

THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SYSTEM OF CONVEYANCING BY
REGISTRATION OF TITLE
WITH
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF PARTIES DEALING,
ILLUSTRATED BY COPIES OF THE BOOKS AND FORMS IN USE IN THE
LANP Q TITLES OFFICE,
BY
ROBERT R. TORRENS
TO WHICH IS ADDED, THE
South Australian Real Property Act
AS AMENDED IN THE SESSIONS OF 1858,
WITH A COPIOUS INDEX
BY
HENRY GAWLER, ESQ., BARRISTER,
PRICE FOUR SHILLINGS.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED AT THE REGISTER AND OBSERVER GENERAL PRINTING OFFICES,
GRENFELL STREET.
1859.




THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SYSTEM OF CONVEYANCING BY
REGISTRATION OF TITLE,
WITH
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF PARTIES DEALING,
ILLUSTRATED BY COPIES OF THE BOOKS AND FORMS IN USE IN THE
LANP Q TITLES OFFICE,
BY
ROBERT R. TORRENS
TO WHICH IS ADDED, THE
AS AMENDED IN THE SESSIONS OF 1858,
WITH A COPIOUS INDEX
BY
HENRY GAWLER, ESQ., BARRISTER,
SOLICITOR TO THE LANDS TITLES COMMISSIONERS.
PRICE FOUR SHILLINGS.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED AT THE REGISTER AND OBSERVER GENERAL PRINTING OFFICES,
GRENFELL STREET.
1859.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR RICHARD GRAVES MACDONNELL, C.B.,
GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF OF HER MAJESTY’S PROVINCE OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Dear Sir Richard—
It has occurred that during your administration the two
most important measures of our colonial history have been initiated and suc-
cessfully devoloped. I allude to Constitutional Government and Reform of
the Law of Real Property.
The manner in which you have borne yourself during the progress of
events fraught with so much importance, as well as the support and counte-
nance which you have afforded my efforts to perfect a measure of the merits of
which your early professional education enables you to judge authoritatively,
naturally induce me to dedicate to you the present work.
I confess, however, that it would more accord with my sentiments could
the dedication be received irrespective of the official relations that have sub-
sisted between us, as testifying friendship and esteem for your character in the
relations of private life and as an English gentleman.
Faithfully yours,
R. R. TORRENS.




PREFACE.
Aware that the critical reader will detect defects both in the
composition and subject-matter of the following pages, I plead
in extenuation that they have been written under circumstances
not propitious for brilliant composition —during hours snatched
from the period usually devoted to rest, after the exhaustions of the
day spent in the performance of arduous duties.
If the outline sketch of the history of English Property Law
affords nothing of novelty to the law student, it can hardly fail to
interest and instruct the Yeomen proprietors of the Australian
Colonies, for whom especially it was written.
The Law Reformer will detect in the measure of which I claim
the authorship a similarity, amounting almost to identity, with
that recommended in the report presented to the House of Com-
mons by the Commissioners on Registration of Title on the 15th of
May, 1857 ; and as I have already been accused of plagiarism on
this score, and it is painful to rest under the imputation of having
borrowed, without acknowledgment, from the labour and genius
of others, I may be pardoned in referring to matters affecting
myself, which otherwise I should not have obtruded on public
notice, feeling that the reputation of having carried into successful
operation the suggestions of men so eminent as the Commissioners
referred to may well suffer for my ambition.
I am further induced to note these matters in the belief that
information respecting the origin and progress of a reform so
important as that treated of will not be without interest to the
general reader.
Twenty-two years have now elapsed since my attention was
painfully drawn to the grievous injury and injustice inflicted under
the English Law of Real Property by the misery and ruin which
fell upon a relation and dear friend who was drawn into the


maelstioom of the Court of Chancery, and I then resolved some day
to strike a blow at that iniquitous institution.
My official employment in the Customs Service during seven-
teen years made me conversant with the Law of Shipping ; and
having just so much acquaintance with the principles of our
Constitution and Law as ordinarily forms part of the education of
an English gentleman, I was enabled to perceive that my object
might be attained by applying to land the principles which regu-
late the transfer of shipping property. lat that time introduced
the proposition to the consideration of my friends, the present
Chief Justice, Sir Charles Cooper, and Mr. W. Belt, since one of
the Solicitors to the Lands Titles Commission, and their reasoning
against it convinced me that it was both feasible and effectual.
Appointed to the office of Registrar-General of Deeds in 1853,
I gained some insight into the details of conveyancing, which
tended to strengthen my convictions; and, having a seat in the
Legislature in right of my office, the hour for action seemed to
have arrived. I therefore communicated the outline of my long-
cherished design to certain friends, who, whilst cordially approving
the suggestion, persuaded me that I Overrated my strength, and
that I should assuredly be overborne by the power and influence
of the legal profession. Under their advice the design was laid
aside, but only for a time, until I should gather the requisite
strength.
The citizens of Adelaide called upon me to represent them in
the first Parliament under the New Constitution; and the leading
journal of the colony about the same time, in a series of telling
articles, drew public attention to the subject of law reform. These
things indicated that the hour had in truth arrived. I therefore
submitted my scheme in the form of a draft Bill to the Hon. A.
Forster, Editor of the journal referred to, and to several other
gentlemen on whose judgment I placed reliance. From these
gentlemen I received some valuable suggestions, which are
embodied in the measure as it now stands. To them I am further
indebted for powerful and unwavering support throughout the
struggle now so successfully terminated.
On the last day of January, 1857, I explained the proposed
measure to the citizens of Adelaide, by whom it was received


with applause. The yeomen farmers of Yatala greeted its
exposition with the like enthusiasm at a meeting in Salisbury on
the 30th May following ; and on the 4th of June in the same year
the Bill was read a first time with acclamation in the Legislative
Assembly. The second reading was carried without division on.
the 11th of November, the cause being much strengthened by the
report on Registration of Titles presented to the House of
Commons on the 15th May, which reached my hands most
opportunely on the eve of the day appointed for the second Beading.
The third reading was carried by a majority of 19 to 7, notwith-
standing the opposition of the Government. The measure passed
the Legislative Council, and was assented to by His Excellency the
Govcrnor-in-Chief, on behalf of Her Majesty, the 27th of January,
1858.
At the request of the Government, backed by the persuasions
of numerous friends of the cause in New Zealand and in the adjacent
Australian Colonies, I abandoned a political career in order to devote
undivided attention to the working details of the measure, which
came into operation on the 2nd of July, 1858.
It is incumbent on me to acknowledge the able assistance afforded
by Mr. Belt in preparing the Amending Bill of last Session, and
to express my grateful sense of the high compliment implied in
the almost unlimited confidence reposed in me throughout this
struggle by a large majority of the South Australian Legislature.
R. R. TORRENS.




INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER I.
ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF THE ENGLISH LAW OF
REAL PROPERTY.
In the reign of James the First letters patent passed the Great Seal for
establishing “An Office of General Remembrance of Matters of Record,” the
recital of which describes the laws relating to real property as “ manifold, in-
tricate, chargeable, tedious, and uncertain.’,’ This complaint has been repeated
throughout succeeding ages until its most remote echo in time as well as in
place is heard in the preamble to the South Australian Real Property Act, thus
—“ Whereas the inhabitants of South Australia are subjected to losses, heavy
costs, and much perplexity, by reason that the laws relating to the transfer and
encumbrance of freehold and other interests in land are complex, cumbrous, and
unsuited to the requirements of the said inhabitants ; it is therefore expedient
to amend the said laws.”
If there bo any person who, having had experience in dealing with landed
property under the English law, has arrived at conclusions opposite to those
above set forth, this treatise is not addressed to him.
Leaving that individual, (if such there be) undisturbed in his contentment
with things as they are, and persuaded that after having traced out the origin and
progress of a complicated evil we shall be more competent to judge of the
appropriateness of the proposed remody, I proceed, as a preliminary step, to
lay before the rest of Her Majesty’s lieges in Australia a brief sketch of the
history of the English law of real property.
Meagre as are the records handed down from our Saxon forefathers, they,
nevertheless, suffice to establish the fact that the lands of England were held
in their time under free allodial tenures, and transferred from hand to hand, by
public acknowledgment, before the folkmote or skiremote, which acknowledg-
ments in those unlearned ages constituted a registration unwritten, but recorded
in the memory of living witnesses, whereby title indefeasible was secured to the
purchaser or grantee of any estate or interest in land.
A


Origin of uses.
In substitution for this liberal tenure, and simple yet effectual method of
dealing, feudalism was imposed by our Norman conquerors, who, as Blackstone
informs tis, “ Thereupon took a handle, not only to introduce the rigorous
doctrines which prevailed in the Duchy of Normandy, but also such fruits and
dependencies, such hardships and services, as were never known to other
nations. This fiction of feudal tenures drew after it a numerous and oppressive
train of sorvile fruits and appendages, such as aids, reliefs, premier seizin,
wardships, marriages, escheats, and fines on alienation.” The Statute of
Mortmain claims especial notice here, because to the subtle and ingenious devices
resorted to at that early date by the monastic body to evade this statute may
be traced the more perplexing and costly complications of our present law,
whilst to the usurpation of power by the Ecclesiastical Courts in maintaining
these devices and contrivances in defiance of the will of the Legislature expressed
in the Statute of Uses may be traced the origin of the power exercised at
this day by our Courts of Chancery, and the distinction between Law
and Equity, with conflicting jurisdictions, which constitutes a monstrous
feature in our system of jurisprudence, and one not recognisable in any part of
the world except Great Britain and certain of her colonies, into which it has
been introduced in ignorance, or through infatuated adhesion to ancient insti-
tutions.
The procedure was on this wise : —The Statutes of Mortmain were designed
to restrain ecclesiastical cupidity from preying upon superstitious weakness,
enervated by the terrors of approaching dissolution, by which means the
fairest lands of the realm appeared likely to bo absorbed in the domains of the
Church.
Uses were devised by the monks to evade these statutes. It was held
that lands bequeathed to be held in trust by a layman for the use of the monastic
body were not bequeathed to that monastic body ; and under cover of this fiction
the proprietors of that day were still at liberty to barter the succession to those
earthly possessions which they were so soon to leavo behind, for masses, requiems,
and benedictions, by which an easier passage to another world might bo
secured.
That the Statute of Mortmain might not be set at nought in this manner,
the Statute of Uses ordained that the bequest or transfer of land to one person
in charge for the use of another should thenceforth be to all intents a bequest
or transfer to that other person of the absolute ownership of tjie land itself. .
The same device which sufficed to nullify the Statute of Mortmain was resorted
to to evade this Statute of Uses, the fiction being merely carried one step
further. It was maintained that if A conveyed to B in trust for C for the
use of D, the statute would not apply.
The great Barons supported a doctrine in which they perceived a means of
evading wardships, premier seizin, and other exactions incident to feudal tenures,
The Ecclesiastical Court, by its decrees, confirmed it, and the law was set at
nought.


Secret conveyancing: grew out of “ Statute of Uses.”
This Statute of CJses—a failure as regards theend3 sought to be attained—was
adroitly availed of by the conveyancers for purposes never contemplated by its
authors, namely, to substitute a system of private or secret conveyancing for
the enfeoffing by delivery of corporeal possession of the land in presence of
neighbours and witnesses which had prevailed up to that time.
As the Statute of Use 3 declared that every person entitled to the uses or
profits of land should be in law the actual owner of the land itself, the
conveyancers immediately perceived that they had only to make the seller
or mortgagor of the land agree to hold it for the use of the buyer or mortgagee,
and that the statute would instantly make the latter the actual owner.
Hence arose the practice of transferring the legal estate to a mortgagee,
when in reality the land is only intended to be hypothecated or pledged as
security for the repayment of a loan. The instrument by which these transfers
were effected, called a deed of bargain and sale, was required to be enrolled
so as to be accessible to those who would be" at the trouble of searching.
Perfect secrecy not being obtainable under this instrument, the conveyancers
invented a means of accomplishing the transfer by two instruments called
a lease and release, which transferred the ownership of the land without the
necessity of enrolment; and this roundabout process of conveyancing by two
instruments instead of one was that usually adopted in England and in these
colonies until within the last twelve years, when the method of conveying the
freehold or feudal seizin of all land by deed of grant prescribed in 8 and 9
Victoria, cap. 106, came to be generally used.
Opinions of eminent Jurists.
A few brief extracts from the works of eminent jurists and philosophers
will suffice to characterize the system of law which has resulted to us from
the conflict between arbitrary power and the subtlety of priests and lawyers,
exercised (it must be admitted) somewhat unscrupulousy in devising means for
evading the tyrannical exactions of that power.
Lord Bacon describes the Statute of Uses as “ A law whereupon the inheri-
tances of this realm are tossed at this day like a ship upon the sea, in such
sort that it is hard to say which bark will sink and which get to the haven.”
Blackstone describes the law of real property in his day as “ Frittered
into logical distinctions and drawn out into metaphysical subtleties with a
skill most amazingly artificial, but which serves no other purpose than to
show the vast powers of the human intellect, however vainly or preposterously
employed. Hence law, which, being intended for universal reception, ought to
be a plain rule of action, became a science of the greatest intricacy when blended
with the refinements engrafted on feudal property, which refinements were
from time to time gradually introduced by the Norman practitioners with a
view to supersede, as they did in great measure, the more homely but more
intelligible maxims of distributive justice among the Saxons.”
I will conclude these extracts by a quotation from the most recent work of
a 2


authority upon this subject—“ The Handy-Book of Lord St. Leonards”—
because the admissions of so zealous an admirer of existing institutions,
of so stern an opponent of radical change, must be accepted by all with implicit
confidence.
His Lordship informs us that “ It is peculiar to the Constitution of this
country that the law on the same case is frequently administered differently
by different Courts, and that not from a contrary exposition of the same rules.
It must sound oddly to a foreigner that, on one side of Westminster Hall, a man
shall recover an estate without argument, on account of the clearness of his
title; and that on the other side of the Hall, his adversary shall, with equal
facility, recover back the estate.” The above words, emanating from the
man most profoundly learned in all the subtleties and involutions of the law
constitute perhaps the most pungent sarcasm ever unconsciously uttered.
Such are the sentiments of the highest legal authorities. The public who
have had experience in dealing in land, or who peruse the reports of law
proceedings in our public journals, are in a position to decide whether Lord
Brougham is correct in describing the law of real property as “ attended
with many evils , giving birth to great vexations , involving the affairs of the
community in lamentable uncertainty , and imposing upon the citizens who live
under it a heavy burden;" or whether Lord St. Leonard’s is nearer the truth
when he speaks of the same law as “ exhibiting a splendid code of jurisprudence"
Possibly, some of those who hold to the latter opinion may concur with me
in regarding it as altogether too splendid and ingenious a work of art to suit
either our means or our requirements in these colonies ; that, like those exquisite
carvings in ivory which we see marshalled in order in some recess or cabinet of
a lady’s boudoir, but never drawn out when the game of chess is really to be
played, the proper place for this “ splendid code" is the cabinet of the antiquary,
where those who have leisure and a taste for that sort of thing, may admire
this “ proof of the vast poioers of the human intellect, however vainly or pre-
posterously employed ” In playing out the game of life in this work-a-day part
of the globe, we require something less costly, something less artificial, something
which we may handle with more freedom and rapidity.


CHAPTER II.
CAUSES WHICH HAVE THROUGH SO MANY AGES DEFEATED
ALL ATTEMPTS AT LAW REFORM IN ENGLAND HAVE BUT
LITTLE WEIGHT IN THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Power acquired by the legal profession.
When under a system, the history of which we have just traced out, a cir_
cuitous, involved, and secret method of conducting dealings in land camo to be
substituted for the simple and open procedure previously in use, the legal pro.
fession acquired a position of great influence and power.
Thenceforth no man could convert his property or conduct the most ordinary
and simple transaction except through the instrumentality of a legal adviser.
The complexities and intricacies introduced gave occasion for innumerable
defects in title, which, if made public, would involve the proprietor in heavy
law costs or ruinous losses; hence some member of the profession became to each
proprietor, not only the indispensable agent, but also the secret confidential
adviser.
This fiducial position was necessarily lucrative. The younger sons of the
great proprietary families were attracted to enter a profession so honourable,
and which held out such prizes to industry and genius.
A profession thus associated with the landed aristocracy of England, and from
whose ranks the peerage was constantly being recruited by a succession of eminent
statesmen, could not fail to become what we now see it, scarcely so much “an
institution of the eountry” as “ an estate of the realm,” so intimately is the
history of the profession incorporated with that of the nation.
It is not to be wondered at that non-professional men, whilst with one
consent acknowledging that the law of real property “ imposes upon the
community a grievous burden,” have shrunk from undertaking the task of
reform which would place them in immediate antagonism with the most powerful
body in the kingdom, impose upon them an oppressive responsibility, involve
them in an almost Herculean labour, and (not the least deterring consequence)
interrupt cordial friendly intercourse with men highly esteemed, whose interests
are incompatible with the success of that enterprise.
Professional bias incapacitates for the work of reform.
Hence it is that the work of law reform has been left in the hands of lawyers;
and without adopting the aneient proverb, “Hawks dinna paik out hawks’
een,” and without attributing any sordid motive, there are other influences no
less powerful which operate to deter the professional mind from realizing
the idea of thorough radical reform of the law. As Lord Brougham says
—“ They love and revere the mysteries which they have spent so much
time in learning, and cannot bear the rude hand which would wipe away
the cobwebs, in spinning which they have spent their zeal and their days for


perhaps half a century.” The effect of education may be such as to prevent
men seeing clearly or judging impartially. How else can we account for the
fact that in the most important affair that can occupy the mind of men here
below—“ religion”—we find men adhering to that creed, be it what it may, in
which they have been brought up ?
It would seem as though the mind, confined for a length of time to run in
grooves, loses the power to draw out from the deep-worn track. Hence, upon
examining the projects ©f law reform emanating from legal men, even the
most learned, we find them to be little better than palliatives, and are for-
cibly reminded of the language of Blackstone: —“ To say the truth, those
scholastic reformers have transmitted their dialect and finesse to posterity so
interwoven with the body of our legal polity that they cannot now be taken out
without a manifest injury to the substance. Statute after statute has been
made to pare off these troublesome excrescences and to restore the law to its
pristine simplicity and vigour; but still the scars are deep and visible, and
the liberality of our modern ceurts of justice is obliged to have recourse to
unaccountable fictions and circuities in order to recover that equitable and
substantial justice which for a long time was totally buried under the narrow
rules and painful niceties of a metaphysical and E orman jurisprudence.”
Palliatives substituted for reform.
Since the above was written considerable improvement has been effected.
The “ circuities” have been curtailed somewhat, and many of the “ unaccount-
able fictiens” laid aside. The redundant verbiage in our Courts of Equity has
been diminished. The fiction of “ fines and recoveries” has been abolished, and
those ancient marionettes, John Hoe and Eichard Eoe, who were wont to figure
as clown and pantaloon in the legal pantomime of dividing the oyster, bringing
amazed bewilderment upon the litigants, and much gain to the profession,
have been consigned to the tomb of all the Capulets.
Still, those improvements ‘ are but “palliatives” —but “paring off of
excrescences .” None have had the hardihood to contemplate clearing away
the vast heap of rubbish which has accumulated in the course of so manv
centuries in order to reach the solid primitive foundation.
Continuing to consider this question, “ How it comes to pass that the landed
proprietors of England remain oppressed by this grievance so many ages after
the conditions of tenure which gave rise to it have passed away?” the point
which next strikes the mind is that in England law reform has not yet be-
come a people's question.
In England the grievance affects a class j in Australia the people.
The lands of England are held by a comparatively small number of pro-
prietors, and are handed down in the same family from father to son for
generations, so that transfers are rare, and when they do occur are for
amounts so considerable that the costs of conveyancing, great though they bo,
amounting on the average to two and a-lialf per cent, on the purchase-money


(as shown by the evidence taken by the late Parliamentary Commission), does
not constitute a very heavy percentage upon the value of the property trans-
ferred. The class immediately affected (the landed gentry of England) are
proverbially averse ta changes in existing institutions ; the genius of conserva-
tism is opposed to any such radical reform as would lead to diminish obstruc-
tions which tend to preserve the hereditary acres in the old lines of descent.
While such obstacles render radical reform in the law of property all but
hopeless in England, in the Australian colonies the case is altogether different.
Here feudal tenures —the source of all the complication—never had existence.
The colonists have from the commencement held their lands under free allodial
tenure by grant from the Crown, and it is only through ignorance or lamentable
oversight that ffle Imperial Government, when planting these settlements, did
not with clear titles and free tenures re-establish also the simple and effectual
methods of dealing in use amongst our Saxon forefathers, the principles of
which are found preserved to this day in the Hanse Towns and other States of
Germany.
Due care was taken that our lands should be held free from the onerous and
invidious exactions of “ tithe but, setting aside the religious sentiment in-
volved, and regarding only the economic side of the question, the otherwise free
lands of Australia, subjected to the English law of property, are thereby
encumbered with a burden less than tithe in actual amount, but far more
grievous in its ulterior consequences.
In Australia, as in England, in endeavouring to shake off this grievous yoke,
wo shall have to contend with those whose interests are incompatible with
thorough law reform; but the legal profession, great as its influence and power
undoubtedly are, does not in Australia occupy the position almost impregnable
in which in England it is entrenched. In Australia the great mass of the
people are, or confidently look to become, landed proprietors. In Australia,
therefore, “thorough law reform” is essentially “the people’s question.” This
it is which affords conviction of ultimate success if only the correct principle
be adopted, and tho labour of instructing the public mind be zealously under-
taken and pursued through good report and evil report with patient endurance.


CHAPTER III.
THE FIYE PRINCIPAL GRIEVANCES WHICH RESULT FROM
THE ENGLISH LAW OF REAL PROPERTY HAVING A
COMMON ORIGIN INDEPENDENT OR DERIVATIVE TITLE,
MAY BE REMEDIED BY RENDERING TITLES INDEFEA-
SIBLE ON REGISTRATION, THUS CUTTING OFF THE
NECESSITY FOR RETROSPECTION.
Five grievances.
The grievances practically imposed upon the Australian colonists by the
English law of real property may be classed under five counts :
Ist. By reason of the “complexity” thereof this community is held and
firmly bound unto the conveyancers in such sort that no man may venture to
deal with his own land except he use the hands of some member of that
learned body.
This yoke might be bomo if it were a mere abstract principle of villanage,
but, like other monopolies, this of the conveyancers has induced that which
constitutes the next count of this indictment, viz.:—
2ndly. “ Heavy costs” are thereby imposed upon all manner of transactions
in land, however ordinary or simple in their nature.
This, also, might be tolerated if security were attained by the expenditure,
but the shortcoming in that respect constitutes the next count.
3rdly. “Losses and much perplexity” are entailed upon purchasers and
mortgagees by reason of the uncertainty which in a greater or less degree hangs
upon the validity of every title acquired under the English law of property.
4thly. In aggravation of these grievances, that law “ is unsuited to tho re-
quirements of a progressing community,” by reason of the tardiness of the
process of conveyancing thereunder.
These defects in the aggregate have brought it to pass that—
-sthly. Through the operation of this law, the value of land as a scoure and
convenient basis of credit is greatly diminished.
Any substituted process to secure immunity from these grievances must bo
simple, inexpensive, invariably Certain, and expeditious.
The South Australian Eeal Property Act, based upon the principle that title
is conveyed by “registration,” not by execution of instruments, realizes all
these requirements.
Dependent title the source of mischief, >
The defects objected above have all a common source—“ The dependent
nature of titles''
When title has to be traced back through successive proprietors, each instru-
ment examined, each transaction scrutinized, to ascertaiu that all necessary for


malities have been observed, and that no equitable interest or claim remains
outstanding, “No man may venture to deal with his own land the experienced
skill of the conveyancer must be had recourse to.
An enquiry which can only be conducted efficiently by men specially trained
to the investigation of such intricacies, and which must be gone over afresh ah
initio each time the property is dealt with, is necessarily attended with heavy costs.
A “ dependent title” is a chain no stronger than its weakest link. Each
transaction adds a fresh link, increasing the 'perplexity and the risk of loss.
Such retrospect as is indispensable when dealing with a “ dependent title”
must necessarily be a tardy process.
The cumbrous machinery required to be set in motion, the attendant risks,
the time necessarily occupied in effecting mortgage, the costliness of the tran-
saction and of the subsequent release when the title is “ dependent,” render land
an inconvenient basis of credit.
Hence, as a first principle, the South Australian Eeal Property Act creates
“independent titles;” retrospective investigation is cut off; each proprietor of
the fee holds direct from the Crown subject to such mortgages, charges, lease-
hold or other lesser estates as may exist or be created affecting the land.
Indefeasibility of title.
Indefeasibility of the title created by registration follows of necessity as a
corollary to the principle of “independent title,” and out of this again arises
the necessity of providing a fund from which rightful heirs and others may be
compensated for the value of land which they are debarred from reclaiming
against persons who have acquired title by registration as purchasers, mort-
gagees, or otherwise through the operation of the law.
These requirements are provided for in the Act referred to.
Advantage of prescribed forms.
A principle next in importance is, “ that plain and simple forms be prescribed
and provided, by use of which persons purposing to deal may be enabled to
express distinctly the intention to which effect is to be given by registration.”
Without this provision proprietors would remain under the necessity of calling
in the conveyancer upon the most ordinary transaction. It affords the best
guarantee that the monopoly of business secured to the legal profession, when-
ever agency is employed in conducting transfers and other dealings, may not be
availed of for the exaction of excessive charges, or the revival of circuitous and
perplexing methods.
The South Australian system has been considered experimental only in that
it applies to land, methods of dealing which abundant experience has shown to
be effectual and completely satisfactory when applied to property in shipping and
in the funds. The procedure itself is confessedly no novelty.
Registration of title applied to land.
Mercantile men repeatedly ask—“ How comes it that I can, and do constantly,
transfer property to the extent of many thousands in the funds and in shipping
with safety, at a trilling cost and with great rapidity and case; yet when I desire


to purchase a rood of land not worth £SO I am at once involved in uncertainty 1 ,
put to considerable expense and trouble, and for months before the
paltry transaction can be completed ?
Professional men as often reply—“ There are essential attributes inherent in
the nature of landed property which do not attach to movable property; hence
it is impossible to apply to land the methods with which you are conversant in
dealing with shipping and funded property,”
Upon this “ Mercator” incontinently “ shuts up;” but if allowed time for a
little careful consideration, he could not fail to perceive that in this reply a false
conclusion is franked under cover of a proposition incontrovertibly true.
No person attempts to deny that landed property in certain of its attributes
differs from property in movables; the logical inference from which is that
methods of dealing which are suitable and advantageous when applied to the
latter may possibly be found inapplicable to dealings in land.” The advocate,
however, pushes the inference beyond this legitimate conclusion, affirming that
“ in consequence of these inherent differences the methods referred to arc neces-
sarily inapplicable.” This the premises will not warrant j and, upon analyzing
these attributes, the converse of that conclusion is found to be nearer the truth.
Thus Ist. Funded property may be said to be infinitely divisible without re-
ducing the intrinsic value of each fractional part. This can hardly be said of
land or house property. 2nd. Thera is an individuality attaching to landed pro-
perty which practically does not belong to funded property. A man purchases
some indicated block of land or house, and that identical block or house must
be conveyed to him; whereas stock is transferred without any necessity for dis-
criminating or identifying any particular parcel. A Thousand Pounds Consols
is £I,OOO Consols whoever may have been the original creditor of the Crown
for that sum. 3rd. Occupancy and possession are circumstances which demand
special attention in purchasing land, else the purchaser may acquire a lawsuit
as part of his bargain. This characteristic does not complicate transactions in
the funds.
These are the essential differences between landed and funded property. They
necessitate a minute and accurate description to identify the property intended
to be dealt with, and a careful enquiry that the actual possession is the pos-
session of the vendor, but they by no means operate to render a system of
transfer by the act of registration inapplicable or inexpedient; on the contrary
nothing could more facilitate accurate identification or conduce to knowledge of
the true occupancy than a welborganized system of registration.
This objection on the score of difference in essential attributes disappears like
mirage upon investigating closely the nature of property in shipping. If the
comparative indivisibility in land constitutes a difficulty, it exists in a yet greater
degree in a ship. Hero also we find the characteristic of individuality. We
must identify the particular ship to be transferred by a long description in the
register. Here again the contingency of adverse possession requires to be
guarded against. Finally, the attribute of immobility in land renders transfer


by registration more siritable for that description of property than for shipping
which may bo removed beyond the ken and jurisdiction of the registering
officer; yet the transfer and encumbrance of shipping property through the
instrumentality of registration has given universal satisfaction, ensuring certainty,
simplicity, and economy.
The practicability and advantage of applying this method to dealings in
land was not, even prior to the operation of the South Australian Act, a specu-
lative question, dependent for solution upon argument. Id many countries on the
continent of Europe it was a realized fact. Instance the Hanse Towns, Prussia,
and Holland; also, the dependencies of the latter State, and the several
British possessions acquired by conquest from her.
There is, however, no necessity for wandering beyond the soil of England
herself for the practical demonstration of this problem. The old copyhold
tenures afford an admirable illustration of the security and economy
attending transfer by registration. Lord Brougham, in a recently-
published letter addressed to the Earl of Radnor, as President of the
Law Amendment Society, speaking of his friend Mr. Faust, says:—“ The
experience to which I refer is as steward to many of our Cumberland
copyhold and customary manors during a period of 30 years. Thus in one
he has never found an instance of disputed title in all the 500 estates of
the manor j they have every one been repeatedly passed by sale, mortgage, and
devise or descent, and the cost of the conveyance never exceeds a few shillings
and the length of the deed 100 words.”
It may not be out of place here to explain that the various forms of tenure
which grew out of the feudal system have long since been reduced to two
species—common socage and copyhold. The one freed, it is true, from all
the servile conditions and exactions of feudalism, but encumbered by the in-
volved, costly, and uncertain forms of transfer, originating, as described in a
previous chapter, from contrivances resorted to to evade those exactions.
The other (copyhold) subject to some remains of these inconvenient exactions,
such as heriots, customary services, interest of the lord in the timber, game,
&c., but preserved free from the more oppressive exactions of the conveyancer,
through the instrumentality of a method of transfer by surrender to the
lord and issue of fresh title to the purchaser, such title being dependent on
registry on the roll of the Manor Court, and evidenced by copy of that roll.
This is the system referred to by Lord Brougham in the above quotation, and
is, in principle, identical with the South Australian Act.
It is difficult of belief, but nevertheless a fact, that the most recent attempt
to assimilate tenures (the 15th and 16th Yic., c. 51), instead of relieving the
copyhold tenures from the oppressive and inconvenient conditions of a past age,
and applying its simple, cheap, and secure method of dealing to all the lands of
England, proceeds on the opposite principle of abolishing copyholds, and sub-
jecting all lands to the grievous exactions of the conveyancers.
Assuredly this should be a warning to the Australian colonists against
leaving the cause of law reform in the hands of professional men.


CHAPTER IV.
POLICY OF REGISTRATION-VARIOUS METHODS CONSIDERED.
Registration being the basis of the South Australian Real Property Law, the
key to the entire position, it seems expedient, even at the risk of being tedious,
to discuss at some length this part of the subject, especially as some of the most
able and learned lawyers of the present day have pronounced very decided
opinions condemnatory of such systems of registration as they were acquainted
with.
Foremost amongst these stands Lord St. Leonards, who in the work referred
to in a previous chapter condemns registration on the plea that “it wantonly
exposes the affairs of all mankind.” Registration proceeds upon the principle
that without going the length of advertising or giving unnecessary publicity
to transactions, it is nevertheless expedient that creditors and others interested
should be enabled to ascertain the amount of debts or encumbrances secured
upon the estates of those with whom they have dealings ; and this policy has
ever been recognised by the English Legislature, though opposed and set at naught
by the lawyers.
Chief Baron Gilbert informs us that “ the policy of the Statute of Enrolments
(passed so long back as the 27th Henry YIII.) was to remedy the effect of the
Statute of Uses, which, by executing all uses raised, introduced a secret way of
conveyance, contrary to the policy of the common law. Accordingly the
Statute provides that deeds when enrolled shall remain in the custody of the
Custos Rotulorum, amongst the other records of the counties, to the intent that
every party that hath to do therewith may resort, and see the effect of every
such writing so enrolled,” An Act of 4th and sth William and Mary runs
thus: —“ Whereas great mischiefs and damages happen and come, as well to
persons in their lifetimes, but more often to their heirs, executors, and ad-
ministrators, and also to purchasers and mortgagees, by judgments entered
upon record in their Majesties’ Courts at Westminster against persens, the
defendants, by reason of the difficulty there is in finding out such judgments”
A more recent Act contains the following recital: “ Injustice is frequently
done to creditors by frequent warrants of attorney to confess judgments for
securing the payment of money, whereby persons in a state of insolvency are
enabled to keep up the appearance of being in good circumstances, and the
persons holding such warrants of attorney have the power of taking the
property of such insolvents in execution at any time to the exclusion of the
rest of the creditors.” This policy was again endorsed by the Legislature
during the present reign in 6 and 7 Vic., to enlarge the provisions of tho
previous Act, and is identical with that set forth in the Bills of Sale Registration
Act. Thus—“ Frauds are frequently committed upon creditors by secret bills


of sale of personal chattels, whereby persons are enabled to keep up the
appearance of being in good circumstances and possessed of property, and
the grantees or holders of such bills of sale have the power of taking possession
of the property of such persons, to the exclusion of the rest of their creditors.”
Supported by so much legislative wisdom we may venture to maintain an
opinion opposed to that of even a lawyer so eminent as Lord St. Leonards, and
though the registration of assurances (the system of which His Lordship speaks)
had secured that which it is supposed and intended to effect, we might yet hold
that His Lordship, in denouncing that system as a “wanton exposure” used
language which the occasion does not warrant. The validity given by Courts
of Equity to secret'mortgages by deposit of title-deeds and the length to which
the doctrine of notice has been pushed, have, however, rendered registration of
assurances a dead letter in this important particular, defeating the so often
declared policy of the Legislature.
' Index by maps impracticable.
His Lordship next objects that “ a register would not work well without
maps, and they would cost at least two millions.” Passing for the present
the objection that “registration would not work well without maps,” it is veiy
certain that registration would not work well with them; that is to say, if the
method of indexing by maps is here referred to. This idea has captivated
many, but, like numerous other theories, it will not stand the test of experiment.
Any person may satisfy himself of this by taking a map of some settled district
drawn to such a scale as would admit of a number or symbol being placed for
the purpose of reference on each section or allotment; let him then divide these
allotments, placing a number on each division, and again subdivide, numbering
the subdivisions. Let him next attempt to indicate a recombination of some
of these into one estate, and a fresh subdivision in lots of various sizes, each
bearing its appropriate reference, number, or letter, and the result will be dire
confusion if he keeps to the original map ; or if he resorts to the expedient of
fresh maps, he will find that the necessity for reference from one to the other,
the vast number that would speedily accumulate, the difficulty of keeping them
arranged in order for constant reference, would render the machinery so cum-
brous and intricate as to be totally unworkable. Lord St. Leonards has
referred to the cost of making these maps as prohibitory; but the cost of re-
newing them every five or six years as they are worn out or obliterated by
handling, and the expense of the offices that would be required for their orderly
arrangement, must also be considered.
The Parliamentary Commission of 1857, after taking evidence on this subject
reports as follows :—“ One of the witnesses has observed in his evidence that
A map is a good servant but a bad master ; very useful as an auxiliary, but
very mischievous if made indispensable.’ In this opinion we concur.” If this
objection has such weight in England, where the boundaries of estates and farms
remain unaltered for centuries, how fatal must it be in those new colonies where
subdivisions and fresh combinations of landed estates are of daily occurrence.


In fact, maps are not available as material in “ registration of assurances,”
though valuable, if not indispensable, aids in conveyancing, for tho purpose of
shortening or facilitating the description of parcels. It is for the latter purpose
only they are availed of in the South Australian Act, under which conveyancing
and registration are one and the same thing.
I have been induced to go into details upon this subject, because I find that
a draft Bill for establishing a system of registration dependent upon maps has
been recommended for adoption by a Select Committee of the Legislative Council
of Yictoria.
Objection to registration of assurance fatal.
The remaining objections urged against registration by Lord St. Leonards are
—that under its operation, “by the negligence of an agent a purchaser or
mortgagee may lose an estate if the seller or mortgagor fraudulently sell or
mortgage to another person whose deed is the first registered;” and finally,
that “ the number of deeds requiring registry would destroy the plan by its own
weight.”
These are valid, insuperable, and fatal objections against “ registration of
assurances .” In a subsequent chapter I will explain at length the South Aus-
tralian system of registration of title , which is not obnoxious to either of them ;
but it is desirable first to discuss a point of very considerable moment, and
which has been the subject of much controversy—Whether the requirement
would be more effectively supplied by one central registry-office or by a system of
district or country registers controlled by the central office in the capital ?
Metropolitan or district registers.
The first consideration that suggests itself is, that though this, which remains
a moot-point, had been decided and proved by the test of actual experiment in
an old-established country like England, in favour of tho district system, it
would yet by no means follow that that method would be best adapted for a
recently-settled country, where the centres of population can scarcely be said to
be as yet finally determined. In connection with this view the consideration will
suggest itself to the practical mind that an expansion of the system from metro-
politan to district registration would not be difficult, whilst a concentration
would be attended with so much difficulty as to be nearly impossible; and,
therefore, that whilst the experiment has yet to be tried, it will be safe to com-
mence with the metropolitan system, except in such colonies as New Zealand,
where communication between the different settlements is so difficult that they
are, for the purposes of fiscal regulations, practically as separate States. *
The great difference in the expense of the two methods is the next considera-
tion. Even in England the advocates of district registration recommended is
as an addition to, not a substitution for, a central metropolitan registry. It
would be a great error to conclude from this that the expense would be
doubled only by this addition. Considering the nature of the buildings that
would be required for district registration, and the economy of managing an
extensive business by one establishment, I am of opinion, after more than


twenty years’ experience in departmental management, that the expense would
be increased fourfold by the adoption of the district system.
The advantages to be derived from district registration have been exaggerated.
The metropolitan system applied even to registration of assurances would suit
the convenience of a proprietary, probably greater in amount—if not numerically
—than that which would be best accommodated by the district system, owing
to the circumstance that large proprietors habitually reside and transact their
affairs in the capital; but when applied to registration of title, the advantages
of district registration in point of convenience become altogether insignificant.
Experience in South Australia.
The advantage referred to consists in saving to proprietors in remote districts
the expense and delay attendant on communication between the resident solicitor
and his correspondent in the metropolis, with occasionally risk attendant on the
transmission of deeds. Under the system of registration of title in operation in
South Australia, parties dealing inland fill up (for the most part without the aid
of solicitors) the printed forms supplied for expressing their intentions. These,
when signed and witnessed, are proved or acknowledged before the nearest
Justice of the Peace, and transmitted through the post to the office in Adelaide,
when effect is given by registration to the intention expressed, or the form is
returned for amendment if the intention be not clearly expressed. Under that
system .the instrument which evidences the ownership of the estate or interest to
be dealt with, be it grant, mortgage, or lease, is in effect an extract from the
register book, and invariably bears upon it memoranda equivalent to memorials
of all liens or interests affecting that estate or interest. The production of it
immediately affords to the parties dealing all necessary information, except as
regards caveats lodged, and this is obtained upon application to the Kegistrar-
Gleneral through the post or by telegram.
South Australian system free from the objection on plea of facilitating fraud.
The risk of fraud by procuring priority in registration for a subsequent
dealing, dwelt upon by Lord St. Leonards, is effectually guarded against by the
law, which requires the surrender of the existing instrument of title for the pur-
pose of endorsement as an essential part of the act of registration.
In questions of practice such as that now treated of, actual experience is
the only certain guide; and in South Australia the metropolitan method, an
outline of which is given above, has been extensively tested with most satisfactory
results.
Transactions have been conducted through the post by persons residing 200
miles and upwards from the capital, and in some instances by persons residing
in the adjacent colonies of Victoria and New South Wales, with safety, facility,
economy, and dispatch.


CHAPTER V.
ON INDEXING, SEARCH, AND ACCUMULATION OF RECORDS.
Problem to be solved.
In the last chapter the accumulation ot' records was adverted to as rendering
registration of assurances too unwieldy for beneficial use, even should it not
involve the breaking down of that system of its own weight, a 3 predicated by
Lord St. Leonards. No system can meet the requirement, unless it be capable
of indefinite expansion without becoming complex or too cumbrous for rapid
and facile action. Hence the difficulty next in importance is to find a system
of registration which shall work without an index, or a method of indexing so
simple as to reduce to the minimum, liability to error or omission ; which shall
bo comprised within moderate compass, yet so full and clear that searches may
be attended with satisfying assurance of certainty, and conducted with ease and
expedition.
Defects of existing methods.
The Parliamentary Commission on Registration of Titles reported to Her
Majesty in May, 1857, the failure of existing systems in this essential in the
following language : —“ These registers are signally defective in not presenting
at one view all the documentary evidence which a party investigating a title
may have occasion to see. There is no guide to the searches which on a sale
ought to be made in the register, except a previous investigation of the docu-
ments which may happen to be included in the vendor’s abstract of title.
When the names of former grantors or owners of the land have been ascertained
from the documents to which the purchaser obtains access, then (but not
till then) he can search the register in the names of those former owners for any
assurances that may have been executed by them. These searches must be
repeated in new names as new light is from time to time thrown upon the
title ; whereas a register of deeds ought in our opinion itself to furnish consecu-
tive information of the dealings with the land which have taken place, when
once a reference to the proper head in the index has been obtained.” The Real
Property Commissioners had previpuslv reported in the following language :
“ We may here mention, as an important inconvenience belonging to the existing
registers, and from which a system founded on classification would be exempt,
that when registered deeds are indexed by names, several searches of the register
at successive times are often necessary.” And again—“ The purpose of a repertory
of documents of title is not answered in a perfect manner by any of the existing
registers in this country. It is obvious that a register framed upon the
principle of indexes by the names of parties could never be relied on for
the discovery of the title anterior to the earliest deed to which the purchase
may have access.”


The Commissioners might have added that such a register could as little
be relied on, “ for discovery of the title,” subsequent “ to the earliest deed,”
as is proved by the following case within the experience of the writer. A, the
proprietor under a registered deed, sells to B, who omits to register the
conveyance: B then sells to C, who registers ; A sells the land a second time
to D, who sells to E. Upon search made by E’s mortgagee, the title appears
perfectly clear traced up to A through E and D, no clue being afforded either
in deed or abstract by which the conveyance to C can be traced ; and this being
the first registered takes precedence unless complicity or fraud can be brought
home to C, which would be extremely difficult.
Cause of failure, the want of practical experience.
These extracts are equally applicable to the laws for registration of assurances
in operation in these colonies, and the failure therein pointed out may be ac-
counted for by the circumstance that the authors of these systems, however
learned in the law, lacked that practical knowledge which can only be attained
by experience, and without which succesi in a purely mechanical process
such as registration is rarely if ever attained. They were careful, moreover,
to limit narrowly the discretionary power of the officers to whom the carrying
out of their systems was entrusted —a principle excellent in itself, but which
should not be applied until after the best method has been ascertained by actual
experiment.
The New Zealand method.
A case in point is afforded in the colony of New Zealand, where the
Registrar-General, experiencing the defects of the system instituted by law,
has devised and brought into successful operation a method of indexing
closely resembling that known as Duval’s method, and this, though destitute
of legal sanction, has entirely superseded the index prescribed by the Registra-
tion Act. Mr. Kelly had the advantage of starting his index simultaneously
with the first issue of Crown grants, and it must be acknowledged that the
introduction of his method under any other circumstances would be extremely
difficult, if not impossible. As applied to registration of assurances, it remains
open to most of the objections which caused the cognate system of Mr. Duval to
be condemned by the Commission of 1850 on “ Registration and Conveyancing,”
and the failure of repeated attempts to carry the Bill embodying that principle
through the Imperial Parliament. Notwithstanding this it probably approaches
perfection as nearly as is attainable when the principle of registration of assurances
is adopted. Mr. Kelly’s zealous exertions have secured for the colonists of
New Zealand this important advantage—that their titles are preserved in the
state most favourable to the introduction of the system of transfer by registra-
tion of title with ease and economy.
Separate indexes, or one index in common for all descriptions of instrumerts, or no index
at all.
A consideration of great importance is, whether there should be set up
several indexes, each referring to a distinct class of transactions, or one index
AX


referring to instruments of all classes; or, finally, whether registration may
not be more advantageously conducted without any index at all ?
When it is considered that each instrument requires to be entered as many
times as there are parties thereto, it will be admitted that the index will be
sufficiently cumbrous without that classification, which entails the necessity of
repeating the same names again and again in separate volumes, and opens a fresh
liability to error by entry under a wrong class.
When introducing this branch of the subject it was laid down as the first
requirement, and to which other considerations must be postponed that
“ registration should be capable of indefinite expansion , without becoming so
cumbrous as to interfere with certainty and rapidity in maJcing search .”
Aiming at completeness, the framers of the various systems of which we have
been treating have lost sight of this principle, and prescribed the keeping of
separate indexes for the several classes of transactions. Under these systems
search not unfrequently occupies three weeks or more, at an expenditure of
twenty pounds and upwards, and the result after all is far from satisfactory.
No advantage in separate index.
That nothing is, in reality, gained even in completeness by these methods
will be perceived on reference to the appendix, where an example is exhibited
of the index under names in use in the South Australian Lands Titles Office.
This is posted periodically from the journal; each name is entered once only,
and under it are several lines on which the nature of each transaction is indicated
by a letter prefixed to the description of the parcel of land affected thereby,
and this effectually answers all the objects aimed at by the advocates of separate
indexes.
Recently proposed methods objectionable.
The report by the Commission of 1857 on “Registration of Titles” recommends
three sets of an index of registered owners ; 2nd, an index of
encumbrancers ; 3rd, an index of lessees.” The 'effect of this would simply
be to multiply the number of volumes and the liability to error threefold.
The draft Bill recommended by the Committee of the Legislative Council of
Victoria for adoption prescribes two sets of indexes for each county—“ No. lof
lands, No. 2 of tenures, each having its map numbered in allotments.” It is
not shown how the system is to be worked; but if ever brought into actual
practice it will probably be discovered that two sets of maps will not suffice, as
different portions of the same allotment shown on the map may be made res-
pectively the subject of lease, mortgage, or settlement, and the attempt by
cross lines to indicate those portions, placing on each a letter or number
for reference, would in a short space result in confusion.
Registration without index feasible and advantageous.
The feasibility of conducting registration without an index will be perceived
upon examining the Register-book and Joumaljof the South Australian system,
examples of which are exhibited in the Appendix. The register book is
comprised of the duplicates of grants from the Crown and of certificates of


title issued to proprietors of the fee-simple or other the greatest estate, in
exchange for deeds of title surrendered to the Crown and cancelled. Each of
these, representing the fee of a distinct property, constitutes a separate folium
of the register-book; and as often as the fee of the entire or of any portion of the
land comprised under an existing grant or certificate is transferred, that graiflt
or certificate is cancelled wholly or in part, as the case may require, and a
fresh certifiate issued to the transferee. The grant or certificate contains a
diagram of the land, drawn accurately to scale, and a verbal description of the
parcels and of the parties entitled. It also recites easements and rights attached
to the property or to which the same may be subject. The remainder of the
folium is reserved for the entry of memorials of lesser estates existing, or that
may be thereafter created, affecting the same land, such as leases, hypothecks
(substituted for the old mode of mortgaging by transfer ©f the legal estate),
encumbrances* &c. So soon as the prescribed form for intimating the desire of
the proprietor to create, transfer, or extinguish any of these lesser estates, duly
executed, is presented at the Lands Titles Office, a memorial of it is entered on the
appropriate folium, under the grant or certificate representing the fee of the parcel
of land affected thereby. A certificate of the day and hour of the entry of this
memorial in the register book, with the volume and folium of the register-book in
which it is entered, is endorsed upon the form, which, by such entry and endorse-
ment, becomes an instrument evidencing title to the estate or interest therein
described. The duplicates of all grants and certificates of title delivered to pro-
prietors of the fee likewise bear upon them the volume and folium of the
register book, constituted by their counterparts. The instruments evidencing
title to lesser estates are numbered in a consecutive series. A counterpart of
each is deposited in the strong room so arranged as to be immediately accessible;
and the duplicate delivered to the party entitled. Thus each proprietor,
whether of the fee or of any lesser estate or interest, holds one instrument, and
one instrument only, evidencing his title, and this bears upon it the number of
the volume and folium of the register book, whereon memorials of all existing
interests that can affect the title of the parcel of land in which that estate
or interest exists are exhibited together in the order of time in which each suoh
interest was created.
Search made in person, through the pest, or by telegram.
When therefore search is required to be made by a proprietor or person
intending to deal, the instrument evidencing title in possession of the former
is referred to to ascertain the appropriate volume and folium of the register-book,
and upon payment of 2s. that volume is opened for perusal, or a certificate
of search forwarded through the post or per telegram. If the party requiring
search is not satisfied with the amount of information given in the memorials,
the instrument itself is produced to him upon calling its number, which is pre-
fixed to each memorial, or a certified copy of that instrument is forwarded
to him through the post, at a cost of a couple or three shillings. A search thus
Ai. 2


conducted, without the assistance of an index, rarely occupies ten minutes,
and never exceeds half an hour.
x Use of the Journal.
In the journal all tranactions are entered in the' order in which they take
place. The first column gives the date and hour, the second the name of the
proprietor, the third the name of the transferee, the fourth the letter in-
dicating the nature of the transaction—thus S. L. M. E. indicate respectively
sale, lease, mortgage, encumbrance—the fifth gives the number of the instru-
ment, and the sixth, the volume and folium of the register book, where
the history of the parcel of land affected is recorded. The journal may be
resorted to to recover the clue necessary for making search whenever the party
dealing has lost his duplicate of the instrument of title, but remembers some
date on or about which any transaction affecting the land had taken place.
The method without index commends itself to the advocates of secret conveyancing.
Those who, with Lord St. Leonards, object to registration as a “ wanton
exposure of the affairs of all mankind,” will find in the above a method suited
to their views, as no person, not even the registering officer, would be in a posi-
tion to pursue enquiry, unless furnished with the clue to the folium of the re-
gister by a proprietor. Those who differ from His Lordship will object that in
the case of a proprietor, losing the instrument evidencing his title, and also
losing all memory of the approximate date of any transaction affecting the
property, it would be extremely difficult, perhaps impossible, to recover the
clue to the registry of the property. The reply is that such a case is probably
lin 10,000; that the 9,999 would have the benefit of registration without
publicity, and the 1 in 10,000 would be no worse off than proprietors similarly
circumstanced in countries where no registration exists.
South Australian Index described.
The South Australian colonists have decided this question the other way, and
an index, under names alphabetically arranged, example of which will be found
in the Appendix, is provided. This will very rarely come into use for the pur-
poses of search by parties dealing in land. Its utility will be to enable persons
to ascertain how far the estates of those to whom they give credit arc encum-
bered ; also to enable a proprietor, who has lost the evidence of his title,
together with his memory, to recover the clue to the history of his estate;
likewise to enable heirs or assignees to ascertain with facility what land an intestate
or insolvent proprietor had dealt in, and how he had disposed of his interest.
An abuse of which this index is susceptible is, that it enables prying curiosity
to get a knowledge of the affairs of landed proprietors, at a trifling expense in
money and time.
It must here be added that the posting ©f this index, and the checking of it
with that minute attention which is requisite in such a work, entail expense.
I have endeavoured to state both sides of this question fairly, though my
views favour open registration. The utmost deference is due to the opinions


of such men as Lord St. Leonards, and the question is one which each com-
munity must decide for itself.
How cumbrous accumulation of records is prevented.
Concluding this branch of the subject I would remark—lst. That the
grants and certificates of title cancelled in consequence of the transfer of the fee
will be withdrawn from the register-book as the volumes require fresh binding.
¥
2nd. That the single instrument representing each lesser estate or interest will
be cancelled and withdrawn upon the expiration of that estate or interest.
The bulk of the register will therefore be one page or folium for each separate
property held in fee simple at the time, and the number of instruments to be
kept in order for reference will never exceed one for each lesser estate or
interest. >
Under other systems the register becomes in time swollen by an overwhelming
number of volumes of memorials, enrolments, and index, each separate estate 1
or interest being represented on an average by a dozen deeds essential to title.
Advantages of the South Australian method.
We have therefore warranty for claiming for the South Australian system of
transfer by registration of title that it offers to the advocate of open conveyancing
with an index, and to the advocates of secret conveyancing without an index ,
a method capable of indefinite expansion without becoming so cumbrous as
to impede rapid and facile action—clear and comprehensive, that search may be
conducted with ease and rapidity, and attended 4 with satisfying certainty.


CHAPTER VI.
REGISTRATION OF TITLE, HOW APPLIED.
*
First introduction, the great difficulty.
Of those who concur in the opinion of Lord Bacon, that the English Property
Law is “ manifold, intricate, changeable, tedious, and uncertain, nine-tenths,
perceiving the disease to be organic, confess no effectual remedy short of
complete abolition of the English methods of conveyanoing, followed by the
establishment of registration of title, thereby to an extent reviving ancient Saxon
institutions. Some nevertheless hesitate, deterred by the difficulties attending
the application of this remedy. “ There can be no question,” say they, “ that
jjad this system been adopted at the planting of these colonies when lands
were first granted from the Crown all would have gone well; our titles would
have been preserved clear and susceptible of being transferred with certainty,
facility, and economy, as those of the Hanse Towns have, under a similar
institution, been preserved for centuries. As the case stands we see nothing to
prevent the application of this system to all lands that may hereafter be granted
from the Crown, but we see great difficulties standing in the way of its
application to titles which, owing to the frequent trafficking in land pre-
valent in new countries, are already involved in complications as intricate as
those which clog the average of English estates.”
It is altogether vain to contemplate entering upon such a work as that of law
reform ignoring the truth that, “ when a great advantage is to be attained, a great
abuse removed, difficulties commensurate must be encountered.” The only con-
siderations that can avail are—lst. Are the advantages sought really so great as
to compensate for what must be sacrificed for their attainment ? 2ndly. Will the
means proposed certainly secure the objects sought ? These questions settled,
when a difficulty or obstruction presents itself it only remains to consider
whether we shall go over it, round it, or through it; for it is a fact that ob-
stacles which appear formidable in the distance generally cease to be so when
encountered in a steady, “ I-am-going-to-do-it” frame of mind.
There is, confessedly, difficulty in applying the system of registration of titles
when frequent dealings under the involved and uncertain methods of the old
law have perplexed the question of ownership ; and our business is to consider
how this difficulty may, with most advantage, be encountered. The methods
urged for consideration with any authority or show of reason are—
Various proposals considered—First, that by the intervention of special tribunal.
Ist. The establishment of a judicial tribunal, with powers resembling those of
the Irish Insolvent Estates Courts, to investigate and deoide finally and without
appeal who shall be registered in respect of each property, as having estate or
nterest therein, upon the first bringing of the same upon the register. This


would be, as it were, tl going over the obstruction .” The objections urged
against it are the risk of injustice to absent or incapable persons who may have
had no opportunity of preferring their claims. 2ndly. That the expense of the
machinery to be set in motion would be prohibitory as regards the small
estates held by the yeomanry and labouring classes comprehending a nume-
rical majority of the titles in these colonies.
Secondly, by registration of claim established through the operation of the statute of
limitations.
Another proposition is, that the person in possession should be registered
in the first instance simply as such, and without warranty of title, until,
through the effluxion of time, possession establishes title under the Statute
of Limitations. This may be termed “ going round the obstruction .”
The objections on the score of costliness and injustice urged as fatal to the
previous proposition do not lie in this case, but they are avoided only by
deferring for twenty years the benefits accruing from registration of title.
The men who have subdued the Australian wilderness will scarcely pause in
their eourse to consider a measure the advantages of which aro postponed to
be reaped by the next generation ; yet this is the idea embodied in the draft
Bill recommended for adoption by the pommittee of the Legislative Council
of Victoria.
Thirdly, by transferrisg liability to claim from the land to the person recognised as proprietor,
supplementing the personal security by an assurance fund.
It remains to consider the method in successful operation in South Australia.
This proceeds upon the principle of transferring the liability to claim by a
rightful owner from the land itself to the person of the individual to whom
certificate of title may be granted in error, the personal security being
supplemented by an assuranee fund with Government guarantee. This method
may be described as “ going through the obstruction .” The Assurance Fund is
created by a small percentage levied upon the value of all lands brought under
the operation of the Beal Property Act. From this fund, failing recovery
from the person on whose application the first certificate of title is grantedj
compensation to the value of the land at the time of its being brought under
the Act, and also the costs incurred in prosecuting the claim, aro seoured
to rightful owners, who by the operation of the Act may be deprived of
the remedy by action of ejectment.
The remedy by ejectment still lies against persons obtaining certificates of
title by fraud; but purchasers, mortgagees, and others deriving estate or
interest, bona fide for valuable consideration, from or through a person wrong-
fully registered in respect of the property, whether through fj»ud or error, are
borne harmless both from ejectment and liability for compensation.
The value, for the purpose of compensation, is decided by the award of a
Jury ; and in case of the decease, insolvency, or absconding of the party liable,
the claim may be preferred against the Begistrar-General as nominal defendant,
and liquidated from the Assurance Fund.


Procedure in Lands Titles Office of South Australia.
An account of the procedure in detail, with examples illustrative, will be
found in the Appendix, under the head “Applications.” It may suffice in
this place to explain that claims to bring land under the Real Property Act
with the deed and other evidence of title, are referred for examination to
solicitors permanently [retained for that purpose, who report upon each case
to a Board constituted by the Registrar General and two Commissioners.
The sole function devolved upon this Board is that of deciding the extent,
and manner in which each claim shall be advertised, and the period to be
allowed after advertisement for parties interested to enter caveats forbidding
the issue of certificate conferring indefeasible title on the applicant. The Board
may, upon the advice of the solicitors, reject the application when the evidence
is insufficient to establish at least a good holding title in the applicant.
This Board exercises no judicial functions. If caveat be entered or adverse
claim set up, all proceeding is stayed pending the decision of the Supreme
Court. Applicants dissatisfied with the decision of the Board may bring the
Registrar-General before the Supreme Court to show cause why certificate
should not be granted, and the Registrar-General must, in such case, obey
the direction of the Judges.
Benefits immediate and costs trifling.
The expense of resort to judicial tribunal is avoided by this method except
on the occasions referred to, which, according to present experience in South
Australia, do not occur oftener than once in three hundred and seventy cases,
fully bearing out the opinions on this head expressed by His Honor Chief
Justice Sir W. F. Stawell, in his evidence before the Committee of the Legis-
lative Council of Victoria, in 1858. The South Australian Act likewise gives
effect to views expressed by His Honor on the same occasion, in that it enables
those who bring their land under its provisions “ to derive all the advantages
immediately which are to derived only prospectively by the measure”
recom'mended by that Committee.
The expense entailed upon the applicant proprietor bringing land under the
Act, exclusive of contribution to the Assurance Fund, varies from one to
three guineas, according to the nature of the title; yet this moderate charge
covers the expense incurred by Government.
Feasibility not a problem, but a fact.
It may therefore be asserted, not as a proposition, but as a matter of fact,
that the difficulty objected against the application ef “registration of title” to
estates of long standing has been successfully encountered in South Australia,
and that the method adopted is free from defects which have been urged as fatal
to other methods brought forward elsewhere.
Objections considered.
The sole objection raised against this method is “ that there are cases in
wluch money cannot compensate for privation of the land itself.” This
objection, if it had application at all, could only be in the rare and exceptional


cases in which the locality affords special advantages for conducting the trade or
business of the party deprived, er in which the sentiment of affection for lands
that had been handed down in families for generations would be outraged.
Now, however strong this objection may appear when applied to the conditions
existing in old countries, it has no application in colonies in which attachment
to hereditary acres is a sentiment as yet practically non-existent, and one
which, when developed in a future generation, will be protected from outrage
by the operation of the very measure against which the objection is urged.
Again, with regard to the class of cases first referred to, considering that the
title of every applicant is carefully investigated by solicitors expressly selected
for the work, and that, even when the evidence is satisfactory, parties interested
are warned by public advertisement to come in and claim, the contingency of a
rightful owner, actually in possession, being dispossessed through error (he
would not be in case of fraud) is barely within the limits of possibility.
The case, therefore, should it ever occur, would be one of 'privation, not of
deprivation , and r.o established business could be interfered with. In truth*
this objection lies in its full force, not against the South Australian Act, but
against the English Property Law, under which the injury, nay, the ruin, of
a purchaser bona fide for valuable consideration, deprived of the site on which
he had established a business and expended capital, is a contingency of
- constant occurrence.
South Australian system consistent with principles of natural justice.
The position here taken startles, perhaps shocks, by its very novelty; but,
contrasted with the English Law, it will be found infinitely the more consistent
with the principles of natural justice.
If there be injustice in the rule which would compel a rightful heir to accept
cash for his patrimony in the land itself, assuredly there is beyond measure a
greater injustice in the old rule, which, in putting the rightful heir in possession
of the land itself, bestows upon him therewith the patrimony of others invested
thereon, it may be to ten times its value. Instances of this kind are but too
familiar to persons conversant with dealings in land. In the mother-country
they are comparatively rare in their occurrence and less glaring in their injurious-
ness. In England, in ninety-nine cases out of one hundred, the property is in
a highly improved state when possession is taken, and its value far exceeds the
sum expended in improvements by thd* existing occupier. In the colonies, all
this is reversed; the improvements are in nine cases out of ten effected with
capital of the party in possession, or with capital advanced upon tjie security
of the property by others equally unconscious of wrong, and the land itself is
of little value compared with the sum invested on it in improvements. Hence
a rule of law sufficiently grievous in the old country inflicts an amount of
wrong positively outrageous when applied to countries still in the course of
settlement, and is in itself sufficient to justify the preamble to the South Australian
Act in denouncing the English property law as 11 unsuited to our requirements.”
The point under consideration constitutes an essential principle in the South


Australian system, and is of sufficient importance to warrant illustration by the
narration of actual occurrences, even at the risk of prolixity.
Certain lands in South Australia passed through the assignees of an insolvent
in India to purchasers. Of this a block of 134 acres, value £l5O, was sub-
sequently sold off in allotments as a township, and houses and improvements
placed upon it by the purchasers to the value of £5,000. Upon other portions
of the estate situated in the City of Adelaide, and worth from £1,200 to £1,500,
a bishop s palace, a chapel, and schoolhouse, also dwelling-houses of superior
class, were erected, to the value of £7,000 to £B,OOO, when a question was
raised as to the validity of the title given by the Indian Insolvent Court, and
the Supreme Court of South Australia declared the heir-at-law of the insolvent,
then deceased, to be entitled to the entire property.
Here the English law, as administered by the Supreme Court, in restoring
to the rightful heir his patrimony, worth some sixteen hundred pounds, would
bestow upon him therewith the patrimony of persons innocent of any fraudulent
intention, amounting to at least twelve thousand pounds. Instances of this
kind are more frequent than is generally imagined. They do not always obtain
the notoriety attaching to proceedings in the courts of law, because the parties
frequently surrender without litigation, aware that the expenses of a chancery
suit would swallow up the entire property. Three such cases are at this moment
pending in this colony within the knowledge of the writer.
To conclude this argument, as wo cannot give the land to one and the improve-
ments to another, there is no way of avoiding injustice other than that adopted
in the South Australian Act, giving compensation in money to the rightful pro-
prietor ; and the plea of grievance on the score of privation of the land itself
is purely imaginary in countries in which land is regarded as so much
merchandize, prized just at what it will fetch in the market.
Economic aspect of the question.
Viewed as a question of general policy, the subject wears a most important
aspect. Throughout these colonies, but especially in the cities of Sydney, Mel-
bourne, and Adelaide, a very considerable extent of land which, but for doubts,
for the most part upon mere technical points, affecting the fttle, would possess
peculiar value as building sites, lie waste, receptacles of the offensive refuse of
towns. If, by the operation of law, these defects could be cured, or the capitalist
be assured against deprivation of th<* wealth expended upon the land, the
vacant blocks which now disfigure the rising streets would immediately become
available as building sites, and the wealth of the community be increased by the
value restored to them as such.
I have been assured by a gentleman, whose information on this subject gives
weight to his opinion, that the value of the property lying in this predicament in
and adjacent to the cities of Sydney and Melbourne alone, exceeds half a minimi.
Herein assuredly we find grounds sufficient to urge our Legislatures to
prompt action in eradicating a system of law which, like a noxious fungus, swells
by absorbing into itself vital elements essential to the production of wealth.


CHAPTER VII.
SHOULD REGISTRATION OF TITLE BE COMPULSORY OR
OPTIONAL?
A question of importance, ana upon which considerable diversity of opinion
exists, is, whether the system of registration of title should be made com-
pulsory, or whether proprietors should be allowed free discretion to bring
their lands under that system or to continue to transact their dealings as here-
tofore under the old law.
Before entering upon the discussion of this point it is necessary to explain that
the compulsion here treated of goes the length of declaring all dealings in
land, after a certain date, void unless they be transacted in accordance with the
new system, but does not extend to compel persons to bring their
lands under that system until they have occasion to transfer, mortgage, lease,
or otherwise deal with them.
And again, that the advocates of compulsion must he prepared to supple-
ment the South Australian system, as it at present stands, by a provision war-
ranting the Registrar-General, under certain circumstances, to issue certificates
of possession only, without warranty as regards the state of the title prior to
the issuing of such certificate; for it is obvious that without this provision
persons in possession under titles of the class rejected by the Lands Titles Com-
missioners (i.e. t that do not appear to be at least good holding titles) would be
precluded from dealing with their lands altogether. Two additional clauses
a slight alteration in the language of some others would suffice for this.
Opinions of “Parliamentary Commissioners on registration of title.”
The opinions entertained in England upon this question may bo gathered
from the following passage, extracted from the report of the Parliamentary
Commission of 1857 on registration of title, under the head “ Observations,
introductory to the plan about to be recommended
“With reference to registration, compulsory in this sense, it has been
urged—on the one hand, that by not making the original registration of title
compulsory, the gradual adoption (if it shall take place) of the. new system
will be so far a test of its usefulness and suitableness to the condition and
wishes of the country, whilst its non-adoption would render it innocuous.
It is further said that, considering that the measure is novel in its character,
as well as in its operation —considering the advantage of gradually introducing
it, instead of encumbering the Registry Office with a mass of applications which
it would be difficult to get through—considering that the main object in


establishing such a system is to ohtain, if possible, a facility of transfer which
many persons whose properties are kept in a course of settlement may not
desire immediately to possess-considering that the change is sure to recoin-
mend itself, if it is likely to be followed by those benefits which are anti-
cipated, it would be advisable, at least in the first instance, to make the re-
gistration purely voluntary.”
In order to render the above passages clear to the comprehension of the
general reader who may not have access to the Parliamentary Paper it is
necessary to explain that the report recommends the adoption simultaneously
of two methods of registration of title. The one, affording no warranty of title,
is in principle similar to that reported on by the Committee of the Legislative
Council of Victoria in 1858; the other, giving warranty of title, is in all its
leading characteristics identical with the South Australian Real Property Act.
The opinions entertained upon the same subject in Victoria may be gathered
from the evidence of the Chief Justice Sir W. F. Stawell and of J. Carter, Esq.,
barrister, given before the same Committee, as lollows:
“ Chief Justice Stawell.
“ Query 13. By the Chairman—Then do I infer correctly that you would
not allow any person to be registered until .he had first obtained his clean
bill of health, or would you allow him to register, and get his bill of health when
he liked ?—I would rather not have any of those measures compulsory. I prefer
the community seeing the advantages and being led by degrees into adopting
them. I would allow any one to register; but for the sake of the public
and in order to avoid their being misled, I would draw a marked distinction
between those cases where the title had been investigated and approved of, and
where it had not.
“ 14- That might be done by a separate class of registration—a registration
of certified titles, and a registration of uncertified titles P —l should wish to
avoid that, not only on account of the expenses of the officers, but also because I
think some confusion might afterwards ensue; at the same time the question
is not without its difficulties. If it is rendered compulsory, great injury might
be inflicted on absent owners ; and if not compulsory, some may be disposed to
incur the expense of investigation, others may not be prepared or not even
disposed to do so, and others again may not be prepared with the necessary
proof of a clear title. Ido not, therefore, see how registration of titles enquired
into and approved of, and of titles not enquired into or not approved of, can be
avoided, bqt the registration itself will be the same in both instances; the only
difference will be that in the one case the title prior to registration must be
enquired into, in the other it need not. But in any scheme great care
should be taken to prevent the public being misled as to the effect of registra-
tion. Many non-professional persons attach greater importance to registra-
tion than it really deserves ; and I fear that they, although men of education,
might be misled, and imagine that if a title is registered it is quite right. I
may, for instance, state that many persons are under the impression that every


sale under a decree of a Court confers a good title, whereas therf never was a
greater mistake. It generally happens that the title is investigated very accu-
rately before the decree is made, but the Court merely sells what the defendant
in the particular case has ; and yet the general opinion even amongst the most
educated men, not professional, and an opinion not unnaturally arrived at, is
that every sale under a decree of Court confers a good title ; so here I fear that
many men would imagine that as the title has been registered, it must therefore
have been investigated. It would, therefore, be desirable in my opinion to
guard as much as possible in any legislative enactments against any such mis-
apprehension.”
Replies of J. Carter, Esq., to the Chairman: —
“ Query 136. Every man should certainly show his title before he was placed
on the register as owner. The advantages of the register would induce all
persons who possibly could get their names placed there to have them so
placed. I would not make it compulsory on every person to register his present
title.”
“ 141. I would only permit the registry of a proper title. Deeds would not have
to he registered according to my proposal."
“ 143. I would suggest that persons should be allowed, on proving a proper
title, to go on the register if they pleased; but whenever they got on the regis-
ter my plan would be to allow of no transfer of their estate unless it was made
by an entry upon the register, and I should say, ‘Until you make a transfer
on the books we do not recognise the devolution.’ Thus, when the owner is
once placed on the books and every subsequent devolution appears on the
books, that will show the title to be absolute in the last registered owner.”
“ 145. I think allowing a man to register unless he proved his title first
would give rise to great fraucis upon purchasers. Practically, they would never
go into the prior title.”
“ 147. I would make every man prove his title before he came on the register
at all, and then every devolution would appear on the register the same as
stock in the English funds or shares in a public company ; and only in that
mode , in my judgment, can you simplify the conveyancing system .”
The opinions above expressed agree with the principle of the South Austra-
lian Act as finally passed by the Legislature ; but it must be observed that an
overwhelming majority of the Legislative Assembly of that colony declared in
favour of making the measure compulsory after the lapse of six years. The
clause embodying that principle was negatived by the Legislative Council. Of
late, however, owing to causes which will be presently explained, opinion, both
in the Legislative Chambers and amongst the public at large, has set decidedly
in favour of the compulsory principle, insomuch that whenever it may be
deemed necessary again to amend the Act, there is little or no doubt that the
restoration of that clause will be insisted upon.
Argument in favour of compulsion.
The arguments adduced in South Australia by the advocates of compulsion


are—lst, inexpediency and costliness. of keeping two systems of law in
operation in the same country, at the same time; 2ndly, and chiefly, that
unless the measure be made compulsory, the legal profession will find means
to deter their clients from availing themselves of its provisions, and thus the
progress of the new system will be retarded—if, indeed, the law be not rendered
altogether a dead letter, as has been the case with numerous other enactments
having for their object legal reforms which involved reduction in the cost of
conveyancing.
How far experience bears out this argument.
The event has in one respect proved the correctness of these views, for the
legal profession in South Australia have, as a body, exhibited decided hostility
to the measure, using every means, “ aut fas , aut nefasf to deter the public
from availing themselves of its provisions. The conclusion, however,
is not borne out, for, despite the powerful influence excited against
it, month after month exhibits a steady increase in the business
transacted, insomuch that the new system, if it should continue to make
progress at the present rate, will have absorbed the entire conveyancing business
of the colony ere five years have expired. The law, therefore, is not rendered
a dead letter by this opposition, but the result has been that many persons, who
under other circumstances would never have thought of dealing in land with-
out calling in professional aid, finding themselves under a sort of compulsion
through the uncompromising character of the hostility referred to, have acquired
the habit of transacting their own conveyancing business under the Heal
Property Act, and will in all probability continue so to do after that hostility
has died out. Thus, as pigs, when they attempt swimming against stream,
cut their own throats, the South Australian conveyancers, by struggling against
the new system, have rendered its effect vastly more disastrous to themselves
than it would have been had they complacently submitted to the inevitable
necessities of progressive reform.
Argument not applicable in other colonies.
The argument from professional repugnancy has an especial application in
South Australia, owing to the circumstance that in that colony the profession
is not divided into the distinctive grades of barrister, attorney, &c., and conse-
quently the interests of the entire profession are alike affected when the emolu-
ments of conveyancing are placed in jeopardy. There is no probability that in the
other colonies the professional opposition will be the same either in its character
or in its amount. In New Zealand, on the contrary, there is reason to
believe that the profession will cordially co-operate, if they do not lead, in in-
troducing a system of thorough reform, for the adoption of which, as has been
before remarked, the state of the titles in that colony affords facilities enjoyed
in no other place. In Victoria, again we find His Honor Mr. Justice Barry
in 1857, giving the following evidence before a Committee of the Legislative
Council on conveyancing:—“There is a plan which would require to be judi-
ciously matured—the surrendering the estates to the Crown, and the having new


grants issued, care being taken that all outstanding titles were introduced, and
providing that they should be effectually barred.” And it is impossible to
peruse the evidence given before the Committee of 1858, on the Transfer of
Land Bill, by His Honor the Chief Justice Sir W. F. Stawell, and by J. Carter,
Esq., barrister, without being struck with the remarkable coincidence of the
opinions expressed with the principles which have been matured and brought
into successful operation in the South Australian Real Property Act.
Encouragement to Law Reformers in other colonies.
Backed by such authorities whoever takes up the task of introducing regis-
tration of title in that colony may with confidence encounter any opposition that
may be raised against the good cause.
Benefits that have resulted from the freedom of choice allowed in South Australia.
If in South Australia the voluntary principle has retarded the general adop-
tion of the measure, that circumstance is not without its advantages. The
gradual progress of business lias allowed time for training the officers of the
department in the novel duties they have to'perform, and for testing the suffi-
ciency and suitableness of the new machinery set in motion. It also affords to
the conveyancers’ engrossing and law clerks deprived of occupation by the Real
Property Act a day of grace, during which they may seek out some fresh career
in which success will not, as is now the case, afford a measure of the amount of
loss and anxiety entailed upon their fellow-citizens.
I have endeavoured to state fully and impartially the argument on both sides
of this question. The weight of reason appears to me to incline in favour of
allowing proprietors free discretion to elect the system under which they will
hold their lands. Compulsion necessitates separate methods—“ registration of
certified titles” and “registration of uncertified titles”—a contingency which
His Honor Sir W. F. Stawell “ would wish to avoid, not only on account of
expense, but also because some confusion might afterwards ensue.” Sub-
scribing as I do with but little reservation to the opinions expressed by His
Honor on the occasion referred to, there appears to me especial farce in the
above remark. The double method would diminish the simplicity of the South
Australian system ; and whatever does that, pro rata , diminishes its capability
of expansion without becoming cumbrous, and introduces a liability to error
from which it is at present free.
The object is to relieve the large class who hold under titles subjeet to technical defects rather
than the few who hold under positively bad titles.
In a measure of this nature the interests of the great mass of the community
should be considered preferentially to that of the few. It is true that a very
large proportion of titles are what are called “blistered,” or unmarketable, but
the evidence collected by the English Parliamentary Commission and by the
Committees of the Victorian Legislative Council shows that absolutely bad titles
are less numerous than is generally imagined. The experience of the South
Australian Lands Titles Commissioners, so far a 3 it extends, would place
the proportion of these at less than 3 per cent, j and it would seem advisable to


leave these to be cured by the operation of the Statute of Limitations, rather
than complicate the machinery by a double process.
It is believed that fully one-third (in value) of the lands in these colonies is
held under titles more or less imperfect. If the general estimate, that from 10
to 50 per cent, would be added to the market value of these lands by remedying
these defects, be at all near the truth, there would appear to be sufficient to
induce proprietors to exchange their present titles for indefeasible certificates
under the new system, without resorting to any compulsory measures.


CHAPTER VIII.
FUNCTIONS OF THE REGISTRAR. —PRINCIPLES AND POLICY
OF THE METHOD OF TRANSFERRING, LEASING, AND
MORTGAGING OF LAND, BY “REGISTRATION OF TITLES.”
Constitution of the Department.
It lias been explained in a preceding chapter that a Board consisting of the
Registrar-G-eneral and two Commissioners, advised by counsel specially retained,
decide upon the manner and extent to which applications for bringing land
under the new system shall be advertised ; that claims or disputes, when
they arise, are referred to the ordinary tribunals for adjustment, the Lands
Titles Commission exercising no judicial functions ; and that in the event of
non-claim within the time limited by the Board, and upon the production of
evidence sufficient to establish at least a good holding title, or, in the event of
claim, pursuant to any order of the Supremi Court, the land is brought under
the Real Property Act.
Upon this step the registration of title commences; and, being purely a
mechanical process, the department appointed to conduct it should, as closely as
possible, be assimilated to a piece of machinery. No judicial functions should
be imposed upon the Registrar—integrity, order, precision, punctuality, and,
in the chief officer, the faculty of control are the qualifications requisite.
The faculty of control is a natural gift, not an acquired power; and there
appears nothing in the study of law, any more than there is in the study of
divinity or medicine, especially conducing to the acquirement of the other
qualities enumerated. These remarks are called forth by observing a general
tendency in existing Registration Acts to remove the department from the
control of the Executive, and subject it to that of the Law Courts, and more
particularly by the Draft Bill submitted to the Committee of the Victorian
Legislative Council, which prescribes that the Registrar shall be a barrister
of five years’ standing. Unless it can be shown that the professional
status referred to evidences especial qualification for the office of Registrar, it
would seem impolitic, especially in a young community, to limit the choice
of the Executive to men in that particular position. It is not likely that
the services of a barrister of five years’ standing, who possessed abilities
at all above mediocrity and the vigour required for conducting such _ a
department, could be obtained without additional expense, if the office be by
law made a perquisite of the profession.
Powers of Registrar.
The South Australian Act leaves the post of Registrar open to all classes,
empowering that officer to administer oaths, to call for the production of
instruments, to summon and examine witnesses, and, with the sanction of the
Governor and Executive Council, to make rules for the management of the
department, and to prescribe and vary the forms of books and instruments to
be used in convevancing by Registration of Title.
AA 1


Transfers.
Transfers are conducted on the principle advocated by His Honor Mr.
Justice Barry—(see preceding chapter)—the existing title being surrendered
to the Crown, and a fresh title issued from the Crown vesting the estate irf.
the transferee indefeasibly. The details of procedure in the case of transfers,
leases, mortgages, encumbrances, and settlements, as also the mode in which
transmissions in case of death or insolvency are authenticated to the Registrar,
and by him recorded, are minutely described in the Appendix, and illustrated
by numerous examples. In this place we are discussing principles only.
That upon which the method of transferring the fee is based commends
itself to the understanding of all men by its simplicity. It is unnecessary
to point out to an Australian the advantages of holding land under grant
direct from the Crown, instead of under title dependent for its validity on
the validity of all transactions by previous proprietors for 20 years back —
under a title evidenced by a single instrument of convenient size in the
possession of the proprietor, instead of under title evidenced by numerous
and verbose deeds, some of which are generally in the custody of others,
under covenant to produce, it is true, but such production is ever attended with
expense and trouble, and the covenant is not unfrequently found to be a nullity
through the absence or death of the parties liable. By adhering to this,
principle abstracts and costly retrospective investigations are effectually and in
perpetuity got rid of, and a purchaser or mortgagee can see at a glance the
precise state of the title, without having to search a register or to call in
professional aid.
Leases.
Leases are stripped of verbiage and tautology by declaring certain invariable
covenants to be implied, and by prescribing abbreviated forms of words, by
the use of which usual covenants may be introduced if desired by the parties.
This and the facile method of transferring or surrendering these lesser estates
by the endorsement of half a dozen words have in South Australia encountered
especial hostility from those whose remuneration was, under the former system,
measured by the quantity of sheepskin spoiled.
Mortgage.
The method by which, under the South Australian Real Property Act,
land is made available as security for the repayment of money borrowed,
or foe the payment of an annuity or sum of money, is novel to the
English law, though analogous to that in general use on the Continent of
Europe.
Origin of the Method Ly Transfer of the Legal Estate.
The man unbiassed by the effects of professional education, or whose per-
ceptive powers have not been blunted by long familiarity with the abuse, cannot
rise from the study of the system of mortgage as established by the English
Law without exclaiming against the perverse ingenuity whereby a matter
simple enough in itself is rendered most complex, costly, tedious, insecure, and
permanently injurious. These are the sentiments invariably expressed by
persons conversant with mortgage transactions in countries not subject to the


English law. But in justice to our legislators, or rather to out Equity
Judges—who in the exercise of powers transmitted to them as a relique
of the ancient ecclesiastical jurisdiction have been the chief artificers of the
system referred to—it should be noted that mortgage, as we find it at the
present day, is not the product of systematic design originating and
elaborating, but a contrivance by shifts and devices to meet the requirements
of modern times without repealing laws adapted to the tenure of land under
the feudal system, and therefore inimical to that freedom of transfer which
our advanced civilization demands. As explained in a former chapter, the
practice of mortgage by absolute conveyance of the land to the mortgagee, when
in reality the object is merely to pledge it as security for a loan, took its origin
from the Statute of Usee.
Legislative functions usurped by Equity Courts.
The severity of a law which in case of default vested the estate absolutely and
indefeasibly in the mortgagee, however much its value might exceed the sum
borrowed, afforded sufficient pretext for* the interference of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and accordingly about the reign of James I. it was decided that the
mortgagee, by applying to the Equity Courts within reasonable time, upon
tendering the principal sum and interest, together with reasonable costs, should
recover the estate which had been forfeited at law. The Judges at Common
Law for a time strenuously opposed this novelty, but without success, the result
being that the administration of the law of mortgage has been brought for the
chief part under the jurisdiction of equity. Thus, with respect to mortgage
as with other cases, instead of the Legislature being called into action to amend
a law found to be injurious and unsuited to the altered state of society, we
find the Equity Courts, taking upon themselves the functions of the Legis-
lature, step in to prevent the law taking effect, and establish a precedent which
immediately obtains the force of law. "Whatever may be said in favour of
this Judge-made law on the ground of its accordance with expediency and
natural justice, the result of assumption of legislative powers by the Equity
Courts, as pointed out by Lord St. Leonards, is that at the present day we “ see
the plaintiff on one side of the Court recovering the estate without argument
on account of the clearness of his legal title, and the defendant with equal
facility getting it back again at the other side of the Court in consequence of
the strength of his equitable rights.” This strange anomaly peculiar to English
law would be ridiculous, if it were not disastrous. That it is so is notorious
to such an extent that persons whose estates have once been drawn within
the meshes of the Chancery Courts are thenceforth spoken of in terms of
condolence such as we use when speaking of the bankrupt and destitute.
Mischiefs resulting from the assumption of legislative powers by the Judges.
The injurious consequences resulting from allowing to those appointed to
administer the law a licence by circuities and fictions to modify its provisions, so
that they may be compatible with the exigencies of progressive civilization,
instead of amending the law by the constitutional action of the Legislature, are
exhibited in the particular case under consideration in tho form of—lst,


expense and delay entailed on the mortgagor through the necessity of sub-*
mitting his title for examination by the solicitor of the mortgagee—an expense
that must be incurred again and again as often as the security is offered to
different capitalists; 2nd, a long and expensive deed of conveyance to the
mortgagee; 3rd, an expensive reconveyance to the mortgagor when the loan
is paid off; 4th, it not unfrequently happens that through the absence of
the mortgagee, and his being unrepresented by a person capable of giving valid
reconveyance, the estate continues tied up and encumbered long after the
mortgagor has expressed his desire to pay off the principal sum in terms
of the mortgage, whereby great injustice and injury are inflicted, especially
in cases where sale and subdivision of the property are pending.
The mortgagor is the principal victim, yet the mortgagee does not entirely
escape. The tediousness of the process occasioning loss of interest is in itself a
sufficient evil; but this is aggravated by the doubt which after all hangs over
the security, notwithstanding the examination at the cost of the mortgagor;
for, as stated by a high authority, Mr. E. Wilson, “Title under the English
law cannot be ascertained as a fact, it can only be wrought out as an inference.”
In addition to this uncertainty, a second or other intermediate mortgagee is in
danger of being ousted of his security by a dealing between the first and a
subsequent mortgagee acquiring the “ equity of redemption.”
South Australian Act a remedy for these mischiefs.
The South Australian Act remedies all this. By making the title indefea-
sible, the expense and delay of retrospective investigation are cut off. By
proceeding direct to the accomplishment of that which is intended, ignoring
the factitious and artificial distinctions of legal and equitable estates with the
circuities of transfer and release, a saving of eighteen shillings in the
pound sterling is effected, and a transaction in landed securities is completed
with as much facility and in about the same time as a transaction in mer-
cantile securities by bills of exchange. By the rule which gives priority to
transactions according to the date of registration, the species of legalized
fraud designated “tacking,” by which an intermediate mortgagee may be
deprived of his security, is effectually barred. Einally, a valid release can be
obtained upon payment of the amount of the mortgage-money into the
Treasury, in the event of the mortgagee being absent or unrepresented.
Mortgagee’s remedies the same uuder both systems.
Eull details of the procedure, with examples illustrative, will be found in
the Appendix; and upon perusal of the mortgage clauses it will be seen
that the South Australian Act secures the mortgagee in all the remedies by
right of re-entry, sale, distress, &c.—provided under the old law.
This question of special importance to the landowners.
No Other question is so important to the landowner as this relating to
the facilities for obtaining money upon the security of his estate, and for
the effectual purging of Iris title from all liability or complication thence arising
upon repayment of the loan in terms of the contract.


Long tll&ge has established a sort of callousness, so that many
cease to be sensible of the loss and injury inflicted under the old
law. The specious misrepresentations of interested parties have so dimmed and
mystified the perceptive powers of others, that they believe the evils of which
they are conscious to be unavoidable and inherent in the nature of things.
By exhibiting the results on landed security produced by the English law
of mortgage, in contrast with what takes place in other countries under
a different system, and in England itself, in respect to securities over
property of another description, we may awaken one class to consciousness,
and dispel the mists which obscure the mental vision of the other.
Law of Mortgage occasions the excess of interest paid on money borrowed on landed security,
over that paid on Government or mercantile securities.
In England, when the interest accruing from stock in the funds is at 3 per
cent., the land-owner, offering as perfect security, pays to the mortgagee 4 per
cent., and to the conveyancer a sum equivalent, upon the average, to 1 per
cent, per annum on the amount borrowed. In the colony of South Australia,
while Government debentures are purchased at rates yielding less than 6 per
cent., the landowner pays from 10 to 12 per cent, to the mortgagee; and, in
consequence of small loans at short dates, a sum to the conveyancer equi-
valent, on the average, to 2 per cent, per annum on the amount borrowed.
Landed security, when not interfered with by mischievous and absurd law, is
not inferior in validity to Government stock ; yet the landowner pays in
England 2 per cent, and in South Australia 6 to 8 per cent, more than the
Government for the use of money ! Nay, further; money is constantly
obtained from the banking establishments in that colony on personal security
at 8 per cent, by the same individual who pays 12 to 14 per cent,
interest and expenses for money secured on land. Why is this ? Because of
the uncertainty which envelops title to land! Because of the tedious process
necessary to be gone through when land is pledged as security! Because
of the difficulty attending that process which necessitates the employment, at
whatever cost, of men especially trained! Because of the cost and delay
attending the transfer of the security !
Illustration afforded by what takes place on the continent of Europe under a different law.
That these are the true grounds of the difference is proved incontestably
by experience of what takes place in other countries; and for this purpose
it may suffice to quote the following passage from the statement of Mr. Yincent
Scully, one of the Commissioners appointed by Her Majesty to consider
the subject of registration of titles: —“In England dealings in land are
a luxury which a rich man may indulge in, that a poor man cannot indulge in.
In Belgium there is a class we should call stockbrokers, but they are
connected with dealings in land, mortgages, and transactions in land;
and any person wishing to invest a largo or a small sum going to them
has no greater difficulty in having the transaction arranged safely and
properly than we have in buying stock and going to a broker for the
purpose. It is just as simple and as easy. In Hamburg and in Frankfort all


persona such as our bankers and brokers, if they have any money which
they wish to make available, instead of laying it out as our bankers would
in the funds or in exchequer bills or other sucurities, would invest it in land,
whkh we according to the 'present state of the law do not consider an
available security. The difference is, in fact, quite reversed. A banker
in Frankfort takes this investment in land, not only as the safest and best, but
because it is most readily turned into money with less deductions or less
influence from any circumstances. They prefer these securities to bonds, or to
bills, or to any other seeurities that are at all available to them as men
dealing in money.” “In Belgium, Prussia, and other parts of the Conti-
nent there is a perfectly easy mode of lending money on land. It is an
affair of an afternoon. It will be found that where the law is simple the less
rate of interest there is, and the larger the quantity of capital which takes that
direction the landowners are able to borrow at a less rate of interest than
they are in this country. In Belgium there is no difficulty in investing money
in land as the savings bank of the country; persons there invest their money
usually, if they have a small saving, in land.”
The South Australian system analogous to that adopted in the Hanseatic States.
The South Australian method of mortgaging resembles that of the Hanse
Towns referred to. The cost of mortgage is 10s., the time occupied in the
transaction is 15 minutes. The cost of transfer or release is 55., the time occu-
pied is five minutes ; and the validity of each step is guaranteed by an assurance
fund supplemented by the security of the general revenues of the colony.
Why the same results have not as yet been realized.
There can be no doubt that the benefits derived in other countries from
the same institutions will, ere long, be to the full extent enjoyed by the South
Australian landowners. The conveyancers, to whom mortgaging under the old
system was the most lucrative branch of business, have directed their main
attack against the innovations introduced by the Beal Property Act in this par-
ticular. Taking advantage of the habitual faith with which the English capi-
talist surrenders himself in such matters to the conscience of his solicitor, and
having, moreover, in their own hands as agent for others a large proportion of
the moneys available for investment on mortgage, they have hitherto been
enabled in a great degree to retard the beneficial'action of the measure.in this
particular.


CHAPTER IX.
ON ENCUMBRANCES, SETTLEMENT, AND ENTAILS.
The South Australian Act provides for charging land with an annuity or
sum of money on the principle discussed in the last chapter, as applied to
mortgages. Full details of the mode of procedure in creating and discharging
encumbrances of this nature will be found on reference to the Appendix.
Nature of Trusts not disclosed.
The principle adopted with respect to settlements and entails is indentical
with that recommended by the Parliamentary Commissioners on registration of
title whose report has been referred to in preceeding chapters. The Registrar
does not take cognizance of the nature of the trusts which, in fact, are not even
disclosed. The only instrument registered is a “Nomination of trustees” (see form
in Appendix), and this vests the legal estate absolutely in the parties named therein.
The proprietor is required to deposit for safe custody and reference, a deed or
instrument declaring the trusts; this, however, cannot be registered, neither are
parties dealing with the trustees at all concerned or at liberty to enquire into
its contents, the title derived through trustees being absolute and indefeasible
so soon as registered. A protection against fraud is provided by enacting that
whenever the words “no survivorship ” are inserted in the “Nomination of
trustees,” the Registrar is prohibited from giving effect to any dealing with the
property until any vacancy in the number of trustees occuring through death,
or otherwise, has been filled up. As a further protection, beneficiaries under the
trust may, at a trifling cost, lodge caveats forbidding dealing with the property
without their concurrence.
Objections answered.
It has been objected with great pertinacity that this exposes the benificaries
to greater risk than they are subject to under the old system. This objection
is conclusively answered by Mr. Cookson, one of the Commissioners on
Registration of Title, and by Mr. Field in his examination before a Committee
on the same subject, as follows:
“It ha 3 been frequently objected that any system of transfer of land, in
any degree resembling the transfer of stock, would open a door for fraud; and
that under such a system, estates, when in settlement, may be lost altogether by
the misconduct of the trustees. An objection of this kind must not be disposed
of by a priori reasoning; and if it be weighed in the balance of actual experience,
it will probably be found very unsubstantial. Under the present system, nearly
all well-drawn settlements of landed estates in this country contain clauses
empowering the trustees to sell the estate, and to invest the purchase-money
in other estates to be settled to the same uses. The power is usually to be
exercised with the concurrence of the tenant for life, if living, but, if dead
at the sole discretion of the trustees; and in either case the purchase-money
remains under the control of the trustees until reinvested in the purchase of


and. Neither must it be forgotten that there are nearly £800,000,000 of money
in the funds, of which a full proportion (probably one-half) is already in the
position in which it is alleged that land cannot.be safely placed j and that
millions on millions represented by shares in railways and canals, and docks
and other public companies are similarly circumstanced. What has been found
practically safe for them cannot, it is presumed, be otherwise than safe for
land.”
Mr. Field .
“Practically, there is no risk whatever that injustice would follow from
the scheme which Mr. Cookson has pointed out. The only true basis of all
legislation is, I conceive, experience. You have no right to say ‘I can see that
under such and such a given plan fraud may easily arise,’ and then to conclude
that therefore it would arise were the scheme enacted. If the percentage of
fraud is only one in a thousand in the case of stock—(this is taken from actual
experience) you have a right to infer that it would not be more than one in
ten thousand in the case of land.
I believe so for two reasons; first, that the land is patent, and everybody
is looking at it in conneetion with what you are doing. Nobody knows what
the trustees are doing with the stock, therefore it is much easier for them to
cheat with stock. That is one reason why I conceive there will be very much
less fraud in the case of land than stock ; and, in the second place, it is very
much more difficult to sell land without its being specially and publicly
advertised and known ; therefore I think the percentage of what one may call
frauds and improper distringases and wrongful acts that would come under the
system pointed out in case it was applied to land may be very safely taken from
the return that is before the Committee showing the distringases, &c., on
stock.”
Advantages of the method.
On the other hand, it should be considered that manifest inconvenience would
result from the exposure of family arrangements consequent upon recording
the trusts upon the register. Security is unquestionably increased by the method
prescribed, which has, moreover, the great advantage that it does not in any
appreciable degree impede freedom in dealing with the land. These considers-
tions may be accepted as a set-off against any inconvenience resulting from
proprietors being deprived of the power of creating life estates and entails other-
wise than through the intervention of trustees.
Entail might conveniently be created without the intervention of Trustees, under the system
Registration of Title.
If deemed desirable, it is quite feasible to provide for the creation of
entails under the system of registration of titles without complication or
difficulty. For this purpose nothing more is needed than to provide that the
tenant for life shall receive certificate of title as such upon which the memo-
randa of his dealings with his limited estate, as also the dealings of reversioners
with their interest may be recorded in the same manner as is prescribed for
the case of dealing with the fee sample. Every devolution of the property would


be authenticated to the Registrar, and a fresh certificate of title issued to the
new tenant for life as prescribed in the case of transmission of the fee by will
or intestacy. I cannot concur with those who object that this proceeding
would either confuse the register or impose judicial functions on the Registrar :
because, as regards the first point, I have worked out a number of the
most complicated cases to test the soundness of the objection; and as re-
gards the second, the objection, if it have existence, may be readily met
by requiring a vesting order to be issued by a competent Court upon the
application of each incoming tenant for life upon proof of his title to be
recognized as such, and ordaining that the Registrar should give effect to such
vesting orders.
Why the South Australian Act does not contain this provision.
I am of opinion that the powers enjoyed by landed proprietors under
the old law are needlessly and injuriously limited by the omission of
this provision in the South Australian Real Property Act, but have
abstained from pressing my views upon this outlying point in opposition
to the will of the vast majority of my fellow-colonists, who regard with
disfavour any measure that can tend to encourage the practice of entailing
property, supported as they undoubtedly are in this view by the high authority
of the Commission above referred to. lam content to have preserved intact
and carried into successful operation all the great principles of the measure as
originally proposed.


CHAPTER X.
SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT.
The English Law of Property is admitted to be insecure, costly, cumbrous,
tardy, injurious, and unsuited to the requirements of the inhabitants of these
colonies.
These evils have not existed in England from all time, neither do they
exist in other countries at the present day. Therefore they are not inevitable
ills, arising of necessity out of attributes inherent in the nature of landed
property. On the contrary, their origin is clearly traced to the subtle de-
vices resorted to in feudal times in order to evade the tyrannical exactions of
arbitrary power; their growth to the assumption of inordinate power
by the Ecclesiastical Courts nullifying the decisions of the Law Courts, and
by the force of precedents establishing another law with sanction superior to
that of the statutes framed under the constitutional action of the Legis •
lative power. Their Perpetuation, Ist—to the maintaining power of the
legal profession, the closest and most influential corporation of modern times;
2ndly—to the formidable aspect of the work, which deterred non-legal minds
from assaying the task of law reform; 3rdly—to the high conservative feeling
of the landowners of England tending to maintain the feudal principle of in-
alienability, in contradistinction to the modern principle of convertability.
The laws regulating dealings in movable property or chattels are free from
the objections urged against the laws relating to immovable property, because
they have been devised in modern times to meet the exigencies of a growing
civilization. These, especially the laws and usages which regulate dealings
in shipping, indicate the safe and effectual procedure for amending the
Real Property Law. The argument put forward so often and with such
authority, “ that as certain attributes attaching to land differ essentially
from attributes attaching to shipping, the mode of dealing acknowledged to
be effectual and convenient as applied to the latter cannot be made available
for dealings in the former ” is a fallacy. That essential differences, inherent
in their nature, distinguish the one description of property from the other, no
person denies ; but as a matter of fact these distinctive characteristics are such
as to render those methods which have been approved by experience in the case
of shipping, still more efficacious and still more easy of application to the case
of dealing in land.
The perishable nature of shipping affords no valid argument to the contrary,
because dealings after the lapse of fifty years or upwards under the system
of registration of title are conducted as readily and as securely as those which
take place immediately after the launching of the vessel. On the other hand
the removal of shipping beyond the law or jurisdiction of the Registrar, as
well as the impossibility of subdividing a ship into separate properties, vesting


each proprietor with power to do with his portion whatsoever he listeth,
occasion difficulties which do not lie in the way of dealing with land under
the same method.
In order to bring land under this simple and efficacious law, a preliminary
step must be to cut off the necessity for retrospective investigation of
title. By this the grand source of insecurity, of costliness, of intricacy,
and of delay, is removed. Indefeasibility of title is a necessary corollary
to this step, and from this again follows the necessity of providing a fund
whence compensation in money may be secured to the rightful heirs and
others who through the operation of the law may be barred from recovering
the land itself. By transferring the liability from the land to the person of
the individual deriving advantage from the error, with right to claim com-
pensation from a guaranteed Assurance Fund, failing the personal security,
this object is effected in the manner most consistent with individual rights
and with principles of public expediency. For there is scarcely any appreci-
able hardship in compelling the acceptance of*pecuniary compensation to the
full value of the land; whilst grievous injury is inflicted by that law which
in restoring to a rightful heir his inheritance, bestows upon him therewith
the capital of innocent parties invested thereon, to an amount, it may be, far
in excess of the value of the land itself.
, This point conceded as a preliminary step, there is absolutely no difficulty
in applying to the subsequent dealings in land that law and those methods
under which shipping property has been transferred for centuries past, and to
the amount of many millions, with security, economy, facility, and promptitude.
The benefits actually realized in South Australia from this policy are,
Ist—Titles being indefeasible proprietors may invest capital on land secure
against risk of deprivation, and the no less harras3ing contingency of a
Chancery suit; mortgagees also having no further occasion to look to validity
of title, may confine their attention to the adequacy of the security ; 2nd
A saving, amounting on the average to ninety per cent., or eighteen shillings
in the pound sterling, has been effected in the cost of transfers and other
dealings, irrespective of the contingent liability to further expenses resulting
from suits at law and in equity, the grounds of which are cut off by the
alteration of tenure; 3rd —the procedure is so simple as to be readily com-
prehended, so that men of ordinary education may transact their own busi-
ness ; 4th—dealings in land are transacted as expeditiously as dealings in
merchandize or cattle, fifteen minutes being the average time occupied in
filling up the forms and completing a transaction.
Prospective advantages, certain to be realized so soon as the Real Property
Act comes into universal operation, are, Ist the value of land, especially of
such land as was previously held under blistered titles, will be enhanced in
proportion to the increased security and facility of transfer ; 2nd so soon as
the fact is generally understood and realized that the risks, costs, and impe-
diments which heretofore attended the system of mortgage, and placed


landed securities without the Dale of hunting *
awflxr ♦!, r P eot banking transactions are entirely sweDt
away, the use of money will be obtain ™ , . . y swept
An<sfrai;a •*. • . obtained on landed securities in South
Austiftiia,, as it is now in i .1
exceeding the amount paid for the use of money Tdv E d Ur ° Pe ’ & ***
first-class mercantile securities. advanced on government or
An eminent writer on political economy Mr J s Mill h , , ,
“ *• lakeland as easily transferrable as stock
economical improvements which could be bestowed 1 greateSt
English Law Keform Association
Transfers of Land ” remarks “It w h ! ° D Eeglstratlon o{
and authority in such matters that a cheTp 7 ly 0 ” 8 ° f experience
system of transfers of land would add four orT ’ eXPed,tl ° US ’ and accurate
- teo)to the marketable X £.* ZT “
pursuant to resolution of the House of Com™ Le Comi ™sioners appointed
of “ Kegistration of Title” state “ the oh' f ti” 8 ° rep ° rt Upoa t,ie sub J ect
means consistently with th ptsertati to “ * " hat
The South H r f a problem fob solution; it
o f e ;M pe „om the
msts are rapidly availing themselves of those mean/ “ ,0 ’


THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
AN ACT TO SIMPLIFY THE LAWS RELATING TO THE TRANSFER
AND ENCUMBRANCE OF FREEHOLD AND OTHER
INTERESTS IN LAND.
No. 15, 1857-8.
Preamble.
Whereas the inhabitants of the Province of South Australia are subjected
to losses, heavy costs, and much perplexity, by reason that the laws relating
to the transfer and encumbrance of freehold and other interests in land are
complex, cumbrous, and unsuited to the requirements of the said inhabitants,
it is therefore expedient to amend the said laws—Be it Enacted, by the Gover-
nor-in-Chief of the said Province, with the advice and consent of the Legisla-
tive Council and House of Assembly of the said Province, in this present
Parliament assembled, as follows :
Eepeal of previous Acts.
1. All Laws, Statutes, Acts, Ordinances, rules, regulations, and practice
whatsoever, relating to freehold and other interests in land, so far as inconsis-
tent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, so far as regards
their application to land under the provisions of this Act, or the bringing of
land under the operation of this Act.
Short title.
2. This Act may be cited for all purposes as the 44 Real Property Act.”
Interpretation of certain terms.
3. In the construction, and for the purposes of this Act, and in all instru-
ments purporting to be made or executed thereunder (if not inconsistent with
the context and subject matter), the following terms shall have the respective
meanings hereinafter assigned to them, that is to say —
The word “ Land” shall extend to and include messuages, tenements, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, of every kind and description
(whether of a greater or less description than life-estates, and whether
at law or in equity), together with all paths, passages, ways, waters,
watercourses, liberties, privileges, casements, plantations, gardens,
mines, minerals, and quarries, and all trees and timber thereon or
thereunder, lying or being, unless the same are specially excepted :
41 Grant” shall mean the land grant of any land of the Crown by any Resi-
dent Commissioner or Governor of the said Province, to any person or
persons :
“ Proprietor” shall mean any person seised or possessed of any estate at
law or in equity, in possession, in futurity, or expectancy, whether a
life estate, or of a greater or less description than a life estate in any
land:
44 Transfer” shall mean the execution of every instrument, and the perfor-
mance of every formality, including registration, required by this Act
to give validity to the passing, either of the whole of the proprietor’s
interest in land, or of any less estate therein :
44 Memorandum of Sale” shall mean the instrument executed by the person
having estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act, for
the purpose of transferring stfch estate and interest in form of the
Schedule hereto annexed, marked B:
B


“ Transmission” shall mean the acquirement of title to or interest in lands,
consequent on the will, intestacy, bankruptcy, insolvency, or marriage
of a proprietor :
“ Certificate of Title” shall mean the instrument executed by the Registrar-
General, in form A of the Schedule hereto annexed, duplicate of which
constitutes a separate page in the register book, vesting the fee simple,
or any less estate (as the case may be), in land brought under the
operation of this Act:
“ Mortgage” shall be applicable to every charge on, or interest in land,
created merely for securing a loan :
“ Mortgagor” shall mean the borrower of money on the security of any
estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act:
“ Mortgagee” shall mean the lender of money upon the security of any
estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act:
“ Bill of Mortgage” shall mean the instrument in form of the Schedule
hereto annexed, marked D, required under this Act to be executed by
the intending mortgagor, with a view to creating such mortgage as
last aforesaid :
“ Encumbrance” and “ Assignment” shall mean the execution by a person
of every necessary or suitable instrument, and the performance of every
formality, including registration, required by this Act, for assigning,
surrendering, or otherwise transferring land of which such person is
possessed, either for the whole estate of the person so possessed or for
any less estate, in order to render such land available for securing the
payment of any annuity or dower, or for the payment of any sum of
money either absolutely or subject to conditions, restrictions, or con-
tingencies ; including also the execution, by the Registrar-General,
of every instrument, and the performance by him of every formality
required by this Act to give validity to such encumbrance or assign-
ment:
“ Encumbrancer” shall mean the person, not being a mortgagor, who shall
have assigned any estate or interest in land under the operation of this
Act for the purpose of securing any annuity, dower, or sum of money :
“ Encumbrancee” shall mean the person, not being a mortgagee, to whom
or for whose benefit any estate or interest in land under the provisions
of this Act shall have been encumbered or assigned:
“ Bill of Encumbrance” shall mean the instrument creating such encum-
brance or assignment executed by the person having estate or interest
in land under the operation of this Act in form of one or other of the
Schedules hereto annexed, marked respectively E or F :
" Estate in Fee Simple” shall mean the absolute property in land, such as is
originally vested by a “ Grant” in the meaning of this Act:
" Registration Abstract” shall mean the instrument under the hand and
seal of the Registrar-General, executed in form of the Schedule
hereto marked H, or in words to the like effect, available in lieu
of the register book, for the purpose of enabling a person to morlgage
or t> sell, in places without the limits of the said Province, land under
the operation of this Act whereof he may be seised as proprietor:
"Lunatic” shall mean any person who shall have been found to be a
lunatic upon enquiry by the Supreme Court, or by any Judge thereof,
or upon a Commission of Enquiry issuing out of the Supreme Court
in the nature of a writ de lunatico inquirendo :
The expression “ Person of Unsound Mind ” shall mean any person not an
infant, who, not having been found to be a lunatic, shall be incapable,
from infirmity of mind, to manage his own affairs :
“Consular Officer” shall include Consul-General, Consul, and Vice-Consul,
and any person for the time being discharging the duties of Consul-
General, Consul, or Vice-Consul:
“ Registrar General ” shall mean the Registrar-General, or other officer
duly authorized or appointed to carry out the provisions of this Act,
or any person duly authorized as Deputy of such Registrar-General, or
to act on his behalf in respect to this Act:


The word “ instrument ” shall mean and include any land grant, certificate
of title, conveyance, assurance, deed, map, plan, will, probate, or ex-
emplification of will, or any other document, in writing, relating to the
transfer or other dealing with lands:
“ Register Book” shall mean the book hereinafter directed to he kept for
the purpose of recording therein, in order, grants and certificates of
titles issued, and the execution of instruments affecting land under the
operation of this Act:
“ Person,” used and referred to in the masculine gender, shall include a
female as well as a male, and shall include a body corporate:
The naming any person as proprietor, vendor, mortgagor, mortgagee, en-
cumbrancer, encumbrancee, lessor or lessee, or as trustee, or as
seised of or having any estate or interest in any land, shall be
deemed to include the heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns of
such person:
And, generally, unless the contrary shall appear from the context, every
word importing the singular number only shall extend to several
persons or things, and every word importing the plural number shall
apply to one person or thing, and every word importing the masculine
gender only shall extend to a female.
Functions of the Registrar-General and his department.
4. The department of the Registrar-General shall be the department te
undertake the general superintendence of matters relating to the transfer,
transmission, sale, mortgage, and encumbrancing of all land under the opera-
tion of this Act, and the releasing of such land from any mortgage or
encumbrance, and shall he authorized to carry into execution the provisions
of this Act, and of any Acts to amend or extend the provisions of this Act
in force for the time being.
Oaths of office.
5. The oath following, shall ho taken before one of the Judges of the
Supreme Court, by the Registrar-General, and by each Deputy Registrar-
General, after the passing of this Act; and by every Registrar General and
Deputy Registrar-General to be hereafter appointed, before entering upon the
execution of his office—
I, A. 8., do solemnly swear, that I will faithfully, and to the best of my
ability, execute and perform the office and duties of Registrar-General,
or Deputy Registrar-General, for the Province of South Australia, ac-
cording to the provisions of the Real Property Act. So Help me God.
Certificates and documents purporting to be signed and sealed in a given manner to be re-
ceived as evidence.
6. All documents whether purported to be issued or written by or under
the directions of the Registrar-General, and purporting either to be sealed
with his seal or signed by him, or by one of his deputies, shall be received in
evidence, and shall be deemed to be issued or written by or under the direc-
tions of the Registrar-General without further proof unless the contrary be
shown.
Registrar-General may make rules.
7. The Registrar-General may, with the consent of the Governor, for the
purposes of carrying into effect the provisions contained in this Act, give
such instructions as to the manner of making entries in the register book, as
to the execution and attestation of instruments as to any evidence to be re-
quired for identifying any person, and generally as to any act or thing to be
done in pursuance of this Act, as he may think fit.
Registrar-General, with sanclion of Governor, to issue forms of instruments, &o.
8. The Registrar-General may, with the consent of the Governor of the
said Province from time to time prepare and sanction forms of the various
books, instruments, and papers required by this Act, and may with like
sanction from time to time make such alterations therein as he deems
requisite; and shall, before finally issuing or altering any such form, give
such public notice thereof as he deems necessary in order to prevent inconve-
nience • and shall cause every such form to be sealed with such seal as aforesaid,
b 2


or marked with some other distinguishing mark, and to be supplied at the
General Registry Office free of charge, or at such moderate prices as he may
from time to time fix, or may licence any person to print and sell the same ;
and every such instrument and paper as aforesaid shall be made in the form
issued by the Registrar-General, and sanctioned by him as the proper form for
the time being; and every such instrument or paper, if made in a form purport-
ing to be a proper form, and to be sealed or marked as aforesaid, shall be taken
to be made in the form hereby required, unless the contrary is proved.
Penalty for counterfeiting seal, fraudulently altering forms, and for not using forms issued by
the Registrar-General.
9. Every person who counterfeits, assists in counterfeiting, or procures to
be counterfeited, such seal or other distingushing mark as aforesaid, or who
fraudulently alters, assists in fraudulently altering, or procures to be fraudu-
lently altered, any form issued by the Registrar-General with a view of
evading any of the provisions of this Act or any condition contained in such
form, shall for each offence be deemed guilty of a misdemeanour, and shall
incur a penalty not exceeding One Hundred Pounds; or may, at the discretion
of the Court before whom such case may be tried, be imprisoned for any period
not exceeding twelve calendar months; and every person who, in any case in
which a form sanctioned by the Registrar-General is by this Act required to be
used, uses without reasonable excuse any form not purporting to be so sanc-
tioned, or who prints, sells, or uses any document purporting to be a form so
sanctioned knowing the same not to be so sanctioned for the time being, or
not to have been prepared and issued by the Registrar-General, shall for each
such offence incur a penalty not exceeding Ten Pounds.
Powers of Registrar.
10. The Registrar-General may exercise the following powers, that is to
say—
To inspect documents.
(1.) He may require the proprietor or other person making application to have
any land brought under the operation of this Act, or the proprietor, or
mortgagee, or other person interested in any land under the operation
of this Act, in respect of which any transfer, lease, mortgage, or other
encumbrance, or any release from any mortgage or encumbrance, is
about to be transacted, or in respect of which any transmission is about
to be registered, or a registration abstract granted under this Act, to
produce any land grant, certificate of titles, conveyance, bill of sale,
mortgage deed, lease, will, or any other instrument in his possession or
within his control affecting such land or the title thereto:
He may summon and examine witnesses.
(2.) He may summon any such proprietor, mortgagee, or other person as
aforesaid to appear, and give any explanation respecting such land, or
the instruments affecting the title thereto, and if, upon requisition duly
made by the Registrar-General, such proprietor, mortgagee, or other
person refuses or neglects to produce any such instrument, or to allow
the same to be inspected, or refuses or neglects to give any explanation
which he is hereinbefore required to give, or knowingly misleads or
deceives any person hereinbefore authorized to demand any such ex-
planation, he shall for each such offence incur a penalty not exceeding
Twenty Pounds ; and the Registrar-General, if the instrument or in-
formation so withheld appears to him material, shall not be bound to
proceed with the bringing of such land under the operation of this Act,
or with the registration of such mortgage or sale, or with the issuing
of such powers of mortgage or sale as the case may be. *
H« may administer eaths.
(3.) He may administer oaths, or, in lieu of administering an oath may re-
quire any person examined by him to make and subscribe a declara-
tion of the truth of the statements made by him in his examination.


Further powers of Registrar-General.
(4.) The Registrar-General may, upon such evidence as shall appear to him
sufficient in that behalf, correct errors in entries made, and supply entries
omitted to be made under the provisions of this Act: Provided always,
that in the correction of any such entry, he shall not erase or render il-
legible the original entry; and shall, on correcting or supplying any
entry, affix his initials thereto; and every correction so made and omis-
sion so supplied, shall have the like validity and effect as if such error had
not been made, or such entry omitted, except as regards any assurance or
instrument which may been entered in the register book previously to
the actual time of correcting the entry or supplying the omitted entry.
He may enter caveat on behalf of any person who shall be under the
disability of infancy, coverture, lunacy, unsoundness of mind, or ab-
sence from the Province, or on behalf of Her Majesty, Her heirs,. or
successors, to prohibit the transfer or dealing with any land belonging
or supposed to belong to any such persons as hereinbefore mentioned.
Appointment of Lands Titles Commissioners.
11. It shall be lawful for the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, by warrant under his hand, and the public seal of the said Province, to
appoint two persons, not being legal practitioners, who, together with the Regis-
trar-General, shall be Commissioners for investigating and dealing with claims
for the bringing of land under the provisions of this Act, and from time to time
with like advice and in like manner to remove any of such Commissioners so
appointed from office, and to appoint another person in his place.
Style, remuneration, form of procedure.
12. The style of such Commissioners shall be the “ Lands Titles Commis-
sioners.” The Registrar-General shall receive a reasonable salary. The other
Commissioners shall be remunerated by fees on applications referred to them for
bringing lands under the operation of this Act, as set forth in the Schedule hereto
marked U. At meetings of the said Lands Titles Commissioners two shall
form a quorum, and the Registrar-General, if present, shall preside as Chair-
man.
Solicitors to be appointed.
IS. It shall be lawful for the said Commissioners, subject to the ap-
proval of the Governor, to appoint two legal practitioners, at reasonable sala-
ries, to be their solicitors and permanent counsel, and also, subject to the like
approval, to dismiss and discharge such solicitors and to appoint others in
their stead.
Land alienated after the first day of July, 1858, to be subject to provisions of this Act.
14. All land alienated from the Crown within the said Province,. from and
after the first day of July, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight, shall
be subject to the provisions of this Act.
Lands granted prior to the day on which this Act comes into operation may be brought under
the operation of this Act.
15. Land, in the said Province, the grants of which may have been signed
prior to the day appointed for this Act to come into operation (whether such
land shall constitute the entire or only part of the. land included in any
grant), may be brought under the operation of this Act in the following
manner, that is to say —the Registrar-General shall receive applications in
the form of the Schedule hereto annexed, marked I, or in words to that effect,
for bringing land under the operation of this Act, if made by any of the fol-
lowing persons, that is to say—
By any person (claiming to be the person) in whom the fee simple of the
land is vested in possession, either at law or in equity, and not being a
mortgagee: Provided that, wherever trustees seised in fee simple have
no express power to sell the land which they may seek to bring under
the operation of this Act, the person claiming to be beneficially entitled
for the first life estate, or other greater estate than a life-estate, in the
said land, shall consent in such application.


By any person claiming to have contracted to purchase the fee of any land,
but not having obtained a conveyance of the said land : Provided that
the vendor of the said land shall consent in such application.
By any person claiming to be entitled beneficially to land for a life estate,
or a greater estate than a life-estate, in possession.
By any married woman beneficially entitled to land for a life estate, or a
greater estate than a life-estate, in possession : Provided that the
husband of such married woman shall consent in such application.
By the father (if he shall be living), or (if the father shall be dead) by the
mother, or other guardian of any minor, in the name of such minor.
By the committee or guardian of any lunatic or person of unsound mind,
in the name of such lunatic or person of unsound mind.
Undivided shares and mortgaged lands may not be brought under Act, except upon conditions.
Provided always, that the Registrar-General shall not receive such applica-
tion from any person claiming to be entitled to an undivided share of
any land, unless the persons who shall appear to be entitled to
the other undivided shares of the said land shall join in such appli-
cation with a view to bringing the entirety of the said land under the
operation of this Act; nor shall the Registrar-General receive any
application from the mortgagor of any land subject to mortgage to
bring such land under the operation of this Act, unless the mortgagee
shall consent in such application.
Applicant to deposit instruments of title; and abstract, if required.
16. And such applicant shall, at the time of making his application, de-
posit with the Registrar-General all instruments in his possession, or under
his control, constituting, or in any way affecting his title to such land, and
also, if required, an abstract of title, in which he shall set forth and describe
every instrument constituting or in any way affecting his title to such land,
with the names and so far as shall be within his knowledge the addresses of
all persons, if any, seised or possessed of any estate or interest in such
land at law or in equity, in possession or in futurity, or expectancy, whether
a life-estate, or of a greater or less description than a life-estate, and shall
make and subscribe a declaration to the truth of such abstract, or if sueh
applicant be the sole and only person having estate or interest in such land,
then he shall make and subscribe a declaration to that effect.
Lands granted subsequent to Regiotration Act of 1842, when applicant proprietor is origi-
nal grantee and no transactions have taken place. Lands granted prior to Registration
Act of 1812 when applicant proprietor is not original grintee or mortgages are satisfied
or parties thereto are also parties to application, and no transmissions have taken place.
When evidence of title is not clear, or transmissions have taken place, or parties in-
terested in unsatisfied mortgages are not parties to the application.
17. Upon the receipt of such application the Registrar-General shall refer
the same to the Lands Titles Commissioners for their consideration, and if
it shall appear to such Commissioners that the applicant proprietor is the
original grantee of the land in respect to which application is made, and that
such land has been granted on or subsequent to the first day of March, one
thousand eight hundred and forty-two, and that no sale, mortgage, or other
encumbrance or transaction in any way affecting the title of such land has at
any time been registered in the said Province, then, and in such case it shall
be lawful for such Commissioners to direct the Registrar-General to bring such
land under the operation of this Act forthwith ; and if it shall appear to the
satisfaction of the said Commissioners that the land referred to in such appli-
cation was granted prior to the first day of March, one thousand eight hundred
and forty-two, or that the title of the applicant to such land has not been
derived by transmission, and that every mortgage, encumbrance, or beneficial
interest affecting such title has been released and satisfied, or if any such
mortgage, encumbrance, or interest remains unsatisfied that the parties in-
terested therein are also parties to such application, then and in any such
case the said Commissioners shall direct the Registrar-General to cause notice
of such application to be advertised, once in the South Australian Government
Gazette, and three times in at least one newspaper published in the City of
Adelaide, and shall further limit and appoint a time not less than one month


nor more than twelve months from the date of the advertisement in the South
Australian Government Gazette, upon or after the expiration of which the
Registrar-General shall, unless he shall in the interval have received a caveat
forbidding him so to do, proceed to bring such land under the operation
of this Act: But if it shall appear to the satisfaction of the said Com-
missioners that the applicant’s title to such land has been derived by
transmission, or that any parties interested in any unsatisfied mortgage
or encumbrance affecting the title to such land, or any other party
beneficially interested therein, are not parties to such application, or that
the evidence of title set forth by such applicant proprietor is imperfect,
it shall be lawful for such Commissioners to direct the Registrar-General
to reject such application altogether, or, at their discretion, to direct
the Registrar-General to cause notice of such application to be published in
the South Australian Government Gazette, and in the London Gazette , and
in the official gazettes of each of the colonies of New South Wales, Victoria,
Tasmania, and New Zealand, or in any one or more of such gazettes, and the
said Commissioners shall specify the number of times, and at what intervals,
such advertisement shall be published in each or any of such gazettes, and
shall also limit and appoint a time, not less than two months nor more than
three years from the date of the first of such advertisements in the South
Australian Government Gazette , upon or after the expiration of which it shall
be lawful for the Registrar-General to bring such land under the operation of
this Act, unless he shall in the interval have received a caveat, forbidding
him so to do.
Notice of application to be published. Lands brought under the Act by notice in the Govern-
ment Gazette.
18. The Registrar-General shall, under such direction as aforesaid, or
under any order of the Supreme Court, cause notice to be published in such
manner as by such direction or order may be prescribed, that application had
been made for bringing the land therein referred to under the operation of this
Act; and shall also cause copy of such notice to be posted in a conspicuous
place in his office, and in such other places as he may deem necessary ; and
shall proceed by notice, published in th e South Australian Government Gazette,
to bring the land referred to in such application under the provisions of this
Act, unless within the time limited in such direction, or under any order
of the Supreme Court, he shall have received a caveat, as hereinafter
described, forbidding him so to do.
Parties interested may enter caveat.
19. It shall be lawful for any person having or claiming an interest in any land
so advertised as aforesaid, or for the attorney of any person having or claiming
interest therein, within the time hereinbefore limited and appointed, or that may
by such direction as aforesaid of the Lands Titles Commissioners, be for that
purpose limited and appointed, to lodge a caveat with the Registrar-General
forbidding the bringing of such land under the operation of this Act, which
caveat shall be in the form of the Schedule hereto annexed marked L, or as
near thereto as circumstances permit, and shall particularize the estate,
interest, lien, or charge, claimed by the person lodging the same, and if such
claim is made under any instruments other than those set forth in the ab-
stract deposited by the applicant proprietor, the person lodging such caveat
shall deliver a full and complete abstract of his title, which shall contain the
same matters, and be subject to the same regulations as are hereinbefore pre-
scribed for the case of an abstract deposited by the applicant proprietor.
If caveat be received within time limited proceedings stayed.
20. The Registrar-General, upon receipt of any such caveat within the
time for either case limited as aforesaid shall notify the same to such appli-
cant proprietor, and shall suspend further action in the matter, and the lands
in respect of which such caveat may have been lodged shall not be brought
under the operation of this Act until such caveat shall have been withdrawn,
or shall have 1 ■ psed from any of the causes hereinafter provided, or until a
decision shall have been obtained from the Court having jurisdiction in the
matter.


Penalty for lodging caveat without reaionable ground.
21. After the expiration of three calendar months from the date thereof
every caveat shall he deemed to have lapsed unless the person by whom or
on whose behalf the same was lodged shall, within that time, have taken
proceedings to establish his title to the estate, interest, lien, or charge therein
specified, and every person who shall fail to show probable cause for lodging
such caveat to the satisfaction of the Judge before whom any prosecution
may in such case be instituted, shall forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
One Hundred Pounds.
Applicant proprietor may summons Begistrar-General to show cause, if dissatisfied.
22. If, upon the application of any proprietor to have land, of which he
is seised brought under the operation of this Act the Registrar-General shall
refuse so to do, or if such applicant proprietor shall be dissatisfied with the
direction upon his application, given by the Lands Titles Commissioners a 3
hereinbefore provided, it shall be lawful for such applicant proprietor to require
the Registrar-General to set forth in writing, under his hand, his objections
to the title of such applicant proprietor or the grounds upon which such
direction was given, and such applicant proprietor may, if he think fit, at
his own costs, summons such Registrar-General to appear before the Supreme
Court to substantiate and uphold his objections to such title, such summons
to be issued at the request of such applicant proprietor, or his solicitor, under
the hand of a Judge of the said Court, and served upon such Registrar-
General six clear days, at least, before the day appointed for the hearing of
such objections, and such objections shall be heard by the said Court upon
motion; and upon such hearing the said Court shall, if any such objections
be a question of fact, direct an issue to be tried to decide such fact; and it
shall thereupon be lawful for the said Court to forbid the bringing of such
land under the operation of this Act, or to order that such land may ba
brought under the same after the expiration of such period of time as the
said Court shall think fit, not exceeding the period limited by any law, for
the time being in force in the said Province, as the period within which
actions of ejectment may be brought, and the Registrar-General shall obey
such order.
Case may be argued by counsel; expense to be borne by applicant.
23. Upon any such motion as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for any person
interested in any land touching or concerning the title to which such motion
shall be made, and for the said Registrar-General by himself or his counsel, to
argue the same before the said Court, in support of or objection to the
bringing of such land under the operation of this Act, and the Registrar.
General, or his solicitor, shall have the right of reply; and all expenses
attendant upon any of the matters or proceedings aforesaid shall be borne
and paid by the person requiring such land to be brought under the
operation of this Act.
Form of notice for bringing land under operation of this Act.
24. Every notice for bringing land under the operation of this Act shall
be in the form of the Schedule hereto annexed, marked M, or in words to
the like effect, and shall take effect and be valid to all intents from the date
of the publication thereof.
Applicant proprietor may withdaw his application.
25. It shall be lawful for any proprietor, being an applicant to have land
brought under the operation of this Act, to withdraw his application at any
time prior to the issuing of such notice; and the Registrar-General shall,
in such case, upon request in writing, signed by such applicant pro-
prietor, return to him the abstract, and all instruments of title, deposited by
such proprietor for the purpose of supporting his application.
Caveats in certain cases not to bar the bringing of land under this Act.
26. The Registrar-General shall not notice any caveat forbidding the
bringing of land under the operation of this Act, if the party lodging the
same claims only an estate or interest to take effect after the determina-
tion, or in defeasance of an estate tail, or forbids the bringing of such land


under the operation of this Act, on the plea only of the absence of legal
evidence that a former proprietor was in being and capable at the time when
any power of attorney executed by such proprietor was exercised by his
attorney in the selling or purchasing, or releasing of such land.
Certificate of title to be issued when land is brought under the operation of this Act.
Instruments of title, if they include other property, to be returned to applicant
proprietor.
27. So soon as any land has been brought under the operation of this Act,
the Registrar-General shall make out and deliver to the applicant proprietor
a certificate of title to the same, in form or to the effect hereinafter described,
and every such certificate of title shall contain a reference to the original
grant of such land, and the Registrar-General shall stamp as cancelled every
instrument of title deposited by such proprietor, when making his application :
Provided that, if any grant or other instrument so deposited shall relate to or
include any property, whether personal or real, other than the land included
in such certificate of title, then the Registrar-General shall endorse on such
grant or other instrument a memorandum setting forth that the said grant or
instrument is cancelled, in so far only as relates to the land included in such
certificate of title, and shall return such grant or other instrument to such
proprietor, otherwise ho shall retain the same in his office : Provided, also,
that the powers or authorities of the husband of any married woman, or of
the guardian or committee of any minor, luriktic, or person of unsound mind,
shall in no wise be altered or abridged, in consequence of the issuing of any
certificate of title in the name of such married woman, minor, lunatic, or
person of unsound mind.
Certificate of title to issue in name of deceased applicant proprietor, unless Registrar-
General shall have notice of his death. Succession not interfered with thereby.
28. In case an applicant proprietor shall die in the interval between the
date of his application to bring land under the operation of this Act, and the
date when he shall be entitled to receive a certificate of title to such land, the
certificate of title shall be issued in the name of such applicant proprietor,
unless the Registrar-General shall have received notice in writing of the
death of such applicant proprietor from his legal personal representative, heir,
or devisee ; and such land shall devolve in like manner as if the certificate of
title had been issued to the applicant proprietor prior to his death.
Certificate of title to be issued to legal representative of applicant proprietor deceased.
29. Upon receipt of such notice of the death of an applicant proprietor
dying as hereinbefore is mentioned, the Registrar-General may, upon like
proof as is required to be made before him in the case of transmission by the
death of the registered proprietor of any land, issue a certificate of title to
the legal personal representative of such deceased proprietor, or other person
legally entitled to receive certificate of title for such land under the provisions
of this Act, unless he shall have previously received a caveat forbidding the
issue of such certificate of title, and the caveator shall in such case take
such proceedings as shall be necessary for establishing his right or claim to
the estate or interest claimed by him; and such caveat and the proceedings
thereunder shall be subject to the provisions in this Act provided for the case
of caveats forbidding the registration of transfers, transmissions, or other
dealings in land under the operation of this Act.
Remaindermen may be registered as such. Name of remainderman to be endorsed on cer-
tificate of title. Remainderman on being registered to contribute to assurance fund.
30. Whenever a certificate of title shall have been issued to a proprietor in
respect of a life estate, or any other estate less than an estate in fee simple,
in land under the operation of this Act, the person entitled as remainderman
to the said land may apply to the Registrar-General to be entered in the
register book as a remainderman, and the Registrar-General shall thereupon
cause the title of such applicant to the estate or interest claimed by him to be
investigated; and shall cause advertisements to be published in manner herein-
before prescribed for the case of bringing land under the operation of this Act,
and shall proceed to enter the name of such applicant on the register book, as
remainderman of the estate or interest to which he shall appear to be entitled,


unless caveat, forbidding such entry, shall be received by him within the time
for that purpose limited in such direction or by any order of the Supreme
Court; and the Registrar-General shall endorse upon the certificate of title of
such land, if produced to him for that purpose, a memorandum, setting forth
that such applicant had been entered in the register book as such remainder-
man, with the day and hour in which such entry had been made ; and the
Registrar-General shall in every such case receive the same fees and pay-
ments, including the sum payable to the assurance fund, as are required to be
paid by persons applying to bring land under the operation of this Act.
Remainderman registered as such, prohibited from dealing with estate, except in manner pre-
scribed in this Act. Provision not to apply to unregistered remainderman.
31. Every remainderman and every person deriving, through a remainder-
man, registered as such in the register book, shall thereafter transfer, mort-
gage, encumber, or otherwise deal with the estate or interest, in respect to
which he is so registered, in manner and by the use of the instruments and
forms by this Act, prescribed in each case for the transfer, mortgage, encum-
brance, and other dealing with land, under the operation of this Act, and not
otherwise; and the Registrar-General shall enter the particulars of every
memorandum of sale, bill of mortgage, bill of encumbrance, or other instru-
ment duly executed by such remainderman, or person deriving through a
remainderman, affecting the estate or interest in respect to which he is
registered in the register book, in manner hereinafter prescribed for the case
of transfers, mortgages, encumbrances, and other dealings in land, under the
operation of this Act: Provided always that nothing herein contained shall
be constmed to invalidate any deed, conveyance, or assurance, which a re-
mainderman may have executed in respect to his estate or interest in such
land prior to h s being entered as such remainderman in the register book.
Certificate of title to be issued to remainderman as soon as his estate shall revert into an estate
m possession, and to purchaser entitled to a present estate in fee simple.
32. Upon proof, to the satisfaction of the Registrar-General, that the life-
estate, or other less estate than an estate in fee simple, in respect of which a
certificate of title of land shall have been issued to any person by the Registrar-
General, is determined, or has become vested in the person entitled to the said
land for the estate next in remainder, or that a purchaser is absolutely en-
titled to the said land for a present estate in fee simple in possession, it shall
be lawful for the Registrar-General to cancel the existing certificate of title of
such land, and, in lieu thereof, to issue such new certificate of title of the
said land as the nature of the case and other circumstances may render neces-
sary ; and the Registrar-General shall, in such case, enter in the register book
and on the certificate of title, when delivered up, the particulars by this Act
prescribed to be entered in the case of cancelling a certificate of title conse-
quent on a transfer or transmission : Provided also, that previous to issuing
any such new certificate of title of such land as hereinbefore mentioned the
Registrar-General may require the title of the person claiming to be entitled
in remainder to the said land to be investigated, and direct advertisements to
be published in any such manner as is hereinbefore prescribed for the case of
applications made for the purpose of bringing land under the operation of this
Act; and shall receive the same fees and payments, including the sum payable
to the assurance fund, as are required to be paid by persons applying to briug
land under the operation of this Act. 6
I ersons registered as joint proprietors to be joint tenants. Tenant* in common to receive eaoh
a distinct certificate of title.
33. Two or more persons who may be registered as joint proprietors of an
estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act, shall be deemed to
be entitled to the same as joint tenants; and in all cases where two or more
persons are entitled as tenants in common to undivided shares of or in any
land, such persons shall be bound to receive separate and distinct certificates
of title, or other instrument evidencing title to such undivided shares.
Registrar-General to keep register book.
34. The Registrar-General shall keep a book, to be called the “ Register
Book of Real I roperty,” and shall bind up therein the duplicates of all grant*


and of all certificates of title issued from and after the first day of J uly, one
thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight, and shall open therein a separate page
for each grant and certificate of title, and shall record thereon the particulars
of all instruments affecting the land included under each such grant or certi-
ficate of title, distinct and apart.
Certificate of title to be in duplicate, and to be bound up in register.
35. Every certificate of title made out by the Registrar-General shall be in
duplicate, and in the form marked A in the Schedule hereto, and the Registrar-
General shall note by endorsement thereon, and in such manner as to preserve
their priority, the particulars of all unsatisfied mortgages or other encum-
brances, and of every lease, rent, charge, or term of years, or outstanding
estate whatsoever, affecting such land, which shall have been registered, or of
which he may have notice, and shall cause one of such certificates of title to
be bound up in the register book, and deliver the other to the proprietor en-
titled to the land described in such certificate, and every such certificate, duly
authenticated under the hand and seal of the Registrar-General shall be re-
ceived in all Courts of Justice as evidence of the particulars therein set forth
and of their being entered in the register book in the manner set forth in such
certificate.
Instruments not to be registered unless in accordance with prescribed forms.
36. The Registrar-General shall not register any instrument purporting to
transfer, or otherwise to deal with or affect anyestate or interest in land under
the operation of this Act, unless such instrument be in accordance with the
provisions thereof.
Grants and other instruments to be executed in duplicate. Grants and certificates of title
registered when embodied in register book. Other instruments registered when par-
ticulars thereof are entered on the register book.
37. Every grant, certificate of title, memorandum of sale, or other instru-
ment transferring or in any way affecting land under the operation of this
Xet, shall be executed in duplicate, and the Registrar-General after registering
the same shall retain in his office one original of every such instrument, and
shall deliver the other to the person entitled thereto, and every land grant,
and every certificate of title to such land, shall be deemed and taken to be
registered under the provisions and for the purposes of this Act so soon as the
same shall have been marked by the Registrar General with a folio and volume
as embodied in the register book; and every memorandum of sale, or other
instrument as aforesaid, shall be deemed to be so registered so soon as the
particulars thereof shall have been entered in the register book in manner
hereinafter described.
Instruments effectual when entered in the register book. Upon entry of particulars, instru-
ment deemed to be part of register book.
38. So soon as the particulars thereof shall have been entered in the register
book, etery instrument drawn in any of the several forms provided in the
Schedules to this Act, or in any form which the Registrar-General may deem
it requisite and expedient to sanction for transferring, mortgaging;, leasing, or
otherwise dealing with land under the operation of this Act, or for creating,
transferring, surrendering, or discharging any estate or interest in the said
land, shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed and taken to he embodied
in the said register book as part and parcel thereof, and the estate or interest
mentioned in such instrument as to be transferred or otherwise dealt with or
affected, shall thereupon pass, and be vested iu manner directed in such in-
strument, subject to such conditions and covenants as may therein be ex-
pressed, or as are by this Act declared to be implied in instruments of the like
nature, and such instrument when so constructively embodied, as aforesaid,
in the register book, shall have equal validity and effect as any deed or instru-
ment heretofore executed and used for the purposes aforesaid, and shall create
and impose the like obligations on the persons signing the same, and shall
also continue in force for the like period of time as any deed or other instru-
ment made to secure the payment of any specialty debt.
Certificate of title and entry in register book indefeasable title.
39. Notwithstanding any error or omission in the observance of any


formality herein prescribed to be observed in bringing land under the opera-
tion of this Act, and excepting in the case of frauds, and so far as regards
any wrong description of any land or of its boundaries, or the omission or mis-
description of any right-of-way or other easement, created in, or existing
upon, any land under the operation of this Act, every certificate of title or
entry in the register book, signed by the Registrar-General, shall absolutely
vest the estate or interest in the land therein mentioned, in the manner and
to the effect expressed in such certificate of title or entry, and the registered
proprietor of such estate or interest in the said land shall be secure from
eviction or disturbance or adverse claim, in respect of any estate, right, or
interest in the said land, which is not declared in such certificate of title, or
entry on the register book, or in the instrument referred to in such entry.
Percentage of halfpenny in the Pound to be levied for assurance of title.
40. Upon the first bringing of any land under the operation of this Act,
whether by the alienation thereof from the Crown, or consequent upon the
application of the proprietor thereof as hereinbefore provided, and also upon
the registration of the title to any land under the provisions of this Act
derived through the w'll or intestacy of a previous proprietor, there shall
be paid to the Registrar-General the sum of one halfpenny in the Pound
sterling on the value of such land; and in the case of land brought under
the operation of this Act by alienation from the Crown, the price paid for
such land shall be deemed and taken to be the value thereof for the purpose
of levying such sum of one halfpenny in the Pound, and in all other cases as
aforesaid such value shall be ascertained by the oath or solemn affirmation
of the applicant proprietor, or person deriving such land by transmission:
Provided always that if the Registrar-General shall not be satisfied as to the
correctness of the value so declared or sworn to, it shall be lawful for him to
require such applicant proprietor, or person deriving such land by trans-
mission to produce a certificate of such value under the hand of a sworn
appraiser, which certificate shall be received as conclusive evidence of such
value for the purpose aforesaid.
Assurance Fund to be invested in Government Securities. Deficiency to be made good out of
General Bevenue.
41. All sums of money so received as aforesaid, shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the said Province to constitute an Assurance Fund, out of which
shall be made good the full amount awarded by any verdict or decree of Court
to the rightful heir or proprietor of land under the operation of this Act as
hereinafter provided, failing the recovery of such amount from the person
who may by fraud, misrepresentation, or error, have become registered as
proprietor of the same; and the said Treasurer may from time to time invest
such sums in the South Australian Government Securities : Provided always
that in case of deficiency in such Assurance Fund the full amount so awarded
shall be made good to such rightful heir or proprietor out of the General
Revenues of the said Province.
Transfer by eale.
42. When land under the operation of this Act is intended to be disposed
of by sale, the vendor shall execute a memorandum of sale, in form of the
Schedule hereto annexed marked B, or as near thereto as circumstances
permit, which memorandum shall contain such description of the land in-
tended to be transferred as is contained in the original grant, or in the
certificate of title of such land, or such description as may be sufficient to
identify that particular portion of land which it is intended to dispose of,
and shall contain an accurate statement of the estate or interest of such vendor
intended to be transferred, and a memorandum of all mortgages and other
encumbrances affecting the same ; and if such land be leased, the name and
description of the lessee with a memorandum of the lease, and every such
memorandum of sale shall be attested by a witness.
Begietration of transfer. Memoranda of sale to be entered in the order of their production.
43. Every memorandum of sale for the transfer of land under the operation
of this Act, when duly executed, shall be produced to the Registrar-General,
who shall thereupon enter in the register book, the name, residence, and


description of the vendor, or of each vendor, if more than one; the name,
residence, and description of the purchaser, or of each purchaser, if more
than one: the amount of the consideration money paid; the date of the memo-
randum of sale, and of its production, and such other particulars as the
Registrar-General may deem necessary; and shall endorse on such memo-
randum of sale, and also on the duplicate grant or certificate of title, lease, or
other instrument evidencing title to the estate or interest intended to
be transferred, the fact of such entry having been made, with the date and
hour thereof, and shall sign each such endorsement and shall affix his seal to
such memorandum of sale, and the particulars of every such memorandum of
sale shall he entered in the register book in the order of the production
thereof, and upon such entry being made by the Registrar-General, the land
or the estate or interest therein, as set forth and limited in such memorandum
of sale as to he transferred, shall pass to and vest in the purchaser; and
every memorandum of sale so endorsed and authenticated shall be received
in all Courts of Justice as sufficient evidence of the particulars therein set
forth, and of their having been entered in the register book in manner stated
in such memorandum of sale.
Purchaser not entitled to call for any instrument dated prior to the existing certificate of title.
44. Upon the sale or transfer of any estate or interest in land under the
operation of this Act, the purchaser or transferee of such estate or interest
shall not be entitled to call for the production of any memorandum of sale,
or other instrument dated prior to the date of the existing certificate of
title of such land, unless such instrument shall be entered in the register
book, and notified by memorandum on the duplicate of such certificate as
an encumbrance, lien, or interest in, or affecting the said land.
Easements and incorporeal right* to be registered.
45. Whenever any easement or any incorporeal right other than an
or rent charge affecting any land under the operation of this Act
is created for the purpose of being annexed to, or used and enjoyed, together
with other land under the operation of this Act, the Registrar-General shall
enter in the register book the date of the memorandum of sale or other
instrument creating such easement or incorporeal right, the date of its pro-
duction to him, the name, residence, and description of the grantor and ot the
grantee, the amount of the consideration money, the nature of the incorporeal
right or easement, and such other particulars as the Registrar-General may
deem necessary.
If estate in fee simple be transferred certificate of title to be delivered up and cancelled so far
as regards the portion of land transferred.
46. If the memorandum of sale purports to transfer an estate in fee simple
in the whole or in part of the land mentioned in any grant or certificate of
title, the vendor shall (unless the grant or certificate of title shall be held
by some registered mortgagee or encumbrancee, whose mortgage or encum-
brance is not intended to be paid off and discharged out of the purchase-
money) deliver up the grant or certificate of title of the said land; and the
Registrar-General shall in such case enter on such grant or certificate of title
a memorandum cancelling such grant or certificate of title, either
wholly or partially, according as the memorandum of _ sale purports to
transfer the whole, or part only, of the land mentioned in such grant or
certificate of title, and setting forth the particulars of the transfer occasioning
such surrender and cancelling.
Fresh certificate to be issued to purchaser, A certificate for the balance, if any, unsold to be
issued to proprietor when demanded, or to a registered transferee thereof.
47. The Registrar-General, upon cancelling auy grant or certificate of
title, either wholly or partially, pursuant to any such transfer, shall make
out to the purchaser, or other registered transferee, a certificate of title to the
land mentioned in such memorandum of sale, and every such certificate of
title shall refer to the original grant of such land, and to the memorandum of
sale or other instrument of transfer to the purchaser or other registered trans-
feree thereof; and the Registrar-General shall retain every such cancelled or
partially cancelled grant or certificate of title; and whenever required


thereto by the proprietor of an unsold portion or balance of land included ire
any such partially cancelled grant or certificate of title, or by a registered
purchaser or transferee of such portion or balance of land so included, or of
r‘ a m . a u 6 ,° ut t 0 ® u , ch P ro P ri etor, purchaser, or transferee a
certificate of title for such balance of land, or for any part thereof, of which
he is the proprietor, purchaser, or transferee.
Lands under the operation of this Act ho* leased. Particulars to be recorded in register,
endorsement by Registrar legal evidence.
48. When any land under the operations of this Act is intended to be
leased or demised for a life or lives, or for any term of years exceeding
three years, the proprietor shall execute a lease in form of the Schedule
hereto annexed, rnarked C, or as near thereto as circumstances permit: and
r ° + n tai i n t o e same description that is given in the grant
oLt t6 ff f tlt!e u° f , th j an j’ °, r such other description as may be neces-
sary to identify such land, and shall be attested by a witness ; and such
lease, when so executed, together with the grant, certificate of title, or
~n, ,ns ‘ rUT T t evidencing the title of such proprietor to an estate in
such land, unless the Registrar-General shall dispense with the production
to thT R gr - a ? t ’ c ® rtlfica f e of tltle - or other instrument, shall be presented
to the Registrar-General, who shall record in the register book the date and
hour of such production to him, the date of the lease, the amount of rent
or consideration money, the dates on which it is appointed to be paid, and
the names and the descriptions of the lessor and of the lessee, and if right
of purchase is intended to be granted in such lease, the amount of the
purchase money, and the period within which the right may be exercised :
and shall record the like particulars by memorandum on the grant', certifi-
cate of title, or other instrument, as aforesaid; and shall endorse on the
lease a memorandum of the day and hour on which the said particulars
were entered in the register book, and shall authenticate such memorandum
by signing his name and affixing his seal thereto; and every lease bearing
such memorandum, so authenticated shall be received as evidence on behalf
of the lessor and lessee named in the said lease, or other person claiming
any estate or interest under the said lease, of all covenants, conditions,
restrictions, and matters therein expressed, or by this Act declared to be
implied on the part of the lessor or lessee respectively.
Right of purchase may be granted.
i 4 j\i ln an y suc ! ll ® ase as aforesaid, a right to purchase the fee simple of the
land thereby demised may be granted to the lessee by a stipulation to that
effect expressed m such lease ; and, in such case, the true amount of the
purchase money to be paid by the lessee, the period within which such right
may be exercised, and such other particulars as may be considered necessary
for explaining the terms of such right of purchase, shall be stated on such
lease; and, in case the lessee shall pay the purchase money stipulated, and
otherwise observe his covenants expressed and implied in such lease, the lessor
shall be bound to execute a memorandum of sale to such lessee of the said
land, and the fee simple thereof, and to perform all necessary acts by this Act
iandand the fee *° * PU " h ” er
50. Upon the entry in the register book of any lease, the land which is
therein mentioned to be leased, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the
lessee for the term or other estate in and by the said lease mentioned to be
emised, and subject to the express and implied covenants, conditions, and
restrictions contained in the said lease, and which are hereinafter declared to
be implied on the part of the lessor and the lessee respectively: save and
except so tar as any such implied covenants and conditions are qualified or
negatived by the said lease; Provided always that no lease of mortgaged or
encumbraneed land, executed subsequently to the entry in the register book
of any bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance shall be valid and binding
against the mortgagee or encumbrancee, unless such mortgagee or encum


brancee shall have consented to such lease prior to the same being entered in
the register book.
Lease may be surrendered by endorsement by lessee, with concurrence of lessor.
51. Whenever any lease, or demise, which is required to be registered by
the provisions of this Act, is intended to be surrendered, and the surrender
thereof is effected otherwise than through the operation of a surrender in
law, or than under the provisions of any law at the time being in force in the
said Province relating to insolvent estates, there shall be endorsed upon such
lease, or on the counterpart thereof, the word “ surrendered,” with the date
of such surrender; and the said endorsement shall be signed by the lessee and
by the lessor, as evidence of the acceptance thereof, and shall be attested by a
witness; and the Registrar-General shall thereupon enter in the register book
a memorandum recording the date of such surrender, and shall likewise endorse
upon the lease a memorandum recording the fact of such entry having been
made in the register book, and upon such entry being so made in the register
book, the estate or interest of the lessee in such land shall revest in the
lessor, or in such other person as, having regard to intervening circum-
stances, if any, the said land would have been vested if no such lease had
ever been executed ; and the production of such lease or counterpart bearing
such endorsement and memorandum as hereinbefore mentioned shall be
sufficient evidence that such lease had been so surrendered.
Lands under this Act, how mortgaged or encumbered. Mortgage or encumbrance valid, when
particulars entered in register book.
52. Whenever any estate or interest in land under the operation of this
Act is intended to be charged or made security in favour of any mortgagee,
the mortgagor shall execute a bill of mortgage in form of the Schedule hereto
annexed marked D, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit, and
whenever any such estate or interest as aforesaid is intended to be charged
with, or made security in favour of any encumbrancee, for the payment of an
annuity, rent charge, or sum of money, the encumbrancer shall execute a
bill of encumbrance, in form of one or other of the Schedules hereto annexed
marked respectively E and F, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit;
and every such bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance shall contain an accu-
rate statement of the estate or interest intended to be mortgaged or encum-
bered, and such description as is given in the grant or certificate of title of the
land in which such estate or interest is held, or such other description as may
be necessary to identify such land, together with a statement of all mort-
gages and other encumbrances, if any, which may affect the said land, estate,
or interest; and every such bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance shall be
attested by a witness, and every bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance so
executed, together with the grant or certificate of title of such land, or as the
case may be, the lease or other instrument evidencing the title of the mort-
gagor or encumbrancer to such estate or interest in the said land, shall be
produced to the Registrar-General, who shall enter in the register book the
date and hour of such production to him, the date of the bill of mortgage or
bill of encumbrance, the name, residence, and description of the mortgagor or
encumbrancer and of the mortgagee or encumbrancee ; and in the case of a bill
of mortgage, the amount of the principal money secured, the rate of interest,
and the date, if any, appointed for the redemption of such money, and the
dates on which interest is appointed to be paid, or, in case of a bill of encum-
brance, the amount of the annuity, rent charge, or sum of money intended
to be charged or secured, the times appointed for the payment of 6uch
annuity, rent charge, or other sum of moneythe rate of interest in case
interest thereon shall be payable under the bill of encumbrance, and the
events upon which such annuity, rent charge, or sum of money and interest
Bhall become and cease to to be payable; and the Registrar-General shall
record the like particulars by a memorandum endorsed upon such grant or
certificate of title, lease or other instrument of title; and shall also endorse
upon such grant or certificate of title, lease, or other instrument, a memo-
randum stating the day and hour of the day in which the particulars of such
mortgage or encumbrance had been recorded in the register book; and upon


such entry being made as aforesaid in the register book, the estate or
interest in the land referred to and described in such bill of mortgage or bill
of encumbrance shall be held by such mortgagor or encumbrancer, subject to
and liable for the payment of the principal sum and interest.
Bill of mortgage or encumbrance to be recorded in order of time in which they are produced to
Registrar-General, and endorsed. Priority of mortgages and encumbrances.
53. Every bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance shall be entered by
the Registrar-General in the register book in the order of time in which
the same is produced to him for that purpose; and the Registrar-General
shall record by memorandum on such bill of mortgage or bill of encum-
brance, that the same has been entered by him, stating the day and hour of such
entry, and shall certify such memorandum by signing the same and affixing
his seal thereto, and every such bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance so
certified shall be received in all Courts of Justice as sufficient evidence that
the estate and interest therein described had been so mortgaged or encum-
bered, as the case may be, and of all other particulars therein contained; and
bills of mortgage and bills of encumbrance registered in respect to or affecting
the same estate or interest in any land under the operation of this Act,
shall, notwithstanding any express, implied, or constructive notice, be entitled
in priority one over the other according to the date at which each instru-
ment is recorded in the register book, and not according to the date of each
instrument itself.
Remedy when mortgagor or encumbrancer is in default. Power to sell. Appropriation of
proceeds.
54. In case default shall be made for the space of one calendar month in
payment of the principal money or interest, or any part thereof secured by
any registered bill of mortgage, or if default shall be made in the observance
of any covenant that may be expressed in such bill of mortgage, or that is
therein as against the mortgagor hereinafter declared to be implied, or in
case such default for the space aforesaid shall be made in payment of the
annuity, rent charge, principal money, or interest, or any part thereof, res-
pectively secured or charged upon any land by any registered bill of encum-
brance, or if default shall be made in the observance of any covenant that
may be expressed in such bill of encumbrance, the mortgagee or encum-
brancee, after giving to the mortgagor or encumbrancer notice in writing to
pay the money then due, or owing on such bill of mortgage or bill of en-
cumbrance, or to observe the covenants therein expressed or implied, as the
case may be, or after leaving such notice on the mortgaged or encumbered
land, or at the usual or last known place of abode in (South Australia of the
mortgagor or encumbrancer, or other person claiming to be then entitled
to the said land, and after such default in payment or observance thereof
continuing for the further space of one calendar month from the date of such
notice, is hereby authorized and empowered to sell the said land so mort-
gaged or encumbered, or any part thereof, and all the estate and interest
therein of the mortgagor or. encumbrancer, and either altogether or in lots,
by public auction or by private contract, or both such modes of sale, and
subjeet to such conditions as he may think fit, and to buy in and resell the
same without being liable for any loss occasioned thereby, and to make and
execute all such instruments as shall be necessary for effecting the sale
thereof, all which sales, contracts, matters, and things hereby authorized,
shall be as valid and effectual as if the mortgagor, or encumbrancer had made
done, or executed the same, and the receipt or receipts in writing of the
mortgagee or encumbrancee shall be a sufficient discharge to the purchaser
of such encumbered land, estate, or interest, or any portion thereof, for so
much of his purchase money as may be thereby expressed to be received, and
no such purchaser shall be answerable for the loss, misapplication, or non-
application, or be obliged to see to the application of the purchase money
by him paid, nor shall he be concerned to enquire as to the fact of any default,
notice, or requisition having been made or given as aforesaid; and the
purchase money to arise from the sale of any such land shall be applied, first
m payment of the expenses occasioned by such sale; secondly, in payment


of the moneys which may then be due to the mortgagee or encnmbrancee, and
the surplus (if any) shall be paid to the mortgagor or encumbrancer, as the
case may be.
Registrar-General to give effect to sale by mortgagee or encumbrancee.
55. The Registrar-General, in any such case as aforesaid, upon receipt of
a memorandum of sale of such estate or interest so mortgaged or encumbered,
signed by such mortgageo or encumbraneee, shall enter the particulars of
such memorandum of sale in the register book, and shall record the fact of
such entry by endorsement on such memorandum of sale, and shall in other
respects proceed in manner herein prescribed for the case of a transfer of a
like estate or interest by the proprietor thereof, and every such transfer when
so recorded by the Registrar-General shall be as valid and effectual to pass
such estate or interest as if the memorandum of sale had been executed
by the mortgagor or encumbrancer prior to the date of the execution of the
bill of mortgage or the bill of encumbrance, as the case may be ; and if such
memorandum of sale shall purport to pass an estate in fee simple,, aud the
existing grant or certificate of title be for that purpose surrendered so him,
the Registrar-General shall make out and deliver to the purchaser a certifi-
cate of title to such land, having first endorsed thereon memoranda setting
forth the particulars of all unsatisfied mortgages or other encumbrances,
and of all leases, transfers, or other transactions (if anyl affecting such land,
which shall appear to have been registered and recorded upon such grant or
certificate of title so surrendered, and shall in all other respects proceed as
hereinbefore is directed in the case of the sale of an estate in fee simple in
land under the operation of this Act.
Payments by instalments and extension of time.
56. The payment of any sum of money by weekly instalments, or other
periodical payments, may be secured on any land or on any estate or interest
therein, by bill of mortgage, or bill of encumbrance, in the form or to the
effect of either of the said Schedules D or B to this Act annexed, by varying
such form, so as to express fully the terms and modes of payment of such
sum of money: Provided also, that the period of time hereinbefore limited as
the period after expiration of which it shall be lawful for a mortgagee or en-
cumbrancee to sell an estate pledged as security, in the event of default made
in payment of interest or principal, or of any annuity or rent charge, or in
consequence of the non-fulfilment of any covenant, may, by condition ex-
pressed in any such bill of mortgage, or bill of encumbrance, be extended or
shortened, and, notwithstanding such variations in such form, the like cove-
nants, rights, powers, and obligations, shall be implied thereunder and thereby,
both against the mortgagor or encumbrancer, and the mortgagee or encum-
brancee, as would be implied if no such variation had been made in the form
of such Schedule.
Bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance not a transfer. In case of default, mortgagee or
encumbrancee may enter and take possession, or may distrain. May bring action for
ejectment, or may foreclose right of redemption.
57. Every bill of mortgage and bill of encumbrance shall be construed and
have effect only as a security for the sum of money, annuity, or rent charge
intended to be thereby secured, and shall not operate or take effect as a transfer
of the land, estate, or interest intended to be thereby charged with the payment
of any money; but it shall be lawful for the mortgagee or encumbrancee, upon
default in payment of the money secured by such bill of mortgage or bill of
encumbrance, or any part thereof, to enter into possession of the mortgaged
or encumbered land, by receiving the rents and profits thereof, or to distrain
upon the occupier or tenant of the said land, under the power to distrain
hereinafter contained: Provided also, that it shall be lawful for any registered
mortgagee or encumbrancee, whenever any money, annuity, or rent charge
shall have become in arrear, to bring an action of ejectment, to obtain pos-
session of the said land, either before or after entering into the receipt of the
rents and profits thereof, or making any distress as aforesaid; and either before
or after any sale of such land shall be effected, under the power of sale given
or implied in such bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance ; and any such
o


registered mortgagee or encumbrancee shall be entitled by suit or other pro-
ceedings in equity to foreclose the right of the mortgagor or encumbrancer
to redeem the said mortgaged or encumbered lands.
Mortgagee or encumbrancee may distrain on tenant or occupier for arrears, not exceeding
the amount of rent due by such tenant or occupier. No lessee liable for greater sum
than the amount of rent actually owing by him.
58. Besides his personal remedy against the mortgagor or encumbrancer, as
the case may be, every mortgagee or encumbrancee, for the better recovery of
any arrears of interest which may be due under any bill of mortgage, or of
the arrear of any annuity or rent charge, or any interest which may be due
under any bill of encumbrance, shall be entitled after such interest, annuity,
or rent charge shall have become in arrear for twenty-one days; a».d after ap-
plication for the payment thereof shall have been made, by, or on behalf of
the mortgagee or encumbrancee, as the case may be, to the occupier or tenant
of any land mentioned in the said bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance, to
enter upon the said lands, and distrain and sell the goods and chattels of such
occupier or tenant of the said land, and to retain thereout the moneys which
shall be so in arrear, and all costs and expenses occasioned thereby: Provided
that no lessee or tenant, occupying such land, shall be liable to pay to any
mortgagee or encumbrancee of such land a greater sum than the amount of
rent which, at the time of making such distress, may be then due from such
lessee or tenant to the mortgagor or encumbrancer, or to the person claiming
the said land, under the mortgagor or encumbrancer.
Procedure when leasehold interest is sold under bill of mortgage or encumbrance.
59. Whenever any lease shall have been sold by a mortgagee or encum-
brancee of the said lease, under the power of sale given to him by this Act,
the said lease may be transferred to the purchaser by the endorsement on the
said lease, signed by the mortgagee or encumbrancee in manner hereinafter
provided in case of the transfer of a registered lease, or by such other form as
the Registrar-General shall approve of; and the Registrar-General, at the time
of recording on the said lease, in the manner hereinafter provided, the transfer
thereof to the purchaser, shall cancel the said bill of mortgage or bill of en-
cumbrance, and shall enter in the register book the particulars of such transfer
and of such cancellation; and shall also, if the same shall be presented to him
for that purpose, endorse on the grant or certificate of title of the land men-
tioned in such bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance, a memorandum, stating
that such mortgage or encumbrance had been discharged or had ceased to
exist, and the date on which such last-mentioned entry had been made in the
register book; and every such transfer, when so entered in the register book
by the Registrar-General, shall be as valid and effectual to pass the said lease-
hold estate or interest as if the transfer of the said lease had been executed
by the mortgagor or encumbrancer prior to the date of the execution of the
bill of mortgage or bill of encumbrance, as the case may be.
Mortgagee or encumbrancee of leasehold entering into possession of rent and profits becomes
liable to lessor.
60. Any mortgagee or encumbrancee of leasehold land, under the operation
of this Act, or any person claiming the said land as a purchaser or otherwise,
from or under such mortgagee or encumbrancee, shall, after entering into
possession of the said land, or the rents and profits thereof, become and be
subject and liable to the lessor of the said land or the person for the time being
entitled to the said lessor’s estate or interest in the said land, to the same
extent as the lessee or tenant, under the said lease of such land, was subject
to and liable for prior to such mortgagee, encumbrancee, or other person en-
tering into possession of the said land or the rents and profits thereof.
Discharge of mortgages and encumbrances.
61. Upon the production of any such bill of mortgage or bill of encum-
brance, having thereon a receipt for the entire or any part of the mortgage
money or encumbrance money thereby secured, signed by the mortgagee or
encumbrancee, and attested by a witness, the Registrar-General shall make an
entry in the register book, noting that the said mortgage or encumbrance is
discharged wholly or partially, as the case may require; and upon such entry


being so made in the register book, the estate or interest which by such bill of
mortgage or bill of encumbrance had been pledged or subjected as security for
such loan or sum of money, shall cease to be subject to or liable for the same,
or, as the case may be, for the part thereof, noted in such entry as discharged
pursuant to such entry as aforesaid: And, in case any annuity or sum of
money shall be secured by any such bill of encumbrance during the life of any
encumbrancee or other person, or contingent upon the occurrence of some event
or circumstance, the Registrar-General, on the production of such bill of en-
cumbrance, together with proof of the death of such annuitant, or other
person, or together with proof of the occurrence of the event or circumstance,
upon which, in accordance with the provisions of such bill of encumbrance,
such annuity or sum of money shall cease to be payable, as the case may be,
and upon proof of all arrears of the said annuity and interest or money having
been paid, satisfied, or discharged to the said annuitant, or other person en-
titled to the same, shall make an entry in the register book, noting that such
annuity or sum of money is satisfied and discharged, and shall cancel such
bill of encumbrance; and, upon such entry being made in the register book,
the estate or interest which had been pledged or subjected as security for the
payment of such annuity or sum of money, shall cease to be subject to or
liable for the same, or any charges incident thereon: And the Registrar-
General shall, in any or either such case asaforesaid, endorse on the grant,
certificate of title, or other instrument evidencing the title of the mortgagor
or encumbrancer to the estate or interest mortgaged or encumbranced, a
memorandum of the date on which such entry as aforesaid was made by him
in the register book, whenever such grant, certificate of title, or other instru-
ment shall be presented to him for that purpose.
Mortgage money may be paid-to Registrar-General, if mortgagee be absent from the Colony
and mortgage discharged.
62. It shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, in case any mortgagee shall
be absent from the Province, or in case there shall be no person authorized to
give a receipt to the mortgagor for the mortgage money, at or after the date
appointed for the redemption of any mortgage, to receive such mortgage
money, with all arrears of interest then due thereon, in trust for the mortgagee
or other person entitled thereto ; and the Registrar-General shall thereupon
make an entry in the register book, discharging such mortgage, stating the
day and hour on which such entry is made, and such entry shall be a valid
discharge for such mortgage, and shall have the same force and effect as is
hereinbefore given to a like entry when made upon production to the Registrar-
General of the bill of mortgage with the receipt of the mortgagee; and the
Registrar-General shall, if demanded, give to the mortgagor a receipt for the
money so paid to him in trust, and shall endorse on the grant, certificate of
title, or other instrument as aforesaid, and also on the bill of mortgage, when-
ever those instruments shall be brought to him for that purpose, the several
particulars hereinbefore directed to be endorsed on each of such instruments
respectively: Provided always, that if it shall be shown to the Registrar-
General that any absent mortgagee has a duly constituted attorney or agent
in the Province, authorized to receive such mortgage money and interest, the
Registrar-General shall not receive the aforesaid mortgage money and interest
in trust for such absent mortgagee; provided also, that after payment to the
Registrar-General of any mortgage money and interest, under the provisions
hereinbefore contained, the mortgagee entitled thereto shall not recover from
the Registrar-General, or the Treasurer of the Province, any further sum or
interest, in respect of the said mortgage, than the sum which shall have been
so received by the Registrar-General in trust for such mortgagee, and upon
and after the date of such payment to the Registrar-General, the interest upon
such mortgage shall cease to run or accrue.
Transfer of mortgage, and of encumbrance, and of lease.
63. A registered mortgage, a registered lease, or the interest of a registered
encumbrancee of any laud under this Act may be transferred to any person, by
endorsement on the bill of mortgage, lease, or bill of encumbrance, which en-
dorsement shall be in the form of the Schedule hereto annexed marked O, or
o 2


in words to the like effect; and on the production of such bill of mortgage,
lease, or bill of encumbrance, so endorsed, to the Registrar-General, he shall
enter in the register book the name of the transferee as mortgagee, lessee, or
encumbrancee, of the land therein mentioned, and shall, by memorandum
under his hand, record on such bill of mortgage, or bill of encumbrance, or
lease, and, if the same be presented to him for that purpose, on the grant,
certificate of title, or other instrument evidencing title to the estate or interest
mortgaged or encumbered, that such transfer had been recorded by him,
stating the date and hour of such record; and, upon such entry being so
made, the estate or interest of the transferror, as set forth in such instrument,
with all rights, powers, and privileges thereto belonging or appertaining, shall
pass to the transferee; and such transferee shall thereupon become subject
to and liable for all and every the same requirements and liabilities to which
he would have been subject and liable if named in such instrument originally
as mortgagee, encumbrancee, or lessee, of such land, estate, or interest, and
the Registrar-General shall certify such endorsement by signing the same,
and affixing his seal thereto, and every transfer, so certified, shall be received
in evidence by any Court of Justice as sufficient evidence of its having been
so entered in the register book.
General covenants te be implied in instruments.
64. In every instrument creating or transferring any estate, interest, or
charge for valuable consideration under the provisions of this Act, there shall
be implied the following covenants by the party creating or transferring such
estate, interest, or charge, that is to say—That such covenanting party will,
at the cost of the party requiring the same, do all such acts and execute all
such instruments as in accordance with the provisions of this Act may be
necessary to give effect to all covenants, conditions,* and purposes expressly
set forth in such instrument as aforesaid, or as are by this Act declared to be
implied against such covenanting party in any such instrument.
Covenants to be implied in every bill of mortgage.
65. In every bill of mortgage there shall be implied the following covenants
against the mortgagor, that is to say—
(l.) That he will pay the principal money and interest thereby secured
after the rate and at the times therein mentioned, without any deduc-
tion whatsoever:
(2.) That the mortgagor will repair and keep in repair all buildings or
other improvements erected and made upon such land ; and that the
mortgagee may, at all convenient times, until such mortgage be re-
deemed, be at liberty, with or without surveyors or others, to enter
into and upon such land, to view and inspect the state of repair of such
buildings or improvements.
Covenants to be implied in every lease against the lessee.
66. In every lease there shall be implied the following covenants against
the lessee, that is to say—
(l.) That he will pay the rent thereby reserved at the times therein men-
tioned, and all rates and taxes which may be payable in respect of
the demised property, during the continuance of the lease:
(2.) That he will keep and yield up the demised property in good and
tenantable repair.
Powers to be implied in lessor.
67. In every lease there shall also be implied the following powers in the
lessor, that is to say—
(l.) That he may, by himself or his agents, at all reasonable times, enter
upon the demised property, and view the state of repair thereof, and
may serve upon the lessee, or leave at his last or usual place of abode
in this colony, or upon the demised property, a notice, in writing,
of any defect, requiring him, within a reasonable time to be therein
prescribed, to repair the same.


(2.) That in case the rent, or any part thereof, shall be in arrear for the
space of six calendar months, or in case default shall be made in the
fulfilment of any covenant, whether expressed or implied in such
lease on the part of the lessee, and shall be continued for the space
of six calendar months, or in case the repairs required by such notice
as aforesaid shall not have been completed within the time therein
specified, it shall be lawful for such lessor to re-enter upon and take
possession of such demised premises.
Eegistrar-General to note particulars of re-entry in register book.
68. In any such case the Registrar General, upon proof to his satisfaction
of re-entry and recovery of possession by a lessor by anv proceeding in law,
shall note the same by entry in the register-book, and the estate of the lessee
in such land shall thereupon determine, but without releasing him from his
liability in respect of the breach of any covenant in such lease expressed or
implied, and the Registrar General shall cancel such lease if delivered up to
him for that purpose.
Abbreviated forms of words for expressing covenants to be as effectual as if such covenants
were set lorth in words at length.
69. Such of the covenants hereinafter set forth as shall be expressed in any
lease or mortgage, as to be implied against the lessee or mortgagor, shall, if
expressed in the form of words hereinafter appointed and prescribed for the
case of each such covenant respectively, be so implied against such lessee or
mortgagor as fully and effectually as if such covenants were set forth fully
and in words at length in such lease or mortgage; that is to say, the words
“ that he will insure,” shall imply as follows—that he will insure and so long
as the term expressed in the said mortgage or lease shall not have expired,
will keep insured, in some public insurance office, to be approved by such
mortgagee or lessor, against loss or damage by fire, to the full amount
specified in such lease or bill of mortgage, or if no amount be specified, then
to their full value, all buildings, tenements, or premises erected on such land,
which shall be of a nature or kind capable of being insured against loss or
damage by fire, and that he will, at the request of the mortgagee or lessor,
hand over to, and deposit with him, the policy of every such insurance, and
produce to him the receipt or receipts for the annual or other premiums
payable on account thereof: Provided, always, that all moneys to be re-
ceived under or by virtue of any such insurance shall, in the event of loss or
damage by fire, be laid out and expended in making good such loss or damage :
Provided also, that if default shall be made in the observance or performance
of the covenant last above-mentioned, it shall be lawful for the mortgagee or
lessor, without prejudice nevertheless, to and concurrently with the powers
granted him by his bill of mortgage or lease, in manner in and by this Act
provided, to insure such building, and the costs and charges of such insurance
shall, until such mortgage be redeemed, or such lease shall have expired, be
a charge upon the said land; the words “and paint outside every alternate
year” shall apply as follows, viz.—and also will, in every alternate year,
during the currency of such lease, paint all the outside woodwork and iron-
work belonging to the hereditaments and premises mentioned in such lease,
with two coats of proper oil-colours, in a workmanlike manner; the words
“ and paint and paper inside every third year ” shall imply as follows, viz.—
and will, in every third year, during the currency of such lease, paint the
inside wood, iron, and other works now or usually painted, with two coats of
proper oil-colour, in a workmanlike manner; and also re-paper, with paper of
a quality as at present, and such parts of the said premises as are now papered;
and also wash, stop, whiten, or colour such parts of the said premises as are
now whitened or coloured respectively; the words “and will fence ” shall
apply as follows, viz.—and also will, during the continuance of the said lease,
erect and put up on the boundaries of the land therein mentioned, or upon
such boundaries upon which no substantial fence now exists, a good and sub-
stantial fence capable of resisting the trespass of horses, oxen, bulls, and
cows; the words “and cultivate” shall apply as follows, viz.—and will at all
times during the said lease cultivate, use, and manage all such parts of the


land therein mentioned as are or shall be broken up or converted into tillage
in a proper and husbandlike manner, and will not impoverish or waste the
same; the words “ that the said lessee will not use the said premises as a
shop” shall apply as follows, viz.—and also that the said lessee will not
convert, use, or occupy the said hereditaments and premises mentioned in such
lease, or any part thereof, into or as a shop, warehouse, or other place for
carrying on any trade or business whatsoever, or permit or suffer the said
hereditaments and premises, or any part thereof, to be used for any such
purpose or otherwise than as a private dwelling-house, without the consent in
writing of the said lessor; the words “ and will not carry on offensive trades ”
shall apply as follows and also that no noxious, noisome, or offensive art,
trade, business, occupation, or calling, shall at any time during the said
term be used, exercised, carried on, permitted, or suffered, in or upon the said
hereditaments and premises above mentioned, and that no act, matter, or
thing whatsoever shall at any time during the said term be done in or upon
the said hereditaments and premises, or any part thereof, which shall or may be
or grow to the annoyance, nuisance, grievance, damage, or disturbance of the
occupiers or owners of the adjoining lands and hereditaments; the words
“ and will not, without leave, assign, or sublet ” shall apply as follow, viz.—
and also that the said lessee shall not nor will during the term of such lease,
assign, transfer, demise, sublet, or set over, or otherwise by any act or deed
procure the lands or premises therein mentioned, or any of them, or any part,
thereof, to be assigned, transferred, demised, sublet, or set over unto any per-
son whomsoever without the consent in writing of the said lessor first had
and obtained; the words “ and will not cut timber ” shall apply as follows —
and also that the said lessee shall not nor will cut down, fell, injure, or
destroy any growing or living timber or timber-like trees, standing and being
upon the said hereditaments and premises above-mentioned, without the con-
sent in writing of the said lessor; the words “ and will carry on the business
of a publican, and conduct the same in an orderly manner ” shall apply as
follows, viz.—and also that the said lessee will, at all times during the currency
of such lease, use, exercise, and carry on, in and upon the premises therein
mentioned, the trade or business of a licensed victualler or publican and
retailer of spirits, wines, ale, beer, and porter, and keep open and use the
messuage, tenement, or inn, and buildings standing and being upon the said
land, as and for an inn or public-house for the reception, accommodation, and
entertainment of travellers, guests, and other persons resorting thereto or
frequenting the same, and manage and conduct such trade or business in a
quiet and orderly manner, and will not do, commit, or permit, or suffer to be
done or committed, any act, matter, or thing whatsoever, whereby or by means
whereof any licence shall or may be forfeited or become void or liable to be
taken away, suppressed, or suspended in any manner howsoever; the words
“ and will apply for renewal of licence ” shall apply as follows, viz.—and
also shall and will from time to time during the continuance of the said
term, at the proper times for that purpose, apply for and endeavour to obtain,
at his own expense, all such licences as are or may be necessary for carrying
on the said trade or business of a licensed victualler or publican, in and upon
the said hereditaments and premises, and keeping the said messuage, tene-
ment, or inn open as and for an inn or public-house as aforesaid; the words
“ and will facilitate the transfer of licence ” shall apply as follows, viz.—and
also shall and will, at the expiration or other sooner determination of the
said lease, sign and give such notice or notices, and allow such notice or
notices of a renewal or transfer of any licence as may be required by law to
be affixed to the said messuage, tenement, or inn, to be thereto affixed, and
remain so affixed during such time or times as shall be necessary or expedient
in that behalf, and generally to do and perform all such further acts, matters,
and things, as shall be necessary to enable the said lessor, or any other person
authorized by him, to obtain the renewal of any licence, or any new licence,
or the transfer of any licence then existing and in force.
Such covenants may be set forth in declaration, in actions for breach.
70. Where any memorandum of sale or other instrument in accordance
with the provisions of this Act is executed by more parties than one, such


mplied covenants shall be construed to be several and not to bind tb*
parties jointly, and in any declaration in an action for a supposed breach of
any such covenants, the covenant alleged to be broken may be set forth, and
it shall be lawful to allege that the party against whom such action is brought
did so covenant precisely in the same manner as if such covenant had been
expressed in words in such memorandum of sale or other instrument, any law
or practice to the contrary notwithstanding.
Covenants declared to be implied to have the same force as if the same had been expressed.
71. Every covenant which shall be implied by virtue of this Act shall have
the same force and effect, and be enforced in the same manner as if it had
been set out at length in the instrument wherein the same shall be implied.
Covenants declared to be implied may be negatived or modified.
72. Every covenant and power to be implied in any instrument by virtue
of this Act may be negatived or modified by express declaration on the instru-
ment, or endorsed thereon.
Lands may be vested in trust by instrument of nomination.
73. Whenever the registered proprietor of any land under the operation of
this Act, or of any estate or interest in such land, is desirous of vesting the
said land, estate, or interest in any trustees,.it shall be lawful for such pro-
prietor to execute an instrument in form of the Schedule hereto annexed,
marked K, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit, nominating
trustees of the said land, estate, or interest; and every such nomination of
trustees shall contain an accurate statement of the estate or interest intended
to be vested in any trustees, and such description as is given in the grant or
certificate of title of the land in which such estate or interest is held, or such
other description as may be necessary to identify such land, and shall be
attested by a witness ; and every nomination of trustees so executed, together
with the grant or certificate of title of such land or, as the case may be, the
lease or other instrument proving the title of the registered proprietor to such
land, estate, or interest, shall be produced to the Registrar-General, who shall
enter in the register book the date of the nomination of trustees, and the
date of its production, the name, residence, and description of the person
nominating the trustees, and the names, residences, and descriptions of the
persons who are nominated trustees, and such other particulars as the
Registrar-General may deem necessary, and shall endorse on such nomination
of trustees, and also on the grant, certificate of title, lease, or other instru-
ment evidencing title to the estate or interest intended to be vested in the
said trustees, unless the Registrar-General shall see reason to dispense with
the production thereof, the fact of such entry having been made, with the
date and hour thereof, and shall sign each such endorsement, and shall affix
his seal to such nomination of trustees, and upon such entry being made by
the Registrar General, the land, or the estate, or the interest therein, as set
forth and limited in such nomination of trustees, shall pass to and vest in the
said trustees.
Trusts may be declared either by schedule to instrument of nomination, or by separate deed
or instrument. Instrument declaring trusts to be deposited, but not registered.
74. The trusts which are intended to be declared of any land, estate, or
interest vested in trustees as hereinbefore mentioned, may be declared either
by a Schedule to the aforesaid instrument effecting such nomination of
trustees, or by any separate instrument or deed. Whenever the said trusts
are declared by a separate instrument or deed, the same may include as well
land under the operation of this Act, as land which is not under the operation
of this Act, provided that the description of the several parcels of land con-
tained in such separate instrument or deed shall sufficiently distinguish the
land which is under the operation of this Act from the land which is not
under the operation of this Act; and whenever such trusts are declared by
a separate instrument, a duplicate or attested copy of such instrument shall
be deposited with the Registrar-General for the purpose of safe custody and
reference; but such duplicate or attested copy shall not be registered.


No entry of trusts to be made In KgUter book Trustee, to receive certificate of title, and
deal with same as if beneficial owners.
I J Vhenever la " d under the operation of this Act shall be settled or
eon It ri w" m 8 Ji? St £ d ™ trusf^e 8 u P on any trust, whether express, implied’ or
onstnrct' ve, the Kegistrar-General shall not make any entry P of the said trusts
m the register book : and the trustees, after the entry in the register book of
the nomination of trustees, in manner’ hereinbefore provided shal notwith
a " y t j5 US^ . affecting the said land, be entitled to sell,’ ?ra nB fe '
•, ? g ,’ 0r , ot j ® rwise dea l Wltb tbe said land in the like manner as if the
fee d simDl?of beuefioi . al o wne rs of the said land ; and in case the
of B V ch land he 80 settled or vested in trust, such trustees shall be
entitled to receive a certificate of title for the same. trustees snail be
The a W ?„ r s d a S n,?°wI 1 f V ? 1 ’ 8h ! P ” i? any instrument of appointment shall operate to prevent
in'“ 8 “ nmb *r of trustees than are named in such instrument dealing with the land
In such case Supreme Court to give direction for appointment to any vacancy or for"
ecurmg moneys. Heceipt of trustees valid discharge; and purchaser or mortcas?ee
case e o a f vLanev Cati r ° f - , Continuin S trustees may nominate !o-
book. f y “ A PP° lr| tment of new trustees to be noted in register
nA la r ful for tbe re S iatered proprietor of any land under the
words ™™ I?'* - Act V°. r any eBtate or interest in Bu ch land, to insert the
nronnetnJ+o BUrviv , orshl P m any instrument intended by such registered
shall be so aS e a "°“ lnatl0 l n of trustees; and whenever such words
shail be so inserted, it shall not be lawful for anv less number of trustees
than the number named in the aforesaid instrument, to sdTfcS,if^SS
t g he S sknct°ion e o7 the d s a W ' tH ‘n® Said Jand ’ estate ’ 0r intereBt > without obtaining
JrVetuSmade nnder P t? m 6 ° r a , Jud S e thereof ’ b 7 an °rder, on motion,
made bv or nnleh % Le proviBlons th ' B Act, which application shall be
.“JJ *LZ ° f seme.Person beneficially interested in the aforesaid
bv JimfoS’ int r reSt ’-/ nd “ shall be lawful for th e said Court or Judge
by such order as aforesaid, to give directions for the appointment of any new
invMf 6 or trusteesi in the place of any former trustee or trustees, and for the
investment or application of such purchase money or mortgage money as the
ra, J'," ,i " t fit f "' th « »“<** of the perfons b.nefX.l*
rSm !f »| h . |7 m ‘, ,ney! and ?“ ch ordet acc ompanied by the memo-
affect tbo Lid l b d 1 ! ™ ort ?age, or instrument purporting to transfer or
GeneLf who b ?i’ ° r ln,er , est ’ shall be deposited with the Kegistrar-
-3® ral / who Bball thereupon make tbe entry in the register book, which,
under the provisions of this Act, is required for the purpose of giving effect
caBe h mav ld br-Tn°d a, ?b Uni ° f - *?' blll u mort S*S e ’ or other instrument,Ls the
be ’ a " d tb ® receipt of such trustee, or (except in cases where the
ords no survivorship ” have been entered in the register book, as herein-
after provided) the receipt of the surviving trustees or trustee, or of the legal
personal representative of the last surviving trustee, shall be a sufficient
whether p ? rchMer or mort gagee of such land or any part thereof
Tnd ft n b PUrChaSer ° r mort £ a S ee had notice or not of thesaid trusts;
the fb mort^ee °* the Baid land shall not be bound to see to
the appl catmn of the money paid, upon receiving such receipt: Provided
thaJthe number r wi,V C b nta,ne ? Sball any leBS uumbei? of trustees
h ma y be named m the aforesaid instrument operating
the numher l!f n tb° f tr f USteeB from flllin ? U P any vacancy which may arise if
co trnJtL -iVL® afo . r . eBaid trUB tees, by nominating any other person to be
meL - lnd th J beaCtlDg ° r contln uing trustees under the aforesaid instru-
S theCbLd Tu trUStCe J may be nora ' na ted by any instrument in form
will nermif U an ” e . xed » marked K, or as near thereto as circumstances
ever tbe » with the addition oi the words “no survivorship and when-
l m th ® number of the said trustees shall be so P filled up by the
reS bS,k°L a ,h y ”7 ‘r te “ th ° dull ente/iif toe
citato totinSr. 7 •“ are her ! by required to bo entered in the
J7 g Bt f, boo . k m the case of any instrument intended to operate as a nomina-
tion of trustees; and thereupon, the new trustee shall have the like eTtafo
mS 8 15°r'f nd 7 , ;f orit ?-“ if ■«" t™«ee had been Sgtoaiy'
nominated a trustee by tbe registered proprietor of such land, estate, ot interest!


The words “no surTlvorship” to be written on certificate of title, if on instrument of
nomination.
77. Whenever the words “no survivorship” shall be written upon any instru-
ment intended to operate as a nomination of such trustees, the Registrar-
General shall, during the existence of such trust, cause the words “no
survivorship ” to be written on every certificate of title of land issued to such
trustees, and also on the duplicate of every such certificate bound up in the
register-book. r
Proprietor may vest estate jointly in himself and others without limiting any use or executing
any reassignment. 6
78. It shall be lawful for the registered proprietor of any estate or interest
m land under the operation of this Act, whether such land shall be of the
nature of real or personal property, or for any mortgagee er encumbrances
thereof, by any of the forms of instruments of transfer, or ether assurance
provided by this Act, and containing such alterations, if any, as may be
deemed necessary in the said forms of instruments, to transfer or otherwise
assure and vest such land, estate, or interest, or the money secured by any bill
of mortgage, or bill of encumbrance, or any part thereof to and in himself,
jointly with any other person or persons; and it shall not be necessary, for
the purpose of any such transfer or assurance, or for the purpose of vesting
such land, estate, interest, or money in such registered proprietor jointly with
any other person or persons, to limit any use or execute any reassignment;
but the said transfer or assurance by such registered proprietor to himself
and another, or others, shall vest the said land, estate, or interest, or money
m such registered proprietor jointly with any other person or persons, ac-
cording to the intent and meaning appearing in such instrument, and thereby
expressed*
, Registrar-General to carry oat order of Supreme Court, vesting trust estate.
79. Whenever any registered proprietor of land, under the operation of this
Act, shall appear to the Supreme Court to be a trustee of such land, within
the intent and meaning of “ The Trustee Act, No. 7, of 1855,” and any order
shall be made in the premises by the Supreme Court, or a Judge thereof, the
Registrar-General, on being served with an office copy of such order shall
proceed to carry out and give effect to the same, by entering in the register-
book the date and hour of the production of the said order, the date of the said
order, and the name, residence, and description of the person in whom the said
order shall purport to vest the said land; and, until such entry as aforesaid
shall be made in the register book, the said order shall have no effect or
operation in transferring or otherwise vesting the said land in the person
named in the said order; and the Registrar-General shall also record the like
particulars upon the grant, certificate of title, or other instrument evidencing
title to the said land, in case the same shall be produced to him for that
purpose. r
Action may be brought by person claiming beneficiary interest in name of trustee. Trustee
to be indemnified.
80. Wherever a person entitled to or interested in land as a trustee for some
other person, would be entitled, under the last preceding clause, to bring or
defend any action of ejectment in his own name for the recovering the pos-
session of land under the operation of this Act, such person shall be bound to
allow his name to be used as plaintiff or defendant in such action of ejectment
by any beneficiary or person claiming an estate or interest in the said land :
Provided, nevertheless, that the person entitled or interested as such trustee"
of the said land shall in every such case be entitled to be indemnified in like
manner as a trustee would before the passing of this Act have been entitled
to be indemnified m a similar case of his name being used in any such action
or proceeding by his cestuique trust.
Transmission cf land to be authenticated bv declaration of party claiming, before registered.
Declaration, before whom made.
81. If any estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act, or any
mortgage, or encumbrance affecting such land, shall become transmitted, in
consequence of the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the registered pro


prietor thereof, such transmission shall he authenticated by a declaration in
writing, or in such other manner as the Registrar-General may require ; and
every such declaration shall state the manner in which and the party to whom
such land shall have been so transmitted, and shall be made and signed by
the person claiming to be entered in the register book as registered proprietor
of such estate or interest mortgage, or encumbrance ; or, in case the person
claiming as aforesaid shall be an infant, lunatic, or person of unsound mind,
then such declaration as aforesaid shall be made and signed by the guardian
or committee of such person claiming as aforesaid, or by some credible person
ac mg for and on behalf of such person claiming as aforesaid ; and every such
declaration shall be made before the Registrar-General, if the declarant shall
be resident within the boundaries of the City of Adelaide ; or if the declarant
shall be resident beyond the boundaries aforesaid, and within the Province of
bouth Australia, then before a Justiee of the Peace for the said Province; or
it the parties be resident in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
or in any British possession other than the said Province, or in any foreign
p ace, then in the presence of any of the persons hereinafter appointed respee-
tive y as persons before whom the execution of instruments executed beyond
the limits of the said Province may be proved. J
Transmission by bankruptcy or insolvency. Certified copy of appointment of assignee to be
noXft n W d fi h a , R wl 8t , rar H Gene n ral V Upon en,l r °f appcdihmentj assignees em-
ficiariM t 0 3631 th andß * Bankru P tc y or insolvency of trustees not to affect bene-
-82. Whenever such transmission shall take place by virtue of the bank-
ruptcy or insolvency of a registered proprietor, an office copy, or other duly
certified copy of the appointment of the assignees of the bankrupt or in-
solvent or such other sufficient evidence of such appointment as the Registrar-
General may require, shall be left with the Registrar-General; and the
Registrar-General shall thereupon enter a memorandum of the particulars of
such appointment in ihe register book, and upon such entry being made, it
shall be lawful for such assignees to transfer to any purchaser or other person,
the land, estate, or interest so transmitted as aforesaid; and every memo-
randum of sale or other instrument for that purpose, executed by such as-
signees in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall have the same
validity and effect as a like instrument would have if executed prior to such
transmission by bankruptcy or insolvency by the registered proprietor of such
land, estate, or interest: Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall
alter or vary the position of the assignees of a bankrupt or insolvent trustee
ot any land, as between such assignee and any person who may be beneficially
interested in any land, of which such insolvent trustee is the registered pro-
prietor; but the rights of such persons (if any), as between him and such
assignees, in respect of such land, shall remain entirely unaffected, notwith-
standmg the insolvency of the registered proprietor of the said land; and the
said insolvent shall transfer the said land to the persons beneficially interested
therein, and shall do and execute all acts which may be necessary for nomi-
nating a new trustee or new trustees of the said land, and carrying into effect
any trusts affecting the said land at the date of his insolvency.
“VT? 16 r op I ietor to t be £ ert *. fied t 0 Registrar-General by declaration. Par-
ticulars to be entered in register book. Instruments to be registered, giving effect to
dealings in land by married women. ’ 8 * 10
83. Whenever a female proprietor, entitled to any estate or interest affect-
ing any land under the operation of this Act, shall marry, the Registrar-
General, on production of the register of such marriage or other sufficient
evidence of the celebration thereof, accompanied by a declaration to be made
in manner hereinbefore prescribed, of the identity of the woman named in the
register book as the proprietor of such estate or interest with the person
named in such register of marriage, shall enter on the register book a memo-
randum ot the day and hour of the production to him of the register or other
evidence of such marriage, and of the particulars certified to him by such
declaration, and shall when required by such female proprietor or other
person claiming through her, enter in the register book any instrument pur-
porting to transfer or otherwise affect the said land, estate, or interest, in


accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided that every such instru-
ment shall, in all cases when the same is by law required to be acknowledged
by such married woman for the purpose of transferring the said land, estate,
or interest, be duly acknowledged by such married woman, in the manner
hereinafter provided, previously to the same being so recorded by the
Registrar-General; and every such entry by the Registrar-General shall state
the date and hour of the production of such instrument, and all such other
particulars as herein are required to be recorded by the Registrar-General
in the register book at the time of entering such instrument, and the Registrar-
General shall also make such endorsement as herein is required to be made
on the grant, certificate of title, or other instrument evidencing title to the
said land, estate, or interest thereby transferred or affected.
Transmission by death, will, and probate, or letters of administration, to be produced. Par-
ticulars to be registered.
84. Whenever land, under the operation of this Act, shall be transmitted
in consequence of the death of the registered proprietor of such land, no
person shall be entitled to obtain a certificate of title of such land, or to sell,
transfer, or otherwise affect the said land, until the probate or an office copy
of the will of the deceased proprietor, or letters of administration, in case the
said proprietor shall have died intestate, shall be produced and left with the
Registrar-General for the purpose of recording the same in the register book,
and the Registrar-General shall enter in the register book the date of the
will and of the probate, or, as the case may be, the date of the grant of the
letters of administration, the date and hour of the production to him of such
will and probate, or letters of administration, and, whenever the same can be
ascertained, the date of the death of such proprietor, with such other par-
ticulars as the Registrar-General shall deem necessary.
Certificate of title to be issued to executors or to Curator of Intestate Estates if no caveat
be lodged after advertisement. Outstanding certificates to be delivered up. Rights
of heirs and devisees saved, except so far as regards purchasers or mortgagees for
bond fide consideration.
85. After the expiration of six calendar months from the death of the
registered proprietor of any land under the operation of this Act, the executor
or administrator of such deceased proprietor, or in those cases where no
executor or administrator shall have been appointed, or where an executor
or administrator shall decline to act in the execution of the said will, or shall
not reside within the said Province, then the Curator of Intestate Estates may
apply to the Registrar-General to issue to him a certificate of title of the said
land, and the Registrar-General shall thereupon give notice of the receipt by
him of such application by one advertisement in the South Australian Govern-
ment Gazette , and two advertisements in at least one newspaper published in
the City of Adelaide; and, unless within fourteen days from the date of the
latest of such advertisements a caveat shall have been entered by, or on
behalf of any person claiming the said land, or any part thereof, or any
estate or interest therein, by devise or descent, the Registrar-General shall
proceed to issue to such executor, administrator, or the Curator of Intestate
Estates, as the case may be, a certificate of title of the said land: Provided
always that before the issuing of the aforesaid certificate of title to such
executor, administrator, or Curator of Intestate Estates, the outstanding
grant or certificate of title shall be delivered up and cancelled,
and the Registrar-General shall enter in the register book a statement
of the fact that such outstanding grant or certificate of title has
been delivered up by the executor, administrator, or Curator of Intestate
Estates, for the purpose of being cancelled, and the date and hour of such
delivery thereof: Provided also, that, subject to the power hereby conferred
upon any executor or administrator, or upon the Curator of Intestate Estates,
of transferring the said land, the rights or interests of any devisee or heir,
or of any other person interested in the said land, shall not be affected in
consequence of such certificate of title having been issued to any executor
or administrator, or to the Curator of Intestate Estates, except so far as
regards any purchaser or mortgagee of the said land, bond fide for valuable


consideration, claiming or deriving title from or under any executor or ad-
ministrator, or from or under tlie Curator of Intestate Estates.
Certificate of title to vest powers of disposition in executors or Curator of Intestate Estates.
86. After any certificate of title shall he issued by the Registrar-General
to the executor or administrator of a deceased proprietor of any land, or to
the Curator of Intestate Estates, under the provisions contained in this Act,
such executor, or administrator, or the Curator of Intestate Estates, shall
have and exercise the like power of disposition over the land mentioned in
such certificate of title as he is by law entitled to exercise over any per-
sonal estate belonging to the testator or intestate which may be vested in
him as such executor or administrator, or as the Curator of Intestate Estates
is by law entitled to exercise over the personal estate of intestates, under the
provisions of an Ordinance of the Governor and Legislative Council of South
Australia, No. 12 of 1848, intituled “An Ordinance for the better preserva-
tion and management of the estates of deceased persons in certain cases.”
Heir-at-law or devisee may apply to Judge of Supreme Court to order the Registrar-
Geueral to issue certificate of title to him. Registrar-General, if authorized by
executors, or Curator of Intestate Estates, may issue certificate of title to devisee or
heir.
87. Subject to such disposition of the said land, as hereinbefore mentioned,
by an executor, or administrator, or by the Curator of Intestate Estates, it
shall be lawful for the heir-at-law, or devisee of a deceased proprietor, at any
time to apply to the Supreme Court or a Judge thereof, by motion or petition,
in a summary way, to make an order for the Registrar-General to issue to
such heir-at-law, or devisee, a certificate of title of the land which may have
descended or have been deviled to such heir-at-law or devisee, and the
Supreme Court or a Judge thereof, shall make such order therein as may
seem proper, and may thereby direct any caveat to be entered for the pro-
tection of the interests of sueh other persons (if any) as may be interested in
the said land, and may also direct the costs of such application to be borne
and paid out of the estate of the said deceased proprietor, or by such other
person, or in such other manner as the Court may think just; and such
order shall be left with the Registrar-General, who shall enter the particulars
thereof in the register book, and shall forthwith give effect to the said order
by complying with ihe directions therein contained: Provided always, that
in any case where the executor or administrator of any deceased proprietor,
or the Curator of Intestate Estates, shall, at the time when the probate or
office copy of the will of the deceased proprietor is produced and left with
the Registrar-General for the purpose of being recorded in the register book,
by any writing authorize the Registrar-General to issue a certificate of title
of the said land to the heir-at-law or devisee of the deceased proprietor of
the said land, the Registrar-General shall comply with the aforesaid authority
by issuing such certificate of title to the heir-at-law or devisee of the
deceased proprietor of the said land, without requiring such order to be
obtained for that purpose as hereinbefore directed; and the Registrar-General
shall, thereupon, make such entry in the register book relating to the issuing
of the said certificate of title to such heir-at-law or devisee as he is hereby
required to make at the time of his issuing a certificate of title of the said land
to the executor or administrator of a deceased proprietor.
Powerß of Supreme Court under Statute of the 6th Queen Anne, applicable to registration
under this Act.
88. For the purposes of registration under the provisions of this Act, of
an estate or interest in or upon any land, or of any instrument affecting or
relating to the said land, or on any application for the issuing by the Registrar-
General of a certificate of title under the provisions of this Act, it shall be
lawful for the Supreme Court, or a Judge thereof, in its equitable jurisdiction,
upon motion or petition, to exercise all such powers as are conferred, or as
may be applicable for any of the purposes hereinbefore mentioned, under a
Statute passed in the sixth year of the reign of Her Majesty Queen Anne,
and intituled “An Act for the more effectual discovery of the death of
persons pretended to be alive, to the prejudice of those who claim estates
after their deaths.”


Transfer of mortgage or lease includes transfer of right to sue thereunder. Saving powers to
Courts of Equity to give effect to trusts.
89. By virtue of every such transfer as is hereinbefore mentioned, the
right to sue upon any bill of mortgage, bill of encumbrance, or other instru-
ment, and to recover any debt, sum of money, annuity, or damages thereunder
(notwithstanding the same may be deemed or held to constitute a chose in
action), and all interest in any such debt, sum of money, annuity, or damages,
shall he transferred so as to vest the same, at law as well as in equity, in the'
transferee thereof: Provided always that nothing herein contained shall pre-
vent a Court of Equity from giving effect to any trusts affecting the said
debt, sum of money, annuity, or damages, in case the transferee shall hold
the same as a trustee for any other person.
Partition of coparcenership, or joint tenancy, or tenancy in common.
90. Whenever it is intended that partition should be made by coparceners,
joint tenants, or tenants in common, of any land under the operation of this’
Act, or of any estate or interest in such land, such coparcerners, joint tenants,
or tenants in common, may execute a memorandum of sale, lease, or other
such instrument of transfer as in accordance with the provisions of this Act
the nature of the estate or interest may require, purporting to sell, lease, or
otherwise transfer, to each or any of such coparcerners, joint tenants, or
tenants in common respectively, such part of the said land, or their estate or
interest in such part of the said land as shall be expressed and described in
such memorandum of sale, lease, or instrument of transfer; and upon such
memorandum of sale, lease, or other instrument being presented to the
Registrar General, he shall enter the particulars of the same in the register
book, and proceed in other respects as is hereinbefore directed for the case of
the transfer of a like estate or interest in land under the operation of this
Act, and upon such entry being made in the register book the estate or
, interest of such coparceners, joint tenants, or tenants in common, in the par-
ticular piece of land described in such memorandum of sale, lease, or other
instrument, shall pass from such coparceners, joint tenants, or tenants in
common, and shall vest in the individual named and described as purchaser,
lessee, or transferee, of the estate or interest of such coparceners, joint
tenants, or tenants in common, as set forth, limited and described in such
memorandum of sale, lease, or other instrument of transfer.
Agent holding power of attorney to sell or dispose of the fee may apply to bring land under
Act and receive certificate of title in the name of his principal.
91. Where any attorney, or agent acting under a power of attorney from
a person who would himself be entitled to make application to bring any
land under the operation of this Act, and to receive certificate of title for the
same, shall by such power be authorized to sell or absolutely to dispose of
such land, it shall be lawful for such attorney or agent, in pursuance of any
contract for the sale of such land, to make a declaration that his principal is
so entitled as aforesaid, and to apply on behalf of his principal to bring such
land under the operation of this Act, and to receive certificate of title for the
same in the name of said principal; and every instrument dealing with such
laud in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and signed by such attorney
or agent on behalf of his principal shall be valid and effectual for the pur-
poses intended by such instrument, and such land shall be considered to
have been properly brought under this Act, notwithstanding the absence of
any express authority from the principal to sign such instruments or make
such declaration or application: Provided that nothing herein contained shall
interfere with any express prohibition to an attorney or agent to bring any
land under the operation of this Act.
Upon surrender of existing grants or certificates of title, the proprietor may obtain a single
certificate for all the land included therein.
92. Upon the application of any registered proprietor of lands held under
separate grants or certificates of title, and the delivering up of such separate
grants or certificate of title, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General to
issue to such proprietor a single certificate of title for the whole of such lands,
whenever the same may be done consistently with any regulations at the time


being in force, respecting the parcels of land that may be included in one
certificate of title, having regard to the descriptions of such parcels of land,
and the plans thereof by this Act required to be delineated on such certificate
of title; and, upon issuing any such single certificate of title, the Registrar-
General shall cancel the several grants or previous certificates of title of such
land so delivered up, and shall endorse upon each a memorandum setting forth
the occasion of such cancellation, referring to the single certificate of title so
issued, in which the land described in such cancelled grants or certificates of
title is included.
Upon surrender of existing grant or certificate, proprietor may obtain separate certificates, ini
eluding each a portion of the land described in such surrendered grant or certificate.
93. Upon the application of any registered proprietor of land held under a
single grant or certificate of title, and the delivering up of such single grant
or certificate of title, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General to issue to
such proprietor several certificates of title, each including a separate portion
of the land previously held by such proprietor, under such single grant or
certificate of title ; and the Registrar General shall, at the same time, cancel
such single grant or certificate of title so delivered up, and shall endorse
thereon a memorandum setting forth the occasion of such cancellation, re-
ferring to each of the several certificates of title so issued in respect to the
land described in such cancelled grant or certificate of title.
Registrar-General may dispense with production of duplicates of certificates of title, and other
instruments, in certain cases.
94. It shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, in case he shall see reason-
able cause for so doing, to dispense with the production of any grant, cer-
tificate of title, lease, or other instrument, for the purpose of making the
endorsement thereon, which by this Act is required to be made, upon the
transfer or other dealing with land under the operation of this Act; and the
Registrar-General may, in such case, if he shall think proper, require proof
to be made, by affidavit or otherwise, of the identity of the person transferring
or otherwise dealing with the said land, with the person who is registered as
proprietor thereof; and the Registrar-General, on making the entry in the
register book of the particulars of such transfer, or other dealing affecting
the said land, shall likewise state in the said entry, that no endorsement of
such transfer or other dealing has been made on the duplicate grant, certificate
of title, lease, or other instrument, and upon such entry as aforesaid being
made in the register book, and upon the endorsement of the said entry, with
the date thereof on the instrument purporting to transfer or deal with such
land, such transfer or other dealing shall be as valid and effectual as if the
endorsement had been made upon the duplicate of the grant, certificate of
title, or other instrument.
Vendor to have no equitable lien by reason of balance of purchase-money unpaid.
95. No vendor of any land under the operation of this Act shall have any
equitable lien thereon by reason of the non-payment of the purchase money,
or any part of the purchase-money, for the same.
No contract for sale or dealing with land in futuro to be registered.
96. Except as hereinbefore provided in the case of right of purchase cove-
nanted in a lease, no agreement for the sale, lease, or other dealing with any
estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act to be performed in
futuro , shall be entered in the register book; but any person claiming an
estate or interest in any such land under any contract or agreement in writing
or by transmission, may, by caveat in the form of the Schedule hereto marked
P, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit, forbid the registration of
any instrument affecting such land, estate, or interest.
Notice of caveat to parties. Person lodging caveat may be summoned to show cause.
97. Upon receipt of any caveat, the Registrar-General shall enter the par-
ticulars thereof in the register book, and also, if the same be produced to him
for that purpose, on the grant, certificate of title, lease, or other instrument
evidencing title to the estate or interest affected by such caveat, and if such
grant or other instrument, as aforesaid, be not produced to him, then the
Registrar-General shall give notice of the receipt of such caveat to the person


registered as proprietor in respect to the estate or interest referred to in such
caveat, and to every person presenting for the purpose of registration any in-
strument relating to such estate or interest, and such registered proprietor, or
any person claiming estate or interest in the same land, may, if he think fit,
summon the person signing such caveat to attend before the Judges of the
Supreme Court of the said Province, or one of them, to show cause why such
caveat should not be withdrawn ; and it shall be lawful for the said Court, or
a Judge thereof, upon proof that such last-mentioned person has been sum-
moned, to make such order in the premises, either ex parte or otherwise, as to
the said Court or Judge shall seem fit.
Caveats to contain the names and descriptions of parties, and a sufficient description to
identify the land. Caveator to leave an address, at which notice may be served.
Registrar-General may approve form of caveat.
98. Every caveat left, under the provisions of this Act, with the Registrar-
General, shall state therein the name and address of the person by whom, or
on whose behalf such caveat shall be lodged, and shall contain a sufficient
description to identify the land which is intended to be affected thereby, and
the estate or interest (if any), which shall be claimed by the caveator in the
said land; and every such caveat shall be signed by the caveator, or by his
solicitor, known agent or attorney; and all notices relating to such caveat, or
anv proceedings in respect thereof, shall be served, either at the place of
address mentioned in such caveat, or at the -office of the solicitor, known
agent or attorney, who shall have signed such caveat; and such service shall
be deemed sufficient service of the notice, as against all persons who may
claim under the said caveat: Provided always, that it shall be lawful for the
Registrar-General, in case he see fit, to require the form of any caveat to be
amended, and, from time to time, to issue such forms of caveats as he shall
deem necessary for the purpose of carrying into effect the several provisions,
matters, and things, which are intended to be hereby effected or provided for.
No entry to bo made in register-book affecting lands in respect to which caveat continues
in force.
99. So long as any caveat shall remain in force prohibiting the transfer or
other dealing with land, the Registrar-General shall not enter in the register-
book any memorandum of sale or other instrument purporting to transfer, or
otherwise deal with, or affect the land, estate, or interest, in respect to which
such caveat may be lodged.
Registrar-General may cancel caveat, upon proof that the interest of parties have been satisfied,
or that the interest of the caveator is inadequate to warrant the caveat.
100. Any caveat which may be lodged under the provisions hereinbefore
contained may be cancelled by the Registrar-General, upon its being proved
to his satisfaction that the estate, interest, or claim of the caveator has ceased,
been abandoned, or withdrawn ; or that the rights of the parties on whose
behalf such caveat may have been lodged are satisfied or arranged; or, in case
the Registrar-General shall be satisfied that the nature of the estate, interest,
or claim of the caveator, or person on whose behalf the caveat is lodged, is
not such as to entitle him to prohibit the sale, or mortgage, or other dealing
with the land, estate, or interest referred to in such caveat.
Power of attorney. Saving powers executed prior to this Act, or without the limits of the
Province.
101. The proprietor of land under the operation of this Act, or any person
registered as having estate or interest therein, may authorize and appoint any
person to act for him, or on his behalf, in respect to the leasing of such land,
or the sale or mortgage of his estate or interest therein, or otherwise lawfully
to deal with such land, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, by exe-
cuting a power in form of the Schedule hereto marked G, or as near thereto
as circumstances will permit, which power shall contain the same description
of such land as is contained in the grant, or existing certificate of title thereof,
or such other description as may be sufficient to identify the said land, and
shall set forth accurately the estate or interest of such proprietor in the said
land, and shall specify the nature of the power intented to be conferred, the
name and description of the person by whom, the places where, and the time


within which it is to be exercised; and upon such power being brought to the
Registrar-General, he shall enter the particulars of the same in the register-
book, and shall record upon such power a memorandum of the day and hour
on wh.ch the said particulars were so entered, and shall authenticate such
record by signing the same and affixing thereto his seal ; and from and after
the of such entry m the register book, all acts lawfully done or performed
t>y the person so appointed under authority of and within the limits prescribed
m such power, shall have the same force and effect, and be equally binding on
such proprietor, as if the said acts had been done or performed by such pro-
proprietor ; and every such power bearing such endorsement, authenticated as
aforesaid, shall he received m evidence as sufficient proof that the person to
whom such power has been granted is duly authorized to make all contracts
to sign aH instruments and to perform all other lawful acts in accordance
with the powers therein limited and appointed for the attainment of the objects
therein specified or any of them : Provided always, that nothing herein con-
tained shall be interpreted to invalidate any power of attorney executed without
the limits of the said Province, or prior to the passing of this Act, although
such power may not be in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Registration abstract for registering dealings without the limits of the Province.
.102. The Registrar-General, upon the application of any registered pro-
prietor of land under the operation of this Act, shall grant to such proprietor
a registration abstract enabling him to sell, mortgage, or otherwise deal with
his estate or interest m such land at any place without the limits of the said
Province, which registration abstract shall be in the firm in the Schedule
hereto marked H, or as near to such form as circumstances will permit, and
the Registrar-General shall at the same time enter in the register book a
memorandum recording the issue of such registration abstract, and shall en-
dorse on the grant, certificate of title, or other instrument evidencing or
constituting the title of such applicant proprietor to such estate or interest a
like memorandum recording the issue of such registration abstract, and from
and after the issuing of any such registration abstract, no sale, mortgage
lease, or other transaction transferring, encumbering, or in any way affecting
the estate or interest in respect of which such registration abstract is issued
shall be entered in the register book until such abstract shall have been sur-
rendered to the Registrar-General to be cancelled, or the loss or destruction
ot such abstract proven to his satisfaction, or until the same shall have been
revoked in manner hereinafter provided.
Mede of procedure under registration abstract.
103. Whenever any sale, mortgage, or lease, is intended to be transacted
under any such registration abstract, a memorandum of sale, bill of mort-
gage, or lease, as the case may require, shall be prepared in duplicate in the
torms tor such ease hereinbefore appointed and prescribed, or as near to such
form as circumstances will permit, and shall be produced to some one of
the persons hereinafter appointed as persons before whom the execution of
instruments without the limits of the said Province maybe proven, and record
shall be made upon such registration abstract of the several particulars here-
inbefore required to be entered in the register book by the Registrar-General
m the case of a transfer, mortgage, or lease, as the case may be, made within
the limits of the said Province, and upon such record being authenticated by
the signature of such authorized person as aforesaid, such transfer, mortgage,
or lease, shall be as valid and binding to all intents as if the same had been
made within the limits of the said Province, and recorded in the register
book by the Registrar General, and subject to the rules hereinafter for each
such case prescribed, every person whose name shall have been so recorded as
P, ur ?,. ase [' mortgagee, or lessee of such land upon such registration abstract,
shall be held and taken to be registered as such, and shall have the samo
nghts and powers, and be subject to the same liabilities as he would hare had
and been subject to if his name had been registered in the register book in-
stead ot on such abstract as proprietor, mortgagee, or lessee of such land, or
of such estate or interest therein.


General rules applicable to powers of attorney and registration abstracts.
104. The following rules shall be observed as to powers of attorney and
registration abstracts:—
(1.) The power shall be exercised in conformity with the directions con-
tained therein:
(2.) No sale, mortgage, or lease bond fide made thereunder shall be im-
peached by reason of the person by whom the power was given dying
before the making of such sale, mortgage, or lease :
(3.) No sale, mortgage, or lease bond fide made to a purchaser, mortgagee,
or lessee, without notice, shall be impeached by reason of the bank-
ruptcy or insolvency of the person by whom the power was given:
(4.) If sale be effected, there shall be delivered up to the Registrar-General
the memorandum of sale by which the land or any estate or interest
therein is contracted to be transferred, the registration abstract, and
the grant, certificate of title, lease, or other instrument of title; the
Registrar-General shall enter in the register book a memorandum of
the particulars of such sale, and of the cancelling of such abstract, and
shall endorse on such memorandum, and also on the grant, certificate
of title, lease, or other instrument of title, a memorandum of the date
and hour on which such entry was made, and if a full estate in fee
simple in such land, or in any part thereof, shall have been passed by
such memorandum of sale, he shall cancel the grant or certificate of
title delivered up, and shall issue a certificate of title of such land, or
of the sold portion thereof to the purchaser, and if part only be sold,
he shall also issue a certificate of title of the unsold portion to the
proprietor; and shall, before issuing the same, endorse on each of such
certificates of title a memorandum of the particulars of all unsatisfied
mortgages or encumbrances appearing in the register book, or on the
registration abstract affecting the land included under each such cer-
tificate of title respectively:
(5.) Every mortgage which is so endorsed as aforesaid on the registration
abstract shall have priority over all bills of mortgages of the same
estate executed subsequently to the date of the entry of the issuing of
such abstract in the register book; and if there be more mortgages
than one so endorsed, the respective mortgagees claiming thereunder
shall, notwithstanding any express, implied, or constructive notice, be
entitled one before the other according to the date at which a record
of each instrument is endorsed on such abstract, and not according to
the date of the bill of mortgage:
(6.) The discharge and also the transfer of any mortgage, so endorsed on
such abstract, may be endorsed on such abstract by any person herein-
before authorized to record a mortgage thereon upon the production of
such evidence and the execution of such instruments as are herein-
before required to be executed and produced to the Registrar on the
entry of the discharge or transfer of a mortgage in the register book;
and such endorsement, so made on such abstract, shall have the
same effect and be as valid, to all intents, as if such transfer or dis-
charge had been entered in the register book by the Registrar-General
in manner hereinbefore provided.
(7.) Upon proof, at any time, to the satisfaction of the Registrar-General
that any power or registration abstract is lost, or so obliterated as to
be useless, and that the powers thereby given have never been exer-
cised, or if they have been exercised then upon proof of the several
matters and things that have been done thereunder, it shall be lawful
for the Registrar-General, as circumstances may require, either to issue
a new power or registration abstract, as the case may be, or to direct
such entries to be made in the register book, or such other matter or
thing to be done as might have been made or done if no such loss or
obliteration had taken place.
»


(8.) Upon the delivery of any abstract to the Registrar-General, he shall
after recording in the register book in such manner as to preserve its
priority, the particulars of every unsatisfied mortgage registered there-
on, cancel such abstract, and enter the fact of such cancellation in the
register book; and shall also, by endorsement on the grant or certifi-
cate of title, lease, or other instrument evidencing the title of such
proprietor to such land, note the particulars of every such unsatisfied
mortgage, and of every such lease, and the cancellation of such cer-
tificate of mortgage, and every certificate so cancelled shall be void to
all intents, and shall file in his office the duplicates of every memo-
randum of sale, bill cf mortgage, lease, or other instrument executed
thereunder, which may for that purpose be delivered to him.
Revocation of power of attorney.
105. The registered owner for the time being of any land in respect of
which a power of attorney has been issued may, by an instrument, under his
hand, m the form Q in the bchedule hereto, or as near thereto as circum-
stances will permit, revoke such power; and if the holder of such power
shall neglect or refuse to surrender the same to such owner, or his agent ex-
inbitmg such revocation order, duly certified by the Registrar-General, he
shall be guilty of a misdemeanour, and on conviction thereof shall forfeit and
pay a sum not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, unless it shall be made to
appear to the satisfaction of the Court before whom the case may be tried
that the powers given therein had been exercised prior to the presentation of
such revocation order.
Power of attorney rendered null by revocation order.
106. After the presentation of such revocation order to the holder of such
power, the said power shall, so far as concerns any mortgage or sale to be
thereafter made, be deemed to be revoked and of no effect.
Consent may be given by endorsement.
107. If the consent or direction of any person shall be requisite or necessary
upon a sale or other disposition of land under the operation of this Act or
any estate or interest therein, such consent or direction may be endorsed upon
the memorandum of sale, or other instrument executed for the purpose of
transferring, or otherwise dealing with such land, or estate or interest therein
m the words following, that is to say—“ I consent hereto,” which consent or
direction, when signed by such consenting or directing party, and attested in
manner hereinafter prescribed, shall have full validity and effect.
Provision for cases of infancy or other incapacity.
. 1 08 - If an F person interested in any land under the operation of this Act
is, by reason of infancy, lunacy, or other inability, incapable of making any
declaration or doing anything required or permitted by this Act to be made
or done by a proprietor in respect of registry, transfer, or transmission, mort-
gage, or encumbiance of such land, or the release of the same from any
mortgage or encumbrance, or the leasing, assigning, or in any other manner
dealing with such land, then the guardian or committee, if any, of such in-
capable person, or, it there be none, any person appointed by any Court or
Judge possessing jurisdiction in respect of the property of incapable persons
upon the petition of any person on behalf of such incapable person or of any
other person interested in the making of such declaration, or doing such
thing, may make such declaration, or a declaration as nearly corresponding
thereto as circumstances permit, and do such thing in the name and on behalf
of such incapable person; and all acts done by such substitute shall be as
effectual as if done by the person for whom he is substituted.
Acknowledgment of married women interested in land under this Act may be tahm by
i^! 8 , £ r ' G TJ a as 7? U J 8 by , Ju(i^e or Master of Supreme Court. Memorandum of
fn rej ? iBter°book pment t 0 b<3 endor£ecl 011 mstrament in form of Schedule, and entered
109. In all cases where married women are interested in land under the
operation of this Act, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, or a Judge
of the supreme Court, or the Master thereof, on the transfer of such land, or
an estate or interest therein by such married woman, and whether the instru


ment of transfer shall embrace or relate solely to land under the operation of
this Act, or shall embrace or relate both to land under the operation of this
Act, and also land not under the operation of this Act, to take the acknowledg-
ment of such married woman touching the instrument executed by her
tor the purpose of transferring, disposing of, releasing, surrendering, or ex-
tinguishing any estate, right, title, or interest in such land, in like manner as
the deed of any married woman is now required to be acknowledged by her
before a Judge of the Supreme Court, or the Master thereof; and also to
examine her apart from her husband touching her knowledge of such instru-
ment, and ascertain whether she freely and voluntarily consents thereto, in
like manner as a Judge of the Supreme Court, or the Master thereof, is now
required to examine any married woman touching the deed of any married
woman, under the provisions of an Ordinance intituled “An Ordinance to
render effectual conveyances by married women, and to declare the effect of
certain deeds in relation to dower.” And the Registrar-General, or Judge, or
Master (or other person), taking such acknowledgment and examination shall
sign a memorandum, to be endorsed on or written at the foot, or in the margin
of such instrument, which memorandum shall be in form of the Schedule
hereto annexed marked T, or in words to the like effect; and an entry of the
said acknowledgment shall be made by the Registrar-General in the register
book at the time when the other particulars to the said instrument are
directed to be entered in the register book; and every such instrument so
acknowledged by any married woman, and recorded by the Registrar-General
in the register book,, shall be as effectual to pass all the estate, right, title, or
interest of the married woman by whom the same is executed, in the lands to
which the same relates, as if she had been then unmarried.
Rights and liabilities daring coverture.
’ 110, -T h . e benefits and liabilities in respect to any covenants or powers under
the provisions of this Act shall, in the case of a married woman, extend to
and be implied against such married woman and her husband conjointly during
coverture. J 6
Seal of Corporation substituted for signature.
Ev 5 rsr p° r P oratio ?’ * n * !eu of sl S nin g the forms of instruments pro-
ved by this Act, or such other form as may be sanctioned as aforesaid may
affix the common seal of the said Corporation to such form of instrument •
and every such form of instrument shall contain a statement that the common
seal of the said Corporation was affixed by the proper officer for that purpose
verified by his signature, in like manner as the contract or deed of such Cor-
poration is usually made and verified.
Attestation of instruments. Execution of instruments, before whom to be proved.
112. Instruments executed pursuant to the provisions of this Act if at-
tested by one witness, shall be held to be duly attested, and the execution of
any instrument made in accordance with the provisions of this Act, or the
discharge of any mortgage or encumbrance, or the transfer or surrender of
any lease, may be proved, if the parties executing the same be resident within
the boundaries of the City of Adelaide, then before the Registrar General •
if the parties executing the same be not resident within the said boundaries'
then before the Registrar-General or a Justice of the Peace ; if the said parties'
be resident in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, then bv the
Mayor or other Chief Officer of any Corporation, or before a Notary Public •
if the said parties be resident in any British Possession, then before the Chief
Justice, Judge of any Superior Court having jurisdiction in such Possession
or before the Governor Government Resident, or Chief Secretary thereof: if
the said parties be resident at any foreign place, then before the British Con-
suiar Officer resident at such place; and a certificate of such proof, under the
hand and seal of the Registrar-General, or of any such Justice of the Peace,
Notary Public, Mayor, or other Chief Officer, Chief Justice, Judge, Governor
Resident, Chief Secretary, or Consular Officer, as the case may be, shall be
sufficient evidence that the execution of such instrument had been duly proved.
d 2


Mode of proving instruments.
113. The execution of any such instrument, release, transfer, or surrender,
may be proved before any such person as aforesaid, by the oath or solemn
affirmation of the parties executing the same, or of a witness attesting the
signing thereof; and if such witness shall answer in the affirmative each ot
the questions following, that is to say—
Are you the witness who attested the signing of this instrument, and is
the name or mark purporting to be your name or mark as such at-
testing witness your own handwriting ?
Do you personally know , the person signing this instru-
ment, and whose signature you attested ?
Is the name purporting to be his signature his own handwriting—is he
of sound mind —and did he freely and voluntarily sign the same .
Then the Registrar General, Justice, or other person before whom such
witness shall prove such signature as aforesaid, shall endorse upon such in-
strument a certificate in form of the Schedule hereto annexed marked R, or as
near thereto as circumstances will permit: Provided also, that, if any person
signing any such instrument, transfer, release, or surrender, as aforesaid, as
the maker thereof, shall be personally known to the Registrar-General,
Justice, or other person as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for such person to
attend and appear before such Registrar-General, Justice, or other person to
whom he is personally known, and then and there acknowledge that he did
freely and voluntarily sign such instrument, transfer, release, or surrender;
and upon such acknowledgment, the Registrar-General, Justice, or other
person, as the case may be, shall endorse on such instrument a certificate, in
the form or to the effect of the Schedule hereto marked S, or as near thereto
as circumstances will permit, and it shall not be necessary for such instrument
to be proved by the attesting witness in manner aforesaid : Provided also that
such questions as aforesaid may be varied as circumstances shall or may re-
quire in case any person shall sign such instrument by his mark : Provided
also that, on the signing of any such instrument by any married woman, and
the acknowledgment thereof by her in manner mentioned or referred to in this
Act, no further or other proof or acknowledgment shall be requisite or neces-
Justices required to administer oaths.
114. Every such Justice as aforesaid, sitting in open Court, shall be, and
he is hereby required to administer the oath, or take the solemn affirmation,
or the acknowledgment, of any person attending before him for the purpose
of proving or acknowledging any such instrument as aforesaid.
Provision in case of lost grant.
115. In the event of the grant or certificate of title of any land registered
under this Act being lost, mislaid, or destroyed, the proprietor of such land,
together with other persons, if any, having knowledge of the circumstances,
may make a declaration before the Registrar-General, stating the facts of the
case, the names and descriptions of the registered owners, and the particulars
of all mortgages, incumbrances, or other matters affecting such land and the
title thereto, to the best of declarant’s knowledge and belief; and the
Registrar-General, if satisfied as to the truth of such declaration, and the
bond fldes of the transaction may issue to such applicant a provisional certifi-
cate if title of such land, which provisional certificate shall contain an exact
copy of the original grant, or certificate of title bound up in the register book,
and of every memorandum and endorsement thereon at the time appearing,
and shall also contain a statement of the circumstances under which such
provisional certificate is issued ; and the Registrar-General shall, at the same
time, enter in the register book notice of the issuing of such provisiona
certificate, and the date thereof, and the circumstances under which it was
issued ■ and such provisional certificate shall be available for all purposes and
uses for which the grant or certificate of title so lost or mislaid would have
been available, and as valid to all intents as such lost grant or certificate.


Duplicates of future jublic ma;.s to be deposited.
116. From and after the passing of this Act all public maps delineating the
Waste Lands of the Crown in the said Province for the purpose of sale, shall
be made in duplicate, and the Surveyor-General shall sign each duplicate, and
shall certify the accuracy of the same, and such duplicates of such maps
shall, he deposited in the Registry Office, and whenever, in any instrument
relating to land brought under the operation of this Act, and executed subse-
quent to the passing thereof, reference is made to the public maps of the said
Province deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General, such reference shall
be interpreted and taken to apply equally, an*d with the same force and effect,
and for the same purposes, to either of such duplicates.
Proprietor may deposit map.
117. It shall be lawful for any proprietor, subdividing any land under the
operation of this Act, for the purpose of selling the same in allotments as a
township, to deposit with the Registrar-General a map of such township, pro-
vided that such map shall exhibit, distinctly delineated, all roads, streets,
passages, thoroughfares, squares, or reserves, appropriated or set apart for
public use, and also all allotments into which the said land may be divided,
marked with distinct numbers or symbols, and the person depositing such
map shall sign the same, and shall certify the accuracy thereof by declaration
before the Registrar-General or a Justice of the Peace.
Registrar-General may require map to be deposited.
118. It shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, if he shall think fit, to
require the proprietor applying to have any land brought under the operation
of this Act, or desiring to transfer or otherwise to deal with the same, or any
portion thereof, to deposit at the Registry Office a map or plan of such land,
and if the said land, or the portion thereof proposed to be transferred or dealt
With, shall be of less area than one statute acre, then such map or plau shall
be ou a scale not less than one inch to two chains ; and if such land, or the
portion thereof about to be transferred or dealt with shall be of greater
area than one statute acre, but not exceeding five statute acres, then such
map or plan shall be upon a scale not less than one inch to five chains ; and
if such land, or the portion thereof as aforesaid, shall be of greater area than
five statute acres, but not exceeding eighty statute acres, then such map or
plan shall be upon a scale of not less than one inch to ten chains; and if
such land, or the portion thereof as aforesaid, shall be of greater area than
eighty statute acres, then such map or plan shall be upon a scale of one
inch to twenty chains, and such proprietor shall sign such map and shall
declare to the accuracy of the same before the Registrar-General or a Justice
of the Peace ; and if such proprietor shall neglect or refuse to comply with
such requirement, it shall not be incumbent on the Registrar-General to pro-
ceed with the bringing of such land under the operation of this Act, or with
the registration of such transfer or lease: Provided always that subsequent
subdivisons of the same land may be delineated on the map or plan of the
same, so. deposited, if such map be upon a sufficient scale, in accordance with
the provisions herein contained, and such proprietor shall certify the correct-
ness of the delineation of each such subdivision, by declaration in manner
prescribed for the case of the deposit of an original map.
Search allowed.
119. Any person may, upon payment of a fee specified in Schedule U
hereto, have access to the register book for the purpose of inspection at any
reasonable time during the hours and upon the days appointed ior search.
Certified copies signed and sealed to be furnished by Registrar-General and to be received in
evidence.
120. The Registrar General, upon payment of such reasonable sum as may
be appointed by any regulation made by him for such case, with sanction of
the Governor, shall furnish to any person applying at a reasonable time for
the same, a certified copy of any instrument affecting or relating to land
registered under the provisions of this Act, and every such certified copy
signed by him and scaled with his seal, shall oe received in evidence in any


Court of Justice, or before any person having by law, or by consent of parties,
authority to receive evidence, as prima facie proof of all the matters con-
tained or recited in or endorsed on the original instrument, and the pro-
duction of any such certified copy, so signed and sealed, shall be as effectual
in evidence to all intents as the production of the original.
No action of ejectment to lie, except in the cases meniioned in this Act.
121. No action of ejectment shall be brought against a registered proprietor
for recovering the possession of land under the operation ot this Act, except
in the case hereinbefore provided of a mortgagee or encumbrancee bringing
such action against a mortgagor or encumbrancer, and in the case of a regis-
tered proprietor or lessor bringing an action of ejectment against the lessee or
tenant claiming the said land under any lease.
Person defrauded may bring action against fraudulent proprietor for recovery of land or for
damages.
122. In case any person shall have been registered through fraud as pro-
prietor of any land or an estate, or interest in any land, the person defrauded,
cr any person claiming through him, may at his election apply by .petition, in
a summary way, to the Supreme Court in its Equitable Jurisdiction, for the
recovery of the said land, estate, or interest, from such fraudulent proprietor,
or the person (not being a purchaser or mortgagee bond fide for valuable con-
sideration) claiming under such fraudulent proprietor; or the person so de-
frauded, or any person claiming through him, may bring and prosecute an
action at law in the Supreme Court for the recovery of damages against such
fraudulent proprietor, or the person (other than as aforesaid) claiming under
such fraudulent proprietor.
Supreme Court may order the cancelling of any entry in the register book obtained
through fraud, and the substitution of any other entry. Saving the case of a pur-
chaser, or mortgagee, for valuable consideration.
123. In case the person so defrauded shall apply to the Supreme. Court, as
hereinbefore provided, for the recovery of the said land, estate, or interest, it
shall be lawful for the said Court to make an order, for cancelling or altering
any entry in the register book relating to the said land, estate, or.interest,
and substituting any entry in lieu thereof; and directing and ordering such
other acts and instruments to be done and executed as such Court shall, under
the circumstances, deem necessary and just: And the Registrar-General shall
give effect to the said order by making the necessary entries directed to be
made in the register book relating to the said land, estate, or interest: Pro-
vided always, that nothing in this Act contained shall be interpreted to sub-
ject to any action of ejectment, or for recovery of damages, any purchaser or
mortgagee bond fide for valuable consideration, of any land under the opera-
tion of this Act, although his vendor or mortgagor may have been registered
as proprietor through fraud or error, or may have derived from or through a
person registered as proprietor through fraud or error.
Persons barred from bringing actions for ejectment, persons electing to bring actions for
damages, and persons damnified by error or mistake, may bring action for recovery of
damages against the registered proprietor at the time when deprivation or injury oc-
curred. Amount of damages limited to the value at the time of deprivation.
124. Any person who may, by the provisions of this Act, be prevented from
bringing an action of ejectment for the recovery of land from the registered
proprietor thereof, and any person who may have been so defrauded as afore-
said, and shall elect to bring an action at law for the recovery of damages
against such fraudulent proprietor of any land, or against the person (other
than as aforesaid) claiming under such fraudulent proprietor, or any person
injured or otherwise damnified in consequence of an error or mistake arising
from any entry in the register book, in respect of which right of action is
hereby given against the Registrar-General, may bring and prosecute an
action at law in the Supreme Court for the recovery of damages against the
person who was the registered proprietor of the said land, estate, or interest
at the time when the act, error, mistake, or other dealing affecting the said
land or easement, and occasioning the said injury, damage, or loss to the
plaintiff to the said action was made, done, committed, or took place, but no
greater amount of damages for the loss of the said land shall be recovered in


the said action than the estimated value of such land at the time when the
aforesaid act, error, mistake, or other dealing affecting the said land was
originally made, done, committed, or took place.
If registered proprietor be dead, action to be against Registrar-General, as nominal defendant.
125. In case the registered proprietor of the said land, estate, or interest,
against whom such action for damages is directed to be brought as aforesaid,
shall be dead, or shall have been adjudged insolvent, then, in such case it
shall be lawful to bring such action lor damages against the Registrar-
General, as such nominal defendant, as hereinafter provided, for the purpose
of recovering the amount of the said damages and costs against the Assurance
Fund hereinbefore described: Provided that the Assurance Fund shall not be
liable for payment of any damages after the expiration of six years, to be
computed from the time when the act, error, mistake, or other dealing affecting
the said land or easement, and occasioning the said injury, damage, or loss to
the plaintiff to the said action was made, done, committed, or took place;
and the Treasurer of the said Province upon receipt of a certificate of the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, and of a warrant under the hand of the
Governor, as hereinbefore provided, shall pay the amount of such damages
and costs, and charge the same to the account of the Assurance Fund.
Actions for recovery of damages may, in certain cases, be brought against the Registrar-
General as nominal defendant. Treasurer, on receipt of warrant from Governor, to
pay amount of award. Notice of action to be-served on Registrar-General and
Attorney-General. Process and notice to be served on Attorney-General.
126. Every action which shallbe brought by any person to recover damages
for or by reason of any loss or damage occasioned by any omission, mistake,
or misfeasance of the Registrar-General, or any of his officers or clerks in the
execution of their respective duties under the provisions of this Act, shall be
brought against the Registrar-General as the nominal defendant; and in case
in,any such action the plaintiff recover final judgment against such nominal
defendant, -then, upon the application or motion of such plaintiff, the Chief
J ustice of the Supreme Court shall and he is hereby directed to certify to the
Treasurer of the said Province the fact of such judgment having been re-
covered, and the amount of damages and costs recovered, and thereupon or
before the expiration of two calendar months after such judgment is so
certified, the said Treasurer, upon the receipt of a warrant under the hand of
the Governor, countersigned by the Chief Secretary of the said Province,
shall pay the amount of such damages and costs to the person re-
covering the same, his executors or administrators, and shall charge
the same to the account of the Assurance Fund hereinbefore described:
Provided always, that notice, in writing, of every such action and of the cause
thereof shall be served upon the Attorney-General of the said Province, and
also upon the Registrar-General, one calendar month at least before the com-
mencement of such action : Provided also, that the Registrar-General shall
not be personally chargeable upon any judgment recovered as aforesaid, nor
shall any process or notice in or relating to any such action (except as afore-
said) be served upon the Registrar-General, but all such processes and notices
shall be served upon the Attorney-General of the said Province for the time
being.
If action discontinued, or plaintiff nonsuited, the nominal defendant entitled to costs.
127. If in any such action judgment be given in favour of the nominal de.en-
dant, or the plaintiff discontinue, or become nonsuit, the plaintiff shall be
liable to pay the full costs of defending such action, and the same, when
taxed, shall be levied in the name of the nominal defendant by the like pro-
cess of execution as in other actions on the case.
Registrar-General may summon person by whom a certificate of title or entry has been
fraudulently or wrongfully obtained. If summons disregarded, Registrar-General may
apply for a warrant tor such person to be apprehended and brought before a Judge oi
the Supreme Court.
128- If any grant, certificate of title, or other instrument affecting land
under the operation of thi3 Act, or any entry, memorandum, or endorse-
ment in or upon any such instrument shall be fraudulently or wrongfully ob-
tained from, or procured to be made or issued by the Registrar-General, it


shall be lawful for the Registrar-General to summon before him the person
who shall have so fraudulently or wrongfully obtained the same, or procured
the same to be made or issued as hereinbefore mentioned, and in case the
person having been so summoned shall not attend before the Registrar-
General at the time appointed, having no lawful impediment to be notified to
the Registrar-General at the time so appointed as aforesaid, the Registrar-
General may apply to a Judge of the Supreme Court to issue a warrant, autho-
rizing and directing some person to be therein named for that purpose, to ap-
prehend and arrest the person so summoned to attend before the Registrar-
Genera,!, and to bring such person before a Judge of the Supreme Court for ex-
amination, and such Judge shall thereupon issue such warrant lor that purpose.
In case person summoned keeps out of the way summons may be served upon any servant or
inmate of his last known place of abode.
129. In case it shall be shown by affidavit, to the satisfaction of the
Registrar-General, that the person to whom a summons ought to be
directed, as hereinbefore mentioned, is keeping out of the way and cannot be
personally served therewith, and that due pains have been taken to effect
such personal service, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General to order, by
endorsement upon the summons, that the delivery of a copy of such summons
to the wife, or servant, or some adult inmate of the house or family of the
person at his usual or last known place of abode or business and explaining
the purport thereof to such wife, servant, or inmate shall be equivalent to
personal service, and in every such case the service of such summons in pur-
suance of such order shall be deemed and taken to be of the same force and
effect to all intents and purposes as if the party to whom such summons was
directed had been personally served therewith.
Party appearing may be examined on oath. Court may order the delivery of the instru-
ment to the Begistrar-General. In case of neglect or refusal, Begistrar-General may
issue a fresh certificate or other instrument.
130. That upon the appearance before the Registrar-General, or Court, or
Judge, of any person summoned or brought up by virtue of a warrant as
aforesaid, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, or Court, or Judge, to
examine such person upon oath ; and, in case the same shall seem proper, to
order such person to deliver up to the Registrar-General such grant, certifi-
cate of title, or other instrument as aforesaid; and upon refusal or neglect by
such person to deliver up the same within a time to be named for that purpose
in such order, the Registrar- General shall issue to the proprietor of the said
land such grant, certificate of title, or other instrument as is herein provided
to be issued in the case of any grantor certificate of title being lost, mislaid,
or destroyed ; and the Registrar-General shall enter in the register book notice
of the issuing of the said grant, certificate of title, or other instrument, and
the circumstances under which the same was issued, and such other particulars
as having regard to the estate or interest of the registered proprietor of such
land he may deem necessary to be entered therein.
If party abscond, proceedings to be conducted as in the case of party attending upon summons
or warrant.
131. If the person who is charged with having so fraudulently or wrong-
fully obtained from, or procured to be made, or issued by the Registrar-General
such grant, certificate of title, or other instrument, or such entry, memo-
randum, or endorsement as is hereinbefore mentioned, shall be proved to the
satisfaction of the Registrar-General or Court, or Judge to have absconded,
so that the Judge’s warrant or summons of the Registrar-General cannot be
served upon him, the same proceedings may then be taken as if such person
had been duly summoned or been brought up by virtue of a warrant, as afore-
said, and had refused or neglected to deliver up such grant, certificate of title,
or other instrument.
Court to award costs and expenses.
132. In every proceeding, under this Act, relating to any summons, exami-
nation, or warrant, it shall be lawful for the Registrar-General, Court, or
Judge, to give or withhold to or from either of the parties who may attend any
such summons, examination, or warrant, his reasonable costs and expenses,
and shall direct by whom such costs and expenses are to be borne and paid.


Costs unpaid may be levied by distress.
133. In case such costs and expenses shall not be paid, pursuant to the
direction for payment thereof, the amount of such costs and expenses shall be
levied by distress; and the Registrar-General or Judge shall issue his war-
rant of distress accordingly; and the sum therein directed to be levied shall
be levied by distress, and sale of the goods and chattels of the party liable to
pay the same and the overplus arising from the sale of such goods and
chattels, after satisfying such sum of money and the expenses of the
distress and sale, shall be returned, on demand, to the party whose goods shall
have been distrained.
No distress to be trespass for want of form.
134. No distress, levied by virtue of this Act, shall be deemed unlawful,
nor shall any person making the same, be deemed a trespasser on account of
any defect or want of form in the application, warrant of distress, or other
proceeding relating thereto, nor shall such person be deemed a trespasser
ab initio, on account of any irregularity afterwards committed by him; but
all persons aggrieved by such defect or irregularity, may recover full satis-
faction for the special damage in an action on the case.
Indemnity of Registrar-General.
135. The Registrar-General shall not, except as hereinbefore is provided,
be subject to be sued or prosecuted by any person whomsoever on account of
any act done or default made by him in his character as Registrar-General;
and the person, goods, or lands of the Registrar-General, shall not be liable to
execution of any legal process by reason of any act or default made or done by
him in his character of Registrar-General, but he shall be indemnified out of the
Assurance Fund or out of the General Revenues of the said Province, in case
such Assurance Fund shall prove to be insufficient, in respect of all losses,
cpsts, or damages, which may be incurred or recovered by any person under
any action or suit brought or prosecuted under the provisions of this Act,
touching or concerning any matter or thing relating to the execution of this
Act and the powers hereby granted.
Witnesses to have expenses tendered.
136. Every person summoned to attend before the Registrar-General as a
witness, in respect of any instrument required to be produced, or any act,
matter, or thing, by this Act, authorized to bo done, proceeded with, or en-
quired into by, or before the Registrar-General, shall have his necessary ex-
penses tendered to him in like manner as is now by law required upon service
of a subpoena to a witness in an action at law.
Pees to be charged.
137. It shall be lawful for the Registrar-General to charge and recover
such fees as shall be appointed by the Governor of the said Province, by and
with the consent of the Executive Council, not in any case exceeding the
several fees specified in the Schedule hereto, marked U.
Eight to register restricted to principal, and his attorney or solicitor. Penalty for registering
incorrect instruments.
138. The right to register and deposit any instrument required to be regis-
tered under the provisions of this Act, or to enter a caveat affecting any land,
shall be exercised by the person claiming under or in respect of such instru-
ment or caveat, or by his solicitor; and whenever such instrument shall be
left with the Registrar-General for the purpose of being registered under the
provisions of this Act, such instrument shall be certified by the person regis-
tering the same as correct for the purposes of registration under the Real
Property Act, and a statement to that effect shall be endorsed on such instru-
ment, and signed by the person so registering the same ; and the Registrar-
General shall not be required to compare the said instrument, when the same
is left with the Registrar-General, with the duplicate thereof in the custody
of the person registering such instrument; and shall not incur or become
subject to any liability, action, or other proceeding in consequence of any
error or mistake in the duplicate thereof, but the person who shall falsely or
negligently certify to the correctness of any instrument on registering the


same, shall incur therefor a penalty not exceeding Fifty Pounds : Provided
always, that the aforesaid penalty shall not prevent the person who may have
sustained any damage or loss in consequence of error or mistake in any such
certified instrument or any duplicate thereof, from recovering damages
against the person who shall have certified such instrument and the duplicate
thereof to be correct for the purpose of registration.
Judges of Supreme Court to regulrte remuneration of Practitioners.
139. It shall be lawful for the Judges of the Supreme Court to readjust,
fix, and determine the remuneration, and the rate, or mode, or kind of re-
muneration to be in future charged and received by the Practitioners of the
Supreme Court for conveyancings or other business, regulated or affected by
the provisions of this Act, and to frame, as far as may be practicable, a scale
of fees and emoluments for such business, and such scale of fees shall be laid
before both Houses of the said Parliament within fourteen days after the
same shall have been framed, if the said Parliament shall be then sitting, or
if not sitting then within fourteen days after its next sitting; and such re-
muneration, fees, or emoluments as shall be fixed, or determined, or allowed
by the Judges of the Supreme Court, for such business as aforesaid, if not
disallowed by the said Parliament, shall be chargeable by the Practitioners
of the Supreme Court for such business accordingly, with such power of
varying the same as from time to time the Judges for the time being shall
approve.
Registrar-General to pay moneys into Treasury, and to render accounts. Parties entitled to be
paid by Treasurer upon warrant signed by Registrar-General.
140. The Registrar-General shall keep a correct account of all such sums
of money as shall be received by him in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, and shall pay the same into the public Treasury of the said Province
at such times, and shall render accounts of the same to such persons, and in
such manner as may be directed in any regulations that may for that purpose
be prescribed by the Governor-in-Chief of the said Province, by and with the
advice of the Executive Council thereof; and the Registrar-General shall ad-
dress to the said Treasurer requisitions to pay moneys received by him, in
trust or otherwise, on account of absent mortgagees or other persons entitled
in accordance with the provisions of this Act; which requisitions, when
proved and audited in manner directed, by any such regulations framed as
aforesaid at the time being in forcß in the said Province, and accompanied by
warrant for payment of the same under the hand of the Governor, counter-
signed by the Chief Secretary thereof, the said Treasurer shall be bound to
obey, and all fines and fees received under the provision of this Act, except
fees payable to the Lands Titles Commissioners for the bringing of land under
the operation of this Act, shall be carried to account by the said Treasurer as
General Revenue.
Penalty tor falsifying register book, or procuring entries or instruments by fraud or mis-
representations. Person making false oath or affirmation guilty of perjury, and liable
to be imprisoned, in addition to damages recoverable by the party damnified.
141. Any person who shall wilfully or knowingly, by fraud or misrepresen-
tation, make, or cause, or obtain to be made in the register book, any entry
which might in any way affect the right, title, estate, or interest of himself,
or of any other person, in any land under the operation of this Act, or who
shall wilfully or knowingly, by fraud or misrepresentation, procure from the
Registrar-General any certificate of title, registration abstract, or other
instrument evidencing or relating to title to, or estate or interest in land
under the operation of this Act, or shall cause or procure to be made any
entry, certificate, memorandum, or endorsement by this Act prescribed to be
made in or upon any such certificate, abstract, or other instrument by the
Registrar-General, or other authorized person, or who shall use or utter any
such certificate, abstract, or other instrument, knowing the same to be
counterfeited, forged, or altered, or to have been obtained by fraud or mis-
representation, or to contain or bear any entry, memorandum, certificate, or
endorsement as aforesaid, forged, counterfeited, or altered, or obtained by
fraud or misrepresentation, and who shall be thereof lawfully convicted, shall
bo deemed guilty of felony, and be sentenced to be imprisoned for any period


not exceeding four years, and to be kept to hard labour or solitary confine*
ment for any part of the period aforesaid ; and if any person shall wilfully
or knowingly make a false oath or affirmation touching or concerning any
matter or procedure made or done in pursuance of this Act, and be thereof
lawfully convicted, such person shall be deemed guilty of perjury, and be
imprisoned for the period, and in the manner aforesaid, and, in addition to
such punishment, any person damnified or suffering loss by any such fraud,
misrepresentation, forgery, counterfeit, alteration, use, or utterance, of any
such certificate, abstract,'or other instrument, as aforesaid, or by the making
of any such false oath or affirmation, shall have a right of action against, and
be entitled to recover damages from, the person guilty of such fraud, mis-
representation, forgery, counterfeit, alteration, use, or utterance, or making
such false oath or affirmation, the amount of all damages he may have sus-
tained thereby, with full costs of suit, as hereinbefore provided.
Jurisdiction.
142. Unless in any case herein otherwise expressly provided, all offences
against the provisions of this Act may be prosecuted, and all penalties or
sums of money imposed or declared to be due or owing by or under the pro-
visions of the same, may be sued for and recovered in the name of the
Attorney-General, or of the Registiar-General, before any Court in the said
Province having jurisdiction for punishment of offences of the like nature,
or for the recovery of penalties or sums of money of the like amount.
Commencement of Act.
143. This Act shall commence and take effect from and after the first day
of July, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight.


SCHEDULES REFERRED TO.
A
South [Royal Arms.} Australia.
Certificate of Title.
A. 8., of (here insert description, and if certificate he issued pursuant to any
sale, reference to memorandum of sale, reciting particulars) is now seised of an
estate (here state whether in fee simple) subject nevertheless to such encum-
brances, liens, and interests, as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon,
in that piece of land situated in the (County, Hundred, or Township) of
bounded on the (here set forth boundaries, in chains, links, or feet), con-
taining (here state area), be the same a little more or less (exclusive of roads
intersecting the same, if any), with right of way over (state rights of way, and
other privileges, or easements, if any) ; plan of which piece of land is de-
lineated in (margin, or in map No . deposited in Registry Office), which
said piece of land is (or is part of) the (Country Section or Tovm Allotment),
marked , delineated in the public map of the said (County, Hun-
dred, or Township), deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General, which
was originally granted the day of , under the hand and
seal of Governor (or Resident Commissioner) of the said Province,
to C.D., of (here insert description), as appears by (land grant, former certi-
ficate, or other instrument of title), now delivered up and cancelled.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto signed my name, and affixed my seal,
this day of
Registrar-General (L.S.).
Signed sealed, and delivered in presence )
of the day of j
B
South Australia.
Memorandum of sale.
I, A.B , being registered as the proprietor of an estate (here state nature of
the estate or interest, whether in fee simple or life estate, or of a greater or less
description than a life estate ), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens,
and interests, as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in all that
piece of land situated in the ( County, Hundred, or Township), of ,
bounded on the (here set forth boundaries, in chains, links, or feet), containing
(here state area), be the same a little more or less (exclusive of roads intersecting
the xame, if any; here state rights of way, privileges, or easements, if any, intended
to be conveyed , and if the land, to he dealt with consists of part only of the land con-
tained in an existing grant or certificate of title , refer to plan delineated in margin,
or annexed to instrument, or deposited ‘in the Lands Titles Office. If the land
contain all that is included in an existing certificate, refer to that certificate for
diagram), which said piece of land is (or is part of), the (Country Section or
Town Allotment), marked , delineated in the public map of the said
(County, Hundred, or Township \ deposited in the office of the Surveyor-
General, which was originally granted the day of , under the hand and
seal of Governor (or Resident Commissioner) of the said Province, to C.D ,


of ( insert description ), in consideration of the sum of £ , paid to me by E.F. ,
of ( here insert description), the receipt of which sum I hereby acknowledge, do
hereby transfer to the said E.F, {all my estate or interest, or a lesser estate or
interest, describing such lesser estate) in the said piece of land. In witness
whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name this day of
Signed on the day above-named, by the )
said A. 8., in presence of G.IL j"
C
South Australia.
Lease.
I, A. 8., being registered as proprietor of an estate ( here state nature of the
estate or interest, whether in fee simple or life estate, or of a greater or less
description than a life estate), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens,
and interests as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that piece
of land situated in the ( County, Hundred, or Township), of , bounded
on the {here set forth boundaries in chains, links, or feet), containing {here state
area), be the same a little more or less {exclusivejof roads intersecting the same,
if any ; here state rights of way, privileges, or easements, if any, intended to
be conveyed. If the land to be dealt with contains all that is included in the
diagram of an existing grant or certificate of title, refer to that diagram;
otherwise refer to a plan thereof on margin of lease, or deposited in the Lands
Titles Office) which said piece of land is {or is part of), the {Country Section
or Town Allotment), marked , delineated in the public map of the said
( County, Hundred, or Township), deposited in the office of the Surveyor-
Gteneral, which was originally granted the day of , under the hand
and seal of , Governor {or Resident Commissioner) of the said Province,
to C.D. of {insert description), do hereby lease to E.F. of {here insert descrip-
tion), all the said lands, to be held by him, the said E.F., as tenant, for the
space of years, at the yearly rental of £ , payable {here
insert terms of payment of rent,) subject to the following covenants, conditions,
and restrictions {here set forth all special covenants, if any, and state what
covenants declared by “ Real Property Act" to be implied against lessor and
lessee respectively are intended to be barred or modified, and in what manner).
I, E.F., of {here insert description), do hereby accept this lease of the above
described lands to be held by me, as tenant, and subject to the conditions, re-
strictions, and covenants above set forth.
Dated this day of
Signed by the above-named A.B. as lessor, and by the above-named EF.
as lessee, this day of in presence of X. Y.
(Signed) A.B. Lessor.
E.F. Lessee.
D
South Australia.
Bill of Mortgage.
I, A. 8., being registered as proprietor of an estate {here state nature of the
estate or interest , whether in fee simple or life estate, or of a greater or less des-
cription than a life estate), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and
interests as are notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that piece of land
situated in the ( County, Hundred, or Township) of , bounded on the
{here set forth boundaries, in chains, links, or feet), containing {here state area),


be the same a little more or less (exclusive of roads intersecting the same, if
any; here state rights of way, privileges, or easements, if any, appertaining,
and if the land to be dealt with contains all that is included in the diagram of
an existing grant or certificate of title refer to that diagram, otherwise refer to
plan thereof on margin of this mortgage, or deposited in the Lands Titles
Office), which said piece of land is (or is part of) the ( Country Section or Town
Allotment) marked , delineated in the public map of the said ( County,
Hundred, or Township), deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General, which
was originally granted the day of , under the hand and seal of
Governor (or Resident Commissioner) of the said Province, to C.D., of (insert
description).
In consideration of the sum of £ , this day lent to me by E.F., of
(here insert description), the receipt of which sum I hereby acknowledge, do
hereby covenant with the said E.F. that I will pay to him, the said E.F., the
above sum of £ , on the day of : Secondly, that I will pay
interest on the said sum at the rate of £ by the £IOO, in the year, by
equal payments, on the day of , and on the day of ,
in every year : Thirdly (here set forth special covenants, if any are intended,
and state what covenants declared by “ Real Property Act " to be implied in
mortgages are intended to be barred or modified; and if so, in what manner).
And for the better securing to the said E.F. the repayment in manner afore-
said of the said principal sum and interest, I hereby mortgage to the said
E. F. all my estate and interest in the said land above described.
In witness whereof I have hereto signed my name this day of
A. 8., mortgagor.
Signed by the above-named A.B. as mortgagor, this day of ,
in presence of G.II.
E
Bill of Encumbrance for securing a sum of Money.
I, A. 8., being registered as the proprietor of an estate (here state nature of
the estate or interest), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and
interests, as are notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that piece of land
situated in (here describe the land by a sufficient description for identifying it
with the description in the grant, certificate of title, or instrument relating to
the same, appearing in the register book, and referring to the original grant of
such land by the Crown.)
And desiring to render the said land available for the purpose of securing
to and for the benefit of C.D. the sum of money hereinafter mentioned, do
hereby encumber the said land, for the benefit of the said C.D., with the
sum of £ , to be raised and paid at the times and in the matmer fol-
lowing, that is to say— (here state the times appointed for the payment of the
sum intended to be secured, the interest, if any, and the events on which such
sum shall become and cease to be payable ; also, any special covenants or powers,
and any modifications of thepowers or remedies given to an encumbrancee by the
Real Property Act): And subject as aforesaid, the said CD. shall be entitled
to all powers and remedies given to an encumbrancee by the Real Property
Act.
In witness whereof I have hereunto signed my name this day of
, in the presence of E.F.
F
Bill of Encumbrance for securing an Annuity.
I, A. B. being registered as the proprietor of an estate ( here state nature of
the estate or interest), subject, however, to such encumbrances,, liens, and
interests, as are notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that piece of land


situated in ( here describe the land by a sufficient description for identifying it
with the description in the grant, certificate of title, or instrument relating to
the same appearing in the register book, and referring to the original grant of
such land by the Crown).
And desiring to render the said land available for the purpose of securing to
and for the benefit of C.D. the annuity or rent-charge hereinafter mentioned,
do hereby encumber the said land for the benefit of the said C.D. with the
annuity or rent-charge of £ , to be raised and paid at the times and
in the manner following, that is to say—{here state the times appointed for the
payment of the annuity, and the events on which such annuity shall become and
cease to be payable ; also, any special covenants or powers, and any such modi-
fications of the powers or remedies given to an encumbrancee by the Real Pro-
perty Act) : And subject as aforesaid, the said C.D. shall be entitled to all
the powers and remedies given to an encumbrancee by the Real Property Act.
In witness whereof I have hereunto signed my name this day of
, in the presence of E.F.
G
South Australia.
Power of Attorney.
I, A. 8., being registered as proprietor of an estate {here state nature of the
estate or interest, whether in fee simple or life estate, or of a greater or less des-
cription than a life estate), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens,
and interests as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in {here refer
to schedule for description and content of the several parcels of land intended to
be affected, which schedule must contain reference to the existing certificate of
title or land grant of each parcel ), do hereby appoint C.D., attorney, on my
behalf to {here state the nature and extent of the powers intended to be conferred,
as whether to sell, lease, mortgage, sc.), the lands in the said schedule described,
subject, nevertheless, to the restrictions and limitations declared and set forth
at foot hereof, and to execute all such instruments, and do all such acts,,
matters, and things as may be necessary for carrying out the powers hereby
given, and for the recovery of all rents and sums of money that may become
or are now due or owing to me in respect of the said lands, and for the en-
forcement of all contracts, covenants, or conditions binding upon any lessee or
occupier of the said lands, or upon any other person in respect of the same,
and for the taking and maintaining possession of the said lands, and for pro-
tecting the same from waste, damage, or trespass.
I declare the said lands {or my estate or interest in the said lands), shall
not be sold for less than £ , or unless upon the following conditions
{here insert conditions, if any, to be imposed).
I declare the amount of money to be raised by mortgage on the security of
the said lands under this power shall not exceed £ , or be less than
£ , and that the rate of interest at which the same is raised shall not
exceed £ for every £IOO by the year.
I declare the said land shall not be leased for any term of years exceed-
j Hg , or at a less rent than £ , or unless subject to the
following covenants and restrictions {here insert conditions, such as whether
right of purchase may be given, and at what price, sc., Syc.).
I declare that this power shall not be exercised after the expiration of
from the date hereof.
In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name this day of .
Signed hy the above-named A.B. this
day of in the presence of X. Y. )
Schedule referred to.


H
South Australia.
Registration Abstract.
r j,io„ *a. a life ame) .leo&'ef toTiet* t,
uite.esis, a,s ai e notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in ( here refer to
dean tih° r r d COnUnt ° f the S6Veral l )arcds °f land intended to be
tro/l l chedlle mus * contain reference to the existing grants or certi-
ficates of title of the said parcels of land), request that a registration abstract of
my title to the said lands may be granted, enabling me
wise deal with the same at places without the limits of the said Province.
To the Registrar-General (Signed) A.B.
Signed by the above-named A. R, this day of , in presence of X. Y.
„he . >^ f &j Btrar - Gen eral of the Province of South Australia do herehv
certify that the above particulars relating to the above-described land and to
the estate and interest therein of A.B , signature is above subscribed
ProvinceFo 88 p®® "’T?? tbe r< * ister book of the safe!
w r vo ‘- No . : Pursuant, therefore, to the above application
and by virtue of powers mme vested by Act of the Legislature of P fhc said
Province, intituled “ The Real Property Act,” this registration abstract is
issued for the purpose of enabling the said A.B. to deal with the said lands
at places without the limits of the said Province. “ th d lands
This abstract shall continue in force from the date thereof to the dav
of > unless sooner delivered up.
this" WitU day W o h f ere " f ’ 1 have hereunt ° Signed “y name append my seal
Registrar-General.
Signed sealed, and delivered, the day of i„ the presence of X. Y
Schedule referred to.
I
South Australia.
Application for lands to be brought under operation of the Real Property Act.
( L.S.) behalf of' °* of d ° declare at . f or .O™
7. ; .} n Possession of an estate {here state the description of the estate
™f e fi slm P\e °r a lesser estate, or as trustee, or held in trust for uses\
in all that piece of land situated in {here state the situation) bounded (here state
the boundaries, and the length of each line of boundary, in 'chains andZksor
in feet), containing {here state area), be the same a little more or less (ex-
clvMve °f roads intersecting the same, if any) with {here state rights of wav
and other privileges or easements appertaining, and if the land is portion only of
cm original Section as delineated on a Crown Grant, refer to plan of the same
eposited in the Lands Titles Offke, or annexed to the application? or delineated on
which piece of land is {the Town Allotment or Country SeZon ortpart
f it Town Allotment or Country Section) originally granted to of^
Tfpa 77}? nd grailt U^ der the hand and seal of , formerly Governor (or
R d Zt Commimomr ) of the Province of South Australia. Dated the
or ColluA of numbered in the plan of the {District, Township,
positecUn the Snrvc nffi" l d °" tbe P ublic ma P s of tb e Province di-
notaware of arivm! Gffice, Adelaide : And I do further declare, that I am
or thaTanr personT a p gage ’ e . n( ! umbrance > or claim affecting the said lands,
or that any person hath any claim, estate, or interest in the said lands at
law or m equity, m position or in expectancy, other than la se? forth and


stated as follows—that is to say (here state particulars of all unsatisfied
mortgages , encumbrances, claims, or interests, if any), and I make this solemn
declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true.
Dated at , this day of , 18
Made and subscribed by the above-named this day of ,
in the presence of me, , Registrar-General or Justice of
the Peace.
I, A. 8., the above declarant, do hereby apply to have the piece of
land described in the above declaration brought under the opera-
tion of the Real Property Act of South Australia.
Dated at , this day of , 18
A.B.
Witness to signature— C.D.
K
Nomination of Trustees.
I, A. 8., being registered as the proprietor of an estate (here state nature of
the estate or interest), subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and
interests, as are notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that piece of land
situated in (here describe the land by a sufficient description for identifying it
with the description in the grant, certificate of title, or instrument relating to the
same appearing in the register book, and referring to the original grant of such
land by the Crown), do hereby transfer all my estate or interest in the said
land above described to C.D. of , E.F. of , and OH. of
s , as trustees of the same, under the provisions of the Real Property
Act.
In witness whereof I have hereunto signed my name this day of
, in the presence of
A.B.
Accepted— C.D. , E.F., 0.H., in the presence of
Schedule of Trusts.
It is agreed that the above-described land shall be held by the above-
named trustees upon the trusts following, that is to say—
L
Caveat.
Take notice that I, , claiming estate or interest (here state the
nature of the estate or interest claimed, and the grounds on which such claim is
founded) in lands described as (here state particulars of description from decla-
ration of applicant) in notice dated the day of , advertising the same
as land in respect to which claim has been made, to have the same brought
under the operation of the Real Property Act, do hereby forbid the bringing
of the said lands under the operation of the said Act.
Dated this day of ,18
«• • A B ’
feigned in my presence this day of
To the Registrar-General of the Province of South Australia.
M
Notice of Lands brought under Act.
Whereas A. 8., of claiming to be seised of an estate, in the lands
a


described at foot hereof, has applied to have the said lands brought under the
operation of the Real Property Act, and such claim having been duly adver-
tised in manner prescribed by the said Act, and no caveat in respect to the
said lands haying been received by me within the time for that purpose by the
said Act limi ted: Now I, ,of , Registrar-General, by virtue
of powers by the said Act in me vested, do hereby declare the said lands to be
lands brought under the operation of the said Act, from and after the date
hereof.
Given under my hand the day of ,18 .
(Signed) Registrar-General.
O
Transfer of Mortgage, Lease, or Encumbrance to be endorsed on Original
Mortgage, Bill of Encumbrance, or Lease.
f, the within-mentioned C.D., in consideration of £ , this day paid to
me by X. Y. , of the receipt of which sum I do hereby acknowledge,
hereby transfer to him the estate or interest in respect to which I am regis-
tered as Proprietor, as set forth and described in the within-written security
together with all my rights powers, estate, and interest therein. In witness
whereof 1 have hereunto subscribed my name, this day of
(*•*) C.D.
Signed by the above-named C.D. in the presence >
of E.F., the day of j"
i' ; '• fr/io
p
Caveat forbidding Registration of Contract for dealing with estate or interest in
futuro.
To the Registrar-General of South Australia—
Take notice that I, , claiming estate or interest ( here state the
ZZIZZth r! 0r u nd tke pounds on which such claim is
founded) in [here describe land) forbid the registration of any memorandum of
°? ei " mStrUment ’ 7 made ’ fii S ned ’ or executed by ( here insert name and
address of person supposed to have made, or suspected of being about to make
such memorandum of sale or other instrument), affecting the said land until
this caveat be by me, or by the order of the Supreme Court, or some Judge
thereof, withdrawn. Dated this ( here insert date of caveat) day of 18
A.B.
Q
South Australia.
Revocation Order.
dated the 7 day of ’ by a P ° Wer of attorne y
sea I l“this neBBWhere< dkJo h f aVe her6Unto Bubscribed “y name and affix my
( L S ‘) A.B. of
has’efe^ted t thi fi R t ™of era1 ’ reby Certif y that tbe above-named proprietor
has executed this revocation order in manner above appearing. *
(Signed) Registrar-General.


Certificate of Registrar-General, Justice of the Peace, sc., taking declaration
of attesting witness.
Appeared before me at , the day of , C.D.. of
attesting witness to this instrument, and acknowledged his signature to the’
same; and did further declare, that A. 8., the party executing the same was
personally known to him, the said C.D. ; and that the signature of this said
instrument is the hand-writing of the said A.B.
(Signed) Registrar-General, or J.P.
S
Certificate of Registrar- General, or Justice of the Peace, before whom instru-
ment may have been executed by the parties thereto.
Appeared before me, at , the day of , A.B. of
the party executing the within instrument, and did freeely and voluntarily
sign the same. J
(Signed) Registrar-General, or J.P.
T
Certificate of Registrar-General upon acknowledgment of instrument to be
made by a Married Woman under Clause 109.
■> I certify that this instrument was this day produced before me the under-
signed M. N., Registrar-General, Judge or Master of the Supreme Court)
of South Australia (or A. 8., a Commissioner duly authorized, in pursuance of
an Ordinance of the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council of South Australia, in that behalf for taking acknowledgments of married
women, or EP’., the Commissioner named in the Commission hereunto an-
nexed, or G.H., Judge, Mayor, or Chief Magistrate of )
and was acknowledged by , the wife of '
therein named, being personally present before me, and being of full age and
competent understanding, to be her act and instrument; previous to which
acknowledgment the said being examined by me, sepa-
rately and apart from her husband, touching her knowledge of the contents
of the said instrument and her consent thereto, declared that she fully under-
stood the nature and effect thereof, and that the same was freely and volun-
tarily executed by her.
As witness my hand this day of
(Signed) Registrar-General.
U
Fees payable for the performance of the several acts, matters, and things herein
specified.
lor the bringing land under the operation of this Act; to be paid £ 3. d.
to the Lands Titles Commissioners, over and above the cost of
all advertisements herein prescribed to be in such case pub-
lished : r
When title consists of a land grant only 0 10
When the title is of any other description, and the value
exceeds £2OO 1 0 0
Do. do. do. do., exceeds £lOO but does not exceed £2OO 015 0
Do. do. do., when the value does not exceed £lOO 0 10 0
e 2


For every certificate of title issued to proprietor for balance of land £ s. d.
left upon a transfer of portion of the land included under a
former grant or certificate of title 0 10 0
For certificate of title issued under other circumstances 1 0 0
Registering memorandum of sale, bill of mortgage, bill of encum-
brance, lease, or nomination of trustees 0 10 0
For registering transfer of mortgage, or of encumbrance, or release
of mortgage, or encumbrance, or the transfer or surrender of
a lease 0 5 0
Registering declaration of ownership, taken by transmission 0 10 0
For every power of attorney 0 10 0
For every registration abstract 1 0 0
For cancelling power or registration abstract 0 5 0
For every revocation order 0 10 0
Receipt and noting of caveat . . 0 10 0
For every search 0 2 0
For every map or plan deposited 0 5 0
For every deed or other instrument declaratory of trusts deposited 0 5 0
For certified copy, first five folios, per folio of seventy-two words.. 0 10
And for every folio, or part of folio, after first five 0 0 8
For every instrument drawn on parchment 0 2 6


INDEX.
A, sch., form of certificate of title.
Abbreviated forms of express covenants in mortgages and leases, s. 69.
Absence from Province, Registrar-General may enter caveat on behalf of
person under disability of, s. 10.
of mortgagee, in case of, mortgage money may be
paid to Kegistrar-General, s. 62.
Abstract of Title, to be left with Registrar-General, if required, s. 16
to be verified by declaration of proprietor, s. 16
to be delivered in certain Eases by person entering caveat
against bringing land under Act,, s. 19
to be returned to applicant proprietor on withdrawing
application, if desired, s. 25.
Abstract, Registration, meaning of, s. 3
for dealings out of the Province, s. 102
form of, sch. H
' issue of, to be entered in register book, s. 102
after issue of, no transaction to be entered in
register book, until surrendered, s. 102
mode of procedure under, s. 103
general rules applicable to, s. 104
to be delivered up to Registrar-General upon a
sale, rule 4, s. 104
new one may be issued in case of loss, rule 7,
s. 104
to be cancelled by Registrar-General on being
delivered up, rule 8, s. 104
fraudulent obtaining or alteration of, felony, s. 141.
Acknowledgment, of instruments by married woman, ss. 83, 109
form of certificate of, by married women, sch. T
to be taken before Registrar-General, or Judge or Master
of Supreme Court, s. 109
to be endorsed on instrument of transfer by married
woman, s. 109
to be entered in register book, s. 109
sufficient without further proof of her execution, B. 113
Accounts to be kept by Registrar-General of moneys received by him under
the Act, s. 140.
Act, commencement of, Ist July, 1858, s. 143
short title of, s. 2.
Action, mortgagee or encumbrancee may bring, for ejectment, 8. 57
for breach of implied covenants, s. 70
of ejectment may be brought or defended in name of trustee by
person beneficially interested, s. 80
trustee whose name is used in, to be indemnified, s. 80
of ejectment not to be brought against registered proprietor, other
than mortgagor, or encumbrancer, or lessee, s. 121
of ejectment or for damages not to be brought against purchaser or
mortgagee for value, ss. 122, 123


Action, for damages may be brought against fraudulent proprietor, or against
volunteer claiming through him, s. 122.
may be brought by person prevented from bringing ejectment, or by
person defrauded or injured by mistake in register book, against
the person who was the registered proprietor when the act occa-
sioning the injury took place, s. 124
amount of damages to be recovered in, limited to the value of the land
at the time when cause of action arose, s. 124.
Action for Damages, may be brought against Registrar-General as nominal
defendant in the event of the death or insolvency of
the registered proprietor against whom such action
might have been brought, s. 125
or for injury occasioned by mistake in the Lands Titles
Office, s. 126
notice of, to be served upon the Attorney-General and
Registrar-General, s. 126
Registrar-General not to be personally chargeable upon
judgment recovered in, s. 126
discontinued, or plaintiff nonsuited, nominal defendant
entitled to costs, s. 127
may be brought against person making false oath,
s. 141.
Advertisements, see “Proprietor”
to be published on entering remainderman in register book,
s. 30
and on issuing certificate to remainderman, s. 32
of application for certificate of title by executors, or ad-
ministrators, or Curators of Intestate Estates, s. 85.
Affirmation, see “ Oath.”
Agent, may bring land of his principal under Act in pursuance of contract
for sale, s. 91
instruments under Act signed by, on behalf of principal, to be valid,
s. 91
may sign caveat on behalf of principal, s. 98.
Annuity may be secured by bill of encumbrance, s. 52
form of bill of encumbrance for securing, sch. F
bill of encumbrance for securing, not to operate as a transfer of th e
land, s. 57
person entitled to, may enter into possession of land or distrain upon
occupier, ss. 57, 58
may bring action of ejectment, s. 57
satisfaction and discharge of, to he entered in register book, s. 61
right to recover, passes to transferee of bill of encumbrance, s. 89
trust affecting, Court of Equity may give effect to, s. 89.
Appeal, see “ Court.”
Application, to bring property under Act, by whom to be made, s. 15
1. by person claiming fee
2. by person claiming to have contracted to purchase the fee, if
vendor concur
3. by person claiming as beneficial owner of life estate
4. by married woman as beneficial owner for life or in fee, if
husband concur
5. by the father, or mother, or guardian of minor
6. by the committee or guardian of lunatic
7. by mortgagor if mortgagee concur.
By whom not to be made, s. 15
1. not by mortgagee
2. nor by owner of undivided share
form of, sch. I
to be referred to Lands Titles Commissioners, s. 17
title to land included in, different classes of, s. 17.


Application, procedure upon—
1. where applicant is the original grantee of land granted on, or
subsequent to Ist March, 1842, and no transaction has been
registered
2. where the land was granted prior to Ist March, 1842; or
where, not having been derived by transmission, every encum-
brance has been satisfied, or encumbrancees concur in applica-
tion . .
3. where applicant has derived by transmission, or encum-
brancees do not concur in application, or evidence of title is
imperfect.
notice of, to be published, s. 18
may be withdrawn, s. 25
by remainderman to be entered in register book, s. 30
by executor or administrator of deceased proprietor, or Curator
of Intestate Estates, to receive certificate of title, s. 85
by heir or devisee to receive certificate of title, s. 87
to bring land under the Act by agent holding power of attorney,
in pursuance of contract for sale, s. 91.
Appraiser, certificate of, to be received as conclusive evidence of value of
land, s. 40.
Assurance Fund, t j be created by the payment of halfpenny in the pound, to
be paid on first bringing land under the Act, and upon the
registration of land under the Act derived through will or
intestacy, s. 40
mode of estimating value of land, for, s. 40
remainderman to contribute to, on being registered, s. 30
and on estate in remainderman vesting in possession in
remainderman or purchaser, s. 32
fees collected for, to be paid to Treasurer, and to be invested in
Government securities, s. 41
rightful proprietor to be indemnified, out of, s. 41
deficiency in, to be made good out of General Revenue, ss.
41, 135
amount of damages and costs recovered by judgment against
Registrar-General as nominal defendant, to be paid out of,
by Treasurer, ss. 125, 126
not to be liable beyond six years from the origin of the cause
of action, s. 125
Registrar-General to be indemnified out of, s. 135.
Attestation, see “ Witness.”
Attested Copt, see “ Copies.”
Attorney, see “ Agent,” “ Solicitor.”
Attorney-General, notice of action and process to be served upon, s. 126
penalties imposed by the Act may be recovered in the
name of, s. 142.
Attorney, Power op, registered proprietor may execute, s. 101
form of, sch. G
particulars of, to be entered in register book, s. 101
executed before Act or out of Province, not to be
affected, s. 101
rules applicable to, s. 104
no instrument made under, to be impeached by the
previous death of the principal, rule 2, s. 104
purchaser, mortgagee, or lessee under, without notice,
not to be affected by the bankruptcy or insolvency
of the principal, rule 3, s. 104
new one may be issued in case of loss, rule 7, s. 104
may be revoked, s. 105
form of instrument of revocation of, sch. Q
penalty for not surrendering, s. 105


Attorney, Power of, deemed to be revoked after presentation of revocation
order to holder of, s. 106.
B, sch., form of memorandum of sale.
Bankruptcy and Insolvency, included under term transmission, s. 3
transmission by, to be authenticated by declaration, s. 81
declaration of transmission by, to be signed by person claiming
to be entered in register book, s. 81
certified or office copy of appointment of assignees in, to be left
with Registrar-General, s. 82
particulars of appointment of assignees in, to be entered in
register book, s. 82
assignees in, may transfer land on appointment being entered,
s. 82
instruments executed by assignees in, to have the same effect
as if executed by registered proprietor prior to transmission,
s. 82
of trustee, not to affect rights of cesluiqui trusts, s. 82
of donor of power of attorney not to affect a purchaser, mort-
gagee, or lessee without notice, rule 3, s. 104.
Bill of Encumbrance, see “ Encumbrance.”
Bill of Mortgage, see “ Mortgage.”
C, sch., form of lease.
Caveat, may be entered by Registrar-General on behalf of persons under
disability, s. 10
unless received within time limited by Commissioners, land included
in application to be brought under the Act, ss. 17, 18
forbidding land to be brought under Act, may be lodged by party
interested, s. 19
form of, forbidding bringing land under Act, sch. L
upon receipt of, notice to be given to applicant proprietor, s. 20.
until withdrawn, or lapsed, or decision of Court obtained, land not
to be brought under Act, s. 20-
deemed to have lapsed, after three calendar months from date, unless
caveator take proceedings within that time, s. 21
penalty for lodging without reasonable grounds, s. 21
not to be noticed by Registrar-General in certain cases, s. 26
unless lodged after death of applicant proprietor, certificate to issue
to legal personal representative or other person entitled, if Regis-
trar-General has received notice of death, s. 29
unless lodged by person claiming land by devise or descent from
registered proprietor, certificate of title to issue to personal repre-
sentatives or to Curator of Intestate Estates, s. 85
Supreme Court or Judge may direct, to be entered, s. 87
may be entered by person claiming land under contract or by trans-
mission, s. 96
form of, forbidding registration of any instrument, sch. P
particulars of, to be entered in register book, and upon instrument
evidencing title of caveator, s. 97
notice of, to be given to registered proprietor, s. 97
person lodging may be summoned to show cause, s. 97
must contain name and address of caveator and sufficient description
of laud, s. 98
must be signed by caveator, or by his solicitor, attorney, or agent, 5.98
notices relating to, if served at address of caveator, or at office of
solicitor or agent, to be deemed sufficient service, s. 98
Registrar-General may require form of, to be amended, and may
issue other forms, s. 98
whilst in force, no instrument affecting land to be registered, s. 99
may be cancelled by Registrar-General, s. 100
right to enter, to be exercised by person claiming in respect of, or
bis solicitor, s. 138.


Certificate of Title included under term instrument, s. 3
to be issued to applicant proprietor, s. 27
to be issued in name of deceased applicant proprietor
unless Registrar-General shall have received notice
to the contrary, s. 28
to be issued to legal personal representative, heir, or
devisee of deceased applicant proprietor, if the
Registrar-General shall have received notice in that
behalf, s. 29
when issued to proprietor of life estate, remainderman
may apply to be entered in register book, s. 30
name of remainderman to be endorsed on, s. 30
to be issued to remainderman, where his estate shall
have become vested in possession, s. 32
to be issued to purchaser entitled in fee simple in pos-
session, s. 32
separate certificate to be issued to each tenant in com-
.33
to be bound up in register book and to be in duplicate,
ss. 34, 35, 37
form of, sch. A
outstanding estates to be endorsed on, s. 35
authenticated under hand and seal of Registrar-Gene-
ral, to be received as evidence, s. 35
deemed to be registered when marked by the Registrar-
General with a folio and volume, s. 37
to be indefeasible, except in case of fraud or wrong
description of land, s. 39
any estate, right or interest in land not declared in,
not to affect registered proprietor, s. 39
transfer to be endorsed on, s. 43
instrument dated prior to date of, not to be called for
by purchaser unless entered in register book, s. 44
to be delivered up if fee simple in the whole or part of
the land included be transferred, unless held by
registered mortgagee or encumbrancee, s. 46
to be cancelled as regards land transferred, s. 46
to be issued to purchaser or transferee, s. 47
shall refer to the original grant, and to the instrument
of transfer to purchaser or transferee, s. 47
cancelled either wholly or partially, to be retained by
Registrar General, s. 47
of balance to be issued to proprietor where required,
or to purchaser or transferee of balance, s. 47
to be produced to Registrar-General when proprietor
grants a lease, s. 48
particulars of lease to be recorded on, s. 48
to be produced to Registrar-General when proprietor
executes a mortgage, s. 52
particulars of mortgage to be endorsed on, 8. 52
to be delivered to the purchaser of the fee simple of
mortgaged land, if the existing certificate be surren-
dered, s. 55
sale of leasehold interest, mortgaged or encumbered,
to be endorsed on, s. 59
discharge of mortgage or encumbrance to be endorsed
on, s. 61
transfer of mortgage, encumbrance, or lease to be en-
dorsed on, s. 63
to be produced to Registrar-General whenever the land
included therein is vested in trust, s. 73


Certificate of Title, particulars of nomination of trustees to be endorsed on,
s. 73
trustees holding fee simple entitled to receive, s. 75
the words “ no survivorship” to be written on, if such
words be written on instrument of nomination, s. 77
particulars of order of Supreme Court to be endorsed
on, s. 79
marriage of female proprietor to be endorsed on, s. 83
to be issued to the executor, or administrator, or
Curator of Intestate Estates at the expiration of six
calendar months from the death of deceased proprie-
tor, if outstanding certificate be delivered up, s. 85
issued to personal representatives or Curator, not to
affect title of heir or devisee, except in certain cases,
s. 85
personal representatives or Curator of Intestate Estates
holding, to have the like power over land as they
have over personal estate, s. 86
heir-at-law or devisee may apply for, s. 87
may be issued to heir-at-law or devisee on authority
of personal representatives or Curator of Intestate
Estates, s. 87
agent may receive in name of principal, s. 91
several representing different properties may be de-
livered up, and a single one obtained including all,
s. 92
single may be delivered up, and several obtained repre-
senting each a portion of the land included in that
delivered up, s. 93
production of, may be dispensed with by Registrar-
General, s. 94
particulars of caveat to be entered upon, s. 97
issue of registration abstract to be endorsed on, s. 102
provision in case of loss or destruction of, s. 115, and
see “ Provisional Certificate”
fraudulently obtained from Registrar-General, fraudu-
lent person may be summoned, s. 128
Court may order delivery of, to Registrar-General,
s. 130
fraudulent obtaining of, or forging, or alteration of,
felony, s. 141.
Certificate of proof of execution of instruments, see “ Execution.”
Certified Copies, see “ Copies.”
Commissioners, Lands Titles, appointment, of, s. 11
style and remuneration of, s. 12
may appoint two counsel, s. 13
two to form a quorum, s. 12
not to be legal practitioners, s. 11
applications to bring land under Act, to be
referred to, s. 17.
Committee, or guardian of minor or lunatic, may apply to bring property
under Act, s. 15
powers of, not to be abridged by issuing certificate of title in name
of minor or lunatic, s. 27
to sign declaration of transmission to infant or lunatic, s. 81
may°act on behalf of infant or lunatic proprietor, s. 11)8.
Consent to disposition of land may be endorsed on instrument of transfer,
s. 107
“ Consular Officer” who included under term, s. 3
certificate of proof of execution of instrument under hand
and seal of, to be evidence of such execution, s. 112.


Contract, not to be registered, s. 96
person claiming under may enter caveat, s. 96.
Coparceners, partition by, s. 90.
Copies, attested of instruments of trusts to be deposited with Registrar-
General, but not to be registered, s. 74
certified, of instruments, to be furnished by Registrar-General, and
received as evidence, if sealed with his seal, s. 120.
Corporation to be included un ler term “ person,” s. 3
seal of, substituted for signature, s. 11l
execution of instrument in the United Kingdom may be proved
before chief officer of, s. 112.
Costs, in proceedings under Act, relating to summons, examination, or warrant,
may be given or withheld by Registrar-General, Court or Judge, s.
132
if unpaid, to be levied by distress, s. 133.
Counsel, Commissioners may appoint, with approval of Governor, s. 13.
Court, Supreme, oath to be taken by Registrar-General and Deputy before
one of the Judges of, s. 5
Registrar-General may be summoned before, to uphold
objections to title of applicant proprietor, s. 22
summons to be issued under hand of Judge of, s. 22
objections to be heard by, upon motion, s. 22
may direct issue to try question of fact, s. 22
may forbid or order the bringing land under Act, s. 22
motion to be argued before, by counsel, s. 23
sanction of, must be obtained to dealing with land by less
than original number of trustees, s. 76
may give directions for appointment of new trustees, and
for investment of moneys, s. 76
may make order under Trustee Act constituting registered
proprietor a trustee, s. 79
order of, to be entered in register book, ss. 79, 87
to have no effect in transferring land until entry, s. 79
to be recorded on instrument of title, s. 79
may order Registrar-General to issue certificate of title to
heir or devisee, s. 87
may direct a caveat to be entered, s. 87
may give directions as to payment of costs of application to,
made by heir or devisee, s. 87
may exercise powers conferred by statute of the 6th Queen
Anne, s. 88
Judge or Master to take acknowledgments of married
women, s. 109
person defrauded may apply by petition to, for recovery of
land, or may bring action in, for damages, ss. 122, 124
may make order to cancel or alter entry in register book,
s. 123
Chief Justice of, to certify to Treasurer the fact of judgment
having been recovered and the amount of damages and
costs, s. 126
may issue a warrant for apprehension of person summoned
by Registrar General, s, 128
may order delivery of instruments to Registrar-General,
s. 130
may award costs and expenses, s. 132
judges of, to fix remuneration of practitioners for business
under Act, s. 139.
Covenants, general, to be implied in every instrument of transfer or creating
charge, s. 64
implied in bill of mortgage, s. 65
in lease, s. 66


Covenants, lessee whose estate has determined by entry of lessor, not to be
released from liability on covenants expressed or implied, s. 68
abbreviated forms for express, s. 69
implied, entered into by several parties, to be construed as several
and not joint, s. 70
may be set forth in declaration in action for breach, s. 70
to be as effectual as if expressed at length, s. 71
may be negatived or modified by express declaration, s. 72
benefits of, to extend to, and liabilities under to be implied against
married woman conjointly with her husband, s. 110.
Covbbture see “ Married Woman”
Registrar-General may enter caveat on behalf of person under
disability of, s. 10.
Crown, lands alienated from, after Ist July, 1858, to be subject to Act, s. 14
lands, duplicates of public maps of, to be deposited in Registry
Office, s. 116.
D, sch., form of bill of mortgage.
Damages, see “ Action.”
right to recover passes to transferee, s. 89
Assurance Fund not to be liable for, beyond six years from origin
of cause of action, s. 125.
Death, see “ Certificate of Title” and “ Proprietor”
transmission by, to be authenticated by declaration, s. 81
no person to obtain certificate of title of land transmitted by, until
probate of will or letters ©f administration are produced, s. 84
of principal, not to invalidate sale, mortgage, or lease, subsequently
made under power of attorney, rule 2, s. 104
of registered proprietor against whom action may be brought, Registrar-
General may be nominal defendant, s. 125.
Declaration in action, may set forth implied covenants, s. 70
transmission to be authenticated by, s. 81
of transmission, before whom to be made, s. 81
of identity of female proprietor on marriage, s. 83
agent may make, on bringing land of principal under the Act, s. 91
to be made by proprietor on loss of certificate of title, s. 115
of accuracy of deposited map to be made by depositor,
ss. 117, 118.
Deed, trusts may be declared by, s. 74.
Descent, see “ Heir”
party claiming by, may enter caveat, s. 85.
Devise, see “ Certificate of Title”
party claimining by, may enter caveat, s. 85.
Disability, Registrar-General may enter caveat for parties under, s. 10
general provision for cases of, s. 108
Distress, mortgagee or encumbrancee may levy, upon tenant or occupier for
arrears of interest or annuity, ss. 57, 58
Registrar-General or Judge may issue warrant of, to levy costs and
expenses awarded in proceedings before them, s. 132
levied under Act, not to be deemed unlawful, s. 134
person making, not to be deemed a trespasser by defect in proceed-
ings, s. 134.
Duplicate, of grant and certificate of title to be hound up in register book, 5.34
all instruments affecting land to be in, ss. 35, 37
or attested copy of instrument of trust may be deposited with
Registrar-General, s. 74
public maps of Crown Lands to be in, and to be deposited in Re-
gistry Office, s. 116
of instrument brought for registration, Registrar-General not to
be liable for mistake in, s. 138.
of instrument brought for registration, t© be certified as correct
by person claiming under or his solicitor, s. 13S


E, sch., form of bill of encumbrance for securing sum of money.
Easement, and incorporeal rights to be registered in certain cases, s. 45.
Ejectment, see “ Action.”
Encumbrance, meaning of, s. 3
form of bill of, schs. E and F
bill of, to be executed for securing a sum of money or an
annuity, s. 52
see “ Mortgage or Encumbrance.”
Encumbrancee, meaning of, s. 3 _ ,
naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, aci-
ministrators, and assigns, s. 3
lease of encumbered land not valid against, without his con-
sent, s. 50
power of sale by, s. 54
receipt of, discharge to purchaser, s. 54
Registrar-General to give effect to sale by, s. 55
may enter into possession, or distrain, or bring ejectment,
ss. 57, 58
of leaseholds, entering into possession, to be liable to lessor,
s. 60.
Encumbrancer, meaning of, s. 3 . ,
naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, ad-
ministrators, and assigns, s. 3
notice in writing to be sent to, on default in payment of
money, s. 54.
Endorsement, instruments of title surrendered by applicant proprietor can-
celled by, s. 27
of outstanding estates to be made upon certificate of title,
s. 35
lease surrendered by, s. 51 , , ,
mortgage, encumbrance, or lease transferred by, ss. 59, bo,
sch. O
consent or direction of any person necessary for disposition
of land, given by, s. 107.
Entry in register book, Registrar-General may make rules as to, s. 7
Registrar-General may correct errors and supply omissions in, s. 10
of particulars of instruments when made in register book, instruments
deemed part of register book, s. 38
in register book, to be conclusive, except in case of fraud and wrong
description, s. 39 , ,
of lease, when made, land to be considered as transferred to lessee,
s. 50
of mortgage or encumbrance in register book, land to be available as
security, s. 52
of transfer of mortgaged leasehold interest, s. 59
of discharge of mortgage or encumbrance, s. 61
of trusts not to be made, s. 75 . 9
may be cancelled, or altered and substituted by order of Court, s. 123
fraudulentlv made, fraudulent person may be summoned, s. 128
procuring by fraudulent representations, felony, s. 141.
Equitable Lien, vendor not to have, for balance of purchase money, s. 95.
Equitable Jurisdiction of Supreme Court, available for recovery of land
fraudulently obtained, s. 122.
Equity, Court op, may give effect to trusts affecting money, annuity, or
damages, s. 89.
Error, in entries in register book may be corrected by Registrar-General,
8. 10
notwithstanding any error in formalities for bringing land under Act,
certificate to be indefeasible, s. 39
Registrar-General not to be liable for errors in duplicate of instrument
brought to be registered, s. 138.


Estate IS Fee Simple, meaning of, s. 3
foHif,, r[r &&2
3v rs ta:i asaiMt ,aua
’ d ~ - **•» - *.
to Jdent.fr any person, Begistrar-General may give instruction, as
.mporfeot, of title of applicant proprietor, course of procedure,
certificate of title to be received in, s. 35
memorandum of sale to be received in, s. 43
aSSSZiFXT**- ot^atr> “ a suthentioated by
.i«£^l?SdSA^S 0 "" 4 as ’° f mMers declared “
Ll”- rtg / ge °r encumbrance certified by Registrar-General to
be received as, of particulars contained therein s 53
in cases of transmission, ss. 81, 82, 83, 84
SSL SfiEUm m“ rame “‘Bby 8by oertife “ B of <™ f f “"
. ana sea,ed by
of Instruments, Registrar-Gen e ral may giro in-
°fßriHs r h mentS 111 this P . rovince » the United Kingdom in
proved, nrr 118 ’ 0r m foreign pkces ’ before wh ° m to be
mode of proof of, s. 113
oTSIt 0 ”
„ TndSordglrr s “n3 n “ oeBSa ' y ' ° th6r lh “
Execution OP Legal Peocess, Bagjstra,jGeneral and his goods or lands not
consent of, neces,a,V\, sanction alterations of book,
FE E S s Ch ” for 7-° f A. bill °^ encum bJan m ce n fo S ; securing annuity 68 ’ **
Fees on applications, Commissioners to be remunerated bv s 12 *oh tt
on searching register book, s. 119, sch. U 7 ’ ’ b ' V
to be appointed by Governor, s. 137
bo framed by Supremo CWt for remuneration of petitioners,
r6 Connnissionera^ o^ S be n paitft^General g ßerenne yab HO b> ™ eS
Feloue, person, falsifying 'register book, „r"Se„ring .Lies or ins,
~ . , ments b y frau d or forgery, deemed gu,lty of, fl 4 U "
Fohms, to be prepared, sanctioned, and from time to Time altered hvP
General with sanction of Governor s. 8 “ d by Registrar-
public notice of alterations to be given s 8
tn t f, ale r 7 T ark - d by Re g is trar-General, s. 8
to be supplied at registry office free, or at moderate charge « 8
persons may be licensed to print and sell s. 8 g ’ 8
penalty for fraudulently altering, s, 9. ’
h baud, certificate of title to be indefeasible excent in n»on t
b “ r ° f Assurance
18 *° iand, or
entry in register boot may be cancelled in case of, s. 123


Fraud, if instrument obtained through, fraudulent person may be summoned,
s. 128
penalty and punishment for, 5.141.
G, sch., form of power of attorney.
Gender, masculine, to include female and body corporate, s. 3.
General Revenue, liable for deficiency in Assurance Fund, s. 41
Registrar-General to be indemnified out of, s. 135
fees received under Act, except those payable to Lands
Titles Commisioners, to be carried to account of, s. 140.
Governor, consent of, necessary to rules and instructions by Registrar-
General, s. 7
consent of, necessary to forms and alterations therein, s. 8
with advice of Executive Council to appoint Lands Titles Com-
misioners, s. 11
to approve appointment of counsel, s. 13
of British possession, execution of instruments may be proved
before, s. 112
on receipt of warrant under hand of, Treasurer to pay amount of
damages and costs awarded, ss. 125, 126
with consent of Executive Council, to appoint what fees to be
taken, s. 137
with advice of Executive Council, to prescribe regulations for ren-
dering accounts by Registrar-General, s. 140.
Government Gazette, application to bring land under Act, to be notified in,
s. 17
lands brought under Act by notice in, s. 18
notice of application by personal representatives or
Curator of Intestate Estates to receive certificate of
, title, to be advertised in, s. 85
see also “Proprietor.”
Government Securities, Assurrance Fund, to be invested in, s. 41.
Grant, to mean land grant of Crown Land, s. 3
included under term instruments, s. 3
lost, mislaid, or destroyed, provisional certificate to be issued, s. 115.
Great Britain, declaration of transmission, before whom to be made in, s. 81
instruments executed in, how proved, s. 112.
Guardian, see “ Committee.”
H, sch., form of registration abstract.
Heirs, to be included in naming any person as proprietor, &c., s. 3.
Husband, see “ Married Woman.”
I, sch., form of application for bringing land under Act.
Identity, rules for ascertaining, Registrar-General may make, s. 7
declaration of, to be made on marriage of female proprietor, s. 83
of person dealing with land, Registrar-General may require proof
of, s. 94.
Implied Covenants, see “ Covenants.”
Implied Powers, see “ Powers.”
Incapacity, see “ Disability.”
Incorporeal Rights, to be registered in certain cases, s. 45.
Indemnity, of Registrar-General, s. 135.
Infancy, see “Committee,” “Disability”
Registrar-General may enter caveat on behalf of person under dis-
abililty of, s. 10.
Insolvency, see “ Bankruptcy”
in case of, of registered proprietor against whom action may be
brought, Registrar-General may be nominal defendant, s. 125.
Instalments, payment of money by, may be secured by bill of mortgage or
encumbrance, s. 56.
Instrument, meaning of term, s. 3
of nomination of trustees, s. 73, seh. K.
Instruments, of title, see “ Proprietor ”


Instruments, not to be registered, unless in accordance with provisions of
Actj s. 36
to be in duplicate, s. 37
deemed to be registered when particulars are entered in register
book, s. 37 6
to be deemed part of register book, upon entry of particulars, s. 38
wnen entered m register book, to have same efleet as a deed
used for the like purpose, s. 38
to continue in force for the same period as an instrument
securing specialty debt, s. 38
dated prior to existing certificate of title, not to be called for by
purchaser, unless entered in register book, s. 44
creating easements or incorporeal rights, to be registered, s. 45
general covenants to be implied in, s. 64
trusts may be declared by separate, or by deed, s. 74
declaring trusts, to be deposited, but not registered, s. 74
acknowledgment of by married woman, s. 109
Corporation in lieu of signing, may affix seal to, s. 11l
sealed by Corporation to contain a statement that the seal was
alnxed by the proper officer, s. 11l
executed according to Act, and attested by one witness, to be held
duly attested, s. 112
execution of, before whom to be proved, s. 112
mode of proof of execution of, s. 113
signature and acknowledgment of, by married woman, sufficient
without further proof, s. 113
C t y ic l of ! tobe fashed by Registrar-General, s. 120
fraudulently obtained from Registrar-General, fraudulent person
may be summoned, s. 128 r
right to register, restricted to principal or solicitor, s. 138
penalty for falsifying or procuring by fraud, s. 141
Interpretation of terms used in Act, s. 3.
Intestacy, see “.Declaration,” “Transmission”
to be included under term transmission, s. 3
of registered proprietor, letters of administration to be left with
Registrar-General, s. 84.
Intestate Estates, Curator of, see “ Certificate of Title,” “ Proprietor ”
Joint Tenants, see “ Tenants.”
K, sch., form of nomination of trustees.
L, sch., form of caveat forbidding bringing land under Act.
Land, see “ Application”
what to include, s. 3
alienated from Crown after Ist July, 1858, to be subject to Act s. 14
g r ed v P™ t0 A d 'X ° n T hi °k Act comes into operation may be
brought under Act by application, s. 15 *
brought under Act by notice in Government Gazette, s. 18
when brought under Act, certificate of title to be issued, s 27
transfer of, ss. 42, 43 ’
easements and incorporeal rights annexed to, to be registered in certain
CASCSj 8. 45
lease of, s. 48
right of purchase of fee simple of, may be reserved in lease s 49
mortgaging and encumbering, ss. 52, 53, 54
may be vested in trustees, s. 73
"‘Lw„'g “ST 78 7 proprietot 10 him ’ elf j° in "y "«■ °*kw« without
transmission of, ss. 81, 82
partition of, s. 90
ha 7 ?<l» itable for balance of purchase money, s. 95
person defraudeTmlv 60 6Dt u* reC -°Y ery of - not to be brought, s. 121
person defrauded may recover, by petition in Court of Equity, s. 122


Land, of Registrar-General, not liable to execution, s. 135
see “ Tenant,” “ Assurance Fund,” “ Maps.”
Lease, of land under Act, how effected, s. 48, sch. C
to be attested by a witness, s. 48
particulars of, to be entered in register book, s. 48
memorandum of entry in register book to be endorsed on, s. 48
endorsed with memorandum authenticated by Registrar-General, to be
received as evidence, s. 48
right to purchase fee simple, may be reserved in, s. 49
upon entry of in register book, land to vest in lessee, s. 50
of mortgaged or encumbranced land not valid without consent of
mortgagee or eneumbrancee, s. 50
may be surrendered by endorsement signed by lessee and lessor, and at-
tested by a witness, s. 51
date of surrender of, to be entered in register book, s. 51
memorandum of entry of surrender to be endorsed upon, s. 51
upon entry of surrender of, estate of lesse to revest in lessor, s. 51
endorsed with entry of surrender, to be evidence of such surrender,
s. 51
sold by mortgagee, or eneumbrancee, or lessee, may be transferred to
purchaser by endorsement, ss. 59, 63
covenants to be implied in, against lesse'e, s. 66
powers in lessor, to be implied in, s. 67
covenants expressed in, short forms of, s. 69
agreement for, not to be entered in register book, s. 96
mode of effecting, under registration abstract, ss. 102, 103, 104
bond fide made under power of attorney, not to be impeached by pre-
vious death or bankruptcy of principal, rules 2,3, s. 104
Lessee, naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, administrators,
and assigns of such person, s. 3
name of, to be entered in register book, s. 48
right to purchase fee may be granted to, s. 49
upon entry of lease, land to be vested in, s. 50
to sign endorsement of surrender of lease, s. 51
covenants to be implied against, in lease, s. 66
estate of, to determine, upon entry in register book of recovery of pos-
session by lessor, s. 68.
Lessor, naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, administrators,
and assigns of such person, s. 3
description of, to be entered in register book, s. 48
bound to execute memorandum of sale to lessee with right of pur-
chase, on fulfilment of conditions, s. 49
consent of, necessary to surrender of lease, s. 51
powers in, implied in lease, s. 67
re-entry by, to be noted in register book, s. 68.
Lost Grant or Certificate, provision for, s. 115, and see “ Provisional Certi-
ficate.”
Lunacv, see “ Committee,” “ Disability ”
Registrar General may enter caveat on behalf of person under dis-
ability of, s. 10.
Lunatic, meaning of, s. 3.
M, schedule, form of notice of lands brought under Act.
Map, included under term instrument, s. 3
public, delineating lands of Crown, to be in duplicate, duplicates to be
deposited in Registry Office, s. 116
of township may be deposited by proprietor subdividing land, s. 117
must be certified as accurate by depositor, ss. 117, 118
may be required by Registrar-General to be deposited, s. 118
minimum scale on which maps must be drawn for registration, s. 118.
Married Woman, see “ Acknowledgment ”
beneficially entitled for life or in fee, may apply to bring
land under Act, with consent of husband, s. 15
F


Married Woman, to acknowledge instrument, s. 83
mode of acknowledgment by, and before whom to be made
s. 109
benefits and liabilities in respect of covenants or powers to
extend to, and to be implied against, conjointly with
husband, s. 110.
Memorandum of Sale, meaning of, s. 3
form of, sch.’ B
. particulars of, executed by remainderman, to be entered
in register book, s. 31
to be in duplicate, s. 37
deemed to be registered when particulars are entered
m register book, s. 37
to be executed by vendor on transfer of land under
Act, s. 42
mode of registration of, s. 43
upon entry of particulars of, in register book, land to
vest in purchaser, s. 43
endorsed and authenticated by Registrar-General, to
ence con f en t s and of entry in register book,
dated prior to existing certificate, not to be called for
by purchaser, s. 44
of easement or incorporeal right to be registered, s. 45
purporting to transfer fee simple, vendor to deliver up
certificate of title, s. 46
executed by assignees of bankrupt or insolvent to have
same effect as if executed by proprietor prior to
transmission, s. 82
see “Transfer.”
Misdemeanour, person counterfeiting seal of Registrar-General, or altering
forms, deemed to be guilty cf, s. 9
holder of powerof attorney not surrenderingsame, guilty of, s. 105
Misrepresentation, penalty for procuring entries or instruments by, s. 141
damages may be recovered from person guilty of, s. 141.
Mortgage, meaning of, s. 3
form of bill of, sch. D
Monev, Registrar-General, authorized to receive, if there be no
other person to give receipt, s. 62
upon receipt of, Registrar-General to discharge mortgage
by entry in register book, s. 62
paid to Registrar-General, mortgagee not to recover any
further sum, s. 62
after payment of to Registrar-General, interest to cease,
s. 62 ’
bill of, covenants implied in, s. 65.
Mortgage or Encumbrance, particulars of bill of, to be entered in register
book, s. 52
bill of, to be entered in order of production to
Registrar-General, s. 53
memorandum of entry of, to be recorded on bill
and certified by Registrar-General, s. 53
bill of, certified by Registrar-General, to be
evidence of particulars contained therein, s. 53
priority of bill of, according to date of registra-
tion, s. 53
money, or interest, or annuity, secured by bill
of, -unpaid for one month, or on default in
observance of covenants, mortgagee or encum-
brancee authorized to sell, s. 54
weekly or other periodical payments may be
secured by bill of, s. 56


Mortgage or Encumbrance, any time may be limited in bill of, after expira-
tion of which sale may be made, s. 56
bill of, not to operate as a transfer of land, but
only as a security, s. 57
bill of, on default in payment of money secured
by, land may be entered, or tenant distrained,
upon, ss. 57, 58
money secured by bill of, if in arrear, mortgagee
or encumbrancee may bring ejectment or
foreclose, s. 57
bill of, of leasehold, to be cancelled on sale, s. 59
discharged by endorsement of receipt for money
secured, produced to Registrar-General, and
entered in register book, s. 61
registered, may be transferred by endorsement,
s. 63, sch. O
bill of, right to sue upon, vested in transferee,
at law and in equity, s. 89.
Mortgagee, meaning of, s. 3
naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, administra-
tors. and assigns of such person, s. 3
not to bring laud under Act. s. 15 ~
consent of, necessary to lands being brought under Act by mort-
gagor, s. 15
lease of mortgaged landnotbindingagainst, without bis consent, 5.50
power of sale by, s. 54
receipt of, discharge to purchaser, s. 54
Registrar-General to give effect to sale by, s. 55
5 may enter, or distrain, or bring ejectment, or foreclose, ss. 57, 58
may transfer mortgaged leasehold interest by endorsement, s. 59
of leaseholds, entering into possesion to be liable to lessor, s. 60
not bound to see to application of money paid to trustees, on re-
ceiving their receipt, s. 76
not to be liable to action of ejectment, or for damages, or to be
deprived of security, in consequence of mortgagor having been
registered through fraud or error, s. 123.
Mortgagor, meaning of, s. 3
naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, adminis-
trators, and assigns of such person, s. 3
not to bring land under Act without consent of mortgagee, s. 15
of land under Act, to execute bill of mortgage, s. 52
name, residence, and description of, to be entered in register
book, and upon instrument of title to land mortgaged, s. 52
upon entry in register book, land to be held by, liable to prin-
cipal and interest, s. 52
in default, notice in writing to be given to, or left at last known
residence in South Australia, s. 54
in default for one month after notice, mortgaged land may be
sold, s. 54
right of, to redeem, may be foreclosed, s. 57
if there be no person to give receipt to, for mortgage money,
Registrar-General may receive the same, s. 62
registered through fraud or error, not to affect interest of mort-
gagee, s. 123.
“ No Survivorship,” the words, may be inserted in instrument of nomination
of trustees, s. 76
effect of such insertion of words, s. 76
whenever inserted in instrument of nomination, the same
words to be written on every certificate of title to the
trustees, s. 77.
Notice, Registrar-General to give such, as be may deem necessary, before
issuing or altering forms, s. 8
F 2


Notice, of application to bring property under Act, s. 17
land to be brought under Act by, s. 18
form of, for bringing land under Act, s. 24, sch. M
unless Registrar-General shall have received notice of death of appli-
cant proprietor, certificate of title to issue in name of applicant, s. 28
notwithstanding express, implied, or constructive, bills of mortgage
or of encumbrance to take priority according to date of entry in
register book, s. 53
to mortgagor to pay money, see “ Mortgagor”
purchaser from mortgagee not bound to enquire as to, s. 54
of trusts not to affect purchaser or mortgagee, s. 76.
O, sch., form of transfer of mortgage, lease, or encumbrance.
Oath of office to be taken by Registrar-General and his Deputy, s. 5
Registrar-General may administer, s. 10
value of land to be ascertained by, of proprietor, s. 40
or affirmation, execution of instruments to be proved by, of parties exe-
cuting same, or witness, s. 113
or affirmation, Justice required to administer, s. 114
or affirmation, person falsely making, guilty of perjury, s. 141.
Order of Court, see “ Court.”
P, sch., form of caveat forbidding registration of contract for dealing with
estate or interest infuturo.
Partition, mode of effecting, by coparceners, joint tenants, and tenants in
common, s. 90
may be effected by such instrument of transfer as the case may
require, s. 90
particulars of instrument effecting, to bo entered in register book,
s. 90.
Penalty for counterfeiting Registrar-General’s seal, or fraudulently altering
forms, s. 9
for issuing form not sanctioned by Registrar-General, s. 9
for refusing to produce any instrument when required by Registrar-
General, s. 10
for lodging caveat without reasonable grounds, s. 21
for not surrendering power of attorney to owner, s. 105
for falsely certifying the correctness of any instrument on registering
the same, s. 138.
Perjury, person making false oath or affirmation, guilty of, s. 141.
Person, of unsound mind, meaning of, s. 3
to include female as well as male, and Corporation, s. 3.
Petition or motion to Supreme Court, see “ Court”
to Supreme Court, person defrauded may apply by, for recovery of
land, s. 122.
Plan, see “ Map”
included under term instrument, s. 3.
Power of Attorney, see “ Attorney, Power of.”
Power of Sale, given by Act to mortgagee or encumbrancee, s. 54.
Powers, implied in lessor, s. 67
implied in any instrument may be negatived or modified by express
declaration, s. 72.
Priority, bills of mortgage and of encumbrance entitled to, according to date
of entry in register book, s. 53.
Proprietor, meaning of term, s. 3
naming any person as, to include the heirs, executors, adminis-
trators and assigns of such person, s. 3.
Applicant, who may be, s. 15, and see “ Application”
to deposit instruments of title with Registrar-General,
and an abstract of title, if required, s. 16
if original grantee of land granted on or subsequent
to Ist March, 1842, as to which no transaction has
been registered, such land to be brought under Act
forthwith, s. 17


Proprietor, Applicant, of land granted prior to Ist of March 1842, or not
derived by transmission, and every encumbrance
satisfied, or encumbrancees concur in application
notice to be advertised once in Gazette and three
times in one newspaper, s. 17
having derived by transmission, or to whose applica-
tion encumbrancees are not parties, or the evidence
of whose title is imperfect, notice to be published
once in South Australian and once in London
Gazette , and in official gazettes of colonies, or in one
or more of them, s. 17
whose title is objected to, may summon Registrar-
General to show cause, s. 22
may withdraw application, s. 25
certificate of title to be issued to, s. 27
deposited instruments to be returned to, if relating to
other property, s. 27
in case of death of, before entitled to certificate, such
certificate to be issued in name of applicant pro-
prietor, if the Registrar-General has not received
notice of death, s. 28
certificate of title to lie issued to legal personal repre-
sentative of, or other person entitled, if Registrar-
General shall have received notice of death, s. 29
to pay assurance fee, s. 40
value of land to be ascertained by oath or affirmation
of, s. 40
may be required to produce certificate of value from
appraiser, s. 40
if entitled as tenant in common, must receive certificate as to
his share, s. 33.
Registered, secure from eviction or disturbance, s. 39
mode of sale by, s. 42
mode of lease by, s. 48
mode of mortgage by, s. 52
may vest lands in trust by instrument of nomination,
s. 73, sch. K
may insert the words “ no survivorship” in instru ■
ment of nomination, s. 76
may vest property jointly in himself and others, with-
out limiting use, s. 78
appearing to be a trustee within “ Trustee Act,”
Registrar-General to carry out order of Court, s. 79
transmission from, to be authenticated by declaration,
s. 81
bankrupt or insolvent, office copy of appointment of
assignees to be furnished, s. 82
bankrupt or insolvent trustee, not to effect rights of
cestuiqui trusts, s. 82
female, marriage of, to be certified to Registrar-
General, s. 83
land transmitted by death of, certificate not to issue
till probate or office copy of will, or letters of ad-
ministration, have been left with Registrar-
General, s. 84
six calendar months after death of, certificate of
title to be issued to personal representatives or
to Curator of Intestate Estates, unless caveat be
lodged, s. 85
rights of devisee or heir of, not to be affected by
issue of certificate to personal representatives,
s. 86


Proprietor, Registered, heir-at-law or devisee of, may apply to Supreme
Court to order Registrar-General to issue certificate
to him, s. 87
heir or devisee of, may receive certificate if autho-
rized by personal representatives, s. 87
when a coparcener, joint tenant, or tenant in common,
mode of partition by, s. 90
may surrender several certificates and obtain a single
one, s. 92
may surrender single, and obtain several, s. 93
notice of caveat to be sent to, s. 97
may summon caveator to show cause, s. 97
may execute power of attorney, s. 101, sch. G
upon application of, Registrar-General to issue
registration abstract to, s. 102
may revoke power of attorney, s. 105, sch. Q
under disability, guardian or committee, or person
appointed by Court may act in his stead, s. 108
provisional certificate to be issued to, in case of loss
of original, s. 115
may deposit map, s. 117
may be required bv Registrar-General to deposit
map, s. 118
action of ejectment not to be brought against, s. 121
may bring action of ejectment against lessee, s. 121
through fraud, person defrauded may petition Court
of Equity for recovery of land, or may bring action
for damages, s. 122
mortgagee or purchaser for value from, not liable to
action, ss. 122, 123.
Provisional Certificate, may be issued in case of loss or destruction of
original, s. 115
to contain an exact copy of original grant or
certificate in register book, s. 115
to contain a statement of the circumstances under
which it is issued, s. 115
notice of issuing of, to be entered in register
book, s. 115
to be as available and as valid as original grant or
certificate, s. 115.
Public Maps, see “ Map.”
Purchase, right of, may be granted to lessee, s. 49
money, no equitable lien in vendor for balance of, s. 95.
Purchaser, intending, may apply to bring land under Act, with consent of
vendor, s. 15
name, residence, and description of, to be entered in register book,
s. 43
not entitled to call for the production of any instrument dated
prior to the existing certificate of title, unless entered in register
book, s. 44
from trustees not bound to see to application of purchase money, s. 76
not affected by notice of trusts, s*. 76
for value, not liable to ejectment or action for damages, ss. 122,123.
Q, sch., form of revocation order.
Questions to attesting witness on proving execution of instruments, s. 113.
Quorum, see “ Commissioners.”
R, sch., form of certificate of Registrar-General, Justice of the Peace, &c.,
taking declaration of attesting witness.
Receipt, of mortgagee or encumbrancee under power of sale, sufficient dis-
charge to purchaser, s. 54
may be given by Registrar-General to mortgagor for mortgage money,
if mortgagee be absent from the Province, s. 62


Receipt, of trustees, sufficient discharge to purchaser or mortgagee, s. 76.
Register Book, meaning of, s. 3
to be kept by Registrar-General, s. 34
See “ Certificate of Title,” “ Registrar-General.”
Registered Proprietor, see “ Proprietor.”
Registrar-General, meaning of, s. 3
functions of, s. 4
to take oath of office, s. 5
signature or seal of, to be received in evidence, s. 6
with consent of Governor may issue general instructions,
s. 7
with consent of Governor may prepare and sanction
forms, s. 8
may licence persons to print and sell the same, s. 8.
Powers or, s. 10
1. may require applicant or registered proprietor,
or person interested in any land under Act,
to produce instruments affecting title
2. may summon persons to give explanations as
to land or instruments affecting title
3. may administer oaths, or require persons to
make declarations
4. may correct and supply entries, and may
enter caveats on behaif of persons under
disabilities, or on behalf of Her Majesty
shall receive a reasonable salary, s. 11
to be Chairman of Commissioners, s. 12
shall receive applications for bringing land under Act,
s. 15
shall refer applicationsto Lands Titles Commissioners, s. 17
by direction of Commissioners, shall cause notice of appli-
cations to be published, s. 18
shall proceed by notice to bring laud under Act, s. 18
shall notify receipt of caveat to applicant proprietor, s. 26
refusing to bring land under Act, may be required by
applicant proprietor to set forth the objections, s. 22
or his counsel, may argue motion for hearing objections
before the Court, s. 23
or his solicitor, to have the right of reply, s. 23
upon withdrawal of application to return documents to
proprietor, if so requested, s. 25
not to notice caveats in certain case, s. 26
to deliver certificate of title to applicant proprietor, s. 27
to stamp as cancelled every instrument deposited by
applicant proprietor, s. 27
upon receipt of notice of death of applicant proprietor
may issue certificate to legal personal representative,
s. 29
shall enter name of applicant remainderman in register
book, s. 30
shall enter particulars of every instrument under Act,
executed by remainderman, s. 31
may cancel existing certificate, and issue new certificate
on remainder vesting in possession, s. 32
may require title of person claiming in remainder to be
investigated, s. 32
shall keep a book called the “ Register Book of Real
Property,” s. 34
shall not register any instrument affecting land under
Act, unless in accordance with provisions thereof, s. 36
to retain in his office one original of every instrument
under Act, s. 37


Registrar-General, to enter in register book particulars of instrument creating
easement or incorporeal rights, s. 45
to record particulars of lease, s. 48
shall enter in register book particulars oi surrender of
lease, s. 51
shall enter particulars of bill of mortgage or of encum-
brance according to the order of production, s. 53
to give effect to sale by mortgagee or encumbrancee,
ss. 55,59
shall enter discharge of mortgage or encumbrance, s. 61
may receive mortgage money and give receipt to mort-
gagor, s. 62
shall enter in register book transfer of mortgage, encum-
brance, or lease, s 63
shall certify endorsement of transfer of mortgage, en-
cumbrance, or lease, by his signature and seal, s. 63
shall enter in register book re-entry by lessor, s. 68
shall cancel lease, s. 68
particulars of nomination of trustees to be entered by, in
register book, s. 73
not to enter trusts in register book, s. 75
shall cause the words “ no survivorship ” to be written
on certificate of title to trustees, if written on instru-
ment of nomination, s. 77
to give effect to order of Supreme Court under Trustee
Act, s. 79
to take declarations of transmissions within the city of
Adelaide, s. 81
to enter in register book particulars of appointment of
assignees in bankruptcy, s. 82
shall enter in register book instruments executed by
married women, s. 83
to advertise application for certificate of title by Curator
of Intestate Estates, s. 85
if authorized by executors or Curator of Intestate Estates,
may issue certificate of title to devisee or heir, s. 87
may dispense with the production of instruments, s. 94
may require proof of identity, s. 94
shall enter particulars of caveat in register book, s. 97
may require form of any caveat to be amended, s. 98
may cancel caveats in certain cases, s. 100
to issue registration abstract on application of registered
proprietor, s. 102
may take acknowledgment of married women, s. 109
may issue provisional certificate in case of loss of original,
s. 115
may require map to be deposited, s. 118
shall furnish certified copies of instruments, if required
s. 120
to give effect to order of Court for cancellation or altera-
tion of entry in register book, s. 123
may be made nominal defendant in case of death or in-
solvency of registered proprietor, or in case of action
brought for injury occasioned by mistake in Lands
Titles Office, ss. 125, 126
notice of action to be served upon, s. 126
not to be personally chargeable upon any judgment re-
covered, s. 126
may summon person by whom a certificate of title has
been fraudulently obtained, s. 128
may apply for a warrant of apprehension, if summons be
disregarded, s. 128


Recistrar-General, may order that substituted service of summons shall be
equivalent to personal service, s. 129
may examine upon oath person summoned, s. 130
may order delivery up of instrument wrongfully obtained,
s. 130
may give or withhold costs in proceedings relating to
summons, examination, or warrant, s. 132
may issue warrant of distress to levy costs, s. 133
to be indemnified, s. 135
to charge and recover fees, s. 137
shall not be required to compare instrument left for
registration with duplicate, s. 138
to keep account of money received under Act, and pay
money into Treasury, s. 140
to address to Treasurer requisitions to pay money
received in trust by Registrar-General, s. 140
penalties may be sued for, in name of, s. 142.
Registration Abstract, see “ Abstract, Registration.”
Remainderman, may apply to be entered in register book, s. 30
title of, to be investigated, s. 30
to pay assurance fee on being registered, s. 30
registered, shall deal with land according to provisions of Act
s. 31
instruments executed by, to be entered in register book, s. 31
instrument executed by, prior to his being registered, not to
be invalidated, s. 31
certificate of title to be issued to, on estate vesting in
possession, s. 32
to pay assurance fee, on estate vesting in possession, s. 32.
Repeal, of all laws, &c., inconsistent with Act, s. 1.
Representatives, real and personal, to be included under name of proprietor,
s. 3.
Revocation Order, of power of attorney, ss. 105, 106, sch. Q
Right of Purchase, in lease, s. 49.
S, sch., form of certificate of Registrar-General, or Justice of the Peace, of
execution of instrument.
Sale, see “ Memorandum of Sale ”
power of, in mortgagee or encumbrancee, s. 54
agreement for, infuturo, not to be registered, s. 96.
Scale, of maps, see “ Map.”
Seal, of Registrar-General, to be received in evidence, s. 6
person counterfeiting, guilty of misdemeanour, s. 9
penalty for counterfeiting, s. 9
of Corporation, substituted for signature, s. 111.
Search, allowed in register book, s. 119
fee for, sch. U.
Secretary, Chief, of British possession, execution of instruments may be
proved before, s. 112
to countersign warrant from Governor to Treasurer, s. 126.
Solicitor, right to register and deposit instruments required to be registered
or to enter caveat, restricted to, or to person claiming under in-
strument, s. 138.
Solicitors, to Commissioners, see “ Counsel.”
Supreme Court, see “ Court.”
Surrender of Lease, to be by endorsement on lease, signed by lessee and
lessor, and attested, s. 51.
Surveyor-General, to sign and certify accuracy of duplicates of public maps
of waste Crown Lands, s. 116.
Survivorship, see “ No Survivorship."
T, sch., form of certificate of acknowledgment of married women.
Tenants, joint, or in common, not to bring property under Act, unless all
join in application, s. 15


lenants, joint, persons registered as joint proprietors deemed as, s. 33
in common, bound to receive separate certificates of title, s. 33
joint, or in common, partition by, s. 90.
Terms, used in Act, interpretation of, s. 3.
Title, of Act, “ Real Property Act,” s. 2.
Transmission, meaning of, s. 3
to be authenticated by declaration in writing, s. 81
by bankruptcy or insolvency, certified copy of appointment of
assignees to be left with Registrar-General, s. 82
by death, probate or office copy cf will, or letters of administra-
te 011 ! to be left with Registrar-General, s. 84.
u ranseer, meaning of, s. 3
by remainderman, to be in form prescribed by Act, s. 31
by memorandum of sale, s. 43
to lessee, by registration of lease, s. 50
bill of mortgage or of encumbrance, not to operate as, s. 57
of lease on sale by mortgagee or encumbrancee of lease, to be by
endorsement, s. 59
of mortgage, encumbrance, and lease, to be by endorsement, s. 63,
sch. O
general covenant implied in instruments of, s. 64
of land, whether of the nature of real or personal property, may
be made by proprietor to himself jointly with others, s. 78
of mortgage, encumbrance, or lease, includes transfer of right to
sue thereunder, s. 89
see “ Memorandum of Sale.”
Treasurer, moneys constituting Assurance Fund, to be paid to, s. 41
to invest moneys in Government Securities, s. 41
to pay out moneys on receipt of certificate of Chief Justice, and of
warrant from Governor, ss. 125, 126.
Trustees, lands. may be vested in, by instrument of nomination, s. 73
of fee simple, entitled to receive certificate of title, s. 75
entitled to deal with land as beneficial owners, s. 75
less than the number originally appointed not to deal wilh land
when the words “ no survivorship ” have been inserted, s. 76
new, maybe appointed by Court or Judge, s. 76
continuing, may nominate co-trustee in case of vacancy, s. 76
DeVV, 76 > aVe estate anc * P owers as if originally appointed,
action of ejectment may be brought or defended in name of, by
beneficial owner, s. 80 J
bankruptcy or insolvency of, not to aflfect beneficiaries, s. 82.
Trusts, may be declared by schedule to instrument of nomination or by
separate instrument or deed, s. 74 ’ 3
not to be entered in register book, s. 75
notwithstanding any, trustees may deal with land as beneficial
owners, s. 75.
U, sch., fees payable under Act.
Use, not to be limited by proprietor when transferring land to himself jointly
with others, s. 78.
Warrant, Governor to issue to Treasurer for payment of damages and costs
recovered against Registrar-General, ss. 125, 126
to apprehend person summoned by Registrar-General, s. 128.
Wipe, see “ Acknowledgment,” “ Married Woman.”
Will, included under term instrument, s. 3.
Witness, one sufficient to attest instruments under Act, s. 112
oath or affirmation of, to prove execution of instruments, s. 113
questions to be put to, s. 113


APPENDIX.
DESCRIPION OF THE MODE IN WHICH BUSINESS IS CON-
DUCTED IN THE LANDS TITLES OFFICE, ADELAIDE.
All lands alienated from the Crown subsequent to the date appointed for the
Real Property Act to come into operation, are granted subject to the pro-
visions of that Act, and freed from the oppressions of the English Property
Laws. These are known in South Australia as “ Free Lands.”
The grants of these are forwarded to the Lands Titles Office, in duplicate,
from the Land Office. One part of each grant is bound up in the register
book. The counterpart, marked with the volume and folium which its counter-
part constitutes in the register book, is delivered to the proprietor. The
receipt of the grant is noted in the journal hereinafter described.
Lands alienated from the Crown prior to the date appointed for the Real
Property Act to come into operation are brought under the provisions of that
Act upon the application of the proprietor of the fee or other greatest estate
in possession.
For the form of application and the procedure to be followed by the appli-
' cant, adapted to the varying conditions and requirements of ownership, see
instructions under the head “ Application,” in a subsequent page.
The receipt of the application is noted in the application hook, hereinafter
described.
The deeds and other evidence of the applicant’s title are deposited together
with the application. These are handed to the Solicitors of the Lands Titles
Commissioners, who call upon the applicants for such explanations or addi-
tional evidence as they may require.
The Solicitors, after examining the title and making the necessary search,
draw up a report on each case for consideration by the Commissioners.
The Commissioners sit once a week to consider the applications reported
on by their Solicitors, and decide the extent to which the claim of each
applicant to be recognised as proprietor of the fee or other greatest estate, as
the case may be, is to be advertised, and the time to intervene between the
advertisement and the issue of certificate of title, or, if they see fit, defer the
case for further enquiry, or reject it altogether.
The decisions of the Commissioners are entered on the minutes, and re-
corded in the warrant book for the guidance of the Registrar-General. Copy
of each minute is also endorsed on the Solicitors’ report of the case to which
that minute refers.
The Registrar-General causes advertisement to be made in conformity
with the warrant, and if no caveat be lodged with him within the time for
that purpose limited, proceeds to bring the land under the Real Property Act
by notice in the Government Gazette.
If caveat be lodged, the Registrar-General notifies the receipt thereof to
the applicant proprietor, and abstains from further procedure until the
caveat be withdrawn, lapses through non-procedure by the caveator within
the time for that purpose limited, or is discharged by due course of law. So
soon as land is brought under the Act, the title-deeds surrendered are stamped
as cancelled, and together with the application and report of the Solicitors are
deposited in a bag marked with the date and number of the application, the
name of the applicant, and the folium of the register-book, constituted by the
certificate of title issued, as presently described in respect to the lands referred
to. The parcels so made up are deposited in tin boxes in the muniment room.


In the top of each box is placed a list of the titles therein deposited. Deeds
evidencing title to other property besides that brought under the Act are
returned to the proprietor stamped as cancelled, so far as regards the land
brought under the Act.
Certificates of title are made out in duplicate for lands brought under the
Act, one part of each is bound up in the register book, the counterpart
is delivered to the proprietor marked with the number of the folium which
its counterpart constitutes in the register book.
The issue of each certificate is noted in the journal.
Lands thus emancipated from the English Real Property Law, are in South
Australia designated “ Freed Lands.”
THE APPLICATION BOOK.
Form A of the schedule hereto contains the record of the transactions iu
respect to land the subject of application prior to its being “ freed.” It ex-
hibits in parallel columns the number and date of the application, the name
of the applicant, the description of the property, the extent of advertisement,
and the time limited by Board’s warrant for lodging caveats, the date on
which caveat is received, the name and address of the caveator, the date from
which the land is freed, and the folium of the register book constituted by the
certificate of title.
THE REGISTER BOOK.
Form B of the schedule hereto is constituted by counterpart grants of “ Free
Lands,” and counterpart certificates of title of “ Freed Lands.”
Each grant or certificate constitutes a folium. The upper portion is occupied
by the form of grant or certificate, and a diagram of the land; the remainder,
and the reverse side are ruled with faint lines, on which are recorded memo-
rials of the dealings and matters affecting each estate or interest in that land
until upon a change of ownership of the fee, a fresh certificate of title is
issued. The fresh certificate constitutes a new folium on which are carried
forward the memorials of all estates or interests existing, or created in the land
represented thereby, which remain unexpired or undischarged at the date of
the change of ownership of the fee. The previous grant or certificate of title
is at the same time cancelled by memorandum under the hand of the Regis-
trar-General, setting forth the circumstances which occasioned the change of
ownership, with a reference to the volume and folium of the register book
where the fresh certificate may be found. Each fresh certificate is in like
manner marked with the volume and folium for reference to the cancelled
certificate.
By withdrawing the cancelled grants and certificates, and binding together
two or more of the volumes thus reduced, the register book is prevented from
growing into unwieldy dimensions. The fly-leaf of each condensed volume
contains a list of the cancelled grants and certificates withdrawn, with a re-
ference to the volume and folium where the fresh certificate issued in respect
of each may be found.
THE JOURNAL.
Form C of the schedule hereto is posted daily. It contains a record of all
transactions affecting “ Free” or “ Freed Lands” in the order of time in which
they are registered. It exhibits in parallel columns the date and hour in
which each instrument is presented at the Lands Titles Office, the names
of the parties thereto, the description of the property affected, the distin


guishing letter indicating the nature of the instrument, its distinguishing
number, and the volume and folium of the register book, where the particulars,
with those of all other transactions affecting the same land, are recorded to-
gether under the grant or existing certificate thereof.
THE INDEX.
Form D of the schedule hereto is compiled from the journal. In it the names
of proprietors and parties dealing are arranged alphabetically, three or more
lines being left under each name, on which are inscribed the description of
each property dealt with, the number of the instrument, the distinguishing letter
indicating its nature, and the volume and folium of the register-book where
the history of the title is recorded. The Roman numerals indicate the volume,
and the Arabic numerals the folium of the register book in all cases. The
same index includes also the reference to deeds declaring trusts; and to wills
and other instruments allowed to be deposited for safe custody, and reference
without registration. These are numbered in a series distinct from that
appropriated to registered instruments.
THE WARRANT BOOK.
Form E of the schedule hereto sufficiently explains itself.
The above with a list of maps, minute book, letter book, and cash book, of
the description ordinarily used, constitutes the official books of the department.
TRANSFERS AND OTHER DEALINGS.
When land is intended to be sold, leased, mortgaged, encumbered, settled,
or vested in trustees, or when any estate or interest in land is intended to be
transferred, released, surrendered, or otherwise dealt with, an instrument in
the form prescribed, adapted to the particular case, is executed in duplicate by
the parties dealing. This is examined by the Solicitors to the Lands Titles
Commission, who draw up a draft memorial of the particulars in a waste book
kept for that purpose. This memorial is entered by the registering clerk in
the register book under the grant or certificate of title of the land referred to.
The entry is then compared with the draft by the Registrar-General, or his
Deputy, and signed.
A certificate under the hand of the Registrar-General or his Deputy is en-
dorsed on each instrument, stating the day and hour when the particulars
thereof were entered in the register book, with the volume and folium where
the entry may be found. The, transaction is likewise noted in the journal
(schedule C). The estate or interest is passes created or becomes discharged
as the case may be upon the signature of the entry in the register book.
All instruments are numbered in a consecutive series in the order of
their presentation at the Lands Titles Office. After entry in the register
book and endorsement as above described, one original of each instrument is
delivered to the person entitled. The counterparts of instrument are tied to-
gether in bundles of twenty; ten such bundles occupy a compartment in the
muniment room. Under this arrangement it is found that any instrument can
be produced on the instant when the number is called.
Instruments are cancelled and set aside whenever the estates or interests of
which they are evidence are surrendered, discharged, or lapse. By this
method the instruments required to be kept arranged and at hand for refe-
rence, are prevented from accumulating so as to be cumbrous.
Cancelled instruments withdrawn from the register book, or from the com-
partments, are set apart arranged in order in the muniment room. It is in-
tended to apply to the Legislature for an Act authorising the destruction of


these, as also of the surrendered title deeds of “ Freed Land” after the lapse of
a period to be named.
Full instructions for filling in the forms of instruments prescribed for each
class of. dealing, illustrated by examples, will be found at the close of this
Appendix.
The examples from the register book (schedule B), exhibit the nature of the
memorials entered in each case.
TRANSMISSIONS.
Whenever any estate or interest in “Free” or “Freed Lands” becomes
transmitted m consequence of the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the pre-
vious proprietor, or whenever a female proprietor of any such estate or interest
shall marry, the facts must be authenticated to the Registrar-General by the
ec aration of the party interested, to be made before one or other of the
autlinnties indicated under the head “Attestation of Instruments.”
he Registrar-General, before giving effect by registration to any dealing
y parties deriving or holding interest under any of such circumstances, must
be furnished as the case may require with probate or office copy of the will of
the deceased proprietor, or authenticated copy of the letters of administration,
or or the appointment of assignees, or of the register of the marriage. The
Registrar-General thereupon endorses on the will or other instrument a certi-
ficate of the day and hour on which it was produced to him, and records the
fact of its production in the register book.
In the case of transmission by will, or consequent on intestacy, six months
must elapse before any instrument purporting to deal with the transmitted
estate or interest can be received at the Lands Titles Office.
The Registrar-General notifies the receipt of such instrument by advertise-
™ official gazette and twice in a newspaper published in
Adelaide, and may not proceed to give effect to the same until fourteen days
have elapsed from the date of the latest of such advertisements, or if caveat be
lodged within that period.
CAVEATS.
T he particulars of. caveats forbidding the bringing of land under the Act are
entered in the application book. Caveats referring to u Free ** or u Freed
Lands ” are numbered in a consecutive series. The receipt of them is noted
in the journal,, and followed by the number of the caveat is inscribed in the
regiser book with a red ink pen, opposite the entry of the estate or interest
referred to. See examples in schedules A and B hereto.
SEARCHED
Persons desiring to make search are almost invariably proprietors or persons
negotiating some, transaction, and as such, have access to some registered
instrument affecting the property, which will indicate the volume and folio
ot the register book in which the certificate of title may be found.
If, as may sometimes be the case, the person applying to search is not in
possession of a registered instrument, but remembers on or about the date of
any transaction affecting the property, the volume and folio of the register
book where the certificate of title may be found is readily ascertained on
reference to the journal.
. V lllO p . arty desiring to make search is not in possession of a registered
instrument and cannot specify any date on or about which a transaction
affecting the property was registered, the index must be referred to for the
volume and tolio of register book where the certificate of title may be found.
Keierence to the index is seldom necessary, except in the case of an heir or
administrator seeking to ascertain what property was held by a deceased


proprietor, or in the case of a creditor or assignee seeking to ascertain what
property is held by an insolvent.
The Clerk of Records opens the register book at the folio required for
perusal by the person making search. The particulars of all transactions
affecting the estate are there set forth under the certificate of title with the
numbers of the instruments by which severally the transactions were effected.
If the person searching desires more full information respecting any trans-
action than is given in the memorandum on the certificate, upon his calling
the number the Clerk of Records exhibits for his perusal the instrument by
which the transaction was effected. .
The Clerk of Records is strictly enjoined not to permit the register book
or the instrument to be out of his sight whilst in the hands of the person
making search.
Certificates of search are forwarded per post or telegram, in answer to re-
quisition accompanied by the fee, 2s.
GENERAL RULES.
No erasure is allowed in any official book, neither will any instrument be
received for registration in which an erasure is-detected. Words written in
error may be scored out and the correct words interlined, but in such case the
initials of the person making the correction must be added.
The description of the parcels in any memorandum of sale, lease, mortgage,
encumbrance, or nomination of trustees, must be the same as that given in
the existing grant or certificate of the land affected thereby, except when
part only of the land is dealt with, and in such cases an accurate description
1911 st be given, together with a diagram on a scale not less than one inch
to twenty'chains if the area exceeds ten acres ; on a scale not less than one
inch to five chains if the area exceeds five but does not exceed ten acres ; on
a scale not less than one inch to two chains if the area does not exceed five
acres.
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCOME.
The establishment required for conducting the entire conveyancing business
of the colony of South Australia (about 10,000 transactions annually) upon
the system above described, is estimated as follows :
Registrar-General a a
Solicitor t X
Deputy Registrar-General “UO U U
Clerks, first class, two •••••• “bO ~ J:
Do., second class, two 480 0 0
Do., third class, two 0 0
Do., fourth class, one 160 6 6
Messenger, one 100 0 0
Books stationery, book-binding, postages, and miscellaneous
charges 500 0 0
£4,500 0 0
The income from fees upon the scale at present authorized accruing from
that amount of business would be about £7,000 per annum.
At a comparatively small increase in the expenditure the above staff might
be strengthened so as'to render it equal to the transaction of a greatly increased
business. Probably the business might be increased tenfold without more than
doubling the expenditure above given.


FORM A.-APPLICATION BOOK.
1 * „
a a. — Ar i
1j 1 U A
riON BOOK.
Application
Residence.
Date of
Number
of advertise
ments in lo
cal or othei
papers.
Period withir
No.
Date.
Description of Property.
advertise-
ment
in Gazette
which after dat
of advertisemen
caveat may b<
lodged.
Caveat
by whom
lodged.
Date
when re
ceived.
Time for
issue of cer
tificate.
When
issued.
Vol.
Foli
50
1858
Aug. 27
S. Jones
Adelaide
Town Acre, 800
Rejected
—
185
Oct. 1
J. Brown
Norwood
Section 201, Survey B
Oct. 14
Three
Two Months
—
Dec. 22
1859
Jan. 4
VI
129
231
Nov. 29
1859
J. White
Port Adelaide
Section 21, Hnd. Port Adelaide
Dec. 6
Three
One Month
J. Scott
Dec. 8
1859
Feb. 23
306
March 27
S. Smith
f
I
Kapunda
1
Section 12, Hundred Kapunda
|
March 31
One
One Month
April 30
May 2
VI
130


FORM B.
REGISTER BOOK.




(Seal) „ *
(Signed)
R. G. Mac Donnell, Governor.
Land Grant,
Register Book,
Voi. V., folio 7.
Soutß
Austbalia.
SfepTION.
Know all men by these pfdseots Jha£l Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell,
Knight Companion of the sSos§ Honourable Order of the Bath, Captain-
General and Province of South Australia, in consi-
deration of the sum of One r Ehogsa|}d Five Hundred Pounds sterling to the
Treasurer on behalf of Her
of Adelaide, merchants, do herebjr in nagne and on behalf of Her Majesty,
grant unto the said John Adams an& William Smith, all that Section of land
containing one thousand lie tfie sAme more or less, and numbered 136,
situate in the Hundred of Clare,
County of Clare, and delineated in
the public map deposited in the
Survey Office at Adelaide, and in
the plan in the margin hereof, to-
gether with all timbers, minerals,
and appurtenances, to hold unto
the said John Adams and William
Smith, their heirs and assigns for
ever.
In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal,
at Adelaide, this twenty-first day
of August, one thousand eight hun-
dred and fifty-eight.
Signed, sealed, and delivered, in
the presence of
(Signed) Arthur Kinlock.
I acknowledge to have 1
received from the above j
mentioned John Adams |
and William Smith the }-
before-mentioned sum of
One Thousand Five Hun-
dred Pounds sterling.
>£1,500.
Witness —
W. W. Hutton.
(Signed) B. T. Finniss,
Treasurer.
a 2




Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. V., folio 13.
South
Australia.
Pursuant to Memorandum of Sale No. 560, dated 15th day of January, 1859,
by John Adams and William Smith, John Adams, of Adelaide, merchant, is
now seised of an estate in fee simple, subject nevertheless to such encum-
brances, liens, and interests as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon,
in that piece of land situated in the Hundred of Clare, County of Clare, being
the south-eastern portion of the Section numbered 136 in the said Hundred,
and formed by drawing a line from the north-east corner to the south-west
comer of the said section, which said piece of land contains 500 acres be the
same more or less, and is bounded as appears in the plan drawn in the margin
hereof, and therein marked by a thick line, and is laid out as the township
called Milltown, according to the plan of the said township deposited in the
Lands Titles Registration Office No. 36, which said Section No. 136 is de-
lineated in the public map of the said Hundred deposited in the office of the
Surveyor-General, and was originally granted the 21st day of August, 1858,
under the hand and seal of Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, Governor-in-
Chief of the said Province, to the said John Adams and William Smith, as
appears by land grant, Vol. V. folio 7, now delivered up and cancelled.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto signed my hand and affixed my
seal this sixteenth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine.
R. R. Torrens, / Spal >
Registrar-General.
Signed, sealed, and delivered, the 16 th day
of January, 1859, in the presence of
W. B. T. A.
Memorandum of Sale No.
715, dated the 20th day of
January, 1859, produced the
same day at two o’clock in
the afternoon, from the above
named John Adams to Wil-
liam Brown, of Kapunda,
Esquire, Lot 2 in plan of
township of Milltown No. 36.
Consideration money paid,
six pounds.
Cancelled as regards Lot 2.
Certificate of Title of said
Lot 2 registered vol. VI., folio
7.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Memorandum of Sale No. 816,
dated the 25th day of January, 1859,
produced to me the twenty-sixth day
of January, 1859, at three o’clock in
the afternoon, from the above-named
John Adams to Henry Jones, of Clare,
farmer, Lot 19 in plan of township of
Milltown No, 86. Consideration
money paid, Fifteen Pounds.
Cancelled as regards Lot 19, Certi-
ficate of Title of said Lot 19, registered
Vol. VI., folio 21.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar- General.
Memorandum of Sale No. 827, dated
twenty-eighth day of January, 1859,
produced the same day at eleven
o’clock in the forenoon,from the within
named John Adams to Mary Robin-
son, of Adelaide, spinster, Lot 26 in
plan of township of Milltown No. 36.
Consideration money paid, Twenty
Pounds.
Cancelled as regards Lot 26, Certifi-
cate of Title of said Lot 26 registered
Vol. VI., folio 33.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar- General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. V., folio 14.
S<®T£fc
IA.USTRALIA.
Pursuant to Memoranda rnJof Sale -Jlo>ts6l, dated 15th day of January,
1859, by John Adams an^AVSliam.' Smith,;William Smith of Adelaide, mer-
chant, is now seised of in- subject nevertheless to such
encumbrances, liens, and iateftstf as £& notified by memorandum endorsed
hereon, in that piece of Jjmd situated.: iifltks*Hundred of Clare, County of
Clare, being the north-western-portioAof th^!Section numbered 136 in the
said Hundred, and formed by-drawing 'a, linpirom the north-east corner to
the south-west corner of thej§ai^S6fctisn t -which said piece of land contains
five hundred acres be the sanfe laorCorJehsi, is bounded as appears in the
plan drawn in the margin marked bya thick line, which said
Section numbered 136 is the public map of the said Hundred
deposited in ihe offiee of •IhacSurveyor-iGeneral, and was originally granted
the 21st day of August, l&B£unger the hind-and seal of Sir Richard Graves
Mac Donnell, Governor of {Be sail Province, to the said John Adams
and William Smith, as appears by liind Grant, vol. V., folio 7, now delivered
up and cancelled. C ’3 o S
ffl « ° «
In witness whereof I Httveg h#etJtitxrsigned my name and affixed my seal
the sixteenth day of
> £= S ' .2 IS If- R - Torrens, .
o _ * w J * Registrar-General. (® ea^-)
S 1 B J °
Signed, sealed, and del&erltl |3}e 46ta djjty of
January, 1859, in presence W *5
W. B. T. A.
Lease No. 718, dated the
twentieth day of January,
1859, from the above named
William Smith to John
Brown, of Adelaide, car-
penter, of the above des-
cribed land Term, 21 years.
Rent, £5OO per annum, pay-
able half-yearly, on the 20th
July and 20th day of Janu-
ary.
Recorded the 21st day of
January, 1859, at half-past
eleven o’clock in the fore-
noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.




Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. V., folio 190.
South
Australia.
Pursuant to Memorandum of Sale No. 720, dated the twentieth day of
March, 1860, by William Smith, Thomas-Wilson, of Norwood, baker, is now
seised of an estate in fee simple, subject nevertheless to such encumbrances,
liens, and interests as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that
piece of laud situated in the Hundred 6f Clare, County of Clare, being the
north-western portion of the Section numbered 136 in the said Hundred, and
formed by drawing a line from the north-east corner to the south-west corner
of the said Section, which said piece of land contains five hundred acres be the
same more or less, and is bounded as appears in the plan drawn in the margin
hereof, and therein marked by a dark line, which said Section nnmbered 136
is delineated in the public map of the said Hundred, deposited in the office
of the Surveyor-General, and was originally granted the 21st day of August,
1858, under the hand and seal of Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, Governor-
in-Chief of the said Province, to John Adams and William Smith, of Adelaide,
merchants, as appears by Certificate of Title, Vol. V., folio 14, now delivered
up and cancelled. ' ■£■ j* -° x
r j -a ® S ® .
In witness whereof I have hereunto signed my name and affixed my seal
this twenty-first day of March,, one thousand eight hundred and sixty.
So R- R- Torkexs, .
* . -v'g I ° ® Registrar-General. (SeaL)
Signed, sealed, and delivered, the 21st day of
March, 1860, in presence of g
1 r. a.
Lease No. 718, dated the
twentieth day of January,
1859, from the above-named
William Smith to John
°f Adelaide, car-
penter,* of the above des-
cribed i£nd. Term, 21 years.
Rent, £5OO per annum, pay-
able half-yearly, on the 20th
day of July, and 20th day of
January.
Recorded the 21st day of
January, 1859, at half-past
eleven o’clock in the fore-
noon.
R. R. Tokrens,
Registrar-General.


Bill of Mortgage, No. 1121. dated
twenty-third day of March, 1860, pro-
duced to me the same day at two
o’clock in the afternoon, from the
within-named Thomas Wilson to
Henry Johnston, of Kensington,
builder. Principal sum secured,
£2,000. Kate of interest, 10 per cent.
Date appointed for redemption, 23rd
day of March, 1864. Interest to be
paid half-yearly, on the 23rd day of
September, and 23rd day of March.
Recorded the twenty-third day of
March, 1860, at two o’clock in the
afternoon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.
Bill of Mortgage No. 1132, dated
the Ist day of April, 1860, produced
to me the same day at noon, from the
within named John Brown, the lessee
described in thgg within mentioned
lease No. 718, tof;Wtlliam Carter, of
Norwood, shoemafcegj Principal sum
secured, £5OO. Ratg of interest, 10
per centum. Dajtpe Appointed for re-
demption, Ist lnterest
to be paid on the Ist
day of October ans l&t day of April.
Recorded the ls| day of April, 1860,
at noon.
R. >R. Torrens,
Registrar- General.
H
TraW'er of the within mentioned
Lease, N. No. 718, by endorse-
ment the'seon dated 4th day of
April, 1860pfrom John Brown, the
said lessee, to\Charles Roberts, of
Adelaide, gentleman, subject to the
above mentioned IUII of Mortgage
No. 1132. \ 8
Recorded the 6th day ofcApril, 1860.
R. R. Tokens,
Registrar- Gbn eral.
Trarhdcr of the above-mentioned
1132 of the Lease No.
718 by entkn-sement thereon, dated
the 18th JanuVnr, 1861, from William
Carter, the saicKmortgagee, to the
within Thomas WtWm.
Recorded the 19th rhur of January,
1861. N.
R. R. Torres,
Registrar-General.
Surrender of the within-mentioned
Lease No. 718 by endorsement there,
on, dated theNfifth day of July, 1861,
by the said Chants Roberts, the trans-
! feree of the said mase to the within-
named Thomas Wißon.
Recorded the 7th dayW July, 1861.
R. R. Tomans,
•
The estate of the within namhd
Thomas Wilson in the land within
described became transmitted on the
10th day of January, 1863, to Thomas
Jones, of Adelaide, gentleman, as the
administrator to the goods, chattels,
and effects of the said Thomas Wil-
son, in consequence of the death of
the said Thomas Wilson, intestate, on
the 10th day of January, 1863, as
appears by letters of Administration
dated the Ist day of February, 1863,
produced to me the same day at noon,
and by declaration in writing by the
said Thomas Jones, dated the Ist day
of February, 1863.
R. R. Torkens,
Registrar-General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. VI., folio 33.
South
Australia.
Pursuant to Memorandum of Sale No. 827, dated twenty-eighth day of
January, 1859, by John Adams, Mary Robinson, of Adelaide, spinster, is now
seised of an estate in fee simple, subject nevertheless to such encumbrances,
liens, and interests as are notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that
piece of land situated in the township of Milltown, being Allotment numbered
26 in the plan of the said township deposited in the Lands Titles Registra-
tion Office No. 36, containing one acre, be the same more or less, and
bounded as appears in the plan drawn in the margin hereof, and therein marked
by a thick line, which said piece of land is part of the Section numbered
136 in the Hundred ef Clare, County of Clare, and is delineated in the
public map of the said Hundred deposited in the office of the Surveyor-
General, and was originally granted the 21st day of Angust, 1858, under the
hand and seal of Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, Governor-in Chief of
the said Province, to John Adams and William Smith of Adelaide, merchants,
as appears by Certificate of Title, Vol. V., folio 13, delivered up and can-
celled as regards the said allotment.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto signed my hand and affixed my seal
jthis thirtieth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine.
R. R. Torrens, / Seal
Registrar-General. 1 ■'
Signed, sealed, and delivered the 30th day of
January, 1859, in presence of
W. B. T. A.


Marriage of the within named Mary
Robinson to Charles Giles, of Nor-
wood, builder, on the Ist March, 1859,
as appears by the register of such
marriage, and by the declaration of
identity produced' to me on the fourth
day of March, 1859, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. VI., folio 34.
South
Australia.
Thomas Jones, of Adelaide, Esquire, is how sgsed of an estate in fee
simple, as administrator to Thomas of Norwood, baker, deceased,
subject, nevertheless, to such encumbrances, liens, anS interests as are notified
by memorandum endorsed hereon a h(F'that 4>iece’t)f land situated in the
Hundred of Clare, County of Clare, being the north-western portion of the
(Section numbered 136 in the said farmed by drawing a line
from the north-east corner to the south-iyest corner oCthe said Section : which
said piece of land contains five hundred acres he thahame more or less, and is
bounded as appears in the plan drawn in the margin hereof, and therein marked
bv a thick line, which said Section $ umbered 136 is delineated in the public
map of the said Hundred deposited m the office of the Surveyor-General, and
was originally granted the 21st day *>f August, 1858, under the hand and seal
of Sir Richard Graves MacDonnell,«GOferno^n- Chief of the said Province,
to John Adams and William Smith, of Adelaide, merchants, as appears by
Certificate of Title, Register Book, fogt* Mo 190, now delivered up and
cancelled. 3 S '3 o
In witness whereof I have hereunhfcsigned my name and affixed my seal
this second day of August, one thousand eigh* hundred and sixty-three.
m o! •
-o' £ R. Torrens, fSeall
J 2 | r Registrar-General.
Sa3 g 3
Signed, sealed, and delivered this-2nd day of £
August, 1863, in the presence of ]§ |
W. S
Bill of Mortgage No. 1121,
dated the twenty-third day
of March, 1860, produced to
me the same day at two
o’clock in the afternoon, from
the aboiye named Thomas
Wilson, deceased, to Henry
Johnston, of Kensington,
builder.'s Principal sum se-
cured, £2,000 ; rate of inte-
rest, £l©. Date appointed
for redetaption, 23rd day of
March, A 86 4; interest to be
paid half-yearly on the 23rd
day of September, and 23rd
day of March.
Recorded the 23rd day of
March, 1860, at two o’clock
in the afternoon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


DiscHarge of the within mentioned
Bill of Mortgage No. 1121, by the
receipt endorsed thereon, for the whole
of the money Nmreby secured. Dated
4th day of September, 1863. Recorded
same day at noon>
R. R.NT ORKENS,
Registrar-General.
Memorandum of Sale No. 2141,
dated the 4th of September, 1863, pro-
duced the same day at noon, from the
within named Thomas Jones to John
Smith,of Adelaide, gentleman, thirteen
acres of the within land, situated at
the north-western corner thereof.
Consideration money paid, £3,000.
This certificate is cancelled so far as
regards the said thirteen acres, for
which a fresh certificate is issued.
Yol. VI., folio 199.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. VI., folio 199.
South
Australia.
r w n •—« w
Pursuant to Memorandum of Sale-N0j.2141, dated the fourth day of Sep-
tember, 1863, by Thomas" Julies, administrator 'of Thomas Wilson deceased,
John Smith, of Adelaide genthfman,'ls f ow seifed of an estate in fee simple,
subject nevertheless to SHch encumbrances, lien® and interests as are notified
by memorandum endorsed hereon, iri that|>iece ofuand situated in the Hundred
of Clare, County of Clar* thirteen acres, be the same more or less,
being portion of the Secuortnumbered 136 said Hundred, and situated
at the north- western comer thereof, the northern and western
sides thereof one thousaigd wx hundred anckfifteen links be the same more or
less, and bounded as (ffawb in the margin hereof, and therein
marked by a thick line ; whtEehZsaiif Section Numbered 136 is delineated in the
public map of the said Hundred deposfteckm fhe office of the Surveyor-General,
and was originally granJsd3heE2lst daynf August, 1858, under the hand and
seal of Sir Richard GraStesuMacElonSiel}, Csbvernor-in-Chief of the said Pro-
vince, to John Adams arid William: Sffiitf, of Adelaide, merchants, as appears
by Certificate of Title, dg>l..VJ& f®iduJ4=?n'»w delivered up and cancelled as
regards the land comprised jm Certificate of Title.
In witness whereof IlTaye hereunto gigged my hand and affixed my seal
this sixth day of September, one tfcouf&iffi eight hundred and sixty-three.
g b*B *5 H Torrens, / gea]
■, t-> « 5 $ « - ’ Registrar-General. '
K S 5 5? a,
Signed, sealed, and delivered the 6th day of
September, 1863, in the presence of
W. B. T. A.
Power of Attorney No. 3112,
dated the first day of Novem-
ber, 1863, from the within-
named John Smith to Thomas
Stokes, of Hindmarsh, Builder,
produced to me the second day
of November, 1863, at noon.
Recorded the second day of
November, 1863, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Lease No. 4121, dated the third
day of November, 1863, produced to
me the same day at eleven o'clock in
the forenoon, by the said Thomas
Stokes, the attorney named in the
above mentioned Power of Attorney,
to Wdham Short, of Adelaide, Gentle-
man. Term, seven years. Kent, £2O
“ d
"" t !’ l . rd jk/ofDeorab.r,
1863, at eleven o’clock in the forenoon.
R- R. Tokeens,
Registrar-General.
tJnl abo ,^°^ ert - v was transmitted
of Ad«lnA° dhan ? and Thomas Giles,
of Adelaide, merchants, the assignees
ppmnted on the insolvency of the
said J ohn Smith, as appears by an
of ® uch appointment, and
by the decoration in writing made by
p.?f ld Henry Oldham and Thomas
Sl eS .Vi the second
day of March, 1864. Produced to me
the same day at noon.
1 ««i eCO * ded the SCCOnd da y of March,
* ob 4, at noon. ’
R. R. Tokeens,
Registrar-General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. X., folio 7.
South
Australia.
iQ? 9 Ur u ant ordw ' < £*« SuP® o * s Court, dated the first day of October,
1863, Henry Wilson, of Adelaide, Esquire, .the heir-at-law of Thomas Wilson,
deceased, is now seised Jf.Sn'asstateSn fee simple, subject, nevertheless, to
such encumbrances, hens, an& interests Ms are notified by memorandum
endorsed hereon, in that-pipcig off latad situated in the Hundred of Clare,
County of Clare, being portion of the Section numbered 136 in the said
Hundred; which said pfece-pf . land contains four hundred and eighty-seven
acres be the same more oglejfc,»isJs Bounded as appears in the plan drawn in
v nd J e ® ll £ marl ¥, d b £ a thick line , which said Section
136 is delineated i£ map of the said Hundred deposited
in the office of the Surveypr-trerierS, and was originally granted the 21st day
of August, 1858, under go hand a**l sfeal ofcSir Richard Graves MacDonnelL
Govemor-in-Chief of thesajd gm«nce, to“ John Adams and William Smith
of Adelaide, merchants, |y C&tificate of Title, vol. VI., folio
34, now delivered up and cancelled-., 'g
In witness whereof I Eay§ hcraanfe signed my name and affixed my seal
this second day of
S g R. R. Torrens, , e .
* § S to rt* Registrar-General. C® 6 ***)
■3 W ffl H
Signed, sealed, and delivered this 2sd day of
October, 1863, in th^rp(es«i»c<^oftj>
1 a if.UT.A.
2aX A £
o,g«
O 5 a ® a>
•: c g f
Bill of Encumbrance No.
1481, dated the third day of
November, 1863, produced to
me the same day at noon, by
the above named Henry Wil-
son, in favour of his daughter
Emily Wilson. Sum secured,
£5OO. Time of payment,
attainment of the age of 21
years.
Recorded the 3rd day of
November, 1863, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Bill of Encumbrance No. 1561,
dated the first day of December, 1863,
produced to me the same day at half-
past two o’clock in the afternoon by
the within-named Henry Wilson, in
favour of his wife, Ann Wilson.
Annuity secured, £l5O. Period of
commencement, death of the said
Henry Wilson.
Recorded the first day of December,
1863, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar- General.
Discharge of the within-mentioned
Bill of Encumbrance No. 1481, by the
receipt dated thirteenth day of March,
1866, endorsed thereon for the sum of
£5OO thereby secured.
Recorded the thirteenth day of
March, 1866, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.
Discharge of the above Bill of En-
cumbrance No. 1561 by the death of
the said Ann Wilson, on the seven-
teenth day of April,. 1867, as appears
by the Certificate of her death, under
the hand of the Registrar-General of
Births, Deaths, and Marriages.
Recorded this eighteenth day of
April, 1867, at noon.
R. R. Torrens,
Registrar-General.


Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. XL, ftjio 3.
Sooth
Australia.
Pursuant to Memorandum of Sale No. 8662, dated the fifth day of June,
1868, by Henry Oldham and Thomas Giles, the assignees appointed under the
insolvency of John Smith, John Williams is now seised of an estate in fee
simple, subject nevertheless to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that piece of land situated in the
Hundred of Clare, County of Clare, containing thirteen acres, be the same
more or less, being portion of the Section numbered 136 in the said Hundred,
and situated at the north-western corner thereof, measuring on the northern
and western sides thereof one thousand six hundred and fifteen links be the
same more or less, and bounded as appears by the plan drawn in the margin
hereof, and therein marked by a thick line; which said Section numbered 136
is delineated in the public map of the said Hundred deposited in the office of
the Surveyor-General, and was originally granted the 21st day of August,
1858, under the hand and seal of Sir Richard Grayes Mac Donnell, Governor-
in-Chief of the said Province, to John Adams and William Smith, of Adelaide,
merchants, as appears by Certificate of Title, Vol. VI., folio 199, now delivered
up and cancelled.
In witness whereof I have hereunto signed my hand and affixed my seal
this sixth day of June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight.
R. R. ToftuENS, ,
' . Registrar-General. '
Signed, sealed, and delivered the 6th day of
June, 1868, in the presence of
W. B. T. A.
Lease No. 4121, dated
the third day of December,
1863, produced to me the
same day at eleven o’clock
in the forenoon, by Thomas
Stokes, the attorney named
in the Power of Attorney
No. 3112, endorsed on Certi-
ficate of Title, vol. VI., folio
199, to William Short, of
Adelaide, gentleman. Term,
seven years. Rent, £2O per
annum, payable quarterly,
on the 3rd day of March,
the 3rd day of June, the
3rd day of September, lind
the 3rd day of December.
Recorded the third day of
December, 1863, at eleven
o’clock in the forenoon.
R. R. Tohrens,
Registrar-General.
n 2




Certificate of Title,
Register Book,
Vol. XX., folio 220.
South
Austbalia.
Pursuant to Instrument of Nomination of Trustees, No. 981, dated the first
day of May, 1868, by Henry Wilson, Peter Wilson and Henry Tomkins, both
of Adelaide, merchants, are now seised of an estate in fee simple, subject
nevertheless to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are notified by
memorandum endorsed hereon, in that piece of land situated in the Hundred
of Clare, County of Clare, being portion of the Section numbered 136 in the
said Hundred, which said piece of land contains four hundred and eighty-seven
acres be the same more or less, and is bounded as appears in the plan drawn in
the margin hereof, and therein marked by a thick line; which said Section
numbered 136 is delineated in the public map of the said Hundred deposited
in the office of the Surveyor-General, and was originally granted the 21st
day of August, 1858, under the hand and seal of Sir Richard Graves Mac-
Donnell, Governor-in-Chief of the said Province, to* John Adams and William
Smith, of Adelaide, merchants, as appears by Certificate of Title, Vol. X.,
folio 7, now delivered up and cancelled.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto signed my hand and affixed my
seal this second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight.
R. R. Toekens,
■> Registrar-General. ' eal '
Signed, sealed, and delivered, the 2nd day
of May, 1868, in the presence of
W. B. T. A.




FORM C.
JOURNAL.


Date.
Hour.
Name.
Opposite Party.
1859.
January 5
“ 20
February 4
11 a.m.
1 p.m.
2 p.m.
John Brown
Frederick Sanderson
Edward Wilson
Henry Green
“ 15
1 p.m.
Alfred Jennings
Robert Owen
“ 20
noon
William Roberts
James Cummings
March 3
1 p.m.
Henry Loveday
John Guthrie
“ 5
2 p.m.
Richard MacDonald
Frederick Curtis
“ 10
“ 14
11 a.m.
2 p.m.
Edward Ward
Charles Young
Thomas Brown
“ 20
noon
Robert Going
William Wilson
“ 26
2 p.m.
Henry Heath
•
,
1


Property.
Distin-
guishing
Letter.
No.
of In-
strument.
Volume and Folio
of the
Begister Book.
Section 1150, Hundred of Adelaide, County Adelaide
G
70
Vol.
II.
Folio,
60
Section 40, Hundred of Moorooroo, County of Light
C
95
II.
180
Section 250, Hundred of Yatala, County of Adelaide
T
104
II.
260
Lot 20, Township of Gawler
M
130
II.
272
Lot 51, Township of Goolwa
E
189
II.
299
Section 1160, Hundred of Saddle worth, County of Light
T.L
200
III.
50
Section 400, Hundred of Adelaide, County of Adelaide
L
218
III.
81
Town Acre, 750
. R
242
m.
111
Section 1210, Hundred of Yatala, County of Adelaide
T.M.
269
hi.
166
Allotment 6, Township of Port Adelaide
S.L.
283
hi.
204
P
286
iii.
214
NOTE EXPLANATORY OP DISTINGUISHING LETTERS.
G signifies Gfant from the Crown.
C, Certificate of Title.
T, Transfer of the Fee.
L, Lease.
T.L., Transfer of a Lease.
S. Surrender of a Lease.
M. Mortgage of a Lease.
M, Mortgage.
T. Transfer of Mortgage.
E, Encumbrance.
T.E., Transfer of an Encumbrance.
D, Discharge of Mortgage or Encumbrance.
N, Nomination of Trustees to settlement of estate.
P, Power of Attorney.
R, Registration Abstract.
A, Appointment of Assignees or Administrators.
X, a Caveat.
Z a Deed declaratory of Trusts or any Instrument deposited
’for safe custody and reference, without being registered.




FORM D.
INDEX.


INDEX.
Adams, John, Blacksmith, Kapunda.
Section 18, Hundred of Tungkillo, 113 M, Vol V., folio 72.
Acre 4, Adelaide, 217 L, Vol. V., folio 90.
Lot 17, Bowden, 324, S.
Addison, John, Customs Officer, Port Adelaide.
Lot 73, Port Adelaide, 977 E, Vol. X, folio 33.
Acre 17, Alberton 997 C, Vol. X, folio 65.
Atkins, Henry, Merchant, Adelaide.
Acre 82, Adelaide, 998 P, Vol. X, folio 67.
Section 27, Hundred Alma, G, Vol. X, folio 85.
Adamson, William.
Lot 12, Walkerville, 1010 M, Vol. Xr, folio 8.
Lot 12, Walkerville, 1050 L, Vol. XI, folio 8.
Atkinson, JonN.
Section 28, Hundred of Alma, G, Vol. XI, folio 21.
Section 28, Hundied of Alma, 1121 L, Vol XI, folio 21.


FORM E.
WARRANT BOOK.


WAARANT OF LANDS TITLES COMMISSIONERS.
Name.
Date of
Application,
Property.
Class.
No. of
notifications
in Gazette.
Period within which
after date of adver-
tisement, caveat may
be lodged.
No. of Advertisements in
[Local Papers.
John Adams
1858.
Oct. 21
Section 136, Hundred of Clare, County of Clare
2
1
One month
3
Thomas Wilson
“ 21
Lot 80, Bowden, part of Section 354, Survey B
5
1
Two months
3
William Smith
“ 28
Portion of Town Acre 20, City of Adelaide
3
1
Two months
3, & 3 in Melbourne Argus
Robert Brown
“ 29
Section 24, Hundred of Grey, County Grey
2
1
One month
3
James Willis
Nov. 7
Lot 19, Town of Port Adelaide
3
1
Twelve months
3,& in London Gazette
3.InVictorian Govern-
ment Gazette 1, Mel-
bourne Argus 3, New
South Wales Govern-
ment Gazette 1, Sydney
Herald 3.
a * Whereas the parties named in the above list have requested that the lands therein described be brought under the Real Property
Act, and the said applications have been referred to us by the Registrar-General, we hereby direct that publication of the same may be
made as above specified, and particularized opposite the name of each respectively; and in case no caveat be received by the Registrar-
General in respect to such lands, on or before the expiration of the periods set opposite each name respectively, from the date of the South
Australian Government Gazette notice, we direct the Registrar-General to take such steps as are by law directed for bringing such land under
the operation of the said Act. do.
M l Titles Commissioners.
Dated this thirtieth day of October, 1858. ’ ’ J


GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR GUIDANCE IN BRINGING LAND UNDER
THE ACT.
Any person may act as agent for another in filling in the forms of appli-
cation for bringing land under the Act, and charge for the services 30 rendered;
or the proprietor may himself transact the business.
Any person may bring under the provisions of the Real Property Act, land
of which he is the proprietor, or which he has contracted to purchase, pro-
vided that in the latter case the vendor shall express his concurrence in such
application, by writing on the form of application the words “ I consent
hereto,” signing the same. If the land be vested in the applicant as a
trustee only, the trust deed does not contain powers of sale and absolute
disposal, the person entitled to tfie next life estate must concur in the appli-
cation ; but if the trust deed vests in the trustees power of sale and absolute
disposal, such concurrence is not necessary. If the applicant be a married
woman, the concurrence of her husband must be indicated in the manner
above described. The father or guardian of a minor, or the committee of a
lunatic, may apply to bring land under the Act in the name of such minor or
lunatic.
Any person holding land for a life estate, or for a greater estate than a life
estate, in possession, may hiing the same under the Act, and receive certi-
ficate of title evidencing the nature of his interest.
An undivided share in land cannot be brought under the Act unless the
proprietors of the other undivided shares join in the application with a view
to bringing the entirety under the Act. In which case if the parties are
entitled as joint tenants one certificate will be issued, describing the in-
terest of each proprietor; but if they hold as tenants in common each will
receive a separate certificate representing his undivided share.
If the land be mortgaged, the concurrence of the mortgagee must be cer-
tified in the same manner. The amount of the mortgage, the date when payable,
the rate of interest, and the dates on which the same is payable, must also
be stated, together with the name, residence, and trade or calling of the mort-
gagee, the date of the mortgage deed, and of its registration. If the land
be under lease, the term for which it is leased, the amount of rent, the dates
when payable, and the name, residence, and description of the lessee, the date
of lease and of its registration must also be stated. If right of purchase be
covenanted, the fact must be stated, with the amount of purchase money, and
the period within which the privilege may be exercised. Should there be
any encumbrance, or settlement, or outstanding estate, or interest affecting
the land, the same must be stated.
An accurate description of the land is indispensable. When the land
mentioned in the application consists of an entire section or allotment, as
delineated in an original land grant, a reference to that land grant for the
description will be sufficient. When the land referred to constitutes an allot-
ment in any township, and the map of that township has been deposited in
the Lands Titles Office, in terms of Section 76 of the Real Property Law
Amendment Act, reference to that map for the description will be sufficient;
when the land consists of an allotment in any township the map of which
has been deposited in the Registry Office of Deeds, under Ordinance No. 22
of 1858, reference to that map for the description will sometimes be sufficient.
As, however, several of the maps so deposited are inaccurate, or not draw* to
scale, as in some cases the allotments do'not really contain the quantity of
land stated in the deed, and in other instances the area is not stated either in


S?* d fJ t-n h f ’ r f erenc i f° ma P s deposited under the provisions of
whli n n ot a , be * ufficient * In these instances, as also in cases
where no map has been deposited, and the land referred to consists of portion
only of a section or allotment delineated on an original grant, the application
must state accurately the length of each boundary line in chains andhnks or
1- th block , <df land be other than a triangular figure bounded by
straight lines, or a right angled figure bounded by straight lines, a map or
of thefo7m 5 SCal r W r h mmute accuracy must be delineated on the margin
ot }}}£ for “ °I application, or on a separate paper annexed thereto.
tb ® consists of a land grant only the application fee is Is
Mt h exce h ed tl ii e nn S a f - land , grant > and the v'alue of the property does
not exceed £lOO, the application fee is 10s. If the value exceed £lOO but
Tho fp?fn XCeC s« 2o ?’ tbe aPPHcation fee is 15s. If the value exceed £2OO, 20s.
rhe fee for certificate of title is in every instance £l. These fees, with one
P® und ® te^! in g °. nth c yalue, as contribution to the Assurance
* must be paid at the time of making application.
the Act ind re th« a^° ntraCt f ° r f 1 ® P endin g ; the bringing of the land under
operation ll! conveyance to the purchaser, may be combined in one
Same Of ,T 7 addltl ™ al expense if the application be made in the
expressed!^ 16 mtending P urchaser , and the concurrence of the proprietor
common iS in * ended to be made by joint tenants or tenants in
be erased W ‘ additio, “" " afmK “
from rel- h f e a la ? d S rant , the certificate will be issued within one week
llTol?% P \ 0{ "“application. When the title is other than a land grant
dtee ftfS be IS r “! d Wltbiu , six weeks . except in cases when the evi-
dence of title is imperfect, or the land has been derived by transmission or
where parties appearing to have an interest in the fee are not paSiescon-
curnng in the application. These cases will be specially dealt with on their
loners’ Sd “ f te, iJ ed advertisement directed by the Lands Titles Commis-
e2nM adyerUsl e e r nt‘ ymen ‘ ° rder *° *** the ° ! «*>
beltn^n^ Il fo e^ 0f pr °P erties “ lan d. wherever situated within the colony, if
* g sam ® Proprietor, may be included in one application but
situaTed b ° taken ° ut for sections or allotments
diagram. * p t tbat the y cannot conveniently be included in the same
dJdTof + u, Cluded on ® ori S inal S rant i or treated as one property in any
su rrendered, may, at the desire of the applicant proprietor be
d tW ° ™ ore properties, each under a separate certificate of title
lami* e htu re hi b X appllcatlon fe ? for bringing under the Real Property Act
lands held by the same proprietor under, say twenty separate grantf and
underZ sbiUing ’ and the application fee for ErkmW
th eSoith ASstrlHfV 615^6 prope , rties ' held under titles all derived through
fiS t i an Company or other original proprietor, is twenty shillings
nr™ f C *° l b iV 6gU atlon as to diagrams above referred to, the applicant
of thlfatTwentvsSr 0 exercis ® discretion as to the number of certificates
sentS. atyShdhngs each under which his property shall be repre-
<rnTi,enfaSSUrnnCe j ee char S ed on the first bringing of land under the Act
Sue encum subse^uent with the same land by sale, lease mort-
becomes ‘ Sata Charged “““ ““ “
purchaser 3br “! knd under lhe A «“» b »»‘<° bemade by
may be to nart wifW pursuant to a contract, the purchaser
y oe reluctant to part with the purchase money until his title is completed


by,the bringing of the land under the Act in his name. The vendor may, on the
other hand, be unwilling to sign the consent on the form of application until
the purchase money be paid. This matter is arranged either by payment of
the agreed purchase money into the hands of a stake-holder, or into a Bank,
in the joint names of the vendor and purchaser pending the publication of the
Gazette notice bringing the land under the Act in the name of the latter. Or
sometimes the vendor signs the consent, and protects himself by lodging a
caveat with the Registrar- General forbidding the issue of the Gazette notice
and certificate of title until his receipt for the purchase money is produced.
The declarations on the form, and also the attestation of the signatures of
applicants and concurring parties, must be made in manner and before the
authorities hereinafter specified under the heading “ Execution of Instruments
and Attestation,” which see.
The application, with the title -deeds of the land, may be forwarded through
the Pcfst, or delivered at the Lauds Titles Office, Adelaide.
Abstracts are sometimes required when all the deeds are not produced, or
when the title is complicated by transmission through the death, insol-
vency, &c., of former proprietors.
Blank forms may be procured at the Lands Titles Office, or will be for-
warded through the post to any applicant transmitting one shilling in
stamps.
Mistakes in filling in forms of application may be corrected by scoring the
pen through the words written in error, and writing the correct words over
them. In such cases a memorandum of the number of words scored out, and
of the number interlined, must be made on the margin of the form, signed by
the applicant proprietor, and by the attesting witness.
No form will be received on which an erasure is detected.
The following examples are given for further illustration:—
Title , a Land Grant, and no outstanding interest.
(I) [South Australia.
Application for Lands to be brought under operation of Real
Property Act.
I, A. 8., of , do declare that I am seised, in possession of an estate
in fee simple in all that Section of land containing eighty acres,
be the same little more or less, and numbered 75, situate in the
Hundred of Light, County of Light, which Section was originally
granted to me by land grant, under the hand and seal of Sir H.
E. F. Young, Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, dated
fourth day of June, 1853, T and is delineated on the public maps of
the Province deposited in the Survey Office in Adelaide : And I
do further declare, that I am not aware of any mortgage, encum-
brance, or claim affecting the said lands, or that any person hath
any claim, estate, or interest in the said lands at law or in equity,
in possession or in expectancy, and I make this solemn declaration
conscientiously believing the same to be true.
Dated at Adelaide, this 10th day of August, 1858.
(Signed) Thomas Jones.
Made and subscribed by the above-named Thomas Jones, this 10th day
of August, 1858, in the presence of me, R. R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
I, Thomas Jones, the above declarant, do hereby apply to have the piece
of land described in the above declaration brought under the operation of
the Real Property Act.
Dated at Adelaide, this 10th day of August, 1858.
(Signed) Thomas Jones.
Witness to signature—R. R. Torrens.
, i


[Endorsement to the above. )
I deelare the within described land to be of the vaiue of £lOO sterling
and no more, and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true. J b
(Signed) Thomas Jones.
Made and subscribed by the above-named Thomas Jones in my presence,
the tenth day of August, 1858.—R. R. Torrens.
'
Application by Trustees not holding powers of absolute disposition and sale.
Property an Allotment under Lease; reference for description to Map in
General Registry-Offite. Tenant for life to concur.
(I) [South Australia.
Application for Lands to be brought under operation of the
Real Property Act.
We, William Smith, of Adelaide, John Edwards, of Adelaide, and Richard
I consent hereto,
(Signed) Thomas Jenkins,
(Tenant for life.)
Witness —Henry Robinson.
Smith, of Norwood, as trustees under an indenture, dated sth May,
1856, do declare that we are seised in possession of an estate in fee
simple in all that allotment of land, No. 28, containing one half
of an acre, be the same little more or less, and being part and parcel
of the Section of land, No. 52, situate in the Hundred of Clare,
County of Stanley, which allotment No. 28, is more particularly
delineated in plan deposited in the General Registry-Office of the
said Province, No. 29 of 1855, and which said Section was originally
granted to Thomas Rolfe, by land grant, under the hand and seal
of Sir R. G. Mac Donnell, Govemor-in-Chief of the said Province
dated third day of July, 1858, and is delineated on the public maps
of the Province deposited in the Survey Office in Adelaide: And
we do further declare, that we are not aware of any mortgage
encumbrance, or claim affecting the said lands, or that any person
hath any claim, estate, or interest in the said lands at law or in
equity, in possession or in expectancy, other than is set forth and
stated as follows, that is to say—that the above property is under
lease to Edward Johnson, for the term of seven years, at the
yearly rent of £5O, payable half-yearly, on 31st of March and 30th
of September, and we make this solemn declaration conscientiously
believing the same to be true. J
Dated at Adelaide, this Bth day of September, 1858.
( William Smith.
(Signed) -< John Edwards.
I Richard Smith.
Made and subscribed by the above-named William Smith, John Edwards
and Kichard Smith, this Bth day of September, 1858, in the presence of me, ’
R. K. Torrens, Registrar-General.
We, William Smith, John Edwards, and Richard Smith, the above de-
clarants, do hereby apply to have the piece of land described in the above
declaration brought under the operation of the Real Property Act.
Dated at Adelaide, this Bth day of September, 1858.
f William Smith.
(Signed) ■< John Edwards.
( Richard Smith.
Witness to signature— F. R. Tobreks.


[Endorsement to the above.]
We declare the within described land to be of the value of £5OO sterling,
and no more, and we make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true.
( William Smith.
(Signed) -< John Edwards.
Smith.
Made and subscribed by the above named William Smith, John Edwards,
and Richard Smith, in my presence, this Bth day of September, 1858.
R. R. Torrens.
Property , Allotment in Township, subject to Mortgage ; reference for description
to map deposited in terms of Real Property Act. Mortgagee concurs.
(I) [Soctii Australia
Application for Lands to be brought under operation of the
Real PROPERTy Act.
I, Thomas Bone, of Kensington, do declare that I am seised in possession
I consent hereto,
(Signed)
John Watson.
Witness— E. R. Torrens.
of an estate in fee simple in all thab-allotment of land, No. 430, con-
taining one-quarter of an acre, be the same little more or less ;
and being part and parcel of the Sections of land, numbered
1129 and 1130, in the Hundred of Port Adelaide, County Adelaide ;
which Sections have been laid out by Messrs. Watts and Levi, a 3
and for a Township, as the said allotment, No. 430, is more
particularly delineated in plan of said Sections deposited in Lands
Titles Registration Office, No. 3; and which said Sections were
originally granted to Philip Levi, by land grant, under the hand
and seal of Sir H. E. F. Young, Lieutenant-Governor of the said
Province, dated 26th day of July, 1850, and are delineated on the
public maps of the Province deposited in the Survey Office in
Adelaide: And Ido further declare, that lam not aware of any
mortgage, encumbrance, or claim affecting the said lands, or that
any person hath any claim, estate or interest in the said lands at
law or in equity, in possession or in expectancy, other than is set
forth and stated as follows, that is to say —that the above
property is subject to a mortgage to John Watson for the sum of
£100; and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true.
Dated at Adelaide, this 14th day of March, 1859.
(Signed) Thomas Bone.
Made and subscribed by the above-named Thomas Bone, this 14th day of
March, 1859, in the presence of me,
E. R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
I, Thomas Bone, the above declarant, do hereby apply to have the piece
of land described in the above declaration brought under the operation of
the Real Property Act.
Dated at Adelaide, this 14th day of March, 1859.
(Signed) Thomas Bone.
Witness to signature —R. R. Torrens.
[Endorsement to the above.]
I declare the within described land to be of the value of £5OO sterling
i 2


the sanM < tobetrue mak ° Solemn declaration conscientiously believing
(Signed) Thomas Bone.
tu, ftir&s asKS.** aboye -*”° d Th " m “ b »”». “■* p—.
E. R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
When Title is deed for part of an original Section , referring for description to
diagram on paper annexed ; applicant being purchaser under contract , and
vendor concurring.
(I) | South Australia.
Application for Lands to be brought under operation of the
Real Property Act.
I> homas Atkins, of do declare that I am seised in possession,
I consent hereto,
(Signed)
Edward Martin (Vendor.)
Witness— R. R. Torrens.
as intending purchaser from Edward Martin, in all that piece of
land, containing twenty acres, being part of and situate at the
northern extremity of the Section of land, numbered 250, situate
in the Hundred of Adelaide,. County of Adelaide, which piece of
land is more particularly delineated in plan annexed hereto; which
said Section, No. 250, was originally granted to Edward Martin
by land grant under the hand and seal of Sir H. E. F. Young
Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, dated Bth July, 1853
and is delineated on the public maps of the Province deposited in
the Survey Office in Adelaide: And I do further declare, that I
am not aware of any mortgage, encumbrance, or claim affecting
the said land, or that any person hath any claim, estate or interest
in the said lands at law or in equity, in possession or in expectancy,
and 1 make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
same to be true. °
Dated at Adelaide, this 12th day of March, 1859.
(Signed) Thomas Atkins.
Made and subscribed by the above-named Thomas Atkins, this 12th dav
of March, 1859, in the presence of me, J
R. R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
I, Thomas Atkins, the above declarant, do hereby apply to have the piece
of land described m the above declaration brought under operation of the
Real Property Act. r
Dated at Adelaide, this 12th day of March, 1859.
(Signed) Thomas Atkins.
Witness to signature—R. R. Torrens.
t
[Endorsement to the above.]
I declare the within described land to be of the value of £3O sterling and
same'tobetoie thlB solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
(Signed) Thomas Atkins.
this mb day ot U MarcbflBs9 he ab ° Ve ’ named Thomas Atkins,in my presence,
R. R. Torrens.


Applications of Joint Tenants or Tenants in Common desiring to make Parti-
tion.
(I ') ’
[South Australia.
Application for Lands to be brought under operation of the
Real Property Act.
We, James Stokes, of Gawler Town, and Thomas Jenkins, of Adelaide, do
declare that we are seised in possession of an estate in fee simple,
each of us paitly in his own right and partly as an intending
purchaser of the estate or interest of the other of us in the land*
and in the manner hereinafter mentioned, that is to say—the said
James Stokes is seised of the western moiety or equal half part of
that section of land containing eighty acres, be the same little
more or less, and numbered 80, situate in the Hundred of Noar-
* lunga, County of Adelaide; and the said Thomas Jenkins is seised
of the eastern moiety or equal half part of the said section, which
was originally granted to the said James Stokes and Thomas
Jenkins by land grant under the hand and seal of Sir H. E. F.
Young, Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, dated 10th
July, 1855, and is delineated on the public maps of the Province
deposited in the Survey Office at Adelaide : And we do further
declare that we are not aware of any mortgage, encumbrance, or
claim affecting the said lands, or that any person hath any claim,
estate, or interest in the said lands at law or in equity in possession
or expectancy : And we make this solemn declaration con-
scientiously believing the same to be true.
Dated at Adelaide this 12 th day of December, 1858.
< {“SL,.
Made and subscribed by the above-named James Stokes and Thomas
Jenkins this 12 th day of December, 1858, in presence of me,
R- R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
We, James Stokes and Thomas Jenkins, the above declarants, do hereby
apply to have the piece of land in the above declaration brought under the
operation of the Real Property Act.
Dated at Adelaide this 12th day of December, 1858.
(Signed) j James Stokes.
y l Thomas Jenkins.
Witness to signature—R. R. Torrens.
[Endorsement to the above.]
We declare the within-described land to be of the value of £2OO sterling,
and no more, and we make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing
the same to be true.
(Signed) •’ /James Stokes.
( Thomas Jenkins.
Made and subscribed by the above-named James Stokes and Thomas
Jenkins, in my presence, this 12th day of December, 1858.
R. R. Torrens.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONDUCTING TRANSFERS AND OTHER
DEALINGS WITH LAND, APPLICABLE TO INSTRUMENTS
GENERALLY.
_ Who titled to present instruments for registration.
may ba P proc r ured atThe^^STHl^Offic^ 6 ’ lea ® e ’, “ftgage, & c ., & c .,
the Posf-Office, to any address •’ ? F T U be fo .™ded through
stamps; these instruments when filled un t°l on ? shilling in postage
nm ein v fter descrf hed, and in duplicate mav u CUte<l and attested in manner
Office by the party claiming thefS’r r Presented at the Lands Titles
Post-Office, addressed to the Registrar Generfl’ 1 n arded by i nm through the
by his Solicitors. In either caso B the wordf« rA P /r‘ Sen , ted for registration
tration,” signed by the party presenting 9 0r ” ct for the purpose of regis-
thereon. 3 P 7 presenting the instrument, must be endorsed
or presenting theiSrumen^ 6^1^^001 “ USt b ° paid at the time of forwarding
tration "KakefmTy be'cJrrecS bvsco wiU be received for regis-
wntten in error, and writing the correct tbe pe ? tbrou gh the words
case a memorandum of the numher of i ords over them ;in every such
be made at foot of the «• TL rds ? cored °nt and interlined must
o-dbytheattestLgSS^ -ent Slg „ed by the patty executing the same'
KctirS,“ a i™ e “ "““f or interest in land under the
to deal with that estate or interest U “B'stered proprietor who contracts
witness, and it is desirable tlmtohe witness'shmddV 111 * 86 atte ? W one
witness should be a resident householder.
Execration of instruments and attestations.
t”™*"* »* «» P-P«try
such contracting proprietor or the nP ?«n °f- tbe L Reg,strar ' General » then
ss r nf u r 40 that
ShTZ^nl^
proprietor does not attend, oris not known but if the 9 0n tracting
attested the signature will be remim H+ n ° the witness who
°?thj or under Statutory Rowing questions on
signing of this instrument? and is the name or il! ho attested tbe
name or mark as such attesting wUness tonr ?’ pur ?°- to be your
personally know A P „ ° w . . > 7°nr own handwriting ?” “Do von
ture you attested ?” “I s he^rsou^mfnd? 8 and wbose signa-
tarily sign the same?” Execution of S and dld he freel 7 a » d volun-
manner—in the United Kingdom i r struments may be proved in like
British Colony, before aJudt’r^ 010 a Notary Public or Mayor; in a
foreign pkee, before a BrittAnS KeS “ eM ; in “
Description of Parcels.
yr^t* 1 * with . com P ri . ses the entire of the lands in-
prises the entire of anv f ° F g , r , ants ’ certificate or certificates, or com-
which has been deposited in terms of^hp “ auy Unship, plan ™f
grants, certificates, or plan for d* Re . a Pro P ert y Act » a reference t® such
and a diagram will pot pr ° perty - will
comprises part only of the lauds included in h ° property ‘° be dealt with
ms included ln a oy such grant, or certificate, or


allotment, the portion to be dealt with must be minutely described and de-
ment m a diagram ’ accuratel y drawn to scale on the margin of the instru-
8. The diagram is occasionally dispensed with in the case of a memoran-
dum of sale of the fee, if the description given be sufficient to enable the
draftsman of the department to delineate the subdivision, with the aid of a
deposited plan, or of the diagram on the existing grant' or certificate of title.
Acknowledgment by married women and consent of parties.
9. Whenever the land to be dealt with is vested in a married womam the
acknowledgment of such married woman must be taken before a Judge or
before the Master of the Supreme Court, or before the Registrar-General
whose certificate of such acknowledgment must be endorsed on the instru-
ment in the form of Schedule T of the Real Property Law Amendment Act.
10. Whenever the concurrence of any person interested is required to give
validity to any transaction, such concurrence may be signified by the words
I consent hereto,” written on the instrument and signed by such person-
the signature must be witnessed and attested in manner hereinbefore
described.
H The counterpart of every instrument registered, bearing a certificate
that the particulars thereof have been entered in the register book, showing
the volume and folio authenticated by the hand and seal of the Registrar-
General, will be returned to the party who has acquired estate or interest
thereby.
12. Entry in the register book is the essential which gives validity to tran-
sactions ; and the certificate and seal of the Registrar-General render the in-
strument evidence to prove title in any Court of Justice.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR TRANSFER OF ESTATE OR INTEREST.
' 13 - W, hen land is intended to be sold, the proprietor fills up memorandum
or sale, iorm B, stating the amount of purchase money, and describing rights
ot way or other easements or privileges, if any, reserved by such proprietor •
also rights of way or other easements, if any, over other lands intended to be
attached to and exercised in conjunction with the proprietorship of the land
intended to be sold.
14. If the land be under lease, the name, residence, and description of the
tenant; the term of the lease, the amount of rent, and any material covenants,
such as right of purchase, should be stated.
15. If the land be mortgaged or encumbered, the amount secured, the date
when payable, the rate of interest, and other particulars, with the name
residence, and description of the mortgagee, or encumbrancee, should be
stated; but if the land be settled and the vendor acts in the capacity of
trustee only, that circumstance need not be stated, as the purchaser has" no
occasion to loek to the appropriation of the purchase money.
16 - The existing grant or certificate of title must be deposited in the
Lands Titles Office, together with the duplicate memorandum of sale.
17. Whenever it is intended to sell an estate less than an estate in fee
simple, or to sell merely a right of way or other easement or privilege without
the fee of the land, the memorandum of sale may be modified so as to express
clearly the nature of the lesser estate, easement, or privilege intended to be
disposed of. In such cases the certificate of title will be returned to the
proprietor of the fee, bearing a memorandum under the hand of the Reeistrar-
(reneral certifying the registration of the transfer of the lesser estate or
easement*
l B ' the / ee s i m P le is transferred, a certificate of title will be made
out and delivered to the purchaser in exchange for the memorandum of sale.
the fee of part only of the land included under an existing grant or
certificate of title be sold, a certificate for .the balance of such land will be
g iv en to the proprietor, and the previous certificate will be cancelled, or, at
the desire ol the proprietor, the existing grant or certificate will be cancelled
so far only as regards the portion of land transferred, and the issue of certi


fieate for the balance postponed in anticipation of future sales. The deposited
grant or certificate Will, in such case, be retained in the Lands Titles Office.
20. Properties represented by several grants or certificates of title may bo
dealt wjth under one memorandum of sale to the same purchaser, who may
exercise his discretion as to whether the lands Shall be included in one certi-
ficate or divided into separate properties, each represented by a separate certi-
ficate, subject, however, to the existing regulations in respect to plans and
diagrams. r
.. 1 h en land is intended to be offered for sale as a township, the proprietor
is required to deposit in the Lands Titles Office a plan of the township, a»d
to subscribe a declaration to the accuracy of the same before the Registrar-
General or a Justice of the Peace.
l 1 !*® allotments, streets, squares, and other reserves for public purposes
must be distinctly delineated, and the allotments numbered.
23. If the allotments be of an area not exceeding one statute acre, then the
plan must be on a scale of riot less than one inch to two chains. If the
allotments be of an area exceeding one acre but not exceeding five acres, then
the plan may be on a scale of not less than one inch to five chains. If the
allotments be of a greater area than five acres then the plan must be on a
scale of not less than,one inch to ten chains.
24. The above is the minimum scale for plans deposited; but a larger
scale, as affording facility for marking off future subdivisions, is recommended
for adoption whenever, the township is of such moderate extent as may admit
cf it without inconvenience.
25. The proprietor, before proceeding to sale, should deposit the grant or
certificate of title to the lands comprised in the township, taking a receipt for
the same; he should also provide himself with forms of memorandum of sale,
*>*» filled in and executed in favour of each purchaser as sales are effected.
j When the handwriting is known, and there is no reason to suspect
fraud, the proving of execution before the Registrar- General or Justice of the
I eace will generally be dispensed with.
. 27 ‘ 7 hese memoranda of sale must be forwarded to the Lands Titles Office
m duplicate, as hereinbefore directed. One counterpart will be returned to
the purchaser, bearing the official stamp, and certificate of entry in the
register book, to be exchanged for certificate of title so soon as the same can
be made out.
28. The fees are—for memorandum of sale, ten shillings ; for certificate of
title, one pound ; and must be paid at the time when the memorandum of sale
is presented or forwarded for registration.
29. Before paying the purchase money the purchasers should have the
existing grant or certificate of title delivered up, or should satisfy themselves
that it has been already deposited in the Lands Titles Office.
30. The grant or certificate of title will show by the memoranda endorsed
all transactions affecting the land, yet prudent persons will take the precaution
of making search, lest any caveat should be lodged forbidding the Registrar-
General to give effect to the transfer.
31. The register book may be searched by the party interested, or by any
person on his behalf, or a certificate of search exhibiting the state of the title
will be forwarded by the Registrar-General to any party applying through
the post or per telegram; the fee, in either case, is two shillings for each title
searched. °
32. _ Some delay and labour will be saved if persons making search or
applying for certificate of search, state the volume and folio of the register
raaVi lr \ w *he history of the title is recorded; this information may
, u , w? , rom the vendor, as every instrument issued from the
r^ les °® ce hears upon it a memorandum referring to the volume and
olio or the register book.
33. Mortgages, encumbrances, and leases, may be transferred by a simple
endorsement of the words following I, the within-mentioned ,
lii consideration of the sum of £ , this day paid.to me, by
the receipt of which I do hereby acknowledge, do hereby transfer to him the


estate or interest in respect to which I am registered as proprietor, as set
forth and described in the within written security, together with all my rights,
powers,, estate, and interest therein. In witness whereof I have hereunto
subscribed my name this day of , 18
34. Tfce surrender of a lease is effected by endorsing the single word—
“ Surrendered,” signed by the lessor and lessee. Signatures to endorsements
of transfer, or surrender, in such cases must be attested as directed in the
former part of this letter.
35. The instrument should then be presented at, or forwarded to, the Lands
Titles Office, that the particulars of the endorsement may be entered in the
register book, and the certificate and seal of registration affixed.
36. The fee for registering transfer of mortgage, encumbrance, or lease, or
surrender of lease by endorsement, is five shillings.
37. In the case of transfers of this nature, the instrument will generally be
returned to the party entitled within ten minutes. When the fee is transferred,
tbe certificate of title will generally be ready for issue on the succeeding day.
38. Examples of memoranda of sale are annexed, exhibiting the mode of
filling in forms under different circumstances.
4
SCHEDULES EEFFERED TO.
Where land transferred is the whole of a Section of land included in Certificate
of Title.
(B) [South Australia.
Memorandum of Sale.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor (cer-
tificate of title, vol. 11., folio 54) of an estate in fee simple in all
that Section of land, situate in the Hundred of Goolwa,
County Hindmarsh, containing eighty acres, be the same a
little more or less, and numbered 1300, bounded as described in
certificate of title aforesaid, which said Section is delineated
in the public maps of the said Hundred in the office of the Surveyor-
General, and. was originally granted the fifth day of May, 1849,
under the hand and seal of Sir H. E. F. Young, Lieutenant-Governor
of the said Province, to Thomas Jones, of Willunga, farmer, in con-
sideration of the sum of £2OO paid to me by William Robinson, of
Adelaide, aforesaid, bricklayer, the receipt of which sum I hereby
acknowledge, do hereby transfer to the said William Robinson all
my estate and interest in the said piece of land. In witness
whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name, this twenty-second
day of January, 1859.
John Smith.
Signed on the day above named by the said John Smith, in the presence
of Thomas Browne, Adelaide.
[Endorsement to the- abovb.]
Correct for the purpose of registration.— William Robinson.
Where land transferred is portion of a Section of land included in Certificate
of Title.
(B) [South Australia.
MeMORANDUMsOF SALE.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor
(certificate of title, vol 1., folio 93) of an estate in fee simple
in ail that piece or parcel of land, situate in the Hundred of


Goolwa, County of Ilmdmarsh, containing fifteen acres, be the
same a little more or less, being the northern portion of the Section
of land No. 1300 in said Hundred, and bounded as appears in
plan drawn m margin hereof, which said piece of land measures
on the south and north sides thereof severally 300 links and on
the east and west sides thereof severally 100 links, which said
is delineated in the public map of the said Hundred in
the office of the Surveyor-General, and was originally granted on
the filth day of May, 1849, under the hand and seal of Sir H E
F. Young Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, to Thomas
Jones, of Willunga, farmer, in consideration of the surti of £B5
paid to me by William Robinson, of Adelaide, aforesaid, brick-
layer the receipt of which sum I hereby acknowledge, do hereby
transfer to the said William Robinson all my estate and interest
in the said piece of land. In witnesss whereof I have hereunto
subscribed my name, this twenty-second day of January, 1859.
John Smith.
Signed on the day above named by the said John Smith, in the presence
of Ihomas Browne, Adelaide. r
[Endorsement to the above.J
Correct for the purpose of registration.— William Robinson.
Appeared before me, at Adelaide, the 24th day of Januarv 1859 Tnhn
» mith, of Adelaide, the party executing the within instrument, and did freely
and voluntarily sign the same. ’ “ wl J r
(Signed) Thomas Johnson, J.P.
When land is transferred subject to a lease and mortgage.
[South Australia.
Memorandum of Sale.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter being registered as proprietor
(certificate of title vol. 111., folio 54) of an estate in fee simple
subject, however, to such encumbrance and interest hereinafter
mentioned, in all that Section of land situate in the Hundred of
Goolwa, County of Hindmarsh, containing eighty acres be
the same a little more or less, and numbered 1300, bounded as
described in certificate of title aforsaid, which said Section
m delineated m the public map of the said Hundred, ip the office
°f S 6 feU ' V^°r^ en T 1 ’ , and was originally granted the fifth day
of May, 1849, under the hand and seal of Sir H. E F Young
Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, to Thomas Jones, of
Willunga, farmer, in consideration of the sum of £2OO paid to
me by William Robinson, of Adelaide, bricklayer, the receipt of
which sum I hereby acknowledge, do hereby transfer to the said
William Robinson, all my estate and interest in the said piece of
land, subject as follows, that is to say—a lease, No. 20, dated 4th
August, 1858, from me the said John Smith, to John Morris of
Kapunda, miller, at the yearly rent of £7O, payable half-yearly,
lerm—seven years, and right of purchase at any time during the"
said term at the price or sum of £1,000; and subject also to bill
of mortgage, No ' 30 ’ dated 6th November, 1858, from me, the said
JXj South to Alfred Perkins of Norwood, Esquire, for the sum of
£1?) hvVh r-Tin” Payabl6 ’ 6th N ° T Vem . ber ’ 186 °- Ra *e of interest,
by the £lOO m every year. In witness whereof I have here-
unto signed my name, this twenty-second day of January, 1859.
. John Smith.


Signed on the day above named by the said John Smith in the presence
of Thomas Browne, Adelaide.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration.— William Robinson.
Appeared before me, at Adelaide, the 24th day of January, 1859, Thomas
Browne, of Adelaide, the attesting witness to this instrument, and acknow-
ledged his signature to the same ; and did further declare that John Smith,
the party executing the same, was personally known to him, the said Thomas
Browne, and that the signature of this said instrument is the handwriting of
the said John Smith.
(Signed) Thomas Johnson, J.P.
Where land is transferred under Power of Attorney and is subject to an annuity.
(B) [South Australia.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor
(certificate of title, vol. IV., folio 17) of an estate in fee simple,
subject, however, to such encumbrance and interest hereinafter
mentioned, in all that Section of land situate in the Hundred of
Goolwa, County of Hmdinarsh, containing eighty acres, be the
same little more or less, and numbered 1300, bounded as described
in certificate of 'title aforesaid, which said Section is
delineated in the public map of the said Hundred, in the office of
the Surveyor-General, and was originally granted the fifth day
of May, 1849, under the hand and seal of Sir H. E. F. Young,
. Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, to Thomas Jones, of
Willunga, farmer, in consideration of the sum of £3OO, paid to me
by William Robinson, of Adelaide, Esquire, the receipt of which
sum I hereby acknowledge, do hereby transfer to the said William
Robinson all my estate and interest in the said piece of land,
subject as follows—that is to say, bill of Encumbrance, No.
52, dated 12th May, 1857, from the said John Smith, securing
. to my wife, Jane Smith, an annuity of £lOO per annum. In
witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name, this 27th
day of January, 1859.
John Smith, by his Attorney, Richard Tomkins. •
Signed on the day above-named by the said John Smith, by his Attorney,
Richard Tomkins, in the presence of Thomas Browne, Adelaide.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of Registration— William Robinson.
Grant of Right of Way.
(B) [South Australia.
Memorandum op Sale.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor
(certificate of title, vol. V., folio 37) of an estate in fee simple
in all that Section of land situated in the Hundred of Goolwa,
County of Hindmarsh, containing eighty acres, be the same little
more or less, and No. 1300, bounded as described in certificate of
title aforesaid, in consideration of the sum of Twenty
Pounds paid to me by John Watkins, of Adelaide, the receipt of


which sum I hereby acknowledge, do hereby grant to the said
John Watkins and others claiming through or under him owners
or occupiers of the Section of land, No. 1300, in the said Hundred
full liberty and right of way, and of driving of horses and other
cattle, and either on foot or on horseback, and with carts or other
carriages to or from the well or pond situated on said Section No.
1300, for the purpose of watering such horses and other cattle or
of carrying away and using the water therefrom, such well or
pond to be approached from eastern corner of said Section, No.
1300. In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name
this twenty-seventh day of January, 1859.
John Smith.
Signed on the day above-named by the said John Smith in the presence
of Thomas Browne, of Adelaide.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of Registration— John Watkins.
MORTGAGES AND ENCUMBRANCES.
After entering on the form of mortgage or encumbrance the name, re-
sidence, and trade or calling of the intending mortgagor or encumbrancer
the nature of the estate held by him, whether fee simple or leasehold as
also the particulars of leases, prior mortgages, or other encumbrances if
any affecting the property, must be stated.
2. Next must be set forth a description of the land identical with that
given m the grant, certificate of title, or lease, under which the estate about
to be pledged is held, or a reference for description and diagram must be made to
that grant, certificate, or lease.
3. If, however, part only of a section or allotment, as described and de-
lineated in such grant, certificate, or lease, is intended to be pledged then
an accurate description of that part must be given, setting forth the length of
each boundary fine in chains and links, or‘in feet. Moreover, a diagram of
the portion to be pledged, drawn accurately to scale, will be necessary
whenever the line dividing the portion to be pledged is not a straight line
and whenever the portion to be pledged is cut off from the original section or
allotment by more than one line.
4. Next must be stated the name, residence, and trade or calling of the
person in whose favour the mortgage or encumbrance is to be effected the
amount of the sum of money or annuity to secure which the land is to
be pledged, the date (if any) fixed for payment of the sum so secured or the
occurrences or conditions upon which it may be intended that such payment
shall be contingent, together with the rate of interest and the dates on which it
is to be paid.
5. Covenants for punctual payment, for keeping in repair, and for right
of entry upon the premises to inspect the state of repairs need not be inserted,
as these are declared by law to be implied in every mortgage under the Heal
Property Act, unless expressly barred or modified by words to that effect in
the bill of mortgage.
6. A covenant for insurance against loss by fire may be introduced into the
bill of mortgage by using the four words, “ that he will insure; ” the law
declaring that whenever these words are introduced the mortgagor will
be bound to insure, and, so long as the term expressed in the said
mortgage shall not have expired, will keep insured in some public insurance
office, to be approved by such mortgagee, against loss or damage by fire to the
full amount specified m such bill of mortgage, or if no amount be specified
then to their full value all buildings, tenements, or premises erected on such


land which shall be of a nature or kind capable of being insured against
loss, or damage by fire; and that he will, at the request of the mortgagee
hand over to and deposit with him the policy of every such insurance and
produce to him the receipt or receipts for the annual or other premiums
payable on account thereof: Provided always, that all moneys to be received
under or by virtue of any such insurance shall, in the event of loss or damage
by fire, be laid out and expended in making good such loss or damage ; provided
also, that if default shall be made in the observance or performance of the cove-
nant last above-mentioned, it shall be lawful for the mortgagee, without pre-
judice, nevertheless, to and concurrently with the powers granted him by his bill
of mortgage, in manner in and by the Act provided, to insure such building
and the cost and charges of such insurance shall, until such mortgage be re-
deemed, be a charge upon tbe said land.” 5 °
7 Any other covenants agreed on between the parties may be introduced into
the bill of mortgage or encumbrance.
8. Repayment by instalments or periodical payments is provided for bv a
special clause m the Act, and a form of bill of mortgage adapted to such cases
and for the use of building or benefit socities is supplied at the Lands Titles
Office.
9. The bill of mortgage or encumbrance, when filled in and executed as
directed in the instructions for preparing instruments given in the preceding
letters, together with the grant certificate of title, or lease under which the
land Intended to bo pledged is held, must be forwarded to or presented at the
Lands Titles Office, in order that the particulars may be entered in the register
book. =
10. One counterpart of the bill of mortgage or of encumbrance will be de-
livered to the mortgagee or encumbrancee, bearing certificate, under the hand
and seal of the Registrar-General, that the particulars had been entered in the
register book, stating volume and folio.
■> 11. Entry in the register book is the essential which gives validity to the
transaction ; the certificate of the Registrar-General makes the instrument evi-
dence in all Courts of Justice that such entry has been made
12. The question who shall hold the counterpart, grant, or certificate of
title, or lease, representing the property pledged, is left to be settled between
the parties.
13 - Under the old law of mortgaging by transfer of the legal estate, it is
usuid for the mortgagee to hold the deeds.
14. On the Continent of Europe, where the system of hypothecation or pledge
is substituted for that device so costly and injurious to the mortgagor the mort-
gagee does not generally hold the title deeds.
15. The mortgage, under the. South Australian Real Property Act isnearlv
identical with the continental “ hypotheckand whilst there is nothin? to
forbid the custody of the grant, certificate, or lease by the or en
cumbrancee, such custody can afford him no additional security or “advantage
beyond what would be secured to him holding his bill of mortgage or encum
brance whilst the custody of the grant or other instrument of°title remained
with the mortgagor or encumbrancer.
K 3. This will more clearly be perceived upon calling to mind, first, that an
original of the grant, certificate, or lease remains in the Lands Titles Office
which, as well as the counterpart in the hands of the proprietor bear* unon
it a memorandum recording the mortgage or encumbrance, and the date and
hour of its creation, certified under the hand of the Registrar-General; 2ndly
that the law declares that all mortgages, encumbrances, and other liens shall
take effect according to the date of their registrations, and that no subsequent
transaction or entry can affect the rights or powers of the previous mortgagee
or encumbrancee, whose title is guaranteed by the law as indefea«ihl«
17. It should also be borne in mind that no lease grantedTubsequent to a
mortgage or encumbrance can have any validity as against the mortgagee or
encumbrancee unless his concurrence shall be certified thereon in manner
above directed under the heading, “ Instructions applicable to instruments
generally.


18. Although the grant, certificate, or lease, will itself exhibit the state of
the mortgagor’s title, the mortgagee is nevertheless advised, as a precautionary
measure, before paying the mortgage money, to cause search to be made, lest
caveat should be entered forbidding the registration of dealings with the
property ; he may also, if there be reason to suspect fraud, protect himself by
lodging a caveat forbidding any further dealing, pending the registration of his
mortgage.
19. Any number of sections or allotments belonging to the same proprietor
may be included in one form of mortgage or encumbrance.
20. A mortgage or encumbrance may be discharged by the simple endorse-
ment thereon of a receipt for the money secured, signed by the party entitled,
and attested by a witness.
21. By the 33rd and 34th sections of the Beal Property Law Amendment Act
power ot sale is given to the mortgagee in case of default made by the mortgagor
in payment of interest or principal, or in the observance of any covenant,
after one month’s notice in writing, served on the mortgagor, or left at his
last known place of abode in the colony, or on the mortgaged premises.
22. The procedure to be followed in such cases is the same as that prescribed
in the instructions under the head of transfers.
23. The Registrar-General is bound to give effect to sales by mortgagees
under such circumstances, and the Act declares such sales to be “ as valid and
effectual to pass such mortgaged estate or interest as if the memorandum of
sale had been executed by the mortgaging or encumbrancing prpprieter, prior
to the execution of the mortgage or encumbrance.”
24. The fee for a mortgage or encumbrance is ten shillings ; for release, five
shillings; and the instrument duly registered will be returned to the parties
generally within fifteen minutes after presentation. Examples are annexed
illustrating the mode in which forms of mortgage and encumbrance are required
to be filled in.
SCHEDULES KEFEERED TO.
Mortgage, with Covenant to Insure.
(D) [South Austealia.
Bill or Moktgage.
I, John Smith, of Willunga, farmer, being registered as proprietor
(certificate of title, vol. I, folio 169) of an estate in fee simple,
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that piece of land situated
in the Hundred of Willunga, County of Adelaide, bounded as des-
cribed in certificate of title aforesaid, containing eighty acres,
be the same a little more or less; plan of which piece of land is de-
lineated in aforesaid certificate of title, which said piece of land is
the Country Section marked 258, delineated in the public map of
the said Hundred, deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General,
which was originally granted the twelfth day of August, 1857,
under the hand and seal of Sir R. G. Mac Donnell, Governor-
in-Chief of the said Province, to Thomas Jenkins, of Adelaide, in
consideration of the sum of Three Hundred Pounds sterling, this
day lent to me by James Brown, jof Adelaide, the receipt of
which sum I hereby acknowledge, do hereby covenant with the said
James Brown, that I will pay to him, the said James Brown, the
above sum of Three Hundred Pounds on the twelfth day of Sep-
tember, 1861: Secondly, that I will pay interest on the said sum
at the rate of Ten Pounds by the One Hundred Pounds in the year,
by equal quarterly payments, on the twelfth day of December, twelfth
day of March, twelfth day of June, and on the twelfth day of Sep-
tember, in every year: Thirdly, that I will insure the dwelling


house, stable, and out-buildings erected and built on the above Sec-
tion, in such Insurance Office as the said James Brown may direct:
And for the better securing to the said James Brown the repayment
in manner aforesaid of the said principal sum and interest, I hereby
mortgage to the said James Brown all my estate and interest in the
said land above described. In witness whereof I have hereto signed
my name, this twelfth day of September, 1858.
John Smith, Mortgagor.
Signed by the above-named John Smith, as mortgagor, this twelfth day of
September, 1858, in the presence of William Jones, of Adelaide.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of Registration—James Brown.
Endorsement op Transfer of Mortgage.
I, the within-mentioned James Brown, in consideration of Three Hundred
Bounds this day paid to me by George Brooks, of Adelaide, the
receipt of which sum I do hereby acknowledge, hereby transfer to
him the estate or interest in respect to which I am registered as
proprietor, as set forth and described in the within written security,
together with all my rights, powers, estate, and interest therein. In
witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name, this tenth
day of January, 1861.
James Brown.
Signed by the above-named James Brown, in the presence of William Stokes,
this 10th day of January, 1861.
Wm. Stokes.
Endorsement of Disharge of Mortgage.
Received from the within-named John Smith, this twelfth day of September,
1881, the sum of Three Hundred Pounds, being in full satisfaction
and discharge of the within obligation.
James Brown, Mortgagee.
Witness— Thomas Styles.
Mortgage to a Building Society.
[South Australia.
Bill of Mortgage.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being a shareholder in the Society known
as the “ East Torrens Land, Building, and Investment Society,”
and being registered as the proprietor of an estate, in fee simple,
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memoranda, endorsed hereon, in that Section of land
situated in the Hundred of Adelaide, County of Adelaide, bounded
as described in certificate of title, vol. 1., folio 63, containing eighty
acres, be the same little more or less, plan of which piece of land is
delineated in aforesaid certificate of title, which said piece of land
is the Country Section numbered 842, delineated in the public
map of the said Hundred, deposited in the office of the Surveyor


t.™ 8 ! ori f inall y granted the fourth day of June
1852, under the hand and seal of Sir Henry Edward Fox Yount*’
Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, to Charles Tomkins’
of Adelaide in consideration of the sum of One Hundred’
Pounds, lent to me by Alfred Johnson, Thomas Stokes and
George Eobinson, the present trustees of the said Society out
a^knnJ^ dS °!i Sai , d Socie ty> thc receipt of which sum I hereby
acknowledge, do hereby covenant with the said present and fnt„Z
S'Kv o,fh S ° CietJ ’ * hat 1 W,U pa}r *° ‘ b » S“X ffg
nf tr &r the perSOn a PP omted to receive the same, the sum
of Two Shillings on every Wednesday in each week, and all sX
hia P to°the nSf and « thel ’ to become due accord-
g othe rules of the said Society upon the said share and unon
ie said principal sum of One Hundred Pounds so advanced
as aforesaid. And also, that I will, during the continuance of the
said Society, observe all the rules and regulations of the said
saTd sLXv ’l”1 la ll nav°off nt °l i PreSent ° r fuhlre trusteeB of th «
of tbc a i « • a P a y sae h balance as according to the rules
Zi h a e J aidSo F ie the said Society in respect of
t e said principal sum of One Hundred Pounds, with all arrears of
subscriptions, fines, and other payments hereby covenanted to h *
S V hC S ,“ id SoCiel *' A " d * «>« taSrS Z ™
“oXTof I ZOT V be mid So ? iet * “■» paymentat the Times
1 ’ such weekly sums and subscriptions, fines interest
Tm ShiK wl we t in W”»“ ° f *»W wS% »um of
Iwo Shillings, and the subscriptions, fines, and interest i „ f i
moneys to become due in respect of he sa d fare and of tL i
Z n l‘o P cf, mm y °r “X Xing’ to the Srt
men? of ll IOUt SerV ‘ DS with an; written demand for par.
°f ®“ ch “0» e y 8 pursuant to the provisions contained in tlfe
33rd section of the Beal Property Law Amendment Art 7ft K «T
compl™ with the other requirement, and proriSXf the aa°d
Act in reference to the power of sale conferred on mortlJers
claiming under any Bill of Mortgage: and save as he^iSf
I— ] > 1 herC o y conflrm unto the present and future trustees™! 1
he said Society all powers and remedies given bv a bill of f
under the Kc.l Property Act. In witSwEo?l
signed my name this fifth day of January, 1859. h cto
J oiin Smith, Mortgagor.
Signed by the above-named John Smith, as mort<*a<*or this um,
January, 1859, in presence of Bobert Lloyd. 005 “ fifth of
[Endorsement to the above ]
Correct for the purpose of registration-A™, Joraot, Tttom, Stokps
George Eobinson, Trustees.
LEASES.
tion of tlio laud, Id'." ‘,i? '", I ? :,, ‘ M to be ™d » do,crip-
forth in the form of le" c 1°’ T° f b «
easc ’ aib0 > the narne ! residence, and trade or calling of


the lessee, the term of years, the amount of rent, and dates on which it is to be
paid. If a right to purchase be covenanted, the amount of the agreed pur-
chase-money and the period within which the right may be exercised must
also be stated.
26. Covenants for quiet enjoynjent, for further assurance, for right of entry
by the lessor to view the state of repair, for re-entry and resumption of posses-
tion by the lessor in case of rent being in arrear for six calendar months, or
in case of default in the fulfilment of any covenant by the lessee continued for
six calendar months, or in case of necessary repairs not being completed within
reasonable time after requirement in writing to that effect served on the lessee;
as also covenants on the part of the lessee for punctual payment of rent, for
payment of rates and taxes during the continuance of the lease, and for keeping
and yielding up the demised premises in good and tenantable repair, are declared
to be implied in leases under the Real Property Act, unless barred or modified
by express words introduced into the form of lease. There is therefore no
occasion for encumbering the instrument with these details.
27. As regards other covenants, prolixity and verbiage may be avoided by
the use of certain brief forms of words, to which specific signification is given
in the Act —
Thus, a covenant to insure may be made binding by the use of four words —
“ that he will insure” which, if introduced in the form of lease, will imply and
include all that is above recited in respect to the like covenants introduced into
a bill of mortgage.
Again, by the introduction of the words “ and shall paint outside every
alternate year,” the tenant may be placed under the obligation “ to paint all
the outside woodwork and ironwork belonging to the hereditaments and
premises mentioned in such lease, with two coats of proper oil-colours, in a
workmanlike manner.”
By the introduction of the words, “ and paint and paper inside, every third
yeqr'” the tenant may be placed under the obligation “to paint the inside
wood, iron,'and other works now or usually painted, with two coats of proper
oil-colour, in a workmanlike manner; and also repaper with paper of a
quality as at present, all such parts of the said premises as are now papered; and
also wash, stop, whiten, or colour such parts of the said premises as are now
whitened or coloured respectively.”
By using the three words, “ and will fence” the tenant may be placed under
obligation “to erect and put up on the boundaries of the land therein men-
tioned, or upon such boundaries upon which no substantial fence now exists, a
good and substantial fence, capable of resisting the trespass of horses, oxen,
bulls, and cows.
The words, “ and will not cut timber,” introduced into the lease will operate
to restrict the tenant from “ cutting down, felling, injuring, or destroying any
growing or living timber or timber-like trees standing and being upon the said
hereditaments and premises above-mentioned, without the consent in writing
of the said lessor.”
The words, “ and will not, without leave, assign or sublet,” introduced into
the lease, will deprive the tenant of the power of “ assigning, transferring, de-
mising, subletting, or setting over, or otherwise by any act or deed procuring
the lands or premises therein-mentioned, or any of them or any part thereof, to
be assigned, transferred, demised, sublet, or set over unto any person whomso-
ever, without the consent in writing of the said lessor first had and obtained.”
The use of these abbreviated forms of words is not compulsory.
28. The covenants above referred to or any other covenants may be introduced
into the lease in any form of words that may, in the judgment of the parties or
of their solicitors, be deemed best adapted for giving effect to the intention,
29. If the covenants declared to be implied are intended to be modified or
it is desired to introduce in any modified form the covenant to insure, or any
other covenant for which an abbreviated form of words is prescribed, or to
express those identical covenants in other words than those prescribed, or to
introduce any additional covenants, parties are advised to engage professional
K


assistance, lest the words they use may fail to give legal effect to their intention,
or may admit of a double or doubtful interpretation, and so give occasion for
litigation.
30. The lease, when filled up, executed, and attested, must be forwarded to
or presented at the Lands Titles Office, in duplicate, together with the grant,
certificate, or other instrument evidencing the title of the lessor, in order that
the particulars may be entered on such instrument of title and recorded in the
register book.
31. The one counterpart, bearing a certificate of the registration under the
hand and seal of the Registrar-General, will be delivered to the lessee, the other
will be filed in the Lands Titles Office, available for examination by the lessor
or others interested.
32. A copy, certified under the hand and seal of the Registrar-General, will
be supplied to the lessor, if required by him, at a cost of from two to five
shillings, according to the length of the instrument.
33. Copies so certified are declared by the 117th section of the Real Property
Act to be “as effectual in evidence, to all intents, as the production of the
original.” Several sections or allotments belonging to the same proprietor may
be included under one lease.
34. The fee for registering a lease is ten shillings; the instrument will be
returned to the parties generally within fifteen minutes after it is presented
at the Lands Titles Office.
Examples are annexed further illustrating the procedure.
Lease of House, with Covenant to Insure and Paint.
(C) [South Austkalia
Lease.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor (certi-
ficate of title vol, 1., folio 180), of an estate in fee simple,
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that piece of land
situated in the City of Adelaide, being part of the Town Acre of land
No. 59, bounded as described in certificate of title aforesaid,
containing one quarter of an acre, be the same a little more or less,
plan of which piece of land is delineated in aforesaid certificate of
title; which said piece of land is the eastern quarter of said acre
No. 59, survey marked A, as delineated in the public map of the
said survey, deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General, which
was originally granted the fourth day of March, 1837, under the
hand and seal of James Hurtle Fisher, Esquire, Resident Commis-
sioner of the said Province, to William Johnson, of Adelaide, do
hereby lease to Thomas Jones, of Adelaide, all the said piece of land,
together with the dwelling-house, outbuildings, and premises erected
thereon, to be held by him, the said Thomas Jones, as tenant,
for the space of five years, at the yearly rental of Fifty Pounds,
payable half-yearly, on the first day of July and first day of January
in each year, from the date hereof; subject to the following cove-
nants, conditions, and restrictions, that is to say—that the said
Thomas Jones shall insure the said premises for the sum of Five
Hundred Pounds at the least; also, that the said Thomas Jones
shall paint the outside of the before-mentioned dwelling-house every
alternate year; and also shall paint and paper the inside of the said
dwelling-house every third year.
1, Thomas Jones, of Adelaide, hereby accept this lease of the above-described


lands to be held by me, as tenant, for the term, and subject to the condi-
tions, restrictions, and covenants above set forth.
Dated this first day of January, 1859.
JonN Smith, Lessor.
Thomas Jones, Lessee.
Signed by the above-named John Smith, as lessor, and by the above named
Thomas Jones, as lessee, this first day of January, 1859, in presence of
Richard Watkins.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration— Thomas Jones.
Lease with Right of Purchase.
(C) [South Australia.
Lease.
I, John Smith, of Adelaide, carpenter, being registered as proprietor (certi-
ficate of title vol. I, folio 210) of an estate in fee simple,
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in that piece of land
situated in the Hundred of Saddleworth, County of Light, bounded
as described in certificate of title aforesaid, containing eighty
acres, be the same a little more or less, plan of which piece of land
is delineated in aforesaid certificate of title, which said piece of land
is the Country Section, marked 285, delineated in the public map
of the said Hundred, deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General,
■s which was originally granted the twelfth day of December, 1852,
under the hand and seal of Sir Henry Edward Fox Young,
Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province, to William Jones, of
Adelaide, do hereby lease to Robert Mundy, of Adelaide, all the
said lands, to be held by him the said Robert Mundy, as tenant,
for the space of ten years, at the yearly rent of Forty Pounds,
payable half-yearly, on first day of March and first day of October,
from the day of date hereof; subject to the following covenants,
conditions, and restrictions, that is to say —that the said Robert
Mundy shall have the right of purchasing the fee simple of the land
hereby leased, at any time within the time hereinafter mentioned,
for the sum of Five Hundred Pounds.
I, Robert Mundy, of Adelaide, do hereby accept this lease of the above-described
lands to be held by me, as tenant, for the term, and subject to the conditions,
restrictions, and eovenants above set forth.
Dated this first day of March, 1858. John Smith, Lessor.
Robert Mundy, Lessee.
Signed by the above-named John Smith, as lessor, and by the above-named
Robert Mundy, as lessee, this first day of March, 1858, in presence of
Thornes James.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration— Robert Mundy.
SETTLEMENTS AND VESTING IN TRUST.
35. The following information is for the guidance of proprietors desiring to
appoint trustees, and of trustees requiring to fill up vacancies by the appoint-
ment of co-trustees j also, to indicate the procedure by which the interests of


beneficiaries may be effectually protected under tbe „ ,
Property Act, such transactions being simple in their nature 3 ° f I' 6 Rml
be conducted by any person of ordinary intelligence d BUCh aS n,ay
36. Parties are referred to their solicitor for the precaution nf tv, i j
Sz. g ,he , '* ture of ttus ' B to
and the nature of the estate or interest which he holds 0, ti ff ’ or ealloift,
be dealt with, describing the same Sher by Sfereit Z„/ >r ° P ? ! | d !°
lease, or other instrument evidencing his title or bv nn “ ’ cei lficafu ’
with diagram, in case the land to hTdeahwitl, consist oTnartmnS deBCrip ‘! 011 >
or of an allotment described and delineated in «,./•>, F ?^ a sec ‘tion,
He will next proceed to glee L name, nlare of ,h»d “ 0 ,\ 0 ‘ ,, f
each trustee, fnd if it of
nated should be kept up, he will express tlmr infpniL l nomi-
form the words “no survivorship ’’ 'Sn tL? ? bj “ sertll) g in the
nomination of t rustees, the Registrar-General cannot withon? , lnserted . on the
Judge of the Supreme Court, give effect to deaWr^' 011 - ° f "
or coutinumg trustees until the original number is filled! g J BUm ™S
88. lhe Supeme Court is empowered to make orders for fiilinn.
m the number of trustees, and for the investment nr „lr U P vacancies
realized upon the trust property application of proceeds
lod^n?. 6 ei”«r“,hlhXSa.n^
wdboutfho consent of the tenant foe life or'olhor h.'n” fleiare!"® J " “ M “ s
infancy or Imaoy.’may lodge’ b ' T
by caveats. P ® lnterests oi incapacitated persons
41. The importance and efficacy of these nrnvisiVma , „
the evidence given before a Commission appointed hw? - ,ud ? ed of fr om
by Mr. Freshfield, Solicitor to the Bank 7 , 6 S° US ° of Coi «mons,
trust property in the funds wi whll ’|
disposal, to the extent of millions annuallv , absolute power of
simple precautionary measures are attended"! ™ Unknown > when these
may be included b in omfora"’"' ‘ he pro P rietor
boS- ,t“g» a ;rs? ,he
« M&s £ tzt ” rrs'Trtfr s r n
- m°To
45. The declaration of the trusts under which the land is to h D v, 11
made either by schedule annexed to the “ nomination of !« b f ° h f, ld ma J he
separate deed. nomination ot trustees” or by a
46. If by separate deed, lands not under the Real Pronertv , .
eluded therein, together with the lands under ♦),« . operf J Att may be in-
nomination of trustees is executed ‘ d ' cd ’ m res P ec t to which the
tb y ieei dnh, ' m -«“
.reefed, “ d "»<*»» by the
of trustees i, .tilling,. T l le
iilice.i minutes after presentation at the l3s iS I^"" ed . witl,i ' 1
nomination of trustees is annexed. e 8 u mct. Example oi a


[SouTn Austealia.
Nomination of Teustees.
I, John Jones being registered as the proprietor of an estate in fee simple
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are
notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in that Section of land
situated in the Hundred of Light, County of Light, bounded as
described in certificate of title, vol. 11., folio 75, containing eighty
acres, be the same more or less, and numbered 49, which said
beet ion of land is delineated in the public map of the said Hundred
deposited in the office of the Surveyor-General, and was originally
granted the tenth day of July, 1850, under the hand and seal of
Sir Henry Edward Eox Young, Lieutenant-Governor of the said
1 rovmce, to James Williams, of Adelaide, do hereby transfer all
my estate or interest m the said land above described, to William
Robinson, of Adelaide, Thomas Jenkins, of the same place, and
Robert Baker, of Mitcham, near Adelaide, as Trustees of the same
under the provisions of the Real Property Act. In witness whereof
hereUnt ° SlgUed my name ’ this fourteenth day of January,
„ John Jones.
William Robinson.
Thomas Je_nkins.
Robebt Bakeb.
in me presence of Edward Morrison.
[Endoesement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration-WiLHAM Robinson, Thos. Jenkins
Robebt Bakeb. ’
POWERS OF ATTORNEY.
9. In filling m the form of power of attorney, the proprietor, after entering
h s name, residence, and trade or calling, is required to describe the nature of
his esiate or interest, whether fee simple or leasehold, &c., &c., giving the same
description of the property as that contained in the existing |rantf certificate
ease, or other instrument of title, or referring to such instrument, and the
volume and folio of the register book for such description.
.. ~e resi dence, and trade or calling of the agent or attorney and
tie extent ot the powers to be entrusted to him must next be stated. Anv
number of sections or allotments may be included in one power of attorney.
°l. e rsori3 residing beyond the limits of the colonv, where the information
necessary for accurate description cannot be had, may Execute a general power
of attorney in the usual form. b p ei
will be issued, upon application at the lands
Titles Office, to proprietors desiring to effect sales in England or the colonies
o 3 Judges notaries public, and the chief officers of Corporations in
England and the colonies are authorized to enter upon the registration-abstract
£ e Particulars respecting dealings with the property, which the Registrar-
Sm! t "o7?Sr p ™vi^ r m 11,6 reSiSta boot “ 11,0 ““ 0‘
ot altor " ej is ten andfOT
Examples of a power of attorney and of a registration abstract are annexed.
[South Austealia.
POWEE OF AtTOBNEY.
J, Richard Stokes of Adelaide, gentleman, being seised of an estate in fee simple
subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests as are


notified by memorandum endorsed hereon, in those pieces of land,
described in the Schedule hereto annexed, and bounded as
described in land grants, vol. L, folios 44, 102, and 215, containing
two hundred and fifty-eight acres, be the same a little more
or less, do hereby appoint Thomas Robinson, of Adelaide, attorney
on my behalf, to sell, lease, or mortgage the lands described in
aforesaid Schedule, subject, nevertheless, to the restrictions and
limitations declared and set forth at the foot hereof, and to execute
all such instruments, and do all such acts, matters, and things, as
may be necessary for carrying out the powers hereby given, and for
the recovery of all rents and sums of money that may become or
are now due or owing to me in respect of the said lands, and for the
enforcement of all contracts, covenants, or conditions binding upon
any lessee or occupier of the said lands, or upon any other person
in respect of the same, and for the taking and maintaining possession
of the said lands, and for protecting the same from waste, damage,
or trespass :
I declare the above lands shall not be sold for less than One Thousand Pounds,
or unless upon the following conditions, that is to say —that not
less than one-half of purchase-money shall be paid on execution
of memorandum of sale.
I declare the amount of money to be raised by mortgage on the security of
the said lands under this power shall not exceed Five Hundred
Pounds, or be less than Two Hundred Pounds, and that the rate
of interest at which the same is raised shall not exceed Ten Pounds
for every One Hundred Pounds by the year.
I declare the above land shall not be leased for any term of years exceeding
twenty-one, or at a less rent than Ten Shillings per acre, or unless
subject to the following covenants and restrictions, that is to say —
that right of purchase may be granted at any time during the
continuance of lease, at not less than Three Pounds per acre.
I declare that this power shall not be exercised after the expiration of two
years from the date hereof.
Schedule.
No. of Section.
Hundred.
Area.
No. of entry in Register Book.
2945
Maude field
One hundred and eighty acres
Vol. I., fol'o 44.
145
Kapunda
Eighty-three acres
Voi. I., folio 102.
2940
Macclesfield
Sixty-seven acres
Vol. I., folio 215.
In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my nauio this tenth day of
January, 1859.
Richard Stokes.
Signed by the above-named Richard Stokes, 1
this tenth day of January, 1859, in pre- V
sence of John J ones. )
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration.—Tnos. Robinson.
(H) [South Australia.
Registration Abstract.
I, James Richards, of .Adelaide, gentleman, being seised of an estate in fee
simple, subject, however, to such encumbrances, liens, and interests


as are notified by memoranda endorsed hereon, in those pieces of
land situated in the Hundred of Willunga, County of Adelaide,
bounded as described in certificate of title, vol. 1., folios 51, 82,
and 94, containing two hundred and forty acres, be the same a
little more or less, plans of which pieces of land are delineated
in aforesaid certificates of title, which said pieces of land are the
Country Sections marked 210, 420, and 595, delineated in the
public map of the said Hundred deposited in the office of the Sur-
veyor-General, which which were originally granted the eighth day
of February, 1858, under the hand and seal of Sir Richard Graves
Mac Donnell, Governor-in-Chief of the said Province, to Thomas
Roberts, of Adelaide, request that a registration abstract of my title
to the said lands may be granted, enabling me to sell, lease, or
otherwise deal with the same at places without the limits of the said
Province.
To the Registrar-General. James Richards.
Signed by the above named James Richards, this fourth day of October, 1858,
in presence of John Jone 3.
I, Robert Richard Torrens, Registrar-General of the Province of South Aus-
tralia, do hereby certify that the above particulars relating to the
above described land, and to the estate and interest therein of James
Richards, whose signature is above subscribed, are correct, as appears
by entries recorded in the register book of the said Province, folios
51, 82, 94, vol. I.: Pursuant, therefore, to the above application,
and by virtue of powers in me vested by Act of the Legislature of
s the said Province, intituled “ The Real Property Act,” this regis-
tration abstract is issued for the purpose of enabling the said James
Richards to deal with the said lands at places without the limits of
the said Province.
This abstract shall continue in force from the date thereof to the first day of
February, 1860, unless sooner delivered up.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto signed my name and append my seal this
first day of February, 1859.
Robt. R. Torrens, Registrar-General.
Signed, sealed, and delivered, the first day of February, 1859, in the presence
of Thomas Johnson.
CAVEATS.
55. Caveats are of two sorts —First, adverse caveats, forbidding the bringing
of land under the Act, or in the case of transmission consequentup on the death
of a former proprietor forbidding the issue of certificate to, or the registration
of dealing by the party claiming under will or letters of administration. These
can only be lodged within the time for that purpose limited in the advertisement
notifying the claim; and some proceeding at law must be commenced by the
caveator to establish his cliam within three months from the date of lodging
the caveat, else it will be deemed to have lapsed.
56. Secondly, caveats not adverse, but merely to ensure to beneficiaries under
deeds of settlement such timely notice of intended dealings by the trusteos
as may afford them opportunity for looking after the proceeds, or for the pro-
tection of parties pending the completion of contracts for mortgage or sale.
57. The fee for registering a caveat is ten shillings. Examples for illus-
atirton are annexed.


(L)
Caveat.
Take notice that I, Robert Smith, of Adelaide, gentleman, claiming estate or
interest, as devisee, under the will of Thomas Smith, deceased, in
lands described as part of Town Acre 456, Survey A, in notice dated
the tenth day of January, 1859, advertising the same as land in
respect to which claim has been made to have the same brought
under the operation of Act of Council, No 15 of 1858, intituled the
Real Property Act, do hereby forbid the bringing of the said lands
under the operation of the said Act. Dated this twenty-eighth day
of January, 1859.
Robert Smith.
Signed in my presence, this twenty-eighth day of January, 1859, at Adelaide,
William Jackson, J.P.
To the Registrar-General of the Province of South Australia.
(P)
Caveat forbidding- Registration of Contract for dealing with estate
or interest in futuro.
To the Registrar-General of South Australia—
Take notice that I, Thomas Jones, of Adelaide, gentleman, claiming estate or
interest as beneficially entitled under deed of settlement, dated
second day of November, 1858, in all that Section of land No. 59,
in Hundred ofWillunga, County of Adelaide, forbid the registration
of any memorandum of sale, or other instrument, made, signed, or
executed by John Smith, Robert Robinson, ar.d Henry Jackson, the
Trustees appointed by instrument of nomination, dated fourteenth
October, 1858, affecting the said land, until this caveat be by me, or
by the order of the Supreme Court, or some Judge thereof, with-
drawn. Dated this third day of January, 1859.
Thomas Jones.
Signed in my presence, this third day of January, 1859.
Fred. Thompson, J.P.
[Endorsement to the above.]
Correct for the purpose of registration.—Thomas Jones.




