

TtiLE
CONSTITUTIONS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
FRANCIS PETER LABILLIERE,
EA KRISTER-AT-I.AW,
A Paper read at a Meeting of the Boyal Colonial Institute,
on the 21 st February , 1870.
LONDON:
1872.


THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES.
The material growth of new communities sets up many landmarks
whereby we may note progress made. The old colonist has only to
visit or call to mind the scenes with which he is familiar, and think
of what they are and what they were. The hush camp, the hut
village, the rising town, the populous and civilised city, are all
associated with his recollections of the particular locality. He
wants no other evidence of progress.
The Englishman, too, who has stayed at homs, has his way of
noting colonial development. He can remember when he knew the
colony only by name, or before it had a name for him to know it by.
He now has the reality of its existence every day forced upon him,
by the place which it occupies in the commercial relations of this
country. He can point to statistics, and show how its population,
its revenue and expenditure, its exports and imports, have risen
fi’om hundreds to hundreds of thousands of pounds. He, too, asks
for no further evidence of progress.
It is not therefore with a view of adducing evidence of the progress
of the Australian colonies that I now venture to trace their con-
stitutional development —although no evidence can be stronger; but
I think it well to look away from the features of colonial progress
which ordinarily attract attention to those which are too much
overlooked —from the population, revenue, and trade returns, to the
consideration of those laws and institutions which must have such
an important present bearing upon the political, social, and moral
wellbeing of these young communities, and which, to such a con-
siderable extent, must mould the character and influence the
destinies of a future great nation. In many circles a question of
constitutional law, like this, would be deemed dry and uninteresting;
but 1 feel I need offer no apology to the Colonial Society for bringing
it forward, being assured that here the intrinsic value and impor-
tance of a question are its chief source of interest and recommendation,
and that I shall better please by introducing an instructive subject
rather than one only entertaining.


Until twenty-seven years ago representative institutions were
unknown in Australia. New South Wales, the chief colony, which
included such portions' of Victoria and Queensland —names then un-
applied to Australia—as were occupied, was ruled by a Governor with
a Legislative Council of fifteen members, nominated by the Crown
under 9 Geo. 4, c. 83. As to the other colonies, of South Australia,
Tasmania, and the small settlement of Western Australia, the first
was provided with a council consisting of the governor and seven
other members, by 5& 6 Viet. c. 61; for Tasmania the 9 Geo. 4,
c. 83, also provided a Legislative Council like that of New South
Wales; and for Western Australia it was enacted, by the 10 Geo. 4,
c. 22, that “ any three or more persons resident and being within the
settlement” might be empowered by His Majesty “to make, ordain,
and establish laws,” &c., “ for the peace, order, and good government
of His Majesty’s subjects and others within the said settlement.”
Twenty-seven years ago representative institutions first appeared
in Australia, and then only in a very diluted form. By the 5 & 6
Viet. c. 76, which received the Eoyal Assent on the 30th of July,
1842, and came into operation in the colony in the following year, a
Legislative Council was established in New South Wales, composed
of thirty-six members, twenty-four of whom were elective, six of
the remaining being official and six non-official nominees appointed
by the Governor. The Port Phillip District, now the colony of
Victoria, returned six of the elective members. The qualification
for members was freehold property of the clear value of 2000 Z. or
clear annual value of 100 Z., and for electors of 200 1, or 20Z. a year.
This semblance of a Parliament was only possessed by New South
Wales. About the time of its inauguration the question of separa-
tion from that colony began to be seriously agitated in Port Phillip.
Meetings were held in Melbourne, petitions forwarded to the Queen,
and the six members did what they could in the Council in Sydney
to effect the desired object. These efforts were for a time fruitless.
The Melbourne people, desiring to proclaim conspicuously how
little they valued representation in the New South Wales Legisla-
tive Council, resolved to elect a member who could not take his seat,
so they fixed upon the Secretary for the Colonies; and, it having
been arranged that no other candidate should be brought forward,
Earl Grey was proposed, seconded, and, with due gravity, declared
from the hustings duly elected member for the city of Melbourne
to serve in the Legislative Council of New South Wales.
The desired change was at length effected by an Act of the
Imperial Parliament, 13 & 14 Viet. c. 59: “An Act for the Better
Government of the Austialian Colonics, which became law on the


6th of August, 1850. A Legislative Council similar to that of New
South Wales was provided by this Act for the new colony of
Victoria, the old joint Council being empowered to arrange the
electoral districts and the number of members. The existing
Councils in South Australia and Tasmania were authorized to
establish legislatures containing twenty-four members in these
colonies, similar to those of New South Wales and Victoria. The
Governor and his Executive in Western Australia were, on petition of
one-third of the householders in the settlement, also empowered to
establish a Legislative Council. This was not done at the time,
and up to the present period nothing remains to be recorded of the
constitutional progress of that colony but the fact that it now
possesses a Legislative Council of official non-elective members,
and six elective members. The Act reduced the qualification for
electors in respect of freeholds from 200 1, to 100 Z. in clear value,
and from 201. to 10Z. annual value. It gave votes to 10Z. lease-
holders with three years to run, and to holders of pastoral licences,
and provided that one-third of the members of the Council should
be nominated by the Crown.
Thus, in 1851, the four leading colonies in Australia had similar
legislatures. Victoria was formally established as a separate colony
on the Ist of July, the elections for its first legislature took place
shortly afterwards, and it met on the 11th of November. In the
meantime, however, the magic influence of gold had begun to effect
a mighty transformation in the new community; in a few weeks
Ballarat had attracted to its previous solitudes busy thousands, and
Mount Alexander had become its rival. 4he new legislatuie found
on meeting that it had to deal with vast questions and important
interests, little anticipated at the time of its election. Although it
soon increased its thirty members, it did not give representatives to
the goldfields until 1855, after the Ballarat riots.
It was soon felt that the colonies had outgrown these primitive
Legislative Councils. The proposal to form new constitutions came
from Sir John Bakington, Secretary for the Colonies in the late
Earl Derby’s first ministry, who, in despatches of the 15th of De-
cember, 1852, to the Governors of New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, and Tasmania, invited the Legislative Councils to
exercise the powers conferred on them by the 13 & 14 Viet. c. 69,
and frame institutions better adapted for their respective colonies.
Accordingly, the constitutions which we shall now consider were
adopted, and received the sanction of the Imperial Government,
The Constitution Act of New South Wales, the 18 & 19 Viet. c. 54,
in the Imperial Statute Book, established a Legislative Council, —the


name in all the colonies of the Upper Chamber, —and a Legislative
Assembly, the former containing twenty-one members, summoned by
the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council. The seats
of the first members were to be held for only five years, but of all
future members for life, unless vacated by resignation, absence, bank-
ruptcy, or other acts specified; four-fifths not to hold any office or
emolument from the Government. The Assembly, containing fifty-
four members, to be elected for five years, by freeholders in pos-
session of 100 Z. clear value, 10Z. householders, and 10Z. leaseholders
in possession, or to hold for three years, holders of licenses to de-
pasture on Crown lands, possessors of salaries of 100 Z. a year, persons
paying 40Z. a year for board and lodging, or 10Z, a year for lodging
only. No qualification is required for members of the Assembly,
except possession of a vote in some constituency in the colony.
Except five responsible ministers, no Government official can be
elected to the Assembly.
The Constitution Act of Victoria, framed by the old Legislative
Council of the Colony (18 & 19 Viet. c. 65), stands next to that of
New South Wales among the Acts of the Imperial Parliament. It
received the Royal Assent on the 16th of July, 1855. It esta-
blished two Houses: the Council, to consist of thirty members, to
be elected by six electoral provinces; one member for each retiring
every two years, so that the Chamber, which cannot be dissolved,
may completely change its members in ten years. Each member
to be thirty years old, and to have a freehold worth 5000 Z., or 500 Z.
a year. Votes are bestowed upon persons residing in the colony
for a year, and possessed for the same period of freehold estate
worth 1000 Z. or 100 Z. a year, or leasehold with reserved rent of 100 Z.,
or 100 Z, clear annual value for a term of five years; upon graduates
of any university in the British dominions; upon barristers, soli-
citors, qualified medical practitioners, officiating ministers of all de-
nominations, and retired military or naval officers. The Assembly,
composed of sixty members, freeholders of 2000 Z. value, or 200 Z, a
year, to be elected by freeholders in possession of property worth
50Z. or 51. a year, by 10Z. leaseholders, owners of premises of the
same value, lessees of Crown lands for a year, possessors of salaries
of 100 Z. a year. Qualifications to be held for six months; the
Assembly to exist five years. No responsible ministry can meet the
Assembly unless four of its members are returned to it.
In South Australia a constitution was passed with an Upper
House, nominated like that of New South Wales, and with very
similar qualifications for the Lower House to those provided by the
constitution of that colony. Strong dissatisfaction having been


expressed in South Australia with this constitution, and the Queen
having been petitioned not to sanction it, it was remitted hack for
the reconsideration of the Legislative Council, which, after a
general election, substituted for it the present constitution of the
colony. The Legislative Council, which cannot be dissolved, con-
sists of eighteen members, six of whom retire every four years.
The whole colony forms one constituency; members must have
attained the age of thirty years, and have resided three years in the
colony ; the electors must be persons of twenty-one years, registered
for six months in respect of freehold estate of 50 1, annual value,
leasehold of 20 1, annual value, or occupation of dwelling-house of 25/.
The Legislative Assembly of thirty-six members is elected for three
years; every British subject of full age, and registered on the
electoral roll of any district, is entitled to vote.
In Tasmania the Legislative Council consists of fifteen members,
representing twelve districts. Members must be thirty years of
age, and are elected for six years. While seven seats are filled the
House can discharge its functions. The property, qualification for
electors is freehold estate of 50 1, annual value ; barristers, graduates,
ministers of religion, officers of the army and navy, have also votes.
The Assembly of thirty members is elected for five years. The
electors are freeholders of property worth 100/., or householders of
10/. annual value, barristers, solicitors, medical practitioners, and
ministers of religion.
The Constitution of Queensland is the same as that which we have
seen was conferred on New South Wales. By the Constitution Act
of the latter colony it is provided that the Queen may, by letters-
patent, erect colonies out of the territory of New South Wales, and
“ make provision for the government of any such colony, and for
the establishment of a legislature therein in manner as nearly re-
sembling the form of government which should be at such time
established in New South Wales as the circumstances of the colony
will allow.” Letters-patent, and an Order in Council of the 6th of
June, 1859, provided for the establishment of Queensland as a
colony. In pursuance of the Order in Council, the Governor of New
South Wales issued a proclamation defining its constitution to be
the same as the new constitution of New South Wales, provided by
the 18 &19 Yict. c. 54. The legality of thus giving to Queensland
the original constitution of the parent colony, without the altera-
tion which had been made in it by the adoption of manhood suffrage,
having been questioned, an Act of the Imperial Parliament (24 & 25
Yict, c. 44), was passed to remove any doubts respecting what had
been done.


Ministerial responsibility was introduced into all the colonies
with the new constitutions, and vote by ballot either shortly before
or not long afterwards.
The powers of both Houses in all the colonies as to money-bills
are the same as those of the Lords and Commons in England. It
only remains to be mentioned, that in Victoria the first Parliament
met on the 21st of November, 1856, and in its first session altered
the new constitution by abolishing the property qualification for
members of the Assembly, and by introducing registered manhood
suffrage. The duration of the Assembly has been fixed at three
years, and the number of its members increased to seventy-eight.
In 1868 the property qualifications for both members and electors
of the Legislative Council were one-half the value
required under the Constitution Act. New South Wales was not
long in adopting universal suffrage. The number of members of
the Council is now twenty-seven, and of the Assembly seventy-two.
In both colonies, however, it is provided that persons iron-resident
in electoral districts shall have votes in them if possessed of any
of the property qualifications specified in the Constitution Acts.
Whatever may be the merits or demerits of universal suffrage—and
this is not the place to discuss them —its adoption in Victoria and
New South Wales, so soon after the introduction of the new consti-
tutions, prevented them from receiving that fair trial to which they
were entitled. Placing, as they did, the franchise within easy reach
of every man possessed of the least industry and steadiness, it would
surely have been wise to have left them unchanged for a few years,
so as to have proved them by practical experience.
To pass from the mere recital of the principal provisions of the
Constitution Acts of the five self-governing Australian colonies, to
consider some of the most striking characteristics of these enact-
ments —it will be observed that universal suffrage does not exist
in Tasmania or Queensland, The most marked feature of difference,
however, between the constitutions of Australia is in the compo-
sition of the Upper Chambers, the members of Legislative Councils
in New South Wales and Queensland being appointed for life by
the Governors, and in Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania,
being elected for several years by voters with high qualifica-
tions.
We shall by practical experience be able to ascertain which of
these two systems more fairly distributes political power among the
different classes in the community; which, with democratic popular
assemblies, secures the larger amount of legitimate influence to the
classes possessed of property and education. It may be thought that


an Upper House of life-members is more likely to attain this object,
and to prove more powerful than a Chamber chosen by election.
The former must, however, eventually merely reflect the views of
the popular branch of the Legislature. Should the Assembly become
democratic, or decidedly take up any particular line of policy for a
few years, the Council must sooner or later hold the same opinons,
because the Governor’s ministers being taken from the majority
of the popular Chamber, he will be obliged to act under their
advice in filling up every vacancy occurring in the Upper House,
which will thus practically be elected by the Lower. A democratic
Assembly will, therefore, ultimately create a democratic Council.
This will appear a perfection to those who think the will of the
Assembly should be supreme in all matters of importance ; but will
be considered a disadvantage by those who hold that political power
should be more evenly divided between the different interests which
two Houses are designed to represent. On the other hand, an
elective Upper House is a substantial, independent power in the
State; it has to fear no creation of new members* such as might
take place in England ; its influence cannot be impaired gradually
by the Executive filling up vacancies. With a constituency at its
back of the most wealthy and intelligent portion of the community,
it may make a stand where neither the Upper House in England,
nor in New South Wales, nor in Queensland, could venture to do so.
In Victoria the strength of such an Upper House has, within the
last three or four years, been severely put to the proof. Rightly
or wrongly, the Legislative Council refused to pass Appropriation
Bills to which, it contended, certain votes were improperly tacked.
For months on both occasions the Council held out, and in the end
the line of action it opposed' was not carried out. Democrats may
denounce such a body as a fertile source of obstruction to the popu-
lar will, and, pointing to the two “ dead-locks,” attribute the evils
of the stoppage of supplies to the power of the Council; men of
property may rejoice that the House in which they are represented
has proved itself to have a real voice in the government of the
colony; and men of moderation and fairness in both Houses will see in
the struggles that have taken place reason for the exercise of tact and
conciliation by both Houses, and for abstaining from any course that
might strain the constitution. Thus the recent disagreement must
have done good if it have led the Victorians to a more thorough
acquaintance with their constitution, and with the functions and
powers of its constituent parts. Bills have frequently been rejected
by the Council, and either not persisted in or modified by the
Assembly ; and only on the two questions referred to, arising out of


the same subject-matter of dispute, has there been a “ dead-lock. ’
There is, therefore, every reason to hope that both Houses in
Victoria will henceforth work harmoniously together, especially
since the reduction in the qualifications for the Council has modified
the disparity between them.
Let us look, for a moment, to the system of responsible ministries
in Australia. It was said at one time, with more pleasantry than
accuracy, that a ministerial crisis was the normal condition of the
political world at the Antipodes. At first there were, certainly, in
all the colonies many ministerial changes, naturally arising from the
new state of things and from the absence of clearly defined political
parties. This is no longer the case. The late Premier of Victoria,
Sir James M’Culloch, held office as long as most Prime Ministers in
England since Lord Liverpool. Under universal suffrage, where the
dead-weight of numbers bears down the balance of political power,
there is but little space for an opposition in the popular chamber, so
that a minister may calculate on remaining in power for some time.
We can easily see how it would have been had responsible ministries
existed in the United States. During the presidencies of Pierce
and Buchanan, ministries of the Southern or Democratic party
would have had a long tenure of office, and since the first election of
President Lincoln the Republican party would have had a monopoly
of power.
The adaptation of the constitution of the mother-country to
the circumstances of her young colonies has been effected with,
perhaps, as few alterations as could have been expected. In New
South Wales, the proposal to establish a House of Peers, like that of
England, was made, and received powerful support. In the con-
struction of the Upper Chambers the chief dissimilarity between the
constitutions of Old England and her children appears; but allowing
for this, and for the fact that the franchise is much wider in the
colonies, a strong family likeness is still observable. r lhe rules and
procedure of the colonial legislatures follow, as closely as possible,
the practice of the Imperial Parliament; whenever questions of
constitutional law or parliamentary privilege arise, its precedents
are searched and its usages followed as infallible authorities. So
frequently have they been appealed to in Australia, within recent
years, that the people there are probably more familiar with them
than those in this country.
To set up his household gods in his new home in a strange land
was considered the duty of the pious in ancient times. To set up
both his religion and his free institutions, in whatever quarter
of the globe he becomes a colonist, is- the more sacred duty and


privilege of the Englishman. His countrymen at home should look
with the deepest interest upon his success.
I venture to bring forward this subject, feeling that it is of the
highest importance that everything connected with the colonies
should be more fully discussed and more generally understood in
England; for the better England and her colonies are acquainted
with each other, the stronger must be their attachment. The colonies,
perhaps, feel more warmly towards England than England feels
towards them, because they know her much better than she knows
them. It is of the utmost importance that the institutions of the
colonies should be more thoroughly understood in this country,
especially as these young communities are rapidly passing away
from infancy, and the time will be upon us, sooner perhaps than we
at present imagine, when it will be necessary to determine upon
what footing their relations with the mother-country must perma-
nently subsist. One great conclusion I desire to draw from the
discussion of every colonial question, is the demonstration of the fact
that the union of mother-country and colonies can be made, and
ought to become, indissoluble. I see nothing in the freest action
of the free institutions of the self-governing colonies inconsistent
with the maintenance of such a union.
I have endeavoured to sketch the systems of self-government
recently established in Australia. Time would not permit me to
enter further into details, or to deal largely in speculations as to the
future. It cannot but be profitable to observe the features of resem-
blance, and of dissimilarity, between these young kindred constitu-
tions compared with each other, and compared with the grand old
parent constitution from which they have sprung; to watch the
shape which the offshoots from the parent tree, which has stood so
many ages, are assuming in a different land. The British Constitu-
tion has been the gradual growth of centuries. It has been moulded
and adapted to the circumstances of the times in which we live ; and,
being moulded and adapted to the circumstances of the times that
are to come, will, I trust, continue to many generations the benefits
of wise and just laws, of perfect freedom and order. The constitu-
tions of the Australian colonies, taken from this ancient constitution
—transplanted from this nursery-ground of free institutions—have
just struck firm root in a new soil. Though in some respects we
might wish they were different, though we may regret the adoption
of some policies to which they have led, we must remember what in
a few years they have effected—the creative and organising power
they have put forth in a land where everything had to be created
and organised—the success with which they have grappled and


solved the problem of providing good laws and regulations for the
goldfields—the enlightened liberality with which they have made
provision for the education of all classes —the liberty, law, and
order which under them exist in the Colonies. The ancient consti-
tution of these kingdoms has passed through terrible ordeals ; but
its course has been safely steered through the political storms, the
mistakes, the passions, the crimes of the past, to the tranquillity of
the present. With the experience of this and other nations to
guide and to warn them, we may reasonably hope that these young
colonies will, in the more enlightened and civilised times upon
which we have entered, so steer their constitutions through the
errors and difficulties that are before them, that one or two hundred
millions of future Australians may inherit Ihe blessings of liberty
and order. Her ancient constitution has accomplished the great
work of providing England with good government; her new con-
stitutions ought, with less difficulty, to accomplish the same work
for Australia. They have as high and as important functions
to discharge as ever were discharged by the parent constitution.
Let us wish them even greater success ; but should they only succeed
as well, they will secure the admiration of the civilised world!


f I&G I
H CO
LONDON :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.
