

f"
.
n
*
%
a
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
THE FINAL
OBJECTIVE
A Souvenir
Of the Voyage from England to Australia
H.M.A.T. TAKADA


""T
'
■
!
j
.
'
i * * ' -|
■
'
' I
»
]
:;
.
. .
i
I
'
.
; . • i
.
kl


AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
ftnaf <D6jecftt>e
Being a Souvenir of tke Voyage
from England to Australia
H.M.A.T. TAKADA
Xmas, 1918 February-, 1919
Published by permission of Lieutenant-Coionel G. Coulter, D.5.0., O.C. Troops
Edited by Staff-Sergt. R.M. MAZENGARB, M.IVI.
CHERISHED AT HOME
WRITTEN AT SEA
PRINTED IN ADELAIDE
FoßE\v o R D .
[By LIEUT.-COLONEL G. COULTER, D.5.0.,
O.C. Troops.]
The Editor does not claim for this Magazine
high literary merit, but I feel sure that in years
to come it will recall with pleasant thoughts
the "last lap" of the four years' big contest,
in which we have every reason to feel proud ol
the great doings of our boys from Australia.
The dangers and hardships which you have
been.through will, I hope, have forged a bond of
comradeship which will stand a heavy strain,
particularly to those who have lost health and
limbs and' are thus placed on an inequality in
the battle of life.
These men mint not suffer on account of their
handicap.
The voyage is long and becoming monotonous,
but I think it shows plainly the irksomeness of
idleness. Therefore it has its moral.
We are nearing "THE COUNTRY."
May your experiences abroad be for the benefit
of Australia, and may the future years be
flourishing and full of happiness.
COLOMBO,
21ST JANUARY, 1919.
EDITORIAL.
: Tis not for me to say much ;an Editor is
merely a man who holds the power to say yea
or nay to any material brought before him for
publication. He is in a unique position-
somewhat like a C.O. —no work to do ! At
least, most aspiring journalists think so. The
short time at one's disposal—the uncertainty
of what material is forthcoming—the ignorance
of matters in regard to printing at unknown
ports all combine against one—just giving the
Editor a worse feeling than his first hop over
the bags ; still the digger, though critical, is
kind ; and I trust he'll make allowances for us
all, knowing that carrying a rifle makes it very
hard to wield a pen. In London an Editor of
a magazine collects his issue nigh on six months
ahead ; with less than a fortnight before pub-
lication and no copy on hand —well, the per-
petrators merely offer up a silent prayer 1o come
through with as few , scars as possible, and a
hope that few curses will come from the readers
of "The Final Objective."
May you all in after years read with pleasure
this attempt at rapid journalism, and remember
the days of our return to dear old Aussie and
our dear ones at home.
—TIIE EDITOR


LOOKING FORWARD
Why this joy and jubilation,
Exultant notes from everywhere ?
Bands and songs in adoration
Triumphant ring throughout the air ?
Joyous tidings now have reached us
Of the fall of Earth's great foe ;
He who planned dominion o'er us
Finds that now his throne must go.
Ho w he clamored for possession—
Peoples, towns, and Empires all.
Till, he finds in quick succession
All his schemes to earth must fall.
Tit.-n in sudden sad dilemma,
Filled at heart with bitter hate
Mess away bedeck'd with armor
Into Holland's neutral State.
There he waits the Allies' verdict,
Who shall render him his due
With that chivalrous, manly instinct
That his person never knew.
In the meantime do not tarry,
There is much that we can do—
Help each other's lot to carry,
See our brother safely through.
For these years of war have taught us
Not to flinch at Duty's call;
Pressing on to triumphs glorious,
Thus attaining "Peace for All."
Let us bring the lesson nearer
To our neighbor at our side ;
He is wanting help still further
For h s future to provide.
There are wrongs which must be righted,
There are claims on ev'rv hand ;
We must see true Justice sighted,
For the honor of our land.
Widows' cares and orphan children,
ITnemploy'd there must not be ;
We must lift another's burden,
Thus proclaiming Liberty.
Lessons all this war has taught us ;
These must never be o'erthrown ;
Rather make us more industrious
For that life of higher tone.
—s. w. w.
All that a woman takes from her foot is
added to her tongue.— Chinese proverb.
NIL DESPERANDUM.
Having been asked to contribute something
to this souvenir of the s.s. "Takada," 1 decided
that I would try and arouse interest in a subject
that would be of interest to all ; consequently
my little talk is based on "The Future—What of
it 1" from the soldier's standpoint. Let me
say first ot all, that I realise the subject to be a
very wile one—one that can be looked into
from many points of view ; but my idea here is
not to go into all the "pros and cons" so much as
to lead, up to a few thoughts that may prove
helpful in later time.
I think that all will agree with me when I say
that the four years of war through which we
have come triumphantly have had a broadening
effect upon all minds—so much so, that indi-
vidually, as a community, and as a nation the
outlook upon life has changed, and I think we
may gladly say, for the better.
What has brought about this change ? I
think we find it in "self-sacrifice.", This spirit
was manifest right from the commencement ;
from the time of enlistment, through the scenes
of Gallipoli and the battlefields of France, in the
line and out of it. At the same time, this
spirit has found, its way into the hearts of our
people and Government at home. Institutions
and organisations sprang into being to help in
c miforts and other ways to make the sons of
Australia realise that they were not forgotten
overseas. Now the ravage of war has ceased,
men are returning home, some, unfortunately,
crippled, others bearing marks as the result oi
the aggressors' weapon, whilst many feel weak-
ened after the strain and turmoil of conflict.
Thus many men are incapacitated as far as
following up their previous means of livelihood.
One hears the question asked by cobber to
cobber : "What are yon going to do when you.
get back to civil life !" Some, fortunately,
have positions to go to, which from a physical
standpoint they will be safely able again to take
up ; but many, alas ! are less fortunate ; con-
sequently the reply to the above enquiry is a
candid "I don't know," very often combined
with "I know I shall not be able to carry on with
the same job that 1 left."
Now, what is to be done in the case of such
need ? Fortunately, the Governments of the
different States are in a position to offer help
to those in need. Offers of land for agricultural
enterprise, poultry farming, and industries in
which disabled men may make their livelihood ;
but, apart from outside help, I am convinced that
the main part rests with the individual—
"What am I going to do with my future ?"
and I think each one of us ought to face the
matter fairly and squarely, not allowing the


thought of disablement, though felt, to master
our ambitious outlook. It is for each of us to
make the best of life, and this can only be realised
by giving of our best. Many .will have to leave
the old fields of employment and embark on
pastures new ; the industrial worker will be-
come an agriculturist, the penman will become
absorbed in poultry-farming, and so on. This, if
properly entered into, will have the effect of
opening up new channels of resourcefulness in
our lives of which we never before dreamt.
My main desire in thus writing is to create
within the heart 01 every reader the feeling
that what ever occupation in life he may be
called upon to follow, to put his whole heart
and soul into it, as all honest labor is worthy of.
Australia is the land of opportunities. T here is
room for every honest man with a determination
to get on, not minding what odds or obstacles
may be in the way. Difficulties vanish before
determined men, and that is the one thought
that as a cobber I want to leave with ail of you.
—-S. w. w.
THE REVELATIONS OF SIMPLICISSIMUS.
Arid it came to pass that on the twenty-fifth
day of the twelfth month of the year nineteen
hundred and eighteen a certain number of men
of the Digger tribe, whose fame as warriors was
known throughout all lands, embarked on the
good ship "Takada" bound for their homes
far across the seas.
Now the voyage was long, and the men waxed
sore impatient for the time when they should
reach their first port of call, known a§ Colombo,
in the island of Ceylon.
Now at this time there raged in many countries
a disease of the tribe of the Dogs, and those who
dwelt in high places sent forth a messenger,
saying, "If thou goest to these lands, thQu shall
be sorely punished when thou readiest thirie
own country," and the men of the Digger tribe
were sore distressed, for they knew not what to
do. Then up spake a Digger and saith to his
brethren, " Why art thou distressed t For I
have a. mystic sheet which will turn thy wheel
barrows into motor cars." And he, straightway
placed on the deck a piece of canvas which was
square, and cried with a loud voice, "W hat has
the old Sergeant-Major done !" And there was
great rejoicing. And it came to pass that cer-
tain wise Diggers, when they saw the success of
the piece of canvas that was square, spake, one
with another, and soon there were many pieces
of canvas which were square placed on the deck,
and there was a very great noise ; so that those
who dwelt in high places cried out, "It is not
lawful to turn wheel-barrows into motor cars."
And there was much weeping and gnashing of*
teeth. Then those who sat in high places said
one to another, "ft is not good that there it no-
rejoicing." So they placed a number of medi-
cine men at certain parts OT the ship, each hold
ing a pitcher full of a liquid which was pink.
And it came to pass that each day before the
sun was at its height-each man received his
portion of the liquid which was pink, and there-
was much competition amongst the men in the
making of strange noises. And there was great
rejoicing, and the men were content.
Here ondeth the revelations of Simplicissimns.
—A. F. B. S.
A SOLDIER'S DIABT.
War's Declaration,
And other things that follow, in rotation :
Proclamation,
Desperation,
Protestation,
Acclamation.
Attestation,
Expectation,
Detestation,
Vaccination.
Irritation,
Inoculation,
Preparation,
Embarkation,
Realisation,
Annihilation,
with
Salvation,
Operation,
Amputation,
Incineration,
Thanks to the Kaiser and his Damnation.
AUSTRALIAN WAR MUSEUMS.
The Museums are fairly well known to all on
board. .Most of yon have given souvenirs and
war relies while with your units. When turn-
ing out your lcitbags before you put them in
their final "possie." remember and set a.-ide
anything which will be of interest to the future
generations of Australia. Any article given by
you will have your name attached, and so you
will be placing an irrefutable and lasting re Gy-
ration of your share in the greatest ol wars.
Many photos have been taken on boaid.
These, together with any others of interest
from an A.I.E. viewpoint (films preferred) a: d
trophies should be sent to the Officer in Charge,
Australian War Records Section, c/o Depart-
ment of Defence, Melbourne.
Men meet together to converse, women to be


LITTLE WILLIE.
Wee Willie is a sailor bold
From India's coral strand ;
He daily goes about his task
His bright tin in his hand.
His task begins at early morn,
It lasts until the night ;
And when his daily round is done,
The brass is clean and bright.
He wanders round the crowded deck
Without a word or smile ;
His face is sweetly innocent—
Shows ne'er a sign of guile.
He moves about as in a dream,
His thoughts are far away ;
Perhaps he dreams of coming years,
Perhaps of yesterday.
But while he dreams he carries on
His daily round of work ;
Though slow, he always sticks it out,
His task he does not shirk.
He lingers long upon his task,
Ho man can him surpass
At killing time and filling in
The hours, just cleaning brass !
—II. A.
SPORTS.
January Ist (Hew Year's Day) was celebrated
on board with a programme of sports. The
weather being ideal, and everyone by this time
having well passed calling forth "Europe" over
the side of the boat, entered into the day's
events in a true sporting manner. A copy of
the programme I give below, from a glance at
which can be seen there were events in which
allcomers could enjoy themselves. As one
walked along the deck, passing from one group
which seemed to be interested in the ordeal ot
trying to pick up a collar stud by standing on
their eyebrows or elevating their front teeth,
to another group who wire enjoying themselves
at the expense of one, who, blindfolded, was
trying to place the tail on the pig. and so on.
I think the most interesting event in the sports
—-one which caused the most amusement—was
the pillow-figliting competition on the cross-
bar. It was a case, of "He that thinks himself
most secure, take heed lest he fall." The
tug-of-war competitions were thoroughly en-
joyed, and to crown the events of the day, we
were entertained with a good concert: to bring
to a grand finale the close of a very pleasant day.
—s. w. w.
A repetition of the above Was held after
leaving Colombo. If anything, they were
better organised, and certainly the form displayed
was higher, showing that the voyage has been
beneficial. A team of sergeants won the first
tug-ol'-war, but they were not allowed to com-
pete except with their respective companies,
and thus the prize went finally to C Company.
SPORTS PROGRAMMF.
1. Tug-of-war.
2. Pillow-fighting on spar.
3. Potato Race.
4. Orange-eating.
5. Cock-fighting.
0. Scratch pull.
7. Bull-board.
8. Skipping.
9. Placing stud.
10. Placing tail on pig.
11. Wheelbarrow Pace.
12. Guessing number of peas in jar.
13. Memory test.
14 ■ Fancy dress.
.15. Sack Race.
16. Reveille Race.
17. Weight-guessing.
IS. Recovering coin from electric tub.
AUSSIE-ITIS.
Oh ! for the jingle of bit and bridle
And a beast of mettle between your knees ;
Oh ! for the smack and the stockwhip's crack,
And the smell of stock on a springtime
brctze !
Oh ! for the clash, and the shear-blades' flash,
And the white wool rippling o'er ;
The rush and bustle and "Wool away !"
And the healthy smell of the tor !
Oh ! for the crash of the splitter's axe,
And the tall trees toppling down,
And the sweety smell of the flying chips
Far back from the busy town !
Oh ! to be nigh to that soft-breathed sigh,
The myst'ry and spell of the bush ;
With the tops of the tall trees whispering
In the stilly church-like hush !
So Bilijim sighs for his Austral skies,
With a love that none can sever,
Once grippal by the charm of Australia's
bush—
The spell of the Never-Hever !
The thicket of Lust never deem it safe to pass by,
The tiger of Pain in it crouched doth probably


"TARADA" FACTS AND FURPHIES.
Given on good authority at Monte Video,
that the "Takada" was a palatial Japanese mail
steamer. Tier tonnage is 5,000, 6,500. 7,000,
and up to 11,000. Her speed is authoritatively
stated to be 12,13, 14,15,16, 17,18, .19, and 20
knots per hour. She has T lie distinction of
having eluded a submarine by developing a speed
-of 19 knots. (It is to be observed from the
above that she still had a little up her sleeve.)
She is regarded as being a sleuth-hound be-
cause on one voyage (distance not stated) she
beat the "Morvada" on the same course by nine
davs.
Her steering machinery is hydraulic, and not
steam. —(By one who knows.)
She has not adhered to her original time-
table, having failed to call at Gibraltar, Malta,
and Alexandria.
No one seems to know what happened to the
200 Light Horsemen who were to be taken
aboard at Port Said.
She may call at Aden for coal: in which case
she will go direct to Fremantle.
Her boilers are fired from both ends.
If she makes Colombo, the next port will be
Sydney, where all the troops will be quaran-
tined for two weeks before being sent on to their
respective States.
—R. J. B.
Thou chastening friend, Adversity—'tis thine
The mental ore to temper and refine,
To cast in Virtue's mould the yielding heart,
And Honor's polish to the mind impart!
Without thy wak'ning touch, thy plastic art,
I'd lain, the shapeless mass that Nature made ;
But ground, great Artist, by thy magic hand
I gleam, a sword to conquer and command !
HAPPENINGS ON 0 DECK.
Jimmy is disconsolate ! Ilis bottle-oh busi-
ness is attacked, and he threatens to turn it
into an "Unlimited Co-operative Mutual Assis-
tance Association" to beat his opponents.
It all happened this way. Jimmy conceived
the notion that if he got an appliance that would
remove the tops of the bottles he would, by per-
forming this favor, have a sort of moral lien over
the empties ; so he interviewed the ship's en-
gineer and. the Chinese carpenter to get one
made. All would have gone well had not the
baldheaded snoozer of the opposition crowd
forestalled him by pinching a dinkum opener
from the officers' mess, and posting himself
at Jimmie's "possie" at the corner of the can-
teen and humming the diggers as they left the
counter. Jimmy tried to regain his trade by
exposing the whole plot, but got no hearing.
If you want to be in a good thing keep your
eyes skinned for the prospectus of his new
company.
LIFE BOARD.
I am not a'diarist, nor am I a great hand at
geography. I can't look at land and say,
"That isle is So-and-so ; that jutting headland is
Cape What-you-may-call-itso I am going to
crave pardon, and trust that you all are more
acquainted with your position geographically
than I am.
We all have our ideas of life on board a trans-
port ; but one and all I think vote it a !
There is one thing about it though—that our
feelings, homeward bound, as we are, are more
cheery and optimistic than they were when we
left Aussie's shores to do our bit. We all
return to loved ones and Home with the know-
ledge that we have done our bit—proved our
manhood and cleared the earth of a deadly
menace. As soldiers we have roughed it,
slept in dug-outs, in shell-scarred biilets and in
the open, so that our "possies" on the "Takada"
are really palatial in comparison. Mind you,
I'd rather sit down to a snowy tablecloth, decent
china and cutlery, than what we have, but
as it is impossible—well, we smile, grouse, and
smile again, that's all. Six months from now
we will have forgotten that bit and will only
remember the pleasant parts ! The change
from the cold of England to the warmth was
welcomed by all. A lot of us were disappointed
at not getting off at Port Said ; but we learnt the
cause of it, and were content. As a matter of
fact, Port Said is uninteresting, anyway, and
more fun was made out of the bargaining with
the natives in their boats than would have been
experienced on shore. Wild rumors went round
that we were stopping at Aden. Having called
there before, I'm jolly glad we didn't ; and,
besides, we have saved that much time, which is
infinitely better. These lines would not be
complete without giving praise to all who look
after our comfort. The ship's staff, who have
braved the deep during these perilous years of
war, and kept Britain the maritime, nation she
is, are all out to do their best for us.
The Colonel is giving us a "good spin," and is
ever ready to do what he can to promote good-
fellowship amongst us and give us a good time.
In this he is ably seconded by the Adjutant and
other officers. I was too long a civilian to be a
good soldier, and I sympathise greatly with
anyone in authority. A S.M.'s job is a thank-
less task ; he's got to rouse, otherwise nothing
would be done ; and it takes great tact to carry
out the various duties. In fact, I think every-


one rs doing the best- possible on the ship, and
discipline is not rigid at all, lor the which
praise be unto —all the military staff.
They say that the way to a man's heart is
through his stomach ; if this is so, most of our
hearts have been won, for the grub on board has
been good so far, and I think that if the stan-
dird is maintained throughout all will be satis-
fied.
One word about our pleasures. The Bed
Cross have Treated us well; we are all grateful
for the issue of pyjamas, shirts, etc., and for the
"backsheesh" smokes ; our people have treated
us well in this respect. The library also has
been a boon, together with the numerous games
iisued to the various decks ; also the gramo-
phone. There are other games, too—some
allowed, some disallowed—but all played, never-
theless. I wouldn't mind laying odds that in
after years, when strolling on a racecourse, I'll
hear such mystical words as "Who'll have a
card—Clickety-click—Top of the house—What's
the mudbook and the old Sergeant-Major done?"
The old "I'll bee a dollar tails" is a big
draw, and is still being carried on as the national
game of Australia.
As an ending, I wonder how many of the boys
dream away the night hours thinking of how
they will look in "civvies !"
ORDERS WE DO NOT GET ON BOARD A
TROOPSHIP.
S.S. "Tapioca." 1/1/19.
TROOPSHIP ORDER, NO. 001.
By Lieut .-Col. Coal Ton, O.C. Troops.
EMBARKATION.
Immediately any digger boards the boat he
will report to Orderly Room to be allotted his
cabin. At 10 a.m. six officers will parade at
Q.M.'s and draw hammocks. On embarking,
all officers and sergeants will go below to be
allotted their respective messes.
NOTE.— A private or lance-corporal will be de-
tailed to compile a nominal roll, and no officer or
sergeant shall leave his mess until same is
complete.
BOUNDS.
The promenade and boat decks are placed out
of bounds to all officers, W.O.'s, and sergeants.
These are exclusively reserved for privates and
nurses.
MEALS.
The officers will fall in with tin plates at their
respective messes immediately "cook-house"
sounds, and will be paraded by a private to the
eook-house to draw rations.
NOTE.—A private will inspect all messes lialf
an hour after rations have been drawn, but is
ordered to take no notice or any complaints.
It is not essential to hand in pay-books prior
to being paid, as we have an unlimited supply of
cash aboard, and will pay at any time any
amount asked for, whether overdrawn or not-
DISCIPLINE.
There will be no discipline enforced on any
lance-corporal or man whilst on board, as we
are on our way home, and you have already
suffered much through this, both in Blighty and
Prance.
BATHING.
Portholes on C deck will be open daily between:
the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. No care need
be exercised, as there is an unlimited supply of
water.
GAMBLING.
Any form of gambling is permitted on board-
PORTS OF CALL.
Immediately our transport pulls alongside a
wharf any man may hop over the side and buzz
off, but must be on the wharf at least two*
minutes before sailing time. For the use of
men detained in the port rope ladders will be
hung on port side of ship, so that they can
scramble aboard as we commence to move.
SOUVENIRS.
Men are allowed to carry whatever souvenirs .
they think fit.
MISCELLANEOUS.
In the event of a private, nurse, or officer
being lucky enough to fall overboard NO
ALARM is to be given, as the ship will not be
stopped. It is essential that we land in Aussie
by the end of the month. Rum bottles, or the
sign of the "two-up," however, may he hung
over the stern with a view to enticing him back.
(Signed) GIBIT BUCKSTIEE,
Capt. and Adjt.
—L. B. S.
A proverb says that what to more than two is
known
Has ceased to be a mystery, and public grown.
The proverb's sense is this :
These two are but thy lips,
A secret is quite free when once through them it
slips.
Why should woman not learn to read ?'"
Because there are bad hooks.


THE CONCERT PARTY.
Before I start on this part of the Magazine,
let me say that I am not a musical critic, nor do
I aspire to that degree of eminence. 1 realise
that the concert party are doing their utmost to
help their comrades pass the long voyage as
pleasantly as possible, to while away hours which
otherwise would be monotonous, to let one for-
get for the moment any pain or discomfort which
is still present from the agonies of war from which
we have emerged triumphantly.
The C.O. has been all that is kind and
courteous ; he has placed the smokeroom at
the disposal of the troupe for rehearsals. The
ship's Commander and officers gave whatever
assistance they could, and under the manage-
ment of Lieut. Winner the concert party has
gone ahead. Talent there is in plenty, though
some of the boys are a bit shy of performing
before their pals. So far four real concerts
have been held, and practically every night
"sing-songs" have been held on deck, with Roy
Langford at the piano.
Langford was a "pro" in pre-war days, and his
able way of rattling out accompaniments to
songs he has never heard before is as astonish-
ing as his great ""rag" playing. Another "pro"
is the whistling baritone, Jack Harrington, who
has performed all round Australia, and also
before Royalty in England. By the way, he
whistled "Roses of Picardy" on the King's
fingers while in Blighty. Davies as a ' rag"
singer and comedian goes big with the boys, as
also does Sgt. Peirce, who is well-known to
lovers of vaudeville in Aussie. It is rather un
fortunate that the Lighting is so poor on board
as far as concerts are concerned, for I remember
that Peirce's facial contortions were great
before war added lines of care to them. Classical
music is within onr reach on the violin, played
hy Mawson, though he felt decidedly nervous.
Straight songs in number have been rendered
by Head, Porter, Quick, ITaddon, and Mazen-
garb, and the cornet solos ot Sgt. Bourne and
monologues ot Don Maclhnes have been highly
appreciated by all.
At the last concert were given concerted
numbers, which were a welcome addition, giving
laughter to the listeners and being far easier
on the troupe than individual items. I have
not mentioned the officers amongst the others,
not from any desire to set them apart because
they hold commissions, but because I feel they
need special mention on account of the good
manner in which they proved their willingness
to come forward and help the boys. Lieut.
Tofler has a voice that would go down in light
opera; methinks he would be a matinee idol.
Lieut. Winner has given some decent items, and
though his voice is not a strong one, he has great
feeling, and renders whatever he sings with that
which to a music lover is called temperament.
The thanks of all on board are due to the
concert party for having given their time and
talent in such a ready way to our amusement.
As the trip goes on, and we are nearing our
beloved land, I trust there will be still further
concerts, and I'm drinking a health to them for
their many pleasant hours —only the drinking
is postponed for a while.
EVERY EVENING AT 8.
The Man from Toronto was walking along the
Strand, when he met the Ring Boys on Broad-
way. They asked him where he had been, and
he replied, "Oh ! I've been to see Chu Chin
Chow at Shanghai, from whom I got The
Chinee Puzzle." They then introduced The
Girl in the Taxi to him. She told him that she
was The Maid of the Mountains, and said that
she was Going Up to see Arlette. "I think that
you know her, do you not?" "Yes," he re-
plied, "1 met The Female Hun at The Officers
Mess in The House that Jack Built. She used
to spend The Week-end there. She was known
as The Naughty Wife, and lived in An English-
man's Home. She also figured in A Royal
Divorce. Do you remember her at The Fancy
Dress Ball ? She was there as The Lilac Domino
and wore A Pair of Silk Stockings. I went as
Soldier Boy, and I wore A Purple Mask. Did
you know "that she is in the habit of receiving
mail from Germany By Pigeon Post ? I saw
her sister Roxanna with Nurse Benson, who has
Eyes of Youth. She is A Box of Tricks, too.
They said they were going to see The Girl on
the Film. This is the Twelfth Night of The
Better 'Ole, so To-night's the Night to see it.
I see that The Hidden Hand is trying to cheat
The Law Divine. Thank goodness The Luck
of the Navy is helping to keep The Freedom of
the Seas." "Do you know," siad one of the
girls, "that my uncle tells Nothing but the
Truth ? He had A Midsummer Night's Dream
once, and he told me about it ; and when he
asked me to be home by nine o'ciock to-night,
I said, "Yes, Uncle, I will."
—J. C. D.
The Editor desires to thank one and all for
their warm support in making this Magazine a
success. Had it not been for the several con-
tributors, as big an edition would not have
eventuated. To those whose MS. has not been
accepted lie apologises.
The wit of women is quicksilver, and their
hearts water.


WAITING.
I am waiting for you by the moonlit sea,
I am longing and longing, my brave lad, for
thee ;
Each wave sends a message, one welcome so
true,
And I'm waiting, I'm longing, my sweetheart,
for you !
I am waiting for you by/the moonlit sea,
My arms are just aching, my lov'd one, for
thee :
-My heart is in rapture—it beats all for thee,
And I'm waiting, I'm longing, by the moonlit
sea !
MANHOOD.
Whilst passing through New York City I by
chance called at the Brooklyn "Red Triangle,"
and was handed a few pamphlets, one of which
was written by Joseph Cook.
If every man who calls himself a man followed
the following quotation the world would be by
no means the wretched world it is to-day :
"Educate a man's body alone, and you have a
brute ; educate a man's mind alone and you have
a sceptic ; educate a man's heart alone, and you
have a bigot. But educate a man's body, mind,
and heart and you have the noblest work of God
—a MAN."
—E. 11.
Fate is a hand that exercises its five fingers on
its victims. Two are played on the eyes, two
upon the ears, and one upon the lips, saying,
"Be for ever silent."
DEFINITIONS.
Happiness is the strangest item in our make-
up. 'Tis generally a bitter sweet ; its great joy-
is generally tinged with pain. To how many is
my experience of it.? For every moment of
happiness we have an hour's sadness, sadness
which makes sombre the sunlighc of our gaiety.
This, then, is happiness.
Joy is a fleeting sensation—a rift in the lute,
coming to us at unexpected times, it eases the
burden of life, but, alas ! only for the moment.
Gladness is the twin sister to Joy, only more
flighty.
Gaiety is a super-abundance of vitality, an
exhaust valve invented by Nature to allow us
to ease the strain of happiness or misery.
Misery is the ruling factor in everyday life.
The unwelcome guest, the never-failing source
of all that makes life not worth while. 'Tis a
vital force in our composition. We strive our
utmost—we struggle—we rebel, but 'tis ever-
present, this deadly enemy, misery, till perfect
love gives it its quietus and us our freedom.
PLACES OF BIBLICAL INTEREST.
Recently we on s.s. "Talcada" have passed
several places of Biblical interest. There have
been some enquiries for information. This, to.-
gether with the fact that all of us are returning
to settle down again to the serious daily round of
life, has suggested the following as a contribu-
tion to the Ship's Magazine.
PASSAGE OF THE RED SEA.
The Israelites had been in slavery in Egypt.
Moses was leading them to freedom ; Pharaoh,
with his. chariots, was pursuing. Before the
Israelites was the Gulf of Suez. God said to
Moses (Exodus .14): "Stretch out thine hand
over the sea and divide it; and the children of
Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst
of the sea. And Moses stretched out his hand
over the sea ; and the Lord caused the sea to go
back by a strong east wind all 'that night, and
made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided. And the children of Israel went into
the midst of the sea upon the dry ground ; and
the waters were a wall unto them on their right
hand and on their left. And the Egyptians pur-
sued and went in after them to the midst of the
sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and
his horsemen. And the Lord said unto
Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea
that' the waters may come again upon the
Egyptians, upon their chariots and upon their
horsemen. And Moses stretched forth his hand
over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength
when the morning appeared ; and the Egyptians
tied against it, and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea, and the waters
covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all
the host of Pharaoh. Thus the Lord saved
Israel that day out of the hand of Pharaoh."
MOUNT SINAI.
On the port side on a clear day there would
have been visible Mount Sinai. Consult the
map. Not long after their delivery from the
Egyptians the Israelities arrived at Mount
Sinai. While there God delivered to tliem a code
of laws. Upon this code all future laws were to
be built up. The Ten Commandments delivered
on that occasion are the foundation of all our
laws in the Empire to-day. Christ made clear
what they should mean to Christians. These
interpretations invite careful study. Recent
events have convinced all thinkers that this is


God's world ; God's laws rule it. Anyone de-
siring to get the best out of life must take these
laws into his reckoning. Before starting the
daily round of life in the land we love—Aus-
tralia—study as follows :
From Mount Sinai.
Christ'sl nt erf retat i on.
1. I am the Lord thy
God ; thou shalt have
none other gods but
Me.
Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all
thy heart and soul and
mind and strength.
2. Thou shaft not
make to thyself any-
graven image : for I the
Lord thy God am a
jealous God.
Ao man can serve
two masters.
3. Thou shalt not
take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain;
for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless that
taketh His name in
vain.
4. Remember that
thou keep holy the
Sabbath Day.
5. Honor thy- father
and mother.
6. Thou shalt do no
murder.
7. Thou shalt not
commit adultery.
8. Thou shalt not
Swear not at all. Be
not as the hypocrites.
Do not blaspheme
against the Holy Spirit.
The Sabbath was
made for man, not man
for the Sabbath.
Render unto Caesar
the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are
God's.
Love thine enemies :
pray for them that per.
secute thee. Forgive
unto seventy times
seven. Do to all as
thou wouldst they
should do to thee.
Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall
see God.
Lay not up for your-
selves treasures upon
the earth, but in Hea-
ven, where neither rust
nor moth corrupt, nor
do thieves break
through and steal:
Seek ye first the King-
dom, and all things
shall be added to you.
9. Thou sbalt not Judge not, lest ye be
bear false witness. judged. First pluck
the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shalt,
thou see clearly to re-
move the mote from
thy brother's eye.
10. Thou shaft not Let him that would
covet. be great among you be
the servant ot all.
PADRE.
OUTBACK.
I was shearing at Muckaburra. The cook was
voted in, and everything was O.K. Of course,
there are three classes of,cooks—cooks, cuckoos,
and cookarouses —and I'm sorry r to say our
cook was a cookarouse. But I might say that
he was a dabster with his fists, which some of us
soon discovered. His strong point was "stoo,"
which we got morning, noon, and night. Stoo !
It just was stoo ! Anything else would have
been a luxury compared with it ; but we had to
grin and eat it all the same.
Things were getting very serious, when
Stirrup-iron Mick hit on a brilliant idea. He sug-
gested sending to Sydney for a pug to come up
and tear the cook to pieces. Heedless to say, we
all agreed with his suggestion. In due course
the pug arrived, per boot, and with a swag up,
according to instructions. How, I might state
that the cook's offsider was no slouch with his
fists. So when the pug staggered up to the
galley, and the usual greetings exchanged, the
slushy asked him to have a drink of tea. The pug
grabbed a pannikin, and dipped some out of a
bucket and tasted it : he screwed up his "dial
and said, "Do y-ou call this tea! " The slushy
said, "Yes." "Dishwater !" said the pug, and
threw it in the slushy's face, arid, of course, the
slushy went at him. But the pug mucked him
ui) lively. The cook standing by murmured,
"Um !" We were watching the performance
from the shed, and were quite pleased with it.
When we knocked off, we came to tea, expect-
ing great things, and were not disappointed.
We sat down to the same old "stoo." The pug
was sitting on his swag, and the cook said,
"Have a bit: of stoo, mate ?" The pug grabbed
a plate, and spilled some of it, looked at it, and
said, "Call this stoo ?" The cook said, "Yes."
"Slush !" said the pug, and emptied it on the
cook's "dial." The cook sailed into him, and
belted the soul-case out of him. The pug slunk
off ; the cook stood at the bucket, and in mourn-
ful tones called m over ; and when he had us all
gathered round the fire he said. "What's in that
' bucket ?" We all roared as one man, "Stoo !"


HOMEWARD BOUND.
Oh ! it's good to smell the briny, and to see the
seagulls wheel
O'er the long-drawn wake of swirling milky
foam,
And the good ship's throbbing, throbbing from
binnacle to keel,
Going Home !
Full many weary months have pass'd—we've
done our little bit
From Gallipoli to Ypres and the dreary, muddy
Somme ;
But we cast our cares behind us, recking not how
hard we're hit,
Speeding Home !
Soon we'll see them in the distance—sweet-
hearts, wives, and mothers, dear —
Stretching out their arms in welcome o'er the
foam ;
And we'll hear the shouts of greeting resounding
from the pier,
Hearing Home !
—E. P. 11.
ROBBER'S ROLL I'M .
One of the diggers asked another it there was
a brake on board to hold the ship going down
hill after they crossed the Line.
"Is there any need for a chap to swing the
lead like this going home?"
THIS IS DINKY-DIE.
One digger remarked to a chap leaning over
the side that the water seemed higher up the
ship. "Oh, yes," he was answered, ".it's high
tide to-night."
Did the C.O. hold back pay until after New
Year so that the "digs." could keep any resolu-
tions not to gamble good for one day at least ?
What's the use of issuing orders about spitting
when a man can't get a drink at all ?
DIGGERS' SAYINGS.
That the heavy puddings have been res-
ponsible for the slow trip.
If any of the boys felt, they had come a crash
when discussing prices of things bought at Port
Said.
The Q.M. intends issuing field kitchens as the
Tommy cookers on which the diggers have beeD
making their tea have run out.
—B. C.
The Artillery will be a dull corps when the
"Kiwi" famine comes. (Or will it be the gallant
Provost Corps ?)
The figures 1, 0, 2, 8, 40, properly read, con-
tain advice to diggers who persist in coming
down late to tea. "'One ought to wait for tea"
(one ought two eight forty).
A ballot will be taken, at a date to be specified
later on the question--"Should the Orderly
Officer kiss the diggers good night !"
DIGGERS' QUERIES.
Who are the officers called "The Hungry
Ten," and is it true they eat more than all the
rest of the mess ?
Why was a certain Piccanin' Sergeant anxious
to miss boat rolls in Blighty ? and was he lucky
in the end 1
If anyone know the chap who has changed
his mind as to getting married now that he has
discussed the matter with some married blokes
on board \ And does he think week-end passes
are good in the Matrimonial Depot ?
If Andy was sore after his dinner hour pillow-
fight ?• And did he feel "butchered ?"
Did the Chief Steward make a special appeal
to "The Hungry Ten" to lower their eating
capacity ? But should he not have appealed
to a certain officer in the main mess ?
The Long Un's quite well, thank you—able
to take a little nourishment through a bottle-
He passes his convalescence quietly, running
a housey-housey joint, and kicking 'em up a
bit of poker. His spare time is taken up listen-
ing to the sage advice of George, and concocting
a tale for the missus to account for the letter he
put into the wrong envelope.
We got a pleasant surprise yesterday, caused
by the new arrangement of making our own tea.
When the soup was issued for dinner, it was mis-
taken for boiling water, and the orderlies
promptly made tea of it, to the gratification ot
the troops, who passed a vote of thanks to the
heads' for their generous forethought. The error
was not discovered until the mess orderlies went
up for the soup. Anyhow, there were no com-
plaints ; instead, there was a feeling of gratifica-
tion that at last a use had been found for the
liquid refreshment attached to the midday
menu.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED. —Life preserver. Apply Pay Ser-
geant. (He'll need it if we don't get pay soon.)
LOST. —Cushy job at the T.B.'s Apply to
several returning Aussies, s.s. "Takada."
MISSING FRIENDS, —Will the Aussie who pro-
mised to send for the tabby in Weymouth if his
'goanna crop was a success kindly communicate
with this office
WANTED. —Tips as to how to get a decent
pension on discharge. Apply "Leadswinger,"
this office.
WANTED. —Ear protectors ; bought in whole-
sale lines by men on D deck.
FOUND.— A big "G" by the Provost Sergeant
when told by the O.M. to stop smoking between
decks.
What man on board is a paradox.? The
bugler, because he is cursed at reveille and loved
at cook-house, blasphemed at picquet, and
thanked at no parade.
After leaving Devonport one of the diggers
complained of being dry, so his cobber asked if
he could do a drink of wine. "Too right," said
he. So he was told to lick the ship's side, as
she had just been in port!
—R. C.
Some diggers were playing the national game
of two-up in a London lane. A Salvation Army
lassie, thinking they were taking up a collection
for the Red Cross, threw two shillings into the
ring. One of the diggers handed her back four
shillings. The lassie said, "I gave it; I don't
want it back." The digger said, "Take it, miss ;
he micked 'em."
—P. 11.
One day, while Pat and Mike were sitting by
the roadside, a funeral passed by them, and Mike
said to Pat, "Bedad, I wish I knew the place
where I was going to die." "Why," cried Pat,
"what good would that do you ?" "Well, I
would not go near the place," replied he.
—J. D.
A woman is always sure of her husband's
heart -while she is sure of her patience.
A w oman who is not dumb may always have
ner revenge.
A RESPONSIBLE POSITION.
Thi y were a merry party at the nobleman's
mansion, and the host asked the flapper present
where her brother Percy was. "Oh !'" she re-
replied, "he is in France." "And where is
Harold ? In the army, too !" "He is in
Italy." "And Algy is fighting, I suppose
"Oh, yes ! He is out in East Africa." "And
is Herbert, that seventeen-year-old brother of
yours in the trenches, too ?" "Oh, no ! He is
minding India," said the flapper.
—R. C.
J. G. D.
A FAIR DIN KIM YARN.
If you want to know the names of the islands
we have passed during our trip, go to our barber,
for what he doesn't know about them is in the
book. Some days ago we happened to pass an
island on the port side, and the barber, being
anxious to know the name of it, went to the ship's
baker, and said, "Say, Doughy, what's the name
of this 'ere island ?" The baker, by way of a
joke, said, "That is Chu Chu Island." "Chu
Chu-!" said the barber, " 'ow the 'ell did it get
that name The baker explained that many
years ago some white people landed there, and
were eaten by the natives ; and that was how it
got its name. The barber, being quite satis-
fied, returned to his shop. Some few minutes
later I happened to be passing that way, and
seeing a crowd of diggers standing around, I went
to investigate, to find that the barber was
trying to explain the exact position of Chu
Chu Island, and how it had got its name ; but
it was quite evident that some of the diggers
did not place mudti faith in his explanation of
this historic island. One digger, bringing a
map out, said, "Garn ! Yer got snakes ! It
ain't on the map." The barber looked a bit
angry at this remark, but went on telling what
he knew about the island, when the digger with
the map again interrupted, asking the barber
to point it out on the map. Getting angry,
the barber said, "Take yer map to ; it's all
to 'ell. What I've told yer is dinkum, and if
yer don't believe me, ask the baker."
The correct name of the island w T as Perim.
It is expected that the baker will be missing
before the end of the voyage.
—B. E. S.
A woman who buys her complexion wants to
sell it.
A bad hibfbaod is sometimes a goqd father ;
a bad wife is never a good mother.


1) ark wisps of mist floated by, and the front
was just a dense bank of fog, into which anxious
eyes strained unavailingly. God ! What was
that ! A bird broke into song on the torn limb
of a shell-blasted tree. .... What is
AN INCIDENT.
I slept. A hand violently shook my shoulder.
The awakening was sudden, and my scattered
thoughts but slowly arranged themselves till
—'"Get up ! Wake up ! We're hopping over
in a minute !"
I was awake now,, and the chill of the early
morning crept up and down my spine ; or was it
the thought of the unknown that lay in front of
us ?
wrong with the world when a bird sings joyously
a matutinal song, while there are crowded below,
waiting in suspense that awful minute of zero-
men in whose hearts fierce savagery lies, whose
veins are throbbing fiercely, madly, almost pain-
fully, with the promise of imminent attack ;
whose minds are concentrated on their unseen
objective, the while they nervously fumble with
equipment to make sure all is well.
Over ! The mist rises ;in front of me a giant
inverted cone-shaped fungus springs up from
the earth—black, with roots of fire—a vicious
"whang !" and something screams by over-
head. We move forward. The earth vormts
forth more fungi. This time on the right—
now on the left—everywhere My
senses are numbed I find myself
shouting. Deep down in me a voice insistently
demands the meaning of these upheavals of
earth—these poisonous fungi with the points of
fire.
"Smith ; Some hot barrage !" mutters the
man on my right. So that is it —the enemy
barrage. Forward still; on, vet on ! Is it a
thousand years or a second since we started ?
What is making my mouth so parched, my
tongue So ——? A mountain of black earth
rises beside me. A roar, a crash . . . .
Sounds come faintly to my ears. Up : Up ! !
I feel myself thrown upwards violently, and a red
mist swims before my eyes, Down ! Down ! !
lam falling, ever falling. My God !is this the
end of all? Blackness hems me in, my ears
are ringing, and still this sickening fall. Down,
down, into an abyss of night and obliv .
"•Say, Dig. ! give the players a chance, can't
you ? You're stopping the game. Sleep and
fall down somewhere else. Who'll have a card ?
Who'll have a 'bueksheesh' card ?"
I had been dreaming, and had tumbled off a
deck-chair into the crowd playing "house."
And the good ship "Takada," with eachthrust
of her propellers, was taking us nearer home.
WELL DONE!
From the land of the Eising Sun you came,
In your glory and your might ;
At Duty's call you gave your all,
To conquer in the fight.
With hope running high, with a steady eye,
With a courage all your own,
You were out to win—you were bound to win-
By your splendid faith alone.
To the land of the Eising Sun you'll go,
Now the days of war are o'er,
To that sunlit land, that dear Home-land,
To that land you've loved of yore.
You have done your best, you have stood the
test,
And the victory's well won ;
We are proud of you,, we'll sing loud of you,
God will hear our cry, "Well done !"
—W. M.
E.I.P.
A most impressive sight took place on A
deck on Sunday evening after tea. The feature
of the proceeding was the burial of the "duff"
by the boys. It was buried with full military
honors, the boys standing at attention while the
"Last Post' was being sounded by the company
bugler.
A duty nobly donee
—E. C.
—J. IL


,
*
■
■
. ' ■
• ' V ■ -
■
'
.
.
.
• . • _ .
'
'
'
'
'


VARDON 6? SONS LTD.
Printers, Lithographers, etc.
Adelaide South Australia
|EZ3I lOCZZ3C3 J
