

THE WAR
AND
FUTURE PROBLEMS
BY
ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE
SYDNEY
“Christian World” Printing House
275 Clarence Street




THE WAR
AND
FUTURE PROBLEMS
BY
ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE
JI paper read at the first Diocesan Conference,
Sydney on 24th August, 1915, and published
about two years later. The interesting develop-
ments and action taken since the paper was
written will show that there were grounds for
these forecasts but there are other matters
referred to which are not receiving the attention
that they deserve


The War
FUTURE PROBLEMS
BY
ARCHDEACON F. B. BOYCE
A paper read at the first Diocesan Conference, Sydney, 24th
August, 1915.
The war will largely bring a new world. History
will in future speak of this mighty conflict of the nine
nations as a singularly great epoch and a dividing-
line between the past and the present. A new volume
will be opened.
ft is very hard to forecast the future, one reason
being that so much depends upon the length of the
war and the consequent effects on the combatants.
If it were like the Napoleonic wars, which covered
nearly twenty years, the trouble would be indeed ex-
treme and its sadness greatly intensified. If it ends
in a year or two, the position will, of course, be more
hopeful. Any prognostication would be very unsafe,
but the uncertainty increases the difficulty of speaking
of the future.
I think that I can set aside such problems as
conscription, the Asiatic peril from Japan and other
neighbours, the question as to who should have the
empty spaces of the world, in view of the ever-growing-
populations in Europe, and some other problems. I
will address myself to those evidently more urgent
in this crisis. Yet I can only touch upon them in a
short paper like this.


Care of the Sick and Wounded.
Future problems! One was how to provide for
our wounded and sick soldiers, but that is almost
already solved. The magnificent generosity of Aus-
tralia Day, with its subscription* of over £600,000,
together with the action of the Government, will make
provision. This noble response I claim as chiefly a
result of the teaching of Christ among people roused
to action by the urgent and great need. Does it not
practically follow the lead given in the parable of the
Good Samaritan? Kind hearts that have done so
much and, with Government aid, may be relied on
to supply any further want in the future.
To Emphasise the Principles of Christ.
The panacea for the ills of humanity is in the
teaching- of Jesus Christ. Never was there a time in
which it was more necessary to proclaim His prin-
ciples. Did He not say, “Blessed are the peace-
makers”? Did He not proclaim the duty of good will
and brotherhood? What did He say about love? In
answer to the question, which is the great command-
ment? He said, Thou shalt Love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind. This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like unto it; Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets. Is not this law
of love diametrically opposed to war? A problem is
how to more effectively permeate the nations with
these priceless principles. Surely the Master’s teach-
ing should enter and be paramount in all phases of
life.
There should, of course, be prayer. There should
be the more persistent teaching of these principles in
* The Australia Day Fund has reached £858,000. This,
with other charitable war founds, make a total for New South
Wales of over £3.000.000 subscribed.


the pulpit, on the platform, in the press, in the home
and elsewhere.
We shall have to more strongly attack the God-
dishonouring and soul-destroying indifference in the
world to Bible truths and duties, and remember that
behind it there is much unbelief and infidelity. Lhe
problem is how better to put into men’s hearts in the
nations the divine and sublime principles of the great
Redeemer.
Educate Against War.
We must educate public opinion in all civilised
countries against war. The cry of the brotherhood
of man should be under every Hag. Societies should
be formed of an international character in every city
and town, which, in view of this brotherhood, would
conserve and promote unity and create the firm resolve
that there shall be no more war, and that the piping
t imes ,of peace shall ever be ours. The scourge
of war is so terrible from many standpoints that its
prevention is worth constant effort; it cannot be left
again to an isolated few.
Arbitration with Enforcement.
Of course, the demand must be for arbitration.
But behind any international court there must be
power to enforce its decisions. Look at the Hague,
with its words of peace, its splendid building, its
influential representatives, and the almost barren re-
sult. Has not Germany flouted its judgments and
treated them as mere scraps of paper? She has not
cared one jot so long as her own lust for conquest
was unsatisfied. There should be an arbitration court
whose decision will be supported and fully enforced,
if need be, by the arms of all the other nations. Just
as there is power behind the constable that the average
man respects, so there should be with the national
burglar, the mighty power, naval and military, that


would be arrayed against him. While sin is in the
world force is the only thing some will avoid. Had
Germany known that the world would have risen
against her because of the violation of written agree-
ments, she would not have dared, I believe, to have
ruthlessly invaded Belgium or any other peaceful
country.
Peace and brotherhood will only be secured by
an arbitration court with real power, and the problem
of forming such a one should, after our experience,
be easily solved. But an educated public opinion on
the point must bring pressure to bear on governments
to achieve the results.
The Death of Militarism.
Militarism is a problem that must be earnestly and
thoughtfully faced. Probably the trouble will be in-
creased, as out of the war itself there may arise a
xnilitary class of considerable size in addition to that
which there was before it began. It must not be
forgotten that militarism is ever a menace to the peace
and brotherhood taught by Jesus Christ.
Germany is an object-lesson. She kept up a big
standing army of about a million men, with immense
trained reserves easily called up. Militarism was an
important political force as well as a fighting one in
field and trench. There is little doubt that the mili-
tary clique that drank the toast of "The Day” and
that surrounded the Kaiser was constantly urging him
on to war, and that at last, probably very willingly,
Early in 1917 both Mr. Lloyd George in England and President
Wilson in America spoke of the want of effective arbitration
in disputes between nations by an International Court, having
powers behind it to enforce its decisions against a recalcitrant.
‘‘A League of the Nations’ for the purpose was said to be
necessary.


he succumbed. The great war of the nine nations
resulted.
Of course, France, Austria, Russia and other
European countries had to have large armies to pro-
tect themselves from the armed neighbour, and so
militarism triumphed. How different it had been in
the United States, with its 10(J,UOC),000 of people, where
the standing army was only 60,000 men. Of course,
if necessary, as in its civil war, it could raise millions,
but in days of peace it has wisely spared itself the
great cost and other difficulties that may arise in
keeping vast bodies of men under arms.
There will be no permanent peace in Europe until
there is a general disarmament. Are not standing
armies antagonistic to the principles of Christ ? Should
we not, in His name, vigorously, by voice, pen, and
votes in all nations, war against militarism? Christian
men should not rest until the teaching of Christ is
accepted and made triumphant.
Australia’s Voice as to War.
Thinking more directly of ourselves. Australia
should have some potent voice in the Empire in decid-
ing for peace or war. It is unfair, to say the least,
that we might be dragged into a war without our
consent, possibly about Fashoda or Venezuela, or
some other out of the way place in which we have
little or no interest. A problem, therefore, is how
rightly to give the oversea dominions a voice in
Imperial affairs while continuing the liberty of self-
government that they now enjoy.
There should be some central council in London
that would concern itself solely with questions that
affected the Empire as a whole. There should be a
proportionate representation of British people, and
some arrangement as to India. Surely the wisdom
of our statesmen should be able to so adjust matters


chat a workable system might be evolved. It is a
matter of common justice. It would strengthen the
unity of the Empire, the brotherhood of Britons.
Germany would not then proceed in the belief that
*he 16,000,000 and more Britons beyond the seas were
a negligible quantity.
I venture to remark that this is no new matter
with me. AVhat I said on it on August 30th, 1910,
when President of the British Empire League in
Australia, appeared in the “Herald” and “Telegraph”
the next morning. I had several times before spoken
on the subject. It is very probable that others earlier
have urged the same action. At the Imperial Council
of the next year (1911), Sir Joseph Ward, Premier of
New Zealand, moved in that direction, but was de-
feated. Sir Pobert Borden, Prime Minister of
Canada, is now urgent in the matter, and some of
the highest authorities favour such a proposal. A
concession has been made, which shows the trend,
by the Secretary of Colonies, saying that Australia
shall have a voice in making the terms of peace.
Mr. Lloyd George, the Prime Minister in London, has since
taken action in this direction. Early in 1917 he called an
Empire Conference, which was attended by oversea repre-
sentatives, including India. Some powers were agreed upon
of a real kind. Australia was not represented. Mr. Hughes,
our Prim© Minister, could not attend, because of political
complications here. Soon after Mr. Lloyd George proposed
that there should be an annual meeting. These are valuable
steps. It appears to me, however, that there will have to
be action by the Parliament before the desired legal effect
can be given to decisions of such a body.
An Empire Council.
The powers of such an Empire Council that 1
advocate should include the right to make treaties
as to the safety of any country.
AVas not the direct cause of this war the fact that


Germany had violated the independence of Belgium
that England had guaranteed?
It can no longer be said that to have a voice in
the Imperial Council we should pay our share in keep-
ing the army and navy. We have our Australian
navy. That has done splendid service. Will not our
contribution to the war this year be an enormous
sum? Canada, before the war, proposed a large naval
outlay, and in the war is spending as largely as Aus-
tralia. The time will be ripe, and while hastening
slowly there should be no unavoidable delay. One
great Empire, able to speak with a united voice
would be an important factor in preserving the peace
of the world. Thus far it would advance the principles
of peace and good will for which Christ lived and
died.
When our Soldiers Return.
Important action has since been taken by the Commonwealth
Government. In April, 1917, it stated, through Senator Mil-
len, that £22,000,000 would be provided for Repatriation pur-
poses.
Coming still closer to ourselves, there are two points
that should cause full consideration and in a Christian
spirit. The first is that employment must be arranged
for the men who have gone forth to fight for us when
they return. When fifty or seventy thousand men
come home again, after having gloriously done their
duty, we are bound to see that opportunities for labour
are found. Many employers have nobly kept places
open for their employees, but the majority will return
without anything in view. The hearty welcome, the
cheering, the waving of flags will not give them work
and food. This question must be met. A good com-
mittee of business men, on which the unions should
be represented, and with which the Government should
co-operate, should take this important question up.
Men who have given up work for us should be found


work when they come home. Let us show our brother-
hood and appreciation of self-sacrifice by providing
in a practical way for our heroes when they return.
Morality a National Asset.
The second point is that we should improve the
manhood of our race. The whole Church of God, and
not a small portion only, should wage war especially
against the destructive forces—the trinity of evil —
gambling, intemperance, and impurity. Christ cared
for the bodies of men as well as their souls. The
vigour of a people is ever a factor in preserving peace
as well as in waging war. Good character is a national
asset. Christian manliness will mean power and
heroism, and cause us to be feared by foes.
Thrift and Drink.
There are economic problems I have not time to
touch, beyond saying that after the borrowed money
irom the mother country is spent there is almost sure
to be a time of serious depression. The cost of war
must be met.
There should be thrift. It is as Hamlet without
Hamlet to talk of thrift without reference to drink.
I he £60,000,000 wasted in this State in intoxicants
n the last ten years is a scandal and a disgrace. To
talk of thrift without reference to drink is to be quite
behind the times. The new laws of France, Russia
and the mother country in this time of war are shining
examples of drastic restrictions of the liquor traffic
that we would do well to take to heart.
These are all problems that should force them-
selves upon us. May they be faced in a prayerful and
earnest spirit.
Only an Honourable Peace.
But, after all, the great problem of the future is


?hat o£ peace. I do not know what more we can do
here at present to hasten the day, except pray. We
shall only be satisfied with peace with honour, but I
think we want more. We want a peace that, by dis-
armament, there may be an end to war —that this
should be the last. May we fight the war in a chival-
rous way and, while punishing our foe, not descend
to and imitate, if we could, his abominable atrocities,
or seek inhuman reprisals. Let us, I repeat, pray that
the sweet angel of peace may be with us soon, so that
the world, schooled by a divine and cruel discipline,
may work out and solve problems absolutely needing
settlement. Someone writes ;
Lord God, we pray for peace! We lift our plea
That to these shores the red tide shall not roll.
Yet first we ask this greater boon of Thee —
This greater boon, still dearer to our soul:
That peace shall not be ours if peace be base,
That ease shall not be ours if ease be shame;
That Thou wilt teach us, if we must, to face
The wrath and wrack, the fury and the flame.
Point us the way of service, mighty Lord!
Make us to see the high thing we must do;
And if, to serve, we needs must bear the sword,
Nerve heart and arm to see the dread task through.
Dear God, we pray for peace, but first we pray
That this, our country, loved by us so well.
Shall not from duty turn her face away —
Shall not lose hope of Heaven for fear of Hell.
