

THE
KERMADEC
ISLANDS:
THEIR CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.
BY
S. PERCY SMITH
ASSISTANT SURVEYOR GENERAL.
BY AUTHORTY: GRORGE DIDSRURY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1887.




■: : '
5K£ l'lilSP' i-HP_


SUNDAY ISLAND
From Meyer Islet


THE KERMADEC ISLANDS.
Survey Office, Auckland,
Sir, 29tli September, 1887.
I have the honour, in compliance with your memorandum
No. S.G. dated the 2nd August the effect that
I should proceed to the Kermadec Islands with the steamer
“ Stella ” for the purpose of reporting on their capabilities
and extent; to furnish herewith my report and plans, and to
briefly relate the events of our voyage.
I left Auckland by the steamer “Manapouri” on the 9th
August, accompanied by Mr. H. D. M. Haszard, Assistant
Surveyor, and Mr. T. F. Cheesemau, Curator of the Auckland
Museum, and arrived at Russell on the following morning.
The “Stella” having arrived on the 11th, we steamed from
Hassell on the 12th at 2.15 pan., with a strong southerly breeze,
and, after a very rough passage, arrived off Curtis Islands at
4.30 p.m. on the 14th, and anchored off the north side of the
larger island in somewhat sheltered water.
On the 15 th, finding that a landing was impracticable owing
to the heavy sea running, we steamed for Macauley Island, off
which place we arrived at 8.30 a..m., and were again disap-
pointed in landing owing to the sea. A course was then made
for Sunday Island, which we reached at 3.30 p.m. Finding no
inhabitants in Denham Bay, and a very heavy sea running,
Captain Fairchild steamed round to the north side of the island,
where we found the steamer “ Richmond ” at anchor in a
sheltered spot, engaged in taking in firewood to supplement her
coal, of which she had run short on her voyage from Raro-
tonga to Auckland.
On the 16th we landed at the Fishing-rock, and commenced
the survey and exploration of the island.
On the 17th Captain Fairchild hoisted the British flag, as
related further on, the rest of the day being devoted to the
prosecution of the survey.
The 18th was also occupied in the further survey of the
island.


On the 19th it commenced to blow from the east; so the
“ Stella ” was moved round to Boat Cove, near the south-east
end of the island, where temporary shelter was obtained, and
the south side of the island topographically sketched. As the
wind increased we moved round to Denham Bay, and anchored
near the north end of the long beach.
On the 20th it blew very hard from, the east; but, after
removing the steamer to the south end of the bay to avoid the
heavy roll coming in, we went ashore and explored that side of
island.
On the 21st it was still blowing very hard from the east,
Binding the shelter afforded by the high land of the island in-
sufficient, we steamed back to Boat Cove and moored the vessel
there, but, owing to a shift of the wind to the south-east, were
obliged to remove to the shelter of Meyer Island, where we
found smooth water, though it blew very hard.
On the 22nd, the wind having gone down, we w r ere enabled
to land at the Fishing-rock, and continued the survey of that
side of the island.
The 23rd w r as occupied in completing our survey, and, as the
sea had gone down very much, we left Sunday Island at 9 p.m.
for Macauley Island.
the 21th, at 6.30 a.m., anchored off Macauley Island.
M e went ashore, when the flag was hoisted and the Proclama-
tion read, after which a survey of the island was made, and com-
pleted in time for us to leave for Curtis Island the same day at
3 p.m. On our arrival at 5.15 p.m, we succeeded in landing,
and explored the crater of the island.
25th The wind having shifted to the north-west made
another landing on the island impracticable, so we steamed for
L Bsperance Rock, at which place we arrived at 12.45 and
laving steamed round it and taken such observations as were
practicable, we shaped a course for New Zealand at 1.30.
On the 2/th, at 8 a.m., the coast was sighted, after a rough
passage across, and, as the wind was dead against us for the
Bay of Islands, Captain Fairchild kept away for Cape Maria
van Diemen lighthouse, under which place we anchored at
0.30 p.m. au
f Btl \ a£ter havin s tendered the lighthouse, the
Stefla steamed across to the Three Kings, where I W a S
enabled to make a sketch-survey to correct the very erroneous
4
THE KBBMADBO ISLANDS :


SUNDAY OR RAOUL ISLAND
N.N.E. 7 Miles.


Raoul or Sunday Island (Captain Denham’s
Lat. S. ;
Long. W.
0 1 II
Flagstaff, Denham Bay)
29 15 30
177 54 50
M'acau'ley
30 15 0
178 32
0
Curtis .. ' .. ..
30 35 0
178 36
0
L’Esporanco, or Brincl, or French Rock. ..
31 36 0
178 55
0
shape of the main island as shown on the Admiralty chart. At
4.45 p.m. we left for Kaipara.
29th August. We arrived at the Pilot-station, Kaipara, at
I p.m., after having passed along the only smooth water we
encountered since leaving the Bay of Islands : this was along
the West Coast, from Cape Maria to Kaipara.
30th August. The survey party left the “ Stella ” at 1 p.m.
by the regular steamboat, and arrived in Auckland by train
from Helensville at 7.15 p.m.
I have, &c.,
S. PERCY SMITH,
Assistant Surveyor-General.
The Surveyor-General, Wellington.
POSITION OF THE KBEMADEO GROUP.
The Kermadec group of islands is situated between the parallels
of 29° 10' and 31° 30'' of south latitude, and between the
meridians of 177° GS" and 179° of longitude west from Green-
wich. The islands are four in number, with some outlying
islets, as follows, —the positions being derived from the Ad-
miralty Sailing Directions for the Pacific, Vol. 11., 1885 : —■
The islands lie very nearly in a direct line drawn from
Sunday Island to L’Esperance on a hearing of about S.S.W.
true ; Macauley being distant from Sunday Island 68 sea-
miles, Curtis 23 sea-miles from Macauley, and IfEsperance
52 sea-miles from Curtis. The extremes of the group are thus
about 142 sea-miles apart.
The principal island—Sunday —is distant from Auckland
just 600 sea-miles, and lies a little more than half-way to
Tonga, but 100 miles to the eastward of the direct steam route
to that place. It is 300 miles eastward of the steam route to
Eiji, and 150 miles westward of the steam route from Auckland
to Rarotonga. It is also almost exactly the same distance from
Auckland to the north-east as Norfolk Island is to the north-
west — i.e. } 600 sea-miles.


PREVIOUS HISTORY OF TIIK GROUP.
There is a difficulty in obtaining authentic ami exact informa-
tion about some periods of the early history of the islands,
owing in a great measure to the absence of any written records,
and partly also to the want of time to procure such information
as is known to exist in other countries; but the facts which are
here related with respect to the, early settlers are reliable, and
state all that is of consequence. With, regard to the first stages
in their history, I have been most fortunate, by the aid of many
friends, in obtaining access to, and copies of, the works which
describe the discovery and give the first account of them.
These works are now very rare and difficult to procure, and I
have therefore made full extracts from them with the view of
bringing together all that is known regarding the islands.
The preservation also of matter relating to the curly settlers is
important, simply on the ground that, as most of it exists in the
memory of a few people now living, their death would deprive
us for ever of what little is known. I am greatly indebted to
Mr. T. P. Checseman, Mr, W. B. White, Mrs. George Kelly,
Mrs. Pymble, Mr. J. H. Greenaway, Mr. 'll. G. L. kcay, Dr.
Hocken, Mr. C. W. Adams, Mr. James MoKerrow, Dr. Block-
well, and Mr. H. Cook for information collected and supplied.
When Captain Arthur Phillip sailed f rmu the Is hi of Wight
on the 13th May, 1787, to found the earliest of the Australian
colonies—New South Wales—he had amongst his fleet of eleven
ships a transport, “a clumsy vessel and heavy sailor,” the ” Lady
Penallynof 340 tons burden, commanded by Lieutenant
Watts, R.N. After discharging her living freight of 10»
female convicts at Port Jackson, the “Lady Pcnrhyn” sailed
from there on the sth May, 1788, on the further prosecution of
her voyage. There appears to have been a change in the. com-
mand of the vessel after her departure from Port Jackson, for,
from the following account, which is compiled from Lieutenant
Watts’s journal, Captain Sever would seem to have been in
charge, although it is stated in all the notices that I have, come
across that Lieutenant Watts was the discoverer of the islands
about to be noticed. After calling at Lord Howe’s Island, the
“ Lady Penrhyn” proceeded on her voyage to the eastward •
“ Nothing material occurred till the 30th June, when about
3 o’clock in the afternoon, they saw two islands' one hearing
6
the khkmadec ihuaxoh


MACAULEY ISLAND
N.N.E 1½ Miles.


N.E. | E. seven leagues, and the other E. by S. about six
leagues distant. Not having an opportunity of getting well in
with the land before night came on, they plied occasionally
under easy sail, and at daylight next morning made sail and
horo up for it. On approaching the southernmost land they
found it to form two barren isles, separated by a channel ahont
a quarter of a mile over, and apparently free from danger. The
north island lies in a N. » E. direction from there, and about
live leagues distant. At noon the body of the north island bore
N.E. by N. three miles distant; their latitude at that time was
30° 11/ S., and the longitude by lunar observation 180° 58' 3 7"
E. At 1 o’clock they bore round the west end of the island,
and hove to near the centre of it, about a mile off shore. They
were in hopes, from the appearance of the island at a distance,
that they should have found it productive of something beneficial
to the people (the scurvy gaining ground daily), but they were
greatly disappointed; both the north and south sides are sur-
rounded by rocks, over which the water flows, without the least
opening for a boat. However, Captain Sever ordered the small
boat to be hoisted out, and went on shore, accompanied by Mr.
Anstis. They found great difficulty in landing, and, when upon
the rocks, they had to mount a very dangerous precipice in
order to gain the level part of the island. This island forms
very high at the west end, and slopes gradually to the east end,
where it terminates in a cliff of a moderate height: both sides
have a range of these cliffs extending the whole length, which
are chiefly composed of white sand. The whole of the island
bears the strongest marks of being of volcanic production, having
great quantities of pumice-stone on it, and the rocks quite burnt
up. The top of the land was covered with a coarse kind of
grass, and the place affords great plenty of the wild mangrove.
The extent of this island is about two miles and a half, nearly
in the direction of E.S.E. and W.N.W.; the soil, a mixture of
mould and sand. The inhabitants are the brown gull, the light-
grey bird, gannets, and a paroquet of the same species with
those met with at Lord Howe’s Island. The gentlemen could
scarcely walk a step without being up to the knee in holes:
they saw a great number of rats and mice, and found many birds
lying dead at the entrances of their burrows. They saw no
appearance of fresh water, though, from the gullies that were
formed in various parts, the island must certainly be subject to
7
THEIR CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.


very heavy rains. This island was mimed MaeauleyY Island, after
G-. M. Macaulcy, Bsquirc, and tim two island* to the southwards
Curtis’s Mas, after Timothy awl William Curt is. Inquires. At
5 in the afternoon, the captain returning mi hoard. tin 1 boat was
hoisted in, and they made sail, standing to the eastward with a
moderate breeze at south-west. Ma.-uuley’s Island is situated
in 30° 9' S. latitude, and 180' J 58' 37” B. longitude.”*
Prom here the ff Lady Pcnrhyn ” proceeded to Tahiti, arriving
there on the 9th July, and, after refreshing the. erew, sailed for
Port Macao, in China, on the .Tin! July, arriving at that pla.-e
on the 19th October, 1788. It is worthy of note that, she was
the first vessel to visit Tahiti after Captain (Vh,L
Next, in 1/93, came the X*ranch licaivAdmind Ilruiii d'Butre-
casteanx, with his two ships "La Eeeherehe ” and l/KsjuC
rance, which were despatched jfrom Brauee in 1791 to seureli for
the unfortunate La Pcronse, who hud sailed to the South .Sean in
178/ on, a voyage ol: discovery, and had disappeared, none knew
whither, until Dillon, in 182(5, discovered the remain* of his
ships at Yanikoro, one of the Santa Cruz group. The Admiral,
after touching at the North Gape of New Zealand, pursued his
course to the north-north-east, and in March, 1793, discovered a
rock, which he named “ Eocher do L’Eaperauee” after one of
his ships. M. Labillardiere, in his “ Eolation du Voyage,” Ac
--a translation of which Dr. Hocken has kindly supplied me
with—says,—
"Next morning early [the 17th March, 1793] we recomiised
the Curtis Islands. They are two in number, very small and
distant from each other about two mvriametres (about twelve
miles]. The southern one is not more than two kilometre*
m length from north to south; it is steep, sterile, and strewn
with numerous rocks, whose highest point is about 100 metre*
[32oft.] above the sea-level. Their whitish colour appeared to
me to he limestone, like the majority of islands in these star*.
The other island [Macauley] is somewhat rounded and of the*
same height. It is steep on all sides; nevertheless one eonld
effect a landing at the western end. It is about 30° "Of
latitude by 179° 38' E. longitude [from Paris], About 6 oVloek
in the evening we observed at some distance north-north-west
some new land, which determined ns to lie to for the night** At
* “ The Voyage of Governor Phillip to Botany Bay: ” Dublin, 1790
8
THE KKRMAIIKC IHLAKtIS :


GURUS ISLANDS.
E.NE. Distance 5 Miles.


daybreak, we saw the land again, distant about five myriametres
[about thirty miles]; five hours after noon we were close to it,
and saw its whole outline, which was about two and a half myria-
metres [ls miles]. We gave the name of the Recherche to this
island, which is about 29° 20' 18" south latitude, and 179° 55'
east from Paris; its shape is almost triangular. Towards the
middle the ground rises about 500 metres perpendicular above
sea-level. We saw on its coast some small landslips where one
could land. \\ c could perfectly distinguish at these points the
disposition of the small beds or strata, parallel and horizontal, of
white stone, without doubt limestone. The interior was very
steep. Trees were seen on the most elevated parts. A shoal,
situated close to the north-west coast, extended 600 metres
[6(50 yards] at least in the same direction. Eight rocks, sepa-
rated from each other by some hundreds of metres, extended into
the sea to within half a myriametre’s [about three miles'] distance
east-south-east. Between the north-west and west points we
observed a little nook where would probably he found a good
depth, where would he perfect shelter from the east wind. We
saw between the north-west and south-east points a little stream
falling into the sea, and at a little distance, in a perpendicular
opening, we saw a largo block of dark red-coloured earth, per-
haps eday, and apparently incrusted by calcareous stone."—
(Tome 11., pp. 88, 89.)
Lahillardiere is, however, wrong in saying that the rocks are
calcareous ; the white strata they saw both here and at Macauley
Island are composed of pumiceous tuff. He says above also that
they called this island “ Recherchej" hut no trace of this name
is to be found in any other work or chart of the Pacific which
I have seen, excepting in the small map given in G. F. Angas's
“Polynesia," published in 1866, and there it is applied to
Macauley Island, The name by which the island is more gene-
rally known is “ Sunday" or “Raoul," and this latter is under-
stood to have been given to it by D'Entrecasteaux when he
discovered it, naming it after his first quartermaster, Joseph
Raoul. The Admiral also gave the general name to the group,
calling it “ Kermadec," after the. captain of his consort, Huon
Kermadec, who afterwards died of scurvy at the Solomon
Islands.
The next visitor to the group was a British vessel. From
Collins's “Account of the English Colony in New South


Wales,” Vol. 1., p. 530, we learn that the ship “ Britannia,” a.
hired transport, commanded by Mr. Haven, on her way home
from. Sydney, from whence she sailed on the 39th September,
1796, called at Norfolk Island to pick up the Lieutenant-
Governor, Captain King, and his family. She left that island tm
the 35th October,having also on hoard Colonel Collins, who was
Judge Advocate and Secretary to the colony. Collins says:
"On. the sth November, 1706, we found an island, named by
Lieutenant Watts (who first saw it in the * Lady Penrhyu,’
transport) Macauley Island. Sunday, the 6th, was passed in
examining an island which Mr Haven was decidedly of opinion
had never been scon before. It was situated in the. latitude ol
29° 15' S., and longitude IHl° 56' K. We found the laud high,
and it appeared to be well covered with wood. On the south-
west side of it is a bay, in which, from the colour of the water,
Mr, Raven thought there must he good anchorage : but at this
time there was too much surf breaking on the beach to render it
prudent to send a boat in. The aspect on Ibis side of the island
was romantic and inviting; hut on the other side the slum* was
bold, and in many parts ragged and bare. The whole appeared
to consist, like Norfolk Island, of hills and dales. We con-
jectured that there was fresh water in the bay on the south-west
side. The knowledge of, the existence of tins island can be of
no other importance than to cause navigators sailing in this route
to keep a good look-out, particularly in the night-t ime, as many
straggling rocks lie off the north side. From the eireumstnuee
of its being seen on a Sunday it obtained the name of Sunday
Island.”
We learn from this account that the previous discovery of the
island by D’Entrecasteaux was unknown, and also hear the
origin of its second and more common name.
For the thirty years succeeding the visit of the “ Britannia ”
scarce anything can be ascertained regarding the. islands, hut we
know that the early years of this century witnessed a great
development of the whaling enterprise, and in the trade carried
on with the numerous islands of the Pacific by ships hailing
from America, England, and Australia, and doubtless they were
visited by some of these vessels, and information as to their
character spread abroad. Situated as the group is in one of
tbe best whaling-grounds of the Pacific, Sunday Island came to
have a certain importance attached to it from the fact of its


being made use of as an “ ocean post-office ” by tbe whalers-
Vessels from Home here deposited letters and papers in a.
secure and well-known place for the crews of other vessels on
the ground, and homeward-bound ships collected and carried
away with them the mails of those remaining behind.
Polaek, in his book on New Zealand published in 1838,
Vol. 11., p. 318, after referring to the occupation of the
Chatham Islands by the Maoris, says, “ Since that period other
tribes have attempted to capture two colonial vessels for the
same purpose, to bo conveyed to Sunday Island, the largest of
the Curtis Group;” and in note 6, “This group is the resort
of whale-ships in the season : no less than thirty sail of shipping
has been seen from one islet called { French Rock/ employed in
the sperm-fishing. A few sailors reside on the islands.”
It would thus appear that Sunday Island was very nearly
having a Maori population. They would have thriven there
well.
In 1821 the group was visited by the French explorer Captain
Dumont D’Urville, in u L’Astrolabe.” It is believed that he
made a survey of Sunday Island; hut unfortunately I have
not been able to see a copy of his Voyage. Indeed, it is believed
no complete set is to be found in the colony; but the following
brief note lias been kindly obtained for me by Mr. C. W.
Adams, from one of the scientific volumes of the Voyage now in
the Museum library, Dunedin; “Captain D'Urville revisited
these islands in 18,27'; not one of them was inhabited; but, if
New Zealand owes its population to migrations from intertropical
regions, it is quite credible that these little islets might serve as
a resting-place for the canoes which made the passage from the
Tonga Islands to Te Ika-a-maui.”*
Although frequently visited by the. whalers and other passing
vessels, no permanent settlement appears to have taken place
until 1837, when the first bond fide settlers arrived.
Some time between the years 1830 and 1835 there came to Hoki-
anga a ship’s carpenter named Baker. He subsequently became
interested in a small vessel trading to the islands, and made a
voyage in her to Tutuila, in Samoa. Whilst there he and
* Through tho kindness of Mr. W. D. Campbell, of Sydney, I have since
obtained D’Urville’s account of the voyage of the “Astrolabe.” He merely
passed through the group in March, 1827, without landing or doing more than to
verify D’Entrecasteaux’s position of tho islands.


another man named Reid married tw« Sutmnm girls, ami were
taken by the vessel to Sunday Island mu! landed there, thus
becoming the first settlers. There A some doubt us {« the
month in which they arrived there, hut the year was IHU7.
They settled in Denham Bay, built houses, and remained there
a good many years, several children, being horn—five of the
Bakers, but how many of the other family is nut known.
Baker built a four-roomed house of raupo. eut from fire edges of
the little lagoon, with a stone chimney, v\c,. h.-ddc-. riveting a
large shed for storing potatoes, maize, yum\ taro, and kuiiiara
for barter with the whalers. They planted bananas and caught
and preserved fish and mutton-birds. A road was uhn cleared
through the hush to the lagoon, to enable Ihe whalers to ohiuin
water, which they did by rolling the casks over the intervening
beach to the boats. Large quantities of potatoes were grown
and firewood cut to dispose of to the whalers, who were frequent
visitors, the barque Danger,” Captain XichoK. being one of
them j ami from these visitors the settlers obtained Hour, sugar,
&c., and the. little clothing they required. ..Bread they made
themselves from pulverised maize. Boots and mock in—, were
not in fashion, but hats were manufactured from a growing
there (probably the Draeama), There were no other settlors on
the island during the time these two families lived there. In
184*3 Baker visited Samoa with his family, and from there in-
troduced the goats which are now so numerous on the island.
Reid was the first to tire of their isolation, and left with his
family, it is said, for New Zealand. Subsequently Baker, Ming
the loneliness of his position after the departure k his shipmate
(and also, it is said, being somewhat alarmed at the earthquakes,
which were "becoming more and. more frequent and severe), gave
up his island-home, and, embarking in the whaler " Ganges ”
with all his family, arrived at the Bay of Islands- in the winter
of 1848. He afterwards settled at Mangonui, where (Mr W.
B. White tells me) he took up the first section sold in that town-
ship. Several of Mr. Daniel Baker’s descendants are now* living
in New Zealand ; among them was Charles Baker, well known in
the Bay of Plenty as the genial master of the ss “ Stella ”
was diwnea aW two y«« “go- It is interna™,, nml
important to note that the first settlers on Sunday Island won-
from New Zealand.
Stemdale (Journal o£ the House of Representatives, A.-l,


1881.); says, "The first little community of Sunday islanders
consisted of three families of American whalers with Polynesian
half-caste wives j their children were very numerous, as likewise
very handsome and healthy” " The first settlers came about
1810.” In this Stcmdale is not quite right: he obviously con-
founds the early settlers with the subsequent and second party
of emigrants, who were Americans.
On the hUh April, 1810, Commodore Wilkes, in the "Vin-
cennes,” with the other vessels forming the United States
exploring expedition, sighted Sunday Island, hut the wind being
light and the sea rough he was not able to get near enough to
send a boat ashore. Ho says, "It is said to be inhabited by a
lew white men, and some of the officers reported that they saw
smoko.” If the settlers then occupying the islands had been
Americans, Wilkes would have mentioned the fact, as he was a
low days afterwards in communication with one of the many
American whalers frequenting those seas, and saw others at Tonga
and Fiji during his stay at those places.
It is not known when the American settler, Halstead, first
took up his residence on Sunday Island, but it was subsequent
to Mr. Baker’s leaving, and prior to the arrival of the second
party from Now Zealand, for he was living there when they
arrived ; hut, from the best information I can get, I believe it to
have been about 1850.
In 1851 Mr. Henry Cook with his Maori wife and daughter,
and two Maoris and their wives, embarked from the .Bay of
Islands in the ship "Louis,” of New Bedford, Captain Clements,
and, landing at Sunday Island, settled near Halstead, in West
Bay. Their object in so doing was to grow refreshments for the
whaling fleet.
At that time none but Halstead and his family were
living on the island. The settlors continued to produce the
same articles as the Bakers for disposal to the whalers, which
frequently called for supplies and water. Cook left again in
1853, and proceeded to Lord Howe’s Island. He says that he
was frightened away by an eruption taking place, though he
also says that " the only sign of anything approaching activity
in the crater was that there was always a certain amount of
heat, and in wet weather steam rose from it.” The crater here
referred to is however the little lagoon in Denham Bay, which
is not a crater at all, and the steam no doubt emanated from the
13
THKIK CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.


fumurcdos at the base of the cliff not for off, which an* still
sending forth a little vapour, Hunk saj, s that, although he
never descended to the hike situated in tin* ure;it crater, oltiers
of the party did, and they found the water salt, and apparently
deep. This is strange, if true, IW the water is quite fresh at.
the present time, and its surface is Bdl. above seudevel.
In 185-1' Sunday Island and the neighbouring sea aas sur-
veyed hy Captain 11, M. Denham, ot 11.M.5. '• lb-raid." Mr,
11. C. L. llcay, who was then an ellieer of the Herald," has
been kind enough to inform me that they arriv'd then- mi the
2nd July, 1854, and ware occupied until the ‘l7th in making the.
survey, having to slip their anchor even few days on account
of bad weather, which generally was front the south-west. At
the time of their visit an American from Ni-.\ York named
Halstead, his two Samoan wives, their families, and u Kanaka
were the sole inhabitants. They had emne there from the
islands and boon landed at their own request to avoid some
unpleasantness on board the whaler wliieh brought t hem. They
lived on the flat at the head of Denham Bay, near to the lagoon
of fresh water, and cultivated bananas, potatoes, kumanis, and
other vegetables, besides cutting firewood, preserving miitlon-
birds, and rearing poultry for barter with the whalers. Fish
were caught in great numbers with a net in Denham Buy. In
one of the frequent winter-gales that prevail here, the “ Herald "
lost both flukes of her anchor, and with ditlhmlfy got to sea:.
On the Bth July Fleetwood Denham, the eupmhVs’stm, died,
and was buried not far from the lagoon. His grave and the
neatly-engraved copper-plate, at the bead of it were seen hy us
in a good state of preservation on the 20th August last. *Mr.
He ay mentions that at the time ol their visit then* was a con-
siderable number of other graves in the same locality, where
some of the early settle.rs had "been buried. {Stories were cur-
rent at the time that these people had not altogether lived such
happy and peaceful lives as might have been expected, and that,
quarrels were frequent.
Dr. Macgillivray, the naturalist on hoard the “Herald"
during her voyage of nine years, made a collection of the
flora of Sunday Maud, which was afterwards described hy Mr.
(now Sir Joseph) Hooker in the Journal of the Idnneau
Society, 1857. His collection, however, comprised only about
one-third of the more extensive one procured hy Mr. T. R


Chccscman on the “ Stella ” expedition. Captain Denham’s
survey is wonderfully complete, and his map is replete with
information as to the island and surrounding seas, which is the
more remarkable considering the difficulties he laboured under
in having .such very had weather to contend with. Having ten
chronometers on board his ship he was enabled to fix the
position of the islands with great accuracy.
In 18(51, or about that time, a great calamity befell, the in-
habitants. Sterndale says (A.—l-, 1881) : ec There came to Sunday
Island a slaver on her way to Callao. She had on board over
two hundred Tokeran natives, amongst whom had broken out
a disease', of a typhoid nature. They were landed here (after
having been refused admittance by force at Tonga), and till died,
as did half the unfortunate settlers and their children; the rest
departed in the first whaleship that came along, fearing the
pestilence which seemed to have established itself in the island.”
The island was, however, again occupied for the fourth time
some time previously to 18(59, at which date a volcanic disturb-
ance took place, ■which drove the inhabitants away.* In 1870
Mr. Arundel, of the s.s. f Explorer,’ landed on Macanley Is-
land, and from thence (a distance of 68 miles) saw steam and
smoke from Sunday Island crater. He says that there were no
inhabitants there at that time; but it must have been again
occupied prior to 187.1, for Sterndale says : “ The last inhabi-
tant of Sunday Island was one Covat, a man of strange
experiences, with a Samoan wife. He is now in Fiji. He
quitted his island-home, on which he was very happy and had
reared a large family, in consequence of being frightened by a
volcanic disturbance. In the early part of the year 1872 the
water in the little fresh-water lake on Sunday Island began to
boil furiously, which was followed by a column of fire spouting
up from the middle of it. A whaleship in the neighbourhood,
seeing the flames, bore up, and took array Covat and his family,
together with a comrade of the whalemen whom they had landed
two weeks previously, his leg being broken while killing a fish.
Thus the place became finally deserted. In September, 1872, I
landed there, having previously stayed some time upon it in the
* A writer in Chambers's Journal for the 2nd May, 1887, says they were fright-
ened away by an eruption at Curtis Island. This eruption may possibly have
been in May or July, 1870, when the outburst at Tongariro, New Zealand, took
place, with which the disturbances at Sunday Island are said to have been con-
temporaneous.


year 1869 (myself and companions having lost our vessel, ‘which
had foundered at sea a hundred miles off: this place two days
previously). I found no one, and the place was much scorched
towards the interior. All signs of volcanic disturbance had dis-
appeared, with the exception of the dead trees upon the hillsides
surrounding the little lake, and some black cinders and ashes
which were strewn about the margin. All was becoming green
again, Covat’s house was uninjured, and the banana-trees had
fruit on them.”
After the departure of Covat the island remained uninhabited
for nearly nine years, though it had some transient visitors.
In July, 1874*, H.M.S. Challenger,” on her voyage from
Wellington to Tonga, passed through the group, but none ol her
people landed. They obtained, however, the only deep - sea
soundings which are known anywhere near the islands, and
which are referred to further on. In May, 1876, Captain Ihw.er,
of the schooner “ Vibelia,” was an unwilling resident, for some
few months, having been deserted by the mate of the vessel
whilst the captain went ashore for water. The mate, in point of
fact, ran away with the schooner, but, being driven by stress
of weather into Auckland, the Customs authorities seh.ed and
detained the vessel till her owners were communieateil with.
Again, in October, 1876, Dr. Stockwell, of Auckland, spent a
few days camped on the island. His description of the suite of
the island at that time shows how very rapidly the vegetation
had obliterated the signs of the then recent eruption.
In December, 1878, Mr. bell and his family, having heard
of the fertility of the soil, and the excellent position tin* island
occupied in the midst of the whaling-ground, removed there fnmi
Samoa, and took possession of the solitary isle, as it seemed u
kind of “no man's land,” open to the first comer. lit* Has
remained in occupation to the present day. He hrnughl with
him (besides seeds,plants, poultry, &c.) sixteen unlives of Xieue
or Savage Island, with the intention of going largely into the
business of supplying the whalers and others with rufiWhmtmtH,
but, owing to the decrease in the number of whaloships visiting
those parts, the scheme failed, and he had to send the natives all
back to their homes, much, I believe, to their regret, for they
bad got to appreciate highly the plenty of food ami fish to bo
obtained at Sunday Island as compared with the wjamty in
their own over-populated island.


MR BELL AND FAMILY - SUNDAY ISLAND.


BANANA GROVE, SUNDAY ISLAND.


In November, 1885, tlie New Zealand Government having
represented to Her Majesty’s Government the desirability of
annexing the Kermadeo Group and declaring- it a part of the
colony, instructions wort' sent to the Admiral commanding the
Australian station to hoist the British flag and to proclaim the
Queen’s sovereignty. This was carried out by Captain Clayton,
ol: 11.M.5, “ Diamond/’ who visited Sunday Island in July,
188(5, and erected a flagstaff near the landing-place at the north
emd of the beach in Denham Bay, and attached to it a Proclama-
tion, winch was seen by the “ Stella ” expedition in August
last, but unfortunately the wet had got into the case in which
the document was secured, and had obliterated the wording of
the Proclamation, all excepting the captain’s name and the date
—July, 1880.
THE ANNEXATION.
The “"Stella” anchored off the north side of Sunday Island
on the 15th August last, and on the 17th Captain Fairchild
hoisted the British flag on a staff erected near Mr. Bell’s home-
stead, at the foot of Fleetwood Bluff. The Proclamation annex-
ing the islands -■ was then read, and the islands declared part of
the Colony of New Zealand, the following persons being present :
Islanders : Mr. Thomas Bell, Mrs. Frederica Bell, Miss Henrietta
Bell, Miss Bessie Bell, Miss Alary 8011, Alisa Frederica Bell,
Miss Ada Bell, Master Thomas Bell, Master John Bell, Master
Raoul Sunday Bell, Master Henry Bell, Air. John Avent.
Government steamier “Stella”: Captain John Fairchild; Second
Mate, Norman Henderson; Second Engineer, A. W. Bethime;
Seaman A. Reynolds ; Seaman ’William Ashwell; Seaman H.
AicFarlanc; Seaman M. McKenzie; Seaman James Hughes.
A. H. Hutton, Treasury Cleric; S. Percy Smith, Assistant-
Surveyor-Gencral; IT. D. M. Haszard, Assistant - Surveyor ;
TL Kensington, Chainman ; T. F. Chceseman, Curator Auckland
Aluseum.
The same ceremony was performed at Macauley Island on the
24th August, by erecting a flagstaff, hoisting the British flag, and
reading the Proclamation as above, there being present Captain
Fairchild, two seamen of “ Stella,” T. F. Cheeseman, S. Percy
Smith, H. D.AI. Haszard, TL Kensington; and again at Curtis
Island on the morning of the 25th August, the weather being
* See Neio Zealand Gazette for 1887, page 954.
2


too rough to land, hut the anchor being down* the flag was
hoisted and the Proclamation read as before on board, the
“ Stella.”
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OP THE GROUP.
The islands are all volcanic : in two of them, indeed, signs of
volcanic activity are to be seen at the present day, though on a
limited scale. They appear to be situated on an oceanic plateau
which extends from New Zealand towards the Tonga group, on
which sounding’s are obtained at depths much loss than in the
adjacent areas, but still so great as to show that the islands
form, as it were, the tops of volcanic cones rising to a great
height above their bases. The depth of water between Sunday
Island and Macauley Island is 3,960 ft., and forty miles north of
the first named it is 3,600 ft. The group is situated in the
north-easterly production of the axis of the volcanic stone of the
Bay of Plenty, which, continued still farther north-eastward,
strikes the Tonga and Samoan groups, places where volcanic
action is still going on. As mentioned above, two, if not
three volcanic disturbances have taken place at the Ker-
madec Islands within recent years, and earthquakes were very
frequent there at one time : Mr. Bell told, me of a very
severe one which took place on the sth April, 1881 (the
disastrous earthquakes which killed over a thousand people
at Chios, in the Mediterranean, occurred on the 3rd and 4th
April, 1881); hut since the eruption of Tarawcra on the; K)th
June, 1886, they have ceased entirely. The eruption of 1870
or 1873 was evidently a very violent one : not only was the
great crater on Sunday Island much affected by the covering of
mud, stone, and pumice scattered all over it, hut a small island
was upheaved in Denham Bay, which, whilst it remained, formed
a shelter sufficient for vessels to anchor under. Several of the
whaling crews landed on it, amongst them Captain Hoosior,
and Reed, an officer of the notorious “Petrel” Mr, Henry
Cook also mentions that on his second visit to the island in the
Auckland whaler “Magellan Cloud” (this would be about
1877) the lagoon in Denham Bay was nearly dry, and that
TTM Q 1 u°£ mg jP°f, SQ ssion of the Bounty Islands, Captain George Palmer, of
H.M.S. Eosano, on the 9th July, 1880, says (App, to Jour. It of K„ IHB4,
paving brought up bottom, I took possession of them
in the name of Her Most Gtacious > hoisting the colours ami reading a
proclamation to the officers and ship’s company to that effect, Ac.”


MR BELLS SETTLEMENT - SUNDAY ISLAND.
Housing the flag.


■“ a mountain of sand had been thrown up by the eruption in
tlu' middle' of the bay; hut when I was there the action of the
waves had washed it down and left a shoal;” Lord G-corge
Campbell, in his account of the voyage of the “Challenger,”
page 137, says, “ The islands arc uninhabited, though not long
ago an American family lived on one of them; but we heard
from tlu; whaling ships at Tonga that they had been frightened
away by an earthquake, which, they say, has thrown up a new
island a little to the southward of the group.” We have
further proof of this upheaval in the “Wolverine flock,” a
feature in .Denham Bay which was added to the chart by Her
Majesty's ship of that name, and which, had it existed during
Captain Denham’s excellent survey, could not fail to have been
noticed, for the sea constantly breaks on it. The island lias
been described as being formed of cinders, lava, &c., and the
ground was hot when the sailors landed on it.
Being in south latitude 30°, the islands are outside the in-
line nee of (lie trade-winds, but are situated in the so-called
“ variables.” The prevailing winds are such as we have in the
north of New Zealand— i.e., south-west and westerly in winter
and north-east and easterly in summer. It is evident from our
experience, and that of the “ Herald” and others, that the wind
frequently blows with considerable force, and that strong breezes
not to say gales —arc the rule rather than the exception in
the winter. The rainfall appears to he plentiful, but still not
100 much. The climate is mild and equable as to tempera-
ture : judging from inquiries made, and our ten days’ ex-
perience, it is slightly warmer than the North of New Zealand,
but not to a very great amount. Doubtless the insular charac-
ter modifies the beat which might be expected from the latitude;
but still in some of the sheltered valleys facing the north we
experienced quite a summer warmth, Mr. Dell mentions the
occurrence of two hurricanes during the time he has been on
the islands; they occurred in January, 1879, and February, 1880,
and blew with great force, commencing in the south-east and
thence working round to the north-east, where they died out,
Wc saw the effects of them in the heaps of decaying logs at the
foot of the cliff in Denham Bay; but I am of opinion that
these must have been exceptional, or the vegetation of the island
would show signs of them. Frosts, of course, are unknown.
The following are the areas of the islands and islets of the


group: Sunday Island, 7,200 acres; Herald group of islets,
85 acres ; Macauley Island, 761 acres; Curtis Islands, 128 acres
and 19 acres; I/Esperance, 12 acres; total, 8,208 acres,
Sunday Island is twenty miles in circumference, and is
roughly triangular in shape. The highest point on it •
Moumoukai -is 1,723 ft. above sea-level. It is rugged anti
broken over a very large extent of its surface, and, except
in a few places, is covered with forest. Tlie most prominent
feature in its topography is the large crater, occupying a position
nearly central, hut somewhat nearer the northern shore. This
crater is a mile and three quarters long by a mile and a quarter
in width, and, as the bottom of it is hut 40ft, above sea-level, its
walls are generally over 1000 ft. high, and occasionally rise
to 1,500 ft. and 1,700 ft., though they fall to 180 ft. in out; place
on the north side. From the crater-rim, ridges extend in
several directions towards the coast, and in most eases end in
abrupt cliffs and bluffs, frequently I,oooft. high. The ridges
have many steep gullies scoring their sides, but, notwithstanding
this, a considerable area of somewhat broken, not: to say undu-
lating country may be found, not too steep for cultivation. Of
level land there is exceedingly little. In Denham Bay then* is a
level flat about a mile and three quarters long, with an average
width of 10 chains, though it is nearly double this in the centre,
containing about two hundred acres. About one-third of it, hud
been cleared and cultivated by the inhabitants; hut; it is now
abandoned to a few pigs and goats, and has become overrun with
heliotrope to such an extent that its eradication would he very
expensive. The polmtukawa and ngaio trees an* also beginning
to encroach on the old clearings, and will soon hide them. On
the north coast, extending westward for a mile and a quar-
ter from Fleetwood Fluff, is a flat of about two hundred acres,
partly bush and partly cleared, where Mr. Bell's eullhaliens are
situated, and where the soil is of the richest description. This
plateau is about 200 ft. above the sea-shore. Another small Hat
east of the .Bluff, of about ninety acres, overgrown with ngaio
and other wood, is not of much use, as the eruption covered
it thickly with pumice. A slope of thirty acres or so in
East Bay, and a valley of titty or sixty acres near Boat
Cove, exhausts the flat land of the island, excepting in the
bottom of the crater ; hut here, although then* is llni and
undulating land, it has been utterly destroyed by the eruption.
20
THE KBBMADBC ISLANDS :


LAKE (OLD CRATER) SUNDAY ISLAND
Shewing forest destroed by eruption 1872.


GREEN CRATER LAKE - SUNDAY ISLAND


at any rate for many years to come. Tire smaller of the two
lakes in the crater was the scene of activity in 1873. . Vast
quantities of pumice, rock, sand, and mud have keen ejected,
covering the old floor of the crater to a maximum depth of 12ft.,
the lighter fragments of which were cast on to the greater
■crater’s rim, and in their fall brought down all the forest with
them. A thinner deposit has been thrown on to the hills to the
north-west. The vegetation is slowly gaining a hold on the
crater-bottom, and clumps of pohntukawa, ngaio, tutu and
other shrubs are gradually hiding the desolate-looking ashes
from sight. This part of the island had been described before
the eruption as being covered with pohntukawa and nikau-palms,
and the soil of exceeding richness, such as would grow anything.
The Green Lake is a perfect little crater, and on its banks in
several places the steam still escapes, but not in any great
amount. The water is cold, and has somewhat of a mineral
taste. Steam also escapes from crevices in the precipitous cliffs
of Denham Bay, and warm water oozes out of the sand at
low water on the north coast, thus showing that the volcanic
forces have not entirely ceased action. The soil everywhere on
the island is very rich : it is formed by the decomposition of a
dark-coloured pumiceous tuff and a black andesitic lava, with
which is intimately mixed a. fine vegetable mould. Being
entirely forest-clad and uninhabited till so recently, the soil of
the island has not suffered the destruction by fire so common in
New Zealand, and I believe it is capable of growing anything of
which the latitude allows. The great luxuriance and richness
of the vegetation all bear witness to the excellence of the soil,
which is everywhere—except where destroyed hy the eruption,
and on the steep cliffs—the same rich loam. It has been sug-
gested that, if the forests were cleared off, the steepness of the
hill-sides would cause landslips; but I think this would not
occur to any great extent. The pumiceous tuffs are very porous,
and thus allow the water to percolate freely and quickly to
great depths, preventing that accumulation of surface-water
which engenders slips. The soil, indeed, is too porous, for the
want of water is one of the drawbacks to the island. Only in one
place did we see a small running stream; all the other numerous
gullies are quite dry, excepting here and there where a little
water stands in the hollows of the lava. Three of the four, lakes
on the island are, however, fresh water, but, excepting that in
21
THE IB CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.


Denham Bay, are from their position useless for economic pur-
y* The vegetation has a strong New Zealand Janus : indeed, it
is difficult to believe, when down in some dark gully, that one
is not in northern New Zealand. The forest is composed for
the most part of pohntukawa of all ages and sizes : our ship-
builders would here find a supply of tins valuable wood -which
would meet the requirements of the colony tor many years to
come In December the island is said to be a glorious sight,
covered as the trees then are with their fine crimson dowers.
A handsome variety of the Now Zealand iiikau-pahn grou* to a
large size and in great quantities. Mapon, whauwhan, karamu,
ngaio, karaka, kawakawa, and tutu are. the principal New Zea-
land forms. Two varieties of tree-fern grow to a very large
size. There arc other trees peculiar to the island or to Poly-
nesia, amongst which the Corumbium (a remarkably handsome
tree), the candleimt or tviitui, and a handsome Dnieauup the
root of which is very rich in sugar, are most noticeable. Ferns
abound everywhere, as docs the triangular-stemmed toetoe or
cutting-grass. This and the Cape-gonseherry take possession of
the cleared land, to the exclusion of anything else. Of the
introduced plants, we saw or know to flourish there the follow-
ing, all those seen looking most healthy : Two kinds ol edible
arum, fourteen varieties of banana, six varieties ot taro, a
launara, oranges, lemons, citrous, shaddocks, limes, custard-
apple, mamec-apple (papaw), rose-apple, yellow guava,, pome-
granate, two yams, melons, calabash, grapes, apples, pears,
peaches, Spanish chestnut, pineapple (in bearing), mango,
strawberries, Tonga bean, sugar-cane, ufilet (a very line kind
of yam), peanuts, marrowfat beans, kapi (a New Guinea plant
with an edible root 2ft. long, Ift. thick, with leaves Oft. to HID
long and 3ft. broad), and maize, besides ordinary vegetables in
great profusion.
Fish abound round the coast in great quantities. We caught
liapulca of great size, a variety of kahawai (a very band some
fish), kingfish or yellow-tail (a delicious fish, very superior tm*
eating to our New Zealand species), and {revalli, beside* others
whose names I have no idea of. Several turtle of the Imwk*-
bill kind were seen, but they are apparently very di fit mil to
catch. They do not breed here, but go north to the warmer
coral-islands.
22
THE KKIUIADKC ISLANDS 1


SUNDAY ISLAND PRODUCE.


Tht‘ land birds are very few—a tui (whose note differs some-
what from that of the New Zealand species), a kingfisher, a lark,
paroquets (on Meyer Island), a hawk, the grey duck, and,
strangest of all, a pukeko, whose presence here raises some
questions as to the origin of the avifauna most difficult to
answer. A pigeon like that of New Zealand, and other birds,
have become extinct since, the introduction of cats, which have
heeeme wild and increased very much. The little blight-bird
(Zusterop'O was seen, and it is said the larger cuckoo —the
kohoperoa is common in September, whilst the smaller one—
the pijnwharauroa—is more rarely seen. Strange to say, some
linnets mid goldfinches found their way here two years ago, but
they have not been seen since.
The albatross breeds hi Nugent and Napier Islets, the gannet
(without the yellow head) on Meyer Island; hut the bird of
most importance is the mutton-bird, which breeds here in
September and October. It lays its eggs on the ground
amongst the trees on the hills. The young are caught in
large numbers and preserved, forming the principal article of
diet of the islanders. They are hy no means unsavoury eating.
The species differs from the New Zealand one, which is very
apparent from its cry. Mr. Bell told me that our tihitihi does
come to one part of the island during the season to breed. Dr.
Stockwell describes the scene when the birds are breeding as
being most remarkable ; the place is literally covered with birds,
young and old, and the air is darkened by their flight. They
have no fear of man, and lighted constantly on his tent.
Tim wideawake gull frequents the island, and breeds on the
sand in Denham Bay, and the tropic-bird is an occasional
visitor.
Goats, which were introduced many years ago by the first
settlers, abound everywhere, and seem to thrive well. Mr. Bell
has three hundred merino sheep which he brought here from
Otago, and which do remarkably wellthey breed every nine
mouths, and the owes generally drop doublets. At present he has
a difficulty about feed for them, for the. European grasses sown in
the clearings are invariably killed by the caterpillar. He now
adopts the; plan of propagating the Poa pratensis hy dividing the
roots and hand-setting it. We saw about fifteen acres of grass
planted in this manner this season, which was doing well, whilst
the older crops were more luxurious than I ever saw that species


of grass attain to. There are a few pigs in Denham Bay, irom
which place they are prevented from spreading by the pre-
cipitous cliffs all round.
The only animal native to the island is a small grey rat,
which is very plentiful in summer, but is supposed to hybcrnate
during the winter. We saw one that had been partly eaten
by a hawk probably; it was about shi. long.
The island has no harbour, and the only place approaching
even to a bay is Denham Bay, on the west side, and this
is exposed to the west and south-west winds, which cause a
tremendous ocean-surf to break on the beach. The best land-
ing is at the north end of the beach, but with easterly weather
it is possible to do so anywhere. The beach is formed of
exceedingly fine grey gravel. On the north coast there art' two
beaches, one a mile, the other half a mile long, on which lauding
is practicable; at the latter place Mr. Bell keeps his boat, but the
best landing is at the Fishing-rock, where boats can lie along-
side the rocks in ordinary weather. At Boat: (love lauding
is also possible, but there is no beach, and the boulders make' it
it very awkward to do so. The only stream of water semi was
about half a mile northward of Wilson Point, and 200yds. from
a black-lava point which there juts out. In very fine westerly
weather it woiild be possible for a boat to laud here on the
boulders and procure water.
As there is no harbour, vessels have to he guided by the
direction of the wind as to where they should anchor, choosing
the sheltered side of the island for so doing. Anchorage on
good sandy bottom seems to he obtainable in most, places. In a
strong easterly breeze Captain Fairchild anchored in Boat Cove,
and found fair shelter close to the short 1 , hut, as far as our
experience goes the anchorage quite close under Meyer Island
is the best in easterly weather ; we found good shelter here in a
south-east and easterly gale, when Denham Bay was not nearly
so good on account of the heavy seas rolling in there.
The difficulty of landing or shipping cargo is the most serious
drawback to the island, and until this is remedied its un-
deniable advantages of soil and climate are in a great measure*
lost, I venture to say, however, that this difficulty may he to
a certain extent obviated by simple means in several places by
making use of a wire rope, one end of which should he
anchored out and the other fastened to the top of the dills, and


FISHING ROCKLANDING PLACE - SUNDAY ISLAND


NORTH ANCHORAGE - SUNDAY ISLAND.


down which cargo' might be transported as* on a wire tram-
way. This would be possible in several places, and, farther,
both at Fishing-rock and Boat Cove, cargo could be frequently
shipped by means of a crane which would lift it beyond the wash
■of the waves.
It appears to me that it is premature to attempt settlement
on Sunday Island at present whilst the colony has still plenty
of land available and nearer to a market, but the day will
come when its rich soil and fine climate will attract settlers.
Situated as it is, only about fifty or sixty hours 5 steam from
Auckland, tropical fruits could be gathered there ripe and
shipped to most parts of New Zealand in a fresh state, instead of
in the stale condition in which we' now receive them from Poly-
nesia. A climate and a soil which will produce new potatoes and
maize any month of the year, and where bananas take only
twelve months to grow 20ft. high, and then bear full crops of
fruit, cannot but be a valuable acquisition, and when the diffi-
culty of shipping has been overcome the island could produce
enormous quantities of these and other fruits. Until these
shipping appliances have been provided it would seem that the
production should be confined to some very portable and yet
valuable commodity, and I think that silk, in the form of
cocoons and grain, would form one of such articles. Arrow-
root would, no doubt, grow well, as it does so in northern
New Zealand. Olives also would flourish there. As a-winter
resort the island may yet find a use. The coast scenery is very
fine —indeed, under some conditions quite grand.
We saw a number of dressed and undressed kauri logs strewn
around the coast, the brands on which showed them to have come
from the northern rivers, thus showing the set of the currents.
An Australian cedar log was also seen in Denham Bay.
The Herald Islets form a group of eight islets and rocks
lying on the north-east side of Sunday Island, and from one to
two miles off it. They are mostly bare rocks, breeding-places of
the sea-gulls; but Meyer Island (485 ft. high) is a little larger,
containing about thirty acres, and, notwithstanding its steepness,
is covered on the west side with bush, principally pohutukawa
and ngaio. The soil is remarkably rich, being a product of the
decaying vegetable matter and guano. At the time of our visit
the young mutton-birds were to be found there in hundreds,
whilst the green paroquets were so tame as to be easily caught
25
THEIR CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.


by a snare. The islet possesses a fine little boat-harbour on the
west side. There were goats here at the time ot the “ Herald'’s ”
visit, but we saw none.
Macauley Island, situated sixty-eight miles to the south oi
Sunday Island, is the next in point of size, though it is but about
a tenth of the area of Sunday Island— i.e., 756 acres. It is a
little over a mile and a quarter long from east to west, and
somewhat over a mile north-and-south. Seen from any side
it presents a pleasant appearance. It is also an old volcano,
but now quite extinct. The highest point, which is situated at
the western end, is 781 ft. above the sea-level, and from hero the
surface inclines to the east by gentle slopes and easy undula-
tions, somewhat cut up by shallow gullies, and the whole
clothed with a beautiful sward'of grass, so smooth and so green
as to resemble in some parts an English lawn. Nearly three-
fourths of the island is plonghable laud, the soil being a due,
dark volcanic loam, the most recent product of the little crater
on top. The island is surrounded by perpendicular cliffs, 600 ft.
high at the western end and from there decreasing in height,
towards the cast, at which side they are about 200 ft. above the
sea-level. These cliffs may be sealed on the north side at a
place we named the “ Lava Cascade,” from the fact of a flow
of andesitic lava having followed down one of the little gullies
from the crater above and then fallen over the el ill, forming a.
rude staircase. Landing is possible in a little sandy hay on the.
east side of the island, where Ilaszard Islet forms a shelter, and
it is probable that from it a way is practicable up to the level
above, though we had not time to ascertain the fact. Captain
Fairchild landed us on the north side, on the rocks; but this
would only be practicable with a trained crew like that of the
“ Stella.” The vegetation is, as has been said, principally grass
of two kinds —one a fine, smooth, close-growing one ; and another
of a coarser kind, but with an equally close habit. The mi f ling-
grass grows in bushes dotted here and there, and a few low-
shrubs of Corumbium and ngaio were also seen, in addition to a
few ferns in the sheltered spots. But at one time there must
have been scrub of a larger growth, for we observed the charred
stumps of some ngaio of a good size. lamat a loss to con-
ceive what plant Lieutenant Watts refers to under the name of
“mangroves,” for no such thing does, or ever could, grow there.
We were not able to ascertain whether permanent water is pro-
32
THE KKKMADHC ISLANDS :




curable ; it was .seen in one of the gullies lying in tlie hollows
ol: the lava, but this was after some heavy rain of a few days-
previously. Iho island abounds in goats—we estimated that
wc saw over a hundred, hut amongst them very few kids, and
the cause of this wo assign to the presence of a fine black-and-
white dug\ which doubtless hunts the kids for food. The
presence ol this dog seems to point to there being permanent
water on the island. How he came there is a mystery ; either
he was left; behind hy some party who possibly landed to hunt
the goats, or In' may be the lust survivor of some shipwrecked
crew, We regretted being obliged to leave him there, for he
will in time probably kill all the goats, and thus may deprive
some .shipwrecked persons of necessary food, although, I would
observe, the quantity of fish and crabs in the rocky pools on the
shore am! the numbers of large limpets (as big as small saucers,
and good eating) would serve as food for a length of time to
any one east away here.
Off the north coast of the island we discovered a dangerous,
rock nut noticed in the chart or mentioned in the sailing direc-
tions. It is situated N. W., distant two miles and nine-
teenths from the highest part of the island, and appears to have
about on. or HIT of water on it. Captain Fairchild named it
£ ‘ .Mae Outlaid Hock,” after the mate, who first saw it. There
art; 15 fathoms of water at two cables’ length to the west of it.
There appear to be no other dangers round the island that do
not show. The passage between Macau!ey and Haszard Isles is
available for boats, and appears to have a depth of 10ft, to 15ft.
of water in it. The “ Stella ” anchored in 18 fathoms about
about half a mile to the north of the Lava Cascade.
'We saw several hawks, some blight-birds, and a large number
of green paroquets, so tame that some of the men caught them
by putting a hat over them. Both Sunday and Curtis Islands
are visible from Maeanley Island.
Cttrfh hlund» are two remarkably rocky islets situated
twenty-two miles from Maeanley. They are separated hy a deep
channel about a quarter of a mile wide, in which we nowhere
got less than 15 fathoms of water, and in which there are no
dangers for the largest vessel, or they certainly would have
been semi in the very heavy .sea running on the two visits the
“ Stella ” paid to the islands. The larger island is about a mile
mid a half in circumference, and half a mile in length south-
27
THEIR CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.


east and north-west. The cliffs rise perpendicularly all round—
indeed, sometimes overhang, except at the north-west end, where
there is a fine little cove, which runs in for about a hundred
yards, with plenty of water in it. The head of tins cove leads
right into the crater, and forms the only place where lauding is
at all practicable.
The crater is very interesting, inasmuch as it is still active,
though in the solfatara stage, and sends forth a considerable
amount of steam from numbers of fumaroles scattered over its
bottom. It is formed by an encircling ring of steep precipitous
cliffs—excepting where the cove breaks in on the north-west
side—of about 400 ft, to 450 ft. altitude. The diameter of the
crater is about 150yds., and its floor is formed by a flat of mud
and rocks, amongst which the hot water bubbles up in numbers
of places, and fearful-looking pools of boiling mud seethe and
twirl their contents about. A strong stream of hot water runs
away from the crater into the cove, the salt water of which is
quite warm for 50yds. from the shore. In several places on the
cliffs the steam escapes from crevices; indeed it docs so also on
the outer cliffs of the island quite a,way from the crater.
Sulphur is found, but in no great quantities. Our visit to the
island was of very short duration, as night was coming on, and
the, following morning the wind and sea got up so much as to
oblige ns to leave. 1 a,in thus unable to say what the top of the
island is like, but it evidently is a mere expansion of the crater
rim, on which here and there a few patches of green Mesem-
bryanthemum or ice-plant, and one or two other plants, do not
even serve to hide the bare and rugged rocks. The island is, in
fact, the mere rim of a, crater, projecting above the sea. The
other islet—which, as it had no name, I ventured to call after
Mr. T. Ik Cheeseman—is a mere; rock with a little of the ice-
plant growing on it, but of no interest or use excepting as a
breeding-place for sea-birds, many of which were seen on both
islands.
L’Esperance, or Brind , or French Rock is situated fifty-two
miles S. W, (mag.) from Curtis Island. It is a bare and
desolate-looking rock about 250 ft. high and about 250yds. long.
Its steep and rugged sides, up which the great waves were dash-
ing, prevented our attempting to land. On the east side there
is a peculiar crater-like hole in which shelter could he obtained
by any one so unfortunate as to he wrecked here. The rock is of
28
THE KERMADEG ISLANDS :


CURTIS ISLAND CRATER
From the North


L'ESPERANCE ROCK.
South - One mile distant.


a dark-brown colour, with some portions o£ a reddish hue, which
have somewhat the appearance of scoriaceous lava, and this
seems to have been ejected from the little crater. A few ice-
plants grow on the more level parts of the rock, and vast
numbers ol pretty little dove-colonrcd terns dot the rocks and
cover the sea in its neighbourhood. It is not likely that there
is any water on it. The rock could be put to no possible use,
though it serves as a visible landmark to the dangerous Havre
Hock situated ten miles north-north-west of it, and which is
just awash.
In conclusion I would submit, for the consideration of the
(lovetnmeiit, the advisability of having’ some provision made in
Macaulay and Curtis Islands for distressed crews in the event of
shipwreck, and that some arrangement should he made for a
periodical visit to the group by the Government steamer, or by
one of the island traders. The cost of providing a hut, water-
tanks, and a few provisions would not be great, whilst it would
possibly be the means ol: saving' life. Should the Government
steamer visit the islands again, in. the winter, I would also-
suggest that some trees he planted on Macauley Island, and
possibly also on Curtis Island.
By Authority: Gbouuk Didbbuby, Government Printer, Wellington.
29
THEIE CAPABILITIES AND EXTENT.
