

The Care
and
Operation
of your
OLDSMOBILE
TRUCKS AND
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
1937
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S LIMITED


OLDSMOBILE TRUCK
SPECIFICATIONS AND LICENCE DATA
Commercial Truck
Series Series
Wheelbase 126 in. 131 i & 157 in.
Tyre Size 6.50 x 16 x 6 ply 6.50 —20
7.00—20
Number of Cylinders... _. 6 6
Bore .. 3-7/16 in. 3-7/16 in.
Stroke .. 4$ in. J 4| in.
Piston Displacement 229.7 cu. in. 229.7 cu. in.
Horsepower (R.A.C. rating) 28.4 28.4
Horsepower (actual) ... 78at3200r.p.m. 78at3200r.p.m.
Firing Order 1-5-3-6-2-4 1-5-3-6-2-4
Battery Capacity, 20-hr. rate 105 a.h. 105 a.h.
Spark Plug Type P.Z.14-B. P.Z.14-B.
CAPACITIES
Petrol Tank _. 15 gals. 15 gals.
Cooling System 13 quarts 15 quarts
Transmission l£ pints 5-£ pints
Differential 4 pints 7i pints
Engine Oil Capacity (Refill) 5 quarts 5 quarts
ADJUSTMENTS
Valve Lash or Clearance
Inlet—Hot 008 in. .008 in.
Exhaust —Hot 011 in. .011 in.
Distributor Point Opening _. .020 in. .020 in.
Spark Plug Gap 035 —.037 in. .035—.037 in.
Clutch Pedal Lash or Free
Movement ... li in. in.
Tyre Pressure —Minimum
6.50 x 16 40 lbs.
6.50 x 20 50 lbs.
7.00 x 20 55 lbs.
The truck serial number is stamped on left front side member
just back of front wheel. The engine number is stamped on the
upper front left side of the cylinder block.


IMPORTANT
The differential (rear axle) of this truck requires
the use of an E.P. (Extreme Pressure) lubricant, and
must be drained and flushed out every 5,000 miles
or at least twice a year and refilled with E.P.
Lubricant only. The use of any other kind of
lubricant, or the mixing of two different makes
of E.P. Lubricant is not recommended, and will
possibly necessitate extensive replacements of
parts if used.
Obtain full information from your Oldsmobile
Dealer, who will be able to supply a correct lub-
ricant when needed.
Hypoid Lubricant Nasco E.P. No. 1, obtainable
from all General Motors —Holden’s Distributors
and Dealers is for this purpose.


The
Care and Operation
of your
OLDSMOBILE
TRUCKS
and
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
1937
V 6
792-600—5/37


lOLDSMOBILEI
of
&
"V
•-5P
A*
V
X
Sfe
*S
X*.
ANY OLDSMOBILE OWNER
experiencing defective workmanship or material
on an Oldsmobile Truck under the terms of General
Motors-Holden's Standard Warranty is invited to
call on any Authorised G.M.-H. Dealer in Australia,
where such defect will be remedied without cost
to him for labor or material.


A MESSAGE
TO OLDSMOBILE TRUCK OWNERS
Whether your 1937 Oldsmobile is your first truck or your tenth,
you are certain to expect a great deal from it. You expect it to
live up to its reputation to haul goods for you dependably and
economically.
Why not, therefore, take the time to become really acquainted
with your truck? Learn what it can do and what a vital part the
owner and the driver have in its performance.
It is the purpose of this book to make the introductory process
as brief and effective as possible. You will find the collective
experience of thousands of other truck owners reduced to a few
crisp thoughts that can be stored away for future use.
Efficient and economical transportation is your aim. Throughout
this book you will find hints to help you get better performance
and reduce your transportation costs.
We therefore suggest that you read thoroughly the pages which
follow. The time you spend with this book will be amply
rewarded, through the greater transportation value you will derive
from your Oldsmobile truck.


Driver's Compartment
1. Ignition Lock
2. Choke Control Button
3. Light Switch Button
4. Throttle Control Button
5. Horn Button
6. Gear Shift Lever
7. Reverse Gear Control
8. Cowl Ventilator Control
9. Hand Brake Lever
10. Brake Pedal
11. Clutch Pedal
12. Starter Pedal
13. Headlamp Dimmer Switch
14. Accelerator Pedal
15. Fuel Gauge
16. Water Temperature Indicator
17. Speedometer
18. Oil Pressure Gauge
19. Ammeter


THE CONTROLS
OF THE 1937 OLDSMOBILE TRUCK
Improvements are constantly being made in the controls of
motor vehicles, and it is advisable for every driver to become
thoroughly familiar with the controls of his truck and to learn
how to use them most effectively.
THE DAILY INSPECTION
Truck owners all over the world have found it
profitable to get each driver to form the habit of
a brief inspection and test each day before start-
ing out. This is especially important when the
truck is used by two or more drivers alternately.
A suggested routine, which need take only a mo-
ment but which may save many minutes and help
to prevent accidents, is as follows:
Before starting, see that—
1. There is enough fuel in the tank.
2. Engine oil is at the proper level.
3. Radiator is full of water.
4. Headlamps, tail lamp and windshield wiper are
in working order.
5. Load is evenly distributed.
6. Tyres are properly inflated.
In the first 100 yards of running—
1. Check brake operation and condition of road
surface to determine safe stopping distance.
2. See that oil pressure gauge is operating.
Ignition Lock —The ignition lock is located at the lower centre
of the instrument board and is operated by the key provided. In-
serting the key and turning it clockwise, switches on the ignition.
Turning the key back until it can be removed, switches off the
ignition and locks it. The key cannot be removed with the igni-
tion on.


Throttle Control — The accelerator pedal is spring-control-
led, returning automatically to its closed, or normal, position. This
makes it a convenient control for use in operating the truck.
The speed of the engine can also be controlled by the throttle
button on the instrument board, identified by the word 'Throttle.’
It is an auxiliary control that can be used when it is desired to
run the engine at a fixed speed. It is also used when starting the
engine.
Choke Control —When starting a cold engine, it is necessary
to provide a mixture richer in fuel than when starting a warm
one. The choke control button on the instrument board, identified
by the word "Choke,” operates a device on the carburettor that
helps to control the fuel mixture.
Correct use of the choke is important. It should be carefully used
in accordance with the instructions for starting the engine.
Starter Pedal —The starter is operated by pressing on the
starter pedal located on the toe-board near the accelerator button.
Lighting Control —The lighting system has two controls: a
lighting switch operated by a button on the instrument board,
identified by the word "Lights”; and a foot-controlled'Switch on
the toe-board.
LIGHTING SWITCH
BUTTON
The button on the instru-
ment board controls the
lights.
HEADLAMP BEAM
CONTROL
With the headlamps turned
on, the upper or lower
beams may be selected by
means of the foot switch.


When rhe button on the instrument board is pushed all the way
in, the head, instrument and parking lamps are switched off.
There are two other positions of this lighting switch button.
First Position —Pulling the button out to the first position turns
on the parking and instrument lamps.
Second Position —Pulling the button out to the second position
turns on rhe head and instrument lamps.
In this position, either the upper or lower headlamp beams may
be selected alternately by pressing the foot-controlled switch on
the toe-board. The use of this switch permits the driver to elim-
inate headlamp glare to approaching vehicles and yet provide
good illumination along the side of the road.
LAMP BULBS • Bulb No. CP.
Headlamps (double filament, prefocused type) 1194 l 32 —21
Parking Lamp 55 \\
Instrument Lamp 55
Tail Lamp 63 3
Stop Lamp 63 3
Ammeter —The ammeter indicates the rate at which electric
current is being supplied to charge the battery, or the rate at
which it is being taken from the battery.
With the engine running at all speeds under about 8 miles per
hour, the ammeter needle should move to the negative ( —)
side. This indicates that the battery is discharging.
At about 8 miles per hour the generator starts charging and the
ammeter needle should move to the positive (+) side. The
amount of current will increase with the engine speed until the
maximum is reached at about 25 miles per hour. At this speed
the ammeter will normally read 14 to 16 amperes with all lights
turned off.
Oil Pressure Gauge —The oil pressure gauge indicates only
the engine oil pressure, showing whether the engine oil is cir-
culating. It does not show the quantity of oil in the crankcase.
Normal reading of the pressure gauge is 25 to 30 at any speed
above 15 miles per hour, after the engine has warmed up.
Make a practice of glancing at the oil pressure gauge occa-
sionally when operating the truck. If, after starting a cold
engine, the hand moves above 40, drive slowly until the reading


drops to normal. If it does not drop to normal after a few
minutes of driving, it may indicate that the engine oil is of too
heavy a grade for the climate, and your Dealer should be
consulted.
AMMETER AND
OIL PRESSURE
GAUGE
Showing average readings
under normal operating
conditions.
FUEL GAUGE AND
WATER TEMPERATURE
INDICATOR
Showing average engine tem-
perature reading under nor-
mal operating conditions.
Caution —If the oil pressure gauge should fall to zero while the
engine is running, the engine should be immediately stopped and
the reason for the drop in pressure determined.
Water Temperature Indicator — The water temperature
indicator shows the temperature of the cooling water in the
engine. This is a valuable instrument, as it gives the operator
considerable information regarding the working of the engine
under unfavourable road and load conditions. It should be
watched carefully. For further information on engine efficiency
and cooling, see page 34.
Fuel Gauge —The fuel gauge indicates the amount of fuel in
the tank. It operates only when the ignition switch is turned to
the "on” position.
Gear Shift I xver —The gear shift lever is used to shift the
transmission gears. First speed is used in starting the truck and
in going up very steep hills or in pulling through sand or


mud. Second speed (also third speed on the Truck Series) is used
under similar conditions when a higher truck speed is possible
and is also useful in traffic. High speed is used for all ordinary
driving.
Commercial Series —The silent, Synchro-Mesh transmission pro-
vides quiet operation and ease of shifting.
When shifting from second speed to high speed or from high
speed to second speed, the best results will be obtained by per-
mitting a slight hesitation in neutral while exerting pressure
on the shift lever ball in the direction of the shift.
Truck Series —These models are built with a selective-type trans-
mission providing quiet operation and ease of shifting. There
are four forward speeds and one reverse. Reverse gear can be
engaged only after the latch on the shift lever has been raised.
When shifting gears, the best results will be obtained by per-
mitting a slight hesitation in neutral before pushing the lever
on into gear. Be sure the lever is pushed all the way, in order
to engage the gears fully.
Clutch Pedal —Pressing on the clutch pedal disconnects the
engine from the transmission for the purpose of shifting the
transmission gears. There should be in. free movement of the
clutch pedal before the clutch starts to release and \ in. clearance
between the pedal arm and the toe-board. Maintenance of these
measurements will help to keep the clutch in good condition.
Driving with the foot on the clutch pedal will cause rapid wear
of the clutch facings and release bearing.
Brakes —The power and speed of modern trucks have made
drivers and owners more conscious than ever of the need for
good, efficient brakes that will assure quick, positive stop-
ping. The new Oldsmobile trucks are equipped with the latest
type of hydraulic brakes. These brakes are so designed that
smooth, quick stops can be made with little effort on the part of
the driver.
The brake pedal operates the hydraulic service brakes on all
four wheels. These are the ones ordinarily used in stopping the
truck.
The handbrake lever is located in the centre of the driver’s com-
partment near the gear shift lever. It operates mechanically the
rear wheel brake shoes and is normally used as a parking brake.


HOW TO START YOUR ENGINE
Set the hand-brake lever and see that the gear-shift lever is in
the neutral position. It is also advisable to depress the clutch
pedal, especially in cold weather.
Turn on the ignition switch. In cold weather, with a cold engine,
pull out, all the way, the choke button which is located on the
instrument panel, identified by the word "Choke.” Pull out,
part way, the throttle button, identified by the word "Throttle.”
Press down on the starter button, and hold it for a few seconds
until the engine starts.
After the Engine Fires —Push in the choke button about half
way and push the throttle button all the way in. Do not keep
the choke button out any more than enough to make the engine
run smoothly.
General Starting Hints: Use the choke sparingly. In hot weather,
or when the engine is warm, it is usually possible to start with
very little choke or none at all. In this case, the -throttle button
should be pulled out until the engine starts.
Do not race the engine immediately after starting, especially if
it is cold.
Do not pump the accelerator. Allow the engine to warm up for
a minute or two before driving the truck. Do not drive with
choke-button pulled out any further than necessary. Push it all
the way in as soon as the engine temperature will permit smooth
running in this position.
Cold Weather Hints: For easy starting in cold weather, be sure
the correct grade of oil is used in the engine, transmission and
differential, and that the battery is fully charged. Follow the
recommendations given on pages 28 to 33 of this book and also
on your Lubrication Chart for best results.
WHEN THE TRUCK IS NEW
A little extra care in driving when the truck is new will be well
repaid. While the tedious break-in period is now largely a
thing of the past, due to the precision with which your engine
is built, still it is necessary to drive so as to give the engine time
to acquire the hard, mirrorlike bearing surfaces so essential for
satisfactory performance and long life. The process is not
troublesome. There are only a few things to remember; —


1. Make sure the crankcase contains the right quantity and
quality of lubricating oil. Buy the correct grade of the best
oil you can find, and keep it at the required level. Do not
over-fill.
2. Always start the engine carefully and according to instructions.
3. Give the engine time to warm up before accelerating.
4. Change engine oil at five hundred miles in accordance with
the recommendations given on the lubrication chart enclosed
with this book.
5. Drive at speeds not exceeding 30 miles per hour for the first
one thousand miles.
6. Change engine oil at fifteen hundred miles.
7. Continuous high speed driving should not be attempted until
the truck has been driven two thousand miles. Do not drive
at top speeds until the engine has been thoroughly warmed
U P-
Note. —The speed at which you drive will naturally be governed
by local laws and regulations.
BODY DESIGN
When the truck chassis and body are purchased complete as a
unit produced by General Motors —Holden’s, the owner is assured
of correct body design. One of the most important factors in
designing a body for any truck chassis is that of correct weight
distribution. This has an important influence on the performance
and long life of every part of the truck.
Every such part is designed to carry a certain load. Obviously
these units will last longer and give better service if they are
not overloaded or abused. When, therefore, the truck chassis
only is purchased from General Motors —Holden’s, and the body


Diagram showing the effect of overloading which may temporarily stress
certain of the truck parts beyond the safety factor
is supplied from an outside source, the same careful attention
should be given to this element of body design.
The proper distribution of the load through correct body design
is as important as keeping within the rated capacity of the chassis.
Weight Distribution —To satisfy the ideal requirements of
design as regards weight distribution, engineers say that two-
thirds of the weight should be carried by the rear axle and one-
third by the front axle. However, it is found commercially
practical to design so that not more than 75% of the total weight
of chassis, body, and pay load is carried by the rear axle, leaving
25% of the load to be carried by the front axle. The major
proportion of the weight should be carried between the axles.
The total loading of the rear axle should not exceed the axle
rating guarantee, which has been scientifically determined for the
construction, materials, and dimensions of the axles available.
DRIVING FOR PERFORMANCE—ECONOMY—
AND SAFETY
Truck owners have watched with interest the progress which has
been made in improving the performance of motor vehicles with-
out proportionately increasing the operating cost for fuel, oil,
tyres, and adjustments. Driven at the same speeds as the trucks
of only a few years ago, those of to-day can actually out-match
them for economy. Since, however, to-day’s trucks can be driven
faster and will get away more quickly from a standing start, the
economy factor is often disregarded.


Those operators who want performance with economy can
profitably spend some time in analysing how their trucks are
driven, to determine if any improvements can be made which
will be reflected in lower operating costs. Often, without ap-
preciably lowering the performance, worthwhile savings can be
made.
FUEL CONSUMPTION
Probably the most important single factor influencing fuel con-
sumption is speed. With commercial vehicles, this does not neces-
sarily mean road speed. Often high engine speeds are necessary
in the intermediate gears, when pulling up-hill or through
sand, mud or gravel.
Tests which show that an increase in speed involves an increase
in fuel consumption have been made so often as to be no novelty,
but it is surprising to find that there is a general lack of know-
ledge concerning this important fact. While actual figures might
be misleading, due to the differences in body type and loading, it
is well for truck owners and drivers to remember that as the
speed goes up, the quantity of fuel consumed will also go up,
in practically direct ratio to the speed.
Of course, there are other items besides speed which affect fuel
economy. Quick acceleration, hill climbing, excessive use of
the brakes, and frequent starts and stops all use up fuel at a
faster rate than straight running: and different drivers will use
differing amounts of fuel to cover the same route in the same
truck.
FUEL SAVING HINTS
1. Study how to start the engine quickly. As long as it is
being cranked without firing, fuel is being consumed with-
out return.
2. Use the accelerator correctly. Avoid feeding more fuel to
the engine than it needs.
3. Warm up the engine judiciously —don’t race it.
4. Do not overload the truck.
5. Drive in high gear as much as you can, without causing engine
to labour. Never drive as fast as you can in lower gears.
6. Drive uniformly and at speeds below 30 miles per hour to
save fuel.


7. Coast to a stop with engine running, clutch engaged, and the
throttle closed whenever you can.
8. An idling engine uses fuel —shut it oft when the truck is
stopped for any length of time.
9. Keep the brakes adjusted so they do not drag.
10. Never fill the fuel tank to overflowing.
11. Keep tyres inflated to recommended pressures.
12. Keep the battery charged —a feeble battery hasn’t the power
to start your engine quickly.
13. Keep the cooling system clean and the radiator filled to the
correct level.
14. Have the engine tuned regularly.
15. Have the chassis lubricated systematically and regularly as
recommended on your lubrication chart.
OIL CONSUMPTION
Just as there is a definite relationship between speed and fuel
consumption, an added toll is exacted in the form of increased
consumption of lubricating oil.
In the process of engine lubrication, some of the oil works past
the piston rings into the cylinders, where it is burned with the
fuel mixture. This is not a disadvantage. It is necessary for
efficient lubrication of the pistons and cylinder walls.
The right grade of lubricating oil should, therefore, always be
used for the engine. Remember that the trend is toward lighter
oils rather than the heavy-bodied oils formerly acceptable. They
are equally efficient at operating temperatures and more so when
cold, so that they get through the bearing clearances quickly and
lubricate well as the engine is warming up.
A big advantage of light engine oil is the saving in fuel which
results from the decreased internal friction—a saving which more
than compensates for any slight increase in oil consumption.
Do not overfill the crankcase. The dipper stick or depth gauge
is provided so that you can maintain the correct level between
the marks provided. Overfilling not only wastes oil, but it may
cause air bubbles to be formed in the oil which might tend to


prevent the lubricant from reaching the bearings in sufficient
quantity.
Keep the oil level between the marks on the dipper stick for
economy and efficient engine lubrication.
Select the brand of oil you use by the reputation of its maker
■ —and the grade of oil by the recommendations of the truck
manufacturer. You are then assured of maximum oil economy
consistent with efficient lubrication.
TYRE MILEAGE
The subject of tyre mileage is of prime importance to every
owner. Y'our truck and your tyres are better to-day than ever, and
very good tyre life can be expected under modern driving con-
ditions. To-day the mileage given by all good makes of tyres
depends much more on the way the truck is driven and the roads
upon which it travels than upon any other factors.
There is considerable variation in tyre mileage due to differences
in road surfaces and average temperatures, even in localities
close to each other. The presence or absence of hills will have
an influence. Overloading is the most frequent cause of rapid
tyre wear. Hard driving is another major cause. This covers
fast driving, quick, grinding stops, and skidding. Also detri-
mental to tyre mileage are incorrect inflation and wheels or axles
out of alignment.
As a matter of fact, excessive tyre wear is generally traceable to
a combination of two or more of these conditions. Since tyres
are expensive, attention paid to the correction of mechanical
difficulties and to the proper care of the tyres in use will prove
profitable.
Many of the factors which have been mentioned are under the
control of the driver. Tyre mileage is sufficiently important to
warrant close attention on the part of owners to the hints given
on the next page to increase tyre life: —
I. Have the tyre pressures checked at least weekly and keep
them at the recommended amount. Under-inflation causes
scuffing of the tread, weakening of the fabric and suscep-
tibility to road damage. Over-inflation gives a hard ride,


causes the wheels to bounce and spin, and wears the tyres
more rapidly.
2. Do not overload the truck.
3. The rear tyres wear faster than those on the front wheels.
When possible, interchange back and front tyres at intervals
of about five thousand miles to equalise the wear. On dual
wheels, interchange inner and outer tyres for the same reason.
4. Check the toe-in of the front wheels regularly, at the time
the chassis is lubricated.
5. Have the wheel alignment checked regularly as to caster,
camber and kingpin inclination, particularly whenever exces-
sive tyre wear is experienced, especially uneven wear. Include
this inspection as part of your routine of Preventive Main-
tenance.
6. Apply brakes gently. The black streaks left on the pavement
after an emergency stop are composed of rubber from the
tyres.
7. Turn corners carefully. Do not purposely cause the truck to
skid, as this wears the tyres unevenly.
8. Drive carefully over ruts and broken pavements to avoid
bruising the tyre side-walls and do not drive on a flat tyre.
Under-inflation Over-inflation Improper use of brakes
This illustration shows the characteristic types of tyre tread wear associated
with three of the more common causes of excessive wear. Under-inflation
causes wear on the sides of the tread as shown by the arrows on the
drawing at the left, often accompanied by cupping and uneven wear. Over-
inflation (centre) tends to cause the rubber to wear off the centre of the
tread. Improper use of the brakes is generally shown when the tread is
worn through to the canvas in spots, or when there are well-defined flat
spots on the tread caused by locked wheels and sliding stops


DRIVERS AND DRIVING HABITS
The satisfaction and service which a truck will deliver depend
largely on the ability of the driver. Poor driving can ruin a
good truck. Furthermore, the drivers of commercial vehicles
have a big responsibility to the other users of the roads. Upon
them very largely depends the safety of streets and highways
for all those who use them. With the thought that it will prove
constructive, we present a few brief discussions dealing with the
every-day problems of drivers everywhere.
Curves and Turns —The proper way to take a curve or a turn
is to slow down while still on the straightway approaching the
curve, so that the truck can be accelerated around the curve.
Begin to accelerate here Slow here
Showing the safe way to take curves
This procedure gives better control of steering and a stability
and solidity which is lacking when curves are taken too fast.
The ability to sense the safe speed for taking curves comes with
practice, but it is wise to be cautious in this matter. For one
thing, one never knows what is around the curve, and for another,
the force which tends to slew the truck off the road is greater
at high speeds than most of us realize.
This is called centrifugal force, and it is responsible for many
mishaps. It multiplies very rapidly as speed increases and it can
soon reach the point where it will overcome the friction of the
tyres on the road and possibly cause the driver to lose control of
the truck. The careful driver will try to take curves as they


should be taken —from a slow start —accelerating around the
bend.
Poor Visibility —Driving in daylight is one thing —driving at
night, or through rain, mist or fog is quite another. When
visibility is poor, most drivers do the instinctive thing —they
slow down or stop. One big point is in recognising when vis-
ibility is poor —as it is every night and when it is raining, as well
as during spells of fog and mist.
The other is in being able to stop completely, with a safe margin,
after an obstacle,has become visible.
Keep in mind that stopping involves three acts —first, thinking
about stopping; second, moving the foot to the brake pedal;
third, applying the required pressure to the brake pedal. These
acts take time, and in that time the truck is moving along.
Even with brakes in good order and favourable road conditions,
the average driver will require forty feet or more in which to
bring the truck to a stop from 20 miles per hour. At higher road
speeds, the stopping distance is correspondingly much greater.
The speed which is safe at night, therefore, is that which permits
stopping within the distance which the headlamps will illuminate
To travel safely it is necessary, of course, to have the headlamps
in good order. Lenses and reflectors should be clean, lamp-
bulbs functioning, and the lamps aimed properly.
Furthermore, when the visibility is poor, it is just as essential to
be seen as to see —which fact cautions that tail lamps are an
important item of equipment and should be kept in good order.
When driving during rain or fog at night, the headlamp beams
should be directed downward toward the road. The side of the
road should be watched carefully; it is the driver’s best guide to
his position on the road under these conditions.


In rain, fog or snow the windshield wiper must be operative.
The best way to be sure it will work when called upon to do so
is to test it regularly and have it lubricated when necessary.
When all is said and done, however, the driver’s caution and
good judgment are the most important factors whenever the
visibility is poor. The rule should be to proceed slowly and
carefully, alertly and with consideration.
Driving on Hills —To climb hills skilfully it is necessary to
understand one’s engine and to change gears at the right time.
Engines should not be flogged up steep grades. Use the gears
to get the power, bearing in mind that the engine develops less
power as the altitude increases. An engine at 5,000 feet altitude
puts out about 80% of the power it will deliver at sea level.
When climbing hills, therefore, change down into a lower gear
in plenty of time to prevent the engine from labouring. Make
the gear-change quickly, depressing the clutch pedal, speeding
up the engine and shifting rapidly before the truck loses for-
ward speed. There is seldom time to double-declutch. Practice
in the proper use of the gears will make hill-climbing easy.
Having stopped or stalled on an up-grade, it is important to
know how to start uphill again. The truck must be kept from
rolling backward while the clutch is being engaged. This can
best be done by using the hand-brake and foot accelerator. Hav-
ing disengaged the clutch and shifted into low gear, the engine
speed is increased by pressure on the foot accelerator, the clutch
is gently brought into engagement, and the brake released as the
engine begins to pull the load.


These three movements are made practically simultaneously, and
though difficult to describe are quite easy to do. Practice on
slight grades will quickly give the co-ordination needed to per-
form this manoeuvre successfully.
For descending hills, it is wise to use the same gear that would
be needed to go up them. If they are steep enough to require
ascent in low or an intermediate gear, the engine should be used
as a brake through that same gear when descending. It is safer,
and it conserves the brakes.
Travelling downhill with the clutch disengaged is a dangerous
practice, particularly when there are curves in the road. It is
safer to keep the truck under control at all times, with clutch
engaged and engine running. The unexpected may happen!
Careful drivers make it a rule never to overtake on hills, or to
get on the wrong side of the road when they cannot see far
enough ahead to be sure the road is clear.
Power, Speed and Brakes —The high road speeds at which
you can drive your truck to-day are a by-product of the power
developed by your efficient engine. By building into the truck
this ability to serve you well at high speeds, the engineers have
made it more practical to operate at moderate speeds.
It is more dependable and durable; it can be driven at sensible
speeds hour after hour, day after day, without being over-worked
It has, in short, a reserve of power and speed upon which the
driver can draw. That reserve can be used wisely or otherwise
and this point can be decided only by the driver, not by the
manufacturer.
It is safe to say that approximately one truck out of every three
on the streets and highways has brakes which are in need of
attention. Your hydraulic brakes are powerful and dependable,
but they should be inspected periodically and adjusted when
necessary.
A good indication of the need for adjustment is the distance the
pedal must travel to bring the truck to a halt. When it is neces-
sary to depress it nearly to the floorboards or when the pedal pres-
sure feels soft or spongy, the brakes urgently require attention.
Slippery Weather and Skidding —When the going is slip-
pery, the driver is apt to experience trouble, both when starting


and stopping. Lack of traction is the cause, and the driver who
takes this into account can usually overcome all but the very worst
conditions of this kind.
The clutch must be engaged very slowly and gently, the truck
moving off with the minimum of power applied to the wheels.
This procedure helps to prevent spinning .wheels and side-slip-
ping. Over-acceleration is particularly to be avoided. To in-
crease traction in slippery weather, tyre chains should be used.
When stopping on slippery surfaces, do not brake sharply. The
tyres will simply skate along, and there will be loss of steering
control and risk of a serious skid. Instead, begin to slow down
at five or six times the usual distance. Press the brake-pedal
lightly and momentarily, releasing it almost at once. Apply
pressure again, lightly at first, and release it quickly.
A series of these brief pressures will slow down the truck and
usually enable the driver to stop without skidding at all. A
greater measure of control is obtained by shifting down to a
lower gear, when this can be done safely.
Allowing the clutch to remain engaged until forward movement
has practically stopped is extremely important on slippery sur-
faces. While it is easy to stall the engine by so doing, it reduces
the tendency to skid.
The remarks made previously about the proper method of round-
ing corners and taking curves are vitally important in slippery
weather, when traction is often cut down until it nearly vanishes.
Go into the curve or turn as slowly as possible.
For the average driver, skids are better prevented than cured —
therefore truck speeds should be drastically reduced in slippery
weather, and more than ordinary caution exercised.
Experienced drivers resist the impulse to disengage the clutch
and apply the brakes. They suggest steering decisively but not
roughly in the direction the rear wheels are sliding —striving to
regain control before the front wheels are involved in the skid.
Position on the Road —Safety on the highways would be
greatly improved if all drivers understood and were guided by
the requirements of correct position on the road. Regardless of
whether the rule of the road is to the right or to the left, the
good driver observes the following fundamentals of road courtesy
and safety;-


Left turn Right turn
Showing the position to be taken on the road when changing direction
1. He remains on his own side of the road and in his own traffic
lane until his examination of the situation ahead of him and
behind him tells him that it is safe to leave it.
2. If he intends to proceed straight ahead or to stop, he drives
close to the edge of the road on his own side.
3. If he intends to turn, to right or left, he takes his position
accordingly on his own side of the road, so that he will not
cut across traffic proceeding in the same direction when he
makes the turn. He keeps left for a left turn, right* for a right
turn —on his own side of the road, of course.
Signals and Warnings —Concern for his own safety should
make the driver of a motor truck heed the signals and warnings
which are given him many times in the course of even the shortest
trip in town or country.
They may be given by sign-posts or traffic lights, by hand-signal
or the note of a horn. They may be welcome at certain times,
annoying at others. Nevertheless, the well-trained driver will
accept them for what they are —guides to his safe progress —and
will act accordingly. He will further recognise his own respon-
sibility in the same matter —that of providing notification of his
intentions, intelligibly and at the proper time.
Of course, hand signals are not the same in all localities. How-
ever, the truck which is in the correct position on the road to
turn one way or another or to stop, has filled most of the require-
ments of safety. It is best to learn the accepted signals of the
*At controlled points this is subject to local regulation


locality in which driving is done, but, failing this, signal in your
own way, plainly and in plenty of time.
In this connection, the driver should not feel that his having
signalled relieves him of further responsibility. He should cul-
tivate the habit of making certain his route is clear. A glance
into the rear-view mirror is good insurance against interference
from the rear which might result disastrously.
Carbon Monoxide Gas —Carbon monoxide gas, which is
present in the exhaust gas from every motor vehicle, is extremely
poisonous. Its presence is difficult to detect, because it is colour-
less, tasteless and odourless —yet a small quantity can be fatal.
Never run your engine in a closed garage —"open the doors before
starting the engine and keep them open all the while the engine
is running.
Keep the windows open when driving in traffic to allow the
carbon monoxide from the exhausts of motor vehicles in front of
you to dissipate itself. Otherwise enough of it may collect within
the cab to cause you drowsiness, acute distress and possible loss
of control over the truck.
Using the Clutch —Keep in mind that there are really only
two correct positions of the clutch pedal —fully out and fully
in. Make it a rule to keep the foot off the clutch pedal except
when actually shifting gears and to allow the clutch to engage
gently. To drive with the clutch partially engaged or with the
foot resting on the pedal is bad driving. It is harmful to the
clutch, resulting in unnecessary and rapid wear of the release
bearing and the clutch-disc linings.
Brakes —Always apply brakes as gently as possible, consistent
with stopping in time. Even in emergency stops a truck can be


brought to a halt more quickly with its wheels turning than with
them locked by too heavy pressure on the brake pedal.
Keep the clutch engaged until the last moment before actually
stopping —then disengage it and apply a trifle more brake pres-
sure. Learn to drive so that you never need to "stop short." The
proper use of the brakes is not difficult to learn, and it is one of
the marks of a good driver.
Finally, it is recommended that the driver cultivate the habit of
glancing at the instruments on the panel and interpreting the
story they tell. Oil pressure, water temperature, and electrical
readings are all useful to indicate normal engine operation or
otherwise. Deviations from the normal should be investigated
and the causes corrected.
The Good Driver —No one wants to be known as a careless
driver or a menace on the road. The penalty for a moment’s
inattention, a burst of speed, or a neglected truck may be more
than we care to pay. Too often the innocent suffer while the
guilty escape.
It is not a pretty picture, but the statistics on motor accidents are
plain, blunt and shocking. They cannot be denied —and the drivers
of motor vehicles are very often responsible.
It is just as easy to be a good driver as a poor one. No sacrifices
are involved —not even of time.
The good driver recognises the capabilities of his vehicle and
his own limitations. He is considerate and courteous on the
road. In protecting his own interests he contributes to the safety
of all.
We hope that these few pages will strike a responsive chord
among drivers, and that they will help to influence all drivers
to a realization of the great responsibility which is theirs, to make
motoring as safe as consideration for others can make it.
THE CARE OF YOUR TRUCK
Your truck is built for reliability and economical operation. We
have shown how to operate it for performance and economy.
Reliability means even more to the owner. Whether the
truck operates on regular schedules or not, it should always
be ready to take the road. It is not wise to wait for something
to go wrong before providing the truck with the attention it
needs. Instead, the modern way is to set up a systematic pro-
gramme of inspection and care at specified intervals, for the


adjustments which are needed to maintain the truck in good
operating order.
Even though an engine may run 100,000 miles without having
the valves ground, it cannot run as efficiently or as economically.
Certainly the increase in operating costs must amount to more
than the cost of refacing and reseating as required for efficient
operation. In fact accurate tests have proved that under certain
conditions as much as 10% savings in fuel consumption can be
effected by merely cleaning and adjusting the spark plugs.
The same applies to other factors. Incorrect valve clearance
causes lack of power and burned valves. Misaligned front
wheels, loose king pins and wheel bearings result not only in
hard steering, but in rapid tyre wear. Improperly adjusted steer-
ing and brakes often cause serious accidents.
These are some of the reasons why two trucks of the same make,
used in the same kind of service, may show entirely different
operating costs. This difference is the result of the difference in
maintenance.
It costs much less to prevent excessive wear than to replace worn
or broken parts.
This is the basis of preventive maintenance. Regular inspection,
lubrication and adjustment are cheaper and they keep the truck
in operation more of the time. Use necessarily involves wear
and if the truck is neglected, the wear will be rapid. If preven-
tive maintenance is regularly applied the wear will be normal.
Systematic care of this kind costs the operator nothing since it is
more than offset by lower operating costs and increased produc-
tive time.
Some operators feel that if the unit is regularly lubricated they
may depend upon the driver to call attention to any necessary
adjustments. With a conscientious driver, this may keep the
truck in operation most of the time but repair costs will still be
high. When the same driver takes the same truck each day, he
does not become aware of its gradually lowered efficiency until
the condition is quite severe and often beyond remedy by means
of a simple adjustment. Preventive maintenance of the right
sort makes use of the daily report of the driver plus a rigid
inspection and adjustment procedure operating independently of
the driver.
The first step in accident prevention is to eliminate mechanical
failures. When schedules must be maintained, when a certain


number of packages must be delivered or a definite number of
calls made in a set time, both the driver and the truck are put
to a severe test. Brakes which don’t hold, steering which binds
'or sticks, or lights which fail at a crucial time may be the direct
cause of a breakdown or an accident.
The only way to reduce mechanical failures is by means of system-
atic inspection and adjustment—in other words, preventive main-
tenance. An important cause of accidents and costly replacements
is eliminated whenever wear is prevented from becoming exces-
sive. With the truck always in good condition, it is easier to
operate, the driver can make better time and can safely turn out
more work.
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE
To be effective, any system of prevention must be reduced to a
routine. The truck must receive inspection and adjustment
regularly. Otherwise the element of "prevention” will be changed
to one of "repair” with a corresponding increase in maintenance
costs.
The following inspection and adjustment routine is intended as
a basis on which to build a Preventive Maintenance system. It
is a reminder rather than a list of instructions, and it will be
found useful whether the owner performs the maintenance oper-
ations or has the work done by his Authorized Service Station.
This list will probably be sufficient for the needs of the owner
of a single unit. Any fleet owner, large or small, can obtain
information and assistance for a more complete and detailed
Preventive Maintenance system through his Dealer.
DAILY INSPECTION
Check radiator water level. Check tyre pressure.
Check engine oil level.
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Lubricate entire chassis according to lubrication chart. (This
requires to be done more frequently if truck is used under
extremely dusty conditions or in rainy weather.)
Test battery and add distilled water if necessary.
Inspect for fuel, oil and water leaks.
Check toe-in of front wheels. Tighten wheel hub nuts.


ADDITIONAL OPERATIONS TO BE PERFORMED
EVERY 3,000 MILES
Tune engine, including following operations :—
Tighten cylinder head bolts.
Tighten intake and exhaust
manifolds.
Check engine timing.
Clean and adjust spark plugs.
Clean and adjust breaker
poinrs.
Adjust valve clearance.
Adjust fan belt.
*Adjust spring shackles.
*Adjust front wheel bearings.
♦Tighten pitman and steering
arms.
Clean, tighten and grease
battery cable terminals.,
Tighten engine support bolts.
Tighten radiator tie-rod and
hold-down bolts.
Adjust clutch pedal.
Fill brake master cylinder.
Adjust carburettor.
Tighten all sheet metal.
Focus head lamps.
♦Adjust tie-rod and drag link.
♦Adjust steering gear.
Adjust body "U” bolts.
EVERY 5,000 MILES OR AT LEAST TWICE A YEAR
Change rear axle lubricant and refill with Special
E.P. Lubricant only.
Check front wheel alignment (caster, camber & king pin angle).
Thoroughly flush out cooling system.
YEARLY
Change transmission lubricant.
EVERY 10,000 MILES
Renew spark plugs.
THE IMPORTANCE of PROPER LUBRICATION
Statistics obtained from authoritative sources show that a very
small percentage, generally under 2%, of the cost of operating
a commercial vehicle is spent for lubricants. These same statis-
tics also emphatically indicate that over 40% of vehicle oper-
ating expenses is affected favourably or otherwise by lubrication,
*The frequency with which these items will require attention will vary
greatly with the type of service in which the unit is used. For hard
service, they should be examined and adjusted every 3,000 miles as indi-
cated, or more often if necessary. For trucks used in less severe service,
inspection of these points may be made at somewhat longer intervals.


While lubrication is the smallest item of operating expense, it
has the greatest effect on operating costs.
The application of the right lubricant, in the right place, at the
right time will appreciably decrease these operating costs which
are affected by lubrication.
The lubrication requirements of your truck can be conveniently
classified as follows: —
1. Engine Lubrication. 3. Chassis Lubrication.
2. Drive-line Lubrication. 4. Body Lubrication.
Each of these classifications needs particular types of lubricant.
A few suggestions are given herewith to enable the owner to
choose wisely the correct lubricants for his truck, and the fre-
quency of application.
A Lubrication Chart is enclosed with this book, containing all
the information necessary to efficient lubrication. It is designed to
be attached to the wall of the garage for convenient reference.
Engine Lubrication —The oil which is used to lubricate the
engine is carried in a reservoir formed by the oil pan attached
to the bottom of the crankcase. Oil is added to the supply in
the crankcase through the filler spout: the level is checked by
means of a dipper stick: oil is drained from the crankcase by
removing the drain plug in the oil pan.
It is a good plan to have the oil level inspected every time fuel
is put into the tank and maintain the level at or near the "full”
mark on the dipper stick. Do not allow oil level to rise above
the "full” mark.
Quality of Engine Oil —The refiners or marketers supplying
the oil are responsible for the quality of their products. Their
reputation is the truck owner’s best indication of quality.
Grade of Engine Oil — Some oils are "thick,” others are
"thin.” They are measured as to their body or fluidity by deter-
mining the time required for a sample quantity of the oil at a
specified temperature to flow through a small hole. These S.A.E.
viscosity numbers constitute a classification for this property only,
without reference to any other characteristics. They refer to the
grade of the oil, nor to its quality. They are simply a measure of
the oil’s resistance to flow. These classifications have been adopted
by practically all oil companies, and no difficulty should be
experienced in obtaining the proper grade of lubricant as recom-
mended on the next page.


A light oil must be used in running in the new engine. It makes
starting easier. It flows promptly and in sufficient quantity to
the bearings, consequently decreasing friction and wear of moving
parts. Such an oil is placed in the crankcase at the factory and
is to be used for the first 500 miles.
Engine Oil Recommendation —After the first 500 miles of
driving, drain the oil from the crankcase and refill with a high-
quality oil having the body or viscosity of S.A.E. 30.
At 1,500 Miles —Drain the oil from the crankcase and refill with
fresh oil —S.A.E. 30.
The mileage period at which subsequent oil changes should be
made will vary with the type of driving and the climatic con-
ditions. Trucks which are driven long distances with few stops
will not require oil changes as frequently as when operating
intermittently for short distances. Also, it is advisable to change
oil more frequently in winter than in summer.
In general, under average driving conditions, the crankcase should
be drained and refilled every 1,000 —1,500 miles.
Drive-Line Lubrication (Transmission and Differential)
—The transmission and differential require a heavier lubricant
which is processed so that it will adhere to the gear teeth, for,
while they operate at relatively low temperatures, they are sub-
jected to great pressures.
To obviate any chance of the lubricant being squeezed out from
between the gear teeth, and so that efficient lubrication can be
had at all times, the use of correct lubricants is advised as recom-
mended on the lubrication chart enclosed with this book.
Transmission —A lubricant having the viscosity, or body, of
an S.A.E. 160 Oil should be used in the transmission of Olds-
mobile Trucks and an S.A.E. 110 Oil in the transmission of the
Commercial Vehicle.
Differential — The differential (rear axle) of both Trucks and
Commercial vehicles requires the use of an E.P. (Extreme Pres-
sure) Lubricant and must be drained and flushed out every 5,000
miles or at least twice a year, and refilled with E.P. Lubricant
only. Should it at any time be necessary to add oil between
changes, use the identical brand of E.P. Lubricant already in the
differential. Mixing different types or brands of E.P. Lubricant
may result in chemical action which is capable of destroying the


Extreme Pressure characteristics with resultant damage to the
gears.
When lubricant changes are made, it is necessary to wash out the
transmission and differential after draining, with a very light
flushing oil. Then replace the drain plug and refill to the level
of the filler opening with the correct lubricant. In addition to
the periodical changes, check the level of the lubricant at intervals
of 1,000 miles, when the chassis is lubricated, and add the correct
oil if necessary to fill to recommended level.
Chassis Lubrication —Several different types of lubricants are
required to lubricate the chassis properly. Ordinarily, the term
"chassis lubricant” describes a semi-fluid lubricant designed for
application by commercial pressure-gun equipment.
It is composed of mineral oil combined with soap or a mixture
of soaps, which are insoluble in water. The addition of soap
decreases the tendency of the lubricant to leak from the bearings
in service. Special types are made for special purposes, such as
for use in lubricating the steering gear.
Other lubricants are also used. The lubrication chart included
with this book lists all points which require lubrication, the inter-
vals at which attention is to be given, and the kinds of lubricant
to be used. It should be consulted and its recommendations fol-
lowed, to be certain of proper chassis lubrication.
Body Lubrication —There are numbers of places on the body
of the truck which require lubrication. It is essential that atten-
tion be given them at regular intervals, and this can be done
most conveniently at the time the chassis is lubricated.
Tuning the Engine —Normal wear of some of its components
after thousands of miles of operation will reduce the efficiency
of the engine, even though it continues to propel the truck with
apparent satisfaction. For that matter, a knife will continue to
cut, after a fashion, when its keen edge is gone. Nevertheless,
for effective use a knife should be sharp: likewise, for efficiency
and economy the engine should be tuned regularly.
Tuning an engine is not difficult or expensive when the proper
equipment, skill and knowledge are available. In brief, it con-
sists of a series of adjustments to the ignition system, the fuel
system and the valves, to bring back the various dimensions and
clearances specified by the truck manufacturer.


Vital points requiring this periodic inspection and adjustment
are the spark plugs, distributor, ignition timing, battery, car-
burettor, air cleaner, fuel pump and valves. When put right,
according to the specifications given elsewhere in this book, they
can work together for maximum performance and economy.
Battery Care and Upkeep —The storage battery in your
truck is hidden from sight and it is therefore wise to make ar-
rangements to give this important unit the regular and systematic
attention it requires if it is to continue to function properly.
The first requirement is to keep all the cells of the battery filled
to the proper level. Distilled water must be added to replace
that lost by evaporation. The plates should always be covered
to a depth of not more than one-half inch. To maintain this
level have the battery inspected weekly in warm weather and
fortnightly in cold weather, and water added as required. On
long, uninterrupted trips, water should be added more frequently.
In general, more attention should be given to the battery when
the weather is very hot or very cold than when it is moderate
After water has been added, see that the filler-plugs are tightly
screwed in and the top of the battery dried. Battery acid is
corrosive. If any should spill accidentally, flush off with clear
water and neutralize with an alkali such as ammonia or sal soda.
Corrosion of the battery terminals and connections can be pre-
vented by coating with petroleum jelly or vaseline. Be sure that
the connections of the battery, as well as the ground-strap con-
nection between the battery and the frame, are kept clean and
tight. Any looseness or rust at these vital points can cause the
lamps to burn out and the starter to refuse to function. They
may also prevent the battery
from being charged.
For best results, the battery
should be maintained as nearly
fully charged as possible. The
specific gravity of the electrolyte
is a good indication of the state
of the charge, and this is usually
tested with a hydrometer.
Periodical hydrometer readings
are advisable and this inspection
will be made by the Battery Ser-
vice Station.


16. Instrument lamps
17. Fuel gauge dash unit
18. Horn button
19. Stop lamp switch
20. Fuel gauge tank unit
21. Stop and tail lamp
7. Ignition coil 11. Fuses
8. Starting motor 12. Light switch
9. Headlamp dimmer 13. Tail light switch
switch 14. Ignition switch
10. Battery 15. Ammeter
Wiring Circuit Diagram
1. Right headlamp
2. Left headlamp
3. Horn
4. Generator
5. Spark plugs
6. Ignition distributor


Specific gravity of acid at various stages of charge and discharge:
In New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania —
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged ... ... ... ... 1.250 (1.240 to 1.260)
Half charged or half discharged ... 1.180 (1.170 to 1.190)
Fully discharged ... ... ... 1.120 (1.110 to 1.130)
In Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory —
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged 1.220 (1.210 to 1.230)
Half charged or half discharged ... 1.150 (1.140 to 1.160)
Fully discharged ... ... ... 1.090 (1.080 to 1.100)
Example of Use of Tables— The specific gravity of the acid in a
battery is found to be 1.140. From the above table it will be
found that the battery is almost fully discharged.
Batteries over half discharged should be used sparingly until,
by charging, the specific gravity is brought up to at least 1.180
in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania,
and 1.150 in Queensland, West Australia and Northern Territory.
If the truck is to be laid up for the winter, take the battery to
an Authorized Battery Station for proper storage.
It is not necessary to add acid to the battery. Except in cases of
broken jar or deterioration of the sealing compound, loss of acid
does not occur. It is inadvisable for truck owners to experiment
with so-called quick electrolytes for the purpose of keeping the
battery fully charged.
Generator Charging Rate —The charging rate of the gen-
erator can be adjusted to suit the requirements of the truck.
When the truck leaves the factory, the charging rate is adjusted
for normal conditions. This is based on the assumption that the
demands for current from the battery will not be excessive and
that the truck will be used enough to keep the battery charged
but not so much that it will be overcharged.
Any re-adjustment of the generator charging rate must be done
with the aid of accurate instruments. The truck should be taken
to an authorized Dealer for this purpose. If the adjustment is
not properly made, serious damage to the generator may result.
A lower charging rate, to prevent the battery from being over-
charged, may be needed to offset the following conditions: —


1. Truck used for long trip or other similar conditions not re-
quiring frequent stopping and starting.
2. Truck in normal use in excessively hot weather.
3. Truck seldom driven at night, with the lights infrequently
used.
A higher charging rate, to prevent the battery from being under-
charged, may be needed to offset the following conditions:
1. Truck used in short trip service with frequent stopping and
starting.
2. Truck in normal use in cold weather.
3. Truck driven mostly at night with frequent use of the lights.
4. Excessive number of electrically-operated accessories.
5. Truck used infrequently.
It may be, if the truck is used infrequently, that the generator
cannot maintain a charged battery with even the maximum set-
ting. In such a case, the battery should be charged occasionally
from an outside source.
Cooling System —When all the passages in the cylinder block,
cylinder head, and radiator are clean, the cooling system functions
efficiently as intended.
However, ordinary water contains compounds which deposit as
scale, and a certain amount of rust and corrosion forms as a result
of the action of the hot water on the various metals.
In certain districts where the water is highly alkaline the deposit
of scale can assume serious proportions, reducing the efficiency
of the cooling system. In such districts it is necessary to flush
out the cooling system frequently, whenever the water tempera-
ture indicator shows that there is a tendency for the engine to
overheat. See page 42 for further information on this point.
If the system is neglected, grease, dirt and small rubber particles
are also circulated with the cooling water and may settle in
small passages, particularly those in the radiator, causing the
decrease in efficiency which makes itself evident as overheating
of the engine.
To prevent corrosion of the cooling system, a special preparation
is added to the cooling water before the truck leaves the factory.


The action of this preparation is to deposit an anti-rust film over
the entire surface of the cooling system, thus preventing cor-
rosion due to oxidisation.
Whenever the cooling system is drained and filled with fresh
water it is advisable to add G.M.-H. Radiator Oil which is an
effective preventive of rusting or corrosion of the metal parts
of the cooling system. When installed in the correct proportions
it first forms a milky white emulsion with the cooling water, and
after several days’ use separates out, forming a protective coating
over the metal surfaces. This coating does not affect the efficiency
of the cooling system, but on the contrary, by preventing rust or
corrosion maintains the cooling system at a constant efficiency.
The use of this oil stops foaming and the resultant loss of water.
The oil is not a cleaning agent. Its sole purpose is the prevention
of rust and corrosion. G.M.-H. Radiator Oil is available from all
G.M.-H. and Nasco Distributors and Dealers.
Steering and Wheel Alignment— The accurate steering and
ease of handling found in your truck are evident at even the
higher road-speeds.
These small but highly important angles must be correctly maintained for
accurate and easy steering, maximum safety and tyre mileage, performance
and economy. The figure 1 indicates the caster angle, measured from the
vertical to the centre line of the king-pin (2). 3 is the centre line of the
weel. 4, at the right, is the king-pin angle, and 5 is the camber angle.
6 indicates the wheel centre lines. The angles are, of course, exaggerated
for clarity—actually they are quite small. Precision equipment is needed
to measure them. Toe-in, another important item in wheel alignment, is
shown on page 43


To maintain good performance and decrease operating costs'it
is necessary to have the steering mechanism and the alignment
of wheels and axles inspected at the correct intervals. The
accuracy which was originally built into the truck will with-
stand considerable abuse, but the motor vehicle of to-day operates
under unusually severe conditions.
The amount of toe-in of the front wheels should be inspected
as part of the Preventive Maintenance routine. Caster, camber
and king-pin wear should be inspected and measured at least
twice a year —more frequently if the truck performs heavily
loaded over bumpy roads and especially if the tyres show undue
wear. These inspections are safeguards against the effects of
long-continued road shocks. Any adjustments required should
be made promptly.
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts —General Motors —Holden’s Ltd.,
recognises its obligation to you in respect to replacement parts.
This applies not only to the larger parts, such as wheels, or
cylinder blocks, but also to those equally important fan belts,
spark plugs, gaskets, brake linings and piston rings. When
through normal wear or because of accident you require new
parts, they can be obtained, of course, from your authorized
Oldsmobile Dealer.
The National Automotive Service Company, (a divi-
sion of General Motors —Holden’s Ltd.) is set up to distribute
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts, and this company has Authorised Dealers
throughout the Commonwealth from whom you can obtain new
parts as required.
Your G.M.-H. Dealer also holds the representation for Nasco
Parts and Accessories.
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts are manufactured to the high standards
of quality established for General Motors trucks —to the same
dimensions and of the same materials as the original parts on
your truck. They are, therefore, dependable, and it is definitely to
your interest to specify them.
KEEPING THE TRUCK LOOKING NEW
Although commercial vehicles are bought for their utility value
primarily, it is nevertheless true that they have an advertising
value as well.


A clean, neat, well-kept vehicle creates a favourable impression
as it is driven around, and the alert operator will take advantage
of this opportunity for advertising whenever possible.
It is not difficult, troublesome or expensive to keep the truck
looking new, and it is well worth while to do so.
Care of the Finish —The cabs and fenders are finished in
'Dulux.” The outstanding advantage of this finish to the owner
is the ease with which it may be kept clean and the new appear-
ance preserved. However, if the original lustre is to be retained
the finish must not be abused or neglected.
The truck should be cleaned at reasonable intervals and while
light surface dust can be removed by wiping with dry, soft cloth,
it is advisable to wash the finish if very dirty, particularly if grit
or small sand particles are present in the dirt. Do not wash the
truck when hot or standing in the sun as water applied under
these conditions will spot or mark the surface.
Under road conditions, the finish may become covered with a
hard, dull crust known as "Traffic Film,” consisting of minute
particles of oily, greasy dirt cemented together by the heat of the
sun. This can be quite easily removed with a cloth damped with
petrol. It is not necessary to use a polish.
Care should be taken that no alcohol or mixture containing
alcohol is spilled on the finish, but if this does occur, it should
be flushed off immediately, using a large quantity of water.
"Dulux” finish will usually resist the action of acids, such as are
present in battery solutions, but it is advisable to exercise care in
keeping any acid from the finish.
Wash the under parts of the truck with cold or lukewarm run-
ning water, soaking off the mud as much as possible.
Grease and oil on the under part of the chassis, except the
wheels and engine, can be removed by washing with petrol and
drying with a clean cloth.
Dents and Scratches —Dents and scratches often appear to
mar the good appearance of the truck. Fortunately, the skill of
experienced body men makes it possible to treat such blemishes
on the body finish as of minor consequence.
In fact, even serious damage to the sheet metal on the chassis
and body can be remedied by the methods which have been


developed for bringing back the proper contours and restoring
the lacquered surfaces.
Such repairs when properly made are invisible. By the use of
special equipment, the metal is bumped out, then filed and
sanded smooth. When necessary, holes are filled with solder and
welds are made.
When the bare metal is again as smooth as it was originally, a
hard, quick-drying lacquer is applied with a spray-gun, matching
the original paint-work in colour, depth and lustre.
The results are often astonishing, and the owner will find that
the cost of doing such work is surprisingly low.
Care of Chrome-Plated Parts —When chrome-plated parts
become spotted with mud or tar, they may be cleaned with either
soap and water or with a non-abrasive solvent, such as benzol.
Do not use metal or lacquer polish on chrome finish as they
contain materials injurious to plated parts.
Scratches —When plated parts become scratched through the
plating to the base metal, rusting takes place, tending to spread
underneath the plating around the scratches. The rust should
be removed with a solution of phosphoric acid diluted with
water in the proportions of one part of phosphoric acid to two
parts of water.
After the rust is removed rinse with clear water and dry thor-
oughly with a soft cloth or chamois. A coat of clear lacquer
over the scratches will then prevent the rust from re-appearing.
DIAGNOSIS IN EMERGENCIES
The possibility that you will ever find yourself in such an emerg-
ency that you will require any of the following information is
only slight.
Nevertheless, emergencies may arise occasionally when the driver
must rely upon his own resources, and it is annoying to learn
afterward that the difficulty could have been corrected without
help.
The following suggestions will be found helpful in such circum-
stances: —


STARTING MOTOR FAILS TO CRANK ENGINE OR
CRANKS IT VERY SLOWLY WHEN PEDAL IS PRESSED
1. Turn on the headlamps and note if they light normally. If
the headlamps do not light and the starting motor fails to
operate, the difficulty is probably due to poor battery con-
nections or a weak battery.
(a) Tighten the battery connections to the ground connection
on the frame and those at the starter switch. If the
battery terminals are corroded, they must be cleaned.
(b) If the starter still fails to operate, the cause is probably
a discharged battery. Check the battery with a hydro-
meter. See instructions for the care of the battery.
2. If the headlamps seem to light normally, press the pedal and
if the starter does not operate, note the intensity of the head-
lamps. If they become dimmed or if they go out, proceed as
follows, trying the starter after each operation: —
(a) Tighten the battery connections and those at the starter
switch. If the battery terminals are corroded, they must
be cleaned.
(b) See that ground wire is tight where it fastens to frame.
(c) Check the battery with a hydrometer. See instructions
for the care of the battery.
(d) Shift the transmission into high gear and, with the igni-
tion turned off, push the truck a few feet to determine if
there is any mechanical condition that would prevent the
engine being cranked by the starter.
3. If, when pressing pedal with headlamps on, the starter does
not operate and there is no reduction in the intensity of the
headlamps, there is probably a loose connection at the starter
switch.
4. If the starter cranks the engine very slowly, it is probably
due to one of the following causes: —
(a) Partly discharged battery.
(b) Too heavy engine oil. This is more likely in very cold
weather. See instructions on correct engine lubrication.
When the engine cannot be started due to battery or starter
difficulty or to heavy engine oil, time is often saved by having
the truck towed or pushed by another vehicle. Have the stalled
truck in high gear and the ignition on. Then, when the engine is
started, the truck can be driven to your Dealer for correction.


ENGINE FAILS TO START
WHEN CRANKED AT PROPER SPEED
1. Be sure ignition switch is turned on all the way to assure
proper contact.
2. If the starter has been operated for some time without results,
it is possible that the cylinders are flooded. To correct this,
crank the engine by means of the starter, with the ignition
on and the cboke button pulled approximately a quarter way
out. Note. —Pulling the choke control a quarter way out
opens the throttle without bringing into operation the choke
mechanism. When the excess fuel has been expelled from
the cylinders, ignition should occur, starting the engine. Not
more than 15 to 20 seconds should be required to clear the
cylinders.
3- If the engine does not start, it should be determined whether
fuel is reaching the carburettor.
(a) Make sure first that there is sufficient fuel in the tank.
(b) See that the fuel pipe connections at the fuel pump and
carburettor are tight.
(c) If these connections are tight and no loss of fuel is noted
at these points, disconnect the fuel pipe at the car-
burettor. Crank the engine with the starter. If fuel
flows from this pipe, it may be assumed that the difficulty
is not due to lack of fuel.
(d) If fuel does not flow from the pipe when the engine is
cranked and there is sufficient fuel in the tank, remove
the fuel tank cap and crank the engine again. If about
15 seconds of cranking causes fuel to flow out of the
pipe, it indicates a clogged vent hole in the fuel tank
cap. This should be cleaned out thoroughly before
replacing the cap.
4. If the engine still does not start, remove the distributor cap
and crank the engine with the handle or starter until the
breaker points are closed. Then, with the ignition switch
turned on, open the breaker points by hand. If no sparking
is observed at the points when they are opened, there is
probably a loose connection or an open circuit.
(a) Tighten all terminals at the ignition coil and instrument
panel. Inspect for broken wires.
(b) If current still does not flow, inspect breaker points. If


necessary clean and adjust/ them as described under
"Care and Maintenance and Emergency Adjustments.”
5. If current is shown by sparking when points are separated by
hand and yet engine will not start, check the ignition spark.
(a) Remove the cable from one of the spark plugs and hold
it d in. from some point of the cylinder head while some
one operates the starter with the ignition turned on. A
good spark at least -4- in. long should appear.
(b) If not, clean and adjust the breaker points, if it has not
already been done.
(c) If a good spark still is not obtained, see that the spark
plug wires are pushed firmly into the top of the distri-
butor cap. Remove the cap and clean the terminals on
the inside with fine sandpaper. Wipe the cap off, inside
and outside.
6. If a good spark is obtained when the engine is cranked while
holding a spark cable \ in. from the cylinder head, remove
the spark plugs and clean them as well as possible. Reset
the gaps. See that none is broken.
ENGINE STOPS ON ROAD
Make tests Numbers 3,4, 5 and 6 under "Engine Fails to Start
When Cranked at Proper Speed.”
ENGINE MISFIRES REGULARLY IN ONE
OR MORE CYLINDERS
1. The most probable cause of regular misfiring in a cylinder is
a dirty spark plug. To locate the plug that is misfiring close
the throttle so the engine will idle slowly. Hold a wooden-
handled screw driver so it touches both the cylinder head and
the spark plug terminal, thus short-circuiting the plug.
If the plug is good, there will be a noticeable slowing of the
speed of the engine. If the plug is not firing there will be no
difference in the operation of the engine.
After the inoperative plug has been located, it should be cleaned
and adjusted, or replaced if necessary.
ENGINE MISSES IRREGULARLY
1. If the engine misfires irregularly, apparently in all cylinders,
proceed as follows: —■
(a) Remove the valve rocker cover and lubricate the valve
stems with kerosene to free up any that may be sticking
from gummy oil. Then adjust all valves as instructed


under "Care and Maintenance and Emergency Adjust-
ments.”
(b) Clean and adjust the breaker points as instructed under
"Care and Maintenance and Emergency Adjustments.”
(c) Remove the distributor cap. Push the spark plug wires
firmly into the cap. Clean the terminals inside of the
cap and wipe off. Be careful to remove all moisture
from both inside and outside of cap.
(d) Remove the spark plugs and clean and adjust them.
ENGINE OVERHEATS
In hot weather, the engine may show a rise in temperature soon
after it has been stopped. This condition is normal and should
not be considered as overheating.
Also, on a long hard pull in hot weather, the temperature may
rise above normal. This should be only temporary and the
engine should cool as soon as the engine’s load is reduced. Over-
heating of varying duration, depending upon circumstances, may
be caused by steep grades, excessive driving in lower gears, over-
loading of truck and pulling through sand or mud. If there
is some abnormal condition causing overheating, it will usually
cause a -more pronounced and prolonged temperature increase.
1. See that the radiator is filled with water. Caution. —In case
of overheating, do not remove the radiator cap until the
engine has been stopped for a few minutes. Do not pour
cold water in large quantities into the radiator if the engine
is overheated, as this may crack the cylinder block. Pour it
in very slowly, running the engine at a good speed, mean-
while, to circulate the water rapidly.
2. Check the fan belt adjustment. See instructions under "Care
and Maintenance and Emergency Adjustments.”
3. See that there is sufficient oil of the proper grade in the
crankcase and that oil pressure gauge shows correct pressure.
4. Remove the radiator cap and with the engine running at a
good speed see if there is any evidence of the water being in
circulation. If not, the thermostat at the front of the cylinder
head is probably not operating. A temporary emergency re-
pair can be effected by removing it entirely until it can be
' replaced by your Dealer.
5. Clean the front and cellular spaces of the radiator core.


CARE AND MAINTENANCE
AND EMERGENCY ADJUSTMENTS
To be made properly, most of the adjustments on your Olds-
mobile Truck and Commercial Vehicle require the use of tools
and equipment not readily available to the owner. However, there
may be occasions when the truck will require some attention
while out of reach of the Dealer’s Service Station. The following
information is given to help the driver in such circumstances and
the instructions should be considered only as emergency adjust-
ments. After such adjustments are made, they should be checked
by an Oldsmobile Dealer at the first opportunity. If the truck
has.received the regular inspections and adjustments which have
been recommended, the following information may never be
required.
Front Axle — The front axle is so simple in construction that
there is little which can be said concerning it except that it has
a very heavy drop forged ”1” beam and the steering knuckles
are held to the axle "I” beam by large king pins; also, each front
wheel is mounted on two New Departure bearings.
Front Wheel Alignment — The front axle and wheels as-
sembly and steering mechanism are so designed that there will
be no abnormal tyre wear when all parts are in correct alignment
and are not subjected to abuse. But it is difficult to avoid unusual
stress and strain when the truck is used in rigorous service over
all kinds of roads.
1: Tie rod ends. 2: Tie rod has left-hand and right-hand threads for
adjusting. 3: Tie rod end clamp bolts


One of the important points of wheel alignment for the truck
owner to watch is front wheel toe-in. The distance between the
front wheel rims, measured at hub height, should be 9/64 in. to
7/32 in. less in front at "A” than in the rear at "B” for the
Commercial Series. This difference for the Truck Series should
be 3/16 in. to \ in.
To adjust the toe-in, loosen the tie rod end clamp bolts at each
end of the tie rod. Turning the rod in one direction lengthens
the distance between the two ends and turning it in the other
direction shortens it. When it has been adjusted so that the
wheels toe-in properly, tighten the two clamp bolts securely.
Running over rough roads, bumping against curbs and similar
hard service may cause misalignment of the front wheels. The
operator should check the toe-in every thousand miles and have
the entire front end alignment checked by his Dealer twice a
year. This will not be expensive and should result in improved
performance and longer tyre life.
Caster, camber and king-pin wear should be accurately measured
twice yearly, and necessary adjustments made. Special equipment
is required for this work, and your Dealer should be consulted.
Steering Gear Assembly —The steering mechanism has been
designed to give the greatest ease of handling with the least
amount of wear and consequent adjustment. The bearings above
and below the steering worm ensure quietness and easy steer-
ing. Go over all the connections regularly and tighten any bolts
or nuts which are loose, supplying the grease and oil where
needed, as this is the only safe insurance against a costly accident.
Engine Lubrication System


ENGINE
Lubricating System —The engine lubrication system, as indi-
cated by the phantom view of the oil lines provides full pressure
lubrication to all the important rotating and reciprocating parts
of the engine. The heavy black lines show the paths of oil travel
from the crankcase, up through the various parts of the en-
gine, and back again to the sump. The gear pump delivers oil
directly to the main bearings, and oil continues under pressure
through drilled holes in the crank cheeks to the adjacent con-
necting rod bearings; and from these, oil is forced, still under
pressure, out of the oil spit hole in the upper half of the connect-
ing rod bearings to the cylinder walls and up through the rifle-
drilled passages of the rods to the piston pins. Drilled passages
in the crankcase webs also deliver oil under pressure from the
main bearings to the camshaft bearings. A jet of oil directs a
small stream upon the timing chain sprocket and the spray there-
from is thrown around the chain compartment. Provision has
been made to collect part of this spray and lubricate the thrust
button at the front end of the camshaft. Other parts of the engine
are lubricated by a continuous spray thrown from the connecting
rod bearings.
FAN BELT
ADJUSTMENT
1. Generator Upper
Clamp Bolt
2. Generator Lower
Clamp Bolt
3. Adjusting Link
Pivot Bolt
4. Generator Pulley
5. Fan Pulley
6. Slack in Properly
Adjusted Belt —¾ in.
Fan Belt —The fan belt may slip, as a result of the accumu-
lation of oil or grease, or of natural wear, causing overheating
of the engine.
If the belt is greasy, wash it with petrol and a stiff bristle brush,
wiping it with a clean cloth. If it is worn, it can be tightened


as follows: Loosen the bolt at each end of the generator base
and the clamp-bolt passing through the slotted adjusting-link.
Pull the generator outward, so as to take up most of the slack
in the belt, as in the illustration. Hold it in that position and
tighten the bolts. When properly adjusted it will deflect | in.
with a slight pressure at the centre. Tightening the fan belt too
much will cause premature and excessive wear of the water-pump
and generator bearings.
VALVE
CLEARANCE
ADJUSTMENT
1. Adjusting Screw
2. Lock Nut
3. Valve Lifter
Valve Clearance Adjustment— Run the engine 15 to 20
minutes —until it has been thoroughly heated to its normal oper-
ating temperature.
Remove the valve covers. Run the engine at idling speed. With
a wrench on the valve lifter and another on the nut at the upper
end of the valve lifter, loosen the lock nut. Turn the adjusting
screw in the upper end of the valve lifter with a wrench until a
clearance of .008 in. for the intake valves and .011 in. for the
exhaust valves is obtained between the end of the valve stem and
the valve lifter. Then securely tighten the lock-nut, being very
careful not to change the adjustment while doing so.
The clearance must never be set closer than the amount specified
or burning of the valves and loss of power will result.
Distributor Breaker Points— The distributor breaker points
should have a clean, grey, frosted appearance. If pitted or
blackened, insert a small, flat file between them, hold them
lightly against the file with the fingers, and dr£w the file straight


out. Repeat as necessary. The points should be kept square with
ea2h other and make contact over their entire surfaces. Wipe
them with a clean, soft cloth.
Badly burned breaker points require more extensive treatment.
In such a case, have your Oldsmobile Dealer make any adjust-
ment or replacement necessary.
IGNITION
DISTRIBUTOR
1. Condenser
2. Cam
3. Breaker Point
4. Breaker Point Lock
Screw
5. Breaker Point Ad-
justing Screw
6. Breaker Arm
To adjust the breaker points, remove the distributor cap and
rotor. Crank the engine by hand until the breaker arm is exactly
on the -peak of the cam. The breaker points are then open the
maximum distance. Loosen the lock-screw and turn the eccentric
adjusting screw to the right or left, increasing or decreasing the
gap to .020 in., the correct dimension. Securely tighten the
lock screw.
Distributor Adjustment —The modern automobile engine
has a relatively high compression ratio, enabling it to develop
more power and use less fuel. For greater efficiency a fuel of
high anti-knock qualities, or 'octane rating,’ should be used. How-
ever, it is sometimes necessary to use a fuel of low octane rating. In
such a case, some sacrifice of performance must be expected.
The wide variation in the different kinds of petrol now on the
market has made it necessary to devise some practical means for
using them efficiently in the engine. The distributor adjustment
makes it possible to compensate for the variation in the octane
rating of different fuels and to enable the engine to operate as
efficiently as possible with the type of fuel being used.


It is necessary to adjust the distributor only when changing to a
fuel with different anti-knock qualities or octane rating. To make
the adjustment, loosen the indicator lock bolt and turri the dis-
tributor toward the "retard” side of the scale for a fuel of low
rating and toward the "advance” side for one of high rating.
DISTRIBUTOR
ADJUSTMENT
1. Indicator
2. Ignition Distributor
Move the distributor not more than one graduation of the scale
at a time, and each time lock the adjustment and rest the en-
gine. The final position should be such that only a very light
knock is evident when accelerating with wide open throttle at
10 to 15 miles per hour and no knock when accelerating at higher
speeds.
Spark Plugs —Dirty spark plugs increase fuel consumption and
decrease power and speed. They should be cleaned and their
Worn plugs should be replaced
Adjust side electrode


gaps re-set at least every 3,000 to 4,000 miles. It is usually advis-
able to replace them every 10,000 miles. The gaps should be
set to .035 to .037 in. In setting them, be careful to bend only
the side electrode and not the one in the centre, otherwise the
porcelain core may be broken.
Spark plug cleaning is an operation that cannot be done without
special equipment and it is recommended that your Oldsmobile
Dealer be consulted. Pyrox Type P.Z.148. spark plugs are used
in all models.
Carburettor Adjustment —lmproper engine operation usu-
ally results from some cause other than an incorrectly adjusted
carburettor. The carburettor adjustment should not be disturbed
without making sure that the cause of the difficulty is not else-
where.
Idling Speed Adjustment —This adjustment regulates the speed
at which the engine runs with a closed throttle. It should be
made only after the engine has been thoroughly warmed up.
Push the throttle button on the instrument board all the way in.
Turn the throttle stop screw on the carburettor in or out until
tire engine runs at the desired speed. If it runs too fast, turn the
screw outward; if too slowly, turn it inward.
CARBURETTOR
ADJUSTMENT
1. Idle Needle Valve
Screw
2. Throttle Stop
Screw
Idling Mixture Adjustment —Fuel for idling speeds is regulated
by a needle valve at the right hand side of the carburettor. This
valve can be adjusted to the correct position as follows: —
Run the engine long enough to warm it up thoroughly. Close
the throttle so that the engine is idling.


Turn the idling adjusting screw gradually to the right or left
until the engine runs steadily. Turn the screw clockwise for a
richer mixture and counter clockwise for a leaner mixture.
If the engine does not run properly after this adjustment, it
indicates that the difficulty is not with the carburettor, and your
Oldsmobile Dealer should be consulted.
FUEL PUMP
1. Chassis Frame
2. Sediment Bowl
3. Retaining Screw
Cleaning Fuel Pump Bowl —The fuel pump is provided
with a bowl and a filter, through which the fuel must pass. Dirt
and water settle in the bowl, which may be removed for clean-
ing. To remove, unscrew the retaining screw under the bowl until
the bowl, gasket and filter can be lifted out.
Be sure the gasket is not broken and that the bowl seats properly
when replaced. Tighten the retaining screw at the bottom to pre-
vent leakage.
Air Cleaner — Ordinarily, washing the air cleaner every 2,000
miles should be sufficient. More frequent cleaning will be neces-
sary when the truck is operated mostly on dusty roads.
The air cleaner should be removed from the carburettor for
cleaning. Remove the wing nut from the top (Trucks) and re-
move the cover. The filter element can then be pulled out.
Caution —Do not pry this part or it will be damaged, resulting
in improper operation. Remove it by hand without tools.
Empty the oil out of the reservoir (Trucks) and clean out the
accumulated sediment. Wash the unit with petrol and dry it.


1. Flywheel
2. Cover
3. Flywheel Housing
4. Pressure Plate
5. Lever Springs
6. Release Lever
CLUTCH ASSEMBLY
7. Disc
8. Release B’ring Oiler
9. Release Bearing
10. Clutch Gear Shaft
11. Release Sleeve
12. Fork Ball Joint
13. Clutch Gear Pilot
Bearing
14. Release Levers
15. Ball Joint Screw
16. Clutch Pork


Wash the filter element by dipping it in petrol. Allow it to dry
after cleaning and then re-oil it by dipping it in new S.A.E. No,
50 engine oil. Permit the surplus oil to drain off.
Trucks —Before assembling, fill the body of the cleaner with one
pint of S.A.E. No. 50 engine oil.
When the engine is first started after oiling the air cleaner, the
exhaust may be clouded with blue smoke. This will be only a
temporary condition and will not indicate trouble.
Clutch Pedal — The clutch pedal is properly adjusted when
there is in. clearance between the pedal arm and the under side
of the toe-board and 1 in. free movement before the clutch starts
to release. If the pedal arm strikes the toe-board before the clutch
is fully engaged, it will cause the clutch to slip and heat, resulting
in rapid wear.
The free movement of the clutch pedal is regulated by the adjust-
ment of the pedal adjusting screw. To make this adjustment, turn
the adjusting nut on the clutch pull rod.
Keep the clutch throw-out bearing lubricated in accordance with
the lubrication chart but do not put any oil, kerosene or other
lubricant or dressing on the clutch facings.
Transmission Assembly—Commercial
Synchro-Mesh Transmission (Commercial) —The Synchro-
Mesh transmission provides easy, quiet and quick gear shifting
from first to second, second to high and high to second speeds


without clashing, by merely pushing out the clutch and pulling
or pushing the gear shift lever. No expert training is required for
easy and quiet gear shifting, the novice can shift gears as easily as
the expert.
The Synchro-Mesh transmission eliminates the pause between dis-
engaging and engaging gears necessary in other transmissions.
This pause is to permit the faster turning gear to slow down
so that its speed corresponds to the slower turning gear it is to
engage. This is due to the difference of the speed ratios in the
transmission. The synchronizing mechanism in the Oldsmobile
transmission automatically does this very thing, speeding up or
slowing down the mating gear requiring no thought on the part
of the driver.
Transmission —Oldsmobile Truck
1. Main Drive Gear Bearing
2. Spline Shaft Pilot Bearing
3. Main Drive Gear
4. High Speed Sliding Gear
5. Countershaft Front Bearing
6. Countershaft Drive Gear
7. Countershaft Reverse Gear
8. Countershaft Third Speed Gear
9. Countershaft Second Speed Gear
10. Countershaft Low Speed Gear
11. Countershaft Rear Bearing
12. Low, Second and Reverse Speed
Sliding Gears
13. Spline Shaft Bearing
14. Spline Shaft
15. Gear Shifting Shaft
16. Shifting Forks
Transmission (Truck) —The transmission is of the selective
type, having four speeds forward and one reverse.


The fundamental requirements are to first engage gears so that
the entire tooth "face” of the sliding gears mesh with those on
the countershaft and, second, to properly lubricate all working
parts. Proper engagement can be had by being sure, when shifting
gears, that the gear shift lever travels as far forward, or back-
ward as it will go, before re-engaging the clutch.
Universal Joint (Commercial) —The universal joint used in
the Oldsmobile Commercial Vehicle is directly connected to and
receives its lubrication from the transmission. Additional lubrica-
tion facilities at this point are unnecessary. The speedometer is
driven from a worm and a drive gear mounted at the universal
joint.
Universal Joint (Oldsmobile Truck) —On the trucks addi-
tional propeller shaft length is provided by a separate propeller
shaft unit consisting of a propeller shaft extension and a rear
universal joint, the housings of which are equipped with pres-
sure gun lubrication fittings.
It is important that these two points be regularly lubricated with
a lubricant not heavier than S.A.E. No. 160. (Approximately one
pound of lubricant will fill the joint housing.) Under no consider-
ation should any lubricant of the fibrous type or grease be used.
This universal joint yoke differs from the front universal joint
in that the extension shaft runs in a ball bearing pressed into the
rear universal joint housing.
Lubrication for this universal joint is provided through the pres-
sure gun fitting on the side of the housing.
Note. —The pipe plug in the top of front universal joint housing
on the commercial vehicle and trucks is for manufacturing pur-
poses and is used to fill this universal joint at time of assembly.
Rear Axle (Commercial) —The rear axle is of the semi-
floating type. The axle shafts are supported on the outer ends by
heavy duty roller bearings.
Rear Axle (Oldsmobile Truck) —The axle on the Olds-
mobile truck is of the full-floating type. The load at each wheel
is carried on two Hyatt roller bearings in the rear axle housing
which is of the seamless steel one-piece type, replacing the mal-
leable iron-casting with steel tubes used in 1936. The illustration
shows the construction and relative positions of the various units.


12. Axle Shaft
13. Spring Seat
14. Pressure Gun Fitting
15. Differential Side Bearing
10. Differential Case
17. Differential Pinion Gear
18. Differential Pinion Gear Shaft
19. Oil Drain Plug
20. Differential Bearing Adjusting
Nut
1. Brake Drum
2. Brake Shoe
3. Brake Backing Plate
4. Axle Bearing
5. Crown Wheel
6. Pinion
7. Rear Pinion Shaft Bearing
8. Pinion Shaft Spacer
9. Front Pinion Shaft Bearing
10. Propeller Shaft
11. Front Pinion Bearing Adjusting
Screw
Rear Axle—Oldsmobile Commercial Vehicle


Rear Axle—Oldsmobile Truck
Hydraulic Brakes —The service brakes incorporate the same
fundamental Oldsmobile design of hydraulic application that has
been so successful in the past year.
Pressure applied to the brake pedal moves the piston in the
main cylinder, thereby forcing brake fluid through the pipes to
the wheel cylinders. This causes the pistons to move outward
bringing the brake shoes in contact with the drums. The full


braking pressure cannot be built up until all shoes are in contact
with the drums. In a hydraulic system, the pressures are all
equal, and the result is a smooth, automatically equalized brake.
MASTER BRAKE CYLINDER
1. Filler Plug
2. Master Cylinder
Do not permit the addition of any fluid to the master cylinder
other than the genuine Delco No. 5 brake fluid recommended by
General Motors —Holden’s Ltd. Inferior fluids may contain
mineral oil which will swell and destroy the rubber parts in the
braking system. If this occurs, it will be necessary to replace all
rubber parts, clean the system thoroughly, and refill with genuine
brake fluid.
When the braking system is in good condition the pedal pres-
sure will be firm and the brakes will operate readily. If the
pedal action seems too soft or spongy, or if too much movement
of the pedal is required to apply the brakes, it indicates the
presence of air in the lines or the need of brake shoe adjustment
To restore proper braking action, the air must be removed from
the lines, the system filled with fluid, and the brake shoes pro-
perly adjusted. This is an exacting operation that should be
done by your Dealer.
Adjusting Brakes —Disconnect the emergency brake pull rods
from the brake cables. This can be done at the clevis just ahead
of the emergency brake cable.
It is necessary that the emergency brake cables be disconnected
before the brake shoes are adjusted in the drums to eliminate


any possibility of a brake shoe
dragging on the brake drum
when adjusting the wheel cylin-
der and a false adjustment
being made.
Jack up wheels so that they
will rotate freely.
Remove adjusting hole covers
from the brake flange plate. In-
sert a screwdriver in the adjust-
ing hole to engage the teeth of
Adjusting Brake Shoe
the adjusting wheel. On the Oldsmobile Truck rear brakes the
adjustment is made, not through adjusting holes, but by turning
the | in. headed adjusting pinion shaft with a | in. open end
wrench. The shaft and pinion is in permanent mesh with the
wheel cylinder adjusting cover.
Turn the adjusting wheel
(or the adjusting pinion shaft
on the rear brakes of the Olds-
mobile Truck) clockwise until
the shoe causes a slight drag on
the drum.
Turn the adjusting cover back;
4 notches on the Commercial
Vehicles.
5 notches on the front brakes
of the Oldsmobile Truck.
Adjusting Rear Brake.
Each notch will be indicated by a faint click of the cover lock
springs as the cover is turned. This backing off of the adjusting
wheel moves the brake shoes away from the drums, to insure
proper clearance between the shoe and the drum.
Turn the adjusting pinion shaft back:
| of a turn on the rear brakes of the Oldsmobile Truck.
Set emergency lever in its fully released position. The emerg-
ency brakes should be adjusted each time the hydraulic service
brakes are adjusted.
Pull on the end of the emergency brake cable until all slack is
removed.
Turn the adjusting clevis on the brake rod until the holes in the
clevis line up with the hole in the end of the brake cable, and


Brakes—Oldsrnobile Commercial Vehicle
1. Wheel Cylinder
2. Brake Retracting Spring
3. Brake Lining
4. Brake Actuating Link
HYDRAULIC BRAKE
MECHANISM
(Rear —Truck)
1. Hydraulic Cylinder
2. Piston
3. Brake Lining
4. Brake Shoe
5. Articulated Link
5. Brake Adjusting Wheel
6. Brake Shoe
7. Brake Drum
8. Brake Actuating Link


install clevis pin and cotter key. Hold the clevis while tighten-
ing the check nut to avoid turning the clevis and twisting the
brake cable or rod.
Check the operation of the emergency brakes to ensure equal
braking of each rear wheel. When it is necessary to change the
adjustment of the emergency brake at this time, loosen the tight
brake rather than tighten the loose one. This must be done at
the junction of the brake cable and pull rod. Do not touch the
wheel cylinder adjustment when adjusting the emergency brakes.
Removal of Lamp Bulbs —Head Lamp —Loosen the screw
in the lower front of the head lamp and pull the door outward
at the bottom. The head lamp bulb is held in place at the centre
of the reflector by three unequally-spaced slots in its base. To
remove the bulb, rock it slightly on its base and turn it. It can
then be lifted out. Reverse these operations to instal it. Make
certain the bulb is against its seat before turning it to its locked
position, '
Bulbs that have turned black should be replaced.
Parking Lamp —Remove the head lamp door as above. To
remove the bulb, press in slightly and at the same time turn the
bulb and withdraw it.
Tail and Stop Lamp —Remove the door by taking out the fasten-
ing screws. The bulbs can be removed and replaced in the same
way as the parking lamp bulb.
Headlamp Adjustment— Proper adjustment of the head-
lamps is an important safety feature. Prevention of glare to
approaching cars and ability to see the road clearly at all times
mean that the headlamps must be correctly aimed.
To make this adjustment, a painted screen or flat wall surface
must be provided about four feet high by six feet wide. The
screen should be painted white with a horizontal black line,
38-15/16 in. above the lower edge of the screen for the Com-
mercial Vehicle, and 42/ in. above it for the Truck. Two vertical
black lines should be painted on the screen, 15 in. on each side
of the centre.
Place the truck on a level floor with the screen 25 feet in front
of the headlamp lenses and square with them. Shield the screen
from outside light so the pattern of light from the headlamps
can be seen. It is often more convenient to do this work at night.
Turn on the headlamps and press the dimmer switch to the


1: Truck to stand square with screen. 2: Truck and screen on level floor.
3: Front of headlamps to face of screen — 25 feet. 4: White screen with
black lines. 5: Commercial Series — 38-15/16 in., Truck Series — 42 ¼ in.
6: Both Series—15 in. 7: Centre line, left light. 8: Centre line, right
light. 9: Centre line of screen and truck. 10: Cut-off line, top of beam
bright or upper beam position. Cover the left headlamp with a
cloth and adjust the right lamp so that the centre of the beam
strikes the right-hand vertical line and the top edge of the beam
does not extend above the horizontal line.
Then put the cloth over the right lamp and adjust the left lamp
in the same manner. Be sure the headlamp clamp screws are
tight after making the adjustment. Then uncover both lamps
and see that the light pattern is similar to that shown in the
illustration.
Cleaning Headlamps — Remove the lens and wipe the sur-
face of the reflector with a soft, clean cloth —or apply a mixture
of lampblack and pure alcohol. Always wipe from the centre
straight out to the rim. Rubbing in a circular motion may cause
slight scratches in the reflector and reduce its efficiency. If fre-
quent cleaning is required, inspect the rim gaskets to see if they
need replacing.
If a headlamp lens becomes broken, the reflector should be pro-
tected by fastening a cloth over the headlamp face, until a new
lens can be secured.
Fuse —A 15-ampere fuse is used to protect some of the elec-
trical circuits from the damage that would result from an abnor-
mally large amount of current, as from a short circuit. It is
located on the back of the ammeter, behind the instrument panel.
In the event of a short circuit, for example, this fuse may burn
out. It is advisable to carry one or two spare fuses for an


emergency, even though they probably will never be used. If
the lights cannot be turned on, first examine the fuse. If it is
found to be burned out, replace it with a new one. If the new
one burns out, this indicates a short circuit in the wiring and the
circuit should be inspected to determine the cause of the difficulty.
Removing Wheels —To remove a demountable wheel, first
jack it up. On Commercial models it will be necessary to prise off
the hub cap with a screwdriver. Remove the wheel nuts with the
demountable wheel wrench and the wheel can be removed.
When replacing the wheel, turn all nuts up lightly first. Con-
tinue to tighten them a turn or two at a time until the wheel is
drawn up snugly and evenly against the wheel flange.
Do not tighten nuts in regular order one after the other around
the circle. Tighten them alternately, skipping every other nut or
working on opposite sides of the circle until all are tight.
Dismounting the Tyre
Raising bead over rim flange Final stage in dismounting tyre
Dismounting the Tyre—Commercial Vehicle — Chang-
ing tyres is ordinarily done at a service station. However, on
those occasions when the tyre must be changed by the driver, the
following instructions will help to simplify the problem.
After the wheel has been removed, deflate the tube entirely. Lay
the wheel down and loosen the beads or edges of the tyre on each
side. Use a tyre iron or other flat tool if necessary. With the
wheel still flat, push the tyre bead, on the side opposite the valve,
into the well in the wheel rim. Hold this section of the tyre in
the well with the knees or feet.


Place a tyre iron or other flat tool about 4 inches on each side
of the valve between the tyre and the rim. By forcing down on
these tools, raise the tyre bead over the edge of the rim flange.
Follow around the flange with one tool until the bead is com-
pletely free from the rim.
Then push the valve stem out of the wheel and remove the tube.
Turn the wheel and tyre over on its other side and, with the
feet, force the top edge of the tyre down inside the well in the
wheel rim. Opposite this section that has been pushed into the
well, insert two tyre irons under the lower edge of the tyre about
12 ins. apart.
Keeping the opposite side down in the well, push down on the
two tyre irons so that the wheel rim flange is raised up over the
tyre.
Hold the tyre irons in that position with the feet and lift the
wheel from the tyre.
Mounting the Tyre—Commercial Vehicle — Clean all
dirt from the inside of the casing.
Application of a little vegetable oil soft soap to the inside and
outside edges of the tyre bead will make the assembly easier.
Mounting the Tyre
Setting first bead over rim flange Forcing second head over rim flange
Inflate the tube until it is barely rounded out and insert it in the
casing, placing the valve next to the red dot or balance mark
on the casing. See that the valve is straight and centrally located
between the edges of the tyre.


Lay the wheel on the ground with the valve hole toward you.
Holding the tyre with the valve toward you, lay it on the wheel
and push a section of the lower edge of the tyre next to the
valve, down in the well of the wheel rim.
Push the valve stem through the valve hole in the wheel rim
and screw on the rim nut a few turns. Check to see that the tube
is not caught between the rim and the edge of the tyre and then
force the remainder of the lower edge of the tyre over the rim
flange.
With the tyre irons, force the top edge of the tyre over the rim
flange, working it over, a small section at a time.
Inflate the tyre to a low pressure —about 7 to 10 pounds. Bounce
the wheel to settle the tyre, making sure it is even, all around the
flange. Then inflate the tyre to the correct pressure.
Truck Rims —Removal of Flange —It is important that the tyre
be deflated sufficiently to permit the flange to be moved from its
support on the gutter diameter. A tool is provided in the tool kit
for use in the removal of this flange. The end of this tool is
inserted in the slot provided in the flange at point "B" in the
illustration.
As pressure is applied to force the flange away from the rim
gutter, using the gutter as a fulcrum, it will be noted that the
flange can be moved outward and prised over the gutter at the
position of this slot until the cutaway portion nearest the tool
slot spans the outside diameter of the rim gutter. Continue to
prise the remainder of this half of the flange from the gutter by
moving toward the opposite cutaway portion until flange is in
same position, where it is ready to be removed by the application
of additional force at either of the cutaway portions.


Replacing Flange —After applying tyre and tube in the usual
manner to the wheel, the continuous side flange is placed in
position for assembly. The two cutaway portions marked "A”
opposite each other on the inner diameter of the flange are placed
so as to span the rim gutter and the flange is forced into the
gutter at point "C” as far as possible.
This flange can be drawn into the gutter by tapping at point
'B’ (see illustration) or by use of a tool as a lever which forces or
draws flange outward and downward over the gutter diameter
and into the groove of same.
It will be obvious that after reaching this stage of application
that the final application is accomplished by striking the flange
at the point where it still spans the gutter at the point of con-
tact. This point of contact will gradually progress toward the
cutaway portion farther from the starting point "B.”
After the flange is assembled to rim, operator must make certain
that inside diameter of flange has passed completely over the
outside diameter of the gutter into the groove of the gutter
before inflating the tyre. As air pressure is applied, it is noted
that the flange centres itself by virtue of the slope in the gutter
that provides this feature.


Authorized Distributors
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts
and Accessories
QUEENSLAND
E. G. Eager & Son Limited, Breakfast Creek Rd., Newstead, Brisbane
NEW SOUTH WALES
Boyded Limited, 112-114 Hunter Street, Sydney
McLeod, Kelso & Lee, Limited, 47-49 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
Larke, Neave & Carter Limited, 177-185 William Street, Sydney
Young & Green Limited, 673-675 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
W. H. Lober & Co. Limited, 147-149 William Street, Sydney
Stack & Co. Limited, Crowle House, 105 York Street, Sydney
W. T. Coggins Ltd., 117 Parramatta Road, Camperdown
Westcott, Ha2el & Co. Limited, 225-227 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Bennett & Wood Limited, Pitt and Bathurst Streets, Sydney
Motor Traders (Riverina) Ltd., Albury
VICTORIA
Preston Motors Pty. Limited, 114 Franklin Street, Melbourne
S. A. Cheney Pty. Limited, 22 Flinders Street, Melbourne
Southern Motors Pty. Limited, 131-137 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
Rhodes Motor Company Pty. Limited, 401 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
E. A. Machin & Co. Pty. Limited, 535 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Brooklands Accessories Pty. Limited, 150 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
City Motors Limited, 95 Waymouth Street, Adelaide
Freeman Motors Limited, Grenfell Street, Adelaide
United Motors Limited, 252 Pirie Street, Adelaide
Alwin Schulz Ltd., 73-77 Currie Street, Adelaide
Motor Traders (S.A.) Limited, 85-87 Flinders Street, Adelaide
Messrs. Duncan & Co., 107-109 Pirie Street, Adelaide
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Sydney Atkinson Motors Limited, Temple Court, Perth
Attwood Motors (1934) Limited, 22-32 Stirling Street, Perth
Atkins (W.A.) Limited, 894 Hay Street, Perth
TASMANIA
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Limited, Macquarie Street, Hobart
Motors Pty. Limited, 165-171 Brisbane Street, Launceston


INDEX
Truck Data Front Cover
A Message to Truck Owners ... ... ... 3
Controls and Instruments ... 5
How to Start Your Engine 10
When the Truck is New ... ... ... ... ... 10
Body Design ... ... ... ... 11
Driving for Performance, Economy and Safety ... 12
Fuel Consumption 13
Fuel Saving Hints ... ... ' 13
Oil Consumption 14
Tyre Mileage .. ... ... ... 15
Drivers and Driving Flabits ... 17
The Care of Your Truck 24
Preventive Maintenance ... 26
The Importance of Proper Lubrication ... ... 27
Keeping the Truck Looking New 36
Diagnosis in Emergencies ... ... 38
Care and Maintenance and Emergency
Adjustments ... ... ... ... ... ... 43


CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Only a good grade of water resistant chassis
lubricant should be used at points indicated in
the chassis diagram, except where other lubri-
cants are specifically mentioned.
Note.—The chassis should be lubricated every
1,000 miles if the truck is operated on paved
highways. If operated mostly on dirt or gravel
roads, more frequent lubrication will be necessary.
Front Spring Shackles
2 Steering Knuckles
Tie Rod Ends
£ Front Spring Pins
10 Rear Spring Pins
12 Rear Spring Shackles
16 Drag Link
7 Clutch Throw-Out Bearing: Give grease
cup several turns. Keep the cup filled with
a non-fluid, short fibre grease having a high
melting point.
8 Transmission: Check the oil level. It should
be maintained at the filler plug opening.
See instructions under “Yearly” and “Drive-Line
Lubricants.”
9 Universal Joints and Propeller Shaft:
Lubricate with transmission oil SAE 160.
<| 4 Rear Axle: Check the oil level. It should
■ I be maintained at the filler plug opening.
See instructions under “Every 5,000 Miles” and
“Drive-Line Lubricants.”
n Starting Motor: Five drops of light engine
oil in the oil cup at the front of the start-
ing motor.
U Steering Gear; The Steering Gear should
be lubricated with special steering gear
lubricant. This is a light non-flowing grease
having a temperature range from extreme sum-
mer conditions to below zero without affecting
the efficiency of the steering gear. Seasonal
change of this lubricant is unnecessary and the
housing should not be drained. If other lubri-
cants are used, it may be necessary to dilute in
extremely cold weather.
Do not use pressure fitting in the filler plug hole
when filling the steering gear, as this will force
grease up the steering column.
E Distributor: Give the grease cup a full
■ turn. Keep it filled with a non-fluid, short
fibre grease having a high melting point.
Put a light coating of vaseline on the breaker
pivot and on the cam face.
“t Generator: Five drops of light engine oil
■ ' in the oil cups at each end of the generator.
EVERY 1,000—1,500 MILES
Engine: Drain and refill the crankcase. Follow
specifications for grade of oil.
LUBRICATION CHART
1937 OLDSMOBILE TRUCKS AND
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
CAB LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Hood Hinges and Catch Mechanism: Light
machine oil.
Windshield Wiper Shaft: Light machine oil.
Door Hinge Pins: Use light machine oil.
Door Lock Bolts: Use “Door Ease” on the curved
side. Use light machine oil on the flat side.
Lock Cylinders : Lubricate with powdered
graphite.
Door Dovetail Bumpers and Striker Plate; Apply
“Door Ease” grease stick to the metal shoes.
DRIVE-LINE LUBRICANTS
In the transmission use transmission oil SAE 160
for Trucks and SAE 110 for Commercial Vehicles.
Hear Axle: Extreme-pressure or hypoid lubricants
must be used to lubricate the rear axle. These
lubricants in the rear axle of trucks subject to
severe service will be of considerable aid in pro-
viding satisfactory lubrication.
It is very important when adding lubricant to use
the same brand that is already in the axle. If the
brand is unknown, do not add lubricant. Drain
completely and refill with new lubricant.
The axle should be drained, flushed and refilled
every 5,000 miles or at least twice a year. Do not
use extreme-pressure or hypoid lubricants in the
transmission.
ENGINE LUBRICATION
The engine oil in the crankcase should be filled
to the proper' level with a well-refined oil of the
viscosity recommended. Maintain the oil level
near the full mark on the oil level indicator at
all times.
During the first 500 miles: Use the oil placed in
the crankcase at the factory. This is a light
oil essential for use during the breaking in period.
After the first 500 miles: Drain the oil from the
crankcase and refill with high quality oil having
the body or viscosity of S.A.E. 30-
At 1,500 Miles: Drain and refill with SAE 30.
CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 2,000 MILES
5 Air Cleaner (Commercial Vehicle): The
filter element of the standard air cleaner
should be removed and washed in petrol. Keep
the felt pad dry. After drying, re-oil the filter by-
dipping it in SAE 50 engine oil. Allow the excess
oil to drain off and then re-assemble.
Air Cleaner (Truck): Remove the entire
filter assembly. Then unscrew the wing nut, re-
move the cover and pull out the filter element.
Do not pry it out. Remove it by hand without
tools. Empty the oil out of the reservoir and clean
out the accumulated sediment with petrol. Wash
the filter unit in petrol and dry it. Then re-oil it
by dipping it in new SAE No. 50 engine oil,
allowing the surplus to drain off. Before re-as-
sembling, fill the body of the cleaner with one
pint of SAE No. 50 engine oil. While the cleaning
interval is given as 2,000 miles, this applies only
to trucks used under the best conditions, such as
on paved city streets. Actually, the cleaning in-
terval must be varied in accordance with oper-
ating conditions. Experience must be used as a
guide. For very extreme conditions, such as road
construction work, once a, day may be necessary
but never longer than twice a week.
—o™
EVERY 5,000 MILES
Rear Axle: Drain completely, flush and
■ ■ refill. See instructions under “Drive-Line
Lubricants.”
EVERY 10,000 MILES
3 Front Wheel Bearings: Remove the wheels,
clean the bearings and pack the bearing
ball retainers with a non-fluid, short fibre grease
having a high melting point. Do not pack the hub
between the inner and outer bearing assemblies
nor the hub cap, as this excessive lubrication will
result in grease working out into the brake drums
and on the linings.
YEARLY
8 Transmission: Drain completely, flush and
refill. See instructions under “Drive-Line
Lubricants.”
MISCELLANEOUS
Rear Wheel Bearings; The rear wheel bearings
receive their lubrication from the rear axle. Addi-
tional lubrication is unnecessary.
Brake Master Cylinder: Check the oil level and
see that- it is not less than half full. Use only
Delco No. 5 brake fluid. Consult your Dealer for
recommendations.
Rear Springs: Should the truck owner find it
necessary to have the spring leaves lubricated,
a cup grease to which 8% to 10% of graphite
has been added should be used.


