

I W. 7 /2 JZ
9 JUtJU. ou
,9 ff
M-*?— V
Jh-^t, *?if
/fS~~


J ■ / „
( 84 )
THE EASTERN SETTLED DISTRICTS IN AUSTRALIA.
J. W. F. BLUNDELL, ESQ.
Leaving the small township of Guildford, briefly described in our
last, the traveller passes over a firm natural road, chiefly composed of
hard clay, with occasional patches of a lighter soil; and at the distance of
about four miles commences upon the ascent of the Darling Range. Here
the road diverges from two points ; the right leading to the inland town of
York, and the left to the fertile and picturesque district called by its
native name Toodyay. Let us in the course of our exploration take the
latter, and then, returning by the former, a fair opportunity will be afforded
of judging of the qualities and capabilities of this portion of the settled
districts.
The Darling Range, which extends north and south for nearly 300
miles, rises abruptly from the plains, and stands like a huge buttress
between them and the interior of the land. A nice scramble it is, both
for man and horse, to gain the summit by the circuitous rocky path,
traced out alone by the drays and vehicles of the settlers, and worn here
and there by the passage of the winter rains. To the newly-arrived
emigrant, who has gazed so long o’er the monotonous lowland and forest,
and looked oftentimes wistfully at these distant hills, it is a matter of
indescribable joy when his desires are at length accomplished, and he
turns to gaze upon the scene beneath, and mark the aspect of a
country whose beauties and resources he is to adopt, and add his mite
towards their development. Many a time and oft is he destined to gaze
from this eminence on each prominent feature of the landscape, and turn
with either pleasure or disgust from that region where the fate of his
annual exertions and hard strivings is made known, and the meed of
necessary civilisation dispensed to him. The view has its charms. To
the left may be seen in the dim distance the estuary of the Swan, and
a glimpse of some of the white buildings of Perth; to the right, the eye
wanders over what appears to be a boundless forest, broken occasionally
by small isolated hills covered with timber, and concealing the course of
the river and the Innumerable clearings upon its banks. It is a solemn
moment for the emigrant, to stand for the first time upon the highest
eminence which his adopted country affords, and catch another faint
glimpse of that remorseless ocean which bore him for so many anxious
days and nights on its fretful and unsleeping bosom, towards the new
distant haven of his hopes and his struggles upon earth. At such a
moment, the novelty of his situation raises him above the conflict of
emotions wherein the past and present are fearfully mingled,—and he
would fain ask that the future might be made known to him. These
suggestions recur painfully to the writer from the details of a little
incident which occurred to him on his first visit to this part of the country,
in company with a friend who had volunteered to act as guide during the
pilgrimage through which the reader is about to be conducted. We left
Guildford ere the sun had risen over the hills, on a bright clear morn-
ing, such as can scarcely be seen except in Australia; and mounted
on well-conditioned steeds, which seemed in their brute natures to hail
the spirit of the hour, journeyed towards the foot of the range.


By the side of the road, but a short distance from the township, stood,
encircled by a rail fence, a small and ruined barn, or primitive dwelling-
house ; and through the rafters of the partly open roof arose a thin wreath
of white smoke, announcing the temporary fire of some benighted person,
or more probably wandering native family. Our companion proposed
that we should light that unfailing solace of the bush, the pipe, at this
fire, ere we were fairly on our journey, and had encountered the noontide
heat of the day. As we drew up to the shattered tenement, we observed
that its occupant was but the shadow of a human being, of an appearance
so indescribable that, amid the dirty whole which made up his apparel
and fleshly form, but little could be distinguished one way or the other.
He wore a light battered foraging cap upon his head, and undoubtedly
seemed as forlorn and outcast —as in truth he was—as human being
could by his frailties or infirmities be found, subdued and punished. The
fire was in perfect keeping with the creature who had kindled it; it was
made up of a bundle of sticks and reeds, loosely and vaguely piled upon
each other ; and, emitting no flame, sent up into the still morning air but
a faint struggling wreath of vapour, emblematic of the fading creature
who ere our arrival stood vacantly gazing at its tardy progress towards
a blaze. He seemed to be without food, and unencumbered with any-
thing that might be fondly termed property. His furtive look, and
apparent disinclination to anything approaching ordinary communication,
spoke volumes of the unhappy condition to which years of heedless
wandering and habitual intemperance had reduced him. His course of
life since his residence in the colony —if it could be presumed that he
had in common with other mortals a local habitation or a name had
been taken amid the most unfrequented wilds of the territory, in slow
and solitary search for the rarest seeds and botanical specimens for
which this colony has long been celebrated ; at times partaking of the
primitive fare of the native tribes, but more frequently drowning the
cares and the disappointments of his monotonous existence in the drunken
revel of the towns, when, by the fortunate sale of the materials of his
labours, he was enabled to indulge in the remaining solace of his
Such was the being who then tended to the travellers a mouldering
ember of the fire for the purpose to which we have alluded, and, having
done so, he shrank instinctively from that closer inspection which is so hate-
ful to one in his condition, yet so natural to those to whom such charac-
ters are objects of deep and painful interest. He stooped down, and
with his feeble breath commenced to blow amidst the leaves, which
seemed at that time to lack their wonted sympathy with the element
glowing beneath. Not wishing to draw him from the recluse position
which was evidently a matter of choice and feeling, we turned hastily
from the spot, and wishing God speed him on his path, however
desolate and drear that path might be, urged our horses into a light
canter towards the hills. We thought in this instance, as in the many
which surrounded us in life, how true is the language ot the poet, when
speaking of that solitude which surpasses all other descriptions of worldly
isolation:
To roam about, the world’s tired denizen,
With none to bless us—none whom we can bless!
But a few months subsequent to the occurrence we have briefly de-
scribed, tidings were brought in, we believe by the natives, of the re-


mains of tins poor creature having been found at the foot of a huge tree
in the depths of the forest, though not many miles from the township we
had just left. It was winter time, in the very heart of the rainy season,
when a frame so wasting and enfeebled as his own required security and
shelter, both from the pelting of the pitiless storm and the deluge of
moisture which floated in the atmosphere, and everywhere saturated the
surface of the land. In some wild night, when the howling of the tem-
pest was lost in the still louder roar of the giants of the forest, and the
gloom occasionally rent by the vivid glare of the forked lightning which
lent additional horrors to the scene, was this poor houseless wretch,
stiffened with cold and convulsed in hopeless agony, yielding up his
spirit from the desolate clay which for months and years delayed to
part, yet gave oft-repeated promise of speedy dissolution. And why was
he there? Why, at such a season, should he brave the dangers with
which forms of hardy bearing shrank from contending? For the bare
pittance of his precarious livelihood—for the small rewards of lonely,
anxious toil, to purchase the soul-destroying drink, the necessary sup-
port of his declining strength, the comfort of his allotted term. In his
simple history there appeared nothing to superinduce so fatal a pre-
dilection. He had been many years in the settlement, and many
before his disposition and character fell prostrate beneath the load of
sorrow, sickness, and desolation, which accrued upon his increasing depra-
vity. Formerly employed at the Royal Gardens of Kevv, he had been
induced to accompany the first governor of the colony for the purpose of
pursuing his avocations in a new field, and under auspices which might
be said to be most favourable ; yet his arrival served but to confirm those
previous habits which, alas! in the bright climate of Australia, are but
too seductive—too easily provided—for the weakest of human creatures
to withstand. So that, after a career of habitual debauch, mingled with
privation and exposure among the rocky hills and damp glades in search
of botanical treasures, he gave in his heart-sickening end but a melan-
choly chapter to colonial annals, where the outcast and the socially ex-
tinct forms of civilised men are fresh in the memory of the colonist, and
breathe sad warnings to posterity. Here, some dreary hollow in the
mountains tells its tale of deep revenge or fatal encounter with the
savage races ; there, some lonely spot in the trackless forest marks where
the bones of some lost traveller whitened for years ere they were disco-
vered : all speak, like so many landmarks, to succeeding generations.
But we left the reader on the summit of the first line of hills of the
Darling Range, and must hasten to conduct him on his journey. As
far as can be discovered in the immediate neighbourhood of the road,
the land upon the hills and in the valleys or gullies of the ranges appears
useless for any purpose whatever. Large masses of granite with quartz
pebbles may occasionally be seen; and when this is not prominent, an
ironstone country covered with fine stately timber is met with, relieving
to a considerable degree the otherwise forbidding aspect of the range ;
for be it known that it is the habit of the settler to dwell upon the avail-
able portions of territory, and, caring little for the picturesque unless it be
allied to fertility, to pass over unheeded many pleasing features of the
country. The road is one continuous hill and dale, uncheered by the
“ clearing” of the settler, though much that is now passed by may, at a
future time, be turned to account. At the end of about twenty miles the


first sign of the presence of civilised man in the wilderness of forest meets
the view, and the primitive little inn ol Balup appears, in sight. The
site of this small roadside inn and farm was selected from the superior
qualities of a patch of slope bordering a streamlet called the Wooriloo;
and which, having been adopted as the “ half-way house” of the settlers,
had been cultivated with considerable care, and yielded abundantly for the
general wants of the occupiers, whose livelihood more particularly
depended upon the profits of the small business afforded by this line of traffic
with the interior. The dwelling-house and land adjoining were then
tenanted by a widow and her daughter, who attended to the cares of the
household and the wants of their customers, as well as to the manufac-
ture, whenever their leisure would permit, of flowers constructed with the
feathers of the parrot, paroquet, and other birds of rare plumage, and often
to the small and beautiful tippet which is formed with considerable labour
of the pink down of the white cockatoo. These articles are sold to passers
by, and form such presents for England as display to the good people at
home the peculiarities of this great southern land.
After leaving this small hostelry, where excellent accommodation for
the place and season is afforded, the road becomes more picturesque in
character, the ranges more abrupt, the gullies deeper, and the slopes more
precipitous and rocky. Towards sunset many of the views thus afforded
had even a romantic character, and spoke of the time when civilised man had
never planted foot in this domain, and the savage rarely. Again the scenery
brightened, and our companion reining up at a turn of the high pass down
which we were slowly and cautiously proceeding, commanded us in a voice
which miffht have belonged to the spectre of the Brocken himself, to
alight, and render obeisance to the first sign of a rich and fertile territory;
which sign appeared in the form of a small and delicately-scented tree,
called from the odour of its wood the violet. After the long sameness of
the forest ranges we were but too glad to hall anything that in a small
degree denoted change ; and shortly after the valley of the Avon, some
hundreds of feet beneath, burst upon the sight. This fertilising river,
which is, in fact, the main tributary of the Swan, was meandering gently
between rich flats of alluvial soil ; and herds of fat cattle were quietly
browsing upon its pastures, or standing in pleasing groups upon the
shady sides of the surrounding hills. At length, on the opposite bank,,
relieving the eye of the monotonous forest-clad hills around, rose sub-
stantial farm-buildings, and next fields of waving corn burst in all their
verdant freshness upon the sight. If there be an indescribable charm in
turning from civilisation to Nature in her solitudes, and then, long absent
with her, to feel the requirements of the heart, and retrace our steps;
surely there can be nothing more deeply soothing to the mind than the
sight of a dwelling rising from out the primeval forest, surrounded by
those contrasts which speak of man’s dominion and his necessary pre-
sence. If such contrasts be pleasing where the clandestine efforts of art
can be seen and traced, what can be more gratifying than those which
Australia herself voluntarily offers ? Peculiar in the construction of her
territory and in the disposition of her land, whether fertile or barren, she
presents a series of continued contrasts to the gaze of the explorer,
which fill his heart with alternate emotions, and send him onward from
plain to forest, from desolate tracts to rich alluvial lands, delighted and full
of wonder. Here we had left a long dreary road, whose monotony had


been but once broken for more than fifty miles; and were, like to a scene
on the stage, in the heart of a district filled with rich variety of animal
life. On one occasion the peculiarity of condition of an old decayed
stump was brought under notice. It stood by the wayside, was to all
appearance hollowed throughout, both by age and the labours of the ant;
yet from the highest remaining portion of its trunk sprang a small and
flourishing tree of a different species altogether, the seed of which had
been blown there by the wind.
The whole valley of the Avon is moderately well settled. Passing the
farm, first displayed by the limits of the high road, the river is traced
onward, winding in a serpentine form amid lofty picturesque hills, among
which are several promising estates; when the country becomes more
open, the valleys wider, and the larger hills more Isolated in position. One
estate in particular, the property of a retired army-captain, embosomed
amid high rocky ranges intersecting one another at all points, spoke of
the rich and varied deposits of soil which may be found in these primitive
valleys. As the country became more open, the ride along the river’s
bank was exceedingly pleasant, rendered still more so by the level natural
roads, which might be well compared with the small avenues leading
up, in the pride of centuries, to some of the rural seats of England. At
length w r e arrived at a beautiful little farm, kept by a very hard-working
and worthy man, who had risen from the rank of labourer to that of sub-
stantial farmer—or yeoman, if it please better : but on that we shall ask
permission to read a lesson hereafter. This homestead stands upon the
right bank of the river; and on the opposite side may be seen, spread out
in all its luxuriance beneath the feet of a huge mount, the more highly
cultivated estate of a retired naval officer. At the working farmer’s snug
and unpretending dwelling we quartered for the night; and while the
wife busied herself in the labours of unvarying colonial hospitality, we
had leisure to gaze upon the different matters around us, which plainly
marked the frugal and respectable habits of the people. The building
itself w r as formed in the usual manner —of clay external w r alls of moderate
thickness, partitioned off in the interior into two compartments forming
the bed-room and the sitting-room : in fact, the general run of farm-
houses are so much of this character, that we will more minutely describe
the present, which will serve for all the rest.
The most approved method of constructing the walls and out-buildings
of colonial homesteads, is by the use of “ wattle and dab,” which is
nothing more nor less than a mixture of stiff clay, in which the small
leaves and fibres of the wattle tree are plentifully mingled. This being
finished, a common rafter roof of extraordinary pitch is then raised upon
the walls, and the whole thatched with straw or reeds. If the walls be
tolerably thick, nothing can surpass the coolness of these dwellings ; and,
garnished according to financial circumstances with the simple comforts
of cottage life, the whole will form an abode which, if not luxurious, is
at least unpretending and all-sufficient. The floors are usually those
which Nature provided; and, when kept cleanly swept, and covered with
that excellent and cool kind of matting which is procured from the East,
are not wanting in convenience or comfort. Such is the simple home-
stead : the more blessed of the settled community live in habitations
constructed after European fashions. The doors and windows ol the
former are matters of after-consideration —'sometimes fitted up with


luxurious glass, at others with but the simple shutter—while each is
usually kept open throughout the day, for the free circulation of air, and
the occasional passage of more enterprising ants and poultry.
The dwelling wherein we passed the night was of this simple descrip-
tion : the usual trophies of the farm were hung around and from the
rafters; and the walls were, moreover, adorned with a few wondrous
efforts of art, of a date beyond record, and dimly displaying sea-fights
of a singularly smoky and sanguinary character. Wandering out beneath
the pale moon ere we retired to rest, when the sound of the night-breeze
alone disturbed the perfect tranquillity of the hour, and the dark outline
of the mount on the opposite bank of the river gave as it were a curtain
to the picture which the lovely night had spread before us, we re-
member turning over and over again in our mind the many so-called
blessings of civilisation which were far off in another hemisphere, and at
that hour waking into renewed activity and life. We thought of the
great sacrifices which men are said to make when they abandon the
homes of their fathers to seek a world elsewhere, —subsistence, and even
happiness, beyond the pale of European test and experience. No balls,
no routs, no theatres, no gay pageantry were here ; no absorbing
political strife, to shake an ambitious world at the newly-reclaimed An-
tipodes. There was the planet which reigned over all, and viewed all
in her appointed course ; but nothing furnished a clue to the mystery —
Here were we, and where were our gains ? —in a land where years must
elapse ere civilisation can engraft its diseases and its antidotes —can
dissolve the barrier, and render each like unto the other! And then we
turned our eyes in the direction of the quiet homestead, where every
daily occupation had ceased, and nought moved save the restless house-
dog, who, not satisfied unless all were as still as death, wandered to
and fro, searching here and sniffing there in his fussy guardianship, and
coming anon to poke his cold nose against our hand, in expectation of
a patronising caress. The scene was eminently tranquil, and we could
all love it —if we could forget. Yes, if we could forget the old ambi-
tion—the fabled destiny of our early and late imaginings; if we could
believe in primitive life, its unfluttering thoughts, its peaceful though
lowly Inspiration! If the emigrant accomplish these, he is safe: if not,
they are to him the ever living fountains of disaster —the cup whose
dregs are wormwood, to be drained hourly, daily, yearly.
The morning sun had not risen when we sprang from our couch to
try conjecture at a different season. The dawn was more beautiful than
the night. We were in a totally different country to any yet experienced
since our residence in the colony. It was all good soil, all verdure, all
picturesque mountain, and here and there careful cultivation. There
was, however, barely a tenth part of the population which might be
housed and nourished in pride and plenty in this smiling wilderness ; the
boundary lines of innumerable unteuanted grants had been already passed,
and were still visible: there were many to inhabit, but none to claim
them by the fair title of labour dispensed and bestowed. The cattle
were asking in the most earnest and feeling manner for their dally
liberty of the pasture; and the sheep were bleating in their innocent
way for the glades and hills around : all spoke of peace, plenty, and
harmless, happy enjoyment. Again we asked if the mind could
cherish these things, and deem them great and enough; and still


the puzzled brain refused to work. The senses, in truth, were all alive,
and quaffing deepl} r of the novelty and real pleasure of the scene; and
we had scarcely commenced upon the contest in a fair and impartial
manner, when our companion called us in to breakfast, in order to
make an early start before the sun had risen far into the heavens. So
we must do so anon.
Following the course of our journey, which now lay towards the York
district, we traversed many miles of open woodland, and then turned once
more into the ranges, till at last we halted at a hilly road overlooking the
beautiful estate called by its native name Moklne, and which takes up a
rich narrow vale extending about six miles. The whole of this was com-
prised in two small farms; that is, it was so divided, and with the compa-
ratively few acres under cultivation might be said to be a waste inviting
population and tillage. Enclosed by parallel ranges of hills, there lie
about 8000 acres of rich arable land with abundant springs; and we have
thus dwelt upon it to show one single instance of the state of abeyance
in which most of the estates of the colony remain at this hour. The
remainder of the route to the township of York passes through a more
level country, where the lands of smaller settlers He ; and cultivated plots
follow in succession, though the traveller is wearied in passing over, for
the greater part of the distance, the idle wastes termed large grants, which
effectually lock up the resources of this naturally fertile region. At
length you arrive by a gradual ascent to the Mount Bakewell Range ; and
passing down the gorge on the opposite side, an extensive and pleasing
view of the small township and farms around is disclosed.
York is more famous for what it is to be than its present actual
advancement. There are but few houses in it at present, and these are
chiefly inns, the barracks of a small detachment of military, a lock-up,
and the abodes and workshops of a few mechanics, who subsist upon the
employment afforded them by the settlers in its immediate vicinity.
From their small numbers, these workmen are too often found to be a
lazy, extortionate set; but competition will soon check them. This town
is situated on a level plain in one of the richest districts of the colony.
Annual races are held ; and several societies are in the habit of holding
their periodical meetings here. From its central situation, and the before-
mentioned superiority of lands in and around it, York will at some not
far distant day become a place of great importance to the district. The
principal inn, styled the York Hotel, was kept by a person who had
risen from the ranks of the labouring class; and afforded another instance
among the many which show that new countries are highly beneficial to
all who are disposed to work themselves—and to such alone—of what may
be accomplished where the prejudices and feelings of an old country are
cast aside and abandoned. The township itself is environed with hills,
the loftiest of which is the before-mentioned Mount Bakewell.
The lands were well cultivated in and around, and the spot appeared to
be well adapted for an inland residence for Indian visitors ; good society
and excellent natural roads being found in the Immediate neighbourhood.
There is one farm in particular, lying at the foot of Mount Bakewell,
which is deserving of notice, as it is tenanted by two industrious young
men, who came to the colony originally with little pecuniary means
either to spend or to invest. After some few years passed in the employ-
ment of others, they began, as it is termed, “ tofeel their legs;” and meeting


with an advantageous improving lease, had rendered a desert spot not
only fertile, but adorned with some of the most solid and durable erec-
tions it was our good fortune to note. The dwelling-house was of supe-
rior construction ; it had its detached kitchen, store, granary, and barn,
together with a substantial stock-yard and stabling; while the only pri-
mitive piece of machinery attached was a wool-press, the power of which
was produced from a huge branch of a tree, alternately hoisted and
lowered over the lid of the box containing the wool. In all cases, it
may be said, where the produce of an establishment will not bear the ex-
pense of the usual screw-press, this contrivance answers every purpose to
which it can be applied.
We rested here some few days, enjoying the hospitality of these
intelligent and thrifty working men; and during that period scrambled
to the summit of Mount Bakewell, chiefly for the purpose of conning
the “ Surveyor’s Tree,” which, from its history, was an affair of im-
portance. It is ever memorable to the colonist, as having been the
centre of the first great survey which was held in early years in this
part of the country, long ere the ploughman or the shepherd had
exercised their appointed tasks over wilds which, since their creation,
had been accumulating the riches of vegetable decay. The view
looks far into the settled district, and amply repays the struggles of
ascent. The Surveyor’s Tree bore many initials carved and painted
thereon; it was evidently a prominent mark in the survey, as it peers
over numerous ranges of hills, which throughout the whole district
appear of less elevation. Like many an Australian scene, this lost much
of its varied richness in the general sombre colouring of the foliage,
though even that was occasionally relieved by the graceful and evergreen
leaf of the violet-wood. At some not far distant day, this now insignifi-
cant spot will hear from afar the distant hum of busy active life, when
the valley of the Avon shall nourish the frugal industry and unambitious
longings of a homely yet cultivated population ; when Britain shall
proudly say, and say in truth, pointing to her Ragged Schools, and the
fairly applied bounties of those Universities which are the property of
her nation, that education has accomplished this, and that the transfusion
of its vitality has forestalled the very rudiments of civilisation. The
most remote islands and hitherto forbidding spots upon the earth yet to
be peopled, and many already in the process, might thus early germinate
the seeds of social wisdom and real happiness, and render that expatria-
tion, which even now is clouded with a thousand regrets, misapprehen-
sions, and domestic as well as Intellectual losses, a giving way alone to
the destiny of an overpopulated country a change rather in name,
beneficial in most, and probably in all, cases.
Leaving this township, there is a road direct to Guildford, closely
resembling that of the Toodyay district, although it cannot be said to be
so hilly and rugged, or to present so many difficulties in the shape of
gullies and watercourses to the traveller ; for in many parts it is as even
as a plain, though the whole passes through a monotonous and unwatered
country. The first object of interest to be met with is St. Ronan’s
Well, a watering-place for the travelling teams of the settlers. It owes
its present title to general good taste in that remote part of the world,
for it originally bore the name of the man who first formed a rude reser-


voir of water at the spot. He was an Irishman, of the name of Ronayne—
a simple shepherd; and the rude work of his hands is thus dignified by a
title romantic and euphonious. Resting here but a space, we arrived at
the half-way house, which is about twenty-six miles from the township of
York. This is upon a small estate of moderately fair land, purchased
for the purposes of an inn; it is surrounded by hills, the echoes from
which are very singular. We recollect the numerous repetitions of the
barking of a dog on one occasion. As we approached this midway
resting-place for travellers, a tree, called the White Gum, and said to
be a sure indication of the vicinity of springs of water, told us that the
locality had been chosen for this particular and essential advantage.
The lowing of oxen, and the hum of distant voices, welcomed us joyfully
to this rude approach at civilisation ; and if an inn be a glad and pleasing
sight to the tired traveller in England, how much more so must it be in
Australia, when it comes in its solitariness at last upon the sight—the
only object denoting human presence and human aid within a dreary
wild, traversed hour after hour! “ Excellent forethought of Nature!” we
felt prone to exclaim, on reaching this central oasis in the seeming desert,
along which we had already, and were still destined to hold a solitary
and cheerless path. Lone haven of rest, planted here that the weary
settler might regale and repose ! It was not long before all that apper-
tained to the spot was revealed to us: on either hand of the small
declivity verging from the main road were several small buildings,
chiefly stabling and stockyards, adapted for the accommodation of visitors ;
and beyond this, facing the approach, stood the small tenement styled
the inn ; the whole forming an unpretending court-yard or halting-place.
In and about this locality were to be seen drays, harness, and yoking-
gear ; the former loaded with produce for the market, or more fre-
quently with articles of domestic use and consumption from the town of
Perth, en route to the settled districts. The inn itself was, upon the
whole, of very fragile construction : it was of wood and brick ; and but
for the general security of its position, environed by gentle acclivities,
and protected by the huge buttresses of the forest, it might long ere that
time have groaned and shivered—nay, perhaps fallen—before some huge
blast, sweeping in the winter months over forest and hill. It was white-
washed inside and out; and having a profusion of green Venetian
shutters, particularly on the garden side, looked smart enough. There
was one general apartment for visitors, stubbornly and substantially fur-
nished, defying the utmost efforts of heavy-nailed stock boots, or the
destructive propensities of the more wayward loungers; leading from
this were two or three small dormitories; and about the centre, a door
opening upon a flight of steps leading into the garden. This garden,
which is the most interesting feature of the place, was well laid out, and
with considerable taste: the soil appeared to be good, and a small spring
of the purest water trickled unceasingly down the slope upon which it
lay. On the opposite hill to this, which was divided from that on which
we stood by a small watercourse, frequently dry, appeared a few acres of
cultivated land. Poultry and pigs were prevalent, and nought appeared
wanting either to our comfort or convenience. In early days, and
especially during the season of the York races, when numbers flock over
from the capital, and even from the South, this little inn has been the


scene of many a wild revel, and of much reckless extravagance. On the
occasion of our visit it was occupied by a few young settlers of more
sober mood, either going down to the capital or returning thence ; and
who were partaking of a quiet supper of kangaroo steaks as we arrived,
which was just at sunset, and in the short twilight which distinguishes
these regions.
Leaving the half-way house, no object of interest appears on the road :
still the same monotonous hill, gully, and rock, with a burning sun
overhead, but slightly shaded by the trees—until at length you arrive at
the toll-bar, Mahogany Creek. This latter place is miserable enough,
with a doubtful supply of water in the summer season, and barely enough
good land for a small garden. Passing this, and for about four miles,
we overtook the dray of a settler, and accompanied him as far as the foot
of Green Mount, not a great distance from the spot described at the
commencement of our journey, and bearing the same features of land-
scape. Here we left the teams to rest awhile, and proceeded upon the
level pretty road leading to Guildford ; thus returning to Perth as we had
left it.
It may be remarked of the soil in the valleys of the Darling Range—
which valleys are very small, however, in consequence of the hills of which
it is composed intersecting each other at all points—that it is generally
good; but there is an absence of water, and in many places a poisonous
plant which will destroy sheep, though cattle, we understand, are safe from
its effects. The latter is a greater drawback than the former, as, by dint
of a little well-applied perseverance and labour, reservoirs may be easily
constructed. There can be no doubt that in time to come, when the
country shall become more populated, many a lovely spot, here embosomed
and shut out save to the denizens of the wild, will bear a smiling home-
stead and farm ; indeed, many that we have ourselves seen, and where a
temporary bivouac has been formed, have caused us to linger ere we
resigned to its primitive state so lovely a locality. There, indeed, we
felt the certain melancholy about travelling, which none can experience
save those who roll along over sea or plain, marking the domains which
man is to inherit of the Earth. It is a sad thing to part from any spot,
no matter where, which has interested us by some peculiarity of feature or
circumstance of social life; it is sad to mark each footfall on a sod far
distant from a gay and thoughtless world, and, leaving each departing
step, to reflect, as the eye oft wanders backward, that we shall probably
pass its precincts no more : it is then we almost resolve to demand it of
Nature, and pledge ourselves to a future speedy possession.
Such are the eastern districts of the colony. Let us next traverse
its southern and sea-board portion.
