









THE
SETTLEMENT
OF
JOHN BATMAN
IN
Port Phillip.
FROM HIS OWN JOURNAL.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE SLATER, 94 BOURKE STREET EAST.
1856.


Printed bt W. H. WILLIAMS,
94 Bourke Street East, Melbourne.


THE
SETTLEMENT OF JOHN BATMAN
IN
Port Phillip.
FROM HIS OWN. JOURNAL.
1835.
May 10. —Sunday. Arrived aboard of the “ Rebecca” at half-past twelve,
noon, in company with Mr. Sands, who remained on board for half an
hour. The “Rebecca” had made about four miles down the river Tamar
when that gentleman took his departure. We passed the “ Jeannette ”
aground, and this tide reached Roserears, where I went on shore for the
space of an hour.
The “ Rebecca” was again got under weigh at 11 p. m., and the tide
took us down to Middle Island. My Sydney natives have behaved
handsomely, and worked well; indeed, it was greatly owing to their
cheerful and willingly-offered services that we have succeeded in reaching
this distance: their behaviour on this occasion was gratifying, as a good
augury of their future services during the continuance of the object which
I have in view, viz.: that of secretly ascertaining the general character
and capabilities of Port Phillip, as a grazing and agricultural district.
May 11.—The anchor was heaved by 9 a.m., and a light, agreeable breeze
carried us into a small, well-sheltered bay, near George Town, The
banks of the country in the vicinity abounded in wood, of which a
quantity was collected and taken aboard, for the purpose of fuel for the
ship’s use.
Captain Harwood and I walked over the narrow neck of land to
George Town. At the time of our leaving the vessel (12 o’clock) the
wind was fair, and it was our intention to have been again under weigh
without loss of time, but, about 2 p. m., the wind veered to due west, and a
violent hurricane, accompanied with large hailstones and rain, took place.


Fortunately, the vessel weathered the point, and, eventually, although
with difficulty, found safe anchorage in the cove of George Town, where
she was, shortly afterwards, joined by the government sloop, “ Opossum.”
• That vessel had started for the heads, but was compelled to retreat to the
cove, for shelter, in consequence of the fury of the storm of wind, rain,
and hail. Our crew, both whites and blacks, got thoroughly wet through.
I took up my quarters at Wilson’s Inn.
May 12.—The heavy storm of the preceding evening continued to
rage throughout the night. By 9a. m. the weather cleared up, and there
appeared a probability of a fair wind. Our newly-raised hopes had,
however, barely been formed, when a most decidedly unfavorable change
of wind again took place, accompanied, as on the previous night, with
heavy rain. We had the pleasure of meeting the port officer, Dr. Smith,
with whom we held a consultation on the probable duration of the present
unfavorable weather, as we were anxious to resume our voyage to Port
Phillip, He gave it as his opinion, that we should not be able, nor would
it be either safe or prudent for us, to renew our voyage, until the moon
was at its full, on the following day, when a change of wind usually took
place.
Here I neglected not my poor, four-footed, and faithful canine com-
panions, but made a small investment with the butcher for the wherewithal
to feed them.
We continued anxiously watching the weather from the window of our
inn. At Bp. m. the rain ceased, the clouds dispersed, and the full-orbed
nocturnal luminary showed his jolly countenance, with his attendant satel-
lites and sidereal companions dotting the vault of heaven. Every thing, in-
deed, to our great joy, promised an agreeable change, and that we should, on
the following day, make up our lee-way. A bullock was slaughtered in
the town, which, with three large kangaroos that had been caught by my
Sydney natives, furnished an ample supply of food, both for ourselves and
the dogs, wherewith to resume our voyage.
May 13. Shortly before daybreak the wind set in with renewed fury,
accompanied, as before, with heavy rain. A dense fog followed, which
lasted till 10 a.m. Altogether, the prospect of resuming our journey was
far from cheering.
The bullock killed on the previous day furnished the inhabitants of the
primitive town of George a sumptuous breakfast, and most of them were
engaged in cutting up and cooking savoury steaks. For three or four
days pie\ions to the arrival of our little vessel (which we destined to act
the part of a pioneer to the future development of the hitherto uncultivated
wild of Port Phillip) nothing in the shape of fresh meat be obtained


for love or money. They all feasted —were full, and, I hope and trust,
were satisfied.
The rain continued and the stormy winds blew during the whole of the
day. In the evening, as it still continued to look “ thick in the clear,”
and no signs of its abatement, an interesting nautical cabinet council
was held, consisting of ourselves, a Mr. Brown, an old master of a govern-
ment vessel, Mr, Wood, a pilot, and Dr. Smith, the port officer, who
unanimously agreed that there was little prospect of a change for at least
a week, and that we should consequently have to remain at George Town
for that period. Upon receiving this doleful intelligence, I determined
upon sending a boat to Launceston.
The blacks caught another kangaroo. The good conduct of my Sydney
natives, as well as that of the three white men, affords me great pleasure.
May 14.
“ Blow on! ye winds, and crack your cheeks!”
The violent winds of the previous night, with heavy rains, characterized
this morning; and we could not, in consequence, succeed in our object of
sending a boat to Launceston. About 10 a.m. a small vessel hove in sight,
and Dr. Smith, with his usual kindness, took Captain Harwood and myself
in his boat to the newly-arrived vessel, which proved to be the “ Hind,”
brig, from Sydney, on its way to Launceston. This circumstance was
fortunate, as it enabled me to despatch Captain Harwood to Launceston,
for the purpose of obtaining a fresh supply of biscuits, meat, and various
other stores, which our present and probable further delay rendered
necessary. On Captain Harwood’s return to the vessel a barque hove
in sight, which proved to be the “ Belinda,” of Sydney, with a cargo of
whale-butts. She left Sydney fourteen days previous to the sailing of the
“ Hind.” Sent the natives out to hunt kangaroos. It is tedious and
distressing to be thus delayed at so short a distance from Launceston, and,
but for the circumstance of my having taken a formal leave of all my
friends at that place, I should have been induced to return, pending a
change of wind. We were not, however, singular in our misfortune, as
the “ Opossum,” the “ Edward,” and a small schooner of 18 tons, close
alongside, are also wind-bound. The little 18 ton vessel belongs to Captain
Friend, and is laden with bark from Cape Portland, with only one man on
board. I have taken up my quarters at the Waterloo Tavern, where the
accommodations are equal to anything of the kind in Launceston,
May 15.—This morning broke fine, although the wind still continues
to blow strong from the west. During the course of the forenoon, a small
schooner came in, the “ William and Ann, ” from Port Sorell, with a cargo
of lime for Captain Scott. I borrowed a whale boat from Dr. Smith, and


went over to Captain Hassall’s farm, and brought back three hundred
weight and a-half of potatoes. The wind still continued from the west,
and the “ Edward,” bound for Circular Head, was, like ourselves, unable
to proceed.
May 16. —This morning was hazy, with the wind from the south-west;
It was a fair wind for us, provided it freshened, in anticipation of
which I immediately went on board of the cutter, where we had not
been long, when the “ Shamrock ” made its appearance, towed by whale
boats. Captain Friend, Mr. Scott, the surveyor, and Mr. Yeoland, were
on board. Captain Harwood arrived, and informed me, that he had duly for-
warded my letters to Mrs. Batman. He had scarcely finished his recital, when,
to my astonishment, Mrs. Batman herself arrived in the gig, with the groom
driving. In doing this she was guided by the contents of my letter,
anticipating a stay of some days’ duration, and was desirous of shorten-
ing the tedium of the delay by spending it in the company of each other.
God bless her for such kindness. Her presence and company was, indeed,
a compensation for a sojourn which had already proved sufficiently
prolonged and provoking. The night closed with the wind again in its
former adverse quarter—the west.
May 17, Sunday.—This morning commenced with a more favorable
wind, and the vessel made the heads in company with the schooner
“ Edward.” Anxious to spend the last minute with my wife, I drove
down in the gig in her company. I went on board, and, the wind again
changing to the west, we visited the lighthouse, afterwards driving into
George Town to the “ Waterloo,” where Mr. Collicott, postmaster-general,
and Mr. Wright, shortly after arrived from Launceston, and joined us at
the dinner table. The westerly winds continued to increase in violence,
and the vessels were compelled to take shelter in Kelso Bay, where they
anchored for the night.
May 18.—Captain Harwood sent in a note this morning from the vessel,
intimating that the wind was fair. After taking a hasty and parting
breakfast with Mrs. 8,, Dr. Smith kindly undertook to put us on board.
My dear wife had the horse put in the gig, and was driven to the light-
house, from whence she could see me fairly off, and where she remained
until we were lost to view on our entering upon another horizon in the
distance, in which all my hopes and expectations had long rested. So
long as any part of the outline of our vessel rested above the horizon, so
long did Mrs. 8., from the flagstaff, continue an anxious and interested
observer. The “ Edward ” schooner kept just a-head of Us all the
evening. The wind, up to midnight, was westerly, and we consequently
made little headway. (I hope my dear wife will get home safe.)


May 19. —At daylight this morning I was awakened by the captain
with the very unpleasant intelligence of a foul wind having set in, and he
advised putting into Port Sorell as soon as possible, as the gale was
increasing. I had observed all yesterday a changeableness and uncer-
tainty about the winds; and about 9 a.m. we cast anchor close to the
heads, in a position to take advantage of a change of wind in our favor.
We saw the schooner “ Edward ” a long way out in the offing.
Some fish w T ere caught for breakfast, and after that I took a walk on
shore, from whence I shortly returned, and had the vessel moored closer in
shore, and under the lee of the island. I then went on land a second
time in the hope of getting a kangaroo. The country, however, proved
too scrubby to enable the dogs to have a fair run. During the afternoon
the westerly winds continued to increase in violence, and it became
necessary to run the vessel higher up the port, to the proper anchorage
ground, under the shelter of a small island, which we did. We then paid
a visit on shore, and saw two limeburners, who inhabited a hut, and were
the only parties residing there. They gave me some excellent fish. One of
them mentioned to me that there was a fine tract of land opposite the
hut, on the other side of the bay.
May 20.—The morning broke with every appearance of a change of
wind in our favor. At 9 a.m. the old man (one of the two limeburners)
from the island came aboard, and I gave him a looking glass which I
had promised him on the previous day. We were not aware of the
length of time which might have elapsed since he had taken a fair survey
of his woolly or frosty pow, and bristly porcupine-like head. He was
probably desirous of reserving that pleasure until reaching his own hut,
as he pocketed the glass.
By 11 a.m., the breeze having freshened from the right quarter, we
again got under weigh, and sailed slowly past the farm lately in the
occupation of Captain Thomas. Passed the mouth of the river Mersey,
whose line of coast was distinctly marked and well-defined by a dense
growth of the native Myrtle, Eucalyptus, and other Tasmanian timber trees,
of stupendous growth, and in the far-off distance the bulky and towering,
well-covered outlines of the Great Western Range, from whence the river
Mersey takes its source. Continuing our course in the direction of what is
called Round Head, we succeeded in accomplishing a distance of twenty
miles by midnight, when the wind again veered, and blew a strong gale
from the adverse quarter.
May 21.
“ Cease! rude Boreas, blustering railer! ”
The heavy westerly gales of the preceding night continued this


morning, and caused our poor little vessel to toss and skip upon the
troubled swell of the mighty waves; we found ourselves drifting
rapidly in the direction of George Town. The captain recommended
returning to Port Sorell. This plan we forthwith adopted, and anchored
off that place about 2p. m. As I was extremely anxious to effect my
object in reaching the Port Phillip country, every additional delay was
the more acutely felt.
After casting anchor, I paid another visit to the hut of my bearded friends,
the limeburnei’s. A dead calm having succeeded the roaring of the elements
about 11 p.m., I rejoined my party on board ship. The calm continued
until midnight.
May 22. —Just before daylight a slight breeze set in from the southward,
with clouds drifting from the westerly quarter. By 11 a. m. all was again
calm, and the little “ Rebecca” lay like a gull asleep. We paid another
visit to the shore,and took a short excursion inland; travelling over some
good grazing land, of sufficient extent to form a large and valuable grant.
Its position was, of course, a guarantee for a plentiful supply of that very
necessary element, good water. In the afternoon I went out with my old
friend the limeburner, and with his net succeeded in catching several nice
fish, some of which we took on board for the use of the crew. Towards
evening the wind blew from the westerly quarter, and we were
unable to move an inch. An hour before midnight I turned in, and
was soon in the “ arms of Morpheus,” dreaming softly and pleasantly of
newly-acquired territories in Port Phillip. When we awoke, our fabulously-
acquired wealth vanished like the “baseless fabric” which Shakespeare
represents as its peculiar character.
May 23. —From midnight until daybreak the wind increased in
violence, and the captain dropped another anchor for security. The
gale continued the whole day; not the slightest chance of our removing
from here. To relieve the tedium, I went on shore, and left some letters
in charge of the limeburners, with instructions for them to be forwarded
to Launceston by the first opportunity. I purchased from these men the
following tools:—I maulrings, 3 axes, 1 breaking-up hoe, 1 cross-cut saw,
4 files, 2 harrows, 1 shingle hammer, 1 palling hammer, 1 saw sett,
1 gimblet, 1 auger, 5 wedges, 1 hand saw, 1 spade. These tools I fur-
nished with the intention of leaving Gunn, and the other white man, at
Port Phillip, should the result of my present expedition prove equal
to my expectations. At 9p.m. I returned on board, and went to bed.
The letters left with the limeburners were, one from myself for Mrs.
Batman, and another from the Captain to his better-half, Mrs. Harwood,
and were addressed to the care of Mr. Ootterill. Our absent Penelopes


were, doubtless, dreaming of our having, by this time, reached the fertile
land of promise.
May 24. —This morning, the wind having changed in our favor, we
lost no time in getting under weigh, and succeeded in reaching the heads
by noon, when it fell a dead calm, and so remained until 2p. m. At
that hour a breeze sprang up, directly adverse to our progress, and drove
us back for shelter to our former anchoring place, opposite our friends,
the limeburners, whose log hut appeared to act as a magnet, the circle of
whose influence we were not allowed to pass. Our temper was severely
ruffled at this continued series of delays (although we have as philosophic
a temperament as most mortals), which perpetually interfered with the due
carrying out the object of my voyage. But “persevere and prosper” we
must allow to be our motto pro. tern. I was puzzled to pass away the
time during the after part of the day, and at night turned into my
hammock, which, under present circumstances, was far from being a bed
of roses.
May 25.—The same unfavorable winds from the westerly quarter, and
the sea running mountains high at the heads. As the gale continued to
increase in violence, we were obliged to run higher up the river, and
again took shelter close under the point. To kill time, and to relieve our
ennui, the captain and myself went on shore and walked round the
island. We obtained two augers from Hine, one of the limeburners. Two
p. m.; westerly gales continue, and not the least apparent signs of a
change. “In troubles, to be troubled, is to have your troubles doubled,”
says the poet. We considered ourselves as being especially unfortunate
in our detention at this place.
A week has elapsed since our leaving George Town, and here we are
still. Nine p.m.: the wind continues. I sent for one of the limeburners,
and gave him three dollars to take our letters and put them in the post
office at George Town. I have despatched three long letters to Mrs.
Batman, and Captain Harwood two to his absent fair one. My Sydney
natives have taken up their quarters on shore the last four nights in
preference to remaining on shipboard; therein they have shewn good
sense.
May 26.—At three o’clock this morning it commenced raining in
torrents, and at 8 a.m. the limeburner came on board for the letters for
Launceston, which he had undertaken to post at George Town.
Eleven a.m.: a light breeze sprung up, fair if it continues, and we are
now sailing gaily towards the heads. Ten p.m.: the wind continues favora-
ble, and there is at length a prospect of our reaching Port Phillip. Our
little vessel is sailing over cleverly in the direction of Circular Head.
B


May 27. —The favorable wind of yesterday continued up till 2 o’clock
this morning, when it suddenly veered from the N.W, and by north ; we
were unable to keep our course, and made the West Hunter; having run
eighty miles since leaving Port Sorell. This distance was more than
I expected to accomplish from the time of leaving Port Sorell. At noon
we cast anchor; I determined to visit the shore, and landed near the
entrance of a large cave, which I explored, and found it to extend 180
feet from the mouth to the end ; the entrance was 40 feet wide, and the
average depth of the cave was about the same; the roof was beautifully
fretted and covered with stalactites. This is the largest cavern I have
yet met with in the Colony. A great many fish were caught in the
course of the day. We again sighted the “ Edward ” schooner on her
way to Circular Head. At 6 p.m. the wind veered in our favor, and the
captain got his little vessel under weigh. We made a good run during the
night.
May 28. —During the darkness of the night, we passed King’s Island,
and about 1 p. m. sighted a portion of Hew Holland, the land of promise
and to reach which we had already endured many anxiops days and
sleepless nights. We continued nearing this hitherto unappreciated
portion of New Holland, and, as evening now cast its shadows over the
waters, the captain preferred lying off the land at a distance of about
eighteen miles, until the following morning, when we anticipated the
satisfaction of entering the port of Phillip. Several chain hooks, being
baited and attached to the ends of ropes, were thrown over the vessel’s
side, and two fine, long, bright, and well-tasted barracoutas, fish peculiar
to the coast of Australia, were caught, not however until we had lost
several hooks, in consequence of the fish having bitten through the rope,
above its junction with the chain or wire part.
May 29. —Daylight had no sooner broke this morning—and never had
* its cheerful return been so ardently longed for —than we were again
greeted by the sight of Port Phillip heads, at a distance not apparently
exceeding eight miles.
By 9 a.m, we were between the heads, with the tide running out, and
nearly at low water ; a heavy surf, and the wind light and baffling. We
effected an entrance with difficulty, at a part of the bay where the width
was about a mile and a quarter. We took soundings, and found the depth
of water from five and a half to seven fathoms. We succeeded, however,
in entering one of the finest bays, or basins of water, well sheltered, that
we remember to have seen. Within the bay, the water was, compared to
our late tossing in the boiling and foaming waters outside, as smooth as a
millpond; and our little bark floated gently along, like a sleeping gull.


I shall, however, take this opportunity to remark that it will be desirable
to enter its mouth only at the times of the tide running in. As we were
sailing down the bay, we were surprised to hear the repeated barkings of
a dog, and were somewhat puzzled as to how he came there. We had
just called upon P to account for this phenomenon, when a flock of at
least one hundred wild geese rose, within a shot’s distance of our vessel.
They appeared of a large size, and flew before us in the direction of
the port. After sailing about*twelve miles up the port, we cast anchor
in a small bay, and afterwards made preparations for going on shore. In
getting ready the boat for that purpose, we caught sight of another dog
on the sandy beach. We made for that spot, and found it to be a native
dog or dingo, which had apparently been left by the natives a day or two
before our arrival. It appeared to be quite tame, and was perfectly
familiar with my Sydney natives, although, -with the cunning peculiar to
the Australian dingo, he would not allow them to lay hands on him.
After a short time our dogs broke after and ran him down into the water,
where we shot him. He proved to be a large and handsome animal,
of the same character as the Australian dogs generally. On resuming our
march from the scene of the last incident, we came upon, apparently, quite
fresh, tracks of the natives, leading to a village of huts or gunyahs,
which had not been abandoned, as we judged from sundry indications, for
more than a day or two ; some appeared to have been used by the
natives as their marine villas, in which they had been plentifully regaling
on the mussel, unio, and periwinkle, from the large number of empty
shells which lay in heaps around. We passed into the country, and, at
the distance of four miles, commenced travelling over land, a little sandy
in places, but of the finest description for grazing purposes; nearly all
parts of its surface covered with kangaroo and other grasses of the most
nutritive character, intermixed with herbs of various kinds; the kan-
garoo grass (anthisteria Australis), and other species from ten to twelv e
inches high, of a dense growth, and green as a field of wheat. We v cie
perfectly pleased with the country at this part, and here changing
our course, found it to open around into softly undulating hills and
plains, with, as before, the richest grass and verdure, so delightful to the
eyes of the sheep farmer. As a relief to the landscape, the gently lising
eminences were adorned with wattle, banksia, native honeysuckle, and the
she-oak, whose short, straight, stumpy huts and round heads resembled a
number of pins sticking in a lady’s pincushion. On our return to the
vessel, we passed over another thinly-timbered and richly-grassed plain,
of not less than from two hundred to three hundred acres, on whose rich


surface a large number of kangaroos were feeding, and, but that our dogs
were stiff, from being so long on shipboard, some interesting hunts would
have followed. We saw several more native huts or gunyahs, and the
marks on one tree are quite fresh, apparently cut yesterday. We continued
our course down the bay, and found the country everywhere of the same
richly-grassed character. We caught sight of some hills in the distance,
bare of timber, although they had the appearance of being clothed with
verdure to their summits. They appeared distant about six miles. I
purpose paying them a visit next morning, as I anticipate being able to
take from their summits a good survey of the surrounding country, more
particularly that part lying in a north-west direction. My natives
preferred sleeping on shore to-night, whilst Captain Harwood and myself
took the shelter of the vessel. In the course of my day’s excursion, we
have travelled at least twenty miles, and the skipper is knocked up! In
the early part of the evening the wind set in again, and continued to blow
hard until midnight.
May 30. —The winds of last night continued, and the vessel was tossed
about considerably, owing to the absence of shelter. We hailed our Sydney
natives, and directed them to go round to a point of land and meet the
vessel, as a boat could not land to bring them off. At the distance of
about fifteen miles we reached the point indicated, and had no sooner
anchored than we perceived my Sydney natives coming along the shore.
I again landed for the purpose of taking another inspection of the country>
which we discerned as exceedingly rich, and beautiful in the extreme;
thinly-timbered, richly-grassed, and diversified by a few sweet vallies, and
hills of small elevation and of volcanic formation. The soil was of a fine,
rich, oily, decomposed whinstone. Nothing could be more satisfactory
and in every point the reality far exceeded my most sanguine expectations.
In these and other situations the kangaroo and other native grasses have
attained at least two feet, and thick as it could grow, capable of affording
hay of the best quality. The trees were thinly-scattered in a park-like
form, averaging five or six to the acre.
Robinson Crusoe was never better pleased with the appearance of the
first ship which arrived, and rescued him from his desolate island, than
I was with the vessel which proved the means of my thus opening to
view a country capable of supporting a future nation, and which, we trust,
will be the means of relieving the Hobart Town country of its overstocked
cattle, and the mother country of her surplus and half-starved peasantry.
Futurity must develop this prophecy! Further travelling and examination
only added to my pre-conceived estimate of this extremely interesting and
extensive territory; consisting of plains or downs at least twenty miles


long by a width of ten miles, and the distance may have been greater, but
for the interruption of hills more than ordinarily high, which broke the
horizon in different directions. One of these vistas, which I have at present
in view, cannot form a less area than 100,000 acres. Its general character
presents that of cultivated pasture for centuries past; the few trees appear
as though they owed their plantation to the hand of man. All the high
hills are covered with grass to their summits.
I ascended these eminences or hill-summits, from which the view was
most satisfactory. The country on either hand presented the same
continuation of rich pastoral plains, apparently of greater extent than
those already mentioned. The bay up which we sailed to-day, and
where we cast anchor, varied in depth from two and a-half to six fathoms,
and, to my great joy, I discovered the fires of the natives or aboriginal
inhabitants of this marvellously fertile country, and felt delighted beyond
expression that the task of its discovery should have devolved upon
myself. I intend going ashore to-morrow morning to the camp of
natives, and, if possible, shall establish a friendly intercourse with them, in
order to effect a treaty for the purchase of a large portion of their fertile
and hitherto useless territory.
May 31, Sunday.—The vessel lay last night in three fathom water, in a
fine little bay, to which I gave the name of Gellibrand’s harbour, in honor
of —. Gellibrand, Esq., late attorney-general, of Hobart Town.
As soon as the day broke, we landed for the purpose of carrying out
our object with the aborigines. We had not travelled more than a mile
and a-half when we caught sight of the smoke arising from the fires of
seven large gunyahs or huts. My Sydney natives immediately stripped
off their clothes, and introduced themselves, purea naturahilis, to the
inhabitants of the gunyahs; at least they intended to have so done,
but on reaching the little village they discovered that the sable tenants
had departed that morning. My natives forthwith beat for their trail,
and, having found it, we commenced to follow, and continued on the
track for about ten miles, when one of my natives caught sight of a black
at the distance of a mile. Having made a sign to us, we again formed
into Indian file, and marched after him until we came up to the black he
had seen, who proved to be an old and crippled woman, having no toes
on one foot. About a mile ahead we saw the main body of the tribe
whom we had followed, and overtook them about 1 p. m.
My Sydney natives and their new companions, by a sort of freema-
sonry, or from a similarity of language, appeared to perfectly understand
each other, and a friendly footing was at once established, which augured
well for the accomplishment of my projects.


A corroborree with song was got up in quick time, in which both tribes
joined, to my great delight. The company was composed entirely of
women, twenty-four in number, each having a child at her back,
excepting one who was young and very good looking. They informed
us that the male members of their tribe had gone up the river. With
this interesting group of females were four native dogs or dingos, and,
independent of infant burdens, they each had a net or basket hung around
their shoulders. The weight of some of their loads could not be less
than sixty or seventy pounds; these loads were so large as to form a hump
behind, on which their children rested. Each had, besides, two or three
baskets of their own manufacture, containing nets, stone tomahawks,
bones, crystals, <fec. In one of the bags, which I took the trouble to
examine, I found a piece of the tire of a cart wheel, with the remains of
two nail holes. This piece of iron was ground down to a sharp edge
and fixed in a piece of wood for a handle; they used it for the purpose
of cutting with as a tomahawk; with this were several pieces of iron
hoop, which they had likewise ground to a sharp edge, and used as sub-
stitutes for knives. Several large wooden vessels, of rude construction,
for the purpose of holding water, were also among their utensils, and in
one of them was some water, of a bad quality. They very willingly
came back with us to where I had a number of blankets, glass-beads,
looking-glasses, sweet sugar apples, and handkerchiefs; and I distributed
amongst them 8 pair of blankets, 30 handkerchiefs, 1 tomahawk, 18 neck-
laces of beads, 6 pounds of sugar, 12 looking-glasses, and a quantity of
apples. They appeared to be very much pleased with the presents, and
shortly after receiving them took their departure. I had arranged that we
were to meet again to-morrow. The young woman, of whom I have written,
gave me a very handsome basket, of her own making: some of the other
women also presented me with two baskets and several spears; all of
which I took with me on board. I have this day travelled over at least fifteen
miles of country, all of the same good character of open plains, several of
which, seen from a neighbouring hill, could not be less than twenty miles
square. In the course of the journey I ascended a sugar loaf hill, which
was richly grassed to the top. This hill I dedicated to the honor of
J. T. Collicott, Esq., postmaster-general, and I hope and trust that,
should this magnificent country eventually be settled upon, this hill may
in future be allowed to retain the name of Mount Collicott. I never
could have imagined it possible that so fine a country existed on the face
of the globe —gentle hills, plains, and downs, on which 5,000 sheep might
have been allowed to feed with little trouble to the shepherd. I cannot,
however, shut my eyes to the fact, that, fine as the land undoubtedly is,


from what I have yet seen of it, there is a great deficiency of water,
although I have no doubt whatever that water might be easily obtained
by digging.
I had forgotten to record, that, during our conference this morning with
the aborigines, they expressed great alarm at the report of a gun, all
falling spontaneously with their faces to the ground; they had evidently
never heard the report of a gun before. All the children wore a good-
looking and healthy appearance. We travelled this day, in going and
returning, at least thirty miles, and, in the course of our journey, observed
a number of the bustard or native turkey; but they were too shy to allow
us to approach within shooting distance.
June 1. —We left the vessel this morning at daybreak, being most
anxious to resume our rambles over a country possessing so many interest-
ing features, and facilities so entirely congenial to the ripening of my
intentions. We travelled round the bay to examine some plains and low
hills at a distance. After crossing the neck of land we fell in with a
small river or creek, which we were obliged to follow up, as we were
unable to cross it; indeed I had rather a desire to follow it up, as I
anticipated finding fresh water at its head : we followed the course of the
creek for ten miles, when we saw a great many duck and teal. The creek
here was from fifty to sixty yards wide. We passed many dams of stones
across the creek, made by the natives for the purpose of catching fish
during the summer months. These dams were from four to five feet high,
and excellently contrived. Three or four of these stone walls were built
in succession, with floodgates formed of sticks and bushes. We found at
least a dozen of these dams or wears in different parts of the creek. It
was also on the margin of this stream where we discovered the remains
and bones of an animal unknown to us. I cannot describe it, but I
counted twenty-four joints in the vertebrae or back-bone; and as each
separate joint averaged at least three inches, the animal must consequently
have been upwards of six feet in length; and we judged that a considerable
time must have elapsed since its death, as many of the bones were partly
burned. It is quite possible that there may have been originally more
bones in the back than those enumerated. I have brought on board part
of the head, thighbones, and some part of the back, for learned gentlemen
to study over on my return to Van Dieman’s Land. This skeleton was
discovered by us in the vicinity of one of the native fishing places. We
continued our journey up the stream, until it assumed the character of a
chain of ponds, where the water was slightly brackish; the further -we
proceeded the better the water became; at length we reached a very
large, deep pond, where the water was excellent, and we here shot two teal.


The diameter of this pond was at least 150 yards ; and finding it situated
in the heart of a tract of good country, of unknown extent, was an additional
source of satisfaction to us. We here camped and took dinner, after which
we ascended a chain of well-defined hills, but of no great elevation, and to
reach which we travelled through the same fine, open country for five miles.
Scarcely a tree was observed upon the surface of the plain; the stems of the
largest did not offer a greater diameter than eight inches, and in some places
there was not a solitary bush on an area of 500 acres, the whole of the soil
being of a light nature, dark in color, with kangaroo grass. We ascended
the hills I have already mentioned in the hope of catching a glimpse of
the country in a S. S. West direction, and found it to be of the same open
and extensive character, far as the eye could reach, viz., plains of good
soil, covered with grass, well adapted for grazing and agricultural
purposes, and all ready for the plough. In casting our eye in the opposite
direction, namely, N. N. East, the same good country met our view, only
bounded by the horizon. Perhaps the principal drawback that will be
felt, should these plains be eventually occupied, will be, the want of fire-
wood, and timber for farming and other uses. We have not yet met with
timber fit for the saw or splitting. Brush yards might be made for sheep
or cattle. A gig or carriage might be safely drawn over these plains,
without the possibility of being upset, as easily as on a turnpike road.
I have given them the name of Arthur’s plains, in honor of Governor
Arthur, of Van Dieman’s Land. Adjoining Mount Collicott are two others,
which I have named Mount Cottrill and Mount Connolly, after Mr. Connolly
and Mr. Cottrill, both of Van Dieman’s Land. At a distance of 15 miles
from Mount Cottrill, bearing N, W, from it, is another mount, to which I
have given the name of Mount Solomon, after Mr. J. Solomon, of Launceston.
To-morrow I intend proceeding up the country for several days, to meet the
vessel at the river or head of the bay, if the weather will permit. It has
rained all this day, and we have experienced a very heavy hail storm, with
the wind blowing hard from the west, and very cold. We caught sight of
the smoke of the natives’ camp under the lee of Mount Collicott.
June 2.—My Sydney natives came on board this morning for the
purpose of assisting in packing up, and otherwise making preparations
for our contemplated expedition into the interior. As it continued to
rain heavily, and a heavy bank of fog prevented our seeing any distance,
I proposed, rather than lose time, to go with the vessel to the river, and
from thence take my departure for the bush. We made the river by
3 p. m., and observed that the whole of the coast at the head of the bay
was clear of timber, and a constant plain covered with grass.
Near the head of the river, on the point, was a plantation of she oak


Wc endeavoured to sail up the river, but found the water not more than
a fathom deep. I went on shore this evening; the country is covered
with kangaroo grass, and thinly-timbered with such trees as are before
mentioned. I saw large numbers of pelicans, swans, ducks, teal, and
other waterfowl; and the borders of the bay abounded in quail. There
appeared to be two kinds of this bird, one of a dark and the other of a
light color, the former being twice the size of the latter. To-morrow
weather permitting. I intend taking my departure up the river.
June 3. —Everything being in readiness, we left the vessel about 9 a.ra.,
and proceeded in a boat up the river for about five miles, taking soundings
as we went, and found from seven to nine feet water in the channel. I now
landed, and joined the party on shore, who had walked some seven miles
on a well-grassed and thinly-oak-timbered country; four miles further I
came upon the banks of the river, which appeared open on both sides,
well-grassed, and deeper than at the place where I landed from the boat.
In travelling further up we passed over several rich flats, about a mile wide,
by two or three miles long, destitute of trees, and covered knee-deep with
grass, from which hundreds of tons of good hay might be made. The
land was of the best description, equal to anything in the world, nor does
it appear subject to being flooded. For twenty-six miles we continued
following the course of this river, and found on both sides of it, as far as
the eye could stretch, fine open plains, with a few trees of the oak species;
one striking object was the absence of fresh water all throughout this
distance. Just before sundown, as wc were preparing to camp on the
bank of the river, I caught sight of a damp place, and, on sending one of
my men, Gumm, to make a hole with a stick to the depth of two feet, we had
in the course of an hour a plentiful supply of good water. By 10 p. m.
the water was running over the top of the hole; I am certain the same
might be done in most places, with a like result. The river varied in
width from 100 to 60 yards; at this place it is but 40 yards wide, and is
becoming narrower as we go up. I have named this place Gumm’s well.
In the course of the journey to day we saw several parrots, kangaroos,
and a native dog or dingo.
June 4. —Re-commenced our journey up the river at 8 a. m.; after
travelling four or five miles, I turned off to obtain a view of Mounts
Collicott, Cottrill, and Solomon. After taking the distance and bearings
of these mountains, some emus started across a fine slightly elevated
plain, my dogs gave chase, and I followed for a mile or two. From
Mount Cottrill I could see in the distance two other mountains, which I
have respectively named Mount Wedge and Mount Sams; both are in a
range with Mount Solomon.
c


We continued travelling over the plains, and in eight miles again made
the river, which was now perfectly fresh. We all took a hearty drink.
Having crossed the river, we travelled over the richest land I had ever
.seen in my life; marsh mallows, with leaves as large as those of the
cabbage tribe, and as high as my head. We recrossed at a native ford,
and we observed on a wattle tree, which they had been stripping of the
bark, scratches or marks of figures, representing blacks in the act of
fighting. These figures I copied as nearly as I was able.
Wo ascended a small eminence where the grass reached our knees, and
followed the course of the river for a few miles; we camped for the
night in a snug corner of land on its bank, which I called Gnmm’s corner.
After taking a refreshing pot of tea and something to eat, I started with
four of my natives, and took a circuit of thirteen miles up the river,
which was here running in a northerly direction. The whole of the land
was of excellent warm hill and valley, with grass three feet high in
places where it had not been burnt by the natives. Where it had been
burned by these people, the young blades are from ten to twelve inches
high, affording fine feed for the kangaroos and other animals. In the
course of the evening we heard a dog howl. The weather has been
very fine and warm. We have travelled about thirty miles to-day.
June 5.—1 left the river this morning, and journeyed in aW, N'. W.
course, as I wished to cross over some large plains in that direction. We
saw a large flock of emus, but too distant for the d6gs to overtake them.
Some wild geese were also seen. In the course of this journey we
crossed three running streams of fresh w T ater, with steep banks, covered
with grass to the margin of the water. In some parts of these creeks
the water did not run, but we observed large and deep ponds in the
heads of the three creeks I crossed, and am inclined to believe that
they are the same waters, but running in different directions until
reaching the river. This country is consequently well watered, the
only thing apparently wanting being timber. Pursuing our course, we
passed through an open forest two miles in length, composed of oak, with
about ten of those trees to the acre, and the stems or buts about a foot in
circumference, their heads forming good shelter for stock, with excellently-
grassed surface. The last creek I have named Eliza creek, as a small
token of regard for my absent, affectionate wife. About noon we
ascended a hill, and from thence took a bird’s eye view of the country,
for a distance of forty miles on every hand, the same open, grazing-like
land is every where seen. The hill on which lam now sitting, under
one of the few she-oaks wdiich are scattered over its surface, is distant
fifty miles from the bay, and all around are rich open plains, with trees,


gentle rising lulls, and valleys of the best description of soil. We have
just discovered smoke arising from the fires of the natives in an easterly
direction, and have commenced to follow in that course. After accom-
plishing sixteen miles over rich plains, we crossed another fresh water
creek, just at its point of junction with one running from the N. N. E.
We again renewed our journey over plains, until reaching a small forest
of box gum trees, which formed a belt of about two.miles. Here, then,
we have, at length, found timber suitable for splitting or sawing, and the
great and only desideratum wanting supplied. In this forest, which was
well grassed, we caught one of the largest kangaroos I have ever seen,
measuring nine feet. This was a boomer. From the box and oak forest
we came upon beautiful open plains, with the usual interruptions of gently
rising eminences, on which grew oak, black wood, and wattle trees, with
grass up to our waists, through which walking was both painful and
tedious. We came eventually to a small lovely valley, where, to our
great delight, was a dense tea-tree scrub, which we knew to be the surest
indication of good water in its neighbourhood, and it soon led us to the
upper end or head of a well of the purest water, the current of which
took a south-east course. It being, by this time, sunset, we camped for
the night. We were hungry, and enjoyed a pot of tea and other viands,
to which our late discovery gave an additional zest.
June 6. —During the greater part of last night the wind was very high,
accompanied with a few showers of rain. We made an early breakfast,
and resumed our journey in order to reach the camp of the blacks, the
smoke of whose fires we had seen yesterday. We travelled over land
equal to any that we had seen, a deep black diluvium, with grass three or
four feet high, and thinly-timbered. After travelling eight miles we
struck the trail of the natives, which in a short time led us to a branch of
the tribe, consisting of one chief, his wife, and three children—fine, plump,
chubby, healthy-looking urchins they were. To this distinguished royal
chieftain of the prairies I gave one pair of blankets, handkerchiefs, beads, and
three pocket knives; upon the receipt of these presents he undertook the
part of guide. We crossed a fresh water creek, with good land on either
bank. Our new guide informed us that he would take us to his tribe, at
the same time naming many of their chiefs. After travelling about eight
miles we were surprised to hear a number of voices calling after us, and
on looking round encountered six men, armed with spears fixed in their
wommeras. We stopped, and they at once threw aside their spears, and
came up to us in the most friendly manner possible. We all shook hands,
and I gave them knives, tomahawks, &c., whereupon they took the lead,
and brought us back about a mile, to where we found huts or gunyahs,


and a number of women and children. We sat down in the midst of these
sooty and sable aboriginal children of Australia; amongst whom, we
ascertained, were eight chiefs belonging to the country near Port Phillip,
over which we had travelled, and with which we had so much reason to
be pleased. The three principal .chiefs were brothers. Two of them
were fully six feet high, and tolerably good-looking; the third was
not so tall, but much stouter than the others. The other five chiefs were
equally fine men. And a question, to myself, here arises, and the answer
as speedily follows, viz.: now is the time for entering into and effecting
a purchase of their land. A full explanation, that my object in visiting
their shore was to purchase their land, they appeared to understand ; and
the following negotiation or agreement was immediately entered into.
I purchased two large blocks or tracts of land, about 600,000 acres, more
or less, and, in consideration there for, I gave them blankets, knives,
looking-glasses, tomahawks, beads, scissors, flour, &c., and I also further
agreed to pay them a tribute or rent yearly. The parchment or deed
was signed this afternoon by the eight chiefs, each of them, at the
same time, handing me a portion of the soil; thus giving me full posses-
sion of the tracts of land I had purchased.
This most extraordinary sale and purchase took place by the side of a
lovely stream of water, from whence my land commenced. A tree was
here marked in four different ways, to define the corner boundaries. Good
land, to any extent, either for stock or tillage, with good water, was here
in abundance, ready for sheep, cattle, or the plough. The timber was
sho-oak, dwarf-gum, and wattle.
Our negotiation was terminated by my Sydney natives giving our
newly-acquired friends a grand corroborree at night, much to their delight.
Upon a close observation of the domestic habits of these people we dis-
cerned that each chief had two wives and several children. The group
consisted, altogether, of forty-five, men, women, and children.
June 7.—Sunday. I awoke this morning with the agreeable conscious-
ness of my being able, like Alexander Selkirk, of school-boy memory, to say,
“ I am monarch of all I survey;
My right there is none to dispute.”
With a view, however, of securing this right more permanently, I busied
myself in drawing up triplicates of the deeds of the land I had purchased,
and in delivering over to the natives more property. This was done on
the banks ot the lovely little creek, which I have named Batman’s Creek,
as a memento of the novel and interesting transaction occurring on its
banks. After the purchase and payment, at the conclusion of the preli-
minaries, I had made preparation for departing, when two of the prin-


cipal chiefs approached, and laid their royal mantles at my feet, begging
my acceptance of them. Upon my acquiescing, the gifts were placed
around my neck and over my shoulders, by the noble donors, who seemed
much pi cased at their share in the transaction, and begged of me to walk a pace
or tw r o in their (now my) princely vestments. I asked them to accompany
Sacred Mark.
me to the vessel, to which request I received a rather feeling
reply, by their pointing, first to their children, and next to their
own naked feet, importing that they could not walk so fast as
ourselves, but would come down in a few days. In the
course of the late transaction I had no difficulty in discover-
ing their sacred and private mark, so important in all their
transactions, and universally respected. ' I obtained a know-
ledge of this mark by means of one of my Sydney natives,
Bungit, who, going behind a tree, out of sight of the females,
made the Sydney aboriginal mark. I afterwards took two
others of my natives, and the principal chief of Port Phillip,
to whom I showed the mark on the tree, which he in-
stantly recognised, and pointed, also, to the knocking out of the
front tooth. This mark is always made simultaneously with
the loss or abstraction of the tooth. I requested the chief,
through the interpretation of my Sydney natives, to give the
imprint of his mark. After a few minutes’ hesitation, ho
took a tomahawk and did as he was desired on the bark ot
a tree. A copy of this mark is attached to the deed, as the
signature and seal of their country.
About 10 a. m. I took my departure from these interesting people.
The principal chief could not be less than six feet four inches high, and
his proportions gigantic; his brother six feet two inches, also a fine man.
I recrossed Batman’s creek, and travelled over thinly-timbered country of
box, gum, wattle, and she-oak, with grass three or four feet high.
Travelling twelve miles down one of my side lines, in a south-west
direction, we came upon another creek of good, pure water, running
through a most romantic valley. I named it Lucy’s creek, in token of
affection to one of my daughters ; and the valley Maria’s valley, after my
eldest daughter. This valley and creek ran for many miles through land
of the richest description. We crossed more plains or grazing land, and
came, subsequently, upon a thinly-timbered forest of gum, wattle, and
oak. Here, for the first time, the land became sandy, with a little gravel.
Tfce grass was ten inches high, and resembled a field of wheat. We have
not seen the slightest appearance of frost. After leaving this forest, wc
came upon the river I had gone up a few days before. Intending to come


down on the opposite side and hail the vessel, I crossed, on the banks
of the river, a large marsh, one mile and a half broad by three or four
long, of the richest diluvium; not a tree was to be seen. Upon the bor-
ders of tins extensive marsh or swamp we disturbed large flocks of quails.
In one flock the birds were so numerous as to form a dense cloud. I shot
two vexy large ones. At the upper part of this swamp is an extensive
lagoon, at least a mile across ; it surface was covered with swans, ducks,
geese, and other acquatic fowl. Having crossed this marsh, we passed
through a dense tea-tree scrub, very high, expecting to make the vessel
in the coixi’se of an hour or two, btxt, to our great surprise, when we got
through we found ourselves on the banks of a much larger river than the
one we had originally gone up. As it was now near sundown, and at
least two days would be required to head the river, I decided upon
allowing two of my Sydney natives to swim across it, and go to the ves-
sel, distant about seven miles, to fetch the boat. Bullet and Bungit
started on this enterprise, and returned in about three hours from the
time of their Their return with the boat was most opportune,
as we had got on the point of junction of the two rivers, where the tide
had set in, and was already up to my ancles. I first dispatched the party
with the dogs in the boat to the opposite bank, and, on the return of the
boat, myself and old Bull, who had cut his foot, went, in first-rate
style, to the vessel. I hope my travelling on foot will terminate, at least,
for some time. I had now accomplished a most arduous undertaking,'
and, in order to secure the fruits of my exertions, I intend leaving Gumm,
Dodds, Thomson, and three of my Sydney natives—Bungit, Bullet, and
old Bull—as overseers and bailiffs of my newly-acquired territory, and of
the possession of which nothing, short of a premature disclosure of my
discovery on the part of my companions, can possibly deprive me. These
people I intend leaving at Indented Heads, as my head depot, with a sup-
ply of necessaries for at least three months. The chiefs of the Port
Phillip tribes made me a present of three stone tomahawks, some spears,
wommeiras, boomerangs, and other weapons of warfare.
June B.—This morning the winds set in foul for Indented Heads, and,
having made sevei’al attempts to get out of the river, we gave it up as
hopeless. We went, in the boat, up the large river coming from the
cast, and, after examination six miles up, I was pleased to find the water
quite fresh and very deep: this will be the place for the future village.
Juno 9.—We made a fair start this morning; and are now, with a°lHxt
wind, under weigh for Intended Heads. We reached the bay early in the
afternoon, and commenced landing goods as expeditiously as possible
the bay being rough and the wind increasing in violence. We have sue-


needed, however, in landing all the goods. I selected a spot where I
wished Gumm to commence the garden, house, and other appurtenances.
All my Sydney natives being desirous of permission to remain here, it was
determined that Pigeon and Joe, the marine, should also remain in addition
to the other natives, this making a total of eight individuals; three whites,
namely, Gumm, Dodds, and Thompson; and of natives five, Pigeon, Joe the
marine, Bunjit, Bullet, and Old Bull, for whom we have left a plentiful
supply of everything to last for three months or more. I left a large
quantity of potatoes for planting, and a great variety of garden seeds,
stones and pips of fruits, with apples and oranges. I also left the six dogs.
To Gumm 1 gave written authority to warn off all persons found trespassing
on the land I had purchased from the natives; and, everything being now
perfectly arranged and understood, we shook hands with all and took a
friendly farewell. We sailed for the heads with a fair wind, which we
cleared by 8 p. m.
June 10.—We made a good run last night, about 80 miles, and by
midnight were within sight of the coast of Yan Dieman’s Land.
June 11.—Got into George Town heads at six a.m., with a fair wind up
the river, and arrived at Launceston this evening. I lost no time in
reaching my own house, where I was kindly and affectionately greeted ;
and, in the bosom of my family, I soon lost all sight of my past
wandering.
Mr. Batman again reached Port Phillip in the latter part of April, 1836,
by the “ Caledonia,” accompanied by Mrs. Batman, their family, and
servants. Among the passengers were James Simpson, Esq., late police
magistrate of Campbelltown, Van Dieman’s Land, Major Welman and sou,
who were on their way to India, and the Rev. Mr. Orton. On the first
Sabbath day after their arrival, the cfiurch service was read by Mr. Orton,
on Batman’s Hill. Forms had been arranged, at the rear of Mr. Batman’s
residence, for the convenience of the congregation, consisting of the enter-
prising founder of the Colony, his wife and family, the governess,
Miss Caroline Newcome, Dr. Thompson, Mr. J. Simpson, and the shep-
herds and farm servants in the employ of Mr. Batman. Not the least
interesting group of individuals were the Sydney natives, who had per-
formed no unimportant part in the discovery of the colony. Their
appearance among the company was striking, dressed in their clean white
jackets and trowsers, and headed by their king or chief, in a scarlet coat
and military pantaloons, with breastplate and gorget, the gift of Colonel
Sir George Arthur, then Governor of Yan Dieman’s Land. The protrusion
of two black legs from the lower part of the pantaloons, we must admit,


in great measure impaired the otherwise military bearing of the ci-devant
Governor of Tasmania. Another group consisted of the Port Phillip
aborigines, of both sexes, who were stationed at a little distance from the
main body of the congregation.
These simple people appeared to be watching with considerable interest
the movements of the others, and when they joined simultaneously in
sacred song their astonishment was very great.
Batman’s first sheep station was situated on the present site of St. James’
church, where a shepherd’s hut had been erected, and the sheep were under
the management of a Mr. Togarty.
Mount Eliza and Mount Martha were named by one of the lieutenants
of the Rattlesnake, at that time employed in surveying the coast ; the
former in honor of Mrs. Batman, and the latter in honor of Mrs. Lonsdale,
and the manner in which it was conferred was as complimentary as it
was judicious. The gentleman called on Mrs. Batman and desired to know
her Christian name, as he said it w T as but paying a well-merited com-
pliment in naming the two most remarkable eminences after the only two
ladies at that time in the colony.
W. H. Williams, Printer, 94 Bourke Street East, Melbourne.








