

— I
THE BUNYIP 1
PATROL j
mSS» : :




■ Holder Memorial mm
PDEJ
=£Ezi— cjv f , EEf
I f —
— mu
—
t c f1 u^ J -
Bpworth Book Depot, Adelaide. South Australia




THE BUNYIP PATROL
The Story oj an Australian Girls’ School.






j ; Jtf W
Jfc hka _rf % .jKt -sbmW
* ’ Ik ‘%1HI^^BP
r «ga,,,..:- - ? gfe*. s ' -&s^[iil^Hr^
? f \ 9 r
~ \iwST y
- #
-~*4tKk
Mrs


w
THE
BUNYIP PATROL
The Story of an Australian
Girls' School*
VIOLET M* METHLEY
THE PILGRIM PRESS
16, PILGRIM STREET, LONDON, E.C4.


PRINTED BY
THE CLASSIC COLOUR PRESS
READING
'


The Bunyip Patrol
CHAPTER I.
THE NEW CHUM.
PLUNK-PLUNK! Plunk-plunk! went
the paddles of the big steam ferry-
boat through the waters of Sydney
Harbour ; plunk-plunk ! plunk-plunk ! went
Rae Raeburn's heart, in time to them.
It beat so hard that it made her feel quite
sick —and rather angry, too ; it was silly to
be so shy, and to hate meeting new people so
much, the girl decided.
“ I'm nearly fifteen, and I've come half
round the world in a liner to get here, and I
was at school three years in England, and
I'm a Guide, and—and they're only girls
about my own age, after all," Rae told herself
rather fiercely. “ There's nothing to be


frightened about, and Fm not frightened,
excited/"
Rae pulled her Panama hat down well over
her eyes, and stared out across the rail at the
blue waters of the harbour. It was exciting
to go to school by steamer, instead of in a
train, or a tram, or a "bus ; it made it so
different to England.
And, of course, it would all be different —the
school itself, and the mistresses, and the lessons,
and the girls. Rae vaguely expected crowds
of black servants, and dangers from bush-
rangers and a wild, adventurous sort of life
altogether.
** They "re sure to be able to ride and shoot,
and everything of that sort —the other girls,""
she was thinking at this moment. “ And I
expect they'll laugh at me for not doing the
same, and call me a 4 new chum"; Fve
read that in books. Well, I don't care ! I
daresay I can do some things they can't if
they're very wild sort of girls, and, anyway,
it will be much more exciting than Folke-
stone, and walking in the 11 croc " along the
Leas. I'm awfully glad dad got that job
out here in Australia, and I'm awfully glad to
be going to school, only—only "


Rae pinched in her under-lip very tightly,
and stared still harder at the blue, shining
water dancing in the sun. She was horribly
home-sick, or, at least, pe haps it would be
truer to call it mother-sick and father-sick.
She longed with all her heart to be with them
and her baby brother, Taddie, at the little
up-country town where her father had got
a post.
But they had decided that a small place
like that, miles away in the bush, would not
be good for Rae. There was no means of
educating her at Worrabanda, and she would
be far better as a boarder at Ocean View, the
big school at Manly, near Sydney, where
there were nearly a hundred girls.
Rae had quite understood all that, when her
father and mother had explained it to her,
and she had agreed that an Australian school
would probably be quite fun. And so she
hadn't even seen the new home at Worrabanda;
it had been more convenient for her to go
straight from the steamer at Melbourne to
Sydney, where Mrs. Seymour, an old friend
of her mother's, had taken charge of her.
She had spent a few days in Sydney at the
Seymour's house, and now Mrs. Seymour was


with her on the ferry-boat, taking her out to
Manly,
Perhaps kind Mrs, Seymour noticed that
Rae's small face looked rather white and
miserable. Anyhow, she came up and began
to point out the places of interest which they
were passing.
They had left Circular Quay behind them,
the place where the great liners lie moored
close to the shore, and round which the town
of Sydney itself is built; they were steaming
along through that wonderful, inland harbour,
where the bluey-grey gum-trees grow right
down to the water's edge, with the white and
cream-coloured and red houses showing be-
tween them.
On all sides were the suburbs of Sydney,
fringing the harbour, and in every direction
steamed and sailed and rowed ships and boats,
big and little, dancing over the gleaming
ripples, with white sails, or moving slowly
and ponderously like pompous giants,
“ That is Macquarie Point," Mrs. Seymour
said, " And those are the Botanical Gardens,
You must come and spend a Sunday with us,
and I will take you there. That's Wooioo-
mooloo, and there is Kirribilli Point."


44 What awfully funny names ! " Rae said,
rather unsteadily.
44 Yes ; they are native words, you know —
the names the black-fellows gave those places.
Up there is Mosman and Lavender Bay —
those sound quite English, don't they ? —and
farther up is Middle Harbour, But we're
going down towards the Heads, the entrance
of the harbour. Manly is between the har-
bour and the sea, you know, on a kind of
isthmus. It has two beaches, the harbour
beach and the ocean beach, and your school
looks right out over the ocean. It's a beauti-
ful house, and the Headmistress, Miss Carlyon,
is very nice, and so are the girls, too. I've
always heard. Oh, I'm sure you will be
happy there, my dear, even if you find things
rather strange at first,"
But Rae didn't feel so sure —at least, about
the happiness ; she was quite certain of the
strangeness. Mrs, Seymour went on talking
in her kind, cheerful way, and Rae listened
to all she said. She didn't want to talk much
herself; her heart was still beating so very
hard, and she wasn't quite sure that her voice
would not sound funny and shaky, ■
44 And I'm not going to let anyone see that I


feel so silly/' she told herself resolutely,
** Why, Mrs, Seymour might speak to the
Headmistress, or she might write to mum.
And Fd simply hate her or dad to think that
I wasn't happy; it would make them feel
horrid. No; if I'm going to be an idiot,
Fll be it inside myself, and nobody shall
know."
So the girl stood very straight and still,
with the Panama pulled well down over her
eyes, and her hands tucked into the pockets
of her blue coat-frock. And perhaps it is
a good chance to look at her, as she stands
there, and see what she is like—at least, the
outside of her.
Rae was not very tall for her age, but
sturdily built. Her face was rather pale, and
her thick, shingled hair was light brown in
colour —her father called it khaki. Her eyes
were almost exactly the same colour, with
thick, short lashes of darker brown, and her
mouth was a bit bigger than Rae herself
thought really pretty.
Perhaps she would hardly have been called
pretty at all; but her face could be very
attractive when she smiled. When she was
feeling shy and unhappy, Rae was apt to look


sulky, and she was distinctly unhappy at this
particular moment.
“ That's Manly; we're nearly there now,"
said Mrs, Seymour, and Rae saw, straight
ahead, a strip of beach, with houses and
shops fringing it, whilst away to the right were
the Heads, one high and one low, and between
them the passage out to the open ocean.
The ferry steamer was soon moored along-
side the pier, and Rae, following Mrs. Seymour
across the gangplank, realised that she had
arrived, and wished with all her heart that
she hadn't.
Looking along the strip of beach, Rae
decided that she didn't think much of it;
it was muddy-looking, not a bit like the clean-
washed pebbles of Folkestone, or the yellow
stretches of sand.
** I shouldn't like to bathe there," the girl
thought, and Mrs, Seymour noticed her glance,
and laughed.
** Wait till you get to the other side ! " she
said, “ Ah, here is a motor, so we'll see
about your boxes,"
They drove for a little distance along a wide,
tree-lined road, then suddenly turned a comer,
and


“ Oh ! " gasped Rae.
Such blue, blue sea; such a white, white
line of breaking surf; such gleaming silver
sand the girl had never seen before. It was
all vivid blue-and-white under a blue sky,
with a fresh wind blowing in their faces
across thousands of miles of ocean.
“ That's rather better, isn't it ? " Mrs.
Seymour said, and laughed at Rae's brighten-
ing face. “ And here are the Ocean View
gardens, so, you see, you are quite close to the
beach."
The brightness left Rae's face, and the
miserable, rather sulky, look came back, as they
drove slowly up a wide drive between high
trees of red and white camelias in full bloom.
The school was a big, cream-coloured, two-
storied building, with wide verandahs, and
on one of these, near the porch, stood somebody
very tall, in a blue-and-white striped dress.
Rae wondered if she was one of the older
girls in the school, and it was with a shock
of immense surprise that she heard Mrs.
Seymour say :
** Good afternoon. Miss Carlyon; you
see that Tve brought your new pupil."
“ I'm very glad to see her," Miss Carlyon


said; and Rae, looking up at the rosy face and
bright, dark eyes, thought that this was a
most unexpected Headmistress, who looked
young enough to be one of her own Sixth
Form girls.
44 But I think she's nice, all the same,"
Rae decided ; and I may as well say at once
that this was one of the few things at Ocean
View School concerning which our heroine
never changed her mind.
She felt a little bit comforted as she followed
Miss Carlyon and Mrs. Seymour into the
Headmistress's own little sitting-room, where
tea was ready—tea and that new delight,
passion-fruit and cream, which added to
Rae's comfort.
44 I thought that you shouldn't face the
whole school at tea, just this first day," Miss
Carlyon said. 44 It's rather a crowd of new
faces, isn't it? I'll introduce you to them
afterwards, or, at any rate, to your room-
mates. They will be enough for the moment."
Rae inwardly thought they would probably
be more than enough, as, tea and her good-
byes to Mrs. Seymour over, she followed Miss
Carlyon again along a wide, whitewashed
corridor, with an open door at each end,


through one of which blue sea was visible,
whilst, through the other, one caught a glimpse
of green trees.
The buzz of voices grew louder and louder
as they went on, and louder still when the
Headmistress opened a door. Then, suddenly,
it fell away into a deep silence, which Rae
found even more frightening.
Her heart was plunk-plunking again, and
there was a big lump in her throat which
could not be swallowed. Through the roar
in her ears, just like that which you hear in
a big shell, she heard Miss Carlyon speaking.
44 Sheila, Wrennie,” she said, 44 this is
Rae Raeburn, your new room-mate. You
will show her round, won’t you, and tell her
the rules and everything else that she ought
to know, so that she will feel quite at home.
Til leave you now, Rae, my dear.”
The door shut behind the Headmistress,
and Rae realised that she was quite by herself,
with what seemed like thousands of eyes fixed
upon her.
She tried to look round the room, without
seeing them, and found that it was big and
cream-washed, with green sun-blinds and rows
of desks.


There were girls everywhere, and, all of a
sudden, Rae realised that they were not a
bit what she expected, although she was not
altogether certain what she did expect.
And nobody said anything ; they all seemed
to be waiting for Rae herself to speak, and
that was just what she found it difficult to do,
when her throat was so dry, and her tongue
felt too big for her mouth I
But, all the same, she was determined that
they shouldn't know—that nobody should
guess how shy and frightened she really was.
Only it was so difficult to find anything to say.
That was why, in the end, Rae burst out
with the very last thing she had meant to;
one does, sometimes, you know.
“ Why — '' she said, ** why, you're not a
bit what I expected. How awfully English
you are 1 "


CHAPTER 11.
THE GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW.
After Rae's speech there was still silence
for a few minutes more ; then it was broken
by the girl whom Miss Carlyon had introduced
as Sheila.
“ English, indeed! Fm nothing of the
kind !” she said, tossing back a thick, curly
mass of copper-brown hair. “ Sheila O'Shea's
not an English name I But did you suppose
we'd be black-fellows, that you're so sur-
prised ? "
“ N-no, of course not I " Rae stammered,
rather uncomfortably, for Sheila's voice sound-
ed angry and offended. “Of course not,
only—only not quite so English—and—and
ordinary."
“ I believe she expected us all to be wearing
scarlet shirts and big felt hats, and cracking


stock-whips and cooee-ing ! ” Sheila turned
to the other girls with a laugh, and Rae grew
more and more crimson with embarrassment.
For, after all, that was a tiny bit what she had
expected.
She felt that she had made a terribly bad
beginning, and that, as it always does, was
likely to mean that she went on even worse.
For the other girls were laughing now, many
of them, and not in a pleased or jolly way,
either; rather as if they were annoyed with
her.
Poor Rae did not know what to say, and
she stumbled on helplessly.
44 It wasn't that, only—Tve been to an
English school up till now, you know, where
we were expected to have awfully good man-
ners, and be —well, very proper and well-
behaved. And —and I thought—l rather hoped
that—that this would be different, more —
more adventurey, and —and ”
44 Thanks ! '* Sheila tossed her head again.
44 You thought that Australian girls were all
absolute bushrangers, with no manners, who
hadn't the slightest idea how to behave, and
that you would have to teach us all about it.
Thanks ! ”


** Oh, I didn't '' Rae began, and stopped
because she felt the big lump in her throat
again, and knew that if she tried to say any-
thing she would probably cry. And that
would be terrible, before all these girls, who
were staring at her in that rather offended way.
So she stood still, pressing her lips together
very tightly, and looking much more sulky
than she knew.
And then somebody else spoke, in a gentle,
rather drawling voice.
** Oh, stop teasing her, Sheila ; it's a shame
before she's used to us. And we didn't know
what she'd be like, either, at all I Just fancy,
Rae, we imagined you with spectacles, and
sleek black hair and a pigtail—oh, and a
checked sort of dress, like a picture in one of
the books in the school library! So we're
quits, aren't we ? "
Rae's eyes had been fixed on the toes of
her shoes ; now she looked and saw that it
was the girl whom the Headmistress had
called Wrennie, who was speaking. She was
very tall, and rather thin and pale, and her
brown eyes had the longest and thickest black
lashes that Rae had ever seen in her life.
But they were nice eyes, and so was her smile.


44 Td better take you round and show you
our room, and everything, hadn't I, as Miss
Carlyon said ? ” Wrennie went on ; “ then
you'll feel more at home. Come on ! "
She held out her hand, and Rae took it
gratefully, and followed her out into the
cool corridor and up the white-painted stair-
case.
But the door had scarcely closed behind
them, when Sheila O'Shea burst out again.
44 Well! I never heard anything so cool
in my life ! She comes from a school where
the girls .have got good manners, and know
how to behave, does she ? She thought she'd
find this such a change "
The Irish girl mimicked Rae's voice so
cleverly that several of the others laughed,
although a round-faced, flaxen-haired girl
said good-naturedly :
44 Oh, come, the poor kid didn't mean it
like that I She was flustered, and "
“ Then why did she say it, Thyrza Whitney,
tell me that I She needs a lesson, and she
shall have it, too, or my name's not Sheila
O'Shea! She shall find it a change from
her beautiful English school; we'll give her
all the Australia she wants, and a bit .more,
19 B.


perhaps ! She deserves it for turning up her
nose at us like that I ''
** She thought that we'd call her a * new
chum/ I expect/' Yetta Arnold, a small,
impish-looking girl, chuckled.
“ Well, we will, if she wants it! And we'll all
be the Aussiest of Aussies I It'll be rather fun!"
Sheila was beginning to chuckle, too I
Her outbreaks of hot temper rarely lasted
long, and she soon saw the funny side of
things. Already she was beginning to plan
in her quick brain the series of tricks which
they might play on the unsuspecting English
newcomer, and the dancing light in her grey-
green eyes showed what she was thinking to
at least one of her companions.
“ Sheila's up to mischief, and she'll drag
us all into it I" Rita Ridge groaned; for Rita,
brown-haired, grey-eyed, was both the pret-
tiest and the laziest girl at Ocean View, and
hated being dragged into anything which meant
exertion.
“ Oh, you can keep out if you like !"
Sheila tossed her head. “ But I really don't
see why any of us should be patronised by a
bit of a girl, just because she's out from home I
We're as good as she is, any day ! "


44 Of course we are I ” a little murmur of
agreement ran round the big classroom. For
Australians, old and young, are exceedingly
patriotic, both as regards the British Empire
in general, and their own bit of it in particular,
and very sensitive where their country ” down
under ” is concerned.
And Rae, unfortunately, had managed to
touch that little sensitive spot a bit clumsily,
so that the girls, as jolly and good-natured
a schoolful as you could wish for, on the
whole, were inclined to be resentful, and to
agree with Sheila that the new girl needed a
lesson.
Meanwhile, Rae herself was feeling much
happier. She had seen the room where
she was to sleep, all cool, white and green,
with French windows opening on to the upper
verandah, and five little beds, with flowered
green-and-white covers.
44 Mine,” Wrennie pointed to the one
nearest the door. ** Yours, Sheila's, Rita's,
and John's.”
John's ? ”
44 Yes, her real name's Joanna Jones, so,
of course, we call her John. By the way, I
like the sound of your name —Rae Raeburn.”


** Yours is pretty, too/' Rae said shyly.
“ IVe never heard it before/'
** No; I suppose it isn't common, though
I'm so used to it myself. Mother called me
Wren, because my elder brother is Robin —
silly idea, wasn't it ? Well, now I'll show you
the bathrooms and everything."
They made a thorough tour of the school,
and afterwards of the beautiful gardens, full
of trees, which Rae Raeburn had never seen
before —Moreton Bay figs and Norfolk Island
pines, and yellow mimosa bushes, which
Wrennie called wattle, and blue-gums every-
where. The school stood on the top of a
hill, and through the trees there were glimpses
of water in every direction —the harbour on
one side, and the open sea on the other.
Presently Wrennie looked at the little wrist-
watch which she wore.
** Goodness I we must tear back to the
house and get our hats," she said. 44 We
go for a walk in five minutes, though I daresay
you needn't come, as it's your first day."
44 Oh, but I'd love to," Rae said eagerly.
“ Especially if —if I might walk with you."
“ All right," Wrennie agreed good-natured-
ly. 44 I'm supposed to be walking with Rita,


but she won't mind —or you can come too,
and make a three/'
Their companions were already waiting
on the steps leading up to the wide verandah,
when they got back to the school, and Wrennie
dashed into the house for her hat, leaving
Rae to feel absurdly lonely and deserted*
She stepped off the path on to the lawn,
thinking as she did so, how unlike the rather
coarse 44 buffalo grass " was to English turf,
and was staring down at it, when she was
startled by a shout from Sheila*
Rae looked up quickly, and saw the other
girl beckoning to her*
“ You'd better get on to the path," she said*
“ Haven't you heard that it isn't safe to walk
on grass in Australia, or to poke about in
bushes or things either,"
“ Do—you mean " Rae began, and
Sheila interrupted her*
44 Snakes, of course ! You're not in England
now, remember. There are swarms of snakes
everywhere, and most of 'em are poisonous*
“ Oh, thanks I " Rae stepped hastily on to
the path. 44 I thought it was only in the
bush "
44 Oh, dear, no ! You can't be too careful,"


Sheila told her solemnly. “ Australian snakes
are ignorant sort of things; they don't know
the diffeience between bush and gardens,
I suppose and they've no manners/'
There was a stifled laugh from Thyrsa Whit-
ney, which Rae did not catch, and a wide
grin on Yetta Arnold s face which Rae did not
see. She began thanking Sheila confusedly.
It was awfully good of you to tell me.
I didn't know a bit; I'll be careful, of course."
“ You'd better. The only thing to do if
you are bitten is to drink heaps and heaps of
orandy, and to burn the place with a red-
hot poker."
“ But ~ if you hadn't got the brandy, or the
poker ? Rae asked seriously, and there was
another giggle from Thyrza.
“ Well, then, you'd have to suck it, to get
the poison out; that would be the only
thing." *
“ And h °w do you know if a snake is
poisonous or not?" Rae asked, longing to
get all the information she could, as Sheila
seemed to have forgotten her offence, and
was in such a communicative mood.
“ Can 't always tell for sure," the other
girl answered. "But I've heard that the


look of the bite makes it pretty certain. If
there is a row of little dotty sort of marks,
the snake's harmless ; but if there are just
two pricks, well, it's almost sure to be deadly.
That's what an old man up-country told me,
anyway."
“ Hullo, Sheila ! " Wrennie, breathless with
haste, had joined them, and the girls were
moving in little knots towards the school
gates. “ What are you frightening Rae about
snakes for ? You'll make her quite nervous."
44 Well, I thought I'd better just warn her,"
Sheila said, and Rae interposed hurriedly.
** Yes ; it was awfully kind of you, and
it's just as well to know. What are the poison-
ous snakes called out here ; we've only one
sort in England—vipers. And they're not
very bad."
“ Of course, they wouldn't be, in England,"
Sheila said solemnly. ** Ours are brutes—
puff-adders and black snakes and whip-snakes,
and "
“ Oh, that's enough, Squealy ! " Wrennie
laughed, and pulled at Rae's arm. ** Come
along, Rae, and don't take any notice of her ;
she's just trying to frighten you."
“ Do you mean it's not true ? " Rae asked.


** About the snakes —oh, yes, true enough,
I s'pose, in a way. Only there's no need to
bother about them ; we don't. I've never been
bitten —people aren't."
But Rae decided that was just because the
** people " Wrennie spoke of were Australians,
and knew how to take care ; inwardly, she
felt very grateful to Sheila for her warning,
and she was careful not to step off the path
on to the grass and undergrowth as they
walked along.
It was a very interesting walk to Rae, and
she soon forgot about snakes as she looked
at the new flowers and birds and insects
about her.
There were bushes of red and yellow blos-
soms which she had never seen before, but
when she stopped to pick them, Rita caught at
her arm.
“ For goodness' sake, don't I It's only
that wretched lantana; it's as common as
dirt, and has a horrid smell."
** Lantana ? Why, my grandmother grows
it in her greenhouse ; she was awfully proud
of it."
44 Well, we're not. Those—oh, those are
waratahs ; they're handsome, if you like."


Rae looked at the big crimson, rather peony-
like flowers admiringly. Wattle, which you
bought for sixpence a small spray in London,
was growing on bushes here, and there were
pale, turquoise-blue violets, and plenty of
other strange, unknown flowers.
But when she dawdled to look at them,
even Wrennie got rather impatient.
** There's simply nothing to look at on an
ordinary walk like this," she declared. ** Wait
till you go into the Bush, the real Bush.
There aren't any parrots here, or laughing
jackasses; here, we'll go along this path on
to the sand-hills. We don't have to stay
with Miss Jackson, as long as we're back at
the school gates by seven."
They left the stretch of gum-tree-covered
land, and took a path which led through
sand-hills, where pink and dark-red clumps of
heath grew, and tall reeds like bullrushes.
Then there were trees again—some standing,
some felled, and here Wrennie came to a
standstill.
** Let's rest a bit; I'm tired," she said.
“ Here, on this log."
Miss Jackson, the young mistress, who was
in charge of the walk, had gone in another


direction, with some of the younger children.
Only Wrennie, Rita, Sheila, and two or three
others were in sight, and Sheila promptly leapt
at the low-growing bough of a gum-tree and
swung from it by her hands, as active as a
monkey.
Rae sat down by Wrennie on the log, just
underneath, and Rita subsided on to a hillock.
44 Better be careful that’s not an ant’s nest,”
Wrennie warned her lazily. 44 You know how
those little bulldog wretches can sting,”
Rae pulled her own skirts round her knees
rather nervously, and glanced at the ground.
Stinging bulldogs, whatever they might be,
sounded most unpleasant, and, besides
There was a sudden shout from Sheila,
and the flying descent of long brown legs
and short green skirts, as she let herself drop
headlong on to the ground, close beside the
log where Rae and Wrennie were sitting.
Rae, startled, half-jumped up, and saw
Sheila make a grab, as though at something
under her foot; something which she herself
could not see. But, at the same instant, she
felt a sharp prick at the back of her heel, just
above the shoe.
“ It’s gone, anyway I ” Sheila gasped. 44 I


thought I caught a glimpse of a snake under the
log, just by Rae's foot, and I was afraid it
would bite her. But I must have been
mistaken; there's nothing there. Sorry if
I startled you, Rae —but I thought I'd better
be in time "
“ You weren't," Rae said, in a queer voice,
sitting very upright on the log, with her hands
tightly clenched together. ** At least, I —l'm
pretty sure that it's bitten me already."


CHAPTER 111.
SNAKE-BITE.
44 Rae I " Wrennie gave a little frightened
gasp, and even lazy Rita jumped up from her
hillock. ** It hasn't really—you don't mean
Rae nodded, her face very white.
44 I —think so," she still spoke in the same
queer voice. 44 I felt a sort of prick at the
back of my foot "
“ Well, let's look I" Sheila interrupted
briskly. 44 It's no good sitting there. And
very likely it was only a harmless snake. I
didn't see it. Let's look at your foot, Rae ;
you know the great thing is to attend to it
quickly."
Rae tried to pull herself together. She
must remember that she was a Guide ; she
must try to be brave, or, at any rate, not^to


show how horribly frightened she was, inside.
She pulled off her shoe and stocking quickly,
and found at the back of her heel two little
pricks, with a tiny drop of blood oozing from
one. Two I
She looked up quickly at Sheila, who stood
beside her.
44 It's what you said-—what showed it was a
poisonous snake," she said. “So there isn't
any doubt."
“ Oh, what shall we do ? " Wrennie spoke in
a distracted voice. “ Rita, do go and find
Miss Jackson. Oh, dear, I never thought of
anything happening like this 1 And we were
talking about snake-bites."
“ What did you say was the right thing to
do ? " Rae asked Sheila —Sheila, who seemed
so much the coolest person there.
“ Well, lots of brandy ; but we haven't got
that here ; or the place ought to be burnt with
a red-hot poker."
44 We haven't got that either ! " Wrennie
looked round helplessly. ** And —and we
couldn't burn Rae, if we had ! "
“ Oh, rot! We'd have to I A burn's bet-
ter than a snake-bite," Sheila declared. ** But
as we've not got a fire or a poker, you'd better


suck it well, Rae; that's the next best thing.
Suck it as hard as you can ; it may get the
poison out in time, if you do it quickly. It
doesn’t seem to be swelling or anything yet.”
** But I feel —horrid I ” Rae said rather
unsteadily. ** Sort of sick and cold,”
“ Well, suck it quickly ! ” Sheila ordered.
** You shouldn’t go on wasting time. You
suck it first, and then we all will, so’s to make
sure that it’s clean. That’s the thing to do.”
Rae obeyed. Sitting on the ground, she
twisted round her foot, holding it in both
hands, trying to reach it with her mouth.
But it was impossible, try as she might.
** I can’t I ” she gasped breathlessly. ** One
of you will have to do it. I can’t get at my
foot, I ”
She broke off. For Sheila had suddenly
collapsed on the ground beside her, and was
rocking to and fro, laughing wildly and
hysterically.
** Sheila I ” Wrennie’s tones were shocked.
“ How can you be such a pig—so heartless
“ I c-c-can’t help it I ” Sheila’s voice came
smothered through her laughter. ** She looks
too funny, trying to coil herself up and put


her foot into her mouth —1-like the fish in
4 Alice/ Oh, girls !''
44 Fd never have thought you'd be so hor-
rid, Sheila !'' Rita, shocked, was kneeling
beside Rae. 44 Don't mind her, Rae; I
think she must be having hysteria, or she
couldn't be such a beast* I'll suck the place.
old girl; I'll do it this minute —let me "
44 You needn't 1 " Sheila gurgled, sitting
up and clasping her knees. 44 N-n-nobody
need. There isn't any bite, and there wasn't
any snake, except me ! "
44 Do you mean ? " Wrennie began ; but
Sheila interrupted her.
44 Yes, I do. So you can save your ques-
tions. There never was any snake ; I was
only pretending, and I pricked her foot with
the pin of my brooch, and —and you all took
it so seriously. And to see Rae doing acrobatic
stunts to put her feet into her mouth —oh,
it was worth it! And —and she wanted
Australia to be wild and adventurous, so I
thought she should have it. Oh, my colonial
! " Again Sheila subsided in paroxysms
of laughter, and the other girls began to
giggle, even Wrennie, who tried her best to
hide it and look serious. But it was funny;
33 c


it was difficult to help seeing that it was funny.
Only one of the little group was perfectly
serious. Rae's face was very white, and she
spoke in a funny, smothered voice.
** Is that what you Australian girls think
amusing ? ”
“Wedo I '' Sheila shook back the copper-
brown curls from her flushed face and dancing
eyes. ** The funniest thing I ever saw;
and you were feeling cold and horrid, taking
it all so seriously ''
44 Because I believed you 1 '' Rae interrupted.
44 I would never have thought that anyone
could do such a hateful thing—to take in
someone who was new; who couldn't know
whether you were speaking the truth or not.
Well, I shall never, never believe anything
you say again ; and if that's your idea of fun,
I'm glad I'm English, that's all I "
Rae was trembling with anger. It is a
horrid feeling to be thoroughly frightened,
anyhow, and to discover that it was all for
nothing that she had been tricked and made
to look utterly idiotic. Well, perhaps it is
no wonder that the little girl felt at that
moment as though she would never willingly
speak to Sheila again.


Yet if the other girl had seemed sorry, if
she had owned herself in the wrong, and asked
Rae to forgive her, they might have made it
up then and there ; but by this time Sheila
was nearly as angry as Rae. She prided her-
self on her straightness, and to be accused of
not telling the truth hurt that pride. She
scrambled to her feet, flushed and annoyed,
and spoke sulkily.
44 Oh, well, if you can't take a joke ! If
you won't stand having your leg pulled "
“ A joke 1 " Rae retorted, and refused to
say another word.
She put on her shoe and stocking, rose with
dignity, and went off towards where Miss
Jackson's rose-pink coat showed through the
trees in the distance.
Wrennie glanced from her retreating figure
to Sheila's scowling face, and spoke un-
happily.
44 I don't wonder Rae didn't like it; really
I don't, Sheila."
“No ; I do think it was rather a mean
trick," Rita agreed. 44 With anyone new,
you know ; it's not like ourselves. Ido wish
you hadn't done it, Sheila ; it makes it so
uncomfortable."
35 C 2


And at that Sheila's always fiery temper
flared out.
“ Oh, of course, if you're all going to turn
on me, and take the side of that silly little
idiot, you can I " she cried, indignantly.
“ I do hate people who can't be laughed at,
anyway, but if you like to make up to her,
of course you can ; I don't care I "
44 Oh, Sheila, of course we don't; I mean
we won't. Only—l think she'd be all right
Oh, dear, I rather wish she hadn't
come I "
And I'm sure I do," Sheila said grimly.
Poor Rae herself was echoing the same wish,
as she walked towards the group round Miss
Jackson, taking no care, now, of grass and
undergrowth, forgetting all dangers of snakes
and bulldog ants in her unhappiness and
anger.
I hate that Sheila girl," she thought
fiercely. ** And Ido think the others might
not have laughed, too. I thought Wrennie
was nice. But it's just what I expected.
They're all going to be horrid to me, and play
tricks on me, and laugh at me because I'm
a new chum. Well, if they laugh at me. I'll
laugh at them, that's all, and if they're nasty,


FU be nasty. But Ido wish I hadn't come to
school here 1 ”
Miss Jackson looked up from the book
which she was reading aloud, and spoke
pleasandy to Rae as the little girl came up.
She walked back to the school with the mis-
tress and the younger children, and sat with
them for the supper of bread-and-butter,
milk and fruit, which was carried out to the
girls on the wide verandah looking on to the
garden, where big, leathery-winged flying-
foxes were flitting to and fro, as their smaller
bat-brothers do in England at dusk.
Rae felt horribly homesick. The feeling
increased as she went slowly up the wide
stairs to the bedrooms, and as she un-
dressed.
As usual, it made her look sulky, and Sheila,
half inclined to apologise by now, tossed her
head and muttered to Rita :
** Oh, well, if she's going to keep it up, let
her ! I don’t care ! "
Rae could not sleep for a long time. It all
felt so strange, and the moon, staring in
through the window, was so unnaturally big
and bright. And then, when she did begin
to doze, she was roused with a start by a sound


which made her spring up in bed and sit
shivering and listening.
There it was again—a wild, blood-curdling
yell, which seemed to come from somewhere
in the garden. It might be a wild beast, or
—yes, that was what it sounded like, some-
one in pain, someone who needed help.
Rae slipped out of bed, pattered across the
floor to where Wrennie lay, twisted up in the
clothes as tightly as a cocoon. She only grunt-
ed when Rae shook her shoulder, and it was
not until after repeated shakes and punches
that she moved and opened one eye sleepily.
“ Wha' d'you want ? " she mumbled. ** It
isn't time to get up ! "
44 No ; but there's someone ill, or hurt, out
in the garden," Rae whispered excitedly.
“ Oh, do wake up, Wrennie ; we simply must
do something to help."
Wrennie uncurled and sat up, rubbing her
eyes and yawning.
“ I don't hear anything," she gaped.
** It'll come again in a minute, I expect.
Yes —oh, listen, Wrennie I "
Again the terrible cry rang out; but to
Rae's utter amazement, Wrennie merely turned
over on her side and lay down again.


“ i t > s only a mopoke —sort of owly bird.
It always howls like that,” she declared, and
added disgustedly : “ I do wish you’d leave
me alone, and not get the wind up about
nothing at all. I’m sleepy ! ”
To prove it, she was breathing heavily in
a few minutes, but Rae crept, cold-fooled,
back to bed, and lay there shivering, and yet,
at the same time, hot with anger and shame.
“ Even the wretched birds play tricks on
me ! ” she thought. 44 I can't believe them,
either. Oh, it's a horrible country ! "


CHAPTER IV,
THE BUNYIP PATROL.
It is a comfort that things very rarely go
on being as bad as they seem at first.
All the same, for four or five days, Rae
simply could not get used to things and the
school, and the girls seemed as strange and
unfriendly as ever.
She hung about by herself most of the time,
looking sulky and feeling shy; even when
Wrennie or Rita tried to be pleasant, Rae did
not encourage them, and when they talked
and laughed together with Sheila or
she made sure that it was her they were
laughing at. And that is a most unfortunate
idea to get into one's head.
Then, at the end of a week, the Head-
mistress thought of a plan which made Rae,
most unexpectedly, quite an important person
at Ocean View.


Miss Carlyon had noticed—as she noticed
most things about her school and the girls
that the English newcomer looked lonely and
miserable. That was partly why she made
this particular suggestion, although in some
ways it did not turn out quite as she had
expected.
But it changed things, anyway; whether
for better or worse you must decide for your-
selves.
It was before school began one morning
that the Headmistress came into the big
classroom which was used by the Sixth Form
and by Forms 5A and 58, in the latter of which
Rae had found herself.
Miss Carlyon sat down on the high dais
midway down the room, and began to talk in
the voice which Rae already thought was one
of the nicest and most comfortable she had
ever heard.
“ I’ve just come in a friendly way, girls,
this morning, to consult all you elder ones
about something. It's a new departure in
the school—a thing that Tve been wanting
to start for some time, and I’m anxious that
you should all think it over and tell me what
you feel. I myself am very keen on it, and


so is Miss Jackson ; but it's you girls who
really matter. My idea is this —that we ought
to start a Guide Company at Ocean View.”
At once there was a little buzz of excite-
ment and applause, and murmured exclama-
tions :
“ Oh, yes I How jolly I ” “ Just what
we'd like,” whilst from the buzz Sheila's
voice rose clear and eager.
** There's not a bit of need for us to think
over that, Miss Carlyon; lots of us have
been wanting it for ages, anyway, ever since
the Carlham House girls started their patrol.
We're as keen as —as chillies ! "
Miss Carlyon laughed.
** Tm so glad you feel like that,” she said,
with satisfaction, ** because I think this is a
particularly good time to begin, when we've
just been joined by a veteran Guide, as it were,
who can tell us all about it. Do you realise
how lucky we are in that way, girls ; it gives
us such a good start to have someone who
knows all the ropes, doesn't it ? ”
As she spoke, the Headmistress turned
towards Rae with a smile and a nod.
“ They wrote to me from the school at
Folkestone, you know, when you came here,”


she said. “ Your Headmistress there told
me what a very keen Guide you were, and how
many badges you*d earned. So that you
will be a tremendous help in starting our
company here; better than any amount of
books and things, because you can tell us
just what happens, and how to set about it.
You see, even Miss Jackson and I are quite
ignorant; weVe never done any Guiding
ourselves.”
The buzz of excitement in the classroom
had died down, and some of the girls glanced
at Rae rather doubtfully. But, for once, she
was too excited and interested to notice. Her
cheeks were pink and her eyes very bright,
as she leant forward over her desk and spoke
quickly and eagerly.
“ Oh, I shall love to do anything I can to
help ! Fm most frightfully keen on Guiding,
and Tve been one for ages now—ever since
I was old enough to join up. And, even
before that, I was a Brownie. It's the most
topping fun in the world —camping and
everything, and nature study, and and cook-
ing, and all the other badges, you know. Tve
got heaps and heaps of books and mags ; I
brought them out, although I never much


thought I should want them. But 111 show
you—and my uniform—that's upstairs, too,
I was a patrol-leader in the Folkestone Com-
pany/'
“ And you'll certainly be a patrol-leader
here—our first! " Miss Carlyon said. “ Well,
I think it will be best, Rae, if we have a kind
of council of war —you and I and Miss Jackson
and Miss Hollyer; they will be captain and
lieutenant, I hope. Well talk over things,
and, in the meantime, will all those who want
to join the Guides put down their names on
the notice-board in the hall ? Then we shall
know how many patrols we can muster as a
start. I m so glad you all like the idea."
Outside in the hall, Miss Carlyon paused to .
speak to Miss Jackson.
I believe we've found just what was
needed to make Rae feel at home," she said.
** you see how interested and eager she
was at once? Yes; I'm sure it will be a
great success."
The Headmistress might have been a little
less sure if she could have been still in the
Classroom after she had gone away—in spirit,
that is. The door had hardly closed behind
her, when Rae turned to Wrennie and Sheila,


her two nearest neighbours, with the flush
of pleased excitement still on her face.
** Isn't that splendid ! " she cried. ** Fve
been so wishing that we could have Guides
here, and I know you'll all love it. It'll be
even better than in England, really; it's so
much more "
“ Wild and uncivilised," Sheila interrupted.
“ Oh, yes, our rough ways won't matter so
much in camp, will they ? "
44 I didn't say anything of the kind," poor
Rae protested, but again Sheila interrupted :
44 No ; but you meant it, and "
44 S-sh ! " Wrennie broke in hurriedly.
“ Here's Miss Selwyn."
The history lesson began, but Rae's cheeks
were still crimson, and not now with pleasure.
She saw that Sheila was angry, but she did
not quite understand why, or, at least, she
was only just beginning to grasp the reason.
But, anyhow, her pleasure in the Guide scheme
was quite spoilt for the moment, and, after
school, she went off to Miss Carlyon's room
for the conference very dejectedly, whilst
the other girls gathered round the board in
the hall.
There were no names written as yet on the


big sheet of paper headed 44 Guides.” It
was Wrennie, always anxious to keep the
peace, who first pulled out a pencil and broke
the rather uncomfortable silence.
*' Well, let's make a start,” she said cheer-
fully, scribbling her name. ** Come on,
Squealy 1 ”
“ I don't know that I'm going to put myself
down at all,” Sheila said sullenly. “ I'm
not at all sure that I want to be a Guide.”
** Why, Sheila ! ” The shrill voice of
Thyrza broke in surprisedly. 44 And you
told Miss Carlyon that you were so keen ! ”
** Tve changed my mind; I suppose I
may if I want to ? ” the Irish girl retorted.
“ And, anyway, Wrennie, you ought not to
have put your name at the top of the list;
somebody else goes there ! ”
** Why, do you mean —of course, you can
put yours over mine, Sheila,” Wrennie spoke
doubtfully, glancing at her friend, but Sheila
tossed her head.
** Oh, I didn't mean mine I ” she said, with
angry mockery. 44 You've forgotten that the
wonderful Rae comes first; that she's to teach
us all about it, and to Guide the Guides ! ”
** Oh, Sheila, Miss Carlyon didn't mean


exactly that/' Wrennie spoke uncomfortably*
44 Only, naturally, as Rae has been a Guide
before, and knows all about it "
44 Quite so ! All the same, if the rest of
you like to be bossed by Rae, I don't I And
I don't intend to stand it either* It will
spoil the whole thing, having her patronising
us and showing us exactly how to behave, and
what to do* Why should a new girl, only
just out from home, order about the whole
push of us ? "
44 I'm sure she won't; she isn't nearly as
bad as you try to make out, Sheila, only she
does know about Guides."
44 Let her ! Only she won't get me in her
patrol ! "
44 Well, but you needn't be ; you can be in
another patrol altogether ; there'll be four or
five, I expect," Wrennie persisted. 44 Come
on, Squealy, put down your name —Miss
Carlyon will think it so awfully funny if you
don't! "
The last argument carried more weight than
Sheila was inclined to confess* Sullenly,
and still scowling, she went forward and
scrawled her name, and the other girls crowded
now to follow her, for Sheila was both popular


and masterful, and, as Wrennie knew, if she
had kept out of it, the list of prospective
Guides would have been very short indeed.
There was a long tale of names now, and
Wrennie gave a sigh of relief as she turned to
Rita.
“ Fm glad that's settled," she said.
Meanwhile, in Miss Carlyon's study the
Headmistress had found Rae rather disap-
pointingly silent, after her keenness of a
few hours before. She answered all the
questions asked, she showed her uniform, and
the books and magazines ; but her eagerness
seemed to have gone, and when it came to the
question of the formation of patrols, she
suddenly spoke, in an awkward, hesitating
way.
4t Please, Miss Carlyon, I —l don't think
Sheila and I had better be in the same patrol.
I —l don't think she'd like it. And —and
couldn't she be a leader ? That would be
much the best way. Only, don't tell her
that I said so."
“ I see," the Headmistress spoke slowly, in
the way which meant that she really did see
and understand, and her brown eyes looked
steadily for an instant at Rae's flushed, down-


cast face. “ Yes, I daresay you're right,
Rae," she added briskly. 44 Sheila ought to
make a very good patrol-leader, too, once
she has learnt something about it. But it
all depends on how many have put down their
names, of course. Let us go and look at the
list, Miss Jackson, and, in the meantime,
Rae, just slip into your uniform. I want you
to act as a kind of walking advertisement —a
recruiting sergeant."
An examination of the list showed that there
were enough names to make up four full
patrols, and Miss Carlyon called the prospective
Guides round her to discuss further details.
44 The patrols must have names," she said.
“ Who has any suggestions ? "
It appeared that everyone had, and Miss
Carlyon listened, writing down a name now
and then.
44 I think that these are the brightest ideas,"
she said at last; 44 and here is a rough scheme
of how the patrols might be made up. The
Bunyip Patrol—leader, Rae, with Wrennie,
Rita, Joanna, and Betty; the Kookaburra
Patrol—Sheila as leader, with Yetta,
Mavis and Katharine. And the other two
patrols shall be the Waratah and the Wattle,
49 d


with Connie and Hetty as leaders, and the
rest divided ; but we can settle that exactly
later. Now, how does that strike you ail ? "
From the murmur of agreement, the plan
seemed to give satisfaction. Even Sheila,
when her name was announced as a patrol-
leader, looked less disconten ed, and came
forward with the older girls to discuss matters.
It is true when Rae reappeared, very smart
and trim in her Guide uniform, and causing
quite a sensation, that Sheila frowned again,
and stood apart whilst the rest crowded round
to examine the stars, the ribbons, and the
clustered badges on Rae s sleeve.
But the others were too interested to notice
her absence ; everybody was wanting to know
at once what the various signs meant the
gridiron, and the flower, and all the rest.
“ That's the Housewifery, and that's First
Aid, and that's Signalling, and that's Swim-
ming," Rae explained. “ This is Nature
Study—no, not that one—that's my Patrol
Badge; we were the Sparrows."
44 Well, you're leader of the Bunyips now,"
Wrennie told her. “ You haven t heard yet;
and I'm in your patrol. And Sheila is a
leader, too ; hers is the Kookaburra Patrol.


“ Oh, I'm glad ! " Rae spoke with a sigh
of relief, and a grateful glance towards Miss
Carlyon. “ But whatever does Bunyip mean ?
And Kookaburra? Are they flowers, like
waratah and wattle ? "
“ Flowers ! ” Rita gave a gurgle of laughter.
“ You shouldn't show your ignorance like
that, Rae ! Don't give away your new chum-
miness, my child I No ; a kookaburra is a
laughing jackass—that's its native name ; and
a bunyip—well, it's just a bunyip ! "
44 That doesn't tell me anything ! " Rae
laughed.
44 It's a —well, a kind of spook or goblin —
it's another black-fellow word," Wrennie ex-
plained. 44 Bunyips live in the Bush, and
in water-holes, and they're sometimes good
and sometimes bad, and generally mischievous,
so I suppose that's why it's the name of our
patrol ! "
44 Rather a nice-sounding name, though—
the Bunyip Patrol! " Rae said, with satisfac-
tion. 44 But whatever will it be like on our
badges—has anybody ever seen one ? "
A lively discussion followed as to the
personal appearance of bunyips, which lasted
until the bell rang for dinner.
5i d 2


As all the girls trooped in, Wrennie found
herself beside Sheila, and caught at her arm.
** Don't you think it's all jolly well ar-
ranged, Squealy, about the Guides, I mean ? "
** And you're glad that you're not in my
lot, I suppose, like Rae," Sheila said. “ Oh,
it's no good pretending she didn't say so !
You heard her, just as well as I did."
“ Oh, dear ! " Wrennie withdrew her arm
with a despairing sigh. ** When you're de-
termined to take offence, Sheila, you'd do it
if —if an archangel was trying to please you ! "


CHAPTER V.
MYSTERIOUS MAVIS ♦
44 It's a funny place—Australia/' Rae spoke
meditatively. 44 All upside-down, and topsy-
turvy."
44 Well, of course, we are upside-down as
far as England goes," Rita laughed. 44 That
can't be helped."
44 Or England's upside-down to us; you
can just as well put it that way ! "
Sheila spoke with the touch of defiance
which was nearly always there, where Rae
was concerned. She invariably seemed on the
defensive with the English girl, although it
would be unfair to give the idea that she was
incessantly quarrelsome and disagreeable, for
Sheila's flashes of temper were very quickly
over, as a rule.


But, as Wrennie put it, the pair were like
oil and water ; they didn't mix, like the rest
of the school.
At present Sheila was quite determined that
her patrol of Guides, in smartness and quick-
ness and number of badges and stripes should
out-do the Bunyips, and the rivalry was really
rather a good thing for the welfare of the
company, so long as it did not become
jealousy.
44 I didn't really mean that sort of topsy-
turviness," Rae said. “ But your swans are
black, and you've got furry beasts with beaks
and webbed feet like ducks, and and Christ-
mas Day is often the hottest of the year !
That seems the funniest thing of all."
44 We think it funny that Christmas should
be the coldest day," Sheila said obstinately.
44 Oh, don't argue, you two ; it's too hot! "
groaned Rita. “ Besides, you won't get any-
where at all, however much you talk, because
you're both right! Look here, Rae, where
ought my Bunyip to go exactly here, or
there ? "
44 Like this." Rae took the navy-blue
drill jumper and showed the place for the
badge.


A dozen or more of the Ocean View girls
were sitting in the garden, sewing badges
and ribbons on to the new Guide uniforms,
which had only come from Hordern’s,
the big draper’s shop in Sydney, that very
day. ,
They intended to have a full-dress parade
that evening, and even Rita, who was more
hopelessly lazy than ever, where sewing
was concerned, had been working away
diligently.
« I do like our colours—yellow and green.
And the Bunyip is a beautiful fellow!"
Wrennie said, surveying the badge admiringly.
“ I like him much better than your jackass,
Sheila." . ,
“ Well, anyway, ours is a real kooka-
burra," Sheila remarked, looking at the
big-headed, kingfisher-like bird on her patrol
badge.
44 So's ours a real Bunyip, Rita said ag-
grievedly.
44 How do you know ? " Sheila demanded.
44 You've never seen one 1 "
“ I'm glad I haven't, if it's like that ! "
Wrennie laughed, holding up her jumper to
display the weird, emerald-green goblin.


which had been designed for the Bunyip
Patrol, huge-headed and thin-legged. “ P'raps
we shall see him when we're in camp ; he'll
most likely come out of the Bush to pay us
a visit."
** And he'll come to our tent, as we're his
patrol," Betty, a round-faced, cheerful-looking
small girl remarked contentedly.
44 You're welcome to him ! " Thyrza re-
torted. “ We'U have the kookaburras sitting
in a row and laughing to wake us in the morn-
ing, like alarum clocks I "
“ You're welcome to them!" Rita re-
marked, so fervently that the other girls
giggled, until Yetta broke in, hugging her
knees.
“ And now I'm going to begin collecting
badges for my arm as quickly as I can, until
I'm simply crusted with them by the end of
term ! "
** Some of them ought to be easy enough,"
said Sheila. ** Fire-lighting and camp-cook-
ing—we've always done those at picnics.
And swimming ; it oughtn't to be difficult for
any of us to pass that test, and get a frog to
stick on our arms ! "
44 Swimming—that reminds me ! " Thyrza


looked up from her stitching. ** What is the
matter with Mavis —does anyone know ? "
“ Yes ! " Impish-looking Yetta spoke ea-
gerly, still hugging her knees. ** It's the
funniest thing in the whole world/"
“ I don't see the fun of it, myself,"" Sheila
spoke with gloomy disgust. ** I thought she"d
be the very best of my patrol at swimming
and diving and riding, and—oh, everything I
You know that she could always beat any of
us at outdoor things, though she was never
much good at lessons. And now, she not
only says she isn"t going to swim or ride any
more, but she"s backed down from joining
the Guides altogether.""
“ Oh, Sheila, she hasn"t!"" Wrennie stared
in dismay.
** Has, though !"" The Irish girl nodded.
44 Says that she"s thought better of it, and
doesn't want to join after all. And I"ve got
to have that little idiot, Vi, in her place, who"s
no good at anything. Oh, you needn't * s-sh ! "
me, Wrennie ; Vi's not here. She's washing
her hair ; she always is washing it, or polishing
her nails, or something."
“ It really is the most mysterious thing;
I can't understand it at all," Wrennie shook


her head seriously, whilst her sewing lay
neglected in her lap. “ It's perfectly true
that Mavis has changed completely; she
isn't like the same girl at all. She doesn't
seem to want to do things with us ; she's not
keen on anything, as she used to be. And
I'd been so looking forward to her coming back
to school, after all this time ! "
44 Wasn't she here last term, then ? " Rae
asked, with interest.
“No ; she went for a long voyage in a
steam yacht all round the South Sea Islands,
with an uncle or something; she had a
lovely time, she says, although we haven't
really heard much about it. She doesn't
seem to want to talk about that, or anything
else."
44 I know what I believe it is," Thyrza
broke in eagerly. “ I've read about it in
books, heaps of times—school-stories, you
know."
“ Oh, your school-stories ! " Rita mocked.
“ You read such a lot of them that you don't
know what's real and what's pretence. And,
anyway, school stories are hardly ever a
bit like real schools. I never read any of
them."


** They are sometimes ; and how do you
know they're not if you don't read them ? "
Thyrza retorted. ** Anyhow, I expect that
Mavis had an illness whilst she was away, and
then the doctors found that she had a strained
heart or something, and mustn't ride or
swim or run, and —and that's why she
doesn't. Why, it happens over and over again,
in the books. I could show you heaps of
them."
** Well, it hasn't happened in real life this
time, anyhow," Sheila said decidedly. “ You
are perfectly wrong, Thyrza, so you may as
well get that romantic idea out of your
head."
** How do you know I'm wrong ? " Thyrza
demanded.
** Because I asked Mavis myself if it was
anything of the sort!" Sheila spoke with
exasperation. 44 I naturally wanted to get
to the bottom of it, so I asked her if she'd
promised anyone not to do things—if she'd
been ill or something. And she got quite
angry, and said : 4 No, she was perfectly well,
and she'd never been ill; she might ride and
swim if she chose —only she didn't choose.'
And when I tried to find out a bit more —I


thought I ought to, being patrol-leader, she
got angrier still, and told me to mind my own
business. So I did ; but yesterday she came
and said that she'd made up her mind, she
wouldn't be a Guide at all. Whatever I
argued made no difference ; she just won't.
So I shan't say any more about it to her;
we must leave it."
44 Tm not going to ! " Yetta's queer little
bright blue eyes were dancing. ** I mean to
find out the Mystery of Mavis. * Mystery
of Mavis I' Doesn't it sound like the name
of one of your most exciting school stories,
Thyrsa ? I hate mysteries, at least, I rather
love them in a way, but they're meant to be
found out! "
** Well, you won't find out this one; Tm
sure of that," Sheila said, fastening off a
thread, and holding up her Guide blouse
to look at it admiringly. ** Mavis is—oh,
dear, what are you * s-shing ' about again,
Wrennie ? "
“ S-sh I " Wrennie whispered. ** She's
coming—Mavis herself I "
Rae looked up with interest, as the new-
comer approached slowly across the grass,
walking with a ** sort of drawl," as Rae put


it to herself, in rather the same way as she
talked.
She liked the look of Mavis, although
she had not found her inclined to be friendly.
She was very tall, with a rather square face,
and deep-set grey eyes, and her light-brown
hair was shingled, like Rae's own —rather
an exception at Ocean View School, where
most of the girls still had long hair, in plaits
and horse-tails, and looked queerly old-fash-
ioned to Rae's English eyes.
Still moving in a slow, lazy way. Mavis
sat down in a basketwork chair, and looked
at the busy group of girls sitting here and
there on the lawn.
" Glad I haven't joined the Guides, if it
means such a lot of hard work," she said,
yawning.
"You used not to mind work. Mavis ! "
Wrennie retorted. ** Don't you remember our
camp at Coolan Beach last year, and how you
tired us all out ? Why, once you swam a mile
there and back to the Shag Rock, and then
raced Sheila another mile along the beach,
and won. And you were always up earliest
in the morning to make the fire,"
** Was I ? How energetic ! " Mavis yawned


again. “ I suppose I'm getting lazy in my
old age, then, because I’m certainly not going
in for such exertions any more. A book and
a chair and a dozen Parramatta oranges are
more my style nowadays."
** Then I think it's a frightful pity! "
Sheila burst out, all her resolutions of non-
interference broken down again, as she re-
membered her grievance as patrol-leader.
** When anyone can do things extra well—
why, they ought to, for —for the good of the
school/'
44 Hear our Sheila preaching I " Mavis still
spoke in the same lazy voice. 44 And I quite
agree —for other people, my dear child !
Fve come to the conclusion that I want rest,
myself—rest and peace; and I mean to have
it."
44 Nobody ought to talk like that —unless
they're ill; and you say you're not I " Sheila
flashed back.
“No ; I'm quite well, thank you —and
quite able to attend to my own business,"
Mavis drawled maddeningly.
Sheila turned away with a stamp of her
foot, and a smothered exclamation of im-
patience, and for almost the first time, Rae


thoroughly sympathised with her fellow patrol-
leader. For Mavis' manner was very pro-
voking indeed, there was no doubt about that j
and even more so was the little laugh with
which she closed her eyes and leant back in
the chair.
Rae found herself wondering, almost as
eagerly as Yetta, what the mystery was, and
what could have transformed Mavis into her
present state from the jolly girl whom all
the others talked about. She certainly looked
quite well; she seemed as strong as any girl
in the school, and far stronger than most, as
she leant back in her chair, her hands clasped
behind her brown head, and her legs in neat
brown stockings and shoes stretched out on
the grass in front of her.
It was very queer —very queer indeed. And
something even queerer, in a way, happened
a few minutes later.
Wrennie looked at her wrist-watch and
jumped up in a great hurry.
“ Mercy me ; we must fly !'' she cried.
“ The tea-bell will ring in two minutes, and
we've got to put all these things away and
wash our hands. Come on, all; I'll race
you to the door, Squealy ! "


In a moment all the girls were on their
feet, gathering together their belongings, and
running across the grass towards the house
in twos and threes.
Rae ran with the others, but, after a few
yards, she noticed that her shoe was
unfastened.
She knelt down on the grass to button it,
in the shade of a clump of pale-blue plum-
bago, and, as she did so, chanced to glance
back to where Mavis was still sitting in the
low cane chair.
The other girl had moved. She was not
leaning back now, but sat bent forward, staring
after the running, laughing groups of her
schoolfellows. And she did not look lazy
or careless any longer; her eyes were wide
open, her lips pressed tightly together, with
something in her face which made Rae turn
away her eyes and scramble hurriedly to her
feet.
She felt rather ashamed, almost as though
she had been eavesdropping or spying.
** And I certainly didn't mean to do that I ”
she thought, as she followed the others.
** Only—only—l wonder why Mavis looked
so desperately miserable when she was left


alone like that ? I don't understand a bit;
whatever can it mean ? "
But a few minutes later Mavis strolled into
the cloakroom, where they were washing
their hands, and spoke with the same drawl
as before.
“ Dear me ; what a rush ! You don't catch
me hurrying like that; I prefer to come
quietly."
Yes, it certainly was a mystery, Rae decided.


CHAPTER VL
THE HARBOUR PICNIC.
If I have given, or continue to give you the
idea that life at Ocean View School was made
up of Guiding and picnics and amusements
in general, that idea is an entirely wrong
one.
The girls at Ocean View did just as many
lessons, and did them just as well or just as
badly as at any other school in Great Britain
or Australia. Only it is not very interesting
to describe ordinary lessons, as I am sure you
will agree. You can fill in that part for your-
selves out of your own imaginations, on the
whole.
The lessons, at any rate, Rae found much
the same as at Folkestone, neither harder nor
easier. As she was fairly keen on work, they
did not bother her, and as Sheila hated it.


there was no rivalry between the pair in that
way, which was perhaps just as well.
Sheila certainly did not intend to exert
herself to beat Rae at French, or geography,
or history; her only grievance was that
Wrennie, who liked lessons and meant to be
a school-teacher, grew more and more friendly
with the English girl, when she discovered
that they both loved the English literature
lessons and history, and really looked for-
ward to them.
** They read history-books for pleasure ! ”
Sheila would say with scorn. 44 At least,
they pretend they do ! ''
A remark which led to fierce protests from
Wrennie and Rae.
“ It isn't pretence —history is much more
exciting and interesting than made-up stories/'
Wrennie declared. 44 You'd know, if you
tried it, Squealy ! "
At which Sheila tossed her red mane and
asserted that she did not intend to do that.
No ; Rae decided that lesson-time at school
must be pretty much the same both sides of
the world. It was playtime, and the every-
day doings which were, in many ways, so
different.
67 Ea


To begin with, not nearly so much time
was given to games as at her Folkestone
school; but that, as the others told her, was
partly because it was summer-time*
“ In the winter we have hockey and cricket
and basket-ball —at least, we have much more
of them/' Wrennie said, “ It's too hot
this term ; that's why we go in for swimming
and picnics and boating instead. Then, after
Christmas, in the holidays, there's generally
camping, and this year we shall have a Guide
camp, for a bit, anyway. Won't it be lovely ! "
“ It seems so funny I " Rae used the ex-
pression which she had often repeated before,
** It's November now, and at home, we'd be
playing hockey hard ; this time last year I
was in the second eleven."
** Well, I wouldn't care to play hockey
to-day," Wrennie remarked, glancing out
through the wide-open French windows, under
the green-and-white sun-blinds, to the garden
where the sunshine was simply dazzling.
“ Just fancy running in this heat —ugh ! "
** No; it isn't exactly a hockey day," Rae
agreed. ** Even the flowers look tired. I'd
like to get into a cold bath and soak."
** Well, you'll be able to, this afternoon —


into a cold harbour, anyway. Well have a
dinkum bathe after tea ; there's a lovely place
for it near where we're going to have the
picnic. You've not been there before, Rae,
right up the harbour ; it's beautiful. We take
the steamer part of the way, and then get
rowing-boats; then we shall make a fire on
the rocks and boil the water for tea; then
we sit about and bathe; then we "
But the rest of the programme was left
to Rae's imagination. The conversation had
taken place during a leisure five minutes, whilst
the French mistress had been called away;
now Madame Laurent came back, and called
them all to order with a smart rap of her
pencil on her desk.
“ Meeses—attend!" she said sharply, and
the murmur of French irregular verbs began
again.
But Rae found herself looking forward to
the picnic; although perhaps she would not
have done so, in the same way, if she had
known quite what an eventful one it was to
be. $
She knew Manly and the neighbourhood
quite well now, and she spent the walks in
diligent nature-studying, a very fascinating


game in a perfectly new country. Every-
thing was different —the flowers, the birds,
the beasts, the shells on the beach.
These last Rae loved, especially those on
the beach which edged the open sea, where
the gold and silver sands stretched away on
either side, and the waves rolled in, deep
blue, and broke into foaming surf. She was
quite excited when she found that the sands
were covered with tiny star-shaped shells;
and quite insulted when Sheila said that they
were as common as dirt.
** They're sweet, anyway," she protested,
and collected so many of them that the rest
of her dormitory complained that they found
shells everywhere —even in their hair-brushes.
So a picnic to a new part of the great
harbour would mean new sights of every
kind, and Rae felt quite excited when the
picnic preparations were being made and
everyone was rushing round collecting towels
and bathing-dresses.
They set off —more than thirty girls and a
couple of mistresses, Miss Jackson, the Guide
Captain, being one of them.
And it was Miss Jackson who started things
badly by putting Sheila into a bad temper at


the very beginning of the afternoon. For
Sheila was very devoted to the young mistress,
and it was perhaps only natural that she should
be a wee bit annoyed when she heard Rae
summoned to sit beside her on the boat.
" Come on, Rae ; I want to ask your advice—
to discuss lots of Guide things with you, and
I haven't had a minute for the last day or two/'
Miss Jackson cried. “ Sit down here; it
is a real comfort to have a veteran Guide
to fall back on, whilst we are such beginners.
Oh, Sheila, I quite forgot that you were to
sit by me j come on the other side of Rae,
won't you, my dear ? "
But Sheila wouldn't. Muttering something
about being sick of Guides, she stamped off
along the deck, and stood staring away over
the stern of the litde harbour steamer, with a
face like a black thunder-cloud.
Poor Wrennie's peace-making efforts were
worse than useless, and only met with a
fierce snub.
“ Can't you leave me alone ? I don't want
to talk to anybody. Sickening, the way that
girl pokes herself in where she s not
wanted."
“ Oh, Squealy, she didn't exactly poke,"


Wrennie protested loyally; “it was Miss
Jackson who called her ”
“ Well, if she hadn't been there, Miss
Jackson couldn't have done it," Sheila de-
clared angrily. “It never used to happen
before she came—that sort of thing I "
“ Of course it couldn't I "
** That's just what I say. It couldn't, and
it didn t, so what's the use of arguing about
it ? "
“ I'm not arguing ; but you do twist things
round in such a funny way that I can't find
the answer, although I know there is one,"
Wrennie sighed, and took herself off de-
jectedly.
Sheila was still stiff and dignified, and
unfriendly when they reached the disembark-
ing place, and set off again in a fleet of four
rowing-boats.
Wrennie and Rae, with Joanna, invariably
called John, a square-faced, black-haired girl,
rowed one of the boats, with Mavis for the
fourth, and Rae was surprised to see that
here, at any rate, the usual laziness of the
elder girl seemed to have disappeared.
She rowed strongly and well, and her eyes
and her whole face looked brighter, as they


sped in front of the other boats, taking the
lead.
“ You don't row badly at all, kid," she told
Rae approvingly. “ Most of the girls I've
seen out from England were idiots at it—
catching crabs half the time. But you pull
as well as a Sydneysider."
** Tm Mavis," Rae murmured, feeling
very flattered, for, besides being about eighteen
months older than herself, the mystery which
hung about Mavis made her seem very inter-
esting to the new girl. It would be exciting
to find out what that mystery was, and what
had changed her, Rae decided for the hun-
dredth time ; and, remembering that curious
glimpse which she had caught of a different
Mavis, longed more than ever to find out
the truth.
But as they landed on the beach of the
little bay where they were to picnic, all the
energy of Mavis seemed to disappear in a
moment.
She climbed lazily out of the boat, and
dawdled over the rocks, absolutely refusing
to help with the baskets, or to hurry to collect
wood for the camp fire.
“ No; you can do it yourselves, all you


energetic Guides and people/" she said, sub-
siding upon a smooth rock* “ There are
heaps of you, without me ; Fm going to rest! ""
“ Rest! I like that! You always are rest-
ing nowadays/" Rita protested, in an injured
voice* “ Miss Jackson, don"t you think Mavis
might come and help with the fire ? ""
“ There are plenty of us without; don"t
bother her if she doesn't want to/" Miss
Jackson answered surprisingly —Miss Jack-
son, who was so quick and energetic herself,
and always wanted everyone else to be the
same !
Rita subsided grumblingly, and went off
to gather firewood, whilst Mavis sat on her
rock and smiled placidly at the busy figures
scattering in every direction.
It was a beautiful place for a picnic, this
corner of Sydney Harbour. Trees grew right
down to the water's edge and straggled along
the little rocky fringe of beach —gum-trees,
nearly all of them, big, red-trunked stringy-
barks and blue-gums, all silvery, greeny-
grey, stem and leaves alike.
44 I do like gum-trees/" Rae said, staring
up into the queer, bare-looking boughs, from
which the narrow leaves hung down straight,


giving hardly any shade. ** They're so —
queer, somehow, like the ghosts of other
trees, but —yes, I like them."
u You'll get rather sick of them when you
see the real Bush," Wrennie remarked. ** Miles
and miles and miles with nothing but gums
everywhere you look. Sheila would hate to
hear me say that; she loves them, too ; but
I do like a place where there are other trees —
green trees, different trees, like the Botanical
Gardens. That's why I believe I should
like to go home, from what you say; it's not
all one kind —all oaks, or beeches, or elms, or
whatever you call the different sorts."
“ No," Rae agreed slowly. ** P'raps you're
right. Oh, well, I suppose both places are
nice, in their way. Oh, Wrennie, look!
I've found the most extraordinary flower ; I'm
sure it must be very rare —it looks just exactly
as though it had been cut out of grey
flannel!"
44 Then I suppose it's a flannel-flower,"
Wrennie remarked carelessly. 44 That's not
rare, Rae; they grow everywhere in the
Bush."
“ Well, I've never seen anything a bit like
it before, except that thing that grows in


Switzerland —what do you call it ? Oh, edel-
weiss ! " Rae gazed admiringly at the plant
which she held, which seemed exactly like
a large marguerite daisy, cut out of pale-grey
flannel, leaves and petals, stalks and buds*
“ I call it a wonderful flower, and Fm sure it
would be fearfully rare if it grew in England !
And I don't see what you're laughing at,
Wrennie ! "
“ You I " Wrennie exploded, 44 That's ex-
actly the sort of thing Sheila says, and expects
us not to laugh. But you must come and
collect wood and leave off gazing at that old
flannel-flower. I'm simply dying for tea.
No ; don't put your hand under the big logs :
there really might be snakes there, you
know,"
By the time Wrennie and Rae arrived at
the camping place with their bundle of wood,
a big pile had been collected, and a place for
the fire chosen between two rocks. Rae soon
saw that no English Guide would have any-
thing to teach an Australian one about fire-
making ; all the girls seemed to know exactly
how to set about it, and the camp-kettle was
soon set over a fine blaze.
I'm going to collect some oysters I "


Thyrza cried. ** There are lovely ones on
the rocks here, and we can cook them in the
hot ashes. Wouldn't it be fun if we had a
picnic with nothing to eat except what we
could find in the bush and on the rocks ? ”
** It might be fun, but I think you would be
starved/' Miss Jackson laughed; and Rae
agreed when she saw the tiny size of the
oysters which Thyrza collected from the
rocks with such pride. They certainly would
have made a poor tea without the addition
of the bread-and-butter and sandwiches and
hard-boiled eggs and cake and fruit which
were produced from the big baskets, with the
mugs and plates and spoons.
It was a very jolly picnic, perhaps the jollier
because it was all so new to Rae.
They sat under a huge tree, with polished,
shiny leaves, which really did give shade, and
which Miss Jackson said was called a Moreton
Bay fig. Behind them, bush covered the
steep slopes, and in front was the little strip
of rocky beach and the harbour, all shining and
blue in the brilliant sunshine, and stretching
away to the wooded shores of the opposite
side, which were here not very far away.
“ Yes, Sydney Harbour is a lovely place ! "


Rae suddenly said, and Miss Jackson laughed
at the rapturous expression on her face.
“ You're beginning to understand why we
Sydney people are always supposed to begin
a conversation by asking : 4 Have you seen
our harbour ?' " she said. 44 You think we've
a right to be proud of it ? "
44 Oh, I do ! " Rae said earnestly. 44 I'm
beginning to be frightfully proud of it myself,
because it belongs to the —to the British
Empire, you know, the same as I do."
“ Yes, I think that's the right sort of feeling,"
Miss Jackson agreed. 44 Just as we Australians
feel that London belongs to us ; just as we
still call England 4 home,' even though we've
never been there, and perhaps never shall."
44 It's funny, in a way, but nice," Rae said
thoughtfully, staring at the blue water, only
to be roused suddenly by a sharp pinch from
Yetta.
44 Leave off thinking great thoughts, and
come and bathe," she said grinning. 44 Or
do you want to be pinched again ? "
44 No, I don't, you little wretch ! Yetta, you
are exactly like a goblin when you grin like
that; or p'raps it's a real live bunyip I "
44 That's what I am —a bunyip I " Yetta


declared, and began to dance on the rocks,
making hideous faces and chanting :
Worra, worra , worra I
Warra , warra , warra I
Oh, wurra, wurra , wurra /
Burra-burra, worra-worra —woo I
Woolla-woolla, hoola-hoola , 600 /
O/z, wurra, wurra , woo /
Rae subsided upon her rock again, helpless
with laughter, as Yetta jumped up and down,
her hands dangling in front of her, like a
kangaroo’s paws, giving fearful howls, at
intervals, in her chant, and then suddenly
stopping as unexpectedly as she had begun.
** That’s what the black-fellows do at a
corroborree ; I heard them once at my uncle’s
run, up-country,” she remarked. ** And I’m
sure it’s what bunyips do, when they dance in
the night, like other fairies—oh, dear, Rae,
do come on ! You are wasting my time ! ”
They ran down to the rocks, where they
undressed in little clefts and caves. As she
did so, Rae congratulated herself.
“ It's a lucky thing that I learnt to swim
fairly decently at Folkestone, though not as
well as most of the others here. But if I


hadn't been able to do it at all, if Fd been
just a learner, I should have felt frightfully
out of it. They are just like fish in the water."
They were, and it was a pretty sight to see
the girls in their neat swimming-suits, plung-
ing in, diving from a rock fifty yards out, and
swimming in every way possible, under-
water, over-arm, and dog fashion.
Amongst them all, only Mavis was not in
the water. She had walked out along the
point which jutted far into the harbour, and
Rae noticed her, sitting on the rocks at the
extreme end, staring out across the harbour.
Somehow she felt that, if she could have
seen Mavis' face at this moment, it would
have had the same look upon it which she had
caught once before that day in the garden.
“ Hullo, Rae ! " Sheila's voice from the
water, clear and mocking, interrupted her.
** Aren't you coming in, or do you mean just
to paddle there at the edge ? Race me out
to the Shag Rock ? "
Rae flushed at the unmistakeable sneer in
Sheila's voice. The Irish girl was by far
the best swimmer in the school, and Rae
knew very well that, in spite of her Folkestone
teaching, she herself was almost the worst.


But she could swim, all the same, and
suddenly she resolved to accept the mocking
challenge.
“ All right,” she said coolly. “ I will.”
4t Oh, don't be an idiot, Rae ! ” said.
“ You can't possibly do it; you're not up to
it; that's why Sheila said it.”
“ I know; and that's why I mean to try,”
Rae answered, and ran out on to the smooth
ledge of rock, from which the others had been
diving.
The Shag Rock stuck up, sharp and grey,
far out in the harbour, a very long way off,
as it seemed to Rae.
“ But I will get there! ” she thought
doggedly, as she prepared to plunge. ** It
won't be a race, because, of course, I can't
possibly beat Sheila; but I'll get out to the
rock, just to show them that I'm not afraid,
somehow.”
She dived, came up gasping, and struck
out, with Sheila s head and bright, laughing
eyes just visible a yard or two away. The
Irish girl had recovered her temper, more or
less, but she had not been able to resist making
the challenge, which she believed Rae would
not dare to take up.


Well, as she had, it was her own fault;
she couldn't do it, and she'd only make herself
look silly ; but Sheila couldn't help that.
Side by side, they began the race, with
Sheila forging ahead each moment, and ex-
pecting every instant to hear Rae call out that
she gave up.
But Rae did nothing of the kind. She
swam on doggedly, slowly, steadily, deter-
mined to reach the rock somehow. And she
did —although it was nearly ten minutes
after Sheila had perched upon the top, watch-
ing her opponent, with rather more admiration
in spite of herself, than she really cared to
allow.
44 Hurry up ; the sun's baking me ! " she
cried, and then, as Rae dragged herself out
of the water, and sat gasping on the ledge, she
added, unwillingly : 44 I say, you've got some
grit. I never thought you'd do it."
44 I know you didn’t," Rae said rather
grimly. 44 You'd better not wait for me;
I shall rest a little before I start back."
“ Oh, I'll wait; you might want a bit of
help," Sheila spoke rather awkwardly, and
it was certainly the very last thing she should
have said to Rae in her present mood.


For the English girl was almost tired out,
and angry with herself for the tiredness.
She knew that very likely she might need
help, and, just for that reason, was determined
not to accept it from Sheila,
** I certainly shan't want anything of the
kind," she flashed back. ** And Td much
rather that you didn't stay ! "
** Oh, well, if you feel like that. I'll go at
once," Sheila declared angrily, and plunged
in, striking out landwards.
Rae, sitting on the sun-baked ledge, hugging
her knees, soon began to recover from her
exhaustion ; but, all the same, she was in
no great hurry to begin the long swim back.
All the girls had left the water now; she
could see them beginning to dress. Mavis
was still out on the point, and much nearer
to Rae herself than any of the others ; but
she, too, was moving now, walking slowly back
towards the beach.
Miss Jackson was waving and hailing, and
Rae waved back. She realised that if she
didn't start soon, a boat would be sent out
to her, and that would be too ignomin'ous!
No ; she must swim back, and she would set
off at once.
S3 Fz


She slipped into the water again, and began
swimming, slowly and doggedly as before.
If nothing had happened, Rae would pro-
bably have reached the shore in due course ;
she was strong, and the water was warm.
But something did happen, something which
first made its appearance as a triangular black
fin above the water, not a hundred yards from
where Rae was swimming. Rae saw it, and
knew what it meant.
One of the girls on the beach saw it, and
gave a wild cry of fear :
“ A shark I A shark ! ”


CHAPTER VII.
THE MYSTERY UNMYSTIFIED.
For a moment the shock of that cry, of
that sight, made Rae stop swimming. Her
legs and arms seemed to stiffen with fear, and
it was only the rush of water into her mouth
which brought her to her senses.
With a choking gasp, she began to swim
again, and, as she did so, remembered some-
thing which she had heard or read. If you
were attacked by a shark, the only thing to do
was to splash furiously; that sometimes
frightened the creature away.
Rae sent the water flying in all directions,
splashing desperately with feet and hands
alike, making as much fuss and noise as she
possibly could.
But perhaps a shark in Sydney Harbour


was too much accustomed to propellers and
paddle-wheels, to the noises made by steamers,
big and small, to be in the least scared by the
splashings of a mere schoolgirl, and a school-
girl, moreover, who was terribly tired and
terribly frightened.
In any case, Rae, glancing back over her
shoulder, saw that ghastly black fin still
moving along, and much closer now, only a
few yards away. Then it disappeared, and
she splashed harder than ever, and tried to
shout, but could only make a gasping, gurgling
sound.
The fin showed again, in a different direc-
tion now —between her and the shore. And
then, again, it shot towards her, and Rae felt
sick and dizzy with horror, whilst the pulses
in her head beat so fast that the thumpings
drowned all other sounds.
Otherwise, she would have heard shouts
from the shore, where some of the girls were
launching a boat, whilst others had dashed
into the water again, dressed or half-dressed,
as they were.
Amongst these, Sheila was the first; she
was striking out into the harbour, swiftly and
strongly, but Rae was a long way out, and


Sheila, like all the others, had already tired
herself with swimming, and soon began
to flag.
And the black fin was only a few yards
from Rae now.
Nobody from the shore could have saved
her, for all this happened in far less time,
really, than it takes me to write or you to read
it. But there was someone nearer to Rae
than the horrified girls on the beach —some-
one who had acted in a moment directly she
saw the danger.
Mavis, out on the point, and walking slowly
back towards the beach, had faced round
directly she heard the cries. In an instant
she saw the ominous fin, and realised what
had happened —what might happen.
In another moment she had pulled
off her shoes, and dived straight into the
water from the rocks on which she was
standing.
Her short, navy-blue cotton dress was
scarcely more clinging or cumbersome than a
bathing-suit, and, in any case, Mavis, once
the best swimmer at Ocean View, had plainly
not forgotten anything which she had ever
known in that way.


She drove through the water, as Thyrza
said afterwards, like a mad motor-boat, and
before poor Rae, desperate and exhausted,
realised what was happening, she heard a
clear voice close at hand.
“ Hold U P> Rae ; it's all right. Fm here I ”
Suddenly, between her and the black fin,
and quite near, she saw a sleek wet head, a
dripping, rosy-cheeked face, and a mouth
which was smiling—yes, actually smiling I
" Donrt try to get to the beach,” Mavis
ordered, steadily. "Make for the rocks of
the Point; it's no distance. Go on, this
instant; don’t look back ; it only wastes time
and breath. Get on to the rocks as quickly
as you can, and I’ll follow.”
Rae obeyed. The very thought of possible
rescue, when it had seemed so utterly hopeless
gave her fresh strength and courage. She
began to swim again, quite strongly, and saw
the grey-and-black rocks of the Point draw
nearer and nearer.
Only a few strokes now, and she would be
there; but suddenly her strength failed
again, and it seemed almost impossible to
make those strokes.
She must, though ; she could not let Mavis


down —Mavis, who had come to her rescue
so splendidly* She must keep on, moving her
arms —striking out her legs, although every-
thing was turning black. Ah ! Her foot
had touched something—the slippery surface
of an underwater rock; she clutched
wildly, and grasped a tuft of floating
seaweed,
In another instant she was scrambling and
crawling out of the water, up on to the dry,
sunbaked rocks of the Point, where she fell,
face downwards, and lay gasping and panting
for a moment.
Then Rae dragged herself up on to her
knees, to see how Mavis was faring, and was
just in time to watch the last act of the drama.
By this time, the boat from the beach had
nearly reached the spot, the girls at the oars
making as much noise as they could by beating
up the water with their blades.
But even this did not frighten the shark,
and the fin suddenly disappeared, as he
turned over and made another dart towards
Mavis.
She saw the big, grey-white body under the
water, and swerved aside just in time to avoid
the great fish, then changed the position by


swimming straight towards it herself, shouting
and splashing.
Such a direct attack seemed to puzzle and
startle the shark, for it darted away, and, at
that instant, the boat shot up, and two of the
girls shipped their oars and held out their
arms over the side to help Mavis in.
She swam to the stern, and began to climb
in, but her movements were rather slow and
awkward —too slow. The shark, only fright-
ened off for a moment, dashed back for one
more attempt, furious, no doubt, at the
thought that both its intended victims might
escape.
The black fin reappeared only a yard away ;
disappeared just when Mavis was almost in
the boat, with one foot hanging in the water
still. There was the gleam of a grey-white
body close to the surface. A horrified cry
from the girl who was helping Mavis, more
cries from the others in the boat, and Rae, out
there on the point, and seeing everything, gave
a little moan, and covered her eyes with her
hands.
She couldn't look again, oh, she couldn't!
It was too dreadful this thing which ha I
happened to Mavis, and all through her —Rae.


“ Oh, I wish it had been me, I wish it had
been me ! " poor Rae sobbed. ** I can't
bear it; I shall never forgive myself! Oh,
why didn't the shark kill me —or —or "
But she couldn't put it into words ; it was
too terrible even to think about, only one
couldn't think of anything else !
“ I can't stay here," Rae wiped her eyes
and struggled to her feet. “ It's cowardly,
hateful of me. It was all my fault, and —and
I must go back and face it; only —only I
wish my legs didn't feel as though they would
give way every second."
Somehow, she managed to drag herself
along, with her eyes fixed upon the boat, which
was very near to the beach now. She could
see Mavis in the stern ; just her head, with two
of the others close to her, leaning towards
her.
Now, they were close to the shore, pulling
up the boat, some of them jumping out,
others helping Mavis, half-lifting her ashore.
Mavis, who could not walk, who would
never be able to walk again, all through
Rae.
Tears, which she simply could not stop,
filled her eyes and ran down her wet cheeks


as she hurried along, stumbling, slipping, often
nearly falling.
She had reached the beach now, but a
high, jutting rock hid the others for a
moment.
She could just hear the buzz of voices and
then someone—someone laughing I It could
not be, surely; and then Rae realised that it
was Mavis' own laugh—the sound was un-
mistakeable.
“ Just what she would do! " poor Rae
thought, gulping back a sob. “ She's so
brave—she'd laugh at anything, even—even
She hurried on, came round the rock, right
into the middle of the groups of girls on the
little strip of beach. She heard Wrennie
call out:
** Oh, here's Rae ! I was just coming to
see if you wanted any help, old girl; you must
be pretty well done-up. I say, hullo ! Catch
hold of her, Thyr^a; she's going to fall."
For, all of a sudden, Rae's strength had
given way, and she sank in a damp, tumbled
heap on the rocks, with a singing in her ears
and a blackness in front of her eyes.
And, when the singing stopped and the


blackness went away, she was in quite another
place, lying on one of the picnic rugs, with
another wrapped round her, and faces every-
where.
Rae tried to speak to the one nearest her,
which happened to belong to Miss Jackson.
44 How —how did I get here ? " she asked.
44 We picked you up and carried you,"
Miss Jackson answered, in her kind, cheerful
voice. 44 You fainted for a few minutes,
and no wonder, poor child ! "
44 Oh, is that what fainting feels like ? I
Tve never done it before. It's —it's rather
horrid," Rae said shakily.
“ You'll be all right in a minute or two,
when you've been lying still for a little. And
we're making some hot tea for everybody,
and then everything will be all right ! " Miss
Jackson said cheerfully. 44 The only com-
fort is that nothing serious has happened ;
it might have been terrible."
The young mistress gave a little shiver, and
turned towards the crackling camp-fire. But
Rae was staring aftei her, with a look of utter
perplexity on her face.
“ But—but—oh, how can she say that ? "
she burst out. 44 Nothing serious happened,


everything all right, when when
** But it's quite true, old thing ! " Wrennie
spoke encouragingly. “ Your fainting was the
worst thing that's happened, really, and you'll
be quite all right in a minute or two."
“ The worst thing ! Oh, what's the good
of pretending ! I tell you —I tell you, I saw ! "
Rae burst out almost indignantly. “ I was
on the Point —I saw everything—the shark,
and —and how it bit off Mavis' foot ! Oh ! "
At the very remembrance, she hid her face
again, and, as she did so, heard, incredulously,
the sound of laughter—a little burst of giggling.
Rae looked up, straight into Mavis' face, as
the elder girl leant towards her.
But it was not Mavis who had laughed
this time; she looked sorry, even a little
ashamed.
“ I say, it's a shame ; I didn't realise that
you'd seen, and that you couldn't possibly
understand. Stop laughing, Yetta; let me
explain to her properly, poor old Rae. Listen,
what you saw happened, in a way, only it
doesn't matter "
** Not matter ? Your foot
44 No ; at least, it's only a question of a
few pounds," Mavis was laughing herself


now, “ because, well, you see, it was a false
one —artificial ”
** O-oh ! ” Rae could find no more to say;
she could only stare in amazement.
44 Yes, it's true, and I think Fve been rather
an idiot about it,” Mavis had turned pink ;
she went on speaking hurriedly. “ Making a
sort of mystery, I mean —not telling anyone
except Miss Carlyon, and asking her not to
let anybody else know. But, well, I didn't
want to be pitied ; I hated to feel that I
couldn't do things as well as I used to do.
It was just pride—silly pride ! ” * \
“It wasn't! Don't talk such rot, Mavis !
It was jolly plucky of you ! " A chorus came
from the girls round; but Mavis spoke
again emphatically.
“It wasn't; it was pride. Anyway, I
didn't tell —didn't explain that, when I was
on that tour with Uncle Ralph, I pricked my
foot on a poisonous thorn, and it got bad and
had to be taken off in hospital at Samoa.
It was pretty beastly at the time ; but, after-
wards, when I'd got an artificial foot, with
all the new sorts of springs and things, I
really didn't notice it much. But that was
why I didn't come back to school for so long.


I was getting used to it. And then I made up
my mind not to let anyone know, to pretend
that there wasn't anything the matter. I
hated so to think that I couldn't do things as
I used to."
“ Poor old Mavis " Rita began, and
Mavis flashed round upon her.
** Yes, that's just it I "
44 I'm sorry—l didn't mean " Rita
stammered, and reddened. 44 It's only that
I was sorry "
44 I know; and I was a beast to jump on
you," Mavis said. “ Only, that'tf exactly
what I mean. I didn't want you all to be
sorry for me, and I don't want it now. After
all, I can do a good many things, still; I
can ride and swim "
44 You certainly can I " Yetta said empha-
tically, and a little giggle ran round.
44 And when I've got a new foot in the
place of the one that old shark is trying to
digest, I'll use it more ; I'll show you all what
I can do. I'll even be a Guide, Sheila, if
you like; I wouldn't before, because I
suddenly remembered that, when we went
into camp, someone would be sure to find
out. But I don’t mind, now."


“ That’s fine ! ” Sheila declared, 44 It quite
spoilt the Guiding when you wouldn’t join in.”
“ All right, then; and there’s only one
thing I ask of all of you—don’t try pitying
me ! ” Mavis said.
“ Tea’s ready I ” Miss Jackson called from
the fire. “ Come and hand it round, some
of you ! ”
There was a general rush, and Mavis and
Rae were left alone. It was just the oppor-
tunity which the younger girl had been longing
for, and yet, somehow, it was frightfully difficult
to make the best of it now that it had come*
“ Mavis,” she spoke in a very low, shaky
voice, “ I know you’ll hate it; but—but I
must thank you for —for saving my life ”
“ You needn’t, and I do hate it. As if
anybody could have done anything else I It
wasn’t anything ”
“It was. And—and if you hadn’t lost
your foot, you would have, so —so it comes
to exactly the same,” Rae said.
“ A bit muddled, isn’t it ? ” Suddenly
Mavis turned, smiling, so that Rae couldn’t
help smiling back.
44 I s’pose it is,” she confessed. 44 Only
I’m so sorry for ”


44 Now I'' Mavis was still smiling, but
she frowned, too.
44 I don't mean for you ! ” Rae's voice was
quite indignant. 44 You're nothing to be
sorry for. Why—why, I know you'll be
perfecdy sick with me for saying it, and —and
I don't mean to be soppy, or anything; but
I think you're splendid —simply splendid 1 99


CHAPTER VIII.
THE LADY-BIRD.
This will be much the shortest chapter in
the story. It is only just to explain something
which happened to Rae, mostly because of
the shark, but partly because of the lady-bird,
which seems a funny thing to say, I suppose.
But it happened like this :
It was three days after the shark adventure,
but Rae still felt stupid and headachy and
tired ; only it couldn't have been proper tired-
ness, because, when she went to bed it was
ages before she could get to sleep, and, even
then, she had horrid dreams.
The weather was hotter than ever, too, and,
as Thyrza said, volcanoes were such a horribly
hot subject. Miss Streeter had been lecturing
on them during the geography class, and her
99 g s


voice went on and on, talking of Popacatapetl,
and Stromboli, and Hecla, until Rae felt that
she was getting them all mixed up together,
and the other girls were fidgeting and yawn-
ing, and even whispering.
Miss Streeter was much the strictest of all
the mistresses at Ocean View, but, somehow,
she never could make her classes attend.
Thyrza's desk was next to Rae's, and,
when she had whispered about the hotness
of volcanoes, she propped up the lid, and
began to watch something inside, now and
then poking at it with a pencil.
Rae felt too headachy to take much notice
at first, but presently she began to be interested.
“ What is it ? " she whispered.
** A lady-bird I " Thyrza whispered back.
** They're such funny beasts ; I'm making it
put up its paws and pray ! "
** Tve never seen a lady-bird do that,"
Rae was getting quite eager now. “ But I
love them ! I think they're darling little
things, although I rather hate it when they
split down the back and fly. We used to
race with them —make them run along pieces
of string. Is that a red or a yellow one ? "
“ Neither," Thyrza answered, still peering


in, with her whisper rather muffled inside the
desk. “ It's bright green/'
** Green ! But I've never seen a green
lady-bird ; I didn't know there was such a
thing. Perhaps it's an Australian kind. Do
let me look, Thyrza ! "
Rae edged along to Thyrza's side, and
peeped over her shoulder into the desk.
At first, she could see nothing but books and
rulers and pencils, and then
“ Ow ! " Rae exclaimed, and jerked back so
quickly that Thyrza, in her surprise, dropped
the lid of the desk with a slam.
** Whatever is the matter ? " she whispered
peevishly. “ You'll get us both into a row !
Fancy being frightened of a lady-bird ! "
Rae felt both ashamed and angry; but,
all the same, it was startling, when you ex-
pected a tiny beetle, to see a creature about
three times as big as a grasshopper, green and
long-legged, with great goggling eyes staring,
asdt stood up on its hind-legs and pawed at
her.
“ It's not a lady-bird! " she muttered
indignantly. “ I don't see the good of telling
me things that aren't true. Why, you might
as well say it's an elephant! "


44 It is a lady-bird ! " Thyrza's whisper
was shrill and angry, for she prided herself
on her knowledge of insects and birds.
“ Don't be silly ! " Rae spoke in a sharp
undertone. ** As if I didn't know a lady-
bird when I see it I "
44 You evidently don't. Ask any of the
others "
“ I shouldn't dream of making myself look
such an idiot. Why—why, a lady-bird's small
and round and red, with black spots on its
back, and "
44 That may be your sort; it isn't mine,"
Thyrza spoke in an irritatingly superior voice.
44 This is a real lady-bird ! "
44 It isn't I " Rae's voice was raised quite
loudly by now, and the other girls near were
turning to look. 44 I never heard anything
so idiotic in my life."
“ Here, Wrennie," Thyrza leaned forward
and pulled the other girl's sleeve. 44 Twizzle
round and look in my desk and tell Rae what
I've got there."
Wrennie obligingly obeyed, twisting herself
into a kind of acrobatic contortion in order to
peer into the desk, and returning to her own
place with a deft wriggle.


« Why, it's a lady-bird, of course,” she
said innocently. .
** There ! ” Thyrza spoke with triumph.
“ I told Rae so, and she simply wouldn't
believe me.”
** And I don't now! ” Rae's eyes were
scorching with tears ; but she blinked t-.em
back angrily. “ You're all the same, just
trying to make me look silly all time.
But I didn't think that Wrennie ”
Then, all of a sudden, she found that she
couldn't go on any more. There was a big
lump in her throat, and the tears were running
out of her eyes, in spite of all her efforts to
stop them, and she put her head on the desk,
sobbing and choking, and cried, and cried.
The girls stared at each other, half-amused,
half-dismayed, and, from the desk at the top
of the room came Miss Streeter s rather ugly.
harsh voice.
44 What is the matter ? What is all this
noise and talk ? Girls —girls, I won t have it i
I must insist on your attention ! Do you
hear me?”
She rapped with a ruler on the desk, and
then, as Rae's sobs continued, peered through
her spectacles, frowning.


Vvhat is it ? Tell me, one of you, at
once ! " she demanded.
Wrennie spoke, after a moment's hesitation.
It s only we we were arguing about
—about lady-birds," she said. “ That's all
Miss Streeter."
“ All I And Rae Raeburn is actually crying
over it I " Miss Streeter's voice expressed
great scorn. “ I never heard of anything so
childish and ridiculous in my life I Rae, leave
the classroom at once I Go upstairs to your
dormitory, and stay there until you can
control yourself."
Rae obeyed. Still sobbing desperately, and
clenching her soaked pocket-handkerchief in
both hands, she walked down the classroom
and out through the door and up the stairs.
In the dormitory she flung herself down upon
the bed, and went on crying—and crying.
It was nearly an hour later that, after a
timid knock on Miss Carlyon's door, Wrennie
went in, and stood beside the Headmistress,
with a very worried look on her face.
Please, Miss Carlyon, I rather wish you'd
come to Rae," she said. “ She doesn't seem
as though she could stop crying, and it's
all because a lady-bird is a lady-bird. And


that doesn't seem enough to cry about, does
it?"
Miss Carlyon did not laugh. She under-
stood the worry in Wrennie's brown eyes too
well for that. Instead, she got up at once
and spoke in a kind, cheerful way.
41 Of course. I'll come this minute."
She asked Wrennie a few questions as they
went up to the dormitory ; then sent her away
and went in to sit on the bed beside Rae.
Tve just come to see what's wrong, my
dear," she said. ** And try not to cry, be-
cause that will make your headache worse
than ever. I've told Wrennie to bring up some
tea; that's the remedy for everything in
Australia, isn't it ? "
" They said it was a lady-bird, and it wasn't,"
Rae choked, just because she had to find some
excuse for crying.
But Miss Carlyon did not seem to think
it was necessary.
** Well, you see, it's what Australians call
a lady-bird," she said. “ I don't believe we
have the real kind out here—the kind I
remember seeing in England. Our sort is
called a praying mantis in other parts of the
world, and a very amusing little beast it is ;


so, you see, you and the other girls were both
right, in a way. But the creature that's
upsetting you really is not as small as a lady-
bird, my dear ! "
“ What is it, then ? " Rae's sobs were
stopping at last, and she raised a very flushed,
wet face from the pillow.
“ A shark. That horrid adventure was
more of a shock to you than any of us thought
at the time, partly because you were brave
and didn't make a fuss. But it's the shark
which is making you feel so bad now, all the
same, and I'm sure Doctor Lowe will agree
with me, and give you something to make you
feel better."
Dr. Lowe did agree. He said that Rae was
to stay in bed for a few days, and read nothing
but story-books, and take a tonic. And then,
as the headache still went on, and the horrid
dreams, it was decided that the girl should
skip the rest of the term, and go to her people
until after Christmas.
For the heat, anyhow, was trying to a “ new
chum," and when you have a shark adventure
on the top of an Australian summer, and a
lady-bird—mantis on top of that, well, it is a
bit too much !


So Rae went home, and found that a topsy-
turvy Christmas could really be just as nice
as one which was right-side up. It was
lovely to see the new home at Worrabanda,
and mother and father and little Taddie.
Yes, the holidays were lovely, and she enjoyed
every day, but, all the same, she found herself
quite looking forward to the last two weeks
of them, which she was to spend at the
Guide’s camp before going back to school.
The camp was to be quite in the Bush, near
the big run which was owned by Sheila’s
father; indeed, Mr. O’Shea had lent them
the place for the camp, and was providing
everything they needed.
So Rae, as well as possible again, and quite
recovered from sharks and lady-birds, and
all such uncomfortable creatures, tidied up
her uniform, and polished the buttons, and
prepared enthusiastically to take up her duties
as leader of the Bunyip Patrol.


CHAPTER DC.
WALTZING MATILDA*
Once a jolly swagman, seated by a billabong,
Under the shade of a kulibar tree,
Sang, as he watched and waited till his billy
boiled : .
“ You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me!”
Chorus 1 ' Yetta stopped in her sing-
ing* stopped in her wild dance, and waved her
hands excitedly* “ Chorus—all together I
Come on 1 ”
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda!
You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me .
And he sang, as he watched and waited till his
billy boiled :
** ton'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me! ”


The voices of some thirty girls rose and
fell in the swinging, merry tune. The flames
of the blazing wood fire rose and fell, too,
lighting up their faces, throwing a dancing
red gleam on Yetta’s impish grin, as she
squatted on a tree-stump and began the next
verse.
Down came a jambok to drink of that billabong,
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed it
with glee ;
And he sang, as he stuffed that jambok in his
tuckabag :
** You'll come a-waltzing , Matilda, with me I"
Again the chorus, a good deal broken by
laughter, for Yetta was acting the song with
the most ridiculous gestures and grimaces.
Up rode a squatter, mounted on his thoroughbred ,
Up rode his troopers, one, two, three .
** Where's the jolly jambok you've got in your
tuckabag ?
“ You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me I "
After the shouted chorus, the singer dropped
her voice to a deep, mysterious note, and sang
slowly :


Up sprang the swagman, jumped into the hilla-
bong ;
“ You'll never catch me alive," says he .
And his ghost may be heard, as you pass by
that billahong :
44 You'll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me ! "
Very softly, in a kind of ghost of a voice,
Yetta sang the last chorus, and a kind of
delicious shiver ran round the circle of girls
as they repeated it, still whispering.
** Ugh ! " Rita shrugged her shoulders up,
and glanced over the left one towards the
line of the Bush. 44 You gave me the creeps,
Yetta. 'Specially as there is a haunted sort
of looking billabong the other side of that
ridge. I shan't dare to pass it, for fear of
meeting the 4 Waltzing Matilda ' spook I I
shouldn't have thought you could have made
that song really ghosty ! "
Yetta chuckled, as she always did after
any exploit of the kind.
44 I was imagining the ghost myself—that's
why," she explained, whilst Rae interrupted
with a practical question.
“ What is a billabong ? "
44 Oh, a water-hole —a pool—a creek —


anything of that sort/' Wrennie told her-
“ The black-fellows say that bunyips live
in them, so p'raps we shall find our bunyip in
the one over there, if we look," Yetta struck
in.
44 Well, you can look yourself; I shan't! "
Rita remarked. “ I don't like bunyips and
spooks and things."
“ I call that idiotic!" John pushed a
particularly large apple further into the red-
hot ashes, where it was baking. 44 You can't
not like things that there aren't, can you,
Rae?"
“ No ; I don't think you can," Rae answered
slowly, whilst the others laughed at John's
involved statement. ** Anyway, I'm sure
Guides ought not to be afraid of ghosts."
44 That's all very well! " Rita flushed and
spoke aggrievedly. 44 But heaps of clever
people believe in them, anyway, and you can't
say they don't! "
44 Oh, well," Rae never found argument
easy, but she stuck to her point doggedly.
44 I'm sure we oughtn't to ; and you can gener-
ally explain them, if you try, you know —
ghosts and things, I mean."
44 Oh, no doubt you can ! " Sheila remarked*.


from the further side of the fire, and Rae bit
her lip hard at the little sneer in the other
girl's voice.
She had determined not to quarrel with
Sheila whilst they were in camp ; but it was
rather difficult sometimes not to answer back,
when Sheila was in the mood, as Wrennie
described it, to 44 trail her coat," and rejoice
in a fight.
The Ocean View Guides had been in camp
for three days now, but this was their first
44 camp fire."
They had been very busy settling in,
and, by the end of each day, had been so
sleepy that they were glad to tumble into
their cots quite early.
Rae had found a good many differences
between an English and an Australian Camp
already. For one thing, you did not really
have to bother about the possibility of rain at
this time of year, which was a pleasant change
from Rae's last experience at home, in the
New Forest, when it had poured incessantly
for five days and nights, and the whole camp
had been flooded.
Then there were many more precautions to
take in pitching the tents, against snakes and


other insects and reptiles—not such a desirable
difference, this, in Rae's opinion.
But that, after all, was only a small matter,
and the country all round the camp was
lovely. It was not all dried up, like other
parts of the country, because a biggish river
ran through it, past the end of the garden of
Mr. O'Shea's house. That house, and the
little “ store," and three or four others, were
the only buildings for miles and miles and
miles, except here and there on the great
sheep-run, a “ boundary-man's " little hut.
Otherwise, there was nothing but bush —
flat stretches, covered with trees ; deep ra-
vines, where great tree-ferns grew, and enor-
mous scarlet lilies; where there were sandstone
caves, and all sorts of exciting places.
The camp was pitched in a kind of clearing
in the Bush, where tree-stumps showed how
the gums had been cleared away, and to
the north was a stretch of country which
was dried up, where the ground under the
trees was mostly sand, and the trees and bushes
themselves looked parched and withered in the
fierce sun.
The girls rarely went in that direction;
it was much less inviting than any other, and
IJ 3 H


there was plenty to do and see everywhere else.
Indeed, as in other camps, where Girl
Guides gather all the empire over, they always
seemed to be busy, from the moment when
the cooks turned sleepily out of bed to pre-
pare the breakfast, until they finished their
cocoa and biscuits and turned in—equally
sleepily —at night. There was something to
do all the time, and even the more unpleasant
tasks were nothing to grumble at, when every-
body shared in them, from Miss Jackson, the
Captain, down to little Phyllis Collins, of the
Waratah Patrol, who was only just old enough
to be a Guide at all, and ridiculously small.
even for her age.
Things were working wonderfully well on
the whole, and as Miss Jackson wrote to Miss
Carlyon—the rivalry between the Kookaburra
and Bunyip Patrols was not a bad thing,
really, so long as everyone kept their tempers !
And that, one of the patrol-leaders, at least,
was determined to do, as far as possible.
She remembered that determination now,
and laughed cheerfully.
“ Well, if any of us find a spook or a bunyip
in the billabong over there, I'll try to explain
it —that's a fair offer, isn't it ? "


“ We'll all try to explain it,” Wrennie
agreed. ** It will be an exciting sort of game.”
44 Only the bunyip's got to appear first,”
Yetta complained ; “ And I’m sure he won't!
Things like that never do when you want
them.”
“ Yetta —Thyrza ! ” It was Miss Jackson's
voice from the neighbourhood of the bath-
tent. 44 Aren't you on water-fatigue to-night ?
Because there won't be enough here to go
round I ”
Yetta jumped up, and Sheila with her.
“ I'll go instead of you, Thyrza,” she said.
“ Your foot isn't quite right where the thorn
was, is it ? And I rather want to speak to
Mrs. Cutts at the store, about that patch on
my shoe.”
The two set off, swinging a large bucket
between them and a smaller canvas one in
each free hand; but they were scarcely
beyond earshot of the group round the camp-
fire when Sheila spoke.
“ I'd got another reason for coming, Yetta,
besides those two I gave,” she said eagerly.
“ I thought so,” Yetta remarked, placidly.
“ I didn’t believe it was only kindness to
Thyrza's thorn.”
115 M*


44 You little pig ! That was quite true, as
well —only—Yetta, let’s make a bunyip ; dress
up or something, to take in Rae, and show her
that she can’t explain everything just because
she’s out from home.”
** H’m ! ” there was a light of interest in
Yetta’s eyes; but she spoke doubtfully.
44 Wouldn't it be rather —rather —well, a bit
low-down ? ”
“ Not a bit! Why should it be ? It’s only
a game, and you’re so splendid at dressing-up
and acting, and everything of that kind. It’ll
be very good for Rae, too ; teach her not to
be so clever. You must do it, Yetta ! ”
Yetta did not need much persuasion. It
was something which appealed to her im-
mensely, and she entered into the scheme
enthusiastically. The pair planned and dis-
cussed all the way to the store and all the
way back to the camp, and Sheila entirely
forgot to ask Mrs. Cutts about the patch on
her shoe.


CHAPTER X.
THE BUNYIP.
4i I wonder if Guy Fawkes and those sort
of people ever wanted to giggle when they
were doing conspiracies," Yetta remarked,
reflectively. 44 Because that's what I find
such a bother myself. I very nearly laughed
at tea when you were arranging with Rae to
come and look for the duck-bill this evening ;
I should have given everything away if I
hadn't pretended that it was only a choke
over a crumb ! "
44 Well, I'm sure she doesn't suspect any-
thing, so that's all right," Sheila said. 44 But
we'd better hurry up, Yetta; you've got to
get into your clothes, you know, and we want
to be all ready for her, just at sunset. That's
when the water-hole looks particularly bun-
yipy."


Yetta chuckled, and hugged herself with
her thin arms in a puckish way.
“ I ought to look a most awful creature
with the dress made of leaves and the green
paint on my face/' she remarked, in a satis-
fied way. ** And, at the last minute, I think
Fll just go into the water and come out all
dripping, exactly when Rae is bending over
to look for the duck-bill. Remember, youVe
got to be frightened, too ; she mustn’t guess
a bit that you know what I am.”
** She shan’t; you needn’t be afraid,” said
Sheila resolutely, and the pair proceeded on
their way through the thin strip of bush
towards the water-hole.
For three days Sheila and Yetta had been
conspiring together and completing their plans.
Now, everything was ready, and Rae —quite
ignorant of what was in store for her —had
caught at the suggestion that she should meet
them at the water-hole that evening.
** Do you think there’s really a chance that
we’ll see an or —ornith —whatever it is ? ” she
cried eagerly.
“ Duck-bill, we call it. Yes ; they’re rather
rare round here now, but Jack, the house-boy,
says that he’s seen one in the water-hole.


just about sunset* So I thought Td go and
hide in the bushes and watch for it, and it
struck me that you might like to come to ;
you're so keen on beasts and things.
** Oh, I would I ” Rae said earnestly. “ And
I think it was ripping of you to tell me, Sheila,
Then I’ll be at the water-hole at about six.”
** Right 1 ” Sheila nodded and turned away,
just a little uncomfortable and ashamed.
For Rae was so eager and pleased —so obviously
delighted that the other girl should seem to
want her company. It really was rather a
shame. But Sheila crushed down that feeling
resolutely.
“It isn’t. It’s only a joke, and, anyway,
it will be jolly good for Rae to be taKen in
and taken down a bit. She’s so sure that
she knows. Well, we’ll just see how she
explains away Yetta ! ”
The pair reached the water-hole and skirted
round the edge of it until they found the
hollow gum-trunk in which they had stowed
their stage-properties for the ** bunyip turn, as
Yetta called it. Hidden behind a big clump
of lantana bushes, they began to make ready,
whilst the sun sank lower and lower behind
the belt of bush.


About ten minutes later, Rae set out from
the camp, walking quickly, since she was
rather late. She did not want to keep Sheila
waiting ; she was very anxious to show herself
as ready as the other girl to be friendly, now
that she had made this suggestion.
“ I ho pe it means that she's really getting
to like me a bit, Rae thought. ** It would
make things ever so much nicer ; and I'm
sure Sheila could be most awfully jolly as a
friend, if she wanted to."
Rae reached the strip of bush— scattered
blue-gums, looking queer and rather ghostlike
in the evening light, bluey-green sarsaparilla
vines straggling underfoot, and here and there
clumps of crimson “ native roses," like small
red flames.
The water-hole was still hidden by trees,
but it was not far away when, suddenly,
Rae heard the quick patter of running feet
coming towards her, and, looking up, saw
a most extraordinary apparition.
A small figure, dressed in what seemed to
be leaves sewn together—a figure with a
green-streaked, comical face, tearing along
wildly, tripping over tree-trunks, sobbing,
gasping—a figure which ran straight up to


her and caught at her arm, crying, in what was
certainly Yetta's voice :
“ Don't go on ; come back ! It's there —
at the water-hole —the bunyip—and—and—
oh, it's horrible ! "
44 Whatever do you mean ? " Rae felt that
Yetta was shivering all over with fright, but
she had not time to question her further before
Sheila came bursting through the bushes,
white-faced, panting, and plainly nearly as
terrified as Yetta herself.
“ What is it ? " Rae asked. “ Whatever
have you seen ? "
“ The—the b-bunyip ! " Sheila tried to
steady her voice. “By the water-hole—the
most hideous thing you ever saw. And —and,
it made noises at us, and —and we ran away.
Anyone would have run away ! "
“ But I don't understand ! " Rae looked
puzzled. “ Why is Yetta all dressed up like
this?"
Sheila flushed, and did not answer ; but
Yetta had been too thoroughly frightened to
keep anything to herself.
“It was—it was for a joke," she sobbed.
Sheila thought of it. We made this dress
and greened my face, so's to pretend I was


a bunyip, and —and frighten you when you
came to look for the duck-bill. But, oh, dear,
Fd never have done it if Fd known what was
going to happen ; if Fd known there was a
real one in the water-hole ! Fm much more
frightened myself than you'd have been of me/'
Indeed, poor Yetta at that moment, with
the tears making gutters down her green-
stained face, was much more laughable than
alarming. But Rae was too busy making
up her own mind to be amused.
** Well, Fm going to see —to find out what
it is, if I can," she said with a gulp, and pre-
pared to walk on towards the water-hole.
“ Oh, you mustn't! " Yetta clung to her
arm. “ It's an awful thing; it might kill
you —you don't know what it's like."
** I must go. You see, I —l said I would ;
I promised Fd try to explain it, if anyone saw
anything at the water-hole, didn't I ? You
know the other night, when we were talking
about the billabong and 4 Waltzing Matilda.'
Well, I meant it, and it's no use backing down,
when —when something does turn up."
“ Oh, rot! " Sheila was both angry and
ashamed of herself by now, and that is a
mood which does not make one in a good


temper with other people. ** There's no sense
in your pretending to be so much braver than
the rest of us ! "
** Fm not/’ poor Rae said. “ I don't want
to go at all; but I've got to. I promised.
Anyway, Fve got to try."
** It's just swank ! " Sheila declared fiercely.
“It isn't. But it's no good talking about
it —only I'm going this minute." Rae was a
little angry herself now, and it helped her in
her resolution. “ You two can go back to
the camp, and say—say I'm coming soon,
when I've just been to the billabong."
And, disregarding Yetta's entreaties as com-
pletely as Sheila's mocking, angry laugh,
Rae walked steadily on towards the trees and
bushes which still hid the water-hole.
** I said I'd do it, and I must —Guides don't
make promises and then not try to keep them,
especially if they're patrol-leaders," she re-
peated to herself. ** But whatever Sheila may
think, it isn't just for swank, and —and I
certainly don't feel swanky ! I shall be able
to see the billabong in a second, and —and
whatever is there. Oh, dear, I do wish I'd
never said that I'd try to explain it I "
Rae's legs felt very shaky at the knees, her


heart seemed to be in her mouth and in her
shoes at one and the same moment, but she
did go on ; she did slip through the bushes
and stand at the edge of the water-hole.
The sun was just setting, and the sky on the
far side was all streaks of crimson and orange,
fiery and angry-looking, between the gum-
trees. The red was reflected in the pool,
too, except where bushes hung over and made
black shadows. It was always rather a dreary-
looking place, as Rita had said; but this
evening it looked more weird than ever, just
the place for uncanny creatures.
For a moment, Rae did not see anything, and
she gave a sigh of relief.
“ I do believe it’s gone,” she thought.
“ And if it isn't there, I can't try to explain
it! I'll just walk right round. Oh ! ” For
her thoughts had ended in a little gasp of
horror.
As she moved forward, she saw something
which had been hidden by a bush, something
crouching on the edge of the billabong, which
turned at the sound of her footsteps and looked
towards her.
It was the strangest, ugliest thing Rae had
ever seen or imagined.


Huge, staring eyes, something like a shape-
less, snoutlike mouth —a naked, hairless head,
swaying from side to side as the creature made
a growling, moaning sound, as it came drag-
ging and crawling towards Rae.
Oh, how much she wanted to turn and
run away —run as fast as she could, like Yetta
and Sheila! She did not know how she
could make herself stand still, and let it come
nearer and nearer —the bunyip.
“Itis a bunyip —it must be ! ” Rae thought*
** What’s the use of trying to explain it —I
couldn't —I couldn’t possibly. Oh, it's a
horrible, horrible thing ! I think I simply
must run away ! ”
But she didn’t. She stood still, shivering,
her teeth chattering, waiting, as it crawled
nearer, looking more and more frightful,
growling-
Then suddenly Rae saw some-
thing which she had not noticed before, and,
all of a sudden, she began to laugh, clinging to
a tree near by.
** Oh ! ” she gasped. 44 Jimmie, Ido believe
it’s you I I —l see the patch on your knickers.
Oh, you horrid little boy, how could you ?
And whatever is it you've got on ? "
The hideous creature stopped crawling and


sat up, like a cat. An aggrieved voice came
from inside the piglike mouth, rather
muffled.
44 I did flighten you ; you didn't know what
I was ! An' the uwers didn't eiver ; they
squealed, and they ranned away —they was
flightened. I founded it in a box, an' I've
been flightening everybody all day—muwer
and Susie and lots and lots and lots I On'y
daddy wasn't flightened, 'cause he knew.
He said he'd wore'd it hisself."
“ But what is it ? " Rae was kneeling now
beside the frightful creature, looking at it
closely. “ Why, Ido believe —yes —I've seen
one in the war museum —it's a gas-mask ! "
** Yes ! " The queer creature nodded its
head. “ That's what daddy said —he wore'd
it in the war, and I founded it in a box, and I
put it over my head, and I said : 4 Ur-rrr V
and muwer was flightened —yes, she was I
And you was flightened, too, wasn't you ? "
44 Indeed I was I " Rae confessed honestly,
still feeling in a queer state, between laughing
and crying. 44 I was very frightened indeed,
Jimmie, and I should never have guessed that
it was you, if I hadn't seen the blue patch
on your brown knickers, and remembered


your mother telling me that she put it there,
because she'd no other colour."
“ Fink Til take it off now," the apparition
remarked ; 44 it smells very nasty inside."
He removed the gas-mask and displayed
himself as a small lad of about eight years old,
with a comical, ugly face, and ruffled, sandy
hair. But Rae had seen him before, as his
real self, and had been rather attracted by the
appearance of Jimmie, the youngest child of
Mrs. Cutts, at the store.
44 Fink Fve flightened enough peoples,"
he said. 44 Til put it back in the box, an' go
an' have my supper. Is you going to have
your supper ? "
44 I hope so," Rae said. 44 Look here,
Jimmie ; come and have it with me, at the
camp, and bring the gas-mask to show the
Guides, won't you? I'm sure your mother
will let you ; we'll go and ask her, shall we ? "
Jimmie was delighted with the idea, and
pranced along proudly at Rae's side, after
the permission had been obtained, and they
set off to return to the camp.
And near the entrance they encountered a
search-party —Miss Jackson, Wrennie, Maisie,
and several of the others, with Sheila rather


in the background, and looking distinctly
ashamed.
** Oh, Rae, my dear, I'm very glad to see
you! " Miss Jackson exclaimed. ** I was
beginning to get rather bothered ; we were
coming to see "
“ Oh, Rae, did you see it; did you find the
bunyip ? " Yetta, still rather green-streaked,
pressed forward. "Was it there ? "
Rae nodded.
** Yes, I saw it; it was there," she said
gravely.
“ And —can you explain ? ” Yetta demanded.
Again Rae nodded.
** Here's the explanation," she said, and
pulled forward the grinning, round-faced
Jimmie.


CHAPTER XL
BUSHED,
Jimmie, the bunyip, was a great success.
The whole camp declared that he must be
adopted as their mascot, although the Bunyip
Patrol especially claimed him.
It really seemed as though an Australian
bunyip must be some relation to a Scotch
brownie, so useful did the small boy become
at fetching and carrying, running messages,
and even acting as cook's orderly.
A week passed very uneventfully—at least,
all the events were those peaceful, ordinary,
comfortable things, which are ever so much
more interesting and nice in real life than
when they are written down.
There were picnics and walks, camp-fires
and inspections, a long expedition in Mr,
O'Shea's motor-car and two lorries to the


coast, for surf bathing, with endless little duties
to fill in every odd corner of time.
Thyrza was engaged upon one of these tasks,
with many groans, on a certain afternoon, for
the sole and body, as she expressed it, of
one of her canvas shoes had parted company,
and she was trying to reunite them.
“ My fingers are getting just like sandpaper—
all pricked and rough/' she complained.
44 Wear a thimble," suggested Rita, who
was mending stockings in a languid way.
44 I should want them on every finger—one's
no good. I say, Rita, how Squealy snapped
your head off just now, only because you asked
her to do ambulance. Her temper wasn't
improved by the bunyip affair."
44 No wonder, poor dear I " Rita said pla-
cidly. ** I don't take any notice. It is an-
noying if you plan a practical joke on someone
else, and it turns round and bites you in
the face I That's what happened to Sheila,
and it'll take her some while to get over it,
I expect. Hullo, Rae, what's up ? You look
sort of distracted."
44 It's John and Betty," Rae said, throwing
herself down beside the others. ** They said
they'd be back to dinner for certain, and now


it's nearly tea-time. They were only going
to the waterfall, and it's not much more than
three miles away. What can have happened to
them ? "
“ Nothing. They'll be all right—don't
worry, Rae." Thyrza fastened off her thread
with a relieved sigh. 44 There —that's done I "
“ But I can't help worrying." Rae's fore-
head was puckered. ** You see. I’m their
patrol-leader, and I'm responsible for them.
And Miss Jackson won't be back until late
to-night, and so "
“ You feel you've got to take her place ! "
Sheila had joined the group. ** Really there's
no need. Australian Guides are quite capable
of looking after themselves, even if English
ones aren't."
Rae reddened, but she did not give in.
** Even the most capable people do have
accidents, Sheila," she persisted. 44 One of
them may have sprained her ankle, or they
might be lost, or "
44 Bitten by a snake ? " suggested Sheila,
mockingly.
44 Yes —or bitten by a snake ! " Rae threw
back her head defiantly. 44 Heaps of things
might have happened, and I shall just go on
131 i«


being worried till they come back* Why,
they Ve been gone more than six hours now.”
** Oh, you're like a hen with two ducklings ! ”
Sheila said contemptuously. 44 That was just
the mistake —making an outsider patrol-leader.
You can't be expected to know Australian
ways.''
Rae said no more. But she thought a great
deal, and, after tea, when the truants had
not appeared, she determined to act.
After all, she was responsible, however
much the others might laugh at her. She
could not possibly go to bed that night with-
out knowing what had become of John and
Betty, and soon it would be getting dark
if she did not hurry.
Most of the Guides had gone with Miss
Jackson for a long picnic tramp through the
Bush ; only she and Rita, Sheila and Thyrza
had been left, and it was no use consulting
them any more.
Rae picked up a stick and set off along the
track which led in the direction of the water-
fall. None of the others saw her go ; they
were busy making a new kind of camp-oven.
Very likely they would never know; she
might meet the wanderers quite soon.


At first the track was fairly plain, and Rae
had felt pretty sure that she knew the way.
After walking for half-an-hour, she was less
sure ; after three-quarters of an hour had
passed she was not sure at all. That was the
worst of the Bush ; it all looked the same ;
just gums and gums and gums, going away into
the distance on all sides. And the track was
so faint now that Rae had an uneasy suspicion
that it might not be a track at all.
** It's no good getting flurried," Rae spoke
to herself aloud, because it made the bush-
loneliness seem less lonely. “ What was it
we learnt about the things to do, if you think
you're lost ? Oh, I know! First, you sit
down and you think, quietly."
Rae seated herself on a convenient stump,
and tried to carry out the second part of the
programme —thinking. But no useful thoughts,
quiet, or otherwise, seemed to come into
her mind; it was all just mixed up and
muddled.
Then, when at last she stood up again, the
girl found that she did not even know which
way she had come. In every direction the
Bush looked precisely the same —just gums,
and gums and gums. Only, in one place, there


was The sun shining between the branches,
and Rae gave a little exclamation of impatience.
“Of course, what a silly idiot I am ! I
ought to be ashamed of myself; and a Guide,
too ! The sun was on my left when I started
from camp, and I ought to keep on in a straight
line —this way. 11l blase the path, too;
I ought to have done it before. 11l leave
bits of paper from my notebook to find
the way back; one on this tree-stump —
there ! ”
Rae set off again with renewed vigour.
After all, what was the use of being a Guide
if you couldn't guide yourself! It was
splendid practice for her Pathfinder badge, and
that was one of her weakest subjects ; dad
always said that there must be a hollow where
her bump of locality should be.
** More than an hour since I left camp,"
Rae glanced at her wrist-watch. 44 Well, I
ought to be very near the waterfall now.
P'raps if I listen, I shall hear it."
She paused, with head raised. A very
long way off you could hear the cascade
dashing down, she remembered. It would
be a nice sort of sound, too; she really felt
most frightfully thirsty, Rae decided, licking


her lips at the very thought of the cool,
clear water.
And then, just as she was beginning to
walk on again, she stopped short, and stood
still, staring—staring at a tree-stump a few
yards away.
There was something on it —not a snake, nor
a scorpion, as you might have thought if you
had seen the girl's white face and wide,
frightened eyes. No; it was only just a
little scrap of white paper, torn from a note-
book —the paper which Rae herself had put
there, half-an-hour before.
* l IVe come back to where I sat when I
first thought I was lost,” Rae said, under her
breath. ** Tve just walked all the time in a
cirde, as they say lost people do. Tm exactly
as much lost now as I was then.”
It was a very terrifying thought, how ter-
rifying you cannot possibly know unless you
have been through it yourself. Rae knew
quite well that people were lost in the Bush ;
Mrs. O'Shea had told them some stories of
it, to warn the girls not to wander alone too
far from the camp —stories of “ bushed ”
swagmen, or tramps, who died of hunger and
thirst.


** And Fm beginning to be so frightfully
thirsty already/" poor Rae thought, ** My
throat feels all dried up, I s'pose I ought
to shout, though, all the same ; somebody
might hear me/"
Rae gave a very feeble “ Coo-ee," and
another, and another, thinking, all the time,
how Sheila would laugh at her calls.
“ She always says I haven't the least idea
how to do it properly, and I suppose I haven't/"
she thought ruefully, ** But I don't mind if
she does laugh, so long as someone hears
me,"
But no one did. Rae shouted and shouted
till she was hoarse —until her voice just went,
altogether, into a squeaky sort of whisper and
the only result was to make her thirstier than
before, and more hopeless.
** I suppose I've got to make up my mind
to be here all night," she thought, trying hard
to be brave about it, and peering round at
the shadows creeping between the grey-white
trunks of the trees, and closing in upon
her.
44 Then, when it's light again, p'raps I'll be
able to find my way. But —all night here I
It's a pretty horrible thought! Ido wish


the Bush wasn't such a lonely place; it
wouldn't be half so bad to spend a night in
an English wood ; it's so much more homely/'
The more Rae thought of it, the worse it
seemed. She dared not even sit down on
the ground, for fear of snakes and poisonous
ants, and all the other creatures that might
be there.
Yet she could not stand all night long, and
she dared not go on walking, since it might
be in precisely the wrong direction, besides
the danger of pits, or water-holes, when it
was really dark. And that wouldn't be very
long now.
There was a crackling sound from some
thickish undergrowth, and Rae's heart began
to beat quickly. A beast of some kind, and
a big one, from the noise. Were there fierce
wild beasts in Australia ? She could not
remember at the moment.
Yes, there was a head —a big head, with
long flapping ears, just visible above the
bushes.
44 A kangaroo ! A huge one ! " Rae thought.
44 An 4 old man,' they call them ; and Mr.
O'Shea said they were very dangerous, that
they could kick you to death. I wonder if


he'll go away without seeing me, if I stand
quite still,"
Rae stood motionless, stiff; but the creature
showed no sign of going away. Instead, the
head was thrown back, the mouth opened,
showing a double row of big teeth, and there
came from it, a loud sound :
44 Haw-haw ! Haw-haw ! "
44 Why, why " Poor Rae was thor-
roughly bewildered, 44 What on earth
Oh, it isn't a kangaroo at all 1 It's a donkey, a
little angel of a baby donkey ! "
For the creature had emerged from the
undergrowth and came trotting towards her
on its four absurd little feet. A shaggy,
adorable, baby donkey, there was no doubt
at all of that —a little beast, who was delighted
to see her, and who was plainly just as much
lost as Rae herself I
44 Because it can't be a wild one," the girl
thought. 44 At least, I don't think there's
such a thing in Australia, only I'm getting
so awfully mixed. Anyway, you're a perfect
little darling, and I don't mind anything so
much now that I've got you for company,
you pet! "
The little donkey rubbed its shaggy head


against her shoulder, and pushed its wet nose
into her hand, and seemed quite to agree.
“ P'raps it'll find the way to its home,"
Rae thought gratefully. 44 And take me with
it. Home, darling, home ! "
But the little donkey stared at her as if it
thought she had gone suddenly mad. When
Rae began to walk along, it only followed, it
did not try to lead, so she decided that it
would be better to stay where they were until
the morning, although it took time to persuade
the donkey to agree with her.
It wanted to wander about, and it would not
lie down, until suddenly it collapsed, just like
a toy, with four stiff legs, and lay on its side.
Rae cuddled down close beside it, with her
head on its shaggy side, and laughed to herself,
in spite of everything, when she thought what
a funny pair of Babes in the Wood they were !
** Still, it's ever so much better than being
alone," she thought. 44 Although I don't
believe I can ever possibly go to sleep. Ah ! "
Rae's thoughts had ended in a tremendous
yawn, and a very few minutes later she really
was asleep, to be wakened only by a bright
light shining on her face.
44 I s'pose it's morning," she thought,


blinking, still only half awake, ** Only—
Why I What is it ? Where am I? "
Something like a shaggy earthquake seemed
to be moving under her ; Rae sat up and
stared, and saw that the bright light was a
big motor-lamp, carried by a man. And the
man was Mr, O'Shea,
“ We've found you, then, my dear child ;
I'm thankful for that! " he said, in his big,
jolly voice, ** I had 'em all out searching,
directly they told me at the camp that you
were missing. And—hullo ! Why, Andy, if
she's not got the little moke as well i Well,
that is luck I Where did you find him, Rae ? "
“ I didn't really; we found each other/"
Rae said. ** Is he yours, Mr, O'Shea ? "
“ Yes; and a valuable little beggar, too,
I got his mother out from home last year,
and this youngster is a champion, I wouldn't
have lost him for worlds, and probably I
should if you hadn't kept him here. By
the morning, he'd have wandered miles and
miles away, and most likely got killed. I'm
grateful to you, my dear! And now the
sooner we get home the better ; it's not far,"
“ Oh, I thought it must be miles and miles'
and miles I " said Rae,


“No ; you're not more than half-a-mile
from the camp now, as a matter of fact," said
Mr. O'Shea, with a twinkle in his eyes.
44 But that's as much as ten miles, sure, if
you don't know the right way ! "
44 It's awfully silly, though," Rae muttered,
shamefacedly. “ And to have made you come
to look for me, and everything "
“ That's no matter, now that we've found
you both, so come along!"
Mr. O'Shea slipped his arm through Rae's
and the little party set off, with the donkey
trotting behind, and the two other men from
the Run, Andy and Tim, bringing up the
rear.
The light of the big motor-lamp shone on
the gum-trees; and then, in a very few
minutes, there was the row of rails which
bounded the camp space, and another row of
anxious, eager faces behind them.
** Oh, you've found her, then ! " Miss
Jackson cried, with great relief. ** What a
comfort! "
** And John and Betty; have you found
them, too ? " Rae asked eagerly.
** We never wanted finding," It was John's
voice, raised indignantly. ** We'd only gone


in the buggy with Andy, to wash the sheep ;
we weren’t lost ever ! ”
“ Oh, I didn’t know,” poor Rae said,
feeling very flat, although Mr. O’Shea came
to her rescue.
** Never mind ! How could you know that
these Australian brats are unloseable ! And,
anyway, she’s found something more valuable
than you and Betty, Miss John i She’s come
back like Little 80-peep—or was it Mary—who
had a lost lamb ? She’s found my donkey—or
the donkey found her ; she isn’t sure which ! ”
** Well, anyway, there were a pair of them ! ”
Sheila whispered to Yetta, so low that Rae
only just heard her. And, in any case, sore
and depressed as she felt, she rather agreed.


CHAPTER XII.
CAMP INSPECTION.
It was barely six o'clock in the morning,
but the whole of the Ocean View Guide
Company was already up and about, and as
busy as a whole hive of bees.
Indeed, before five, the cooks had been at
work; it would be such a tragedy if the fire
didn't light this morning, of all mornings.
The tents were already brailed up, and the
mattresses and bedding airing outside ; little
Phyllis Collins was scuttling about like a
distracted chicken, picking up tiny scraps of
paper and other untidiness ; Betty, the cap-
tain's orderly, was polishing Miss Jackson's
brown brogues vigorously, and the patrol-
leaders were doing a preliminary kit-inspec-
tion, with serious and frowning faces.
Jimmie, the bunyip, was as busy as any of


the Guides, scrubbing away at the dixies, and
making them shine like silver, protesting
vigorously when Rita, an overburdened cook,
came to take one from him.
** You'll black it all again if you puts it on
the fy-er! " he cried dolefully, clinging to
the handle.
** But I must, Jimmie ! " Rita explained.
** We can't boil water for tea without a dixie,
and I must have the lid to fry bacon in. Leave
go, that's a good boy ! "
** I've shined it and shined it —an' now you'll
black it all again I " wailed Jimmie, and re-
fused to be comforted until the resourceful
John produced a frying-pan so encrusted
with blackness that it had been cast aside as
hopeless.
“ You can't possibly clean this, Jimmie,"
she said, and the small boy trotted forward
and clutched the handle resolutely.
u I can ! " he said, and set to work vi-
gorously.
** He's rather like Michael Scott's demon,"
laughed Miss Jackson, coming up to the
fireside. ** You know —the old magician who
had an imp-servant and couldn't keep him
busy enough, so that the creature was always


saying : Give me some work to do, give
me some work to do ! ' That's a lovely fire,
Thyrza."
** I thought it was never going to burn
clear ! " Thyrza raised a crimson face. ** Just
fancy if the porridge was smoked this morn-
ing ! Do you think if we fry him four eggs
it will be enough, Captain, or had it better be
six ?
** I should think four would be plenty,
Thyrza," Miss Jackson said gravely. ** And
I doubt if he will eat as many as that —after
the porridge."
“ Fd rather be on the safe side, though,"
Thyrza was anxiously measuring out tea
into a muslin bag. ** Oh, dear, it's splendid
having him, of course, but I am glad that it
doesn't happen every day I "
** Thyrza I " Yetta's voice and face were
full of righteous indignation. ** Why, Fd
simply adore it if he was here always / "
** You're not cook," Thyrza rejoined gloom-
fly.
** No; but Fm colour party," Yetta re-
joined importantly. ** Ido hope there's going
to be a nice little wind so that it blows out, and
doesn't flop, you know. Oh, I must go and
*45 K


make sure that it's rolled properly ! Betty
did it last night, and she's so careless."
“ Anyone would think that the whole camp
depended on Yetta this morning, John re-
marked, making a neat pile of wood by the
side of the fireplace.
44 She feels like it. You see, her brother
was with him at the Dardanelles, and so she
sort of thinks he belongs to her. I believe
shell die if anything goes wrong," Rita said
gravely.
Clear and loud the captain's whisde rang
out.
44 Only fifteen minutes before the inspection
begins I " Miss Jackson cried, and there was
a rush of cooks to wash and tidy themselves,
whilst the other members of their patrols
rolled their bedding for them.
Even Miss Jackson herself looked rather
pink and excited, for this was really a very
important occasion for the Ocean View Guides.
It chanced that a very important personage
indeed had come to spend a couple of days
with Mr. O'Shea; General Sir Michael
Sullivan, who had commanded a division of
the Anzacs in the war, who had been in the
great Gallipoli landing, and won a V.C. there,
146


and who was, in fact, a real live hero, as Yetta
said emphatically.
And Mr. O'Shea had mentioned the Guide's
camp to the great man, and he had actually
asked if he might come and inspect them.
This morning the inspection was to take
place, and afterwards Sir Michael was to have
breakfast in the camp. As Thyrza said, it
was almost too much !
Punctually at half-past seven their visitor
appeared at the rails with Mr. O'Shea.
44 Oh ! " Yetta said with a little gasp, ** isn't
he splendid ! Just look ; he's put on uniform ;
I expect it's the very same uniform he wore at
Gallipoli. And, 100k —that dark red ribbon —
the one nearest the buttons —that's the V.C.! "
Yetta's voice had dropped to an awestruck
whisper; but there was distinct disappoint-
ment in Betty's face, as she glanced sideways.
44 Is it ? Oh, how dull! I thought the
V.C. was gorgeous-looking, you know —a
scarlet ribbon, and a great, huge, glittering
cross, all set with diamonds."
44 Of course it isn't, you silly! " Yetta's
voice was full of scorn. 44 They don't wear
the cross at all every day, and it's just bronze,
very plain-looking."
i 47 k*


“ How dull I" Betty repeated. “It ought
to be diamonds, to show how frightfully
brave they were, and ”
** S s s —sh ! " Yetta's whisper was as fierce
as a snake's hiss. “ Get ready ! It's colours."
The General and Miss Jackson had met and
shaken hands; they were standing talking;
and, try as they would, the girls could not keep
their eyes from moving in that direction.
Yes ; he looked just as he ought to look,
tall and grizzled, and broad-shouldered, with
beautifully-polished brown bools, and three
rows of coloured ribbons on his khaki tunic.
His eyes were very bright and blue under the
slouched brim of his felt hat. Yes ; Yetta
decided, with a little sigh of relief, he was
quite as nice as her much-older brother, Ted,
had always told her ; and wasn't it splendid
of him to come in uniform ?
“ If only I could do something to make
him notice me —to make him ask who I was,
and—and praise me, I'd just give anything ! "
Yetta thought, for Sir Michael had always been
her particular hero. “ I am glad that I m
doing colours to-day ; that's my chance. Oh,
now ! "
Yetta stiffened up her small figure, her little


impish face rather white under the dark-
blue hat. Straight and rigid she marched
forward to the flagstaff with the two others,
whilst Sir Michael and Miss Jackson stood
ready to salute the colours when they were
broken out.
Sharp and loud, Yetta gave the orders, and
felt quite pleased with the sound of her own
voice. She fastened the rolled colours to
the halliards, with fingers which felt very
cold and stiff, then began to pull.
The rolled flag ran up half-way, three-
quarters—and then the terrible thing hap-
pened. For it stuck, stuck and hung limply,
half unfurled, just as though at half-mast.
Yetta’s cheeks w r ere scarlet, as she tugged
and tugged, fiercely, furiously. But the flag
did not move ; it seemed as though an evil
imp had entered into it, just this morning of
all others I
Poor Yetta ! Her wish was being fulfilled,
she was doing something which Sir Michael
could not help noticing. Probably he would
ask who she was, but not in the way she had
hoped.
Miss Jackson made a movement forward,
then stood still, biting her lip. It would be


cruel to go to Yetta's help; it would make it
ail look worse.
Again Yetta tugged at the halliards, and
still the flag did not budge. She glanced up
at the hateful thing, her eyes bright with
anger, and then, before anyone could inter-
fere, she had darted forward, and was climbing
the pole, like a monkey.
All the girls gave a little gasp of amazement;
Sir Michael ejaculated : 14 By Jove ! ” ; Miss
Jackson gave a cry of ** Yetta ! ”
But the little girl took no notice at all.
She was climbing hand-over-hand, intent
only on one thing—to reach the flag. For-
tunately, Yetta was tiny and light, and the
flagstaff a good, stout one ; she came level
with the flag, leant out and hauled it in to her,
loosened the catch with one jerk, slid down
the pole, and caught at the halliards. Next
second the Union Jack broke out, Sir Michael
stood at the salute, and Miss Jackson's voice
rose, sweet and clear, leading all the Guides :
God Save our Gracious King . . .
The moment of excitement over, Yetta's
knees felt weak, and she longed above every-
thing to run away and hide. But before she
could even attempt to do so, Sir Michael w r as


coming towards her, looking tremendously big
and broad-shouldered.
He was going to reprove her, before every-
one, before all the Guides; that was what
inspecting generals did when anything went
wrong. ,
“ Oh, I don't think I can bear it! poor
Yetta thought; but managed to stand stiff
and straight, feeling very tiny and lonely.
If only she hadn't boasted beforehand.
And then the general was speaking ; but
his voice wasn't stern and fierce.
** That was as smart a bit of work as I ve
ever seen," he said. “No man I've known
could have climbed that pole quicker. Well
done, Guide. I should like to know your
name, to remember you by ! "
“ A-A-Arnold," Yetta stammered. “ Yetta
Arnold."
“ Arnold ? " Sir Michael spoke with eager
interest. “ Any relation to Ted Arnold—
Captain Arnold, who was with me at Galli-
poli ? "
44 Yes/' Yetta's heart beat in little jumps ;
44 he's —he's my big brother."
44 No wonder that you're quick and plucky,
then ! That brother of yours was one of the


finest soldiers Tve ever known—a splendid
fellow I Fm glad his little sister is worthy of
him ! ”
Sir Michael held out a big brown hand ;
Yetta found herself shaking it, and wonder-
ing if she was really beginning to float off her
feet and up into the air.
He shook hands with her —hard —and then
turned away to join Miss Jackson, leaving
the proudest and happiest of little Guides
standing there by the flagstaff.
The rest of the inspection was a great suc-
cess. Sir Michael praised everything, ad-
mired everything, and finally sat down to
breakfast, with a sigh of satisfaction.
44 I hope Tve earned it I ” he said, laughing,
44 for I feel as hungry as a schoolboy ! ”
The flushed, anxious cooks approached with
the porridge, and heaved a sigh of relief as
it was helped—unburnt, unlumpy, smooth —
just right.
44 Best porridge Tve tasted for years ! ”
Sir Michael declared. 44 And anyone can
tell by the smell what the eggs and bacon are
going to be i I couldn't have fried them
better myself, and I can tell you, Fm a bit of
an expert at the job I ”


44 What a relief! " Thyrza heaved a great
sigh as she and John raced back to the Are for
the tea dixie. ** I was simply praying that
that porridge wouldn't be burnt I Now there's
nothing more that can go wrong, is there ? "
"You never know ! " John remarked. ** It's
dangerous to count chickens ..."
44 Pooh ! " Thyrza scoffed. ** Not when
they are hatched already ! "
Carrying Jimmie's brightly-polished dixie,
they returned to the breakfast group, where
Thyrza filled the dipper, and poured it into
the general's mug; then gave a little gasp
of horror as she stared at the colourless
liquid.
44 Oh ! " she cried. 44 I —l've forgotten the
tea ! ”
44 No harm done," Sir Michael said cheer-
fully. 44 I've often done the same thing
myself! "
But, as the pair hurried back to the fire,
John remarked briefly :
44 That comes of reckoning chickens !"
Breakfast was over ; the inspection was
over; the general had departed, and the
happy, but exhausted Guides were left to
discuss it all.


** 00-ooh I "" Rae drew a long breath. ** It's
more tiring than a ten-mile walk I ""
** I feel exhausted 1"" Rita declared. “ I
shall need pounds of chocs, when the canteen
opens! ""
** He"s just splendid/" Yetta murmured.
** He"s written his name on that postcard I
had of him, and something else as well, some-
thing awfully nice about Ted —and me, al-
though I didn't deserve it/"
** You did; you were awfully smart and
nippy/" Thyrza said. “ All the same, I
stick to what I said before he came. I"m
glad it doesn"t happen every day !""


CHAPTER XIIL
THE BRICK-FIELDER.
That day of the general's visit was the
hottest Rae had ever known in her life.
Perhaps it was partly for that reason, and
partly owing to the exhaustion which followed
the early-morning inspection, that the Guides
of the Ocean View Camp were one and all
in extremely bad tempers by the time dinner-
time was reached.
“ I don't know what has come to you, really,
girls ! " poor Miss Jackson said in despair.
** You've done nothing but quarrel and fight,
just as though you weren't Guides at all,
who are supposed to be cheerful sort of
people ! "
“ It's no good," Sheila said gloomily, “ no-
body on this earth can smile and sing if
they're Guides twenty times over, with a


4 brick-fielder ' coming on* It always makes
one feel like killing oneself—or somebody
else*'"
44 What is a brick-fielder ? " Rae asked*
“ Wind from the north, full of hot sand
from the deserts there/' Thyrza explained
shortly* 44 You'll know, if it comes."
By the middle of the afternoon the 44 brick-
fielder " was blowing in good earnest, so
that all the air seemed hot and dry and burn-
ing, and filled with tiny sand-particles which
parched the throat and mouth. It was a
horrid feeling, and the only thing to do was
to lie in tents, with the flaps up, and long to
be at the South Pole, or anywhere cool*
Then, just before teatime, the wind dropped,
as quickly as it had come up, the air cleared,
and the sun, which had been showing through
a reddish mist, blazed out brilliantly once
more.
It was hot still, but not the same kind of
hotness, and the Ocean View girls felt dis-
tinctly more cheerful and peaceable when
tea was over.
44 Although I still want to kill something,"
Sheila remarked. 44 I know, we'll take those
empty lemon-squash bottles, and put them


up on stumps, and throw stones at them. I'm
sure that will do me lots of good —work off
the murderous feeling."
The others were always inclined to follow
Sheila's lead, and presently they had arranged
what she called a “ rifle-range," a whole row
of bottles at varying heights, and a place marked
out from which to ** fire."
44 And we'll collect piles of ammunition
before we start, and do it all properly,"
Sheila commanded. “ There mustn't be any
stones bigger than a peanut, and Rita shall
be marker and keep the score, because she
simply can't throw to save her life ! "
“ Oh, I like that! " Rita protested, whilst
Miss Jackson, who had been listening to the
plans, interrupted :
“ You may do it, if it's going to work off
the murderousness, and make you all better-
tempered," she said, laughing. ** As long as
you promise me to pick up all the broken
glass; it's such dangerous stuff to leave
about."
"Of course we will, Captain!" Sheila
assured her; and Miss Jackson, who was
tired herself, went off to rest.
And that is the small way in which the very


worst trouble at the camp began—the trouble
which might have been so serious that it does
not do to think of it.
The “ rifle range " was really a great suc-
cess, as organised by Sheila. Some of the
girls were quite good markswomen, and soon
the scores, as kept by Rita, were very close,
with Sheila, Mavis, Yetta, and Rae at the top.
The sport did not finish until all the bottles
were broken, and the last one eluded them
for a long time, until a lucky shot from Sheila
smashed it to fragments.
“ There ; Fve won ! " she cried. ** Oh,
sure, I feel much better now ! "
44 We'd better go and pick up the bits,"
Rae suggested. 44 It’s getting late."
44 There's no hurry ! " Sheila was swinging
lazily on a low bough. “ We'll do it all in
good time."
44 Well —we promised " Rae hesitated.
44 Oh, go yourself, then, if you're so hor-
ribly conscientious ! " Sheila said impatiently.
44 I do wish you wouldn't preach."
Rae did not answer; but it must be con-
fessed that she marched off rather aggressively
and began to gather up the glass.
44 I suppose we ought to, too " Rita


began, but sat down again at an impatient
movement from Sheila,
44 Let her do it, if she's so fearfully
good I " she declared. ** It'll save us the
trouble."
Wild horses would not have induced Rae
to ask for help again; she went on gathering
up the glass, until her back and her head
ached, and she felt indignant and aggrieved
with Sheila in the first place, and all the rest
of her companions as well.
44 It's simply rotten of them ! " she thought;
44 leaving it all to me, when we all promised
Miss Jackson, and when it was Sheila's own
idea, too ! But it's just like her —yes, I thought
so ! There they come, just when I've fin-
ished ! "
44 We —we've come to help, Rae," Rita spoke
in rather a shamefaced manner, as she ap-
proached, with Thyrza and John, and Sheila
dawdling along well behind.
“ Thanks ; but it's all finished," Rae de-
clared, her head in the air, and her tones very
stiff and cold.
“ Cheers ! " Sheila cried incorrigibly.
44 Thanks so much for taking it on. Then,
if it's all done, you don't want us ? "


** I don't/' Rae said curtly, and turned
towards the camp*
She did not intend to go on any longer,
having said that the job was finished* Besides,
it was, really; and her head was aching so
abominably, and she had made dozens and
dozens of journeys to the rubbish-pit* There
simply couldn't be any glass left
But there was. Lying there by the tree-
stumps and amongst the dry undergrowth
were several big pieces, glittering now in the
level sun —catching its rays* But the Guides
were all on their way back to camp, Rae well
in advance, and walking by herself, her hands
in the pockets of her jumper, a frown wrinkling
her forehead.
** Hullo, Rae," Miss Jackson glanced at
her ; ** you look very white."
** Fve got a perfectly beastly headache,"
Rae said shortly. “ It's just the heat; but
I think I'll go straight to bed, Miss Jackson,
if you don't mind."
“ Oh, what a pity ! I'm so sorry, my dear,
especially as I was just going to make what I
thought was a bright suggestion. It's be-
ginning to be so beautifully cool now, and I
thought we might all go for a walk along the


river by moonlight, and have a picnic supper.”
44 Oh—lovely ! ”
44 What a perfectly bonza idea ! ”
44 You really are an angel, Miss Jackie ! ”
44 I’m just beginning to feel pleasant again,”
this last from Sheila.
44 I'm glad you like the idea, girls, but ”
The captain glanced doubtfully at Rae. 44 I'm
afraid if your head's bad, Rae ”
44 I won't come, thank you; I’ll just go to
bed.”
44 I don't like leaving you ”
44 It doesn't matter a bit,” Rae said hastily.
44 It will be perfectly all right. I don't in the
least mind being left alone.”
44 Poor little martyr ! ” Sheila said, under
her breath, but Rae heard and stalked off to
her tent, simply boiling with anger internally.
44 She really is a beast! ” The girl struck
her pillow a fierce blow. 44 It's all her fault
that I got a headache at all, and now she's
doing her best to make out that I'm pretending,
just because I'm in a bad temper. And
p'raps Miss Jackson will believe it, and it's
nothing of the sort. My head is simply
jumping and jumping.”
Rae got to bed very quickly. When Miss
161 L


Jackson looked in a quarter-of-an-hour later,
she was lying with her back to the tent entrance,
and the sheet pulled up over her ears, breathing
heavily*
** She's asleep already—l'm so glad," the
captain said, moving away* “ It's the very
best thing for her headache; I expect she
will wake up, feeling quite all right* Don't
make a noise, girls, when we start; I don't
want to disturb Rae*"
But Rae was not asleep—only pretending.
She felt at that moment as though she
couldn't stand even Miss Jackson's questions
without crying or doing something equally
silly.
She waited until the last sounds of voices
and footsteps had died away, then turned on
her back and stared at the bit of camp which
she could see through the upside-down V of
the tent door.
The moon was rising; soon it would be
nearly as bright as daylight again*
** And I don't believe the moon in this
country is a bit like it is at home," Rae
thought, tossing from side to side. ** I'm
sure it's scorchy, like the sun ; it seems to me
it's getting hotter and hotter —at any rate.


inside here. Oh, dear, I think I'll get up and
go outside for a bit."
She pulled on her dressing-gown over her
pyjamas, and pattered out barefoot, then
remembered the possibility of biting insects,
and went back for her canvas shoes.
It certainly was cooler outside, and Rae
squatted upon the big tree-stump which
formed the captain's seat at camp fires, and
proceeded to enjoy herself thoroughly, think-
ing what a big grievance she had, and how
miserable she was I
Because it is rather nice to do that sometimes,
isn't it ? Only not if you go on too long, and
enjoy it too much.
** Not a single one of them cares about me
the tiniest bit in the -world," Rae thought
drearily. “ Otherwise, they wouldn't all have
gone away and left me alone in the camp—
Miss Jackson and Wrennie, and everyone.
Why, I might die whilst they were away;
my headache might have been sunstroke, or
brain fever, or something. How could they
know it wasn’t? And I'm sure it felt bad
enough for anything, even if it is a bit better
now. I hate being here; I'd like to run
away from the camp and school and every-
i 63 lz


thing; go back to mother and daddy and
Taddie. They love me, anyway, and nobody
else does/'
I don't know where Rae's misery would
have ended ; perhaps she really might have
come to the point of running away, for, once
one starts being miserable, it is very difficult
to stop.
The gum-trees looked grey and ghostish in
the moonlight; a bird cried somewhere in
the Bush so mournfully that it made Rae feel
inclined to cry.
And then, suddenly, as she sat there, staring
in front of her with her elbows on her knees
and her chin in her two palms, she saw some-
thing which made her start to her feet, and
stare away through the trees.


CHAPTER XIV,
THE BIG FIGHT.
At first sight, what Rae saw did not seem
so very startling.
It was just a twisting wreath of bluish smoke,
curling up through the trees ; then something
red and orange, forked and flickering, like
a snake's tongue.
That was all; but it was enough to make
Rae spring to her feet and forget all her own
miseries and grievances completely.
Fire ! And Rae had learnt, even in those
few weeks of camp life, what bush-fires mean
in Australia. She had heard stories; read
in the papers, for this had been a bad season
for them down Melbourne way.
Without waiting a second, Rae began to
run in the direction of that twirl of smoke,
that forking flame, which was rising steadily


now. It was just possible that it was a proper
camp-fire ; that some swagman was boiling
his billy there. Anyhow, she must find out
for certain.
She ran noiselessly over the dry, sandy
ground under the gum-trees, sloping to a
hollow —a slope which she had plodded up
and down ever so many times that very after-
noon. For it led to the place where they had
made their ** rifle range,” a kind of clearing,
with undergrowth thickly covering the ground
beyond, round the feet of high gum-trees,
trailing veils of moss.
By now, Rae knew quite well that this was
no harmless camp-fire; more senses than
sight told her that. There was a tang of
burning wood in the air, and a low crackling
sound, and then, suddenly, she mounted a
little hillock and saw plainly.
The undergrowth beyond the clearing was
on fire; the flames had just caught a tall,
stringy-bark gum, and were mounting it,
wreathing round it, higher—higher Even
as Rae watched, horror-struck, they seemed to
make a leap and gain the boughs of another
near by.
Those broken bottles had done their work


only too well; lying there, in the iast blaze
of the sun, they had acted as burning-glasses.
The dry twigs and moss near them had caught,
smouldered, crept inch by inch, finding at
first little to feed the fire, almost dying out,
then struggling on, until the tangle of under-
growth had been reached.
Once there, the flames blazed up furiously,
for everything was dry as tinder after the
long drought. It was not a very big fire yet,
but it was growing each moment, spreading,
even as Rae watched it.
It must be stopped; somehow it must be
stopped; and it was in the very worst place
possible, nearly a mile from any water, Rae
knew the only thing to be done, and she tore
a big bough from a tree and dashed forward,
right to the very edge of the fire.
She began beating at it with all her might;
but it had too strong a hold already for her
efforts to be of much use. All the time, she
was thinking, thinking how she could fetch
help,
Mr, and Mrs, O'Shea were away for a few
days ; they had motored over to the nearest
town with Sir Michael that afternoon, as
Rae knew. Of course, there would be a few


men about the house, and the Cutts at the
store, not many, but she must get them here
somehow.
The Guides might not be back for another
hour, or more, and by that time, at this rate,
the nre would have spread for miles.
Rae thought in jerks, whilst she beat at
the fire with the big bough until her arms
ached unbearably. The air was dry and
burning, sparks and charred wood were falling
all round her, and she knew, from the smell
of singeing, that her hair had been scorched.
But she couldn't stop to think about that.
Bang ! Bang ! Swish —swish ! Was she
doing any good at all ? The roaring and
crackling was louder, the fire was certainly
spreading; it had sprung past her, and a
tree was blazing between her and the camp.
Suddenly Rae realised, panic-stricken, that
she was almost surrounded by flames; if
she did not escape now, she might not be
able to at all. She made a wild dash for the
only gap that showed, got through, and began
to run at full speed in the direction of the
O'Shea's house and the store, both nearly a
mile away.
But by now the fire itself had given the


warning; before she had run half-way, Rae
met Cutts from the store, and Mrs. Cutts,
and three or four men, all coming at full
speed.
** My Colonial! Were you caught by it,
missie ? ” the storekeeper asked. “ Terrible
state you he in ! ”
44 No; I was only trying to put it out
before it got so big,” Rae explained. ** But I
couldn't, and it nearly caught me. Oh, do
hurry ! Perhaps you can stop it; it's worst
round the clear place beyond our camp.”
44 We'll do our best; but there aren't
many of us,” Cutts looked very grave. 44 And
it's all dry as bones ; what with the wind this
way and all, it'll be a mercy if the house is
saved. Come on, missus, we'll get on and
do what we can. You're as good as any man,
old girl.”
“ Yes, I'll come; but I don't half like leaving
that Jimmie,” Mrs. Cutts hesitated. 44 He's
such a young monkey; can't tell but what he
won't be up and out of bed ; he's given me
the slip that way, time and again, when I
haven't no more than turned my back for
a minute.”
44 I'll go to the store and look after Jimmie,”


Rae said eagerly* “ They're all out at the
camp, and I can't be much help at the fire.
Don't bother, Mrs* Cutts."
“ Well, now, that would be good of you,"
the storekeeper's wife said gratefully* “ I'll
feel ever so much more comfortable."
** All right—l'll go now," and Rae turned
and ran towards the little store*
The sky was all red now, and the roaring
of the fire could be heard quite plainly*
Rae wondered if poor little Jimmie had heard
it, and would be awake and frightened ; the
thought made her run faster, and she hurried
through the open door of the shop and on,
up the short staircase.
The door of the room where she knew
Jimmie slept was open, too, and Jimmie's
little cot, made of orange-boxes, was drawn
close to the window.
But Jimmie himself was not there !
“ Jimmie —Jimmie, where are you ? " Rae
called ; but there was no answer.
“ Jimmie, don't be naughty ! " she called
again* ** If you're hiding somewhere, come
out! "
Still not a sound; and Rae proceeded to
search the whole house* It did not take long ;


there were not many places in it where even a
small boy could hide. Soon there could be
no doubt what had happened; Jimmy had
given his mother —and Rae, too —the slip
once again.
But to-night was different from other nights,
when the small boy might have come to no
harm whatever, even if he wandered a little
way into the bush, and fell asleep, curled up,
in his sunny fashion, like some small animal.
If Jimmie had done that to-night! If he
was somewhere in the way of the fire. But
it did not do to think of such a thing.
“ Anyway, I must go and look at once,”
Rae decided. “ It's just possible I may be
able to find him; or he may be in some quite
safe place. Only I don’t think anywhere is
awfully safe to-night! Dear me, how the
fire is roaring, louder and louder I I wonder
when the others will be back —I wonder ”
But all Rae’s wonders came to a sudden
stop, with a kind of jerk. For, at that moment,
running along the narrow sandy track from
the store, she had come in sight of the camp
clearing, where the tents stood, here and there,
amongst the few scattered trees which had
been left standing, and the remains of stumps.


Away beyond was a great bank of fire and
smoke, and from that fireband, a cloud of
drifting vapour, all flecked with sparks, blew
straight down upon the camp itself, coming
nearer and nearer. One of the big trees at
the edge of the clearing was already in a
blaze ; in a few minutes there could be no
doubt that the tents would go, if nothing
was done.
And if the fire spread from tent to tent;
if it reached the trees on the farther side,
why, then, it would be no distance to the big
house, to the store, and the smaller buildings
round. It might all go.
In a moment Rae had forgotten Jimmie,
forgotten everything except that one thing
which must be done as quickly as possible.
Madly, she raced down the path to the camp
clearing.
She dashed across it to her own tent, on
the side nearest to the fire. Inside it, she
groped until she found her big knife on its
lanyard, and hung it round her neck; it
might be needed.
Then, quick as lightning, she loosened the
guy-ropes of the tent, running from one to
the other; in the fewest possible seconds it


collapsed, and lay flat, whilst Rae tore on to
the next.
Once they were down, the tents would be
no danger, but whilst they were up Ah !
A great, glowing cinder had fallen on the
roof of the captain’s tent, but before it could
spring into flame, Rae was upon it, beating
it down, crushing out the tiny flame which
would have been a great blaze in another
minute.
The ten was down —and the next. Then the
girl saw r that one on the farther side of the
clearing was smouldering, and dashed across
to put it out.
How long she was at the work, Rae never
knew; it seemed like hours —or minutes.
The big store-tent was the most difficult to
manage, since it would not fall quite flat;
the boxes and piled tins underneath made it
rise in lumps.
But Rae soused the canvas with water from
the filled pails which stood by, and ran off
to the next task.
And now all the tents were down, and there
was very little in the clearing for the flames
to feed upon. It might save the houses and
the gardens and the orchards —that strip of


bare ground; the fire might not be able to
jump across it.
Rae stood panting, her face and hands all
smoke-blackened, her hair scorched. And
then she saw figures running towards her,
and heard Miss Jackson's voice.
** Rae, what has happened ? Is the camp
burnt ? We saw the fire, and we hurried
back,"
** No; the tents are all right; Tve only
let them down so that they shouldn't catch,"
Rae explained breathlessly.
** Rae, how splendid of you! What a
mercy you were here ! But what can we do
now ; how can we help ? "
“ Look ! " Rae pointed ; ** it's beginning
to creep down that side of the clearing—toward
the water-hole. Couldn't we stop it there,
p'raps ? "
“ Yes; we'll make a chain from the water-
hole, with the canvas buckets. Where are
they ? Yes, over by the washing places.
Come on, girls—quick I "
Miss Jackson's voice was clear and quiet.
She had seen what to do, and knew how to get
to work. And all the Guides played up
bravely, forming a long chain, passing the


buckets quickly from hand to hand, filling
them at the water-hole. The fire, which was
only just beginning to get a hold in that
direction, had no encouragement, and it was
plain, in a very few minutes that the Guides
had it well in hand.
On the farther side, the few scattered trees
burnt fiercely; but there were not enough to
make it dangerous in that direction, Rae,
from where she stood, passing the buckets,
could see the humped outline of the store tent
—could see that the drooping tree which hung
above it was just beginning to blase. It
had been such a useful tree, too; they had
hung their larder on one of the branches.
And then Rae found herself staring at the
store-tent, peering through the smoke clouds
which drifted everywhere.
Was it just fancy ; was it only that her eyes
were inflamed and aching, or had she seen
something move ? Yes ; there it was again,
something which heaved and struggled under
the folds of canvas, trying to get out —trying
to escape.
Suddenly Rae realised what had happened,
Jimmie ! It was one of his favourite hiding-
places ; the little fellow had been discovered


again and again, curled up between the tins
of biscuits and the bags of potatoes and beans,
sometimes with a stolen handful of raisins
clutched in his chubby fingers*
That was where he had gone to-night; he
had crept into the store-tent, and Rae had
let it down upon him, all unknowing, whilst
he was still sound asleep. And now —now he
had wakened up, terrified, with the fire close
upon him.
Rae almost dropped the bucket which she
was holding at the moment. She thrust it
into Thyrza's hand and turned to run.
** Close up! ” she gasped. ** Take my
place, somebody—l've got to —got to ”
There was no time to waste in explanations.
In another second she was running at full
speed, stumbling, almost falling, racing with
the fire. Great flakes were falling from the
tree on to the canvas of the tent; only the
water which Rae had dashed upon it had
prevented it from catching already.
And the prisoner underneath was struggling
fiercely; as Rae came nearer, she could hear
his piteous sobs :
“Oh ! Fm flightened ! O-oh ! Get me
out I I can't get out I**


“ It's all right, Jimmie ; it's all right,
darling ! ” Rae cried. 44 I’m here ; ITI get
you out. Just wait one minute.”
But it was no easy matter. She could not
raise the canvas, and, even if she had been
able to do so, it would have been too dangerous,
since the water had dried, and, at any moment,
it might burst into flame.
The child was too terrified to help himself,
or even to understand what Rae told him to
do ; he was plunging about wildly, trying to
free himself, trying to escape, and only making
matters worse.
And then suddenly Rae remembered the
knife, which she had slung round her neck.
What a mercy. In another second she was
slashing a great hole in the canvas, not too
near to where Jimmie was.
It was fighting against time, and the fire,
for already part of the tent was smouldering.
But the hole was big enough now; Rae
thrust in her arm.
44 Here, Jimmie,” she cried ; 44 this way,
old boy ! Catch hold of my hand —that's
right! Now crawl along quick ; you’ll be
out in a minute ! ”
A small, dishevelled figure, Jimmie came
i 77 m


scrambling through the opening, and Rae
caught him up in her arms and ran ran
faster than she had ever run before, away from
the blazing tree, across to the water-hole, where
there was coolness and safety*
The other Guides, busy with their chain of
buckets, had not even noticed what was
happening.
It was not until Thyrza happened to glance
round that she gave a startled exclamation.
“ Why, Rae, what's happened to your hair ?''
she cried. ** It always was a bob, but now
it's more than a shingle —it's —it s an Eton
crop !"


CHAPTER XV,
SILLY SHEEP,
Nobody was hurt. No real harm was done.
Even in the camp, only the store-tent was
really damaged.
Rae's scorched-away hair, so comically short
that it was almost like that of a convict, was
the one serious loss, and even that, as she
philosophically remarked, would soon grow
again.
There was a burnt and blackened waste to
the north of the camp clearing, where the
ground was still hot and smouldering, that,
like Rae's head, would soon be grown over,
when the rain came.
It had been a great excitement, and it left
everyone feeling rather flat, and perhaps not
altogether so sorry as they might have been
*79 **


otherwise to think that, in four days more,
school began.
“ The fire ought to have happened on
the last day/' Yetta grumbled. 44 That would
have been such a splendid sort of end. As
it is, I'm sick of eating ashes, and they blow
into simply everything ! Now, there's noth-
ing more exciting to happen ; we shall only
just pack up and go."
“ There's the sheep," Rita suggested.
“ Sheep ! Do you call a flock of sheep
exciting ! " Rae wrinkled up her nose dis-
dainfully. 44 Why, they're the silliest crea-
tures in the world —and the dullest."
“ You wouldn't talk like that if you'd ever
seen flocks like father's," Sheila declared,
tossing her red mop. 44 They re the most
valuable sheep in the Colony, and there
are thousands and thousands and thousands
of them ! "
At the time Rae only thought that Sheila
was exaggerating, for the Irish girl, to tell
the truth, was rather apt to speak of thousands
when she meant hundreds.
But when, three days later, the whole
company of Guides walked up to the top of a
little hill, a mile from the camp, and saw the


sheep coming towards them across the plain,
driven by dogs, and by men on horseback,
Rae gave a gasp of amazement, and stood
staring.
“ Why —why —there seem to be millions I "
she cried.
It was rather a wonderful sight.
The great flocks were being brought from
all parts of the huge sheep-run for the shearing,
and from where the Guides stood, it looked
exactly as though the whole plain was moving
—surging in waves, for the ground and
animals were all about the same dusty, reddish
colour —woolly waves, noisy waves, for
the sheep bleated all the time in a peevish,
fretful way.
44 I expect they're thirsty, poor old things,"
Sheila said. “ They've been driven all day,
and it's so awfully hot."
44 The boundary men must be thirsty, too,"
Thyrza added. “ Just fancy riding in all
those clouds of dust; they're simply covered
with it."
44 Old Sam will be waiting for them at the
shack, before they get to the pens, with
great barrelfuls of cider ; I know he
always does," Sheila chuckled. ** And won t


they be glad of it! Look here, if we cut
down, and round by the steep bit above
die water-hole, we shall be in time to see
them go into the pens, and it's rather ex-
citing to watch/'
The others agreed eagerly, and the whole
party of Guides hurried off, taking a short
cut through a belt of bush skirting the edge
of the water-hole, and hastening up the
steep, narrow road which led from it to
higher ground.
This road was a kind of cutting, with steep
banks on either side overhanging the path,
and quite unclimbable. It ran straight down
to the water-hole, and, as the girls hurried
along, they knew that they would only just
be in time. The flocks must already be al-
most passing the top of the road; their
incessant bleating and crying could be
heard.
“ Quick, or we'll miss them ! " Yetta, who
had run on in advance, cried over her shoulder,
and the others began to run, too, talking and
laughing.
They reached the top, and crowded together
on a hillock —just in time.
The crowding, hustling sheep were already


beginning to cross the road-entrance, and
the riders and dogs were herding them towards
the great pens down in the hollow beyond.
** Oh, poor dears, don’t they look thirsty !
Yetta cried; for the sheep, seen close, were
a pathetic sight, all covered with red dust, and
with their tongues hanging pitifully from
their mouths.
Then, all in a minute, it had happened.
Perhaps the sheeps’ sense of smell, perhaps
some other instinct, told them that there
was water at hand.
In a second the leading creatures swerved,
and, before they could be stopped or headed
off, they were tearing down the steep road
between the high banks, with their com-
panions pressing after them.
The boundary riders shouted, the dogs
barked, but it was too late now to stop the
rush for the water. The sheep were mad
with thirst; somehow they knew that if
they ran that way they would be able to drink,
and, sheeplike, they followed their leaders
helter-skelter.
“ Oh, isn’t it exciting 1 ” Thyrza clapped
her hands. “ I’m rather glad, poor darlings !
They did look so frightfully thirsty.”
183


“ It's jolly serious, though/' Sheila, un-
derstanding the situation better, was frowning.
“ I'm afraid hundreds of them will be killed ;
they'll trample each other to death trying to
reach the water. Where one goes, all the
rest will follow, even if it's over the bodies of
the others, and "
A shrill cry from Wrennie interrupted
Sheila’s words.
** Miss Jackson —anyone ! Where's Rae ? "
Contradictory answers came quickly, jostling
each other.
“ I didn't see —I don't know ! Isn't she
here ? I thought I saw "
44 Oh, I remember now ! " It was little
Phyllis's voice, clear and shrill. 44 I saw
Rae just before Yetta called us to hurry
up. She'd stopped behind to pick up some
flowers; she'd climbed a little bit up the
bank."
44 Then she's there still —down the road ! "
Wrennie's face was white. 44 And the sheep
—«. be sheep, they'll run her down I She'll
be killed ? Oh, what shall we do ? "
44 We can't get down the road to her —
look! " Rita cried, and pointed desperately
towards the surging, bleating avalanche of


sheep which were pouring headlong down the
narrow passage, packed together, pressing
on each other, rearing up and pawing at each
other's backs, as more and more crushed on
them from behind.
The shouts of the men and the yelping dogs
seemed only to increase the rush, now that
it had once started.
“ We must try to get at her from above,"
Miss Jackson cried, and began to run along
the top of the steep embankment which
dropped down to the road.
The other Guides followed her; but one
of them was already far ahead, speeding
along, her hair flying out behind her like
flames.
Sheila had seen the danger before the
others, and acted first as a result. Already
she was beyond the struggling sheep in the
road below, and suddenly she came to a
standstill, and leant far out over the over-
hanging bank.
She had caught sight of Rae, standing in
the middle of the road, puzzled, bewildered
by the noise and shouts, not understanding
what had happened.
** It's the sheep!" Sheila called down.


“ They're rushing down the road; you can't
get up it! Climb the bank —quick—only a
few feet would do ! Oh, hurry ! "
But Rae shook her head desperately. At
this part of the road the sides rose almost sheer
for ten or twelve feet —smooth, polished rock,
which gave no foothold or handhold.
She tried to climb, but fell back, and, at
the third attempt twisted her foot and sub-
sided in the roadway.
And round the bend, only twenty yards
away, came the first of the sheep, panting,
pressing forward, stumbling under the weight
and pressure of those behind.
“ Get up ! " shouted Sheila. “ Run back
to the water-hole. It's the only chance now.
You'll be killed —you'll be trampled to death
if you don't."
Rae had already stumbled to her feet.
She began to limp down the road as fast as
she could, but not fast enough. In another
minute —in less than that —the sheep would
be on her.
As Sheila complained afterwards, there
simply wasn't any time to think, or she
wouldn't have done what she did.
But her one idea at that moment was


to reach the road —to head the sheep
off somehow, before Rae was trampled
down.
It was a drop of fully twenty feet from
where she crouched on the overhanging
edge, and there was no chance of
climbing—nothing to hold by—only a sheer
drop.
And Sheila dropped. She clung for a
moment to the edge, then let go, and dropped
full on to the backs of the leading sheep, as
they passed underneath.
It was a struggling, living, moving blanket
of wool which caught the girl and broke her
fall, so that she was not hurt. The sheep,
terrified out of their wits, stopped short for a
minute —just a minute —bleating wildly, their
eyes starting out of their heads.
Sheila was on her feet, facing them, her
arms outstretched, shouting, and they dared
not try to pass this strange creature who
had fallen upon them from the sky, fright-
ening them out of the few senses they
possessed.
** Get away, Rae, get away ! ” Sheila cried,
at the top of her voice ; but it was drowned
by the wild bleating of the sheep—by the


shouts and barkings from above, and by other
shouts from behind.
There was the quick clatter of hoofs, and
a man's voice :
44 Here, Miss Sheeley, get up behind me,
quick ! You’ll not be able to hold ’em any
longer—too much crush from behind ! Quick
now ! ”
44 Rae
” Sheila gasped.
44 She’s all right—Andy’s got her —he and
I got round in time, thanks to you stopping
’em just for that minute. We’ll be able to
keep ’em from rushing the water now —let
’em through slowly. All right, are ye ? ”
44 Yes,” Sheila spoke breathlessly. She had
swung herself up behind the horseman, cling-
ing to his belt.
The horse was pawing and snorting,
standing up out of the swirling tide of sheep,
which was flowing on now on either side
of them.
But the first wild rush had been stopped.
They were all coming rather more slowly
now, and the two or three men who by now
had reached the entrance of the road, and were
guarding the water-hole, would be able to
control them to some extent.


Sheila, mounted behind Ben, her eyes
bright with excitement, her hair in wildest
disorder, shouted across the flowing current
of sheep to Rae, mounted behind Andy, the
other boundary-man.
“ All right ? ”
“ Quite all right! ” Rae’s voice came back,
rather shaky. “My ankle’s nothing, just a
twist. But I’d never—l’d have been killed —
I couldn’t have got away, if—if Oh,
Sheila, you were splendid ! ”
44 Oh, do be quiet! ” Sheila shouted back,
her cheeks matching her hair, and Rae sub-
sided for the moment.
But she said all the same things—and more
—over again, a few hours later, when she and
Sheila were alone in the big, cool living-room
at the O’Shea’s.
Once safely out of the crush of sheep, and
standing rather shakily on solid earth again,
both the girls had found themselves queerly
dizzy and unsteady, and Sheila, in her wild
leap, had twisted a foot —to match Rae s,
as she remarked.
So there they were —established in two long
cane-chairs, side by side, with cold compresses
and huge glasses of iced lemon-squash, and


all the rest of the party having tea at the other
end of the house.
Perhaps Mrs. O'Shea had arranged things
on purpose.
lam not sure about that; but mothers
are clever people, and this one had seen
more than either Sheila or Rae knew,
since the Ocean View Guides had been in
camp.
** Sheila, I can't be quiet! I must say it
again! I simply must thank you! " Rae
said, rather shakily.
“ There isn't any need, or any reason;
and I don't deserve it," Sheila said gruffly,
and her face was hidden for a moment
between the rim of her big glass and the
masses of her hair. ** I've been a pig,
Rae, over and over again; ever since
we've been in camp, ever since you came to
Ocean View."
** So've I," Rae declared. “At least, I
am sure you wouldn't have been if I had
not."
** You weren't; it was just jealousy, I
s'pose," Sheila said honestly. ** Jealousy
over the Guides, especially, because you
knew more than I did, and I knew it! But


I won't be like that any more, truly I won't.
I —l haven't really enjoyed being piggish,
Rae ; I shall be awfully glad to stop."
“Do you mean ? " Rae spoke rather
breathlessly. “Do you really mean that you
would like to be friends, Sheila —particular
friends ? "
“ Why, of course, I would ! " Sheila said
earnestly. 44 I believe that's what I have
been wanting all the time, and I was horrid
because I knew it wouldn't be any good to
expect it, after having been horrid. Oh,
dear, how difficult it is to explain things
properly ! "
“ You have explained. And that's what I've
been wanting, too, all the time, Sheila, to
be friends with you. Much more than any
of the other girls."
44 Have you really ? Oh, I say " Sheila
turned and held out her hand, to find Rae's
outstretched over the space between the
chairs. And that handshake was the tight-
est and the longest that either of the two girls
ever remembered.
“ Good old Guides I " Sheila remarked.
44 I thought I hated you at first because
of them, but we wouldn't really have got


to know each other without the camp, would
we ? "
“ No* I shall always love the Bunyip
Patrol/' Rae sighed happily. “ It's been
a jolly camp, but it's going to be a jollier
term. Oh, Squealy, I'm glad that we're going
back to school to-morrow, now that we’re
friends."
THE END.
■ VTI
m s? a Axu.
Prime* hy The Classic Colour Press, Recusing


0




V


ZSBrwl
wmsEL i«>»>'. , smE^*■'miwwiiitw i>l li , M JW
---_ — _ ‘tMaKSk x . - •ffigrv — T-nirai l ■■ Wmm ■ fri rTi**
■*fe2S?ifcla* ■ smmk.&r .JaBSmWB **. |
41 m«m BK i ;B8
HI jp . TBiigHiiM^
mMJi itaL~
«n v jgf ..*■ ■ .pSfe -
< • BBP3.
•M till A **Ti ’.pM
r *
fsrw j gaffiS " ./ ’ M,, ,
jBr? It“Ljv * *■ ’„ S I; v-' I V-lv *|SS JSf frjs
»* 5ZS‘
Mffi?V,‘| yn 'VaM 4, «
Bi Jr .4 Hmf i Ryy[ ..■
BB » lijjljH ■- B& . : .jb* ;■ «*-;>•• ..vw3g!l=gi>- < v .-#^3gl£»#*#-
1 ‘ - - ; 1
bI
fc g l[h ' J iMi-flw*frftj *■*-;.' %. **,
■MWJBP* '*1
i * ri|W
Sl - ' -4 Jfy, jgj E >. *■'■■'■. ftfl I w|Bp-ra *■ gjBflBalj j9 7
B - '' ■ ■ B .. B B ■
- »f ** ■* m i-- *&*_» •£,”; : r ';. fc-* '* •■ ? ,, .?. •’ |ira
■ f ■ -i. ■ tm|# : ->■'"' •-•fiv •■’ is R ’?
JR
