

Jal. Wm. Gilbart F.R.L.
General Manager of the London & Westminster Bank.


THE
MORAL AND RELIGIOUS DUTIES
OF
PUBLIC COMPANIES.
By J. W. G[?] F.R.L.
“I implore the blessing of Divine Providence on our united efforts
to encourage the industry and increase the comforts of my people, and
to inculcate those Religious and Moral Principles which are the surest
foundation of our security and happiness.”
SPEECH FROM THE THRONE, AUGUST, 9, 1845,
"Property has its Duties as well as its Rights.”
THE LATE MR. DRUMMOND.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WATERLOW AND SON,
66, AND 67, LONDON WALL.
1846.


This Book is not published, but is designed chiefly for private
distribution among such of the writer’s friends ns arc in a position to
influence the conduct of public companies.
January Ist, 1846.


THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS DUTIES
OF PUBLIC COMPANIES.
This is the age of public companies: the principle of asso-
ciation is one of the most powerful agents of modern times;
whatever object we wish to accomplish—whether political or
commercial, literary or religious—the first step is to form a
society. Those joint-stock associations that invblve the outlay
of capital with a view to profit, are called public companies
and these form the subject of our present inquiries.
Public companies now occupy a distinguished place in our
social economy. We receive our education in schools and
colleges founded by public companies. We commence active
life by opening an account with a banking company. We in-
sure our lives and our property with an insurance company.
We avail ourselves of docks and harbours and bridges and
canals, constructed by public companies. One company paves
our streets, another supplies us with water, and a third en-
lightens us with gas. At home numerous luxuries are brought
within opr reach .by different companies. And if we wish to
travel, there are railway companies, and steam-boat companies,
and navigation companies, ready to whirl ns.to every part of the
earth. And when; after all this turmoil, we arrive at our jour-
end, cemetery companies wait to receive our remains, and
take charge of our bones.
a 3


The question that now claims our attention is, whether
these powerful companies ought to he regarded as moral agents ;
that is, whether they are capable of virtuous and vicious actions,
and, like individuals, are responsible to a superior power, who
will reward or punish them, according to their works.
In examining this question we shall propose the following
inquiries:—
First.—Ought public companies, like individuals, to be
regarded as moral agents, and therefore bound to perform moral
and religious duties ?
Second. —What are those moral and religious duties which,
as moral agents, public companies are bound to perform f
Third.—What are those rewards or punishments which may
be expected to follow the performance or non-performance of
those duties ?
First. —We inqune, ought public companies, like individuals,
to be regarded as moral agents, and therefore bound to perform
moral and religious duties ?
We assume, at the commencement of our inquiries, that
mankind, as individuals, are moral agents, having had laws laid
down for their government by a Superior Being, to whom they
are responsible for their actions. They who deny this proposi-
tion (if such there be) are not the persons for whose perusal
these pages are designed j and therefore we will not ask them to
accompany us any further in our inquiries.
Assuming that mankind are responsible, as individuals, we
propose to inquire whether public bodies, as such, are subject to
the same responsibility. And here we would suggest the follow-
ing considerations ;> —
: 1. Public companies are recognized as moral agents by the
laws of the country in which they are established.
Public companies have, by law, the same rights as indi-
viduals j their property is protected by the same laws as that of
individuals, Theft or fraud towards them is attended, with the
same punishment. They can sue and be sued in the same


courts of justice. The military and naval forces protect them
from external violence. They have the same commercial privi-
leges, and can buy and sell and get gain. The improvements in
the arts and sciences benefit them as well as individuals; and
whatever new laws are passed by the legislature confers upon
them the same benefits as upon individual citizens. Having the
same rights, they have necessarily the same duties as individuals.
Equality of privilege implies equality of moral obligation. Pro-
perty has its duties as well as its rights j and if the property
which to-day is in the hands of an individual is transferred to-
morrow into the possession of a thousand individuals, would it
not carry with it the same amount of moral obligation ? Would
not the possession of the property demand from the company
the same duties towards their servants, their fellow citizens,
their country, and their God, which it previously demanded from
the individual ? and would they not be equally bound to the
exercise of justice, kindness, benevolence, and patriotism? The
success of public companies is often at the expense of indi-
viduals. Ought they not, then, to be called upon to perform
the social duties of the classes they have annihilated ?. On these
principles the legislatures of all countries have imposed on
public companies the same duties as on individuals; and in case
of violations of its laws, have rendered them subject to the same
penalties. They have thus been recognized as moral agents.
2. Public companies are capable of sustaining many social
relations which are the foundation of moral duties.
The social relations of public companies are various. They
may be buyers or sellers—debtors or creditors —they may em-
ploy others or be employed themselves —they may he receivers
or hestowers of favor—they may be friends or enemies, neigh-
bours or strangers —they may be wealthy or indigent—in pros-
perity or adversity—they may he influential or otherwise —they
may he plaintiffs or defendants in a court of law, or be the
accusing or the accused party in a criminal court. Every
relationship implies a corresponding duty; and we contend that


public companies in any of these relative positions are bound to
perform the same duties which the same relations would impose
upon individuals.
If it were necessary to quote Scripture, to show that relation
implies corresponding duties, we might multiply quotations—
a few will suffice
Have we not all one Father ? Hath not one God created us ? Why do wc
deal treacherously, every man against his brother, a — A son honoureth
his father, and a servant his master. If then Ihe a father where is mine
honour? and if Ibe a master where is my fear? 6—lt is not for kings to
drink wine, nor for princes strong drink, o —lt was not an enemy that
reproached me, then I could have borne it; but it was thou, n man mine
equal, my guide, and my acquaintance, d —Thou shalt neither vex a stranger
nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt, e— Am I a Jew?
Thine own nation have delivered thee unto mo./ —Ye call me Master and Lord,
and ye say well, for so 1 am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed
your feet, ye also, ought to wash one another’s feet, g —There was a certain
creditor which had two debtors , the one owed five hundred pence and the
other fifty, and when they had nothing to pay ho frankly forgave them both.
Tell me, therefore, which of them will love him most? A—Shouldest not thou
also have had compassion on thy fellow serva7it, even ns I had pity on thee, i
—Which now of these three thinkest thou was neighbour to him that fell among
thieves? And he said, he that showed mercy on him/ —Love as brethren, k
—Sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commaudest me to be smitten
contrary to the law. I —‘What hast thou that thou didst not receive ? Now if
thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory ns if thou hadst not received it. m
If any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in an idol’s temple,
shall not the conscience of him which is weak be embolden to oat those
things which are offered to idols; and through thy knowledge shall the weak
brother perish 7 ni—Art thou a Master of Israel, and knowest not these
things? o —Thou that teaohest another, teachest not thou thyself?/—lf thou,
being a Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and not ns do the Jews,
why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews ? q
a Malaohl, 2; 10. I Malaohi, X; 6. e Proverbs, 31; 4. d Psalm 55; 12,13.
e Exodus, 22; 21. /John, 18; 35. /John, 13; 13, 14. h Luke, 7; 41, 42.
i Matthew, 18; 33. j Luke, 10 ; 30. * 1 Peter, 3(8. I Acta, 23; 3.
ml Corinthians, 4; 7. » 1 Corinthians, 8 ; 10,11. ojohn, 3 s 10.
p Homans, 2; 21. q Galatians, 2 ; 14.


All these quotations refer to certain relations, and intimate cer-
tain duties. They serve to prove the general principle, that every
relation implies a corresponding duty; and hence we infer, that
so far as public companies are capable of entertaining the same
relations, they are bound to the performance of the same duties.
3. Public Companies sustain those relations to the Deity
which imply an obligation to the performance of moral and reli-
gious duties.
We have considered public companies in their relation to
the community in which they are established—in relations they
may sustain to individual members of that or any other com-
munity—we shall now consider them in their relation to the
Deity. This forms the chief ground of moral and religious duty.
Their relation to the Deity is a relation of dependence. It will
not be denied, that for every talent necessary to conduct their
operations, and for all the success which may attend their exer-
tions, public bodies are as dependent as individuals upon the
kindness of Providence, Every good and every perfect gift
cometh down from the Father of Light, r Their relation to the
Deity is also a relation of obligation. They have received favors
—as recipients of favors it is their duty to be grateful, and this
duty is the more obligatory in proportion to the greatness and con-
descension of their benefactor. Their relation to the Deity is also
a relation of responsibility. They possess wealth —influence—
power. Providence never bestows these talents, without holding
the parties on whom they are bestowed responsible for their
proper use. Those who duly improve the talents with which
Providence has entrusted them, will have those talents increased
and be rewarded by the Divine approbation. Those who neglect
to use these talents, are held responsible for their neglect, and
will be punished for their inactivity, s We have no reason to
suppose that public companies are excluded from the general
rules of the divine administration. As lar, then, as they are
»'James, 1; 17. * Luke, 19; 13—26.


endowed with the same talents, as individuals, so far must they
be considered as subject to the same responsibilities. From
these considerations we infer, that public companies, like indi-
viduals, are moral agents.
4. Public companies are analagous to other collective bodies
who are acknowledged to be moral agents.
It will not be denied that a nation may declare an unjust
war—may carry it on in a cruel manner—may treat a conquered
nation with oppression, or may conduct a treaty of peace with
duplicity and fraud. Nor will it be denied, that a nation may
become immoral by the extinction of moral feeling in its rulers,
and throughout the population.
If, then, nations are capable of performing virtuous or vicious
actions, then are they moral agents j to be rewarded or punished
according to their actions. The doctrine of national respon-
sibility is thus stated by Moses.
If ye will walk in my statutes, and keep xny commandments, and do
them, then I will give you rain in duo season, and the land shall yield her
increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruits, and your threshing
shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing
time, and ye shall cat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely ;
and I will give peace in the hind, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make
you afraid; and I will rid evil beasts out of the land j neither shall the sword
go through your land, and ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall
before you by the sword j and I will set my tabernacle among you, and will
bo your God, and ye shall be my people, t— But if ye will not hearken unto
me, and will not do all these commandments, I also will do this unto you :
I will appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall
consume the eyes and cause sorrow of heart! and ye shall sow your seed in
vain, for your enemies shall eat it j and 1 will set my face against you, and
ye shall bo slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you;
and ye shall flee when none pursueth you. And if ye will not yet for all this
hearken unto me, then 1 will punish you seven times more for your sins, u
t Leviticus, 2fi; 3-12. n Leviticus, 20, 14-18.—Deuteronomy, 28 ; 1-15.
Nehemiah, 9.—Jeremiah, 5 j 23-29: 7; 5-7. 18; 7-10: 22 ; 2-6,—Ezekiel, 22.
Matthew, 23 i 31-38.


The Jewish history presents the most remarkable instance
on record of a nation being rewarded for their righteousness and
punished for their disobedience. The nations they conquered were
subjected to the same discipline, and it is expressly stated that those
nations were punished fur their sins. And those who have studied
the philosophy of history will have observed, that nations have
risen and fallen in political greatness as they have risen and fallen
in their observance of the principles of morality and religion.
On this subject we might quote the language of historians of
morals, of philosophers, and of theologians; but we prefer
citing the language of a monarch, especially as that monarch is
our own. Surrounded by her nobles, her senators, her coun-
cillors, her judges, her generals, and her admirals—Queen
Victoria has declared from the throne “Religious and
MOEAL PEINCIPLES AEB THE SUEEST FOUNDATIONS OF OUE
SECUEXTY AND HAPPINESS.”
As, then, large bodies of men, like nations, are rewarded or
punished, in their collective capacity, for their virtuous or vicious
actions, it would seem to follow, that smaller bodies of men, like
public companies, may be subjected to the same moral discipline.
A public company, like a nation, is composed of a number of
individuals who have a government for the regulation of their
affairs, and whose acts are considered as the acts of the whole
body. It is true that a public company is composed of a smaller
number of persons than a nation, but that cannot affect the
moral character of its actions, It is also true, that while a
nation must always act through its government, a public com-
pany may, and often does, at the general meeting of its share-
holders, act independently of its government; but neither can
this alter its moral agency, for whether the form of government
be aristocratical or democratical, the duties of a nation, or of a
public company remain the same.?;
p In this discussion we consider public companies as corporations, and inquire
what duties they, as corporations, owe to other parties. The several duties of
directors, officers, and shareholders, do not lie within the range of our inquiries.


In opposition to this doctrine, it may be contended that, to
render public bodies of men responsible in their collective ca-
pacity, would be destructive of personal dr individual respon-
sibility. But this is not the case. A nation may be punished
for its* national crimes, and yet the individual who may have
caused these crimes, may sustain an individual punishment. Thus
Jeroboam, Ahab, and other Mugs of Israel, were individually
punished, while, at the same time, the nation was also punished
in its collective capacity. So a public company may be punished
or rewarded for its actions, while, at the same time, any indi-
vidual who caused these actions, may also be personally rewarded
or punished. It may also be objected, that if a public company is
to be punished, as such, for its acts, then all the partners would
share in the punishment, though many of them may have been quite
innocent of the crime. To this, we answer, that the same objec-
tion would apply to the doctrine of national responsibility, u It
is not possible in the case of a* large body of men, for every
individual to take part in its actions. The act of the authorized
government, or of the majority of the members, must be regarded
as the act of the whole community, and every individual must
share in- the prosperity or adversity resulting from such acts.
It may further be observed, that it is not inconsistent with
the principles of the Divine government for persons to suffer for
the wickedness, or to be rewarded for the righteousness of those
with whom they are socially connected: (< I the Lord thy God
w Tha logical reader need not be reminded, that in arguments from analogy it is a
sufficient answer to an objection to show that tha objection,,applies with equal force
to the doctrine from which the analogy is drawn. Thus, in the text, tho moral
responsibility of nations is assumed as admitted by all parties, and, therefore,
requiring no farther proof. Prom the resemblance, or analogy between the two
cases, we infer the moral responsibility of public companies. It is, therefore, a sufficient
answer to any objection against tho latter doctrine, to show that it will equally apply
to the former. Indeed, the more numerous the objections, if they will equally apply
in both cases, the more the argument is strengthened •, as they are confirmatory of
the soundness of the analogy.


tn a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hat
me, and shewing mercy unto thousands in them that love me
and keep my commandments.” x
In our own day, we witness numerous instances of children
possessing wealth, mental cultivation, and influence in society
through the virtues of their parents. And also, not a few cases
of children being reduced to poverty and degradation through
the vices of their parents. Children suffer through the conduct
of their parents, and parents through the conduct of their chil-
dren ; masters by their servants, and servants by their masters.
In fact, it is not possible for any individual, however obscure, to
be either virtuous or vicious, without in some way promoting the
happiness or misery of some person besides himself. It is,
therefore, no valid objection to the doctrine of the moral respon-
sibility of public companies, that it renders all the partners
answerable for the conduct of the majority. In fact, human
governments act upon this principle. If any company were to
incur penalties to • the state, those penalties would be enforced
against the whole property of the company, though many indi-
vidual partners might be quite unconscious of the offence by
which those penalties were incurred.
We might further confirm our doctrine, by tracing the
analogy between public companies and families.
Pour out Thy fury upon the families that call not on Thy name, y—-In that
day I will perform agaijist Eli all things I have spoken concerning his house ;
for I have told him that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which
he knoweth, because his sons made themselves vile and he restrained them
not. And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of
Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever. z~ And the
ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obededom the Gittite three months,
and the Lord blessed Ohededom and all his household j and it was told king
David, saying, The Lord hath blessed the house of Obededom and all that
pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. a—And Jeremiah said unto
x Exodus, 20 i 5, 0. y Jeremiah, 10 ; 25.
z I Samuel, 3i 12 —14. a 2 Samuel, 6; 11, 12.


the house of the Roohabites, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
Because ye have obeyed the commandments of Jonadah your father, and kept
all his precepts, and done according to all that he hath commanded you, there-
fore thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel: Jonadah, the son of
Rechah, shall not want a man to stand before me for ever, a
We might adduce other declarations respecting the families
of David, Jeroboam, Ahah, and others. It may he objected,
that in these cases, the families were rewarded or punished for
the acts of the head of the family, and not for their own. It
appears, however, that the families concurred in the actions of
their head. When this was not the case the exception is men-
tioned, 1) and in others it is expressly stated, that the reward or
punishment of the family would in some degree depend upon
their own conduct, c
The doctrine of collective responsibility in the present world
might be still further confirmed by references to the punish-
ments inflicted on particular cities. We will refer only to
Nineveh and Jerusalem. In the former case an act of general
humiliation obtained a remission, or at least a postponement,
of the punishment due to their wickedness; and in the latter,
their sin in rejecting the Gospel was visited with a signal
punishment.
The word of the Lord came unto Jonah, saying, Arise, go to Nineveh, that
great city, and cry against it, for their wickedness is come up before mo* * *
And he cried and said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown. So
the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sack-
cloth from the greatest of them even to the least of them. I'or word came
unto the king of Nineveh, and ho arose from his throne, and he laid his robe
from ,him,.and covered him with sackcloth and sat in ashes. And he caused
it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, by the decree of the king
and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any-
thing ; let them not feed nor drink water; but let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, yea, let them turn every one from
a Jeremiah, 35 i 18, 19. h X Kings, 14 •, 13. c Psalm 80 i 30—33.


his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if
God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish
not. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil that ho had said that ho would do unto them, and
he did it not. d
And when he was come near ho heheld the city, and wept over it, say-
ing, If thou liailat known, oven thou, at least in this thy day the things
which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. For
the days shall come upon thee that thine enemies shall cut a trench about
thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay
thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, and they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knewest not the time of
thy visitation, e
Before quitting this branch of our inquiry, we may notice
one practical application of the doctrine of collective responsi-
bility. Tt is, that every individual member of a public body,
whether a nation, a family, or a company, should induce that
body to walk in the path of uprightness. For should they not
do so, he will have to bear a portion of the collective punish-
ment, though he may not personally have taken any active part
in the crime./
Secondly. —Having shown that public companies are moral
agents, and consequently bound to the performances of certain
duties, we shall now inquire, what are those duties, which as
moral agents, public companies are bound to perform ?
We shall not attempt to enumerate all these duties, but
merely make a selection of the most important, and these we
shall classify as, 1. —The duties of patriotism. 2.—The duties
of social relationship. 3.—The duties of religion. 4,—The
duties of benevolence.
1. The duties of. patriotism.
By the duties of patriotism, we mean those duties which a
tl Jonah, 1,2, 3 s 4—lo. ohuke, 19 i 41—44.—Matthew, 23; 37—38.
/Matthew, 24 j 19.


public company owes to the state. Patriotism is the love of
one’s country, or more properly the love of one’s nation. Public
spirit is a willingness to sacrifice a portion of one’s time, property,
or comfort, to promote the happiness of one’s fellow citizens.
There are duties obligatory on every and consequently,
binding on every collective body of citizens. We repudiate the
doctrine that a public company has only to attend to the interest
of its proprietors, regardless of the effect its measures may have
on the public weal. This would be a violation of duty on tbe
part of an individual, and still more so on the part of a public
company. For they have received from the legislature, special
privileges' to enable them to carry on their operations. These
privileges have been granted with a view to the promotion of
the public interest. If then these privileges are employed
to the injury of the public, then is there not merely a violation
of the duty of citizenship, but a farther violation of duty by
the mis-application of privileges conferred by the legisla-
ture. “ Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
required; and to whom men have committed much of him
they will ask the more.” h In proportion, as the legisla-
ture has conferred privileges, in such proportion it may be
expected that they who have received these privileges, will be
active in promoting the public interest. The possession of
privileges implies an increased obligation to perform certain
duties.
The first of these duties is to obey the laws—a public com-
pany should abstainfrom smuggling and all other illicit proceedings
—should make correct returns to Government, and pay its fair
proportion of the property-tax, and of all other duties. “ Render
unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s. Render to all their
dues; tribute, to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom;
j 7 Psalm 137.—Nehemiah, 1 i '1- 2 j 3.—Romans, 9; 3.
h Lvike, 12 j 48.


fear, to*whom fear; honor, to whom honor.” * Another duty
is to enforce the laws upon others. Individuals sometimes
abstain from prosecuting frauds upon themselves, from a mis-
applied feeling of compassion, an unwillingness to incur odium,
or the fear of expense; but none of these feelings are sufficient to
justify a public company in abstaining from this duty. Such a
course is injurious to the public, by holding out inducements to
the commission of similar crimes. “ Because sentence against
an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the
sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.”/ It is also the
duty of public companies to support the cause of order and of due
submission to constituted authorities—the rights of property —
the supremacy of the law the impartial administration of
public justice—and to honor the constitutional government of
the country, by whatever party it may be administered. “ Put
them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no
man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto
all men.” k Another duty is to conduct the affairs of the com-
pany on such a liberal, yet prudent scale of expense, as shall
afford encouragement to the industry, trade, and fine arts of the
country. Solomon says, “ Prepare thy work without, and
make it fit for thyself in the field, and afterwards build thy
house.”/ Which means, if we understand it rightly, “Get
your money before you spend it, but having got it, live in a
scale of expense corresponding to your means—“ afterwards build
thy house.” Individuals may be justified in living much
within their means, in order to provide for old age, or for the
proper settlement of their children; but public companies cannot
have such motives for conducting their establishments with an
unsuitable economy. But, above all, it is the duty of a public
i Romans, 13; 7. j Ecclesiastes, 8 ; 11. i Titus, 3 ; 1.2,
I Proverbs, 24 i 27


company to maintain, in all its transactions, a high toned
morality. Cf Righteousness exalteth a nation.” m A departure
from moral rectitude is altogether inexcusable in a public com-
pany. As all their actions are presumed to be the result of
previous deliberation, they cannot plead in' excuse, as indi-
viduals do, the power of passion, the impulse of the moment,
or the force of habit. In proportion to the weakness, or the
absence of temptation, in such proportion would their conduct
be the more criminal; n while their wealth and influence would
render their example more extensively injurious to the public
morality. If parties of high station in society, depart from the
strict rule of duty, those of inferior station will deviate still more
widely. “If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are
wicked.” o
2. The duties of social relationship.
The social .duties of public companies are the same as those
of individuals who maintain the same relations. These duties
are clearly stated in the Holy Scriptures. The Bible is a code
of laws—not a book of adjudged cases. It lays down the prin-
ciples of human actions, but leaves the application of these
principles to the dictates of reason and of conscience. We
might read through the Bible, and not find a chapter headed
“ The duties of public companies.” In this case we endeavour
to ascertain, in the first place, what are the duties of individuals,
Then we take the principles of these, duties and apply them to
the acts ofi public companies. The principles of moral duty
undergo no change; but the circumstances of human society are
perpetually changing, and hence the correct application of these
principles is sometimes a matter of difficulty. We shall here,
.in the first place, state the principles of some of our social
relationships, and then make a practical application of them.
There are doubtless other principles we have not mentioned, and
m Proverbs, 14 i 34. n Proverbs, 6 i 30. o Proverbs, 29 j 12.


those we have mentioned may be applied, and are applied, in
practice, to many other cases besides those specified.
1. These are the things that ye shall do: speak ye every
man the truth to his neighbour, execute the judgment of peace
and truth in your gates, and let none of you imagine evil in
your hearts against his neighbour, and love no false oath; for
all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord.y?
Insert no erroneous statements in your prospectus; make
no incorrect calculations in order to deceive a Parliamentary
committee; circulate no unfounded rumours for the purpose of
affecting the market value of your shares; and let your annual
reports contain nothing but the truth. “ Thou shalt not raise a
false report; put not thy hand with the wicked, to be an un-
righteous witness.”# <c The getting of treasures by a lying tongue
is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death.” r
2. Te shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another, s
Be honest and upright in all your dealings, let your charges
be fair and just, and be sincere and straightforward in all your
pecuniary transactions.
Thou shaft not have in thy hag divers weights, a great and a small;
thou abaft not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.
But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt
thou have; that thy days may he lengthened in the land which the Lord thy
God giveth thee, t— What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days,
that he may do good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile. Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it. u
All promises or engagements must be faithfully kept, even
when the performance is injurious to the interests of the com-
pany, " That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shalt keep
and perform.” v u He sweareth to his own hurt and changeth
p Zeclmriah, 8 j 16, 17. ? Exodus, 23; 1. r Proverbs, 21 ;6. s Leviticus
19; 11. t Deuteronomy, 25 ; 13—15. u Psalm 34; 12 —14. —1 Peter, 3; 10,11.
o Deuteronomy, 23 i 23.
a


not/’ w The Israelites were punished with three years of fern;
because one of their kings attempted to violate a treaty ii
which they had been drawn by false representations, x
3. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let i
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles, y
If any of the servants of a public company are found wa
ing in integrity they should immediately he dismissed, and :
no account he reinstated. And if any of their professio
agents act dishonestly, even to benefit the company, they slice
not be employed again. “He that walketh in a perfect way,
shall serve me. He that worketh deceit shall not dwell wit]
■myhouse; he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.” 3
Banking companies should not take the accounts of dis
putable parties; and a fraudulent bankrupt should not
allowed to reopen his account, even should he plead tl
although he had cheated all his other creditors, he had ;
cheated his banker. “ Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and L
them that hate the Lord, therefore is wrath upon thee fr
before the Lord.” a “ Depart from me, ye evil doers, lor I
keep the commandments of my God.” h In making advam
banking companies should consider the moral character of
party with whom they deal, as an element of their secun
and should more readily afford accommodation to parties havi
such a character than to those who are without it.c “ The wic.
borroweth and payeth not again.” d
w Psalm 15 i 4. x Joshua, 4; 25.—2 Samuel, 21 (1. y Job, 11! 1
# Psalm 101 i 6, 7. a 2 Chronicles, 19 ; 2. iPualm 119 ; 115.,
c The following quotation points out the course which hanking companies a
to pursue Banking exercises a powerful influence upon the morals of sot
It tends to produce honesty and punctuality in pecuniary engagements : banker!
their own interest, always have ft regard to the moral character of the party
whom they deal. They inquire whether he be honest or trickey, industrious or
prudent or speculative, thrifty or prodigal; and they wUI more readily make
Vances to a man of moderate property and good morals than to ft man of largo
perty but of inferior reputation It is thus that hankers per


Public companies should do nothing that would be con-
sidered dishonorable or disreputable in an individual member of
the company. The moral character of an action cannot be
changed by the number of persons who may commit it.
Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpu-
nished.” e “ Fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.” f
“ Abstain from every appearance of evil.”;? Public companies
should not, listen to plans and schemes proposed for their
adoption by parties known to be deficient in moral principle; nor
should they hire agents to do what they would not do themselves.
Evil communications corrupt good rammers, h— Lord, who shall abide in
thy tabernacle—who shall abide in thy holy hill? He that walkoth uprightly,
and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart; he that
baokbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up
a reproach against his neighbour j in whose eyes a vile person is contemned,
but who honoroth them that fear the Lord, i
4. Speak not evil one of another. J
Public companies sbonld not speak unjustly or unkindly
of each other. " Love as brethren.” k But this docs not
prohibit their speaking the tuxith of each other on proper
occasions, even when the truth may be unpleasant or injurious
to the party about whom it is spoken. It may sometimes
become the duty of a respectable and honorable company
to expose the fraudulent and deceitful practices of other
companies: we are not forbidden to bear witness—but only
tha functions of public conservators of the commercial virtues. Prom motives of
private interest they encourage the industrious, the prudent, the punctual, and the
honest; while they discourage the spendthrift and the gambler, the liar and tho
loiave. They hold out inducements to uprightness which are not disregarded by
even the most abandoned. There is many a man who would bo deterred from dis-
honesty by tho frown of a banker, though he might care but little for the admonitions
of a bishop.”— Gilbarl’s Practical Treatise on Hanking.
d Psalms 37 ; 21. e Proverbs, 11 ; 21. /Job, 15 ; 34,
g 1 Thessaloniana, 8; 22, h 1 Corinthians, 15 ; 33. i Psalm 15 ; 1 4.
j James, 4 ; IX. k 1 Peter, 3 ; S.
B 2


false witness —against our neighbour. “By mercy and imtl
iniquity is purged. 55 1
5. Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not witl
them that are given to change, m
A public company should not meddle with polities: nor le
the influence of the company he employed to produce any politica
change. It should not too, frequently change the principles am
maxims of its own government. Fixed rules and regulation;
are to a, public company what habits are to an individual: the}
insure a uniformity of conduct, and are equally essential ti
success—a steady adherence to fixed principles is the sures
road to prosperity. A restless discontent with moderate profits
and an attempt to get suddenly rich, by reckless speculation, ha
been the ruin of many companies as well as individuals, n No
should they change too often the terms on which they transac
business with the public, as that occasions much inconvenience
Nor change too frequently the rate of their dividend, as that ma
lead to gambling in their shares. Better pay always the sam
rate of dividend, and let the surplus profit of one year be places
to a reserved fund to supply the deficiencies of future years, “i
double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. 55 0 “ Unstable a
water thou shalt not excel. 55 .?? “ Trust in the Lord with all thin
heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding. Be not wis
in thine own eyes. Fear the Lord and depart from evil. 55 q
6, Thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge against th
children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour 8
thyself, r
In cases of dispute or litigation, do not let your judgment h
blinded by self-interest; but judge impartially, and do unt
others as, in a similar case, you would wish to be done unto you)
Z Proverbs, 16 ;0, m Proverbs, 24 } 21. n Proverbs, 28; 20—22.
o .Tamos, X; 8. p Genesis, 49 ; 4. q Proverbs, 3; 5—7.
t Leviticus, 19 ; 18.


self. Use no means of hostility, or annoyance, or rivalry
towards other companies which you would condemn as unjust
or unfair were they used against yourself. Recommend to others
no schemes, or speculations, or investments in which you would
not be willing to take any share yourself. Give no false testi-
monials of character, so as to induce others to employ paities
whom you would not employ yourself. If you have received
favors from other companies or from individuals, do not let your
thankfulness evaporate in mere votes of thanks, or acclamations
of applause, hut render to others the same tokens of gratitude,
which, under the same circumstances, you would expect to
receive yourself. “ All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you do ye even so to them, for this is the law
and the prophets.” s
7, If thine enemy he hungry, give him bread to eat; and if
he he thirsty, give him water to drink; for thou shalt heap coals
of fire upon his head, and the Lord will, reward thee, t
If there be a run on a banking company the rival banking
companies should render assistance, and not suffer a solvent
hank to stop payment for want of temporary support. All
hostile companies should render assistance to each other on tlio
occurrence of calamities, to which all are liable. c< Rejoice
not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad
When he stumhleth, lest the Lord see it and it displease him,
and he turn away his wrath from him." u It is quite right to
contend against our enemies, and to rejoice when we are success-
ful. “ I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou hast lifted me up, and
hast not made my foes to rejoice over me." v But it is not right
to rejoice when the wrath of Providence permits them to fell
into calamity or to stumble into acta of vice or folly. A railway
company should not rejoice when accidents occur on a i'ival
s Matthew 7 ! 12., t Proverbs, 25 ! 21, 22. u Proverbs, 21) 17,18.
v Psalm 30 ; 1.


line; nor a banking company when a rival bank has made a
large amount of bad debts; nor an assurance society when
extensive fires or numerous deaths have absorbed the funds of a
rival society; nor a mining association when accidents have
damaged the mines belonging to a rival association. “He that is
glad at calamities shall not be unpunished.” w If your enemies
treat you in a different manner, you should not imitate their ex-
ample, but forgive them. “Recompense to no man evil for evil.”a?
“ Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger and clamour, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye kind
one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you ”y
8. If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also, z
1, If he has an equal claim to the coat and the cloak, and the
law decides that he is justly entitled to the coat, give him the
cloak also, though he do not claim it. Do what is just though
the law may not require it, and never have recourse to a legal
quibble in order to baffle a just demand. “The thoughts of the
righteous are right, but the counsels of the wicked are deceit.” a
2. Do not go to law without mature deliberation. “Go not
forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.” h 3.
Nor yet about matters of trifling importance which’ are no
practical injury. “ Strive not with a man without cause, if he
have done thee no harm.” c 4. Nor yet from vindictive motives.
“ Say not thou, I will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord and
he shall save thee.” d 5. Never go to law about matters in
which you have no direct interest. “He that passeth by and
meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh
a dog by the ears.” e 6. Do not go to law with a man merely
w Ufovoflis, 17 ;5. .v Romans, 12 j 17. y Ephesians, 4 ; 31, 32.
z Matthew, fi j 40. a Proverbs, 12; 5. b Proverbs, 25 i 8.
e Proverbs, 3 ; 30. d Proverbs, 20 j 22. e Proverbs, 26 ; 17.


uuse he is poor, and, therefore, unable to contend against
iv large capital; nor trespass on any man’s rights, because he
not afford the expense of obtaining legal redress. “Rob not
poor because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the
e, for the Lord will plead their cause and spoil the soul of
se that spoiled them.”/ 7- If will be wise and honorable to
;ig the suit to a close as soon as you can. “Itis an honor
a man to cease from strife, hut every fool will be meddling.” y
If you reject a just and honorable compromise, you may lose
action, and you will then not only have to pay the expense
the suit, hut you will have put yourself in a disreputable
lition, “ Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art
the way with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver thee
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou
cast into prison. Thou shalt by no means come out thence
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.” h 9. Do not indulge a
.duess for litigation. ■“ He loveth transgression that loveth
ife, and he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.” i
If you have to sue any party criminally, enforce the law with
idness and forbearance. “ Execute true judgment, and shew
rcy and compassion every one to his brother.”./ It is quite
ssihle to execute judgment and show mercy at the same time.
,If called upon to arbitrate between contending parties, act
tlyand impartially. “Thou shalt not respect the person of
i poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteous-'-
ss shalt thou judge thy neighbour.” k “ Thou shalt not wrest
[gments thou shalt not respect persons; neither take a gift, for
;ift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of
s righteous.”/ 12. Public companies should employ none but
norablo men to plead any cause in which they may be engaged,
vocates who are noted for legal quibbling, attacking private
/Proverbs, 22; 22, 2,1. g Proverbs, 20 i 3. h Matthew, 0; 25, 2(>.
i Proverbs, 17 ; 19. j Zroluiriuh, 7 i 0. h Leviticus, 19 i 15.
I Deuteronomy, 16 ; 19.


character, or brow-beating witnesses, should not be engaged;
ancl more especially the standing counsel of a public company,
should be a man of high moral and religious principle.
What hast thou to do to declare my statutes ? Thou givest thy mouth to
evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit, m —They speak vanity every one with his
neighbour; with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak. The
Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that apeaketh proud
things. Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are onr
own, who is Lord over ns 1 n —There is that apeaketh like the piercings of a
sword; but the tongue of the wise is health. The lip of truth shall he estab-
lished for ever; hut a lying tongue is hut for a moment. Deceit is in the
heart of them that imagine evil; hut to the counsellors of peace is joy.o
9. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another j
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.^
Be of one mind,- —Public companies should entertain a good
feeling .towards each other, and endeavour to promote each other’s
interest. On proper occasions they ought to unite their influence
for the protection of their mutual rights.
Be courteous. —'All the servants of the company who come
into communication with the public, should be instructed to
behave with the utmost courtesy; and, if they do so they are
entitled to courtesy in return. No shareholder of the com-
pany should address a servant of the company as if he were
his own individual servant; nor should he, in his transactions
with the company, expect any undue attention or preference
on account of his being a shareholder. When a company has
occasion, in its annual report or public documents, to refer to
the proceedings of other companies, it should always be done
in the language of courtesy.
Be pitiful (full of pity) . —ln some cases life policies become
forfeited, through the inability of the parties to pay the pre-
miums, and, sometimes, by the party meeting his death in a way
that deprives his relations of all claim on the company. In
m Psalm 60 ; 16—19. n Psalm 12; I—4. o Proverbs, 12; 18—20,
p 1 Peter, 3 ; 8.


cases like these, insurance companies should take all the circum-
stances into consideration, and, be pitiful.. When an honest
tradesman fails, and his creditors agree to take a composition, the
hanking company should not refuse to accept the terms proposed,
hut should, be pitiful. When the servant of a company has
hastily committed an error, not involving any moral delinquency,
let him not he too hastily dismissed, and thus placed for life in
a lower condition, hut, be pitiful. When servants of the com-
pany, from sickness or old age, have become less effective than
formerly, let arrangements he made for rendering their duties
proportionate to their diminished strength. Recollect, they
were once young and healthy, and you had then the benefit of
their services—do not treat them harshly now. Be pitiful.
10. Use hospitality one to another, without grudging, q
It is proper that public companies on particular occasions,
such, for example, as the opening of a new line by a railway com-
pany, should entertain their friends and others connected with
the company. Also, that the companies should use' hospi-
tality " one towards another.” Social intercourse tends to pro-
mote friendly feelings, and a friendly feeling between the principal
officers and friends of different companies, tends to promote a
friendly feeling between the companies themselves. It is also a
good practice to give an annual dinner to all the servants of the
company. The words " without grudging,” may suggest, that
when the company can afford it, these entertainments should be
given in a rather handsome style without a too strict regard to
economy. On these festive occasions, the humbler servants and
others connected with the company should not be forgotten.
"When thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind. And thou shalt lie blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee, for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrec-
tion of the just.”r
q 1 Peter, 4; 9. r Luke, 14 i 13. 14.


11. Thou shalt not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart
of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt, s
The principle of this suggestion is, that we ought to have
compassion for all those who are in the same difficulties in which
we formerly were ourselves. Those whom Providence has raised
to a higher station than they or their fathers occupied, should
entertain kindly feelings towards those who belong to the class
from whence they have sprung. The same rule applies to public
companies. Those which have overcome the difficulties of their
formation and become prosperous, should not employ any vexa-
tious or oppressive means of preventing the growth of similar
companies. Knowing the anxieties they experienced from the
difficulties they had to encounter, they should not inflict similar
anxieties upon others. Moses often enforces the duty of kind-
ness towards servants and strangers, by reminding the Israelites
that they had been strangers and bondsmen in the land of
Egypt. In questions of morals, it is generally a safe guide to a
correct judgment, to put ourselves in the position of others, and
to inquire what then would be our own feelings, and what kind
of conduct we should wish under such circumstances to be
adopted towards ourselves? In the decision of such cases, it
usually appears that the cultivation of the moral feelings has
improved the intellectual faculties upon questions of social
morality. A sound heart is less likely to go astray than a
clever head. “The entrance of thy words giveth light: it
giveth understanding unto the simple.” t
12. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and
equal, knowing that ye also have a master in heaven, u
tie just in your ..appointments, and select those who are the
moat worthy, and the best qualified for the duties they will have
to discharge. Be just in the amount of your
recollect that many of the servants of public companies have
.V Exodus, 23 i i). /Psalm 11!) i 130. u Colossiims, 4 ; 1.


greater trusts* and heavier responsibilities, than the servants of in-
dividuals; and in this ease it is just and equal that they be rewarded
accordingly. Be just in your promotions, and let not merit be sup-
planted by patronage or favoritism. Be just in the quantity of
labor you exact. Appoint a sufficient number of servants to do
the work easily. Do not compel them to keep late hours; nor
refuse reasonable holidays, for the purposes of health and re-
creation. Be just in your pensions, and let your aged and worn-
out servants be treated with respect and liberality. Be just in
your reproofs, “Forbearing threatening.” v Let not your
censures, or your punishments, be more than proportionate to
the offence; and be as ready at all times to acknowledge the
merits of your servants, as to notice their defects. All com-
plaints, and all applications for increased remuneration, or
privileges, from the servants of public companies, should receive
mature consideration; and all refusals should be given with
kindness and courtesy. Job, when reduced to distress, con-
soled himself with the reflection, that in his former prosperity,
“ when he was the greatest of all the men of the east,”w
he had not despised the cause of his man servant, or his
maid servant, when they contended with him, Moses enacted,
“Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the
corn; ” x and St. Paul has twice quoted this enactment, y
to inculcate the lesson that we ought not to stint the remu-
neration, nor even the enjoyments of those by whose labor
we profit. There is something touching in the following text:—
“A certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was
sick, and ready to die z and the Psalmist has given us a lovely
exhibition of the Divine character in the words :—■“ He hath
pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.” a
13. Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters,
v Ephesians, fl ; !). w Job, 31 ; 13. x Deuteronomy, 25 ; 4.
y 1 Corinthians, 9; U.—l Timothy, 5 i 18. g Duke, 7 i 2.
a Psalm, 35 i 27.


and to please them well in all things, not answering again, not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn
the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things, b
Public companies have a right to expect that their servants
should not only be obedient during the official hours of business,
but that at all times their conduct should be such as will be
reputable to the company —attempting to “ please them well in
all things”—“not answering again”—not objecting to obey
any lawful commands—“ not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity,”'—not misapplying the property with which they are
entrusted, nor suffering the company to be defrauded or
damaged by other parties, “ that they may adorn the doctrine
of God our Saviour, in all things.” The servants of a public
company are exposed to observation and criticism, and its
honorable reputation in the world will be affected by the esti-
mate that may be formed of their moral and religious cha-
racter. Christian principle is of more importance than brilliant
talents, and is more highly respected, even by the ungodly.
The personal character of its servants is sometimes of greater
value to a company than their personal services, and can
less easily be replaced. They adorn the doctrine of Christi-
anity when, from Christian motives, they practise those virtues
which are suitable to their several stations. It gives us a
pleasing idea of social life among the Hebrews, when we find
that not only did the children address the Supreme Being as
the God of their fathers, but the servants addressed Him as
the God of their masters. “O, Lord God of my master
Abraham,” said Eliezer of Damascus, “ I pray Thee send me good
speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.” c
It is one of the duties of the servants of public companies to
pray for the prosperity of the company whom they serve.
I Titus, 2 i 9,10,
c Genesis, 24 j 12.


14. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the bather
is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted from the world, d .
Establish a fund for the relief of the widows and children of
the servants of the company. Such a fund is established by the
East India Company and by the Bank of England; and why not by
all large companies ? Mining and railway companies should relieve
the widows and children of those who meet with accidents in
their respective works. The word visit, implies that this relief
should be generous and kind; and the words, in their affliction,
may suggest that it ought to be prompt and immediate, not
postponed till after their affliction.
15. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men,,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith, e
Let all your arrangements he adapted to promote the public
good,/ and more especially to benefit the moral and religious,
portion of the community. “He that diligently seeketh good
procureth favor, hut he that seeketh mischief it shall come unto
him.# , ,
3. Having considered the duties of patriotism, and the duties*
of social relationship, we now come to the duties of religion.
By the duties of religion, we mean the duties we owe directly
to God. Those which are most applicable to public companies,,
are to acknowledge the hand of God—to promote his worship—
and to reverence his sabbaths.
d James, 1 i 27. a Galatians, 5 i 10.
/ Among the minor immoralities of the present age we are disposed to place the-
practice Of smoking cigars, to the extent to which it is now carried. We refer to.
smoking in the streets, on hoard of steam-boats, and in places of public resort, where
the smoker can obtain Ms enjoyment only by annoying others, and thus v.olatmg the-
injunction, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The public are much
indebted to the railway companies, for prohibiting this practice in their carnages and
establishments, and it is desirable that the steam-boat companies should adopt srnular
regulations.
tj Proverbs, 11; 27.


To acknowledge the power and goodness of God, and our
dependence on Him for all the blessings we possess, is not less
the duty of a public company than it is of an individual. Moses
cautions the Israelites against forgetfulness of God in the time
of their prosperity:—
Beware that thou forgot not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his com-
mandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this
day; lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses ami
dwell therein, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and
thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied—then thy heart he
lifted up, and thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand
hath gotten me this wealth j but thou shalt remember the Lord thy God, for
it is Ho who giveth thee power to get wealth, h
A neglect to acknowledge the band of God, is denounced as
a heinous offence. The chief national crime charged against
ancient Tyre by the prophet Ezekiel, was, Cf By thy great
wisdom and thy traffic thou hast increased thy riches, and thy
heart is lifted up because of thy riches." i “If ye will not
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart to give glory unto my
name, saith the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon
you, and I will curse your blessings."/ They who honor
inferior agents, but forget the cause of all their prosperity, are
compared to the heathen fishermen, who “ sacrifice unto their
net and burn incense unto their drag, because by them their
portion is fat and their meat plenteous." k
In ancient Rome the merchants and hankers had a public pro-
cession every year to the temple of Mercury—who, by a strange
association, was regarded as the god of merchants and of hankers,
of thieves and of eloquence—to offer sacrifices for the blessings
they had received; and, as their slanderers said, to ask for-
giveness for all the frauds and tricks they had practised in their
trade during the past year.
h Deuteronomy, 8 | 17,18. i Ezekiel, 28 ; 6. j Malnoln, 2 j 2.
h Habakkuk, 1 j 18.


In the middle ages the, public companies then formed took
mottoes, many of which were expressive of religiousfeelings. Thus,
if we cast our eyes on our Royal Exchange, we shall see that
the City motto is Domine dirige Nos/ 5 and that of the IVtercers’
Company is “ Honor Deo/ 5 This would not be consistent with
the manners of the present age, though we believe bur public!
companies are as much disposed to implore Divine direction, and
to render to God the honor of their success as were any of the
associations of former days. The way to obtain this direction,
and to have occasion for rendering this honor, is to acknow-
ledge the superintendence and kindness of God. “In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. 55 ,/ =*= “ Call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.”k*
We are not friendly to the introduction of religious matters,
either by individuals or public bodies, into secular intercourse.
We have no wish that our business meetings should commence
with prayer, and conclude with the doxology ; but surely there
must be some way in which a public company may, consistently
with our national character, and the manners of the age, express
its reliance on Divine Providence, and its gratitude Tor the
favors that Providence has conferred. Is there no way in which
a public company may virtually utter the sentiments so
beautifully expressed by David :
David blessed the Lord before all the congregation, and said, Blessed be
thou Lord God of Israel, our father for over and ever. Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and Dio power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty,
for all that is in the heaven and the earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom
0 Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come
of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and miglitj and
in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now, there-
fore, our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But wlio am I,
j* Proverbs, 3 j o.— it* Psalm. 50; 15.


and what is my people, that wo should be able to offer so willingly after this
sort, for nil things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. I
Another religious duty is, to support the public worship
of God. Human legislation can enforce a small portion only of
the moral and religious duties of mankind, and can never inter-
fere until vice has grown into crime, m Religion extends her
sway, not only over all the actions of man, but over the. motives
and springs of action. n Religious and moral principles, implanted
in the mind of the community, are the only security for the
performance of religious and moral duties; and the only means
of acquiring the happiness which the performance of these duties
tends to produce.
While we maintain, in the words of our motto, that “ pro-
perty has its duties as well as its rights/ 5 we maintain with
equal firmness, that property has its rights as well as its
duties; and they who disregard its rights, have no claim
on the performance of its duties. But though the rights of
property are as sacred as any other rights, o yet they are the
first to be disregarded among an immoral or an irreligious popu-
lation. As a portion of the property class, therefore, public
companies should support the extension of moral and religious
principles, as a means of securing the safe and quiet enjoyment
of their possessions. The maintenance of the public worship of
God, is one means of extending the knowledge and influence of
these principles.
1 1 Chronicles, 29 j 10—14,
m Some writers on moral philosophy have divided the social rights of man into
perfect and imperfect. The perfect rights can be enforced by human laws; tire enact-
ments referring to those rights are generally expressed in a negative form: “Thou
shall not killj” “Thou shalt not steal.” The imperfect rights cannot be enforced
perfectly by human laws; these enactments are generally positive: “Honor thy
father and thy mother j" “ Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The fourth
commandment has one of each kind; “Thou shall do no manner of work.”
“ Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.”
» Exodus, 20; 17,—Matthew, 15; 19. o Mark, 10; 19.


But apart from motives of interest, it is no less the duty
of public companies, than of individuals, to promote the honor of
their Creator and Benefactor; and to diffuse among others those
blessings that attend the discharge of religious obligations.
Public companies should not only give to all their servants
the means of attending public worship, but they should also
contribute towards its support in the district in which their
operations are carried on. The houses and the lands they
occupy, if not hold by them, would probably be occupied by
others who would thus contribute. It is, therefore, as much
their duty as it is the duty of the other parishioners to provide
the means of religious instruction for their neighbours. Con-
tributions towards this object, may not only be a suitable way of
performing the duty to which we have referred, of acknowledging
their obligations to the Divine Being, and of extending those
principles by which their own property is rendered more
secure, but also, of promoting the piety and, consequently, the
happiness of all the members of the community, and of dis-
charging a duty to which is distinctly attached the promise of
temporal prosperity. “ Bring ye all the tythes into the store-
house, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me
now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you
the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there
shall not be room enough to receive it.”o*
Another religious duty is to reverence the Sabbath-day.
Viewed only with reference to the present life, the institution
of the Sabbath-day is one of the greatest blessings that religion
has conferred upon man :■ — ee Remember the Sabbath-day to
keep it holy: in it thou shall not do any work.” of It may be
observed, that this is the only one of the ten commandments
that we are expressly enjoined to enforce upon our households,
and some of the most awful, denunciations and threatenings in
the Holy Scriptures are directed against the violation of the
o* MnkeW, 3 ; 10. of Exodus, 20; B—lo.
c


Sabbath-day. After the return from the Babylonial captivity,
Nehemiab was most anxious to enforce the due observance of
the Sabbath.
“In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine-presses on the Sabbath.,
and bringing in sheaves and lading asses; as also wines, grapes, and figs, and
all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath-
day; and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals; there
dwelt men of Tyro also therein, which brought fruit uml all manner of ware
and sold on the Sabbath unto the children of Judah and m Jerusalem. Then
I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them. What evil thing is
this that ye do and profane the Sabbath-day ? Did not your fathers thus,
and did not our God bring all this evil upon us and upon this city ? Yet, ye
bring more wratli upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath, o
The design of the Sabbath is to ensure an interval of bodily
repose, more especially for the humbler classes of society jjp to
change the current of thought, and thus to preserve the mental
powers in a state of vigour and freshness 5 to give leisure fox
reflection, and thus enable maxx to look above him, and around
him, and within him, and consider his own character and destiny;
and to furnish opportunity fop the discharge of those duties of
piety, of khxdness, and benevolence, which devolve upon him as
a moral and religious being. To express thankfulness for past
mercies is specially named as one of the duties to be performed; Q
and these feelings are beautifully expressed in the 100th Psalm :
0 bo joyful in the Lord, all ye lands, serve the Lord with gladness, and
come before his presence with a song. Bo ye sure that the Lord he is God;
it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the
sheep of his pasture. O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and
into his courts with praise; be thankful unto him, and speak good of his
name. For the Lord he is gracious : his mercy is everlasting, and his truth
eudureth from generation to generation, r
The institution of the Sabhatli-day must not he regarded as
diminishing the sum of annual labour. By improving the habits
and invigorating the mental powers, it increases the annual pro-
duce of labor, both in regard to nations and individuals.
0 Nehemiab, 13; 15—18". p Deuteronomy, 5 ; 11. q Deuteronomy, 5 ; 16.
r Prayer Book translation.


The labor of the Sunday tends not to wealth. It is not the
man who “adds Sunday to the week” of toil, who employs that
holy day in attending to his ordinary business or in making up
his books —no, it is not he who is in the surest road to riches.
It is the man who, when the Sunday dawns, feels his mind
expand with new and exhilirating and ennobling associations;
who, accompanied by his family, appropriately attired, pays his
morning homage in the temple of religion, and passes the re-
mainder of the day in works of charity or piety, or in innocent
relaxations corresponding with the sanctity of the day—that is
the man who, by improving the intellectual, the moral, and the
social faculties of his mind, is adopting the surest means of
acquiring wealth and respectability in the world.
They greatly err who imagine they are pleading the cause of
the poor when they endeavour to remove the religious sanctions
of the Sabbath-day. Should the mass of the population mice
entertain the impression that the observance of the Sunday is
not required by religion, but is merely a matter of convenience
or expediency, the poor will then have no security for cessation
from toil.- Reasons will soon be found, based apparently upon
a regard for the poor, for increasing their labor. Let the
Sunday he regarded no longer as a clay of devotion, but merely
as a day of pleasure, and it will soon become a clay of toil.
Were the Sunday abolished, the poor man would receive no
more wages for his seven days labor than he now does for his six.
His scale of comforts would be reduced, as he would have no
occasion for a Sunday's attire. His opportunities of social inter-
course and of moral improvement would be abolished. In
this and in other cases it is shown that religion, while she
is the guide and solace of the wealthy, is pre-eminently the
friend and guardian of the poor.
If it be the duty .of nations and of individuals to observe the
Sabbath-day, it must equally he the duty of public companies.
We read of no dispensation in their favor. The prohibition
against any manner of work does not except the work of public
o 2


companies. It is not said that all men servants and maid
servants shall have rest except the servants of public companies-
Nor are we taught that the violation of the Sabbath-day will
bring down judgments upon nations, but none upon public
companies.
But, as in domestic, so in social life, there are certain works
of necessity, and many duties that must be performed, even on the
Sabbath-day, s In these cases a public company will act like the
head of a religious family. All the secular duties that can be
postponed will be postponed to the following day. Other duties
will be performed in such portions of the day as will admit of
as many servants as possible to attend Divine service; and those
servants who cannot be thus favored will be allowed other
seasons for the performance of this duty, s*
Here we are compelled to notice the important question,
how far railway companies are justified in carrying passengers on
the Sabbath-day.
In applying general principles to the present complicated
state of society, there is a danger, either that we relax our
principles, and hence lessen their importance; or strain them,
so as to make their application interfere with the operation
of other principles equally deserving of our respect. In this
case we shall not relax our principles. We contend that the
s Isaiah, 49 ; 15. —Luke, 13, 15 : 14 ; 5.
s* We passed last summer from Hull to Hamburgh, in the Queen of Scotland.
The captain informed us, that he sailed every Saturday, either from Hull or Ham-
burgh. We observed, then neither you nor your crew can ever attend church on
a Sunday. He replied, that was true; but every Sunday he read prayers himself,
when the weather permitted, and when in Hamburgh full service was performed on
board every Thursday evening, by a clergyman of the Church of England. In
Hull this was not necessary, as the men had the opportunity of attending divine
service in the week evenings ashore. Why do not steam companies make
provision for the performance of divine service on board those boats that are afloat
on the Sunday ? It has been stated, that the boats of the Aberdeen Steam
Navigation Company will in future start on Wednesdays, so as never to he afloat
on Sundays.


violation of the Sabbath-day is a religious and a political
crime; an offence against God, and against both the phy-
sical and moral interests of society. But then comes the
question, whether travelling for a lawful object on some portion
of the Sunday, that shall not interfere with attendance on Divine
worship, and in a way that shall not necessarily produce a state
of mind incompatible with the sanctity of the day, is a violation
of the Sabbath ?
The decision of the question with regard to railway com-
panies, depends very much upon the extent to which individuals
may lawfully travel on the Sabbath-day. If it can be proved
that no person can on any account travel on any portion of
the Sabbath-day, without committing sin, then railways cannot
aid this sinful travelling without being partakers of the sin.
But if there are many cases that would justify travelling on
this day, and if among these causes we place the restoration or
maintenance of health—the exercise of filial or social duty, by
making visits that can be made on no other day and if
these journeys can be made on such parts of the day, as shall
not interfere with the services of the sanctuary, nor the devout
feelings of the traveller, then it would appear that these com-
panies are not guilty of sabbath breaking, in granting facilities
for making these journies. It is doubtless true that many
persons who have no lawful cause for travelling on Sundays,
will take advantage of these opportunities, but the companies
cannot be held answerable for the misconduct of individuals.
The company can know nothing of the objects, the motives, or
the circumstances of individual passengers; and they seem, there-
fore, justified in meeting the public demand, under the restrictions
we have mentioned, for means of conveyance; leaving each indi-
vidual to be responsible for himself, if he, by travelling, trans-
gresses the Sabbath-day. It may also be worthy of inquiry,
whether those persons who thus trangress, would not many
of them transgress in some other way, were they to remain at
home, and, perchance, commit some additional sins. It may also


be asked whether one object of the Sabbath-day, that of pro-
ducing a total suspension of labor, and a change in the current
of thought, is not more effectually obtained by taking people
from their homes, where all around them would call to mind
the labors of the week, and transferring them to places where
the rivers run among the hills, and the birds sing among the
branches, and the pastures are cloathed with flocks, and the
valleys are covered with corn, and the heavens rejoice, and the
earth is glad j—or where there is “ that great and wide sea,”
wherein are creatures innumerable, and where are the ships, and
the tossing waves, and the roaring winds ; the sandy beach, and
the rocky cliffs; all calculated to awaken the attention of even
the irreverent wanderer, and to cause him to exclaim, “ O Lord,
how manifold are thy works, in wisdom hast thou made them
all; the earth is full of thy riches.” t
And, finally, it may be asked, whether public opinion in this
country would allow the total suppression of travelling by rail-
way on Sundays ? And whether, as the Jewish legislator, under
Divine authority, permitted certain social evils to remain among
the Israelites, in deference to popular opinion, in order to avoid
greater evils, u Christian legislators, and public companies, who
partake of some of the functions of legislators—may not for the
same reasons, allow to a certain extent, of Sunday excursions
by railways ?. And whether those scrupulously conscientious
individuals who condemn the practice, might not do more good
by attempting to superintend and regulate the Sunday travelling,
than by making unavailing attempts for its total suppression f
Under any circumstances, railway companies should diminish
the number of their trains on the Sabbath-day and abstain from
running during the hours devoted to Divine service; v they
should also adopt those regulations which are adapted to induce
t Psalm 104; 24. u Matthew, 19 j 8,
« The following Table shows the number of trains that leave London on week
days and on Sundays, on each of the railways, and the interval between the storting


of two trains on Sundays, which includes the time of morning sendee.
{See Brad-
sham’s Quids for December, 1845.) —
On
week days.
On
Sundays.
Interval.
A.
h.
M.
rn.
P.M,
h. in.
London and Birmingham
17
7
10
0
to
6 0
18
9
10
15
to
2 0
16
8
10
30
to
2 15
10
5
10
0
to
2 30
9
4
10
45
to
6 30
Eastern Counties
13 '
5
9
0
to
3 0
people to travel on the Saturday and return on Monday. Those
companies which have lines in the course of construction should
provide means of religious instruction on the Sabbath-day for
those workmen whom they have drawn from their homes, and who
would have no means of attending Divine worship; w and where
stations—the centre of future towns —are placed at a great distance
from the parish church, the company should co-operate with the
ministers of religion, in providing suitable places of worship in
the neighbourhood. Steam-boat, and other companies, should
in the same manner observe the sanctity of the Sabbath-day. so
w We attended the opening of the railway to Norwich last July, and at the
meeting, held at the Cambridge station, H. Bosanquot, Esq., in the chair, several
dignitaries of the Church, from Ely, Cambridge and Norwich, bore witness to the
good conduct of the men who had been employed in constructing the line. This
exemplary behaviour was attributed hy the Bishop of Norwich to the attention
paid to the moral and religious instruction of their laborers hy the contractors,
Messrs. Grissell and Pete.
oe It has often occurred to us, that temporary places of worship might ho erected
in those places which are usually places of public resort on the Sundays, during
certain seasons of the year, and that a succession of short services might ha per-
formed, bo that those who will visit such places may not altogether neglect the
duties of religion. Why should tent preaching be left in the hands of the
Dissenters ? It we cannot persuade people to come to the church, ought we not to take
the church to the people ? We would further ask, why should none hut clergymen
preside at a meeting held for the purposes uf devotion ? Among the Wesleyan


We will not attempt to specify in detail all the works that
may lawfully be performed by public companies, or by indivi-
duals on the Sabbath day. We will merely observe that, though
“ the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath/V
yet, at the same time, they who most religiously keep holy the
Sabbath-day, may expect to share most largely of those spirit-
ual and temporal benefits its institution was designed to bestow.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honour-
able and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own
pleasure, nor speaking thine own words j then shalt thou delight thyself in
the Lord, and I will cause thoo to ride upon the high places op the
earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it. y
4. The last class of duties are the duties of benevolence.
By the duties of benevolence, we mean the duties we owe to
the poor.
Throughout both the Old and the New Testament there is no
duty more frequently enforced than this—nor one, to the
performance of which, there is attached so many promises of
temporal prosperity.
Moses, besides enacting many laws that had an especial bear-
ing upon the welfare of the poor, enjoined, moreover, the duty
of voluntary benevolence.
And if thy brother ho waxen poor, and fallen iu decay with thee, then thou
shalt relieve him, though he bo a stranger and a sojourner, z—For the poor
Methodists, the local preachers, who are usually engaged in business during the
week, and are not the leas pious because men of business,f are found to be useful
assistants to those who are wholly devoted to the work of the ministry. We would
ask, too, why should clergymen require a Bishop’s licence to enable them to officiate
in any building not wholly set apart to ecclesiastical purposes ?. Why should not
some part of the houses at the railway stations, which are at a distance from the
parish church, be used on a Sunday, for the accommodation of the district ? But we
feel we are approaching holy ground, and we tread no farther.
a* Mark, 2; 27. y Isaiah, 58 ; 13, 14. z Leviticus, 25 i 35.
f Romans, 12; 11.


shall never cease out of the land, therefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shalt open thy hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy in
thy land, a
The devotional exercises of the Israelites abound with bene-
dictions on those who pitied the poor.
Blessed is he that considercth the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time
of trouble. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be
blessed upon the earth, and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his
enemies, The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou
wilt make all his bed in his sickness, b
Job said :
When the ear heard me, it blessed me j and when the eye saw me, it gave
witness to me; because I relieved the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and
him that had none to help him. The Messing of him that was ready to perish,
came upon me; and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy. o
In the Proverbs of Solomon, we read :
He that hath pity upon the poor, lendeth onto the Lord, and that which
ho hath given will he pay him again, d —He that hath a bountiful eye, shall be
blessed; for he giveth of bis bread to the poor, e —He that hath mercy on the
poor, happy is be. f
Seasons of festivity were celebrated by granting relief to the
poor.
The days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which
was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good
day; that they should make them clays of feasting and joy, and of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor, g —This day is holy unto the
Lord your God, mourn not, nor weep; go your way, eat the fat and drink the
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared, h
In the New Testament, we read: —
Give, and it shall he given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For
with the same measure that ye mete, withal it shall he measured to you again.®
—Charge them that are richin this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, hut in the living God, who giveth us richly all things
to enjoy; that they do good ; that they be rich in good works ; ready to dis-
a Deuteronomy, 15 ; 11- 5 Psalm 41 ■1,2, 3. c Jot, 29 ; 11—13/
d Proverbs, 19 ; 17. « Proverbs, 22 i 9. /Proverbs, 14 ; 21.
g Esther, 9 ; 22. h Nehemiah, 8 ; 9, 10. i Luke, 6 j 38,


tribute j willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves, a good
foundation against the time to come; that they may lay hold on eternal lile.ji—
Whoso hath this worlds goods, and secth his brother have need, and shutteth up
his bowels of compassion from him j how dwelluth the love of God in him 1 k
On the other hand, the most awful denunciations are directed
against those who are unfeeling towards the poor.
He that oppressed! the poor, reproacheth his Maker ; but he that honoreth
him hath mercy on the poor J—Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor,he
also shall cry himself, but shall not he hoard, m —He that oppressed! the poor,
to increase his riches; and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to
want, n —He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack; but he that hidoth his
eyes shall have many a curse, o
The rule by which public companies, as well as individuals,
should regulate the amount of their contributions to religious
and charitable purposes, is distinctly laid down in the Holy
Scriptures—it is their ability.
Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the Lord
thy .God, which he hath given thee.p—Tliou shalt truly tithe all the increase of
thy seed that the Held bringeth forth, year by year, q —Upon the first day of the
week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, r
The spirit of these instructions appears to be, that public
companies should devote to religious and charitable purposes, a
certain proportion of their annual profits j what that proportion
should be, must be determined by each individual company. All
public companies have the advantage of knowing the exact
amount of their annual gains. “Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.” Tlfe principle
of this injunction is—balance your books every half-year, in
order to ascertain the state of your affairs, and the amount of
your profits. In all cases we think it better that a fixed sum
should be set apart at the commencement of the year, rather than
the amount should be regulated by the caprice of the moment.
We think it a good practice, even for individuals, and especially for
j 1 Timothy, 6 j 17—19. k 1 John, 3 ; 17. I Proverbs, 14 j 31.
m Proverbs, 21 ; 13. n Proverbs, 22 ; 10. o Proverbs, 28 j 27.
p Deuteronomy, 14 j 17. g Deuteronomy, 14 ; 22. rl Corinthians, 10 ;2.


young men commencing life, to determine, like Jacob,.« that a
certain part of their future gains should Ire devoted to the cause
of piety and benevolence. We are not; friendly to religious vows j
but we think every prudent man, (and public companies are pre-
sumed to be assemblies of prudent men) should have fixed prin-
ciples of action, and not let his discharge of pious and charitable
duties depend on the impulse of the moment. “ Every man
according as he purposeth in his heart so let him give, not
grudgingly or of necessity, for God loveth a cheerful giver.” s*
This language seems to imply, that the amount devoted to acts
of charity, should be the result of previous deliberation, and that
those who have fixed the amount by a previous purpose, give
with more cheerfulness than those whose minds present on every
occasion a conflict between the suggestions of liberality and
those of selfishness, and who grudgingly comply with the solici-
tations of others, or give as a necessity imposed on them by
their social position.
We are no advocates for indiscriminate charity. We think
that men of business (and of such our public companies are usually
composed), should show the same prudence in the exercise of
their charity as they would on other occasions ; they should en-
deavour to ascertain the way of doing the most good with equal
means, and should look to the remote as well as to the immediate
effects of their benevolence.
The first claim on their liberality, is that of the parish or
district in which the company conducts its operations. As the
locality if not occupied by a company, would probably be occu-
pied by individuals, the company is morally bound to subscribe
to the local charities as liberally as would be done by individuals
of equal wealth. Another claim is, that of charities whose object
has some connexion with the object of the company, or which
would relieve the distress of parties employed by the company.
There are also extraordinary cases, wherein, by a sudden visi-
s Goneaia, 28 ; 22, s* 2 Corinthians, 9(7.


tation of Providence there is general distress; such as when,
hy a revulsion of trade, large masses of men are thrown out
of employment; or the occurrence of famine, pestilence, or fire;
in these cases the appeal is not made to us in our local or pro-
fessional character, hut to our national feeling, or to our common
humanity; and then public companies have the same duties to
perform as would fall upon individuals of equal wealth. On the
other hand, there are occasions wherein private charity is more
useful than public charity; and it may become the duty of pub-
lic bodies, as well as of individuals, to exercise their benevolence
in secret, t
But it is not necessary that kindness to the poor should al-
ways take the form of almsgiving. It is often better to prevent
poverty than to relieve it, to give employment rather than money,
to grant a loan than to bestow alms. And sometimes public com-
panies can so construct their business arrangements, as, without
any pecuniary sacrifice, greatly to promote the interest and the
comfort of the humbler classes of the community. Public compa-
nies should also co-operate in endeavouring to raise the social
condition of the poor, by diminishing the hours of labor, by
relieving women and children from unsuitable or oppressive
toil, and by extending among the rising population the benefits
of religious education.
To remove the ignorance of the poor is a duty .not less im-
portant than to relieve their distress.
t Matthew, C; I—4. It appears to us, that one of the least useful modes of
bonefittwg the poor is that of permanent endowments. It seems much better, .that
£l,OOO were distributed immediately to the poor, than that this sum were invested
in the funds, and the interest doled out to the poor of distant generations. Let the
benevolence of the present age. relievo the distress of the present ago, and lot us
hope, that the benevolence of future ages will be equal to our own, and equally com-
mensurate with the distress which may then exist. This immediate and broad-cast
charity seems to answer best to the scriptural description s “He hath dispensed
abroad iho hath given to the poor; his righteousness—not his legacies—endureth
forever.”—(Psalms, 112 ; 9.—2 Corinthians, 9 ; 9.)


The God of the Bible is described as <c the God of know-
ledge u and he has implanted in the minds of Ms creatures, a
faculty for acquiring and increasing knowledge—the exercise and
improvement of this faculty is as much a duty as the improve-
ment of any other talent with which we are entrusted. And
from the claims of our common humanity, and from the relation
we all sustain to the same Creator, v it becomes our duty also to
aid others in their pursuit of knowledge. The cultivation of
our intellectual faculties does not diminish, but increases and
refines our physical comforts—-augments our social pleasure by
imparting to each individual additional claims to regard—exalts
our devotional feelings by unlocking more of the wisdom and
goodness manifested in the works of God —and while the
amiable, though injurious aberrations of the moral and religious
feelings, are controlled by the judgment, the adjudications of rea-
son on moral and religious questions, are aided and guided by
an instructed and enlightened conscience. It is quite possible
for all these advantages to be extended to every individual in the
community.
It is peculiarly the duty and the interest of the rich, to edu-
cate the poor —the morals of their children, and the comfort of
their families, depend much on the religious education of their
servants. Among an educated population, the rights of pro-
perty —the effects of capital on the demand for labour, and the
useful tendency of what are called luxuries—and the necessity
for order and subordination in the state, will be better under-
stood. In proportion as the mass of the population are in-
structed, will be the amount of national happiness and prosperity.
Mighty is the monarch, great is the statesman, who can direct the
united energies of a nation of cultivated minds. The education
of the poor is a duty even more incumbent upon public compa-
nies than upon individuals. For it is to the inventions and im-
provements in science, often made by persons of the working
ttl Samuel, 2; 3. v Malaohi, 2 ; 10. —Acts, 17; 26.


class, that many of them owe their existence. Improvement* in
the application of steam, have produced most of our present min-
ing and steam boat, and railway companies. Increased attention
to°statistics and the laws of mortality, has multiplied our in-
surance companies. The general principle on which all our
companies are founded—the power of association—is itself,
the offspring of modern science. Our public companies are
triumphs of mind; they denote a high degree of civilization,
and exhibit, most strikingly, the command of man over the
elements of nature, as well as over the beasts of the field, and
his power in compelling the inert properties of matter, to be-
come the active ministers of his will.
Great is the debt of gratitude due by all our public companies,
to the cause of mental cultivation—and when these companies
are computing the annual gains which from this source they have
acquired, let them not forget that the genius of mental cultivation
supported by benevolence, patriotism, and religion, and attended
by crowds of the uninstructed children of the indigent, stands at
their door, and humbly asks payment of a portion of this debt.
Let them, in part, discharge this debt, by seeing that the
children of their laborers, and the people of the district, are all
supplied with the means of instruction. And afterwards, let them
patronize those societies which have for their object, the educa-
tion of the children of the poor in other districts, and throughout
the land. They should also, as far as ,it can be done with jus-
tice to others, give promotion to such of their servants, as de-
vote their leisure to the cultivation of their minds. The time is
gone by when it was a reproach for a young man to be bookish,
as he was supposed to abstract so much more time and atten-
tion from his official duties. It is now well known, that the
general cultivation of the intellectual powers, renders them more
effective in every operation in which they may he exercised.
It is a great advantage to a public company to have educated
servants. Their superior knowledge is always useful—the men-
tal discipline they have acquired improves their business habits


—and possessing within themselves a constant source of enjoy-
ment, they are the less likely to indulge in those expensive
pleasures which are the usual temptation to neglect and dis-
honesty. w
Third n y. —Having ascertained that public companies lire
moral agents, and having described the duties which as moral
agents they are hound to perform, we shall now inquire what are
the rewards or punishments which may he expected to follow the
performance or non-performance of these duties.
A liability to rewards or punishments is essential to moral
agency. To say that public companies are. moral agents, but
that they will not be rewarded or punished for anything they
may do, would be to assert a contradiction. In pursuing our
inquiries, therefore, on this subject, we shall askl. At what
time will these rewards or punishments be received ? 2, What
will bo their nature ? 3. In what manner will they he applied ?
and 4. What are the effects these doctrines should produce on
the conduct of public companies ?
1. When will these rewards or punishments be bestowed?
From the established order of Providence which causes virtue
to be followed by happiness, and vice by misery, x and from the
dispositions implanted in the mind of man, y it may fairly be
inferred that the Creator and Governor of the world is a God of
truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.j? And as He also
possesses omnipotent power He will assuredly carry his disposi-
tions and purposes into effect. But on comparing these attributes
of the Supreme Governor of the universe with the actual destiny
w Proverbs, 3 ! 13—IS i 4; 7—o. x Proverbs, XI; 31.
y Romans, 2 j 14, 15. Some writers on Moral Philosophy have denied that man
possesses those moral powers which arc usually, but, perhaps, not very properly,
called the moral sense / and, to support their sentiments, they have adduced the
immoral practices of various nations in ancient and modem times ! snob, as infanti-
cide, the burning of widows, &c. They might as well have collected together all
the erroneous opinions in the arts and sciences that have prevailed in different ages
of the world, and then have inferred, that man is not endowed with reason.
* Deuteronomy, 32 j 4.


of the righteous and the wicked in the present world, we do not
perceive that perfect union of virtue with happiness, and of vice
with misery, which our contemplation of the Divine character
would have lead us to expect, and inquiring minds have often
been puzzled for a solution of this difficulty.
Righteous art thou O Lord when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with
thee of thy judgments. 'Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper.
Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously, a —Thou art of
purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity. Wherefore
(then) lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and boldest thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he. h
—As for me my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped, for
1 was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, c
The hook of Job is a controversy upon this question.
The friends of Job maintained the proposition, that the
destiny of men in the present life corresponded with their moral
character.
Remember I pray thoo who ever perished being innocent, nr when were
the righteous cut off. Even ns I have seen they that plow iniquity, and sow
wickedness, reap the same, d —Behold God will "not cast away a perfect man,
neither will ho, help the evil doers, e —lf thou wort pure and upright, surely
now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous./
But Job does not admit this proposition, and declares that
“ the tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God
are secure, into whose hand God hringeth abundantly.” g
In attempting the solution of this difficulty, it may be
observed that, though not universally, yet generally, virtue and
happiness, vice and misery are associated in the dispensations of
Providence in the present world. And indeed, in all the moral sci-
ences the general propositions are subject to exceptions; the moral
sciences differing in this respect from the abstract and the physical
sciences; or, to use the language of logicians, there is a metaphy-
a Jeremiah, 121. 6 Hahakkuk, 1; 13. c Psalms, 73 | 2, 3.
d Job, 4; 7, 8. e Job, 8 ; 20. /Job, 8 ; 6.
g Job, 12 ; 0.


sical, a physical, and a moral universality, h Thus, though it be a
general rule in political economy that the diligent hand maketh
rich, yet there are some diligent hands that do not become rich;
and though it be a general rule in the science of education, that
if you train up a child in the way he should gb, when he is old
he will not depart from it; yet there are some melancholy excep-
tions. And thus it is a general rale, that the righteous are
prosperous, and the wicked miserable, in the present world, sub-
ject only to those exceptions to which all general rules, in the
science of morals, are liable. It may also be observed, that when
those exceptions do occur, the prosperity of the wicked, and the
afflictions of the righteous, are only of a short duration; i —and
often even rectify themselves; the afflictions of the righteous
leading to prosperity, and the prosperity of the wicked leading
to destruction, j
It may moreover be contended, that outward circumstances
are no certain index of happiness; that the wicked man amid all
his prosperity, may have a conscience that shall biteas an adder; k
or have some particular circumstance that shall give him so much ■
annoyance as to nullify all the pleasures of his success. I While
on the other hand, the righteous man may possess such inward
sources of happiness, as shall enable him to rejoice even in
tribulation, m
But though these considerations may lighten, they do not
remove the difficulty. It is not consistent with the teaching of
our intellectual faculties, nor with the impulses of our moral
feelings, that a Being of immaculate holiness and inflexible
justice, and possessed, moreover, of omniscience and omnipotence,
should permit, in even a single instance, that virtue should go
unrewarded, and vice should remain unpunished. If the Creator
of the world were not a righteous Being, he would not have im-
h Watts’s Logic. i Psalms, 34 ; 19. —Job, 20 ;5. j Genesis, 45 ;7, B.
Proverbs, 1 ; 32. h Proverbs, '23 ; 32. I Esther, '5 ; 11—13;
m Hebrews, 10 j 34.—Hnbakkuk 3 i 17, 18.
D


planted a love of righteousness in the minds of his creatures;
and if he be a righteous Beings it is reasonable to expect that his
righteousness should appear in all the operations of his moral
government. And as we find this is not universally the case, we
are driven to the conclusion, that the present state is not a state
of final retribution; that the enjoyments and afflictions of the
present life are intended chiefly as instruments of moral dis-
cipline ; and that there is a future state of existence, in which
the final distribution of rewards and punishments will take
place. Thus reason concurs with Revelation in teaching us that
“ it is appointed unto men once to die, and after that the judg-
ment.”?} The inequalities of the present world will thus he
rectified in the next, and “ every man will be rewarded accord-
ing to his works.
But, hciwever satisfactory this solution of the difficulty may
Be with regard to individuals, it does not apply to the case of
public companies. Their existence commences and terminates
in the present world, and they must be rewarded or punished
in the present world, or they will not be punished or rewarded
at all. In the latter case they are exempted from the moral
government of God. With them virtue has no reward and vice
no punishment. In reply to any exhortations to perform their
moral and religious duties, they may exclaim, “ What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit should we
have if we pray unto hirn.”p "We know not the Lord, neither
will we obey his voice.”# As, however, we cannot suppose that
God has exempted public companies from his moral government,
we must infer that they are punished or rewarded in the present
state.
This conclusion rests upon the same evidence as the argu-
ment we have just stated. In the former case the argument
stands thus:—
n Hebrews, 9 ; 27. o Proverbs, 24 j 12, p Job, 21 j 15.
q Exodus, 5 ; 2.


The righteous Governor of the world must reward the good
and punish the wicked.
But this is not done in the present world.
Therefore there must be a future world, in which this retri-
bution will take place.
Our present argument stands thus:—
The Righteous Governor of the world must reward the good
and punish the wicked whether those actions are performed by-
public bodies, or private individuals.
But the public companies who now perform good or evil
actions will not exist in a future world.
Therefore public companies must be rewarded or punished
in the present world.
The only way of resisting this argument is either to maintain
that public companies are not moral agents, and therefore not
responsible for their good or evil actions, or that they will exist
in a future world. The former part of the alternative we think
we have sufficiently refuted—the latter is too wild to need refu-
tation. r
All the promisings and threatenings of Scripture made to
nations or other bodies of men have a reference to the present
world, as it is only in the present world that such collective
bodies can, in their corporate capacity, be either punished or
rewarded.
2. What is the nature of those rewards or punishments ?
The object of a public company is to get wealth—a few
patriotic shareholders may have taken shares to benefit the
country, or the district that may be the field of its operations;
but by far the greater number have no other object than to
obtain a profitable employment for their capital. A public
company therefore cannot be considered as prosperous, unless
this object be obtained—if then a public company be rewarded
r Luke, 20 j 34—30. If the marriage contract shall then he dissolved a fortiori,
other contracts will also he dissolved.
D 2


it must lie by an increase of its wealth; if it be punished it must
be by a diminution of its wealth, s
That wealth is an evil, is not the doctrine of Scripture nor
of common sense.
In Scripture, wealth is distinctly called a blessing.
The Lord hath blessed rny muster greatly, mid ho is become groat; and
be hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and man-servants,
and maid-servants, and camels, t —Thou knowest how I have, served thee, and
limy thy cattle was with me; for it was little which thou luidst before I came,
and it is now increased unto a multitude, and the Lord hath blessed thee since
my coming.*—The Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning,
for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand
yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses, v
The exhortation given in Scripture to the rich, to relieve
the distress of the poor, must be founded on the principle that
wealth is a blessing, and that poverty is an evil, for if the poor
are more happy, more wise, and more virtuous, than the rich,
upon what ground can the rich be exhorted to relieve the poor ?
Even the cautions and admonitions given to the rich,
assume the principle, that wealth is a blessing —“ Better is the poor
who walketh in his integrity, than he who is perverse in his ways,
though he be rich.” w This asserts that wealth is not so great
a blessing as moral rectitude; but still it assumes that wealth is
a blessing. This will appear if we reverse the sentence, for
though it will then be equally true, yet for want of this
assumption, it will appear ridiculous—better is the rich that
s It may be observed, that wealth, riches, and similar terms, have usually a
relative moaning. Generally, they denote the amount of property possessed by each
individual in the highest classes of society. In this sense, wealthy people are com-
paratively few. But when it is sold, “ that the diligent hand mnketh rich,” it is not
meant that every diligent man is placed at the top of society—that would be im-
possible. It means only, that ho possesses more property, and a larger portion of
the comforts of life, than he would possess were he not diligent. He is rich, not,
perchance, as compared with others, but as compared with his former self.
< Genesis, 24 i 35. u Genesis, 30 j 29, 30. , a Job, 42 ; 12.
w Proverbs.


walketh in his integrity than he that is perverse in his ways,
though he be poor. Let not the rich man glory in his riches, x
Riches make themselves wings and fly away as an eagle towards
heaven, y Charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust
not in uncertain riches, z All these expressions imply that
riches are blessings, and though theypartake of the uncertainty
of all earthly blessings, as health, friends, or reputation, yet still
they are blessings to be received with thanksgiving; a and to be
employed in promoting the honor of God j b and the good of
mankind.
The Scriptures do not intimate that the personal enjoy-
ment of wealth is necessarily sinful.
Wealth, like any other blessing, may be desired from
improper motives, c and sought by improper means, d and such
an ill-regulated desire may become the root of all evil, e It is
also true, that when wealth is obtained it has its temptations,
and so have intellectual superiority, literary excellence, and even
religious attainments./ But, it is not the honorable pursuit of
wealth, nor the innocent enjoyment of its advantages, that
constitutes a crime. “ The ground of a certain rich man brought
forth plentifully, and he said, I will pull down my barns and
build greater, and there will I bestow my fruits, and will say to
my soul, take thine ease, eat drink, and be merry, g There was
nothing wrong in this. His folly consisted in forgetfulness of
the approach of death, and his neglect of preparation for a
future state. And in regard to the other rich man. h It was
not his cloathing himself in purple and fine linen, and faring
sumptuously every day ; it was his omitting to relieve the poor
man, who was laid at his gate, and his neglecting to hear Moses
and the prophets, that brought him to the place of 'torment.
a Jeremiah, 9 ; 23. y Proverbs,' 23 i 5. z 1 Timothy, G j 17.
a 1 Timothy, 4; 3. h 2 Corinthians, 8; 7. c James, 4; 3.
d Proverbs, 28 ; 22.—1 Timothy, G; 9. el Timothy, 6 ; 10.
/ 2 Corinthians, 12 j 7. g Luke, 12 ; 16—20. h Luke, 1G ; 19,


Not only is wealth represented in Scripture as a blessing,
but it is a blessing promised as a reward to the practice of
virtue and piety.
All these blessings shall come on thee and overtake thee, if thou slmlt
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God. —Blessed shall thou he in the
city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field. —Blessed shall be thy basket and
thy store. The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy store-
houses, and in all that thou scttest thine hand unto.—And the Lord shall
make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy cattle and in the fruit of
thy ground.—The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thy hand.i
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.y—By humility and the fear' of the
Lord, are riches, honor, and life, k —The blessing of the Lord it maketh
rich, and he addeth no sorrow therewith. I —That I may cause them that love
me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures, m
The virtues, upon the exercise of which wealth is most fre-
quently promised, are .diligence, righteousness, prudence, liberality
in the cause of religion, and kindness to the poor.
1, Diligence in business.
The diligent maketh rich, n —The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but
the slothful shall be under tribute, o—The soul of the diligent shall be made
fast.p—The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness, q —Seoth
thou a man diligent in business, he shall stand before kings, he shall not
stand before mean men. r —Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, but
he that gathereth by labour shall increase, .s—Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy flocks and look well to thy herds, t
2. Righteousness in social transactions.
The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, but ho blesseth the
habitation of the Just, u —Ho that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly,
he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shutteth his hands from holding
of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes
from seeing evil. He shall dwell on high; his place of defence shall be the
i Deuteronomy, 28, j 1 Timothy, 4 ; 8. fc Proverbs, 22 ; 4.
I Proverbs, 10 i 22. m Proverbs, 8; 21. n Proverbs, 10 j 4.
o Proverbs, 12 j 24. p Proverbs, 13 ; 4. q Proverbs, 21 ; 5.
r Proverbs, 22; 29. s Proverbs, 13; 11. t Proverbs, 27; 23.
« Proverbs, 3; 83,


mountain of rocks; . bread shall be given him; his water shall be sure, v
And if thy brother be sold unto thee and serve thee six years, then, in the
seventh year, thou shall let him go free from thee. And when thou sendeth
him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go away empty, Thou shalt
furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy
wine-press; of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee, thou shalt
give unto him. It shall not seem hard unto thee when thou sendest him
away free from thee, for he hath been worth a double kind servant tmto thee
in serving thee six yews, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all that
thou doest, w
3. Prudent habits.
He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man, he that loveth oil and wine
shall not be rich,®—The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty,
and drowsiness shall cloathe a man with rags.y —He that tilleth his land shall
be satisfied with bread, but he that folioweth after vain persons shall have
poverty enough.2—He that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a
great waiter, a —A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hideth himself, but the
foolish pass on and are punished.
4. Liberality in the cause of religion.
Honor the Lord with thy substfinoe and with the first fruits of all thine
increase, so shall thy.barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst
out with new wine, b —Thou shalt truly tythe all the increase of thy seed that
the field bringeth forth year by year, and thou shalt eat before the Lord thy
God, in the place in which he shall choose to place his name there, the tythe
of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and
of thy flocks, that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always, And
the Levite (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,) and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow which are within thy gates, shall
come and shall eat and be satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the work of thy hand which thou doest. c
5. Kindness to the poor.
If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of
thy gates in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not
harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. Thou shalt
surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto
v Isaiah, 33; 15,16. io Deuteronomy, 15 ; 12,13,14,18.
w Proverbs, 21; 17. y Proverbs, 23 ; 21. z Proverbs 28 ; 19.
a Proverbs, 18 ; 9. i Proverbs. c Deuteronomy, 14 j 22, 23, 29.


him, because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto, e
These are the maxims that form the Scriptural art of getting
rich. We often hear of other maxims, such as, ee Mind number
one,” “A penny saved is a penny got,” “Take care of the
pence and the pounds will take care of themselves,” “ Charity
begins at home.” But these maxims are not found among the
Proverbs of Solomon, nor does the Bible anywhere teach us
that selfishness, niggardliness, and closefistedness, are the road
to wealth. The scriptural doctrine is the reverse of this :
The liberal soul shall bo made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered
also himself./—The liberal deviseth liberal things, and by liberal things shall
he stand, g —There is that scatteretb and yet inercasoth, and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet and it teudoth to poverty, h —He which
soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he which soweth bountifully
shall reap also bountifully, i
And even in those cases in which wealth is obtained by dis-
honorable means, that wealth is represented as soon departing
from the possession of the individual, and passing into more
worthy hands.
He that oppressetb the poor to increase his riches, and he that givetb to
rich, shall surely come to want../ —The Lord will not suffer the soul of the
righteous to famish, hut he easteth away the substance of the wicked, k —Ho
that by usury and unjust gain, increoscth his substance, he shall gather it for
him that will pity the poor. I —The wealth of the sinner is kid up for the
just.m—God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and know-
ledge, and joy; but to the sinner he giveth travail to gather and to heap up,
that he may give it to him that is good before God, n
Thus we find, that, according to the political economy of
the Bible, wealth is the gift of God, and it is bestowed by him
upon those that fear God, and keep his commandments. This
blesssing is not always bestowed on righteous individuals,
e Deuteronomy, 15 ;7 f 10, /Proverbs, 11 ('25, g laaiali, 32 |B.
A Proverbs, II ; 25, i 2 Corinthians, 9 ! C. j Proverbs, 22 ; IG.
It Proverbs, 10 ; 3. I Proverbs, 28 i 8, m Proverbs, 13 ■, 22.
» Ecclesiastes, 2 ; 26.


because with individuals this is not a state of final retribution;
and they are promised in this world, only such a portion of the
sunshine of prosperity, as shall conduce to the maturing of the
excellencies of their character; hut with public companies this
is a state of final retribution, and hence, with them righteous-
ness will bring wealth, and wickedness will bring poverty.
3. In what manner are these rewards or punishments ap-
plied.
Rewards or punishments in the present life, reach us as the
natural effects of the virtues or vices which we practice, or they
fall upon us by the special visitations of Divine Providence.
There is a natural connection, for instance, between the virtue
of temperance, and the blessing of health between in-
dustry and wealth —— between honesty and reputation and
when we read, “he that tilleth his land shall be satisfied
with bread,” o “ the hand of the diligent maketh rich,”p we
see at once the connection between the virtues practised, and
the blessings that follow them,—but when we read, “Honor thy
father and thy mother that thy days may be long, g” “ Blessed
is he that hath mercy on the poor, the Lord shall deliver him
in the day of trouble,?-” we do not so readily see the con-
nexion between the duty and blessing. —We do not see why
filial piety should be connected with longevity, nor why mercy
to the poor should produce deliverance from trouble. These
then, are to be considered as commandments “ with promise.” «
The connexion between the duty and the blessing depends on
the promises of God. It may so be, that in the secret machin-
ery of Providence, the connexion between the virtues and the
blessings, may be as natural and as necessary in these latter
cases, as in the former, but the connexion is not so obvious to
us, and therefore, when these blessings occur, we view thein as
coming directly from the special visitations of the Most. High.
o Proverbs, 12 ; 11. P Proverbs, 10; <l. <J Exodus, 20 ; 12.
r Romans, 8 ; 28.—1 Corinthians, 3.; 21. » Ephesians, 6; 2.


It may also be observed, that even in the former cases, tb e
connexion is not so necessary or so constant as to supersede
the necessity for the Divine blessing. For though industry has
a tendency to produce wealth, yet, in many individual cases, it
does not do so. In this, and in other moral laws, the Supreme
Being appears to have left them open to exceptions, in order to
keep up the sense of dependence, and the feelings of devotion
in the minds of his creatures.
It may be observed in general, that a principle of righteous
retaliation, appears to bo the prevailing principle of the Divirxe
government.
The Scriptures abound with declarations of this principle.
X the Lord search the heart. I try the reins, oven to give every man.
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings, f—Whatever
good thing any man doetli, the same shall he receive of the Lord.«—For if
ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you, But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses, u—He that doeth wrong, shall receive for the wrong,
that ho hath done, w—lt is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribu-
lation to them that trouble you. a —Judge not that ye ho not judged, for witlx
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete,
it shall bo measured to you again, y—Whoso rowardeth evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house, z— Whoso cauaoth the righteous to go astray
in an evil way, he shall fall himself into him own pit. a—They shall cat of tlie
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices, b
This principle prevails throughout all the enactments of the
Mosaic law.
If a man cause a blemish in his neighbour, ns ho hath done so shall it be
done to him. o—Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
d —lf a false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him that
which is wrong, then shall yo do unto him as ho had thought to have done
unto his neighbour, e—Whoso sheddeth man’s blood by man shall his blood,
ho shed./
t Jeremiah, 17 | 10. u Ephesians, G i 8. v Matthew, 6 j 14,16.
wColossiana, 3 t 26. x 1 Thossnloniaus, 1; 6. y Matthew, 7;1, 2.
* Proverbs, 17; 13. a Proverbs, 28 ; 10, i Proverbs, 60 j 31.
oLeviticus, 24 ■, 19. d Exodus, 21 j 24. cDeuteronomy, 19 j 16,1.0-
f Genesis, 9 s 6.


The denunciations of Scripture often refer to this principle.
Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in
anywise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; [and your
wives shall he widows and your children fatherless, g —Because thou hast
spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee, h —The
children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem, have ye sold unto the
Grecians; and I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Saheans. i
Many of the facts recorded in Scripture illustrate the appli-
cation of this principle.
But Adonibezelc fled, and they pursued after him and caught him and out
off his thumbs and his great toes j and Adonibezelc said, three-score and ten
Icings having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered then- meat
under my table: as I have done so God hath requited me. j —Samuel said
unto Agag : As thy Sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother
be childless among women, k —Elijah said to Ahah, Thus saith the Lord : iu
the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine. I —They hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. m.
Providence seems to have implanted in the mind of man, a
desire of witnessing this application of these principles. An
honorable feeling of gratification arises in virtuous minds, when
the man of violence, of fraud, or oppression) has been punished
in a way corresponding to his crime, and by means brought on
by his own actions. Hence the Psalmist prays; “ Let the
wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal escape/’ n
“ Let his net that he hath hid catch himself; into that very
destruction let him fall.” o —And he rejoices in witnessing the
accomplishment of his desires. c( The wicked is snared in the work
of his own hands. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that
they made : in the net which they hid is their own foot taken.” p
“ They have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they
are fallen themselves.” q.
g Exodus, 22; 22,24. h Halmldculc, 2 ; 8. i Joel, 3; 6, 8.
j Judges, 5 j 6, 7. * 1 Samuel, 15 ; 33. IX Kings, 21 j 19.
m Esther, 7; 10. » Psalm 141; 10. o Psalm 35; 8.
p Psalm 9 ; 15, 16. q Psalm 57 ; 6i


We should infer from these principles, that in the ordinary-
course of Providence, it will be natural to expect that public
companies will receive their rewards or punishments as the result
of their own actions. And this will more obviously be the case
when prosperity is bestowed as the reward of diligence, righteous-
ness, or prudence. But when success is bestowed as the reward
of the duties of religion or benevolence, it may arise from sudden
or unexpected causes; at the same time, we cannot lay down
any rules for the Divine procedure. “He giveth not account
of any of his matters.” r “He will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the pru-
dent.” s He can unlock fresh sources of prosperity, or open
new fountains of affliction whenever He thinks meet to do so
for the moral discipline of his intelligent creation. “ The Lord
maketh poor and maketh rich: He bringeth low and lifteth up.” t
“ When He giveth quietness who then can make trouble; and
when He hideth His face, who then can behold Him ; whether
it be done against a nation or against a man only.” u With
regard to public companies as well as individuals, " He putteth
down one and setteth up another, and none can stay His hand, or
say unto Him, what doest Thou.” v “ But though clouds and
darkness are round about Him, yet righteousness and judgment
are the habitation of His throne.” w And He will so arrange the
dispensations of His providence " That men shall say; verily
there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that
judgeth IN THE EARTH.” X
4. The effects which a liability to these rewards and punish-
ments, should produce on the conduct of public companies.
The doctrine we have endeavoured to establish is, that
public companies are moral agents, capable of performing good
r Job, 33! 13.; s X Corinthians, 1 1 19. jf 1 Samuel, 2, 7.
« Job, 84 i 29. v Psalm, 75 j 7.—-Darnel, 4; 35.
w Psalm, 97 ! 2. a; Psalm, 58 j 11.


and evil actions. That those which perform good actions will be
rewarded, and those which perform evil actions will be punished;
and that those rewards and punishments will consist generally,
in an increase or diminution of their wealth. We shall now
notice the practical application which public companies may
make of this doctrine.
A liability to be rewarded or punished according to their
works, should naturally induce public companies to act in such
a way as to obtain the reward, and to avoid the punishment.
This is to he done by performing the duties we have described.
Let them perform the duties they owe to their country, and to
those with whom they are socially related —their duties to God,
and to the poor; and they may hope with confidence, for those
blessings which are promised to follow the performance of those
duties,
1. Public companies should not use this doctrine uncharit-
ably, in the opinion they form of other companies which are not
so prosperous as themselves.
Our doctrine does not teach us that success will immediately,
in all cases, follow the performance of the duties we have
described. Nor that success will be unchecked or unalloyed.
A few 1 years is a short period in the history of a public com-
pany, and we can form no judgment from so short a period
of its ultimate success. Nay, it may he, that these few years
of struggle and difficulty, may he the foundation of its future
greatness. We should, therefore, judge illogically and uncha-
ritably, were we, from the temporary distress of a public com-
pany, to infer that it was deficient in the performance of its
moral and religious duties. We know enough of the principles
of the Divine Government, to be able to regulate our own con-
duct, but not enough to enable us to pass sentence on the con-
duct of others, y
2. Public companies should not envy other public companies
y Luke, 13 ; I—Acta, 28 ; 3—6,


who may have neglected their moral and religious duties, and yet
for a time, may enjoy a high degree of apparent prosperity.
When large fortunes are suddenly acquired, by comparatively
slight deviations from the path of rectitude, even virtuous minds
are almost tempted to regret their own purity, and to exclaim —■
“"Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands
in innocency. Behold the ungodly, they prosper in. the world,
they increase in riches.-” g —But we are cautioned against the in-
dulgence of this disposition.
Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity; for they shall soon bo out down like the grass, and wither
as the green herb. Rost in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret nut
thyself because of him who prospered; in his way, because of the man who
bringeth wicked devices to pass. Fret not thyself in any wise to do evil, for
evil doers shall be out off, but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall in-
herit the earth. For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou
shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. a —l have seen the
wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he
passed away, and 10, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not bo
found, h
3. Let those public companies which are not successful, ex-
amine the duties we have described, one by one, and ascertain
if they have performed them all. If they find they may justly
be charged with omissions, then “ put away the evil of your
doings; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment;
relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless; plead for the, poor;
if ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat of the fruit of the
land.” c If they find they have performed all their duties, and
yet are not successful; let them not “be weary in well doing, for
in due season they shall reap if they faint not.” d
4. Let those public companies which are prosperous, also
examine how far they are chargeable with a neglect of any of
their moral or religious duties. “If weighed in the balance, and
x Psalm, 73 ; 13—12. a Psalm, 37; I—lo. i Psalm, 37; 35—36.
c Isaiah, 1; 16, 18, 19. d Galatians, 6; 9. e Daniel, 5 ; 27.


found wanting,” e let them reflect on the transient nature of
unsanctified prosperity. “Behold these are the ungodly, who
prosper in the world, they increase in riches. Surely thou didst
not set them in slippery places—-thou castest them down into
destruction. How are they brought into desolation as in a
moment,”/ “ Lo! this is the man that made not God his
strength, hut trusted in the abundance of his riches, and
strengthened himself in his wickedness. God shall destroy thee
for ever—he shall take thee away, and root thee out of the land
of the living.” g
If they find that they have strictly observed the duties of
morality, hut neglected those of religion and benevolence, let
let them recollect that, although it is said, “To do justice and
judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice,” h —thus
intimating that morality without religion is better than religion
without morality—yet the union of both is essential to perfec-
tion of character and to the attainment of the highest degree of
prosperity. If they have received those blessings which are
promised to the exercise of diligence, righteousness and pru-
dence, let them endeavour to obtain those also which are pro-
mised to religion and benevolence. Let them not allow it to be
said, that though “diligent in business,”* yet they have not
diligently followed every good work,/ 5 that their righteousness
refers only to temporal affairs, and though scrupulously obser-
vant of the rights of man, yet they have been unmindful of the
rights of God ;/c that their wisdom is only the wisdom of this
world, and not the wisdom which cometh from above, which
is “ first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits ; 55 1 and that their splendid
buildings are temples devoted to the service of Mammon, m
from whose altars no sacrifices of thanksgiving n ascend to the
/ Psalms, 73; 12, 18, 19. ff Psalm, 52 ;7, S. A Proverbs, 21; 3.
i Proverbs, 22 ; 29. j 1 Timothy, 5 ; 10. * Deuteronomy, 32 j 18.
I James, 3; 17. m Matthew, 6 j 24. n Psalms, 116; 17;


Most High, and at whose gates the poor and the needy stand
and plead in vain, o
As for those public companies that have performed all their
moral and religious duties, and have obtained all the promised
prosperity, they have only to indulge in the pleasing duties of
gratitude and joy. “Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy and
drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepteth thy
works.”yj "Because' the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all
thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou
shalt surely rejoice.” g “ Peace be within thy walls, and pros-
perity within thy palaces.” r It affords pleasure to God s and
to men t to see piety and virtue in a state of prosperity.
And let those individuals who from their talents, their wealth,
or their position, have the power of influencing the conduct of
public companies, recollect they are responsible for the exercise
of the influence they possess 5 and although these companies will
cease to exist with the present world, yet individuals will not.
And those who from Christian motives may cause the companies
with which they are connected to pay higher attention to their
moral and religious duties, and who thus shall “ turn many to
righteousness,”m may expect that, after they have served their
generation, v according to the will of God, they will be permitted,
through Divine grace, to join the company of angels, and the
spirits of just men made whose names are written in
the Lamlfls book of life.#
o Deuteronomy, 15 i 7. —Lulco, 10 j 21. p Ecclesiastes, 9; 7.
q Deuteronomy, 16; 15. r Psalms, 122 ; 7. s Psalms, 35 ; 27.
t Proverbs, 11, 10; 29—2. u Daniel, 12; 3.
« Acts, 13 ; 30. w Hebrews, 12 i 22—23.
x Revelations, 21 ; 27.
Waterlow & Sons, Printers, 00, London Wnll, Loudon.
fj
