

BRITISH AND AUSTRALIAN
STEAM NAVIGATION.
STATEMENT AND PROPOSAL.
A. BOSS.
LONDON;
BELL AND DALDY, YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN.
1868.


JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.


BRITISH AND AUSTRALIAN
STEAM NAVIGATION.
The success and progress of ocean steam naviga-
tion Rave for many years afforded a prospect of greatly
facilitating and increasing tlxe commercial and passenger
intercourse between Britain and Australia, but the route
via Suez and Ceylon being adopted for the mails, the em-
ployment of full-powered steamers via the Cape of Good
Hope has been regarded as financially impracticable.
An allowance for the conveyance of mails being now pro-
posed, together with the lessened expenditure in the
operations of steam navigation which is now effected,
will procure the establishment of regular and rapid steam
communipation by the direct sea course.
The advantages to be derived from quick transit, com-
bined with regularity in conducting intercourse, are so
well understood that no doubt is now entertained of a
line of powerful steamers, stationed wherever the traffic
warrants, both securing a preference and obtaining a
proportionate increase. The exception to this rule is
when obstacles intervene to counterbalance the advantage
of speed, such as are presented by the mail communica-
tions now existing with Australia. The hindrances to


enlarged intercourse on these lines are so obvious that it
O
is only necessary to note the result in order to exhibit
their inadequacy for facilitating or conducting the traffic.
Although the branch communication from the East to
Australia has been in operation 13 years, and that from
the West two, both together obtain only a small share of
the passenger trade, and as respects goods the quantity
is insignificant. This proves their unsuitableness to the
purposes of the large traffic between this country and
Australia, arising chiefly from the necessity for tranship-
ments; and as all classes of passengers prefer the direct
conveyances, it follows that large and powerful steam-
ships established via the Cape of Good Hope will obtain
ample support and promote additional intercourse; and
by making the inward passage via South Africa instead
of via Cape Horn, as at present, the preference is certain
to be general.
By comparing the passages of the steamships em-
ployed on the Atlantic and applying the result to the
Australian voyage, it will appear that the postal delivery
by the direct sea course can be effected within 47 days,
the shortest time now taken via Marseilles and Galle.
The passage outward to Australia being more favourable
than the passage inward, it is believed that the former
can be made unbroken by any stoppage : by the latter one
stoppage will be requisite. Some advantage in time will
be gained in the delivery outwards counterbalanced by the
delivery inwards. These considerations, coupled with the
advantages obviously belonging to the direct sea route,
as enabling the voyage to be made without removals or
delays, have pointed to its adoption for the conveyance of
the mails. The large amount of the correspondence with


tlie Australian Colonies has induced the demand for a
more frequent mail delivery. The Panama route has
proved inefficacious for the object of a semi-monthly
postal service except with New Zealand. A monthly
steam communication via the Cape of Good Hope alternat-
ing with the mail service via India will secure a semi-
monthly delivery.
If the object to be gained were one of mail delivery
only, an offer made by the P. and 0. Company of perform-
ing it fortnightly via Galle might have been considered;
but the object of obtaining quick and commodious pas-
senger conveyance is at least equally essential to the ad-
vancement of Australia, and the impolicy of subsidizing
routes unsuited to this important requisite has become
apparent. It is perceived now that the consequence of
supporting the branch mail lines to the exclusion of the
direct route has been to deprive Australia of a large share
of the advantages derivable from a system of enlarged
steam communication with Europe. By means of the
government grants steam navigation on the Atlantic was
rendered efficient and widely beneficial from the beginning,
and with the progress of development it has now come to
absorb nearly all the passenger traffic besides vastly in-
creasing it. Should similar encouragement be granted
the steam navigation to and from Australia, it would, with-
out doubt, be attended with the same results. Under
present circumstances, it follows that because a branch
from the East Trunk line effects the mail deliveries for
Australia, therefore the promotion of general intercourse
languishes, and the southern colonies are retarded in the
race of colonization. If it is to continue thus, the great
revolution in ocean navigation which has been progressing


during the last thirty years has resulted in placing
Australia to a comparative disadvantage. Arguments
formerly cogent are now become urgent reasons for pro-
curing the adoption of the direct route for the mails, and
so secure the early establishment of a superior system of
steam navigation between England and Australia.
In Victoria public attention has been much directed
to this object, and active measures are in progress.
Dissatisfaction has been long felt in that Colony, and
frequently expressed, at the inferior capabilities of the
vessels plying from Ceylon; and it is plain enough that
steam across the Pacific via New Zealand cannot effect
the improvements necessary.
At present, towards the maintenance of these two
lines of mail steam communication, the Australasian
Colonies contribute a total of £226,335 Bs. 4 d. per annum ;
the mail service via Galle amounting to £106,335 Bs. 4 d.,
and that via Panama, £120,000. Towards the former the
various Colonies contributed in a ratable proportion
according to the extent of their population and resources :
for the latter, New South Wales and New Zealand have
guaranteed the amount, but given notice of withdrawing
their contribution for the service via Suez. A third route
to Queensland via Batavia, which had been tried, is also
now demanded by that Colony.
These complications having rendered necessary the
assembling a Postal Conference in order to settle the
claims of each Colony and adjust the amounts of ratable
contribution, this body met at Melbourne in March of
last year, each Colony being represented by its delegates.
Having at a former period been engaged in promoting
steam navigation to Australia, the writer of the present


statement (in a pamphlet published at Melbourne) urged
the importance of embracing the Cape route in the scheme
of Postal Service.
It was shown that the direct sea route had been the
first proposed for steam mail communication before the
extension from India had been attempted; that auxiliary
steam-vessels had for several years performed the voyage
in the same period as originally reckoned upon for the
delivery of the mails, demonstrating that the employment
of full-powered steamers would prove even more success-
ful with Australia than with America; that large and
powerful steam-ships would effect the passage from Eng-
land within seven weeks at the rate of the Atlantic
steamers, and secure a preference from all classes of
passengers. Being calculated to convey a great number,
and having capacity for considerable cargo, the receipts
from freight and passengers would go far to balance the
whole expenditure, and the subsidy required for the con-
veyance of the mails could not exceed that granted to
the service via Galle. That with the progress of en-
gineering science and increase of business, vessels of
still greater power and capacity will come to be em-
ployed, improving speed and conveying larger bodies of
people objects comparatively unattainable wherever
transhipment is necessary; that the advantages to be
derived by the Colonies of Australasia from this improved
system of communication with Europe will be seen in the
advancement of every colonial interest; that the object
of expediting and facilitating the transit of passengers
and goods from the centres of European population by
steam navigation is no less desirable than its accomplish-
ment by rail between Melbourne or Sydney and the in-


terior of Australia, for which latter purpose several
millions have been raised on Government guarantee, and,
if necessary, the establishment of steam communication
should be secured by the same means; for, irrespective
of the capability of this route performing the mail
service by full-powered steamers, its adaptation to the
purposes of conducting and promoting immigration ren-
dered it of equal importance with the rail, and it would
in process of time meet its own expenses.
These representations had the effect of reviving the
question, particularly in Victoria. The subject was
largely discussed, and these views are vigorously main-
tained by the leading Press. In the Conference the
following resolution was proposed by a Victorian dele-
gate, and seconded by another from New South Wales :
f That, in the opinion of this Conference, it is de-
sirable that direct steam communication should be
established by way of the Cape of Good Hope, by means
of large steamers carrying mails and passengers cheaply,
quickly, and regularly, between Great Britain and Aus-
tralasia/
This important motion was not pressed to a division.
The meeting of the first Postal Conference resulted in
the adoption of a memorial to the Queen, wherein the
claims of the Australasian Colonies to the three Postal
Services—one by way of King Sound, one by
way of Torres Straits, and one by way of New Zealand
and Panama—were represented as ‘ necessary to the de-
mands and large growing commerce of these Colonies ; y
and it was stated that ‘ the associated Colonies, by their
representatives in Conference, have agreed to contribute
a moiety not exceeding £200,000 of the entire cost of


maintaining these three lines of postal communication/
The Home Government have declined to adopt the
proposals of the Conference: it follows that the system
recommended falls to the ground, and another meeting
must take place, and other negotiations.
Time is therefore afforded for the further considera-
tion and development of the question, which delay was
needed, in order to lead the Colonial public to form a just
estimate of the comparative merits of the proposed direct
mail communication.
Deeply interested as all the Southern Colonies un-
doubtedly are in the enlargement of their intercourse
with Europe, they are not all equally alive to the utility
and advantages of the direct route. The absence of
correct information with regard to steam navigation, the
prejudices arising from priority or otherwise in receiving
mails and passengers, and the adverse representations of
rival interests, have combined of late years in preventing
any unanimous expression from the Australian colonists
themselves in favour of their obtaining an independent
line of mail steam communication.
Events are rapidly tending to the removal of these
hindrances. The colonial capitalists and employers of
labour require to be supplied with hands, and the wide-
spread territories of Australia to be occupied by settlers.
More and more difficulty is experienced in obtaining this
supply, and inducing settlers from Europe. Virtually,
diminishing the distance by rendering voyage more
speedy in vessels both commodious and economical is the
only certain means of withdrawing the objections to an
Australian voyage, and the only obstacle in the way of
enlarged immigration.


In oi’der to aid to a greater extent than hitherto in
the introduction of the labouring classes into Victoria,
the Parliament of that Colony has recently resolved upon
devoting a large proportion of the land revenue for this
object, and it is the expressed opinion of the members
that the grant should embrace the rapid conveyance of
emigrants.
Most of the organs of the Melbourne press condemn
any proposal of increasing the subsidy to the P. and 0,
Company, in order to obtain the performance via Galle
of a semi-monthly communication, but declare the pro-
priety of giving to the Cape route a fair trial. At the
latest date we find an editor thus writing f The Suez
line bears the same relation to the direct ocean route that
a luxury does to a necessary of life. It would be the
extreme of folly to double the allowance of the luxury by
establishing a fortnightly mail by way of Suez, while the
colony was being starved—deprived of its very life-blood-
by the neglect of the only route through which labour and
the materials of industry could flow/ Viewing the ques-
tion in this light, he points out that { the carriage of the
mails is of secondary importance when compared' with
the carriage of the people and the merchandise to which
the correspondence passing through the post office re-
fers. Similar statements abound in the leading press of
the commercial metropolis of Australia, proving that
public opinion there is adverse to the granting further
subsidies to bratoch lines, and directed to obtain the
establishment of a monthly mail by the Cape of Good
Hope.
The other Colonies may be regarded as more or less
willing to co-operate according as position or interests


intervene. New South Wales does not lie so favourably
for direct communication as Victoria, and has given
powerful aid to the Panama line, for which Sydney is
made the terminus. New Zealand took the lead in
establishing the Pacific route, for which it is most ad-
vantageously situated. Queensland has attempted to
open mail steam communication via Singapore and Torres
Straits; this third branch route, adopted by the late Con-
ference, was calculated to involve an additional subsidy
from the associated Colonies of £45,000 per annum.
Tasmania, Western Australia, and South Australia
all lie favourably for the Cape route ; but it must be noted
that Victoria will be much the largest contributor and is
therefore entitled to the principal advantage in point of
arrival and departure. An arrangement with South
Australia might be concluded, allowing of the steam-ship
calling at Kangaroo Island without seriously delaying the
delivery at Melbourne. That city, both by reason of its
geographical position and of its commercial importance, is
adapted to be the principal terminus, whence passengers
proceed to other ports. It is erroneous to suppose that
one Colony benefits to the exclusion of any other by be-
coming the centre of passenger traffic. There is a con-
stant tendency to equalize the value of labour throughout
these Colonies. The means of intercolonial intercourse
are now so complete and comparatively reasonable, that
whenever any attraction is presented either of better
wages, mining facilities, or settling on the land, it draws a
supply.
Increased immigration does not benefit that Colony
only with which it is carried on, but it is indirectly shared


by all the Colonies. The maintenance of a line of large and
powerful steam-ships should therefore be shared by each
Colony in proportion to its ability, not only as a means
of postal communication but as facilitating personal in-
tercourse between the whole of Australasia and Eu-
rope.
The prospects presented for the investment of capital
hi the construction of steam-ships and their employment
between this country and Australia are sufficiently en-
couraging to induce proposals for the raising of capital in
order to accomplish it, but the attempts which have been
made have hitherto failed. They have been succeeded by
another expedient. Offers have been made to the
A ictorian Government by private firms to effect this com-
munication upon certain conditions of remuneration per
voyage. It would tend to give confidence to the Govern-
ment and Parliament of that Colony if the proposals were
accompanied by assurances or proofs that the large capital
necessary was at command, or that one vessel at least
was in course of preparation. It may be acknowledged
tnat no steam-ship at present existing is exactly suited to
the Australian voyage and trade. It will require vessels
not less than 4000 tons, and 500 N.H.P. and 2500 1.H.P.,
fitted with all the latest improvements, adapted for the
conveyance of a large number of passengers of the three
grades, and calculated to convey not less than 2600 tons
of coal. The best guarantee for the performance of the
mail service by the Cape, and the surest means of obtain-
ing an adequate allowance, is the construction forthwith of
such a vessel, and its early dispatch with freight, pas-
sengers, and mails. The great obstacle to the adoption of


any proposals for direct mail steam is tlie fact that no
vessel has yet performed the work that is required to be
done. No suitable full-powered steamer has yet attempted
to perform the whole distance. The first steam-ship which
shall succeed in delivering the London mail in Melbourne
via the Cape within seven weeks will put this vital but
not uncertain question to rest, and practical success will
secure to her proprietors every advantage which priority
confers. Capitalists, therefore, in this country who are
able and willing to embark in this enterprise should not
delay their proceedings. Granting that the Parliament
of Victoria, as is most probable, will vote this year a
sum in the way of bonus to the first steam-ship arriving
at Melbourne in 1869, and delivering mails within ‘SO
days from England, it will take more than a year until
the steam-ship is ready, and no proprietor during that
period could be certain that he has the start in the
race. The successful performance of one voyage is the
great lever which would operate in determining the Colonial
Legislatures and the Home Government in adopting a
system of mail steam by the open ocean route, and will
operate to this end more beneficially than any arguments
or offers however ably or powerfully supported. If British
capitalists continue to wait for the promised encourage-
ment from the Colony of Victoria, or for the conclusion of
a negotiation there, the consequences will be neither
beneficial to themselves nor advantageous for the object.
Arrangements for a fortnightly mail via India might be
yet concluded, and the present opportunity be lost of se-
curing the advantages of combining the advancement of
the general intercourse with the mail service by the direct
route.


The financial prospects of the undertaking appear, on
investigation, to be favourable and legitimate. It affords
also a prospect of very largely increasing operations, and
of becoming of great commercial, even national im-
portance. Moreover, there will be no danger of foreign
competition nor of any other so long as the company shall
succeed in meeting the fair demands of the traffic. It is
well ascertained that for a full ship the profit on a voyage
to Melbourne and return will be large, charging at a very
moderate rate for passengers. In the annexed estimate,
less than the full complement is assumed. The pecuniary
assistance to be given by the Colonial Government for the
introduction of immigrants will reduce the fares to be paid
by the third class to be on a par with those now charged
for the same class to America from the United Kingdom,
which will aid in securing a full ship whenever the de-
mand by unassisted passengers is deficient.
An extra allowance for the conveyance of the mails
on the first trip might be acceded on petition by the
Home authorities; but the delivery of the mails within
the specified period will doubtless secure an adequate
sum. The experience of India has shown that the intro-
duction of a fortnightly mail does not lessen the amount
of the correspondence by each mail. The amount of fees
on letters, newspapers, and packets between London and
Melbourne can be reckoned at £3500 per month. Allow-
ing the fees on the same for all the other Colonies to
equal this sum, there is a total of £84,000 per annum to
be received on the establishment of this proposed monthly
mail by the Colonial and Home P. O. Departments.
Granting that, in order to obtain this line by the Cape,
an allowance pf £IOO,OOO per annum is requisite, the


increase on tlie Australian correspondence, which is now
above 10 per cent, per annum, will soon enable the re-
ceipts to balance the amount of allowance, which is not
the case with either of the existing branch mail lines to
Australia.
Many years ago the capitalists in New South Wales
combined to subscribe conditionally for the construction
of a steam-ship to begin steam mail communication direct
with England. They regarded the undertaking as of
great public advantage, and that it would ultimately
prove remunerative.
At this advanced era, British capitalists can regard it
as such on its own merits; and this early proposal, which
has taken so long to ripen, shall now arrive at complete
maturity.
A. ROSS.
44, Gloucester Place, Hyde Park,
March, 1868
Cost of a Screw Steam-ship of 4500 tons, 0.M., fitted
with Engines of 500 N.H.P. and I.H.P. 2500, capable of
carrying 1000 tons of cargo and 2600 tons of coal, speed
in smooth water about 13 knots per hour, capable of ac-
commodating 100 first, 200 second, and 700 third class
passengers, supplied with all the latest improvements.
Ready for sea, £140,000.


Passage inward.
First class passengers
100 @ £00
£0000
Second class „
150 35
5250
Third class „
150 20
3000
14,250
2 500
Freight on 1000 tons @ 50s. ...
Parcels ...
Gold
2 000
Profit on "Wines, &c. (both passages)
.
500
£40,800
Estimated Expenditure for a voyage to Melbourne
and back, via the Cape of Good Hope, by the above
vessel:—
1. Consumption of fuel on passage outward, being 11,GOO miles, at
an average speed of 1 knots per hour =46 days at an average
consumption per diem of 50 tons of coal 2300 Tons.
On passage inward, say 11,800 miles, at 10 knots, at an average con-
sumption of 60 tons per diem, 49 X6O = 2940 „
/including 400 tons, Table Bay), at a total.average of 255. 5240 = £6550
2. Port charges and pilotage ... ... ' ... ... ... goo
3. Wages of officers and crew, four mouths ... ... ... 2600
4. Provisions for crew, four months ... ... ... ... iooo
5. Provisions for passengers, out and home ... ... 5500
6. Engine-room stores, &c. ... ... ... ... ... (j()0
7. Agency expenses ... ... ... ... ... ". 2000
8. Insurance, four months, at 120 s. ... ... .... 2800
9. Harbour expenses ... ... ... ... ... 400
10. Management ... ... ... ... ... ... jgOO
£23,250
' Note. The expenditure would be considerably increased if the N.H.P. was higher,
say 750. The consumption of fuel would then be about 65 tons per diem outward,
and about 85 inward, and the loss of freight might not be compensated by some gain
in time, ihe saving of steam power on the latter half of the outward passage will
always be considerable, and the employment of a very high power unnecessary. The
difficulty is the first halt of the inward passage, vi& Table Bay, which can be over-
come by steering a more northerly course without requiring very high power. An
equal quantity of freight co\ild be taken by the high-powered vessel, receiving fuel at
St Vincent and King George’s Sound. The distance is 7800 miles. Filling up at St
Vincent on the outward passage, it would be discretionary calling at the Sound.
Likewise filling up at Table Bay on inward passage, calling at St Vincent might not
always be requisite. Practical experience alone can determine which arrangement
shall be most advantageous.
Estimated Receipts for a voyage to Melbourne and re-
turn, exclusive of Mails.
Passage outward.
First class passengers ... ... 100 @ £5O £5OOO
Second class „ ... ... 150 30 4500
Third class „ ... ... 550 15 8250
£l7 75Q
Measurement goods, 700 tons @ 80*. ... ... ... 2*Boo
Parcels ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ’ m
Net Receipts on the above calculation of the proposed voyage out and
home, the Steam-ship loading as stated, without the addition of Mail
subsidy (estimated by the fees on letters, Ac., to amount to £7000) ... £17,550
JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.
