

The
Pastoral Homes
of Australia.






“THE ADMIRAL” (13223 C.S.B. imp.)
THE PROPERTY OF MESSRS. F S. FALKINER & SONS LTD.,RIVERINA, N.S.W.


THE PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
COPYRIGHT.
Published by “ The Pastoralists’ Review Propy. Ltd.,” Melbourne, Sydney and London
1910


Printers:
JOHN ANDREW & CO.
Sydney
1910


CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...v., vi., vii., viii
Athole ... ... ... Messrs. James Robertson & Sons ... ... 213
Belmont Park Captain Philip Charley 341
Bengalla Mr. J. H. Keys 393
Bergen op-Zoom Mr. Wm. Bor-thwick 569
Bethungra Park Mr. C. Rendel Westmacott 245
Big Springs Mr. George P. Wilson 233
Binnia Downs Mr. John McMaster 533
Boonoke ... .. ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... .. .... 29
Brindley Park ... Mr. J. B. Bettington ... ... 449
Bunaba ... ... ... ... Mr. George Paine ... ... ... ... 653
Bundella ... ... ... Mr. John McMaster ... ... ... ... 533
Burnima Mr. H. T. Edwards 257
Collendina ... ... ... ... Messrs. Henry Hay & Sons ... ... ... 141
Combadello ... ... ... . Messrs. W. &F. A. Moses ... 641
Dalkeith ... ... ... ... Mr. F. D. McMaster ... ... ... ... 509
Eumaralla ... ... Mr. H. R. Denison 365
Glen Moan... ... ... Mr. J. C. Manchee ... ... .. ... 545
Goree ... ... ... ... Mr. Duncan Robertson ... .. ... 189
Gragin ... ... Messrs. G. H. & H. E. H. Gordon 677
Gum Swamp ... ... ... Mr. George Ferguson Simpson ... ... 177
Haddon Rig ... ... ... Mr. James Richmond ... ... ... ... 605
Hazeldean ... ... ... ... Mr. Arthur Litchfield ... ... ... ... 269
Inveralochy ... ... ... Mr George E. Faithfull ... ... 329
Inverell ... ... ... ... Messrs. Campbell Bros. ... ... ... 689
Kentucky ... ... ... ... Mr. J. G. Gray ... ... ... ... ... 93
Kentucky ... ... ... ... Mr. John Fletcher . . . ... ... 581
Killarney ... ... ... Mr. W. F. Buchanan ... ... ... ... 665
Lanyon ... ... ... ... Mr. Andrew J. Cunningham... ... ... 281
Lue ... ... ... Mr. Willoughby V. Dowling ... ... ... 353
Martindale ... ... .. ... Messrs. Martindale White Bros. ... ... 433
Merribee ... ... ... ... Mr. W. W. Killen ... ... ... ... 225
Merton ... ... ... ... Mr. E. R. White ... ... ... ... 417


PAGE
Mohonga ... ... Mohonga Pastoral Co ••• 161
Moira ... ... ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... ... ■■■ 45
Moonbna ... ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... ... ...
Moroeo Mr. A. J. McLaurin 153
Narramine Mr. Frank Mack 593
Neotsfield Mr. R. H. Dangar 381
Nornbi ... Mr. Walter Hawker .. ... ... ••• 461
Nowranie Messrs. Ferguson Simpson & Co 201
Oban ... Mr. Duncan MeMaster ... ••• 521
Perricoota ... ... ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... ... ... 45
Quanda Mr. Geo. L. Ryder 629
South Wangamong Mr. C. D. Sanger 117
Springfield Mr. A. L. Faithfull ... 317
Springwell ... Mr. O. C. Litchfield ... ... 269
Steam Plains ... Mr. Lewis Kiddle ••• 31
Strathbogie Mr. E, C. Body 701
Tarella Mr. E Quinn 173
Timor ... ... ... ... Mr. J. H. White ••• 557
Tondeburine ... Mr. J. L. Brown ... ... ... ■■■ 617
Tuggranong Mr. James Cunningham 293
Tuppal ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... ... ... 45
Turanville ... ... ... ... Mr, Thos. Cook ... ... ... ... ... 405
Ulamambri Messrs. Rogers Bros 473
Ulinda .. Mr. D. I. Watt 497
Urangeline... ... ... ... Mr. G. R. Jackson ... ... ... ... 105
Wangamong ... ... Mr. W. B. Sanger ... ... ■■■ 57
Wanganella Mr. Albert Austin 1
Wanganella Estate The Exors. late Thos. Millear 25
Warrah The Australian Agricultural Co 485
Widgiewa ... ... ... F. S. Falkiner & Sons Ltd. ... ... 29
Woodstock ... ... ... ■ Mr. E. H. Litchfield ... ... ■■ • 269
Yarralumla Mr. F. Campbell •• 305
Contents- -continued


INTRODUCTION
A FITTING preface to this volume is an explanation of its purpose.
It is no mere picture book arranged to please the eye; neither
does it lay claim to be a standard history. It is, in brief, an effort
to place on record for all time a conception of Pastoral New
South Wales as it is in this year nineteen hundred and ten. It has been
a task of no mean proportions to procure such a variety of photographs.
Immense distances have been traversed. The railway train, the motor car,
the station buggy, the tedious coach, have all been requisitioned, and these
pages illustrate this State from its northern to its southern boundaries.
Change everywhere is persistent, but in comparatively young countries like
Australia, the present merges into the past so unobtrusively that one is
inclined to overlook the fact that history is being made even out of the
ordinary circumstances of life. The necessity for a work like this is a
very real one, because already, too much that has counted in the growth of
Pastoral New South Wales has been allowed to slip away, quite unrecorded.
As a rule, when new landmarks arise the old ones are swept away. Though
little more than a century has passed since settlement became established
in New South Wales, a huge development has taken place. No one dare
predict the changes that the next half-century may bring to pass. There
are still with us —God bless them ! —a few of those courageous men who faced
the bush when it was as the first white men found it. Their endeavours
will stand for all time, and it is because of them that the pastoral industry,
as depicted in these pages, came to be. It is to these venerable pioneers
that the Editor is indebted for such glimpses of the past as are weaved into
the descriptions of the present. As before stated, this work does not pretend
to be historical, but it will not require many generations to make it so. All
too quickly the pioneers are passing from us, but they have lived to witness
a development of which they hardly dreamed. They have actually seen, or
have heard their forbears tell of the days before railways pierced the bush.
They know of the rough and tedious journeys on bullock drays and carts,
when it took six weeks to do what the steam horse does in but as many
hours. They know of the lonely homesteads and the joy experienced in


entertaining passing friends, because that privilege was so oft denied. They
know how they got their stock together and penetrated a lonely land, building
their humble homes where water could be found. Though no noise of warfare
dins the early pages of this country’s history, a conquest was none the
less achieved, but it was an unobtrusive one, against nature’s silent forces.
The native blacks for a brief period caused much suffering and trouble,
but they quickly faded away before the white invader. The text books tell
of the exploration of this State, and numerous works pay tribute to the
early settlers, and so it is left for these few lines to touch upon factors oft
lost sight of, but which, nevertheless, have contributed to the present con-
ditions of our pastoral life.
Of all the products that have made Australia’s greatness, the Merino
Fleece stands out in strong relief. The gold digging chapters in this country’s
history are alluring in their way, but the steady lever of development has
been the golden fleece. And the history of the fleece is very largely the
history of these Pastoral Homes. The first houses were crude enough,
but they were loved as homes will always be. The main problem then in
life was to raise the means to support such homes, and in the Merino sheep
the solution lay. But the land had to be prepared for it, and the progress
from the wooden home to the brick or stone mansion has been a most
fascinating evolution, the underlying forces of which were necessity and
experience. Necessity mocked the early settlers, but experience often
came to their assistance and pieced together the pastoral industry of to-day.
The first pastoralists were not daunted by the obstacles they met, but they
were forced to overcome them. The well filled dams and lagoons, the
windmills, tanks and troughing, and the artesian bores illustrated in these
pages, are not of mushroom growth but were evolved by stages from the
waterholes beside which many pastoral homes had their small beginning.
The first settlement arranged itself along the rivers, and in consequence
the oldest landmarks are found upon the various rivers in the order of their
accessibility. The Nepean and the Hunter are identified with the earliest
homes, and when the pass through the Blue Mountains was discovered the
Macquarie and the Lachlan attracted settlement. The Murrumbidgee and the
Murray had their turn, and eventually the far off Darling and the north-west
rivers, hardly worthy of the name. But large tracts of fertile country inter-
vening were, for many years, unused because water was denied them.
Lack of water was one of the early obstacles to be overcome and this
volume bears witness to the success achieved. Then there was the bush,
the heavy gum trees which would not permit grass to grow underneath them.
But they were in time replaced by grass, not by hewing down each tree as is
necessary in nearly every other country but by simply nicking out a circle of


bark from around each trunk. When the timber died, grass and nutritious
herbage at once appeared and the carrying capacity of the country was
increased immeasurably. Since the first tree was ringbarked the custom has
swept throughout the land and while it has been of untold benefit it has also
been responsible for vandalism from which the land will always suffer.
Pastoralists therefore made important progress towards the present homes
when they discovered how to place water convenient to their stock, and when
they learned that by ringbarking the bush fine pastures took its place.
These are now simple every day matters, but like many other things, they
came to be out of pure necessity.
There will be noticed in these pages frequent reference to subdivision,
also an ordinary topic, but, like the other two, it has been one of the things
which have counted in the game. There are very few countries on this earth
where such rich pasture grows so naturally as in Australia. No laborious
cultivation or costly sowing—pastures of the most nutritious kind cover the
face of the land, just on the magic touch of rain. The various plants and
grasses, hardy as they are through fighting centuries of droughts, require arti-
ficial help when browsed upon by stock. So, when fencing wire came in, the
process of cutting vast paddocks into small ones enabled grazing to be regulated,
which has meant the salvation of this country’s pastures. In the “far out
back ” where paddocks still are measured not by acres but by miles, when
seasons fail, the stock, wandering where they list, cut up the shallow soil and it
is carried off by the first hot winds that blow, leaving only barren clay pans.
The Merino sheep was looked to to support the homes of the early days
and to provide for the homes which were to come. And while water was being
provided for him, while bush was being killed for him, he was not neglected
as he stood. When the Merino first came to Australia he was a miserable
specimen compared with his descendants of to-day. Captain Macarthur who
imported the first sheep to this country, wrote in 1802 that his rams’ fleeces
had increased from 3 lbs. to 5 lbs. in weight, but to-day rams have been known
to cut up to 40 lbs- and the face of the country has been changed in conse-
quence. To the lay mind a sheep’s fleece is neither here nor there, but the
Pastoral Homes of New South Wales would not be what these pages
show them now to be if stud rams’ fleeces had not increased in weight
since Macarthur’s time.
It has all gone on so quietly that one can hardly realise how it happened.
Men classed their sheep in Macarthur’s time and saw five-pound fleeces
carried through the drafting gates. Men have stood at drafting gates through
all the intervening years and have come to see sheep with jackets weighing
40 lbs. passing through the gates. Thus, in the dusty sheep yards, untold


wealth has been given to this country by controlling nature’s underlying
law that like must beget like. Stately Pastoral Homes have been
reared upon this law intelligently directed, albeit by dusty, sweating
sheepmen hidden in the Australian bush.
So the change has come about and so it still goes on. While cattle and
horses have played no small part in the pastoral development of this land, the
real burden has been carried by the sheep. He, himself, has been so changed
that he has changed the face of everything. When his fleece is
twelve months old the idle woolsheds throughout the land awake to life;
glittering machines peel off his fleece, wool teams come in to the Railway
from far off parts and in due time the wave of keen activity reaches the
ocean's side. This wool is sold for gold, and these pastoral homes have cost
much gold. They are beautiful in design and stand in beautiful surroundings.
They are intended to be homes. They are modern in their appointments and
most of them possess telephones and motor ears which defy the obstacle of
distance which was, to the first pastoralists, one of the hardest things to face.
Surely such homes are an asset to the nation ? Surely they are a tribute to
the country and to those who solved its problems? If so, then they are
worthy of being placed on record, before inexorable change lays its finger on
them. For change must go on and no one can prophesy how quickly.
Already the Merino has been pushed off large tracts of country to make room
for wheat, which, in its turn, brings crossbred sheep. How far this wheat
belt can encroach upon Merino land must yet be proved, but it seems as
though, as time goes on, the Merino must go further and further west. Then
will the solution of the knotty problem of the huge territory beyond the
Darling become a necessity more urgent than it is at present, and who can
tell the class of homes that such necessity, aided by experience, will evolve
“outback’ - ? But when that time comes, if it ever does, what will be the
appearance of the country illustrated in these pages? The Pastoral Homes
described herein may still be there, ever growing dearer as old age creeps o’er
them, but, if change should not spare them, then will these pages recall
things as they were. As old Omar Khayyam said —
“ The moving finger writes; and having writ
Moves on ; nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a line
Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it”
“CAMDEN ”
Sydney,
December , igio.


Wanganella.
The Property of Mr. Albert Austin.
WANGANELLA, which lies about 25 miles north-west of Deniliquin, in the
Riverina, is the best known of Air. Albert Austin's pastoral properties.
Ihe property was purchased in 1858 as a squatting leasehold by Messrs.
Peppin and Sons, and they held it till 1878. when it was sold to Messrs. Austin and
Millear. In 1894. however, this partnership was dissolved and W anganella divided. The
area was about 46.000 acres, having a frontage of 22 miles to the Billabong. Being
somewhat longish in shape, there was no difficulty in dividing the run. The partners held
a limited auction between themselves for the right of selection between the two sections,
and Air. Austin, bidding the highest, chose the western portion, which contained the
original homestead. He now holds about 34.000 acres at AVanganella. The estate
is well watered for besides having the Billabong running longitudinally through it, there
THE BILLABONG
1


is a second creek flowing in a parallel direction about 3 miles further back. It branches
out of the Billabong, and continues on for nearly 40 miles before rejoining that stream.
Wanganella consists of typical Riverina country, undulating so slightly as to appear
quite flat, and comprising great grassy plains of red soil, except for a strip of black sod
country along the Billabong. Wide expanses of pastures, lightly timbered with boree,
alternate with belts of eucalyptus and with pine-clothed sand ridges. In wet seasons the
black soil grows a wonderful wealth of varied and nourishing grasses, but tends to crack
and parch in the heat of summer. The red plains retain the moisture, and are of a greatei
carrying capacity after long spells of dry weather. The country always grows clean
Photo by Johnstone , O’Shannessy & Co.
MR.ALBERT AUSTIN.
bright wool, and produces large-framed hardy stock. The homestead is pleasantly,situated
on an elevated bank of the Billabong, and is surrounded with an orchard and flower
garden. The house is close to the main road from Deniliquin to ITay.
Ibtetorp of the Sheep.
The famous Wanganclla flock of Merinos dates its origin to a time when very little
of Riverina was used for sheep at all. When Messrs. Peppin and Sons bought the property
it was devoted to dealing in and fattening sheep, but in 1861 that firm, which consisted
of very skilful breeders, decided to establish a stud of pure Merinos. For that purpose
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A PEEP OF THE HOMESTEAD ACROSS THE BILLABONG.
3
Wanganella, New South Wales.


WANGANELLA STUD RAM. No. 610 (1902 DROP). CUT FLEECE ,245½ LB.(1906).
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


they selected 200 of the best of their own ewes, and bought roo ewes bred by Mr.
Nicholas Chadwick, of Canally, New South Wales, and sired by an imported Rambouillet.
On these 300 ewes the owners used French and German rams. The former were
Rambouillets and the latter of Negretti blood. Emperor, one of the Rambouillet rams,
not only himself possessed rare wool-yielding qualities—giving 25 lbs. of greasy and 12
lbs. of scoured wool from twelve months’ growth and repeating the record for several
successive years—but he also held in a pronounced degree the power to impart his traits
to his progeny. So greatly above the average was the stock of this prepotent sire that
he was put to the best of the ewes, and exercised a most important influence on the
subsequent evolution of the stud. In writing of the effect of this sheep on the flock,
“ Bruni” stated in 1894: —-
“ As the best of the original ewes were by a Rambouillet ram, and the best of their
produce for several generations were bred to Emperor, the stud sheep were from the first
greatly inbred to the type of the Rambouillet. They had large, handsome frames, with
heavy fleeces of robust wool—the bold, pronounced character which was such a marked
feature of the old Rambouillets. For years after Emperor died the old servants on the place
were able to point out many of the stud rams as bearing a strong resemblance to him.”
In 1874 Messrs. Peppin and Sons decided, with a view to further improving their
stock, to form a “ double stud,” and for this purpose a special selection was made from
the ordinary stud. Only sheep having large symmetrical frames and carrying heavy
THE HOMESTED AT WANGANELLA.
5
Wanganella, /Vew South Wales.


THE GARDEN, WANGANELLA.
fleeces were picked. With the formation of the second stud, attention could more easily
be concentrated on animals of very exceptional qualities. A number of small paddocks
had then been formed for working the studs, and the progeny of each sire was specially
ear-marked, and a station stud book was kept for preserving records of the breeding and
yields of the best sheep.
When Messrs. Austin and Millear acquired the property in 1878, they bought one-
half the ordinary stud sheep and the whole of the double stud. The new owners continued
the methods of breeding which had been followed with so much success in the past. The
sheep were at no time subjected to artificial treatment, and the lams were inn undei
just such natural conditions as would apply to their progeny when used for growing-
wool under ordinary practical conditions. Pastoralists were in the habit of visiting
Wanganella by invitation to see them shorn and to test the weights of the fleeces. In
the 1883 season “ Bruni” was one of the guests at Wanganella during shearing, and he
testifies that of fifty 4-tooth rams twenty-five cut fleeces weighing 18 lbs. and over, and
sixteen gave fleeces turning the scale at 19 lbs. and over. At that comparatively early
stage in the history of sheepbreeding, and considering the heavy scouring returns the
Wanganella wool always gives, such weights reflected great credit on the management of
the flock. “ Bruni” says :—“ The wool was clean, free from black tip, and lighter in grease
than is usual with rams’ fleeces,” so no wonder that by that time a steady and heavy
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WANGANELLA STUD RAM. NO.86.
WANGANELLA STUD RAM, No. 646 (1903 DROP). This ram vut a fleece of 27 lbs., 1906.
Wanganella, New South Wales.


WAN GAN ELL A STUD RAM, No. 110.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


demand had set in for Wanganella rams.
Eleven years later Mr. Samuel McCaughey
gave 4000 guineas for ten of the stud 2-tooths,
and the whole of the surplus of the same drop
of rams and ewes sold for a total of over
£33,000. Ever since the demand has con-
tinued to increase.
In the eighties and early nineties, when
the Deniliquin Show attracted such keen
competition among the most prominent sheep-
breeders, some very important prizes were
won by Wanganclla sheep. For ten consecu-
tive years they won the first prize for the pen
of the five best 2-tooth rams. Another notable
achievement was in the challenge contest
of £lOO for scoured fleeces in 1891, when in
competition with twenty-two exhibits from
seven of the leading Riverina flocks Messrs.
HEAD OF A STUD RAM.
Austin and Millear secured the four first places. The winning fleece was from Premier
IV., and weighed 20 lbs. 12 ozs. in the grease, and to lbs. ozs. scoured. This
sheep was shorn by machine on the show-grounds. The following year he was shorn
by hand, and gave 2714 lbs. for fourteen
months' growth. The same prize was won
next year by the Wanganclla ram Warrior
IV., a sheep which also beat the artificially-
fed rams for the grand championship. In
referring to this sire, the “ Deniliquin Times”
said:—
“ The grand champion is of the true
Wanganella type, with an apparently robust
constitution, a grand head, and carrying a mas-
sive frame and a fleece such as one sees but
a limited number of times in a lifetime. The
staple is very long and of a silky texture,
bright and lustrous wherever looked into; all
the points are clothed as if the wool had been
mechanically put on to meet the acutest criti-
cism, and, in fact, the grand champion looked
as if he had been made to order after all the
experience to be gathered together had decided
upon what they thought to be a true type of
a sire.”
9
HEAD OF A STUD EWE.
Wanganella, New South Wales.


A WANG ANELLA-BRED STUD EWE.
ic
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


In 1893 the prize in the challenge contest again went to Wanganella. In
commenting at the time on the result the “Argus” wrote: —
“The scouring contest this year has resulted in another triumph for Messrs. Austin
and Millear’s celebrated Wanganella flock, which with five exhibits out of a total of
twenty-four has secured five out of the six places. The first prize is won by a ram whose
fleece gives the extraordinary scoured weight of 12 lbs. 7 ozs., which, we need hardly say,
has beaten all previous records in these contests. . . . The wool is a splendid type
of the robust combing wool, for which that portion of Riverina of which Deniliquin is the
centre has earned such an enviable reputation. It is bright and lustrous, of good quality,
without being fine, very deep and sound. . . . This winning fleece was shorn from the
ram which was selected by the judges as the grand champion. He was a very large-
framed sheep, long in the body, with a splendid neck. He is of the Warrior strain.”
Another interesting test of the scouring possibilities of Wanganella wool was made
near Geelong in 1903. Six ewes on Mr. Frank Armytage’s Narada Station w r ere put to a
ram Mr, Albert Austin had bred, and six ewes on an adjoining property were mated with a
Tasmanian sire. The wool from the progeny of the latter was valued at 10s. io„d., and from
the former at 10s. iifd. But when valued after scouring, the wool from the progeny of the
Wanganella ram came to ns. yd. per head, and that from the others to only 9s. 6|d.
Some of the most convincing evidence of the value of Wanganella rams is afforded
by the history of flocks which Mr. Austin has purchased with the various estates he has
at different times bought, and which he has improved by the use of his sires. Borriyallock
provides such an illustration. In 1891 the clip there totalled 499 bales. After the property
changed hands only W r anganella rams were used, with the result that the clip was increased
in eight years (1899) to 813 bales—a clear gain of 314 bales, worth at that time about
about the same number being shorn on less acreage. The clip that season sold in
Geelong at up to iBd. for fleece and igd. for lambs. In 1905 the Borriyallock fleece wool
sold up to isfd. per lb. and averaged lambs wool sold up to igd. Ihe weaner fleeces
FIVE STUD RAMS.
11
Wanganella, New South I Vales,


were increased from 4 lbs. to 8J lbs., and the wool on the 6-tooth wethers from 7 lbs. to
10 lbs. 11 ozs. At Lake Midgeon the wool on the sheep was very nearly doubled in eight
years; the 1909 Clip sold in Melbourne up to 14IM. per lb. At Canoon the Wanganella
rams produced a clear gain of 38 per cent, in the weights; the 1909 clip sold in Melbourne
up to 13d, per lb. In 1905 the whole drop of one-year-old M anganella ewe hoggets,
unclassed, cut a fraction over 13 lbs. of wool, which sold at up to per lb. in London.
50 bales of broken averaged nfd. and 101 bales of pieces io-|d. The fleeces of two special
stud rams, Nos. 646 and 458 in use in the Wanganella flock, were scoured and valued at
igs. 3d. and £1 is. 2d, respectively.
The Wanganella sheep are widely known throughout all those portions of the
Commonwealth where woolgrowing is an industry of importance, and probably no single
stud has exercised a wider influence over Australian sheepbreeding. They are notable
primarily for great frames (18 months old sheep have been killed on the station, weighing to
over 80 lbs. dressed weight) and their quantity of long bright wool. They are plain-bodied
sheep, but with a heavy fold of skin on the neck, wide on the thighs, deep in the body,
broad on the back, and of very heavy carcase. All the best features of the Rambouillets
have been maintained unimpaired, while the yield of wool has been greatly increased.
The fleeces are remarkable for their density, length of staple, and character. It is
interesting to note that the type has been established entirely by selection within itself.
After the death of Premier, the two rams which contributed principally to the
subsequent progress of the flock were Premier 11. and Warrior, both used in the
early eighties. Premier 11. was three times champion at Deniliquin against the best
sheep in the Riverina.
When the partnership between Messrs. Austin and Millear was dissolved in 1894,
the sheep were divided between them in two evenly-selected lots. Mr. Austin has since
retained the tvpe unimpaired. He is often unable to fully satisfy the demand existing for
his rams, and whenever any of them are offered for sale by public auction they realise high
prices. Their reputation for withstanding difficult conditions in the back country, whilst
TWO-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WANGANELLA STUD RAM, No. 582 (1902 DROP).
A WANGANELLA STUD EWE.
1 3
Wanganella, New South Wales,


SHEARING AT LAKE MIDGEON.
H
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


also being adapted
to yielding high-class
wool in more favour-
ed localities, has led
to them being used
over a very wide zone
of varying climates.
Their potent influ-
ence on Australian
sheepbreeding has to
no small extent been
due to this trait.
Since the subdivi-
sion of Wanganeila
DRAUGHT STALLION WITH MARES AND FOALS AT LAKE MIDGEON
Mr. Austin has not laid himself out particularly to win successes at shows, but where he has
exhibited sheep he has not failed to secure prizes. The following are some of the suc-
cesses he has achieved:—Deniliquin, 1896, first, second, third; 1897, in the publicly-shorn
classes, two champions, eight firsts, four seconds, three thirds, one fourth; 1898, publicly-
shorn classes, champion, grand champion, four firsts, one third; Australian Sheepbreeders’
Show, 190 F first and champion strong-wool grass-fed ram, first and champion sheep for
fine-wool grass-fed rams with a 4-tooth, and first in class and reserve championship for
ewes with a 2-tooth. At the last-named display Mr. Austin exhibited only three sheep.
®tbcr
properties.
Lake Midgeon, a
fine property of
80,000 acres, and
situated on the Mur-
rumbidgee close to
the town of Nar-
randera, also belongs
to Mr. Austin. The
country is undulating
in character, and in
parts fairly heavily
timbered with gums
THE WOOLSHED, LAKE MIDGEON.
!5
Wanganella, New South Wales.


THE HOMESTEAD AT LAKE MIDGEON.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW ON LAKE MIDGEON, LOOKING SOUTH.
ANOTHER VIEW, LOOKING NORTH.
*7
Lake Midgeon, New South Wales.


THE LAKE MIDGEON ESTATE, LOOKING EAST.
and belts of Murray pine. Besides Merinos, which are of pure Wanganella de-
scent, a stud of Hereford cattle is kept on the run. Draught horses are also
bred in small numbers, and wheatgrowing is carried on to a considerable ex-
tent. Of recent years from 2000 to 3000 acres have been sown with this cereal
with satisfactory results. However, in 1909 only 640 acres were under crop, of
which 180 acres cut for hay gave about 35 cwt. per acre, and 460 acres stripped for wheat
returned an average of 20 bushels an acre. The grain was sold to the local miller in
Narrandera at 3s. 73/id. per bushel, which gave a net return of over £2 per acre. Barren
Jack water scheme takes water through the southern portion of the property, where about
1600 acres can be irrigated by gravitation.
Bringagee, another fine property of 85,200 acres, situated on the Murrumbidgee,
also belongs to Mr. Austin. The country, which is practically all Boree, is at present stocked
with pure Border Leicester sheep and crossbreds, also with Merino ewes from which fat
lambs are bred. Mr. Austin, however, intends stocking it with his pure Wanganella
Merinos. There is a pure herd of Hereford cattle running there, also draught and blood
horses.
In addition to the above, Mr. Albert Austin has interests in some other properties
in New South Wales and Victoria. In partnership with his brother William, he holds
Canoon and Gelam, on the Murrumbidgee, about 25 miles west of Hay. These total 137.000
18
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FOUR-YEAT-OLD MERINO WETHERS-OFF SHEARS.
HEREFORD CATTLE.
STOCK ON LAKE MIDGEON.
Lake Midgeon, New South Wales.


EILYER, TOORAK.
20
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ticies of freehold and Crown lands. Kanawalla, in Western Victoria, was purchased by
Messrs. A. and B. Austin from the Hon. 1 hos. McKellar in 1862, and Fallal, in New South
\\ ales, by Messrs. Austin and Millear in 1885. His enterprises include a venture in New
Mexico, where he at one time owned a block of pastoral land in partnership with the Hon.
Thos. Skene.
HDr. Elbert Euetin.
Mr. Albert Austin was born in England in 1834, and came to Australia in by the
clipper ship brilliant, of 500 tons burden. Immediately on his arrival at Geelong, he
joined his uncle, Air. 1 homas Austin, at Barwon Park, and spent two years there gaining
pastoral expeiience. hrom there he went to Eilyer, in the Lake Bolac district, the property
being purchased from the I rustees of the late Mr. Gibb. The holding consisted of 30,000
acies of Crown lands fully stocked, and he held it till 1889, when he sold it to his eldest
son, A. S. Austin. In partnership with the late Air. W. H. Bullivant, he bought
Longerenong from Sir Samuel A\ ilson in 1873- and later purchased Borriyallock (32,000
acres) from the Executors of the late Hon. Francis Ormond, and afterwards sold it to his
second and third sons, E. G. and I*. S. Austin. It is held by them now. He also purchased
Alurgha (42,000 acres), on the Edwards, 45 miles west of Deniliquin, and sold it to two of
THE TERRACE, EILYER, TOORAK.
2 I
Wanganella, New South Wales.


A VIEW IN THE GARDEN AT EILYER, TOORAK.
22
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE AND GARDEN AT EILYER, TOORAK.
2 3
Eilyer, Toorak , Victoria.


A GARDEN WALK AT EILYER, TOORAK.
his younger sons, A. J. and H. L. Austin. In 1888 Mr. Austin built Eilyer, his residence in
Toorak, and has lived there ever since. He has been on the board of advice of the Australian
Mortgage, Land and Finance Company since 1898. On the formation of the Pastoralists’
Association of Victoria and Southern Riverina he was elected the first president, holding
that office through the stormy times from 1890-1 to 1896-7. He was vice-president for the
years 1897-8 and 1898-9, and was again president from 1899-1900 to 1901-2. He is now a
trustee of the association.
2 4
The Pastoral Htunes of Australia.


The Wanganella Estate.
She Property of the Erecutors of the late Mr. Thos. Millear.
THE Wanganella Estate consists of the eastern half of the original Wanganella run,
which first became famous for the sheep bred there when held by Messrs. Peppm
and Sons. The holding then consisted, of 46,000 acres, and in 1878 it was sold to
Messrs. Austin and Millear, who worked it m partnership till 1894, when the property was
divided and the estate split up between the proprietors. Mr. Thos. Millear, sen., then
obtained the eastern portion, which has sinee borne the title of Wanganella Estate. It now
consists of 20,500 acres of freehold, all of which, excepting some 040 acres, were included
in the original run.
THE HOMESTEAD, WANGANELIA.
(DROUGHT TIME.)
I


As the original homestead went with the
western half of the run, it was necessary to
build a new house on Wanganella Estate. A
fine structure of brick was consequently erect-
ed, and surrounded with pleasant plantations
and gardens. It is situated some 17 miles
from Denihquin, and is fitted with all the most
modern appliances, including telephone con-
nection with Denihquin.
In addition to tanks and windmills, the run
is watered by the Billabong Creek, to which
there is a single frontage, and the Forest Creek
with a double frontage. The country consists
mostly of black soil, carrying belts of timber,
and a small proportion of red soil plains. From
9000 to 11,000 sheep are shorn annually, but
for many years past great difficulty has been
experienced in contending against adverse cli-
matic conditions. The black soil, although it
gives a wonderful growth of grass in a wet
spring, dries and cracks during hot, rainless
periods, and is of little use then for grazing
THE LATE MR. THOS. MILLEAR.
purposes. Unfortunately, since 1894, the seasons have been so dry that it has been quite
the exception for the run to carry all the stock throughout the year, and it has generally
been found necessary to send a large proportion of the sheep on to relief country for a
time. These continually-recurring periods of drought seem to indicate that the character
of the seasons is altering in this part of the country.
The Wanganella Estate sheep are known to woolgrowers throughout Australasia.
When the original Wanganella flock and stud were divided between Messrs. Millear and
Austin, the sheep were split into two even lots. Of course their type was firmly established,
and their fame made, long before then. Subsequently the blood has been kept quite pure
at Wanganella Estate. No outside strains of any kind have been used, and a steady pro-
giess has been maintained by selection and judicious inbreeding. The result is a con-
tinually increasing demand for the rams from the estate. Some 1200 to 1400, the number
varying according to the nature of the season, are sold annually as 2-tooths, only a
small reserve being kept. Only having the one property to breed for, and having resolved
not to increase the area of that, the trustees sell all the stud rams each year, with the
exception of about fifteen, which are kept for home use. A “cast for age” mob of very
high-class ewes is also sold, in addition to the “ seconds ” from the younger ewes. The
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


number of sale stock available does not satisfy the annual demand, but the trustees are firm
in then determination to maintain a high standard, and they have always resisted the tempt-
ation to increase the quantity of the output at the expense of the quality. The conditions
under which the sheep are bred have probably played an important part in establishing
the demand existing for the rams, and this strain of blood is pre-eminently suited to hot
districts and for contending against difficult conditions of life generally.
The characteristics of the Wanganella Estate sheep are altogether typical of the true
Australian Merinos. They are of large and robust frames, and carry tremendous fleeces of
\ er\ high scouring yielding capacity. The wool is notable for its length, softness and
character.
Two very marked and important features have been characteristic of the Wanganella
Estate sheep almost from the time when the strain was first established. They are notable
for carrying their high wool-yielding propensity well into old age, and for having the
Powei of imparting their traits to progeny to an unusual extent. The original foundation
stock collected b}/ Messrs. Peppm and Sons was bred largely from Rambouillet blood, and
the subsequent history of the flock shows that the best traits of that variety were main-
tained throughout, and greatly improved on. Besides selecting 200 of the best of their
own ewes, the Peppins purchased 100 stud ewes bred from Rambouillet sires, and on the
300 they used both Rambouillet and Negrette rams. However, it was the former which
most distinctly left their mark on the subsequent generations, though the Negrette sires
were not without their influence in thickening up the fleeces. Among the Rambouillet rams
used in the early stages of the flock’s evolution was one very famous sheep called
Emperor, who for several successive years yielded 25 lbs. of greasy and 12 lbs. of scoured
wool at a time when those heavy weights were almost unknown. In addition to that, he
was stamped with an almost phenomenal prepotency. His stock and their get could for
se\ eral generations be quite easily picked from the flock by any experienced sheepman who
happened to have
been acquainted
with the sire.
The Peppins
were very skilful
s h e ep b r eeders,
and they had be-
fore them a defin-
ite objective in
their effort to
breed sheep of
large, handsome
frames, with
heavy fleeces of
WANGANELLA ESTATE STUD RAMS.
3
The Wanganella Estate, New South Wales.


robust wool. In 1874 they formed a double stud, the intention being to more closely con-
centrate their attention on the evolution of the best sheep they had, and which they
desired to make the fountain head of subsequent progress. Very careful records from
then on were kept of the yields of the individual sheep, and the breeding was conducted
on most methodical lines.
When Messrs. Austin and Millear bought Wanganella in 1878 they secured the whole
of the double stud and half of the ordinary stud, so they may fairly be considered to have
taken over the cream of the Peppms’ sheep. The new owners did not vary the methods
of breeding which had been used with so much success in the past, but maintained a steady
progress, which has been continued right down to the present. The Wanganella Estate
sheep have never been subject to any artificial treatment, but are reared under just such
practical conditions of woolgrowing as their progeny may be expected to have to face.
Drafts of the rams are offered annually at auction and they never fail to bring very high
prices, their great capacity for yielding weighty fleeces under almost any class of Aus-
tralian climate being generally recognised throughout the Commonwealth.
The late Mr. Thos. Millear died in 1895, and the benficiaries in the estate are his four
daughters and one son. The latter, with a son-in-law, Dr. T. R. Lyle, are the trustees.
THE COTTAGE, WANGANELLA ESTATE
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Boonoke. Moonbria, Widgiewa
and Wanganella Estates
The Properties of F. S. falkiner & Sons Ltd.
THE history of the pastoral estates owned by the firm of F. S. Falkiner and Sons,
Fimited, is to a very great extent the history of one of the largest and most suc-
cessful Merino flocks in the world, and with the development of the Boonoke studs
is entwined the personality of one of the strongest and most able of Australia’s pioneers
the late Mr. F. S. Falkiner.
TWO-TOOTH STUD EWES AT BOONOKE.
The late Franc Sadleir Falkiner was born at Beechwood, Nenagh, County Tipperary,
on the 23rd October, 1833. His father was Daniel Falkiner, solicitor, a member of the Fal-
kiner family of Mount Falcon. He was educated privately, and at his father’s death, while
quite young, he left Ireland to seek his fortune in Australia.
That he should have proved a man of uncommon ability and great force of character
was somewhat to be expected, as several of his ancestors on both sides were men of more
1


THE BOONOKE GARDEN.
than average intelligence. On his mother’s side he was a descendant of Sir Ralph Sadleir,
a man of some considerable note in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. His father’s family
went from Leeds (in England), in 1630, to Ireland, and engaged in the woollen industry,
and afterwards purchased Mount Falcon, County Tipperary.
The late Mr. F. S. Falkiner, who made the Boonoke stud what it now is, came to Aus-
tralia in 1853 with a capital of but £2O, he died in 1909, leaving his family Boonoke, Moon-
bria, Tuppal, Moira, Perricoota, and Widgiewa Stations, with, of course, the famous stud
flock.
He achieved these results by sheer ability and energy, and if good luck entered into
the balance at all, it was frequently counterbalanced by adversity. It is difficult to com-
mence on a subject so big as this, but it is safe to start with the stud flock, inasmuch as
to the Boonoke Merino is due such a large portion of this success. It was in 1878, when
the Peppin Estates were being realised, that the late Mr. F. S. Falkiner purchased Boo-
noke with stock in partnership with the late John R. Ross, then manager of the London
Chartered Bank, Melbourne, and a Mr. Mackenzie. In 1882 these partners were bought
out, and Mr. Falkiner then settled down to the concentration of the whole of his intelligence
and industry into the stud flock. The late Mr. Jonathan Shaw was at this time the leading
sheep classer, and had charge of most of the flocks in Riverina, amongst them Boonoke. At
about this period his connection with the flock ceased, and after, or soon after, Mr. J. C.
Darke was entrusted with the classing, a position he still retains. His -wide experience and
knowledge of sheep over Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria, and his ability and
enthusiasm have given results eminently satisfactory both to the breeders and buyers of
the Boonoke rams.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE BOONOKE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wanganeda Estates, New South Wales.


At the time of the purchase of Boonoke the Peppins were well known as skilful sheep-
breeders, and with their famous Rambouillet ram Emperor had laid the foundation of a great
flock, and the late Mr. F. S. Falkiner was not slow to realise the great possibilities of the
pastoral industry and the need of good-framed, well-woolled, sound-constitutioned rams.
To supply these, the expansion of the flock was necessary, which allowed of its deeper
culling and wider breeding within itself. To this end he purchased Moonbria, so as not to
be forced to sell his aged stud ewes. The size of the stud is now its great strength, buyers
being able to get lines of rams of the same high class year after year. It is not easy for
the average breeder to realise the extent and value of this flock, but some idea may be
given by stating that from 1882 to 1909 th e sales of rams have averaged P er an "
num. As locality has so much influence on sheepbreeding, it must be stated that Boonoke
and the other stud estates owned by Messrs. F. S. Falkiner and Sons are all open plain
country, the sheep being exposed to the cold of winter and the heat of summer.
OLD MAN PLAINS, BOONOKE, SHOWING CLASS OF COUTRY THE SHWEEP ARE GRAZED ON.
No fancy sheep would thrive on such country, and Mr. Falkmer directly he purchased
the flock laid down the cardinal principles of the system of breeding he intended to pursue.
He insisted on deep, shapely frames, with well-sprung ribs, and plenty of width across the
shoulders and back. He knew these characteristics meant constitution, and during the
thirty-two years he resided at Boonoke and supervised the stud he never deviated one iota.
Few flocks have had the benefit of such continuous supervision by one man —nearly a life-
time.
He exercised his great skill and care in covering the sheep with high-class, bulky wool
of a texture to suit the hot plains of New South Wales and Queensland. The flock having
been bred within itself, the leading characteristics of the Boonoke sheep are thus very
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


THE HOMESTEAD AT MOONBRIA.
firmly established. Their prepotency is one of their greatest recommendations, for having
been bred so long on the same sound principles, they transmit their special characteristics
to their progeny. This very largely explains the steady and increasing success of the stud,
for it has been no sudden flare into fashion or popularity with them; the demand has been
steady ever since Mr. Falkmer bought the flock from the Peppins. The writer was re-
cently at Boonoke, and was permitted to see the firm’s books in connection with the ram-
breeding business.
Two things most impressed him. First, the big lines in which the Boonoke rams are
sold and can be supplied, while at the same time the many small orders executed. The se-
cond thing that impressed the writer was the wide distribution of the Boonoke rams. There
is hardly a district in the Commonwealth not mentioned in the ram sale book at Boonoke ;
m addition to which they go to South Africa, Tasmania, New Zealand, and some have
even gone to India. Western Australian graziers are also large buyers.
Now for a word about the sheep themselves. They are well known as being among
the most hardy and prepotent in Australia. The special stud rams have a few bold folds on
the neck and front, but the sheep generally are devoid of body wrinkles, and are large-
-5
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wangane/la Estates, New South Wales.


THE OLD MAN PLAIN, BOONOKE.
framed, deep-bodied sheep. Their great constitutions are proved b} 7 their success in the
hardest parts of Queensland, New South Wales, and Western Australia, where many of the
leading clips are bred from Boonoke rams. The books at the firm’s head office show the
same buyers for rams for years past, and no higher testimony could be given to the con
sistent standard of the sheep. There is no pampering or housing at Boonoke, the sheep
depend on natural pasture only, and rams that, say, are worth each can be seen
hustling for themselves on the wide, treeless Old Man Plain.
As regards Boonoke itself, the homestead is situated about twenty miles north of
Deniliquin, near the township of Conargo. The run comprises about 70,000 acres of free-
hold and Crown lands —it was originally part of the country owned by the Clyde Company,
and has passed through the hands of Messrs. Holmes, Dunne, Myles, Patterson, and Pep-
pin and Sons, before Messrs. F. S. Falkiner and Co. purchased it in 1878. The estate is
essentially grazing country, being a vast, open plain, with little or no timber, excepting the
trees along the Billabong, and a narrow sandhill running parallel with it, and is, excepting
the frontage, devoid of natural water.
The house is built on a sandhill in a bend of the creek; it is an exceedingly pretty
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BOONOKE STUD RAM.
7
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wanganella Estates, New South Wales.


spot studded with
shady trees, and is a
welcome relief from the
big open plains. A fea-
ture of the Boonoke
homestead is the plan-
tation of pepper trees,
which are amongst the
finest in the State. Ihe
old home was burnt to
the ground in 1888,
and Mr. Falkiner erect-
ed the present cool
brick building on the
same spot. It is light-
THE DINING ROOM, BOONOKE.
ed with electricity, and fitted with every comfort one could wish for.
The rainfall is about 1 5 inches average, and Boonoke was originally dependent on the
Billabong for water supply, but this was not reliable or sufficient; fine tanks have therefore
been excavated, and lately wells and windmills have been gone in for, and a concrete o\ er-
shot dam has been constructed on the creek to water the homestead and garden. The old
original outbuildings are now being rebuilt of brick.
Moonbria comprises 64,000 acres, and lies to the north-east of Boonoke, and was pur-
chased from H. B. Pat-
terson and Co. in 1884
—it is also a large tract
of open plain situated
about thirty miles from
Jenldene railway, and
forty-five miles from
Deniliquin. It is man-
aged by Mr. R. S. Fal-
kiner, who has done a
tremendous amount of
work in the way of im-
provements. The coun-
try is hard, red and
brown cotton bush
THE FRONT VERANDAH, BOONOKE.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A BOONOKE STUD RAM.
9
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wanganella Estates, New South Wales.


THE HOMESTEAD ON WANGANELLA ESTATE.
plains, destitute of natural water and tim-
ber, with the exception of a sandhill or
two and a few box clumps. The rainfall
is about the same as Boonoke, 1 5 inches.
The improvements include a securely
netted boundary, and sub-divisioned
fences, cutting up the run into suitable
paddocks. The water supply is entirely
artificial, but adequate.
Widgiewa, which was purchased by
the firm from Mr. J. S. Horsfall in Octo-
ber, 1909, without the sheep, is situated
on the Colombo Creek, about thirty miles
south of Narrandera, and consists of red
and brown plains, free from grass seed —
ideal sheep country if not overstocked.
The house is beautifully situated close to the creek, and is a long, rambling, shady build-
ing, well appointed, and surrounded by a charming old garden. The Boonoke sheep should
give a good account of themselves, especially as the estate is still managed by Mr. A. L.
Morrison, one of the most experienced and clever sheepbreeders in the Commonwealth, in
fact, there are very few so able, and it will be interesting to see what he produces at
Widgiewa now that the Boonoke sheep are there. Certainly he could not have better ma-
terial on which to use his skill. Widgiewa and Moonbria are devoted to stud breeding, and
are worked in connection with Boonoke, the operations on the three places being carried out
under the supervision of Mr. Otway Falkiner.
Ihe most recent of Messrs. Falkiner and Sons’ station acquisitions is the Wanganella
Estate, purchased from the trustees of the late Thomas Millear in August, igio. This
estate joins Boonoke, and with it Messrs. Falkiner and Sons purchased the whole of the
Merino stud and the goodwill. There were about 11,000 sheep on the Wanganella Estate at
the time of the purchase, and it is the present intention to keep these sheep quite apart
from the Boonoke flock, and not to cross them in any way, though both flocks are of the
pure Peppin blood. Ihe Wanganella Estate rams are very widely and favourably known, so
that the new owners have made a most valuable purchase, and with their personal attention
and knowledge the reputation of the flock should increase.
This estate is fully described elsewhere in this work, as are also the firm’s other
properties—luppal, Moira and Perricoota, the first-named property being managed by Mr.
F. B. S. Falkiner, and the latter two by Mr. Norman Falkiner.
Note. The Wanganella Estate (page 25) had not been sold when the portion of this work in which it appears was
printed, which explains why it appears under the name of the old owners.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE FIRM OF F. S. FALKINER & SONS LTD.
1. MR. F. B. S. FALKINER.
3. Mrs. F. S. FALKINER.
5. MR. NORMAN FALKINER.
6. MR. LEIGH FALKINER.
11
2. MR. OTWAY FALKINER.
4. THE LATE MR. F. S. FALKINER.
7. MR. RALPH FALKINER.
The Boonoke, Moonbrict, Widgiewa and Wanganella Estates, New South Wales.


So satisfied was
the late Mr. F. S. Fal-
kmer with the wealth
that was in the stud
fiock that he engaged
all his sons in pastoral
pursuits. They were all
brought up at Boonoke
with a knowledge of
the stud sheep, and
each in turn served his
probation amongst
them there, and as
manager of Moonbria.
In order that the
THE NEW BARRACKAS. BOONOKE.
flock might always be carried on and not split up, he formed his properties into a limited
company (the present proprietors) with himself and his sons as directors. On the late Mr.
Falkmer’s death, Mr. F. B. S. Falkiner was elected managing director, and, as Mr. Otway
Falkiner was educated at Boonoke and had been continuously amongst the stud sheep, it was
unanimously decided by the brothers, on their father s death, to give him the active supei-
vision of the stud —a choice that was widely approved of, as he had been so closely associ-
ated with his father for many years in the selection and mating of the sheep, in addition
to his personal ac-
quaintance with so
many of the firm’s
buyers. In this work
he is ably assisted by
his brother Ralph, who
manages Moonbna.
The Falkiners
manage their own pro-
perties in a thorough
and up-to-date manner.
All the estates are
linked up by telephone
to each other, and also
to the nearest towns.
THE VRIDFE NEAR BOONOKE
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


EIDGIEWA.
I hey have several motor cars, which just slaughter the distance between the stations on
those big, open plains, besides being a great convenience and saving of time and expense
both to the firm and their buyers.
The head office of F. S. Falkiner and Sons, Limited, is at Boonoke, which is connected
with Conargo and Deniliquin by telephone. Mr. Leigh Falkiner, the secretary of the firm,
resides there and supervises the books and accounts.
personal.
The eldest son, F. B. S. Falkiner, was educated at the Church of England Grammar
School, at Geelong, and at the age of 1 7 he went to Moonbria Station, of which he had full
charge for 6 years. In 1891, when Tuppal Station was purchased, he went there as man-
ager, a position he has held to the present time. On his father’s death he was elected
managing director of F. S. Falkiner and Sons, Ltd. In 1905 he married Ethel, eldest
daughter of Mr. George Howat, of Melbourne He has been a member of the Conargo Shire
Council since its inception.
Mr. N. F. Falkiner was also educated at the Church of England Grammar School, at
Geelong. Shortly after leaving school, at the age of 18, he took up the management of
l 3
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wangane/la Estates, N ew South Wales.


Moonbria Station,
which he managed for
six years. When Moira
Station was purchased
in 1899 he went there
as manager, and was
at that station till he
went to Perricoota in
1910. He married, in
1901, Mary, daughter
of Canon Smithwick,
Chancellor of St. Bri-
gid’s Cathedral, Kil-
dare, Ireland.
Mr. 0. R. Falkiner
THE VARRACKS, WIDFIEWA.
was educated privately at Boonoke, and was associated with his father m the management
of Boonoke and the stud sheep until his marriage, in 1899, to Elizabeth, daughter of James
McLaurin, of Moroco, when he took up the management of Moonbria Staion. He remained
there until Perricoota Station was purchased in 1900, when he took up the management of
that station. Ever since he was quite a boy he has always retained the active management
of the stud flock at Boonoke with his father. On the death of his father, he took up his
residence at Boonoke, where, with the assistance of his brother Ralph, he controls the stud
flock.
Mr. R. S. Falkiner
was educated at the
Church of England
Grammar School, at
Geelong. Upon leaving
school he was appoint-
ed the hrst secretary of
F. S. Falkiner and Sons,
Ltd., and was associ-
ated with the stud
flock at Boonoke until
Igo I, when he took up
the management of
Moonbria Station,
SOME OUT-BUILDINGS, WIDGIEWA.
M
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TYPICAL BOONOKE STUD EWE.
i 5
The Boonoke, Moonbria, Widgiewa and Wanganella Estates, New South Wales.


THE COLOMBO CREEK, WIDGIEWA.
where he still is. Ever since he left school he has been closely identified with his late
father and brother, Mr. 0. R. Falkiner, in the management of the stud flock. He is a mem-
ber of the Conargo Shire Council, and originator of the Falkiner 801 l Patent Electric Sheep
Shearing Machine.
Mr. F. S. Falkiner is the youngest son. He was educated at the Church of England
Grammar School, Geelong, and upon leaving school he went to Tuppal to gain
experience under his brother, Mr. F. B. S. Falkiner, and for the last nine years
has been secretary of the company. The whole of the firm’s books and station books
and business are under his supervision. During this time he was associated with his late
father in the management of Boonoke, and was in charge of that station whenever Mr. F.
S. Falkiner was absent.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Tuppal, Moira and Perricoota Estates.
The Properties of F. S. Falkiner and Sons Ltd.
Guppal.
TUPPAL is situated in the Deniliquin district of the Riverina, and runs from within
twelve miles of that town easterly to within a similar distance of Berrigan and
Tocnmwal, the township of Finley being on the property. It has a frontage of
twelve miles to the Tnppal Creek on the south bank, and about eighteen miles frontage on
the north bank, on which side is situated almost the whole of the run. Along the creek the
country is open plain, but the balance, consisting of three-fourths of the estate, was originally
box forest, interspersed with Murray pine The whole of the timber, except the pine, has
been rung, the dead wood cleared up and burnt, and the pines trimmed axe-handle high,
which gives the country a well-kept, park-like appearance. I here are four out-stations
conveniently situated and connected with the homestead by substantially-erected telephone
lines, and the homestead is connected with the telegraph office at Tocnmwal. Around Finley
MOB OF 9100 EWE WEANERS, TUPPAL-BRED, BOONOKE BLOOD.
I


OVERSHOT DAM ON TUPPAL CREEK.
railway station a few years back a very large area was cultivated on the share system, or
rented straight out, hut it is now used for grazing purposes only. The whole estate is wire
netted, and kept free from rabbits, three packs of dogs being constantly employed going
over the area, hunting and digging out being the methods adopted. The country is amply
watered by the creek frontage and wells from too to 150 ft. deep. Tanks are made where
suitable catches are available. These range in size from 4000 to 10,000 cubic yards. The
homestead is watered by a brick overshot dam, rather unique in construction, built on the
creek, and so constructed as to stand a complete submerging when a heavy flood comes from
the Murray and the creek becomes miles wide.
The improvements on Tuppal are very good, £43.000 having been spent under this
heading since the estate was acquired in 1891. The house is a large roomy one of brick,
surrounded by 3 acres of well-kept garden. The old original store, office, stable, and men’s
quarters have been rebuilt of brick. A new cart-shed, completely enclosed, and new horse-
yards have been erected, making the homestead surroundings very complete. The woolshed
is a feature of the property, and is fitted with seventy-two Wolseley machines. Suitable
quarters for the shearers and shed hands are also provided.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


I. THE TUPPAE HOMESTEAD.
2. 1100 KAMS, MIXED AGES, USED IN TUPPAE FLOCK, PURE POONOKE BLOOD.
3. THE MANAGER’S HOUSE AT TUPPAL.
3
Tappal, New South Wales.


INTERIOR OF THE TUPPAL SHED.
Contains 72 stands. Forty-four stands on inside line and 14 on each side of the table on the outside line.
The tables, of which there are seven, are in a wing off the centre of the board, where the basket stands.
The sheep are pure Boonoke blood, the average number shorn for the past nineteen
years being 152,780. The annual clip is usually sold in London, and is noted for its careful
get-up and evenness in the character of the wool, which is reflected in the prices obtained
for the different lots. The largest clip totalled 3326 bales greasy and scoured.
Mr. F. B. S. Falkiner. who manages at Tuppal, was born at Ararat in 1867, and
educated at Geelong Grammar School. Tie left at an early age, and after managing Moonbria
Station for a few years, took up the management of Tuppal when twenty-three years of age.
Fie married Ethel, eldest daughter of Mr. George Howat, of Cumnock, Royal Park,
Melbourne, and his family consists of two boys and two girls. FTe is a J.P. for the State
of New South Wales, and has been a member of Conargo Shire Council and Tuppal Creek
Water Trust since their inception.
niXMra.
Moira is managed by Mr. Norman Falkiner, and comprises 46,000 acres freehold,
situated in Southern Riverina, close to the Victorian border. It was originally taken up by
Messrs. Lewis and Throsby, and was subsequently sold to Mr. O’Shanassy. Messrs. Falkiner
and Sons purchased it in 1899, and it is now becoming well known for the fine Clydesdale
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


horses bred on it. Moira is of about a sheep to an acre and adialf capacity, and is open
country, with belts of box and pine timber.
The homestead is situated about three miles from the Moira railway siding. It is a
substantial brick residence, replete with every comfort and labour-saving device. It is
prettily situated in the midst of a garden and plantation of some 5 acres in extent, the
principal trees being sugar gum, kurrajong, pepper, and Cootamundra wattle.
The improvements carried out by the present owners have to date cost £18,273 3s. 3d.
The estate is subdivided into fifty paddocks by substantial six-wire fences, and is also
divided into three blocks with rabbit-proof netting. Nearly all the fencing has been erected
since the firm acquired the property in 1899. Over 26,000 acres have been cleared. Tanks,
wells, and bores have been constructed and put down, and water is laid on to all the yards
and buildings on the property. The woolshed is of iron, and has accommodation for thirty-
two shearers. The men’s huts are all of substantial brick.
<L\k nooira Cl\>bC6bale Stub.
The stud was founded upon the original Moira mares, which were purchased with the
property from Mr. O'Shanassy, and which were the progeny of mares he purchased from
Messrs. Robertson Bros. These have from time to time been added to by the purchase of
high-class pedigree stock. There are about seventy mares at present in the stud. The most
recent additions are as follows: —In 1908 four mares and three foals were obtained from Mr.
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD, MOIRA.
3
Moira, New South Wales.


TWO-YEAR-OLD FILLIES. DRAUGHT MARES.
S. 1 . Lynn, Orbost; this lot included Dolly Castles, a full sister to Tilly, who was first and
champion in Melbourne in 1908. When Mr. Hogan, of Kyneton, sold off, four more mares
were purchased, and later five mares were bought from Mr. E. J. Rickey Dean—four being
by that famous horse Lord Dundonald, and one by Royal Title (imp.). This lot included
Rosebud and a full sister to Lord Wallace. Rosebud is a prizewinner out of Moss Rose,
winner of first and champion prizes at Melbourne. At Mr. Trevaskis’ sale the same year,
four more mares were purchased, including the prizewinning three-year-old filly and a Herd
Laddie mare, with colt foal at foot. The other mares in the stud are by such well-known
sires as Lord Dundonald, Bonnie Charlie, Lord Brassey, Revolter, Stanley Style, dancer.
Clydesdale Hero, Glenloth, Grampian (imp.), Lord Clyde, Young Champion, Royal Title
(imp.), and Herd Laddie (imp.). These names are sufficient to indicate that Messrs,
halkincr have gone for the best blood obtainable, and that they keep very careful pedigrees.
Among the stallions used in the stud were Lord Brassey, by St. Lawrence (imp.) ; and Bonnie
Charlie, bred by Mr. Andrew Towns, Hobartville, N.S.W., got by Gallant Scotchman (imp.).
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


In 1904 Baron Glengyle
was imported from
New Zealand, and
there are some splen-
did foals by him at
Moira, and also by The
Admiral, Lord Dun-
donald, Baron Bold,
and St. Lawrence 11.,
bred in New Zealand.
These foals are out of
great mares, and are
full of promise. There
are also in the stud
some very fine two-
year-old colts by Baron
Glengyle, British Lad-
THE ADMIRAL.
die, and Major Robin. The stallions at present at the head of the Moira stud are the
imported horse The Admiral (13223 C. 5.8.), purchased in 1907, and Federation (imp.),
well known as a prolific sire of prizewinners. The Admiral is a very handsome dark
brown horse, foaled in 1904. He is powerfully built, and stands about 16)4 hands on good,
sound legs and feet. Fie has good bone, hair, and plenty of style. His sire, Drumflower
( i 0537 C. 5.8.), is a winner of many prizes at the leading shows in Great Britain, and his
dam, Chester Princess, is about the best mare in Scotland to-day.
Mr. Norman Falkiner is always on the lookout for fresh stock, and in Inly last the
firm imported a notable consignment of mares from New Zealand. This included Princess
Fanny, by Crown Prince, winner of fully a dozen championships in the Southern Island,
DRAUGHT COLTS AND FILLIES
7
Moira , \ew South Wales.


including the Christchuich International Show of 1906: Silver Rose, by Prince Alexander,
also a champion; and Helen McGregor, a filly by Garthland (imp.). In addition, eight two
and three year old fillies by such well-known sires as Pride of Newton (imp.), Prince
Alexander, Sir Royal, and Dalmir Prince, were imported at the same time. The 1909
Melbourne Royal Show Champion, La France, a three-year-old full sister to Rosebud, by
Lord Dundonald, has been added to the stud.
Some of the best draught horse blood in the world is concentrated at Moira, and the
young stock have long pedigrees on both sires’ and dams’ sides. They are absolutely
pure, and eligible for registration in any stud book. The mares and young stock are all
run out in the paddocks, and they get nothing but the natural grasses. It is the same
with the stallions; they run out with the mares, and exceedingly satisfactory results are
obtained. The mares are healthy, and breed better, and the stallions get a greater
percentage of stock than they do when stall-fed.
STUD SHORTHORN COWS AND CALVES ON MOIRA.
The Merino sheep are all pure Boonoke blood. A pedigree herd of Shorthorn
cattle is also kept at Moira.
pcmcoota.
Perricoota comprises 70,000 acres, and is situated about fifteen miles from Echuca,
on the border between New South Wales and Victoria. This property was held for about
twenty-five years by Messrs. Robertson and Wagner, and Falkiner and Sons Limited
purchased it in July, 1900. It comprises chocolate soil and red loam, with a seventy-mile
frontage to the River Murray. It is timber country, intersected with little patches of
plain. The timber is box, dogwood, and bull oak, with red gum along the river banks.
The whole estate is well watered by its extensive river frontage and numerous creeks,
tanks, and lagoons.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE PERRICOOTA HOMESTEAD.
THE ENTRANCE.
9
Perrlcoota, New South Wales.


Mr. Otway R. Falkiner manages Perricoota, and his homestead is situated on a sand
rise on a charming bend of the Murray. A magnificent view is obtained both up and
down the river. The house is a two-storied Prick building, most up to date in every
respect. It stands in about 5 acres of garden sloping right down to the river. Here
oranges, lemons, figs, mandarins, apples, pears, apricots and grapes grow to perfection,
and there is a beautiful flower garden and a fine assortment of vegetables. There is a
fine avenue of Finns iusignis, a quarter of a mile long, leading up to the house, in front
of which there are some magnificent pepper trees. Altogether Perricoota is a beautiful
country residence. It is connected by telephone with the township of Moama, also with
the Moira homestead.
One of the most noticeable improvements on Perricoota is the woolshed, which is
fitted with forty-two stands of Falkiner-801l electric shearing machines, invented by one
of the members of the firm. Electricity is also used for lighting the shed, so that a full
eight hours’ day can be worked independent of the season or the weather. The stables
are built of brick, and they contain ten stalls and four loose boxes. The overseer’s cottag'e,
containing eight rooms', is also of brick. Water is laid on from the Murray to the house,
stables, cottage, and men’s huts.
The freehold land has all been rung and cleared and burnt off two or three times.
The proximity to such a river as the Murray facilitates irrigation. On Perricoota there
A STEAMER COMING UP THE MURRAY AND PASSING PERRICOOTA STATION.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SOME OF THE LAND AT PRESENT BEING CUT UP INTO FARMS AT PERRICOOTA.
is a 20-in. centrifugal pump driven by a 50-h.p. engine pumping 10,000 gallons per
minute, sufficient to irrigate 2000 acres. Artificial channels convey the water a distance
of 15 miles through the estate. These also fill the natural watercourses when required for
30 miles in different directions.
Several portions of Perricoota have been sold for farming purposes during the last
twenty years. Within the last eighteen months the firm have sold 9000 acres, and are
offering another 11,000 acres in 320-acre blocks at the present time (Spring, 1909). The
freehold portion of the estate is surrounded with a rabbit-proof fence, and it is also
subdivided into six rabbit-proof sections.
On the irrigated land wheat, oats, sorghum, lucerne, amber cane and Japanese millet
are grown, as much as
20 tons of sorghum to
the acre having been
obtained.
The Merino flocks at
Perricoota are bred
from pure Boonoke
blood, and are of the
same big robust type,
with plain bodies and
great fronts. The
PUMPING STATION FOR IRRIGATION WORKS
11
Perricoota, New South Wales .


THE PERRICOOTA STABLES.
lambing averages range from between 70 to 80 per cent. Since Boonoke blood was
introduced the wool returns per sheep have increased 3 lbs. per head
There is also a pure herd of Shorthorns at Perricoota. This was founded from
the pick of the original cattle bred by Messrs. Robertson and Wagner, who used bulls
from the notable herd of Messrs. Robertson Bros., of Colac. During the past nine years
the Messrs. Falkiner have used high-class bulls from the Trustees of the late Mr. J. H.
Angas, of Point Sturt, South Australia; Mr. D. Mitchell, of Colbinabbin; and Sir Rupert
Clarke, of Belinda Vale. The Perricoota herd now comprises no fewer than 1000 head of
breeding cows, mostly reds and roans. The Perricoota Shorthorns are a wonderfully level
lot, with great thick-fleshed, massive frames. For years Perricoota has been famed as one
of the finest fattening grounds for stock in the Commonwealth, and fat bullocks trucked
to the Flemington yards not infrequently top the market, and are in great favour.
Altogether the estate is now carrying 80,000 sheep and about 2500 head of cattle.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Wanganmong Estate.
The Property of Mr. W. B. Sanger
Daysdale, A.S.W
LATE JOHN MILDRED SANGER.
WANG AMONG (native name, “pigeon plains ’) is 34 miles from Jerilderie, 24
from Berrigan, 35 from Corowa, thus situated in the southern centre of the big,
robust-typed Riverina stud breeders. It was taken up by the late J. M. Sanger
in 1850, and divided between his two sons, W. B. and C. D., in 1907, the present owner,
W. 8., retaining the old homestead, and C. D. taking the southern portion. It is now kept
as the stud estate, the bulk of the flock sheep being on estates in Deniliquin and Urana
districts, all saltbush country.
The country is part open-timbered box, interspersed with myall and saltbush plains and
sandy loam rises, grassed with Riverina natural grasses, principally barley grass autumn
and winter, trefoil and a species of white-flowered clover summer and winter, the latter
a fine burrless seed fodder All obnoxious weeds, such as Bathurst burr and saffron thistle,
are eradicated. Rainfall—lowest 9, highest 22 in.; average 15J. No green grass from No-
vember till April. Barley grass being a great tax upon stock in skin, mouth, and eyes, has
always necessitated open faces in sheep
The late John Mildred Sanger, born at Cirencester, Gloucester, in 1816, was a man
full of independent
thought and action.
Before leaving Eng-
land, being a mem-
ber of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, he
placed before them
a scheme for the
Panama Canal (op-
posed to the then
popular and shorter
one), which has
since, many years
BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
I
57


after, been adopted, his reason being the natu-
ral lay of the country. He arrived in South
Australia in 1837, bearing letters of introduc-
tion, still extant, to most of the leading men
in Australia. These he did not use, but fol-
lowed his own bent in starting various con-
cerns. Finally, after managing Messrs. T. and
J. P. Bear’s various properties, he settled at
Wangamong in 1850, residing there until his
death in 1904. Here, with his characteristic
energy and forethought, he at once founded,
and strictly adhered to, a line of big-framed,
robust, good-woolled type of Merino stud
MR. WILLIAM BRENT SANGER.
sheep, which similar type to-day, sixty years later, is firmly fixed in the majority of the Aus-
tralian sheepbreeders’ eyes
Mr. W. B. Sanger, elder son of the late J. M. Sanger, was born at Wangamong in Janu-
ary, 1864; was educated at home, and after at John Henning Thompson’s Kew High School.
He took an active part in classing sheep, and recording individual results from fourteen
years of age, since when for thirty-two years he has never left the helm of the Wangamong
stud flock; the chart mapped out by his late father, always strictly adhered to, being, “to
fill the bales with long, lustrous, profitable wool, and the freezing chambers with profitable,
edible mutton.” Mr. W. B. Sanger is a well-known sheep judge, having from 1887 to date
been appointed over seventy times to judge at the leading shows of Australia, but from 1902
to 1905 he refused to act until a more robust
type of sheep came forward.
He married, in January, 1888, Isobel Kate,
daughter of the late R. W. Larntt, C.E., of
“The Hurst,” Upper Hawthorn, many years
Inspector-General in the Roads and Bridges
Department, Victoria. He has one son and
three daughters. His son, John Mildred San-
ger, born December, 1888, educated at Gee-
long Grammar School till 1906, now takes an
active part with his father in the management
of the stud stock and estate.
MR. JOHN MILDRED SANGER.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF TYPICAL STUD EWES.
VIEW OF PLAIN AND GOLF LINKS AFTER TWO INCHES OF HEAVY RAIN.
A very simple effective self-acting contrivance is attached to the windmill it consists of a five-gallon drum with a nail hole in
the bottom, attached to the lever. The overflow pipe fills the drum and stops the mill. When the water leaks out the mill
starts again.
3
The Wctngamong Estate, New South Wales <


STUD RAM EMPEROR 09/2 BRED BY. MR.B.S. SANGER.
In 1909 this ram cut a fleece weighing 26 lbs. for 12 months’ growth, valued at 1/8.
The live weight of the ram is 230 lbs.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A CU LTIVATION PADDOCK.
Droughts are frequent, but by conserving fodder, stocking judiciously, a system of
changing paddocks often, and good water, no serious trouble has ever been encountered.
Cultivation is only moderately gone in for, the system being fallowing, cropping, and grass
alternately, by station teams, five-disc stump-jump ploughs (draft six horses), loamy soils,
including drilling and superphosphates 40 lbs. acre.
Rabbits are no trouble; ten years ago all harbour inaccessible to small terriers was re-
moved, rabbit burrows crowbarred in and not dug out, but followed up constantly with
shovels and dogs for two years, qd. an acre a year, and last eight years has cost |d. per
acre a year. In back country one suggests this system with blackfellows and dogs.
DOUBLE STUD Ewe, typical of the greatest amount of development and density, ever used,
staple (close on 4 in. long). One of the biggest ewes on the station. Cut17½ lbs. clean,
bright, junky wool. Width of nose and size of bone always prominent. Barley grass has
taken off point wool.
5
Fencing.—Old style
—6 and 7 wires, No.
8, posts 10 ft. apart;
new style 6 and 7
wires, No. 8, posts 36
ft. apart; droppers
every 9 ft.; 2 years’
trial very good; strain-
ers every 10 chains;
if required, let top wire
be a barb. Subdivision
is such that remarkable
facility to the testing of
every stud sire is af-
forded, thus guaran-
teeing true lines. Mr.
Sanger does not favour
machine shearing, both
as to expenses and
“come” of next sea-
son’s growth.
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


A STUD SIRE.
Cut 27 lbs. of solid very bright 4 inch staple wool. He has has great frame and length of carcase. Ten of these sires are used
annually singly, and all lambs from them are mothered.
Iblston? of the jflocfc.
The Wangamong flock was founded in June, 1853, on the very biggest-framed ewes
obtainable, being 1000 of the pick of 5000 Macarthur’s Camden blood by pure Saxon Me-
rino rams. In 1856, thirty Learmonth rams were introduced. On 2nd December, 1863,
the late J. M. Sanger (who then preferred his own sheep) saw at G. Peppin and Sons, Wan-
ganella the imported Rambouillet sire Emperor (Certificate No. 75 Royal Rambouillet
Farm), which cut as four, six, and eight tooth respectively, 21, 22, and lbs. of very
bright, strong, dense wool; very big, plain-bodied sheep, with square frame and massive
neck. He bought straight away ten, the pick of the entire dropping (25th May to 31st
August, 1862) of stud ram lambs by Emperor, out of pure Wanganella stud ewes. This
introduction on top of his own great frame gave all he wanted. No further change of blood
has ever been effected, for in all successful flocks given the right foundation, it is the man
and the country that does the rest, and certainly Wangamong is a type of its own.
On 31st March, 1907, the stud and flock were divided. W. B. Sanger picked his
sheep turn about, according to his judgment, and C. D. Sanger picked his sheep turn about,
according to his judgment, in full wool, July-August, 1907, since when everything has been
entirely separate.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


, AX
Wangamong ('
over)
Class
Total
Total
per
Price
per
Average
Cent.
d.
Cent.
Price.
AA Pieces
23-63
11.76
d.
A
41.82
11
B
34-54
9-25
1 °° %
10.58
4I.O4
IO. 58
Bellies
5.22
8-57
Locks
2. 24
3-75
In Grease,
Melbourne
100 %
11.17
Wool
Sales, October,
1909.
Class
Total
Total
per
Price
per
Average
Cent.
d.
Cent.
Price.
AA Fleece averaged
68, 11
I2.8l
d.
A (tender) ,,
13.04
■1-55
81.16
12.6
B ,, averaged
<5-95
■0-75
Rams ,,
2.89
IO
100 %
12.23
5i-5
12.23
All Sheep
All Wool in
All Sheep
Year.
Averaged.
Grease Averaged.
Averaged.
1879
6 lb. 8 OZS.
io3d. per lb.
5/9 per head.
1889
8 ,, I ,,
io|d. ,,
7/3
1899
9 1 »
n?d. ,,
8/9 ,,
1909
10 ,, 8 ,,
io|d. ,,
9/5 »
Two Promising Stud Rams (age 2 years 3 months).
Cut 24 lb. and 26 lb. of wool respectively. Identical with the outside rams on page 13.
Wangamong holds the best all-round, all-wool average price (ii.i/d.) per lb. greasy
wool as IQOQ-IO record for Central Riverina, wherever conditions are against the high prices
—burr and dust under at least six months’ dry conditions. A noticeable feature is that with
this bold combing wool (staple to 4 h in. in rams and 4to 5 in. in ewes) there is prac-
tically only one class, viz., AA combing, as A combing would be AA only for being “ten-
der.” This clip is about the “broadest-locked” wool in Australia; rhe immense “junks” or
“flakes” are most noticeable in the saleroom. It is absolutely impossible for a “junky”
clip to come off any but solid-cutting sheep.
92 per cent’ being ewes, of which 25 per cent, are aged 7 to 13 years.
N.B.—ln 1909 average, stains, scoured, lowered n.iyd. to io|d. Every double extra stud 4-tooth sire averaged 26 lb., and
every double extra stud 4-tooth ewe averaged 15 lb. as dropped.
7
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


ENTRANCE TO DEIVE.
Across this drive in the early days, and up to about 1880, some 100,000 bales of wool from Jerilderie way and
out west travelled Melbournewards.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A fair sample group of specially bred flock ewes sired by stud rams (page 12), and the dams of 5-guinea specially bred flock rams. Three months’ old lambs afoot —the
lambing averaging 81 per cent. They represent 28 per cent, of the total number of breeding ewes and are the biggest, longest-backed, longest-stapled, and heaviest
cutting flocks on the station, averaging from 13 lbs. up to 15 lbs.
A fair sample of specially bred 5-guinea flock rams (aged 2 years 3 months). Sired by stud rams on page 12, dams as above. Average weight of fleece 19 lbs. 10 ozs.
These ram are booked to go all over Australia and to South Africa, and are specially recommended to follow on after the ordinary flock ram. When these rams have
been offered at the Sydney or Melbourne auction sales they have invariably averaged 40 per cent, to 80 per cent, more than station price.
N. B.—Second left-hand corner is only shorn lamb.
9
The Wang among Estate, New South Wales.


A CORNER OF THE GARDEN.
The old lopped almond tree (planted in 1852 by the late J. M. Sanger, and brought out in the late Mrs. j. M. Sanger's work basket), in above photo was
possibly the first tree planted north of the Murray ; it died the same year as the planter. Apropos of above, in 1850 the late J. M. Sanger left the Murray
to inspect this country, the only horse procurable being “a jib.” He said “Is he a ‘goer' if I get him going?” “Yes !" “Well twist that sheet of bark on
to his rump," and he went to such purpose that horse and rider travelled out and back, seventy miles, without a drop of water in height of summer.
I o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A FAIR SAMPLE GROUP OF SPECIALLY SELECTED STUD BRED IO-GUNEA RAMS.
Age 2 years 3 months. Average weight of fleece 21 lbs. By double extra stud sires similar to those illustrated on pages 4 and 6.
The dams are illustrated on page 11. The following is South African testimony in regard to these rams :—‘I cannot help ex-
pressing my satisfaction with them. I have 800 lambs from them and they are quite up to what they should be, and farmers
here are now thinking that they have made a mistake in buying the rams instead of buying with me.” 7.11.09.
AN AVERAGE SAMPLE GROUP OF 3 TO 14 YEAT OLD STUD EWES, WITH 80% LAMBS WEANED.
Average weight of fleece from 13 lbs. to 15 lbs., 4 in. to 5 in. staple, with brightness to the very tip, and showing true density ot
fibres to the square inch. These are the mothers of the Sale Stud Rams illustrated above. They have massive roomy quarters,
so essential in a “wool and mutton ” flock. They have long straight loins, with great depth of carcase, and they form two-thirds
of the whole stud and are the backbone of it.
11
The Wang among Estate, New South Wales.


A representative group of stud sires of specially bred flock ewes (5-guinea flock rams on page 9). The average weight of fleece
is 25 lbs., the average live weight is 210 lbs.
IRam Breeding. —These facts are plainly written on the wool and mutton industry of Eastern Australia, viz., to the extent of some 800 flocks, by the use of
close on 60,000 rams ; and above all, ? no man of that number who has duly noted results —viz., the progeny into two years of age —has ever been dissatisfied, New
South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia, and South Africa especially testifying to the great adaptability of the rams to withstand great hardships under any conditions —
drought, disease, snow, wet, etc. —that may crop up ; hundreds of letters testifying to this. There are many very necessary natural laws to follow, taking many years to stamp
them on more than one or two generations to produce such results. Once doing so, never let fads interfere. One very natural law to retain vigor, applying to every living
thing, and especially to sheep, is “ work thoroughly for the tucker.
Wangamong's special feature to the flock ram buyer is its method of selection by birth, viz., its three-guinea ram is born so and sold as such, likewise the specially bred
five-guinea. All flocks are by stud sires, and out of ewes carefully selected on one line for fifty Years, and always for bulky fleeces, netting high returns. Results testify that
all clips using Wangamong blood to any extent either top the district for all-round values or make considerable advance in their prices. Yearly output 1000 to 1500 rams.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS RURNED UP.
Showing the wonderfully good under covering for such plain bodies as are shown on page 7. The Ram opened up cut 29 lbs. of
sire’s wool 4½ in. to 4¾ in. long.
SAME RAM AS IS OPENED UP IN THE TOP PICTURE.
These pictures illustrate the length of staple and brightness and weight, combined with size of carcase.
J 3
The Wangamong Estate h gw South Wales.


A VERANDAH.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ROW OF ORANGE TREES 30 YEARS OLD.
TYPICAL STUD SIRE OF FLOCK RAMS (1000 to 1500).
Weight of fleece, 27 lbs. ; bright lustrous wool, in. staple Live weight 230 lbs.
*5
The Wangamong Estate, New South t Nates.


A GROUP OF FLOCK RAM LAMBS, THREE MONTHS -OLD.
Sired by the Rams shown on page 18 out of the Ewes on page 17. A constant user of Wangamong Rams wrote last year :
“ We put through 17,000 lambs—middle April to middle June drop —giving an average of 4 lbs. 1 oz., very fine lot of lambs.”
4½ months old.
THIS IS THE SAME RAM AS SHOWN ON PAGE 15,
Producing following results. From a constant buyer : —“ I am glad you appreciate results of your blood—I do ;my fleece averaged
the great price of 14¾. We sent home 139 bales of fleece. We scour our 2nd pieces, bellies, locks, and stained, in all of which
the shrinkage is remarkably small, viz:—2nd pieces lost 43-79% ; bellies 41.92%, stained 40.95%, locks 52.70%. Good stuff
to scour, eh ?”
j 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A FAIR SAMPLE MOB OF “SELECTED FLOCK EWES,” WITH 83 PER CENT, OF LAMBS, 3 MONTHS OLD, AT FOOT.
This class represents 46 per cent, of the total number of breeding ewes ; they cut an average of 12 lbs., realising at the 11 1/8d all round average this season 1 IS id
per wet ewe. These are the mothers of the 3s. selected flock rams that for over fifty years have gone all over Australia making many remarks similar to the
following : “I am more satisfied with your sheep every year. Our ewes have improved from ‘scrags’ without a ewe being culled for years, and now return almost
double the weight per head, and we have nothing but your common flock rams to thank for it. Our six-tooths looked like elephants alongside bought wethers of
same age.” —Dated 1900, from a breeder of 25,000 lambs.
N.B.—The same breeder, Mr. W. B. Sanger, has, without a break, classed these ewes tor over 30 years, never forgetting that broad points everywhere
must give hardy lasting propensities into old age. This is proved by the number of absolutely toothless ewes earn ing very bulky fleeces.
'7
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales <


A REPRESENTATIVE FROUP OF SIRES OF SELECTED THREE GUINES FLOCK RAMS (Same as page 20).
Aged 3 to 9 years. All carefully pedigreed. Sire and dam right back in the Stud Book. The average weight of fleeces off these rams is lbs., which sold this
season (1910) catalogued as rams, to within 83% of Mr. Sanger’s clip average, and Therefore, the above sires averaging and the dams (page 17)
averaging 11/1, the Wangamong ,£3/3/- flock rams must, in such a prepotent flock, cut a money value of 13/8 a head. Year in and year out they average lbs.,
and at per lb. (an all-round average for ram’s wool) the resultant 13/ 1 is a good return when on a tip-top mutton sheep, and it cannot be safely increased
for flocks.
Stud Notes. PEDIGREE. —W. B. Sanger has for twenty-nine years always been compiling, improving, and extending a system of stud records, whereby not
only every stud sire, but every stud ewe can be instantly looked up at classing exactly, and concisely, describing pedigrees and all their
characteristics and values, without which no stud can be steered correctly in any one direction. Weighing stud sires, live weights, is an interesting study to a
breeder, and adopted some years ago. No rams are ever allowed to leave the station until the breeder is personally satisfied with every sheep, the result being he
could sell his annual draft of flocks twice to three times over.
18
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


This picture shows a fair sample mob of Wangamong flock weaner ewes, 1909, as dropped, 15 months’ old and never handled for previous 1 1 months
in any way. They elicited the following tribute from the men who shore them in 1910 : “We, the undersigned shearers, wool rollers and pressers,
being present here 1909, do hereby certify that of our own knowledge we believe the Wangamong flock ewe weaners we have just shorn to be the
whole of the 1909 ewe lambs as shorn by us and others months ago. We are above an average team of shearers. We have done our best to
average 57 per full day of 8 hours, and have cut off these weaners 3.3 bales per 100, averaging over n lbs. of the cleanest, brighest, long-stapled
wool we have ever shorn. Further, we ourselves have seen that 98 per cent, of the fleece was baled in one class as Super or AA Hoggets. We
consider these weaner ewes the biggest, most even, and best we have shorn here (one man 5 years and another 14 years consecutively), and further
that most of us know that the dry season did not break here until the end of May, or only two-and-threequarter months before shearing.”
Dated 23rd August. 1910 SIGNED (J AS- J ORDAN w - G - McMONIGLE H. ELLIOTT C. ALLEN
MICK ALLEN HERBERT ARNOLD JAMES McINTYRE
i 9
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


SIRES OF FLOCK SHEEP ON PAGES 19 AND 23,
(Representatives of the massive frames and fronts of the Wangamong Flock).
Lambing Hverages. Lambing averages are and always have been out on top in any year. For instance, in great drought, 1908. Wangamong lamb marking returns were 70
per cent, being three-fifths more than the district’s average for that year, and the loss of ewes between to ram and marking count only 3 1/3 per cent. Lambing averages last fourteen
years, 84 per cent. The reason of such good returns is easily accounted for —mothers’ milk strong and rich, even in drought, largely brought about by several natural laws of selection,
which the breeder has never departed from or overlooked.
This speaks for itself :—“Western New South Wales, 18th July, 1909. Just marked 17,000, averaging Si A percent; the highest Wangamong rams, 76-per cent,
maidens and 87 per cent, and 83 per cent, from older ewes.”
20
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THIS ILLUSTRATION SHOWA A LOT IF SALE RAMS 2 TO 3 YEATS OLD (5 GUINEAS)
Purchased without inspection and photographed at the trucking yards. They went to the order of two buyers who remarked as follows respectively •
“ Rams received safe and sound, and I am more than pleased. I got them shorn by the blades and the average was 22 lbs. The best ram amongst them
cut 30 lbs. (Dated 16th October, 1908).” The second buyer wrote: “The rams arrived home to-day, and I am well pleased with them (3/10/08) - and
referring to former purchases, he wrote : “ I am very highly pleased with the progeny of the rams I bought from you. I never had hoggets cut so well
and they got a great starving last summer. I got fleece, pieces, and bellies 1905-6/"
Mr, Sanger has sold during the past two years 1877 rams, without inspection, at prices from 3 guineas to 80 guineas, to 27 buyers, and every one of
that number expressed satisfaction ; 20 out of the 27 had purchased Wangamong blood before.
21
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


MR. J. M. SANGER'S PINNIC RACER, PATRICIA.
ON THE WAY TO THE STABLES.
22
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE IS AN ILLUSTRATION OF A REPRESENTATIVE MOB OF O F FLOCK EWES, AGED 2 YEARS 3 MONTHS SIRED BY RAMS SHOWN ON PAGE 20
They cut an average of 12 lbs., and this season they travelled 240 miles along dusty, muddy roads, and the wool realised per lb. in the grease at Melbourne. A Victorian
buyer, writing under date of 21/2/06, said : “Re the rams I purchased (3-guineas) in 1900 from you. I used them for crossing, and their progeny are very satisfactory, I have always
had over 90 per cent, of lambs, and three-quarters of them (6 years after), are now as vigorous as ever. I generally get from £I to £I 2s 6d for their wethers. I sold some ewes last
winter to a butcher and he got I is 3d for their skins, the highest price he has ever got for skins. Last November I got 14s 3d ex wool for my comeback ewes from your rams.”
2 3
The Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


THE ABOVE IS A GROUP OF SELECTED FLOCK RAMS, aged two years 3 months (photographed ex trucks).
They are representative of the thousands of Wangamong rams that go all over Australia and South Africa, giving such results as the following— expressed by over forty different ram
buyers in the past few years :
92 per cent, of them had excellent to good results in Hardiness
87 " " " " Percentage of lambs
95 " " " " Carcase
75 " " " " Wool Values
83 " " " " Weight of Wool
9 2 " " " " Length of Staple
Which proves that thirty-five out of the forty buyers had excellent to good results.
24
The Pastoral Homes of Australia*


Steam Plains and Carabost Estates.
The Properties of Mr. Lewis Riddle.
THE Steam Plains Estate lies on the Eastern fringe of the Old Man Plain, in the
Rivcrina, about 40 miles from Deniliquin and 20 from Conargo, in a locality
deservedly famous for growing robust Merino sheep of a very profitable type.
The property was purchased by Mr. Lewis Kiddle and others during 1874, but at the
end of the following year the former became the sole owner. At the time of the sale the
holding comprised nearly 50,000 acres of Crown lands, and it now consists of close on
47,000 acies of freehold, all of which were obtained either at auction or by improvement
purchase.
Ihe country is very level and evenly covered with many varieties of sweet native
grasses. One-third of the property is plain country, portion of the remaining two-thirds
is lightly timbered with boree, myall, native willow, and other indigenous trees, and the
balance with box and Murray pine on sand ridges. The timber provides shade and shelter
for stock, besides a good supply for fencing and building purposes, as well as firewood.
Originally the country was covered with saltbush, but that has now almost disappeared, and
TYPICAL STEAM PLAINS COUNTRY.


is replaced by grass. Although this may have increased the grazing capacity, it is to be
regretted there is now no vestige of the useful fodder plant to be found for miles around,
except in one 500-acre paddock, which Mr. Kiddle has specially reserved on Steam Plains
for “ Old Man” saltbush.
The saltbush paddock provides quite a unique feature of Steam Plains. The plants
grow to 8 ft. in height and 40 in circumference. In the hottest weeks of summer, when
grass is dry or much reduced, the saltbush sprouts with its annual growth of new leaves, and
in consequence the milking cows of the homestead are kept at their maximum production
long after they would have gone dry on any other feed. The object lesson afforded
Photo by Lafayette.
MR. LEWIS KIDDLE.
■should impress landholders with the benefits which may arise from the systematic
cultivation of indigenous fodder plants. A quantity of the original cotton bush is scattered
throughout the run, and its presence there shows the country is not overstocked. Great
assistance is derived from it during the droughts which periodically occur.
The property derived its name from the first engine to cross the Murray, going
there in the sixties. When working at the homestead well, the steam could be seen for
many miles, hence the title. This has never been changed, because the general and stud
Merino flocks, as well as clip, have acquired a high reputation under the well-known old
brand.
Ihe local rainfall averages about 14 in. per annum, a sufficient supply when regular
L>ut the district is liable to sharp periods of drought, which render necessary the most
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


APPROACH TO THE HOMESTED.
SALTBUSH PADDOCK WITH RIDGE OF MURRAY PINE.
3
Steam Plains , New South Wales.


THE STEAM PLAINS HOMESTEAD
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


PICTURE SHOWING THE GROWTH OF VARIEGATED THISTLES AND BARLEY GRASS IN A GOOD SEASON.
careful handling of the country and water supply. In this respect Mr. Kiddle has placed
very valuable improvements on the property, each of the thirty paddocks being provided
with a tank. These excavations vary from 5000 to 12,000 cubic yards in capacity, and in
any but the most protracted spell of dryness afford an ample supply. They have,
however, been supplemented by seven wells no ft. deep, and fitted with whims and
windmills and the necessary tanks and troughing. The holding is specially favoured by
a shallow artesian flow lying beneath its surface. Eighty feet down a shaft usually strikes
a flow giving 500 gallons per hour. The method has been to sink 30 ft. further, when a
4-in. bore is sunk another 20 ft., to where a strong flow rising 50 ft. is tapped. This
gives a supply of 1500 gallons per hour. By continuing the bore another 10 ft., a still
stronger supply can be reached, and will maKe available 5500 gallons per hour. By means
of an oil engine nearly a quarter of a million gallons can be raised in twenty-four hours
continuously, and the quantity appears to be unlimited. As the supply is practically
fresh, being fit for drinking or for watering a garden, the asset is a very valuable one in
a country particularly devoid of natural surface water.
Ever since the property came into the hands of Mr. Kiddle there has been a
continual addition of permanent and substantial improvements. The homestead has been
connected by telephone with the Conargo P.O. The run is enclosed with rabbit netting,
and the subdivisional fences and gates are all kept in first-class order. The box country
has been ringbarked and cleaned up, and the pine ridges cleared of scrub and dead timber
and the trees trimmed. Fifteen years ago an invasion of rabbits threatened to seriously
detract from the value of the property, but the burrows were systematically dug out and
5
Steam Plains, New South Wales,


Photo by Lafayette.
MR. L. E. LOCH KIDDLE.
the rodents destroyed, the result being that
for the last twelve years the estate has been
entirety free from rabbit troubles. The wool
shed was erected many years ago, and it is
still found amply convenient for the pre-
sent-day requirements. The board contains
accommodation for twenty-two shearers. For
the better handling of stock six sets of
drafting yards have been constructed on differ-
ent parts of the run. Some 200 acres are
cultivated for hay for home consumption; the
land is very suitable for farming.
About too head of Shorthorn cattle are
kept for milking and other purposes. A
cow from the herd took first prize as the
best of her class at a recent Deniliquin show.
Horses are also bred on the station. Three
stallions are kept, one being a draught and
the other two bloods, one a descendant of Panic and the other of Snowdon.
cl be Steam plains fPerlnos.
Ihe stud at Steam Plains was already formed when the flock came into the
possession of Mr. Kiddle in 1874, and is directly descended from Ad Lara strain. The
Rambouillet features of plain bodies, with well-
developed necks, and big fleeces of bright,
free, high quality wool, have been well main-
tained, and improved on down to the present
day, with the result that the flock is character-
ised with the merits of the best “ Australian
Merino" type. For twenty-five years the sheep
were classed and bred by Mr. Lewis Kiddle,
but for the last ten years the work has been
carried on by his son, Mr. L. E. Loch Kiddle,
who resides on the property, and early in 1909
became a partner with his father in this
estate.
The stud consists of about 2500 ewes,
from which suitable rams are bred for private
sale both in Australia and South Africa, selec-
ted rams also being disposed of by auction
Photo hy Lafayette.
MR. RUPERT G. KIDDLE.
6
the Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A BACK STATION ON STEAM PLAINS
THE WATER SUPPLY.
7
Steam Plains, New South Wales.


DREADNOUGHT No. 3.25.
Six-year-old Stud Merino Sire. Six of the Progeny of this Ram were
awarded 2 Firsts, 2 Seconds, 2 Thirds and 2 Fourths at
the Deniliquin Show, 1909.
at the Melbourne, Bris-
bane, and Perth an-
nual sales. The sheep
are all grass-fed and
run in the open pad-
docks throughout the
year without any arti-
ficial treatment what-
ever. The result is
that, besides being of
large frame, they are
hardy in constitution,
and cut very good
weights, the rams giv-
ing from 25 to 30 lbs.
of wool, and the stud
ewes average 15 lbs.,
the whole flock of all
ages yielding the very
high average of 11 lbs. The fleeces are very dense, and the clip always commands high
prices, the staple being long, bright, and free, with a strong fibre of high weaving quality.
The Steam Plains country is very healthy for sheep and all other stock.
Owing to the long
journey involved and
the risk of carting
valuable animals con-
siderable distances, the
sheep are not regularly
sent to shows. But
when exhibited at
Deniliquin they have
always won prizes.
Among the successes
Mr. Kiddle has at-
tained at this show
(deservedly popular on
account of the merit of
the grass-fed Merinos
STUD MERINO RAMS ON SALTBUSH COUNTRY.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


competing there) are :
—First and third prize
for 2-tooth rams, first
prize for q-tooth ram,
second prize for 6-tooth
ram, and fourth prize
for pen of five 2-tooth
ewes. In addition the
Steam Plains 4-tooth
ram which was first in
his class at the 1908
show was also placed
reserve grand cham-
pion of the show; the
two judges officiating
being unable to decide
SAWMILL AND OIL ENGINE.
Cutting Murray Pine for Shearers' Huts
between him and another ram, a referee had to be called in to make the award.
At the Deniliquin 1909 show the stud was exceptionally successful, and carried
nearly everything before it, winning no less than eighteen prizes. The judges who
officiated were: —Mr. Thos. Philip, of Victoria; Mr. A. J. Austin, of Wanganella, N.S.W. ;
and Mr. W. Kilpatrick, of Cornalla, N.S.W., acted as umpire. The following is a detailed
list of the prizes awarded to the Steam Plains sheep at this show: —
HEAD OF THE GRAND CHAMPOION RAM AT
DENIQUIN SHOW,1909
Grand Championship for best Grass-fed Rain.
Grand Championship for best Grass-fed Ewe.
Champion Ram in his Class.
Champion Ewe in her Class,
ist Prize Ram over z\ years old.
ist Prize Ewe over z\ years old.
ist Prize Ram over i| and under z\ years old, and also
runner-up for the Grand Championship,
ist Prize Pen Five Ewes under years old.
2nd Prize Ram over z\ years old. (This ram was last
year ist prize winner of 4-tooth Rams, and runner-up
for Grand Championship.)
2nd Prize Pen of Three 4-too(h Rams.
2nd Prize Ram under years old.
2nd Prize Ewe under ilf years old.
3rd Prize Ewe over z\ years old.
3rd Prize Ram over if and under z\ years old.
3rd Prize Ewe over i| and under z\ years old.
3rd Prize Ewe with lamb at foot.
4th Prize Ram over if and under z\ years old.
4th Prize Ram under if years old.
A total of two Grand Championships, four ist prizes,
four 2nd prizes, four 3rd prizes, two 4th prizes— 18 in all.
9
Steam Plains, Mew South Wales.


I. THE STEAM PLAINS FOUR-IN-HAND. 2. STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON BOREE COUNTRY, STEAM PLAINS.
3. STATION SHORTHORN CATTLE, STEAM PLAINS.
Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Cara best.
In 1902 Mr. Kiddle purchased Carabost, which lies in Eastern Riverina, and about
40 miles from \\ agga. it consisted then of 8000 acres of secured and 15,000 of Crown
land. Two years later an adjoining property—Shockaroo—was also acquired, whilst in
1907 Mount Air\ was added. It was found, however, that unimproved land in the locality
is difficult to work profitably, and the Crown portions were abandoned, so one block of
21,000 acres of freehold and secured land now forms the station. When acquired by
Mi. Kiddle the country was rabbit-infested, much of it covered with rough scrub, and the
fences were in bad order. Already the rabbits have been practically exterminated over
most of the area, the scrub has been completely cleared except in a few back paddocks, and
the fencing, mostly netted with a top barbed wire, has been put in excellent order. The
name of Carabost has been given to the combined properties, which consists of flats, gentle
rises, and low hills. A forest covered the ground in its natural state, and the original
pastures were coarse, and only suited for cattle. The present improved carrying capacity
is very high, and fat sheep were sold last summer, when most of the Riverina stations
were feeling the pinch of a drought, the Carabost wool has already made a name for
itself, and in the dullest part of last season the clip sold at up to iq-pjd. per lb. A stud
of Lincolns has been founded on stock purchased from Mr. R. A. D. Hood, of Merrang,
near Hexham, V ictoria. The progeny of the stud has been crossed with Merino ewes from
Steam Plains, and the resultant stock thrive excellently. At present about 500 head of
Shorthorn cattle are run on the station.
THE CARABOST HOMESTEAD.
i:
Carabost , New South Wales.


THE CARABOST FLATS.
Not very much farming has yet been attempted in the immediate neighbourhood of
Carabost, but Mr. Kiddle last year put about 100 acres under oats and hay. Very heavy
crops were obtained. A quantity of lucerne will probably be grown on the property in
the not distant future, as it thrives excellently on the alluvial flats, giving, without irrigation,
from four to five cuttings each year. Up to 20 tons of maize and sorghum were grown
last year and cut for ensilage, whilst tobacco was at one time most successfully raised on
parts of the estate.
A substantial and modern woolshed was erected about three years ago to replace
an older structure destroyed twelve months earlier by a bush fire. The shed has been
built with sufficient sweating pens to hold enough sheep for two whole days’ shearing,
thus giving the very necessary independence to climatic conditions.
Mr. Lewis Kiddle’s youngest son, Mr. Rupert G. Kiddle, resides at Carabost, and
manages the estate and stock. Tie carried out all the improvements, and early in 1909
was taken into partnership by his father in this property.
Carabost is about 1300 ft. above sea level, and is subject to a most favourably
temperate climate during summer time. English fruits and trees thrive well there.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Kentucky Estate.
The Property of Mr J.G Gary.
KENTUCKY, the home of Mr. John Guthrie Gray, is located about twenty miles
north of Corowa, and the homestead is two and a-half miles from the Balldale
railway station on the Corowa-Culcairn branch of the main Sydney to Melbourne
line. Corowa is the postal town used. Until quite recently the property contained some
24,000 acres of typical Riverina country, mostly well-grassed flats, and varied with
occasional sand ridges. The locality is exceedingly healthy for stock, the soil being so
constituted that sheep develop robust constitutions and large frames. There is a strength
and nourishment in the pastures which also makes for early maturity and a vigorous growth
of fleece.
Originally Kentucky belonged to a Mr. Coring, of Tasmania. In his days the value
of the holding was little realised, and but feeble efforts were made to develop its latent
productiveness. The land then was heavily timbered with pine and other native trees, and
A VIEW ON THE ESTATE.
I


the ground thickly strewn with broken forest debris, while the grass-growing capacity was
extremely limited. From the hands of Mr. Loring, Kentucky passed to Mr. Michael
Dawson, who held it for a number of years, and then sold out to the late Mr. Leyser Levin.
The latter did not own the property very long, Mr. J. G. Gray being the next purchaser,
he acquiring the estate in 1876. Together with Kentucky, that gentleman bought
Goombargona, also from Mr. Levin. Goombargona he afterwards sold, and it has since
passed into the hands of the Hon. John Morrissey. Kentucky afterwards again changed
hands, being sold by Mr. j. G. Gray to his brother, Mr. George Gray, and Mrs. Neill, of
Sandy Ridges, who were his partners. Mrs. Neill’s husband was adjutant of the Victorian
Photo by Lafayette MR.J.G. GRAY.
military forces at about that time. Mr. Gray acted as manager of both Kentucky and
Sandy Ridges, which were worked as one. In 1885, the partnership was dissolved, Sandy
Ridges being sold to the late Mr. Alex. Wilson, of Mount Emu, Victoria, and a year later
Kentucky to Messrs. C. H. James and J. G. Gray. These two carried it on for about ten
years, but the bank ultimately took the property, and Mr. Gray was retained as manager.
He acted in that position for about five years. In 1902. however, the bank leased him the
property for seven years with the option of purchase, which Mr. Gray was fortunately able
to exercise. He did this by selling 14.300 acres of the run to Messrs. Ritchie, Young and
Riddoch, who are cutting up the block for closer settlement, as it is admirably suited
to agricultural purposes. With the purchase ended twelve years of most cordial relationship
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
Kentucky, New Sout/fitiVales.


A VIEW TAKEN BEHIND THE HOMESTEAD.
PET LAMBS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SOME HORSES ON KENTUCKY.
between Air. Gray and the late owners, the Melbourne Trust Limited. Air. Gray now has
left about 10.000 acres, which he works in conjunction with an adjoining 4000 acres also
belonging to him. An owner’s experience in losing a property to the bank, in working on
as its manager, and again winning back the freehold into his own hands is, it will be
admitted, rather unique in the annals of Australian pastoral industry, the droughts and
fluctuations of which, when they bring misfortune, do not usually end so satisfactorily.
improvements.
During the last twenty-five years land values about Kentucky have been quite
revolutionised. This is due to a variety of causes. One of them is the discovery of the
possibilities of the land when treated by modern methods of farming and artificial manuring
for agricultural purposes. Until quite recently there was practically no closer settlement
in the locality. Lately, however, some of the land has been subdivided, and farming has
developed rapidly.
The increase in the value of Kentucky is very largely the result of improvements
which have been carried out by Mr. Gray and his predecessors, while the fine range of
recently erected station buildings is largely due to the generous assistance of the Trust
Company. The holding was first worked in a most primitive way, with the country left in
its original rough state, poorly subdivided or not subdivided at all, ill provided with water,
difficult and risky to work, and yielding but comparatively poor returns at any time. It is
now subdivided into 101 paddocks, with seventy-two tanks and dams, three bores, and
5
Kentucky , New South Wales.


thirteen sets of draft-
ing yards. The or-
iginal state of the
land may be sur-
mised by the con-
dition of some of the
barren - looking un-
cleared Government
reserves in the local-
ity, where all the
nourishment is ex-
tracted from the soil
by tree roots. The
clearing of the land
was a costly under-
taking, but when fin-
ished, it completely
changed the appear-
MISS GRAY ON HER PONY.
ance of the property. Great expanses of rich pastures took the place of rough and half dead
woodlands, and the carrying capacity showed a great and sudden increase. The estate is
now attractive and picturesque to ride or drive across. Red flats and black alluvial soil
alternate, and the monotony of the rolling seas of grass is pleasantly broken by green
beltsof stately Murray
pine. The character
of the country gives
an impression of vast-
ness, of the possibility
of travelling on for
hundreds of miles, as
indeed one might,
through the same un-
changing scene.
Experiences in the
Riverina have de-
monstrated the dire
necessity of efficient
water storage, and
this has been duly
MR. GRAY ON HIS STATION HACK.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


borne m mind at Kentucky. As previously mentioned, there are a large number of dams
and tanks, the excavations for which are of sufficient size and depth to withstand the long
rainless periods which sometimes visit almost the whole of New South Wales. The bores
on the property have been sunk to a considerable depth. One of them goes down 260
feet, and is the deepest in the district. The supply of water is unfailing.
The woolshed is of pine, and contains twenty stands. There is, however, room for
thirty shearers if they are needed, but with the present area of the property it is found that
the smaller number is sufficient. The work is still carried out by hand. The fencing on
the estate is kept in very thorough order, and the boundary is netted, as are also five sub-
divisions. Ihe country is not nearly of the worst type for keeping rabbits down on. but Mr.
Gray prefers to have the place absolutely free from vermin, and it has been recognised
that to do this successfully it is cheaper to net than continually fight against rodents which
are always coming in from outside.
Though most 01 Kentucky is very level, but for low sand ridges, there is one patch
of undulating land on the property, and this has been taken advantage of as the site for the
homestead. Ihe house is a single story wooden structure, and is one of those fine old
rambling buildings which form the most pleasant of all Australian country homes. The
small hills about the homestead relieve the somewhat monotonous flatness of the
surrounding country, and from these elevations a commanding view may be obtained of the
environing plains.
£be Ikcntuchp Sbeep.
Kentucky is devoted mainly to breeding Merino sheep for woolgrowing purposes.
Besides improving the property, the management has of late years greatly increased the
wool yield of the flock. Indeed, one of the first things Mr. Gray did when he took over
SOME OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
/
Kentucky, New South Wales.


I. GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
2. STUD MERINO RAMS. 3. STUD MERINO EWES.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia•


the estate was to clear off the old flock,
which was of inferior description,
being small of frame, and giving light
fleeces of poor wool. Now there arc
two distinct flocks on the estate.
When Sandy Ridges Station was
sold the cream of the breeding ewes
were brought to Kentucky, and Tas-
manian rams were used on them.
Ihe progeny of these forms one of
the flocks of to-day. These sheep are
dense in the wool, and yield fleeces
that usually sell well. The other
flock is of pure Wanganella blood,
being descended from ewes pur-
chased from Messrs. Austin and Millcar
in 1879. The Wanganella sheep have
retained all the merits of the famous
stud to which their origin traces.
1 hey are of commanding frames,
A WATTLE TREE IN THE GARDEN.
deep in the body, wide on the thigh, with plain bodies and heavy folds of skin on
the neck. The wool is very long, dense, and bright, and the fibre strong, with great
character. In fair seasons the sheep average the very heavy weight of g l / 2 lbs. of wool
each. Ihe wool is a strong combing, yielding from 60 to 64. The station ewes were
placed first in the Wagga Wagga
scouring test in 1906, and in 1908 first
and second.
The Kentucky sheep prove ex-
cellently suited to the country on which
they have to run. The Wanganellas
have been specially evolved to suit
Riverina conditions. They are of very
robust constitutions, and preserve their
great woolgrowing traits to an ad-
vanced age. Droughts affect them
probably less than most sheep, for
being of a natural type, they arc able to
fossick for feed when it is scarce, and
travel to water in hot weather without
“G.P.”—THE LEADING STUD RAM.
9
kentucky, New South Wales.


“ COMMANDANT.”
By a Welsh Pony out of a Half-bred Arab Mare.
distress. Moreover,
whilst the wool is
very long, the dense
even tip with which
it is also charac-
terised serves to keep
out the dust. There
is always a ready
demand for the Ken-
tucky wethers on ac-
ccount of their size
and usfeul shape.
©tber Stock*
Mr. Gray runs about
200 head of cattle, in-
eluding a breeding herd. They are all Shorthorns, and are bred from pure bulls.
Of recent years Mr. Gray has entered into the horse-breeding business. He runs
about no head on the property, having obtained a stock of Arab blood from Dr. Spooner
Hart. He used the stallion Child o’ Desert for one season on the station, and subsequently
sent mares to the Brocklesby stud, and there are indications of the progeny turning out
very satisfactorily. In breeding from the Arab strain, Mr. Gray considers he will get great
quality, combined with a certain durability and hardiness of limb and constitution not easy
to secure by any other means. Child o’ Desert is a bright bay with four white stockings,
is a sure foal-getter, and impresses his stock with his own good qualities. He shows
evidence of an aristocratic descent in his finely chiselled legs, and his shapely form, whilst
he is at the same
time a horse of great
power, a very active
mover, and built to
carry weight. He is
the kind of sire likely
to get saleable horses
from even inferior
mares, and certain to
throw valuable foals
when put to dams of
good breeding and
shape.
THE STORE.
IO
The PasrtOSi'al Homes of Australia,


THE WOOLSHED.
THE SHEARERS’ HUT ON GOOMBARGONA CREEK.
11
Kentucky , New South Wales.


A SNAP IN THE GARDEN.
personal.
Mr. John Guthrie Gray was born at Perth, in Scotland, in 1846, and was educated at
Kensington and Courbevois, a suburb of Paris. He came out to Australia in 1863, arriving
in Victoria in October of that year. In 1871 he returned to the old country, travelling
home via Egypt, Malta, Italy, Spain, France, and Belgium. Two years later he came back
to Australia, and almost immediately afterwards bought Kentucky, where he has resided
practically ever since. Mr. Gray has two great hobbies. One is to collect aboriginal stone
implements, of which he presented 187 specimens to the Victorian National Museum, and
the other is collecting curios and works of art. He owns one of the most interesting and
valuable private collections in the State.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Urangeline Estate.
The Property of The Urageline Co.
U RANGELINE is a large pastoral estate lying about 50 miles north-west of Albury,
and 40 miles north of Corowa. Originally it was owned by the late Mr. Robert
Rand, who worked it in conjunction with Mohonga, and for some years after his
death (between 1894 and 1906) the two properties were carried on by the Mohonga
Company, formed by the beneficiaries under his will. In 1906 there was a division, and
the Lb -angeline portion was taken over by a company, trading as the Urangeline Company,
of which Mr. George R. Jackson is the managing partner. This firm now hold some
103,000 of the original Rand estate, to which 4000 acres of adjoining land have been
added.
About 45,000 acres of the property are fine pastoral plains, interspersed with clumps
of myall, and consisting principally of black soil. The balance is good agricultural
country. There is frontage to the Billabong Creek, and other water is provided by large
JERSEY CATTLE IN THE HOME PADDOCK,
I


THE WOOLSHED, DRAFTING
surface tanks and dams. The ground readily lends itself to water storage, being principally
of an undulating character, whilst the stiff nature of the soil prevents soakage. The
holding is very thoroughly subdivided, the number of paddocks having recently been
considerably increased, and over 50 miles of extra fencing erected within the last two
years. There are now 120 paddocks on the estate.
From 95,000 to i 10.000 sheep are shorn annually, according to the nature of the
season. In addition to these, horses and cattle are grazed all the year round. Taking one
year with, another, the carrying capacity is about the sheep to the acre standard. Idle
grasses are those peculiar to Eastern Riverina. Besides growing sheep of good frame,
they possess excellent fattening properties, and as a result high prices are always obtained
at the sales of surplus wethers and cull ewes. The most notable features about the
pasturage are its sweetness and vigorous growth. The variety in the plant life is also
considerable, and during the spring time the growth is greater than the sheep can keep
pace with. At the time of writing (spring, 1909) there is an area of 1400 acres under crop
for hay and grain, whilst another tooo acres are lying fallow. Last year some 1100 acres
were cropped, with satisfactory results.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


YARDS, SHEARERS’ HUTS, &C.
flDenno Sheep.
The flock was founded by Mr. Rand on the old Peppin strain. The first rams used
were obtained from Wanganella and Boonoke, whilst some time afterwards the Vermont
strain was introduced. By close culling and judicious inbreeding a steady improvement
was maintained, and latterly rams have again been bought from Wanganella. The
foundation built on has thus been one specially suited to meet local conditions. Great
care has at all times been exercised to keep the type large in carcase and strong in
constitution. The flock is true to the best “Australian Merino" tradition, being deep in
the sides, large of bone, and well covered with long dense fleeces of strongish and very
pure wool. While thus giving excellent wool returns, the sheep are hardy and able to
withstand the ill-efifects of drought with a minimum of deterioration. The stud has not
often been exhibited at shows, but whenever entered has always been very successful. In
igog six sheep were sent to the Australian Shecpbreeders’ Show, Melbourne, and they won one
championship, three firsts, two seconds, and a third. Also the same year a pen of ten
rams were forwarded to the Sydney Sheep Show, and in the face of very strong
competition were placed second.
3
U rangeline, New South Wales.


I. STUD MERINO EWES.
2. TWO-TOOTH STUD MERINO RAMS. Ten Of These Were Second Prize Winners For Pen Of Ten At Sydney Sheep Show, 1909.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Suffolk Sbccp.
Besides the large flock of Merinos, Mr. Jackson has formed a stud of Suffolk sheep.
1 his variety is not well known in Australia yet, but the mutton qualities it possesses have
been recognised in England for a long time past. The type was developed in the county
of Suffolk eighty or more years ago by a cross between the Southdown and Norfolk
breeds. Of recent years Suffolks have been remarkably successful at the Smithfield Live
Stock Shows, and have carried off a large number of prizes, particularly in the carcase
competitions.
The stud was started at Ferndale, a small property adjoining Urangeline, and owned
by Mr. Jackson, in 1903-4 by the importation from the flock of Mr. U. Abbott Green,
1 ingringhoe Hall, Essex, England, of seven ewes and one ram. The ram (Fingringhoe
Persimmon, No. 7003 in the Suffolk Society’s flock book) was bred by Mr. H. E. Smith.
Walton Grange, Ipswich, whose flock is registered No. no. The sire of this sheep was
Grange Persimmon 2nd, To. 6014. Ihe seven ewes were all bred by Mr. D. Abbott Green,
flock No. 103. In 1907 another ram was imported. This was from the stud (registered
flock No. 105) of Mr. S. R. Sherwood, Playford, Ipswich, Suffolk. Unfortunately, this
ram was bitten by a snake after only one year’s service. His place was filled by another
sire imported from the same stud in February of 1908. The stud now consists of about
seventy-five stud ewes. Grade sheep have been bred from pure Southdown and Shropshire
THE HOMESTEAD.
5
Urangeline, New South Wales.


DRIVING UP TO THE HOMESTEAD.
ewes, and the ram lambs from them sold as 2-tooth, for the purpose of getting fat lambs,
at prices varying from 3 to 5 guineas.
The wool from the Suffolk sheep is of medium length, and when sold unskirted, so
as to give it a fair test, has realised from gd. to nd. per lb. on the Melbourne market
during the past fi\e years. Ihe great merit of the breed is, however, in its capacitv for
throwing fat lambs and mutton sheep. A number of experiments have been tried, and it
has been found that lambs from first cross Lincoln-Merino ewes give the best results for
export purposes. Lambs bred in this way have sold at an average of 12s. 6d. per head
during the last five years, and the number rejected in that period has averaged onlv 4
per cent. They are usually sold at from fourteen to fifteen weeks old, and yield from
37 to 38 lbs. freezing weight. A few individual weights are as follows —Three lambs,
sixteen weeks old, 43 lbs., 41 lbs., and 47 lbs. One of fourteen weeks dressed 37 lbs.,
and another of twenty-two weeks dressed 65 lbs. A pen of ewes bred on the same lines,
neither of them having the four teeth up, was shown at the Corowa Show in 1905 for the
export prize for sheep under eighteen months, and were placed first. One of these ewes
dressed 79 lbs. A two-year-old sheep of similar breeding, though not then showing the
four teeth, was killed in 1906, and dressed 129 lbs. All these were fed entirely on natural
pastures.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


I. STUD MERINO RAMS. 2. STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS.
3. STUD SUFFOLK SHEEP.
7
LI rangeline, New South Wales•


Cattle.
The Urangeline Shorthorn herd is one of the best bred in the State. It was founded
by Mr. Rand, but has since then been greatly improved by selection, and by the
introduction from time to time of carefully-chosen stud animals. The old Mohonga Company,
of which Mr. Jackson was a partner, imported some very high-class bulls and cows from
Scotland. These were selected from the studs owned by the Earl of Rosebery, the Duke
of Richmond, and Mr. Morrison, of Phingask, Aberdeen. When the estate was divided
in November, 1906, the Urangeline Company took seven-twelfths of the herd, and a
corresponding proportion of the stud stock. The Urangeline herd now numbers some
500 head, and it has been brought to a high state of perfection.
Lady Lynne (imp.), the subject of the illustration on the opposite page, is the dam
of some of the best stock bred on the station, including the bull which some years ago
realised 525 guineas when sold in Sydney by the original Mohonga Company to the late
Mr. Chas. Baldwin, of Durham Court. The red heifer on the right is a full sister to this
bull, while the roan yearling heifer on left is by Scottish Beau (imp.), a prizewinner in
Scotland. A large number of bulls have recently been sold at remunerative prices.
The fact has been established on this property that good results may be obtained
with Jersey cattle without pampering them. Some fifty head are run on the estate for
dairy purposes. The original stock was drawn from Stanbridge’s herd, Daylesford,
THE CULTIVATION PADDOCKS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


LADY LYNNE AND TWO OF HER PROGENY
9
Urangeline, Mew South Wales,


STUD SHORTHORN COWS AND CALVES.
Victoria. The first bull to be used was Laddie Progress, of the famous Progress strain.
At a later date a sire was obtained from the herd of Mr. George Chirnside, of Werribee
Park, Victoria.
Iborses.
The Urangeline horses and ponies have won for themselves a high reputation on
account of their merit and good breeding. A stud of polo ponies had for some years been
bred at Ferndale by Mr. Jackson, and when the division occurred in 1906 the company
took over this stud. Arab blood has all through been used chiefly. The first sire of
importance was purchased from Mr. J. A. Riddoch, of Yallum, Penola, S.A. This was
the imported Arab stallion Paul, and he was put to the best mares that could be obtained
(principally of Arab blood). On the death of Paul another horse of great merit was
obtained. On this occasion it was the pure Arab Scorn owned and raced in India by
Captain Greville. Before being imported into Australia by Mr. Jackson, Scorn won a large
number of races in India. Besides showing considerable speed, he displayed in a striking
manner the large durable bone, wide loins, and great weight-carrying ability for which his
breed are so deservedly famous.
On the pr. geny of this stock the imported English thoroughbred polo pony Baby
Boy is being used. Baby Boy was bred in the stud of Mr. John Barker, the most noted
English breeder, and was very successful in the show ring before being shipped out of
the United Kingdom. As a foal at foot, he and his dam took the first prize at the great
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Dublin Horse Show. Next year he was
again a winner, and in a class of 170
yearlings he secured the premier honours.
In the same year he also won a first prize
at the Park Royal Show, England, and in
several other important competitions was
unbeaten. Besides being used at the polo
stud Baby Boy is mated with a number
of nearly thoroughbred mares, which are
kept on the station for breeding purposes.
These dams have mostly been sired by
well-known horses, being by such stal-
lions as Buzz, by the famous Yattendon
from The Fly; Blowfly, by Boolka out of
Sandfly; and latterly Sainfoin, by Rich-
mond out of Instep ; Solatium, by Somnus
BABY BOY (IMP.)
Registered English Polo Pony Stud Book.
out of Blue and White : and Carillon, by Carlyon. From mares with such pedigrees as these,
the shapely and high quality Baby Boy throws stock that meets with a ready and
remunerative demand.
In view of the probable early agricultural development of the surrounding district,
Mr. Jackson some time ago determined to found a stud of the type of horses most useful
for farm work in the locality. He ultimately resolved that the great activity, the strength,
and durability of the Suffolk Punch horses rendered them the most suitable for this
purpose, and consequently, in December, 1908, obtained five pure mares from Mr. A. J.
Cotton, late of Hidden Vale Station, Grandchester, Queensland. At the same time the
stallion Mariner was bought from the
same breeder.
Mariner was bred by Mr. A. A. Dan-
gar, of Baroona, New South Wales, and
was foaled in 1895. He is by Clinker, by
Benbow (imp.) 1589. Mariner’s dam was
Matchett, by Cupbearer (imp.) 641. The
second dam was Chance 2nd, by Bow-
bearer (imp.) 140, and the third dam
Chance (imp.) 1883. Mariner was first
shown in 1903, when he took two first
prizes at Ipswich Show, and one first
prize and a special at the National Show
of Queensland. The following year he
MARINER.
11
Llrangeline, New South Wales,


1, 2, AND 3-YEAR UNBROKEN POLO AND HARNESS PONIES.
won two firsts and a championship at Ipswich, whilst in 1905 he was again first at Brisbane.
Since then he has been placed first twice at Ipswich and four times at Brisbane.
Air. Jackson hopes to make a name for his Suffolk Punch stud in the near future.
The suitableness for the purpose intended is quite beyond That great authority
on live stock, William Youatt, in his book on “ The Horse,” says“ The immense power
of the Suffolk Punch is accounted for by the low position of the shoulder, which enables
him to throw so much of his weight into the collar.”
Cultivation,
The paddock, with stacks, illustrated on page 8, yielded an enormous crop in 1908.
Though not fallowed, the 285 acres cut for hay returned 4 tons 11 cwts. of prime green
wheaten hay per acre. Forty-five lbs. of seed and 40 lbs. of superphosphate were sown to
the acre. A portion of the crop, which consisted altogether of 315 acres, was saved for seed
and yielded something over 27 bushels to the acre of prime Zealand wheat. About 2 miles
south of the paddock there was a crop of 300 acres, which, on ground fallowed the previous
year, yielded 2j4 tons to the acre off 150 acres, and the remaining 150 acres, sown with
Federation and Darts Imperial, returned 34JJ bushels to the acre for the former and 2
bushels for the latter. A large amount of seed wheat is grown on the property, and this
year (1909) there arc 300 acres entirely devoted to this purpose, the varieties being Zealand,
Plover, Federation, and Marshall's No. 3. A large quantity of graded wheat is yearly sold
for seed, and, of course, a great quantity is needed for the seeding operations on the
estate, and Mooratunka, another property owned by the company on the River Murrav,
about 2 miles from Corowa, where there are now 850 acres of very promising crop growing.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The South Wangamong Estate.
The Property of Mr.T.D. Sanger.
THE Riverina is a magnificent stretch of level plain, lying between the Murrumbidgee
and Murray Rivers. It is rich, healthy country, intersected by belts of timber,
and between the two rivers are situated some of the most important pastoral
homes in the State. The annual rainfall is not heavy, the average ranging from i i inches
in the west, to about 16 inches further east. There is a great variety of indigenous
A STRING OF PICNIE RACERS
grasses and herbage, which provide an abundance of feed whenever the rainfall is fairly
evenly distributed. The Riverina, with its peculiar climate and soil, has produced a type
of Merino sheep all its own—a type characterised by immense frames, long staple, and
117


great constitution. South Wanga-
mong, the property of Mr. Charles
Dunsford Sanger, is the home of one
of its famous flocks.
£bc Estate.
The property is located in one of
the most favoured localities of all the
Riverina. ft lies some 20 miles to the
north-west of Corowa, in the belt of
country which is bounded on three
sides by railway lines, and on the
fourth by the River Murray. The area
is approximately 7000 acres freehold,
but in addition to this Mr. Sanger
leases several adjoining properties,
THE LATE MR. J. M. SANGER.
and altogether holds a considerable area in the district. The country may be described as
25 per cent, open plains, and the balance box forest country. Except for belts of trees
left for shelter purposes, the timber was ring-barked many years ago, and the greater part
of it has in the course of time been cleaned
up. Among the natural grasses peculiar to
the estate, which is splendidly grassed, are
trefoil burr (an excellent standby in dry wea-
ther), blue grass, and the various clovers.
There are no permanent watercourses on the
property, so water is provided for stock by
means of a large and increasing number of
tanks and. wells. The tanks are made with
earth scoops, the station teams being employ-
ed on this during the slack time after harvest-
ing and before ploughing. The rainfall ave-
rages about 15 inches a year. Daysdale is
the nearest postal town, but Corowa is the
most convenient railway centre. Just across
the River Murray from Corowa is Wahgunyah,
connected with the Victorian railway system.
MRS. J. M. SANGER.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The South Wangamong Estate , New South Wales,


MRS. C. D. SANGER.
the yards, &c. The subdivisions and gen-
eral arrangements are so planned that the
property forms a compact and easily-
worked stud farm. Most of the fences are of
six wires (barb on top), with posts 15 ft.
apart, and iron droppers between as neces-
sary. The boundary is not netted. Rab-
bits were, in the early days, troublesome,
but, as far as South Wangamong is con-
cerned, they have now been practically
cleared out. All cover has been cleared
up and burnt, and all burrows dug out.
Where new subdivisional fences are being
put up, netting is being used, but that is
more because it is safer with stud animals.
From 1500 to 2000 acres are cultivat-
ed each year, and a considerable quantity
of grain (wheat) is harvested in addition
to hay. This season (1909-10) fully 1600
The property is well improved in every
respect. The homestead is a roomy house,
designed on the bungalow system, and
surrounded by a wide verandah. The walls
are built of pisa, i.e., rammed earth, 18
inches thick, which has the advantage of
being cool in summer and warm in winter.
About an acre of well laid out garden sur-
rounds the house. The woolshed is a solid
wood and iron T-shaped building, and con-
tains stands for eight shearers. The shear-
ing is all done by hand, and Mr. Sanger has
no difficulty in obtaining a full board. The
station is directly connected with Daysdale
and Corowa by telephone, and, therefore,
with practically the whole countryside.
Roughly speaking, the run is subdivid-
ed into thirty paddocks, without counting
MR. C. D. SANGER.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


tons of prime wheaten and oaten hay have been stacked. This, with the surplus of past
years’ hay and ensilage, forms an excellent insurance against loss from drought. Indeed,
a good stock of reserve fodder is the best insurance an owner can possibly have in country
like the Riverma, which is dependent on single lines of railways to move stock to relief
country. All the farming operations are carried out with the station horses. These are
bred on the property. Mr. Sanger owns the Clydesdale stallion English Clyde, by Bri-
tish Oak, with which he breeds from a fine lot of draught and general utility mares. Ex-
cept a few cows for milking purposes, no cattle are kept on the run.
THE RISING GENERATION.
South Wangamong was once part of the famous Wangamong Estate, owned by the
late J. M. Sanger, Mr. C. D. Sanger’s father, who took it up as far back as 1850. The
name of John Mildred Sanger is so wrapped up in the early history of the Riverina, that a
brief reference to him just here may not be out of place. He was born at Cirencester,
Gloucester, in 1816, and subsequently entered commercial life in London. Later on he
took an active part in promoting a colonisation scheme of some islands, but the project
failed, and he came to South Australia in the “William Barrett,” in 1837. On arrival he
went in for mining, being the first to smelt copper ore in that State. Later on he went to
Melbourne, and was prominent in many enterprises, and after managing various proper-
-5
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


A CORNER OF THE GARDEN AND HOMESTEAD.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ON THE GARDEN.
7
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


A PORTION OF THE VERANDAH.
ties, he took up Wangamong in 1850. Mr. C. D. Sanger took over the management of the
estate in 1889, and in 1899 he and his brother, Mr. W. B. Sanger, leased the property
with the option of pur-
chase. During this pe-
riod the stud flock,
which has made the es-
tate so well known, re-
ceived the full attention
of the brothers, who in
1907 purchased the es-
tate from their father,
and divided both stock
and property. Mr. C.
D. Sanger then took the
southern portion now
known as South Wan-
gamong. The sheep
were equally divided by
THE HOMESTEAD TANK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A TEAM IN FRONT OF THE HONESTEAD.
being classed into small lots, and the brothers taking pick and pick about.
Che Stub jflodc
One idea has always been kept in view since the foundation of the Wangamong stud
Merinos, namely, to get large frames, and fleeces with character and length of staple.
The late Mr. J. M. Sanger attached
the utmost importance to constitution,
and the present owner of South Wan-
gamong is equally emphatic on this
point. The flock was started in 1853,
when the late Mr. Sanger purchased
ewes bred at Camden Park, and Ercil-
doune rams, which studs are the foun-
tain head of many of Australia’s lead-
ing flocks. It is common history that
some of the first Merino sheep that
came to Australia were taken to Cam-
den Park, These sheep were purchased
THE DRAUGHT STALLION “ENGLISH CLYDE.”
9
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


THE WOOLSHED.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE SHEEP DIP.
X I
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales,


FOUR-TOOTH FLOCK RAMS.—SOLD.
at the Cape for Captain Macarthur in 1797, and in 1804 a further addition was made by
sheep selected from the flocks of King George 111. Therefore, on the ewes’ side, the
Wangamong foundations were laid on the soundest lines. The Learmonth flock at Ercil-
doune was one of the first Merino flocks in Victoria. It owed much of its origin to the pro-
geny of sheep brought out in the barque “Fourth,” in 1832, by the late Mr. Thomas
Henty and the Circular Head Company. These sheep went on to Mr. Samuel Bryan’s
place at Southmore, and many breeders, including Mr. Learmonth, of Ercildoune, purchas-
ed sheep at the annual sales held there. From these old sources the Wangamong stud ori-
ginated, and, in skilful hands, the old original strain has been developed into a most profit-
able type of sheep.
In 1863 an important addition was made to the Wangamong stud by purchases from
Wanganella of ten rams, the progeny of the imported Rambouillet ram The Emperor. This
ram was at that time famous for his large, well-shaped frame and heavy fleece. “Bruni,”
in referring to him, wrote: —“For several years in succession he yielded a fleece weighing
25 lbs. of unwashed wool, which, carefully scoured in hot water, yielded 12 lbs. of scoured
wool. I have been informed by Mr. T. Peppin that the wool was faithfully scoured, and
was almost, if not quite, as clean as the best samples from the metropolitan scouring es-
tablishments.” The Emperor had remarkable prepotency, and he never failed to impart
to bis progeny his own remarkable qualities. He was one of those great sires that crop
up at different periods, and have a far-reaching effect on the general standard of sheep.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


STUD LAMBS.
STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWES.
J 3
The South Wang among Estate, New South Wales.


A MOB OF AGED STATION SIRES,
i 4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF FOUR-TOOTH SELECTED RAMS.
1 5
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales -


TWO-TOOTH STUD RAM, CUT 21 LBS. OF WOOL, 1910.
A SIX-TOOTH STUD SIRE.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


He was always used with the best ewes in the stud, and it was possible to pick out his
strain for years after. The ram so impressed Mr. Sanger that he offered Mr. George Pep-
pin per head for ten of the next year’s drop of ram lambs by Ihe Emperor. In those
days such an offer was phenomenal, and it was accepted. Since the introduction of those
Emperor rams the Wangamong flock went right ahead. Size and length of staple were
obtained, and no further introduction has been necessary.
The South Wangamong type of ram is well known throughout Australia. they have
big frames, good bold heads and fronts, pure noses, and an excellent quality of bright,
A STUD SIRE.
shafty wool, evenly distributed. The live weight of the South Wangamong stud rams ave-
rages about 210 lbs., and they cut fleeces averaging 24 lbs., present value 17s. All the
grown sheep on the property averaged last year 1 1 lbs. of wool, and this return included
2-tooths and sheep fourteen years old, with 80 per cent, breeding ewes. To show how pro-
lific the strain is, it is only necessary to mention that the annual lambing percentage is
approximately 87 per cent. The size of the frames is illustrated by the fact that the
deadweight of station-bred 4-tooth wethers averages in Melbourne 60 lbs., dressed with
fat off.
■7
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales.


TYPE OF FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS—AVERAGE 24 LBS., 1910.
i 8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


GROUP OF SIX-TOOTH STATION SIRES.
r 9
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales,


hike his father, Mr. C. D. Sanger lays great stress upon frame and constitution, and,
as far as the wool is concerned, he aims at producing a long staple of strong combing
wool, put on without impairing constitution. His skill in this direction is meeting with its
full reward, for he has a ready sale for his rams, and invariably has to book orders in ad-
vance. Fully 80 per cent, of his buyers leave the selection of rams entirely to his discre-
tion, and the result has been that he never has had any complaints. Buyers come back
again and again, which proves the wisdom of his judgment. Mr. Sanger sells from 800 to
1200 rams every year, and these go out to all parts of Australia and to South Africa, New
A GOOD FRONT.
Zealand, and South America. All his sheep are fed on natural pastures only, and he is one
of the strongest opponents of artificial feeding of stud sheep in any shape or form. It is
the nature of such country as South Wangamong to produce big-framed sheep, and the
fact that they are such a densely-covered sound type, makes them eminently adapted to
hot, open plains. Sound backs are one of the most essential characteristics required in
plain country where dust is so liable to work into the fleece. Mr. Sanger sells his wool
in Melbourne, and gets his share of whatever good prices are ruling.
Note. —When our photographer visited South Wangamong last spring the stud sires
had just been shorn. It was too late, therefore, to get photos of the best rams, and the
illustrations of sheep which appear m connection with this article are of young rams sold
in wool.
20
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
2 1
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales*


A WHEAT CROP.
22
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia..


VIEW OF A SOUTH WANGAMONG PADDOCK.
{personal.
Mr. Charles Dunsford Sanger was born at Wangamong in 1870. He was educated at
the Geelong Grammar School, and shortly after leaving school took over the management
of Wangamong, under his father. He is now looked upon as one of the leading authori-
ties on Merino sheep, and his services as a judge are in great requisition at various shows.
He married, in 1899, Charlotte Rebecca, daughter of Benjamin Crosthwaite, a well-known
A GROUP OF DRAUGHT FOALS.
2 3
The South Wangamong Estate, New South Wales,


A VIEW OF THE WHEAT CROP FROM HOMESTEAD.
pastoralist in Victoria and Queensland. His family consists of one son and one daughter.
He has always taken a keen interest in sport and general affairs in his district. He is
Vice-President of the Corowa Picnic Race Club, has a private training track on South
Wangarnong, and has always owned a few good horses.
2 4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Collendina Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Henry Hay and Son.
COLLENDINA, the property of Messrs. Henry Hay and Son, is one of the oldest
stations in the Riverina. It was originally taken up by the late Robert Brown
in the forties, and it was held by him for some years. In those days it was
a very extensive run, and it passed through several hands before it was purchased by
the late Mr. William Hay in 1873. It then comprised 45,000 acres, but Mr. Hay during
his time disposed of various portions, and the estate now contains 23,000 acres of freehold
land. Originally the country was timbered fairly heavily with grey and yellow box, pine,
and bull oak, but about thirty-five years ago most of the timber was ringbarked, and the
carrying capacity, after a few years, increased by some 300 per cent, to 400 per cent.
Belts of green timber about six chains in width were left to check grass fires, as well as
clumps and individual trees for stock shelter. Approximately 2000 acres of the estate
THE BOWLING GREEN.
I


A View of the House from the Garden.
consist of fairly rich rivci flats, well timbered with the valuable red gum (Eucalyptus
rostrata). The rainfall averages about 21 in., the greater portion of which falls during
the autumn, winter, and spring.
£bc Ibomesteab.
The homestead comprises a two-story brick cemented residence of some thirty rooms
all told. The garden is six acres in extent, which includes two acres of lawn, a bowling
green, a tennis court, an orangery, about 400 roses, and many ornamental trees and shrubs.
Water is supplied to it and the house by a steam pump situated on the bank of a lagoon,
which is periodically filled from the overflow of the Murray River, which bounds the
estate for eight miles on the southern side. A 10,000-gallon steel tank on a brick tower
40 ft. high receives the water, which then flows by gravitation to the garden and
homestead buildings. As much as 20,000 gallons per day are used during the hot, dry
months.
In addition to the principal homestead, the partner, Mr. H. A. Hay, has a prettily
situated bungalow on the estate, five miles away, whence he can communicate with the
stall and direct operations by means of a telephone. The two residences arc also
connected by telephone with the neighbouring town, Corowa.
2
The Pastoral Hnines of Australia,


THE DRIVE.
3
Collendlna, Mew South Wales,


THE BUNGALOW AT KUNANADGEE. MR. H. A. HAY’S HOUSE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Photo by Lafayette.
MR. HENRY HAY.
3mprcn>emcnto.
The stockyards, stables, machinery sheds,
&c., are all situated at the homestead, and
are substantially built. The shearing shed has
accommodation for twenty hand shearers.
The estate is enclosed by a wire-netted
rabbit-proof fence, and is divided into
paddocks. It is also subdivided into ten wire-
netted areas, and further netting is in contem-
plation. The fencing, which has been erected
in recent years, is of a most substantial
description, consisting of 6-in. x p-in. posts of
red gum or grey box and seven wires, with
wooden battens. Including the netting, it cost
£65 to £75 per mile, and is estimated to have
a life of fifty years.
Although the estate has a frontage to the River Murray, it is found necessary to
supplement the water supply by means of tanks. There are about twenty of these, ranging
from 1000 to 6000 cubic yards. The excavations were made by means of ploughs and scoops
drawn by horses or bullocks, and cost 6d. per cubic yard. As the subsoil is a retentive
clay, there is no loss of water except by
evaporation.
preservation of jfobber.
Until late years Messrs. Hay and Son
took their chances in dry periods, and either
sold their surplus stock at whatever it would
fetch, or kept it alive by means of expensively-
bought fodder. For the last three years, how-
ever, they have gone in extensively for
ensilage, made from whatever natural or in-
troduced pasturage gave the best prospective
yield. Cultivation paddocks, which had got
somewhat foul from wild oats and other
so-called weeds, they also utilised (in the form
of stack ensilage for the first two years)
and made the first year (1906) some 350 tons,
and so saved a heavy fodder bill in I9°7>
5
Photo by Sears.
MR. HARRY A. HAY.
Collendina, New South Wales,


PICNIC RACEHORSES.
which was a very dry year. In 1907 they made about 650 tons of ensilage, which tided
them over the year 1908, which was also a dry year. In 1908 they decided on the pit
system, and excavated fourteen pits, totalling about 3000 cubic yards. These pits gave
2347 tons of ensilage. Of this quantity they have used 500 tons this year (1909), and
have some 1800 tons in reserve. They estimate that they can feed this to sheep at a total
cost of a penny per head per week. Irrigation is not in evidence at all, except in so far as
the garden is concerned. With a rainfall averaging 21 in., it is not found necessary, and
by means of ensilage conserved in more bountiful seasons, it is easy to tide over the
unproductive years. As ensilage will remain in sound condition for many years, it is
preferable to hay, which is exposed to the ravages of mice, fire,
The natural grasses are generally not heavy yielders of fodder in this part of the
Riverina, and of the exotic varieties, the various clovers (introduced no one seems to
know how, but most likely with grain seeds and fodder from abroad) are most valuable.
Among the clovers very prominent now on Collendina are the burr trefoil (Medicago
denticulata), another burr trefoil with a brown or red spot on the leaf (Medicago
maculata), Trifolium glomeratum, black medic (Medicago lupulina), subterranean clover
(Trifolium subterraneum), strawberry clover (Trifolium fragiferum). Of the true grasses
there is only one which seems to spread naturally on Collendina, and that is Timothy
grass, the seed of which must have been introduced by means of imported fodder, as it is
not known that anyone has tried to establish it.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


I. FILLING AN ENSILAGE PIT.
2. TEAM OF 22 BULLOCKS LEAVING COLLENDINA WITH 12 TONS OF WOOL,
7
Collendina, New South I Vales.


MERINIO RAM LAMBS.
MERINO WEW LAMBS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Stock.
Ihe horses bred on Collendina are of a good useful type, and are mainly reared
for local use. Ihe blood sire used for many years was Emerald, by Crown Prince, dam
Chrysolili, but he \\ as not mated with mares g'ood enough to produce racehorses.
Ihe cattle aie principally Shorthorn, with the exception of a few graded cows for
milking purposes, hat cattle from Collendina always bring' high prices in the Melbourne
market.
ihe sheep number about 32,000. Ihe lambing percentage, of course, varies with
the different seasons, but the averag'e may be reckoned at 75 per cent. No stud is bred
except for use in the station flocks, and the weight of fleece in the general flock may be
put clown, taking one year with another, at about 8 lbs. per head for grown sheep, and 3 lbs.
pei head for lambs. Owing to a certain amount of dust and grass seeds, the clip, though
profitable, does not yield a high price per lb. About lock to iid. per lb. for fleece wool
is the amount usually realised. Ihe wethers, fattened on grass, average when fat 55 lbs.
to 60 lbs.
Cultivation.
\\ heat-growing is carried on to a fairly large extent on Collendina. For many years
the share system has been followed, in which the landowner finds the land and seed wheat
STUD MERINO EWES.
9
Collendina, New South Wales.


FAT CATTLE.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FALLOWING.—FOUR TEAMS AT WORK.
and the farmer plant and all labour, each party taking one-half the crop. Messrs. Hay
and Son consider that the system, though fairly satisfactory, has its drawbacks, owing to
the share farmer, whose tenure is only from year to year, not having sufficient interest in
the land to farm it in the best manner. This year 2000 acres were put in by the firm, and
1000 acres on the share system. The cost of putting a crop in is about Bs. 3d. per acre
for labour and horse-feed, but that does not include cost of seed (of which they sow half
a bushel) and interest on, or depreciation of, horses and plant. To harvest the crop of,
say, 16 bushels to the acre costs from ss. to 6s. per acre. The average yield is about
14 bushels. Other crops grown on Collendina are 150 acres of lucerne and 100 acres of
rape.
IRabbits.
As may be surmised from the fact that the estate is wire netted, rabbits were once
much in evidence. Messrs. Hay and Son have found the only really effective way of
dealing with the pest is to dig out all burrows, and destroy all cover, such as hollow
timber, &c. This is a costly method, but it pays in the end. The first year it cost the firm
£750, the second about £350, and this year £l5O. The result is that there is now
scarcely a rabbit to be seen on the property.
11
Collendlna, Mew South Wales.


Messrs. Ibcnry Ibay anb Son.
Mr. Henry Hay, J.P., is a son of the late Mr. William
Hay. He was born in 1847, and educated partly at the
Edinburgh Academy and partly at the Melbourne Church
of England Grammar School. On leaving school he in-
terested himself in pastoral pursuits, and in 1873, i' l
conjunction with his father and brother, purchased Collen-
dina. The partnership was dissolved in 1886, and Mr.
Hay continued to work the property on his own account.
In 1879 married Christina Mary, daughter of Mr. George
Rutherford, of Pechelba Station, and has a family of three
daughters and one son.
Mr. Harry Algernon Hay, the son and partner, was
born in London in May, 1881. He was educated at Brighton
THE LATE MR. WM. HAY.
Grammar School, Melbourne, and Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He took his degree, and got his
blue for athletics, and was subsequently called to the bar at Inner Temple. In 1904 he
returned to Collendina, and has followed the pastoral industry ever since. In 1907 he
was made a partner of the firm, and is now manager of it. In the same year he married
Marjorie, daughter of Mr. W. H. (now Judge) Moule.
As the late Mr. William Hay was one of the pioneers of the Australian pastoral
industry, a few brief references to his history will be found interesting. He came to
Australia in 1839, started a school in Tasmania, and in 1851 bought Glenlyon Station, near
Seymour, Victoria.
After three years’ pio-
neering work he sold
out, and took his
family home to be
educated. In iB6O
he returned, and pur-
chased Pine Lodge
Station on the Bro-
ken River. Two
years later he bought
Boomanoomana Sta-
tion in the Riverina,
and in 1873 Collen-
dina. He died in
1908, at the ripe age
age of ninety-two.
STUD DRAUGHT MARE.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Moroco Estate.
The Property of Mr A.J. McLaurin.
MOROCO Estate, belonging to Mr. Alexander John McLaurin, and situated 28 miles
from Deniliquin, and about 25 miles from Tocumwal. is one of the historic
properties of the Riverina. In the early forties it was taken up by Messrs.
Redfern and Alexander, and from them it passed into the hands of Messrs. Tootal and
Glass, who, however, were owners for only about twelve months. The next proprietor was
Air. John Mooney, and he sold it to the four McLaurin brothers, Alexander (the father
of the present owner), Archibald, James, and Robert. The holding then consisted of
50,000 acres, and, excepting subdivisions within the McLaurin family, it has remained
practically intact ever since. In the fifties the brothers also owned Cornalla and Yarra
Yarra, both of them being extensive runs. Ultimately they dissolved partnership, the late
Mr. Alexander McLaurin taking over the whole of Moroco for his share. He held it until
his death in 1871. From then till 1888 it was worked by executors, but in the latter year
A SNAPSHOT TAKEN IN THE GARDEN.
I


the estate was purchased conjointly by Mr. A. j. McLaurin and his brother, Mr. R. VV.
McLaurin. That partnership ended in 1902, when the property was divided between the two
brothers. The present article deals with Mr. A. J. McLaurin's portion of the original estate.
Like a number of other Riverina pioneers, the elder McLaurins came originally from
the Monaro district of New South Wales. From that land of snow and fertile plains, they
travelled down the Murray, and settled for a time near Seymour in Victoria, but, observing
From an Oil Painting.
THE LATE MR. ALEXANDER MCLAURIN.
the superior attractions offering to enterprise north of the Murray, they bought Moroco,
giving £24,000 for it. About the same time Tuppal, with 7000 sheep, was sold for £7OOO,
and Deniliquin Station (afterwards divided into North Deniliquin and Wandook), containing
10,000 sheep, changed hands for £lO,OOO. The McLaurins paid £lO,OOO of their purchase
money in hard cash, and it was prophesied that they would never be able to find the balance.
However, at the end of the first year a sudden rise in the price of cattle enabled 1600 head
of cattle to be sold for E 16,000, and the debt was immediately liquidated.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FAT STATION-BRED CATTLE.
THE MISSES MCLAURIN ON THEIR PONIES IN FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD.
3
Monaco, New South Wales.


BRIDGE OVER THE BULLATALE CREEK.
The country at Moroco consists partly of wide rolling plains and partly of heavily
timbered river flats. The trees are mostly grey and yellow box and red gum. The wood is
of considerable value, and the appearance of the forest land is very picturesque. Barley
grass and trefoil grow plentifully beneath the timber. The pastures on the plains are similar
to those found over so much of the Riverina. being healthy and very nourishing for stock.
They shoot up with a rapid growth in springtime, and sheep fatten very readily on them.
Moroco is excellently supplied with water. Back in the forties, when artificial means
of storage had not been adopted, it was in this respect one of the most drought-resistant
runs in New South Wales. Probably that was one of the reasons which induced the
McLaurins to pav so high a price for the holding, and undoubtedly it was one of the chief
factors in their subsequent success. The original area had eight miles frontage to the
Murray on the southern boundary, and a similar frontage to the Tuppal Creek on the north.
It was also intersected by the Bullatale Creek (a branch of the Murray, and practically a
permanent watercourse), by the Towrong, the Naranghi Tuppal. the Toupna, and Taylor’s
Creeks. Nature had practically provided for permanent water all over the run. The
Bullatale runs through the centre of the present estate of Moroco. and of later years has
contracted a habit of drying up during the dry summer months. This, however, will soon
+
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


he rectified. as the Government intend converting - portion of the Murray into the channel,
which will make it a never-failing- stream, the Tuppal Creek still forms the northern
boundary, whilst theie are several other useful streams on the property. These have been
supplemented by five dams and tanks constructed at convenient points about the run.
The property has been divided into thirty paddocks.
The woolshed is a convenient building of wood and iron. There are ten stands
fitted with Wolseley machines, which are driven by a 6-h.p. engine. The engine is also
used for pumping water and other purposes.
Ihe homestead is a comfortable structure of wood, built in 1889, and from time to
time added to by the present owner. Acetylene gas is laid on throughout, and the house
is surrounded with a water service in ipGiu. pipes. One of the principal motives leading
to the installation of the latter convenience was to afford protection from fire. Owing to
the fertile nature of the soil, and the efficient water supply, it has proved practical to
surround the house with a garden of considerable area, and very rich in flowers. Large
vegetable and fruit gardens have also been formed.
£be StocfL
Originally Moroco was looked on exclusively as a cattle station. Indeed, in the very
early days the whole Deniliquin district was regarded as being of very little use for any
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.
5
Moroco, Mew South Wales.


1. ARAB FOUR-IN-HAND 2. MERINO FLOCK RAMS.
3. STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Photo by Sears.
MR. A. J. MCLAURIN.
other purpose. Not being ring-barked, and
quite unfenced, the country was then very
much rougher than it is nowadays. It was
not until 1876, after the death of the late Mr.
Alexander McLaurin, that sheep were intro-
duced on to Moroco.
In the early days much fame attached to
the old Moroco herd of Shorthorns. Great
enterprise was shown in establishing the strain,
and importations were made direct from the
United Kingdom, as much as 500 guineas hav-
ing been paid for a single bull for use with the
station stud cows. About 1874 some fresh
blood was obtained from local sources, pur-
chases being made from Mr. Kiel Black’s
Mount Noorat herd. Cows were also bought
at the Perricoota sale, and up to 50 guineas
was paid lor a single cow. Air. McLaurin still keeps a herd of the old station strain, though
in point of numbers the larger class of stock has greatly given place to sheep. The type
is notable for large frames and ready fattening qualities. A number of bullocks are
topped up each year on the property.
1 he Moroco Merinos are also notable for their size, being' plain and deep in the body,
and carrying heavy fleeces of dense combing, high-grade wool. The sheep yield an
average of from 8 to y lbs. of wool, and in 1907 the fleeces brought is. 2%d. at Alessrs.
Goldsbrough, Mort’s Melbourne
sale. The flock was formed in
1876 from Merinos bought from
Mathoura and Tuppal. Boonoke
rams were introduced at a later
date, whilst still more recently
purchases of stud stock were
made from Wargam and Noorong,
and from Belle Vue in Tasmania.
Apart from these introductions
of outside blood, progress has
been made by careful selection
and judicious inbreeding. The
wool returns show a great im-
provement both in weight of
ARAB CHIEF.
7
Moroco, New South Wales.


PET LAMBS.
fleeces and in the character of the wool. As the flock is typical of the “ Australian
Merino” type, the wethers sell at good prices.
Mr. McLaurin usually runs about 10,000 sheep and some 1000 head of cattle. Ile
also breeds horses to some extent, and uses a high-grade Arab stallion on the station mares.
The combination of strength and high quality which the former displays is found to nick
well with ordinary upstanding dams of substance.
personal.
Mr. Alexander John McLaurin is the eldest son of the late Mr. Alexander McLaurin.
and was born at Moroco in iB6O. He received his education at the Brighton College, and
afterwards at the Wesley College, Melbourne. After his school days were over, he returned
to his father's station, where he has ever since been actively engaged in pastoral pursuits.
In 1891 he married Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Mr. 1). W. Forbes, of Echuca. There
is a family of four daughters and one son.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Mohoga Estate.
The Property of The Morohonga Co.
THE Mohonga Estate consists of some 68,000 acres, of which 65,000 are freehold
and 3000 Crown lands, including stock routes and travelling stock reserves. The
homestead lies 35 miles from Corowa, 49 miles from Albury, and 20 miles from
Urana. The country is by no means typica of Riverina, but rather belongs to the western
extremity of the hill districts, and is undulating and timbered.
Until some years ago Mohonga and Urangeline were worked as one station from the
Mohonga homestead. The two properties totalled over 166.000 acres of freehold land, and
made one of the most valuable and best-known woolgrowing holdings of New South Wales.
The fame of Mohonga, which has spread far and wide in the pastoral world, has been due
partly to the fact of it having been worked intact as a large estate since 1839, and partly
because of the remarkable character of that hardy and resourceful pioneer, the late Mr.
Robert Rand, who first took up the country from the Government. At first Mohonga was
used principally as a cattle station, but the horses bred there in the early days still linger
in the memories of the old stockmen who rode in the hard times of early Riverina squatting.
Indeed, Mohonga has never lost its reputation for horse-breeding, and the famous high
ws and Calves.
I


THE HOMESTEAD
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


jumpei Mohonga, who was bred there, keeps their fame alive in the present day. At the
time of writing (September, 1909) the stallion Hero has just been bought for use on the
station males, lie is a son of that most symmetrical horse Dick Swiveller, and has been
pronounced by several expert judges to be one of the most suitable sires for station purposes
they have ever seen.
Mohonga contains country of diversified natural features. Belts of timber are
inteispersed with open grass lands. The soil in some parts is of alluvial formation, and
the stock-carrying capacity varies on different portions of the run. The Billabong (in which
a gieat supply ol water is conserved by an overshot dam), and several creeks, traverse the
propelty. In addition to these, over eighty substantial dams and tanks have been
constiucted, some of the embankments to the dams being three-quarters of a mile long
and in places 15 ft. high. Shallow wells are a feature of the w r ater supply, beautiful water,
sufficient to carry 5000 sheep through the summer, being obtained by these on many parts
of the estate. Ihe soil, however, is w r ell adapted to hold surface water in tanks, and
that is the mode of conservation most generally adopted, as will be noticed by reference
to the paddock plan which appears on page 4. The whole of the boundary has been wire
netted, and subsequent and continuous repressive measures have been taken to keep down
the rabbits, with the result that it is now a rare thing to see one on the property. The
homestead is connected with the township of Urana by telephone, and also with the public
exchanges at Daysdale and Corowa. Altogether the estate has been brought into a high
state of productiveness.
A VIEW ON THE ESTATE.
3
Mohonga, New South Wales,


4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


VIEW LOOKING FROM THE WOOLSHED ACROSS THE PADDOCKS TOWARDS SOUTH CREEK.
Mr. Rand died in 1894, and the property is now owned by his relatives, trading under
the name of The Mohonga Company. Mr. j. McLaughlin, of Melbourne, is the general
manager.
A visitor to Mohonga would perhaps be as interested in the bush fire fighting
arrangements as anything he would see. There are three look-out posts on the run, each
furnished with a metal plate showing the points of the compass, and they are all connected
with one another by telephone. When a fire is seen, the look-out man at each post
ascertains the compass bearing of the fire from where he is standing, and telephones it to
the other posts. The bearings are all laid ofif on a map or chart, and where they intersect
is the exact locality of the outbreak, which is thus found in a very few seconds. With
this system men can be quickly concentrated at the point of danger, and when the position
of the blaze is thus known beforehand, the water carts may be sent away empty after the
drivers have been instructed which is the nearest tank that they can take in water. In
addition, many miles of fire breaks have been made through the property, and the fire carts
used have a very powerful pump and spray attached. This scheme of fire fighting was
devised by Mr. Fosbery, of Wagga, and was originally used at Mohonga in 1895. It has
now been adopted on many other properties. Since its inception there have been a number
of what appeared to be most threatening outbreaks, but in every instance they have been
speedily checked.
5
Mohonga, New South Wales .


PART OF A MOB
flDohoiuia Sheep.
The late Mr. Rand early realised how greatly he might increase his returns by breeding
Merino sheep, instead of the cattle, to which the station had previously been devoted.
The flock was established in 1864, and then and since no expense has been spared in
obtaining the best blood. The sheep are of the true Australian Merino type. At first
stock were obtained from the Cunningham Plains stud, which was largely bred from pure
Rambouillet blood. In 1871 rams were bought from the Havilah stud, whilst specially
selected stud rams were also secured at the Brombee dispersal sale. Since then Wanganella
blood has been used to no small extent, and the sheep to-day show marked evidences of
GRAND CHAMPION STRONG-WOOL MERINO RAM
AT THE A.S.B. AHOW, 1909.
being in part descended from that strain. So
confident did the management feel in the
capacity of the Wanganella sires to improve
the Mohonga sheep that in 1890 they paid
Messrs. Austin and Millear 400 guineas for
the ram which that year took the champion
prize at the Deniliqnin Show.
After the death of Mr. Rand, special efforts
were made to maintain, and. if possible,
improve, the size of the sheep. A special stud
was formed by selection, and a number of
high-class, big-framed rams have been bought
from Tasmania. Among these was a son of
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


OF 7000 MOHONGA WETHERS.
Vice-President, bought in 1897, and a son of The Admiral, for which 550 guineas was paid
in 1900. Since then other purchases have included Salvitas, by Young Vice-President, for
230 guineas; Clean Sweep, by Vice-President, for 150 guineas; and Federalist, by Royal
Hero.
Besides giving highly satisfactory financial returns, Mohonga sheep have been very
successful whenever exhibited at shows. That their success is well merited was exemplified
by the ram which was champion of the grass-fed section at the Melbourne Sheep Show of
1900 cutting lbs. of pure wool after being taken home. Large numbers of prizes have
been won by the stud sheep. At the last show of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association
the company was very successful, and among other distinctions which went its way
were the championship and grand champion-
ship for strong-wool grass-fed Merino rams,
first prizes in the classes for aged fine-wool
hand-fed ewes, for 4-tooth strong-wool hand-
fed rams, and for 2-tooth strong-wool hand-
fed rams.
Zb c Clip.
The Mohonga wool has for many years
been sold in Melbourne market under the
brand of RR over , and as such is cer-
tainly one of the best and favourably known
clips handled in this or any other market in
the world. In character the wool is what
7
A STID EWE.
Mohonga, New South Wales.


is commonly known to
the trade as a useful
clip, being suitable to
all requirements, and
consequently it elicits
the keenest competition.
Of particularly soft
“handle” and attractive
appearance, it shows
plenty of quality with-
out being “thin.” It is a
bulky full-bodied wool,
which invariably yields
honestly, or, in other
STUD RAMS.
words, returns more clean scoured wool than even its attractive appearance would seem to
indicate. A great deal of its popularity amongst buyers is due to this fact, and it is easy
to understand the scramble that always takes place in the sale-room when this well-known
brand comes under the hammer. The top lots are generally taken for America at extreme
prices, as an instance of which up to was paid for the hogget wool on the Melbourne
market in November, 1907. Continental buyers also evince a keen partiality for the clip,
and usually secure a large proportion of it. Although sought after by the home trade, this
section does not often secure the same proportion, principally from the fact that the clip as
a whole -is more suitable to the manufacturer of the fine goods rather than to the ordinary
topmaker. However, even he is enabled to fill some of his requirements from the lower
qualities, which, of course, are inseparable from a clip of the size of the RR over .
£be HDobonoa
Cattle,
Though at an early
date the late Mr Robert
Rand introduced Merino
sheep on to Mohonga,
and used the resources
of the estate mostly for
wool-growing purposes,
he nevertheless kept a
large herd of Shorthorn
cattle. No trouble or
expense was spared in
STUD EWES.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MONONGA I.
Champion Grass-fed Strong-wool Ram at the Melbourne A.S.B. Show, 1900.
A STUD RAM RUNNING IN THE PADDOCKS AT MONONGA.
9
Mohonga, New South Wales.


SPICY PEER.
This Picture was taken at Phingask before he left Scotland.
SPICY PEER IST.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


maintaining- and improving- the standard of these, and the best bulls obtainable were from
time to time purchased from leading- Scottish and Australian herds. Since the property
has passed into the hands of the present owners, a notable stud has been established. Few
Australian strains have been started under more favourable auspices, and when in the United
Kingdom Mr. J. McLaughlin personally searched Scotland for the bulls and cows he considered
best suited for breeding high-class stock under Australian conditions. He then bought three
bulls and six cows, which on their arrival were pronounced by experts to form one of the
finest importations of their variety ever made into Australia. Among the sires was Spicy
Peer, bred by Mr. W. S. Marr, of Uppermill, Tarver. He was sired by Spicy Robin, bred
by Mr. J. I). Willis, which was bought as a yearling for 250 guineas. Before coming to
Mohonga Spicy Peer won second prize at the Royal Northern Show, Aberdeen. He was
afterwards placed first at the Sydney Show. The early promise which Spicy Peer held
out was fulfilled in the stock he got. It was not only that his progeny won prizes at shows,
for in addition to that they have commanded some very sensational prices at public auction.
Spicy Peer 2nd, sired by him at Mohonga, was placed first in his class and reserve champion
at Sydney in 1904, and when afterwards offered for sale he was bid for till 525 guineas
were reached, and he was knocked down to the late Mr. C. Baldwin, of Durham Court.
SPICY PEER 2ND.
Photographed when he was a Yearling, and sold for 525 Guineas.
11
Mohonga, Mew South Wales.


STUD SHORTHORN CATTLE.
N.S.W. Spicy Peer 2nd was only a yearling at the time, and the price paid constituted a
record. On the same day another Mohonga bull, an eight-months’-old animal known as
Royal Hope, also by Spicy Peer, brought 230 guineas. Two other sons of his brought
£175 and £243.
In 1905 a further importation of Shorthorn stud cattle was made from the United
Kingdom. On that occasion Mr. McLaughlin bought one bull and four heifers. These
animals were carefully selected, and they excited considerable interest on being landed.
One of the cows, Vintage 2nd, was declared by some experts to be the finest Shorthorn
heifer ever introduced to Australia. The Mohonga Shorthorns are notable for large frames,
sound constitutions, and for showing the characteristics of the variety to a marked degree.
They are of a type most excellently suited to life under ordinary conditions on big runs.
Zbc flDohonoa Iborses.
The excellent type of horses which has been propagated for so many years on
Mohonga comes from some of the best blood in the land. For many years both Sainfoin and
Solanum were used as the chief sires. The latter was a chestnut horse with a big powerful
body, well supported by legs of great bone. He is by Somnus from Blue and White. He
was a sire of great power, and was excellently adapted for throwing general purpose horses
of bone and substance, coupled with activity and pace. Sainfoin, by Richmond from Instep,
is perhaps better known to the public. He was a very fast horse over a mile and a-half,
having a Caulfield Cup to his credit.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Tarella Estate.
The Property of Mr. Edward Quin, J.P.
THE 1 arella Estate contains 685,000 acres of undulating stony country growing
mulga and saltbush, situated about fifty miles from Wilcannia, in the far north-
west of New South Wales. Prior to 1872 the property was held by Mr. Kennedy,
but in that year it was purchased and stocked by Mr. Quin, who effected a number of
improvements and brought the carrying capacity up to 120,000 sheep.
When laying the foundation of his ilock, Mr. Quin obtained rams from the late
Mr. Currie, of Western Victoria, and ewes from Messrs. Joseph J. McGaw and Co., of the
Hay district. He persevered with this blood until 1893, when he introduced Boonoke
rams. In 1895 he purchased some stud stock from Sir Lancelot Stirling, of South
Australia, and later rams from Koonoona, in South Australia. The last-mentioned
introduction was followed with excellent results. At the present time he runs about
40,000 sheep on the estate; they are good wool yielders, and well suited to the district.
He also takes considerable interest in cattle breeding, and has a high-class herd of about
1000 head of Shorthorns on the property.
A FEW CAMELS LOADED WITH WOOL AT THE TARELLA WOOLSHED.
I


THE MOMESTEAD AND OUT-BUILDINGS. (Taken from the top of the windmill, 1/ 4 mile distant.)
THE WOOLSHED.
2
The Pastoral Homes of A ustralia.


Photo by Alice Mills.
MR. EDWARD QUIN, J.P.
Since Tarella came into the hands of the
present owner about 100,000 acres of the
run have been resumed, and some £70,000
spent on the balance in permanent improve-
ments. The water supply is mainly provided
by dams and wells. The homestead, which
built in 1879, is of a useful design. It is
situated on a rise, and commands the view
of a magnificent stretch of country. The
house is surrounded with many improvements,
and in droughts gives the impression of being
an oasis in the desert. Hot and cold water
are laid on all about the homestead. The wool-
shed is 200 ft. long by 60 wide, and contains
stands for forty shearers. The shed is fitted
with Wolseley machines. About 100 men are
employed at shearing time, and thirty all the
year round.
Mr. Quin is an enthusiastic horsebreeder.
Among the sires he has owned is Gay
Lad, by Elegance (imp.), out of Kate Coventry (stud book). He also owned the stallions
Amendment, by Angler from Proposition; Maitland, by the Barb; and Hero, by Knight
Errant. At the present time he is using Sir Simon, by Bobadil out of Reminder. Some
170 pure blood horses are run on the estate, besides a number of draughts and some
Arabs bred from the stock of Sir Tames Boucaut, South Australia.
About twenty - five
years ago The Lea-
sowes, a property of
805 acres near Ferntree
Gully, in Victoria, was
bought, and is used as
a summer residence. A
comfortable house has
been erected, and the
estate is now worked
on the share system by
dairy farmers. From 80
toiooAyrshire cows are
run on The Leasowes.
YOURLTOO—AN OUT-STATION ON TARELLA.
3
Tarella, New South Wales.


THE LEASOWES..
MR.Quin’s Summer Residence in Victoria.
Mr. Quin was member for Wentworth in the Xew South Wales Legislative Assembly
for three Parliaments, being the first member for Broken Hill. He is still chairman of
the Pastures Protection Board of Wilcannia, a position he has held for over twenty years.
He has also been a justice of the peace for thirty-five years.
in 1871 he married Edith, the eldest daughter of the late Mr. Charles Dollman, of
London. There is a family of eight. The sons are Edward Parmeter, who is engaged in
pastoral pursuits at Eucumbene, in New South Wales, and Alfred, who is fanning in the
Kooweerup district of Victoria. The daughters are Mrs. Chas. E. Taylor, of Bootra, New
South Wales; Mrs. T. Daskcin, of Morden, New South Wales; Mrs. A. W. Officer;
Edith, Isa, and Merita.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Gum Swamp Estate.
The Property of the of the late George Ferguson Simpson.
A I a point about fifteen miles south-east of Jenldene and thirty miles south-west of
Urana, is situated one of those fine pastoral properties which have contributed
L so much to the prosperity and stability of Australia. Known to all pastorahsts
as Gum Swamp Station, it is owned by the Irustees of the late George Ferguson Simpson,
and has, for very many years, been regarded as one of the most valuable in the Riverina
A CORNER OF THE GARDEN.
district. It has, too, the reputation of always having been well managed. Having had
many owners since it was taken up by the Kennedys in the early years, it was finally pur-
chased by the late George Ferguson Simpson, the father of the present managing trustee,
i


who is named after him.
The estate comprises 30,000 acres of fine
freehold country, with broad stretches of plain
land, with occasional strips of well-timbered
country, and with a natural herbage particu-
larly suitable for the 30,000 sheep which are
run on the station. The property originally
embraced Nowranie, and the two stations were
worked in conjunction by the late Mr. G. F.
Simpson, and since his death by his trustees.
In 1903 the properties were divided, and the
management of Gum Swamp was undertaken
by Mr. G. F. Simpson.
The boundaries of the estate are all wire-
netted, and the whole of the property is divid-
ed into twenty wire-netted paddocks. This has
meant the exclusion of all pests such as rab-
THE LATE MR. G.F. SIMPSON.
bits, &c., and Gum Swamp can so far claim to be practically free from plagues of this char-
acter. Ihe property is splendidly watered with a number of wells, and bores have been
sunk from which a splendid supply of water is obtained. There are five bores and five wells
sunk on the estate, and so arranged that each
of the twenty paddocks is separately and per-
manently watered. For supplying the home-
stead, woolshed, and station buildings, the
water is obtained from an adjacent dam, be-
ing pumped into tanks by a Rider-Ericsson hot-
air engine. As a standby in the event of a
drought, there is as much as 1000 tons of
hay in hand on the property. A well-kept fruit
and vegetable garden covering about three
acres adjoins the homestead, and furnishes all
the station’s requirements in this respect.
Stock.
1 he flock consists of 30,000 Merinos of a
2
MR. GEO. F. SIMPSON.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
The Gum Swamp Estate, New South Wales.


DURHAM CATTLE AND POLLED DURHAMS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
very fine type. Tasmanian rams were in the first instance used in the flock. Most of the
rams were the best procurable from that source, the prices paid for them being very high.
The Admiral, bred by Mr. Thomas Gibson, of Esk Vale, Tasmania, was bought for 1500
guineas. The utmost care was always observed in the building up of the flock, and as
time went on, outside importations were discontinued, and a system of inbreeding adopted.
The sheep on Gum
Swamp are of robust
constitution, and the
greatest possible suc-
cess has been achiev-
ed by Mr. Simpson in
the management of his
flock. The wool clip
averages between 10
and ii lbs., and the
wool shows a long
staple of 64’s quality,
and is bought princip-
STUD EWE HOGGETS,
5
The Gum Swamp Estate, New South Wales.


GROUP OF ONE YEAR OLD EWES.
ally by Americans at the Sydney Sales.
The annual sale of rams represents about 500, and there is a ready demand for all of
them each year at good figures from all the States of the Commonwealth.
The lambing takes place in April and May, and the average is about 80 per cent. It
has not yet been found
necessary to dip the
sheep, but considerable
trouble has been experi-
enced with the fly.
Careful attention to
crutching has, however,
invariably proved a
good preventive.
Some good draught
horses are bred on the
station, and for this
purpose several well-
bred mares were im-
ported from Scotland,
STUD RAM JUMBO
Ist Prize, Champion, Grand Champion, Wagge, 1908.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


300 FLOCK RAMS IN USE AT GUM SWAMP.
SALE ONE-YEAR-OLD RAMS.
7
The Gum Swamp Estate, New South Wales.


THE WOOLSHED
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


CULTIVATION PADDOCK.
together with the stallion Marshal Keith, who cost Tiooo, and won for Mr. Simpson numer-
ous prizes at various shows in New South Wales and Victoria.
In addition to the sheep and horses run on the station, Mr. Simpson has a very good
dairy herd of Shorthorns, the blood introduced being from the herd of the late William
McCulloch, the well-
known breeder of
Victoria.
The woolshed,
containing the most
up-to-date appli-
ances, is a large iron
structure, and is fit-
ted with twenty Mof-
fat-Virtue sheep-
shearing machines.
These machines are
driven by an 8-h.p.
TYPICAL STUD RAMS.
9
The Gum Swamp ' Estate, New South Wales■


A WELL AND TROUGH.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ruston-Proctor steam
engine.
Personal.
The late Mr. G. F.
Simpson was born in
Aberdeenshire, Scot-
land, and was descend-
ed from a long line of
farmers, his ancestors
having taken year after
year many prizes for
their cattle at the his-
toric shows held in
Scotland. He came out
to Australia when quite
A VERANDAH.
a young man, and settled near Kyneton, in Victoria, where he engaged in agricultural pur-
suits until 1870, when he came to New South Wales, and settled at Nowranie. He was a
man of considerable public spirit, and took an active interest in everything that was cal-
culated to develop and forward the district. As President of the Urana Hospital Committee
he did much to maintain the efficiency and reputation of that institution. In the discharge
of the many duties he was called upon to perform in his capacity as a public man he brought
into operation an earnestness of purpose which contributed largely towards the success he
enjoyed. His son, Mr.
George Ferguson Simp-
son, was born at Now-
ranie in 18/3) an d was
educated at Toorak
College. Upon leaving
school he entered the
office of a wool valuer,
where he gained an in-
sight into technical and
commercial matters,
and from there he pro-
ceeded to Nowranie
Station, where, under
his father’s supervision,
A CORNER OF THE HOUSE.
11
The Gum Swamp Estate, New South Wales.


STUD RAM, 3 YEARS OLD.
Cut as a 4-tooth 30 lbs. clean bright wool with 4-inch staple.
he acquired that knowledge of pas-
toral affairs which has so well fitted
him for his career as a pastoralist.
Upon the death of his father in 1896
he assumed the management of the
two stations, Gum Swamp and Now-
ranie, and continued to manage both
until 1903, when the properties hav-
ing been divided, he took over and re-
tained Gum Swamp as trustee.
He married, in 1898, Agnes, the
youngest daughter of the late Mr.
Donald McLarty, of Bundure, a well-
known pastoralist. He has a family consisting of three sons and one daughter.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Goree Estate.
The Property of Mr. Duncan Robertaon.
IT is not easy, with the pen alone, to convey an adequate idea of the great pastoral
properties situated in the Riverina. The illustrations more successfully achieve this
object, but better than both is to visit the country itself, to see it as it really is. Pen
and picture may materially assist in showing what a place is like, but to feel what it is
like requires actual presence on the spot. And it is fine to be in the Riverina, and feel
FATTENING GATTLE AT GOREE.
the immensity of the great plain which stretches scores of miles further than the eye can
see, and is intersected by useful belts of timber. The Riverina in a good season provides
one of the finest pictures of pastoral life in Australia. It produces big healthy stock, with
T


constitutions which have been tested by more
than one long severe drought.
Among the many fine stations in this part
of New South Wales is Goree, belonging to
Mr. Duncan Robertson. Is situated on Yanko
Creek about 31 miles south-west of Naran-
dera, and is 42 miles from Jenldene. Goree,
which adjoins the Yarrabee Estate, was ori-
ginally taken up by the late Mr. Ryan, of Ryan
and Hammond. Some years later it was sold
to the late Mr. John Peter, who held it until
1872, when Mr. Duncan Robertson and his
brothers purchased it. Yarrabee at this time
was held with Goree, and the two properties
were worked together. They comprised about
MR. D. ROBERTSON.
110,000 acres, some 6000 acres being leasehold. The partnership comprised Angus, Dun-
can, David, James, and Annie Robertson; it continued until 1884, Mr. Duncan Robertson
being managing partner. In the year above mentioned he bought his brothers, Peter and
John, out, and Angus took Yarrabee as his share. The remaining partners carried on the
property until 1907, when Goree was divided between Duncan and James. The partners
worked together for some time, when they separated, Duncan taking Goree, and James
a portion of the estate now known as Athole. Goree comprises about 34,700 acres, and
Athole is about the same area.
Goree is open plain
country, intersected by
pine ridges, and the
timber is chiefly grey
box and red gum, The
estate is well improved,
the boundaries all being
wire-netted. In fact,
Mr. Duncan Robertson
was one of the first in
the district to erect
rabbit-proof fences, and
the Goree netting has
been up for about
twenty-two years. The
MR. D. A. BOBERTSON IN HIS BUGGY.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE GOREE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Goree Estate, New South Wales,


A WATER HOLE.
station is divided into forty paddocks, and the pasture is made up of a great of
valuable natural grasses. It is watered by the Yanko Creek, to which there is a double
frontage, and the water supply is aug-
mented by numerous wells and creeks.
All the live stock on Goree is good, but
the Merino flock calls for special men-
tion The sheep on the property about
1872 were bred from the fubbo flock,
but Mr. Robertson subsequently pur-
chased 300 rams from the late Mr.
Thomas Shaw, of Woonwynte, Vic-
toria, and in the course of time select-
ed a stud flock from their progeny.
Then he purchased a very high-class
stud ram from Mr. McFarland, of
Beruga, and with those selected from
his flock he very carefully inbred until
1902, when he purchased eight Coon-
ong stud rams from Sir Samuel
A GOOD PICNICKER.
ST. ALOYSIUS
Liguria St. Swithin.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FLOCK OF EWES AND LAMBS.
5
The Goree Estate, New South Wales,


MOB OF GOREE HOGGETS, AS DROPPED.
McCaughey. He only used one of these in his stud flock, and the result was a general im-
provement in the way of density. The Goree sheep are now noted for their large frames and
long staple, and are looked upon as one of the best flocks in the district. Mr. A. L. Morri-
son, the well-known Widgiewa manager, has spoken very highly of the size Mr. Robertson
has got into his flock, and the ewes would be hard to beat anywhere for size and quality.
The quality of the fleece is not neglected, and the Goree wool is invariably near the top of
the Sydney wool sales. About 33,000 sheep, inclusive of ewes and lambs, are shorn annu-
ally, the shearing season being about the middle of August, and the work is done in a cor-
rugated iron wool-
shed fitted with
thirty-six stands of
Moffat-Virtue shear-
ing machines. Mr.
Robertson once regu-
larly exhibited sheep
from the Goree stud,
and he won a large
number of prizes,
GOREE STUD RAMS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE ENTRANCE TO THE HOMESTEAD.
7
The Goree Estate, New South Wales.


A STATION YRAD.
a
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED.
chiefly at the Wagga and Narandera Shows. At Wagga, in 1888, he secured three cham-
pions and seventeen first prizes. The same year he had the misfortune to lose one of his
most valuable rams on returning from the show. He had been offered 700 guineas for
him.
Prior to 1884 Mr. Robertson kept a fine lot of Shorthorn cattle, but after the drought
of that year he sold
them off, with the ex-
ception of a few re-
quired for station pur-
poses.
The Goree home-
stead is an old build-
ing, part of it having
been erected when the
station was in the pos-
session of the late Mr.
Peter. Mr. Robertson,
however, has added to
it from time to time. It
stands in a garden of
THE YANKO AT GOREE.
9
The Goree Estate, New South Wales.


A STATION TEAM.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


three acres, which is
the special care and
pride of Mr. Duncan
Robertson, jun., the
present manager of the
estate.
personal.
Mr. Duncan Ro-
bertson was born at
Inverness-shire, Scot-
land in 1840, and
came to Tasmania in
1854. After nine
months’ residence, he
A SECTION OF THE GARDEN.
crossed to Australia, where his father, the late Mr. Duncan Robertson, purchased Ingle-
field, near Balmoral. After two years on that estate, Mr. Robertson had a variety of ex-
periences in connection with the pastoral industry. For seven years he was at Moy Hall,
in South Australia, and he managed that property during his brother’s sojourn in the old
country. About the year 1864, with his brothers and sisters, he purchased Mount Emu
Estate, in Victoria, a property of about 30,000 acres. After five years there he came to
Riverina, where he took the management of a property for the Australian Mortgage, Land
and Finance Company,
Ltd. From there he
connected himself with
Goiee, as mentioned in
the preceding para-
graphs. Mr. Robert-
son married Alice, the
youngest daughter of
the late Sir John Ro-
bertson, and there are
four sons and two
daughters.
Mr. Robertson has
actively interested him-
self in matters pertain-
ANOTHER VIEW OF GARDEN SHOWING ARCH.
J 1
The Goree Estate, E New South Wales.


CROSSING THE YANKO AT GOREE.
ing to the pastoral industry, especially as regards his own district. For over thirty-three
years he has been a member of Urana Pastures Protection Board, of which he was chairman
for sixteen years. He is always interested in the various country shows, which he has fre-
quently supported. He took an active part in the erection of chilling works at Narran-
dera.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Nowranie Estate.
The Property of Messrs Ferguson Simpson & Co.
NOWRANIE is the property of Messrs. Ferguson Simpson & Co., and it ranks
among the best-known of the Riverina pastoral holdings. It is situated about
eighteen miles from Urana, and the same distance from Jerilderie, and is
bounded on the north by Cocketgedong, on the west by South Yathong and Gum Swamp.
Altogether, there are 40,000 acres of freehold on the estate, and the country is open plain,
with belts of timber and forests intersecting, typical of Riverina. The soil is rich, and res-
FRONT OF NOWRANIE STUD RAM.
ponds quickly to a well-distributed rainfall; the timber is chiefly boree and box, and the
grasses comprise many of the valuable species indigenous to that part of the country. Now-
ranie has been well improved, and the whole estate is made rabbit-proof with ij in. netting.
It is also subdivided into about twenty-six paddocks, and every paddock is well supplied with
water. The estate has a valuable frontage to the Nowranie Creek, which affords the prim
i


cipal water supply, but this is augmented by-
water pumped from wells by windmills. A
good supply can be obtained at a depth of 150
ft., and it rises in the bores to within 11 5 ft.
Tanks and dams have been constructed wher-
ever necessary, and the latter have a storage
capacity which will stand at least two years’
drought. The water supply for the house and
garden is obtained from two windmills and a
Rider-Encsson hot-air engine.
Nowranie came into the possession of the
present owners in 1903 from the trustees of
the late Mr. G. F. Simpson, and it has been
worked ever since by Mr. Ferguson Simpson,
who is the managing partner.
Nowranie has won a name among the pas-
toral holdings of New South Wales for the
THE LATE MR. G. F. SIMPSON.
standard of its Merino flock. The sheep are of the same strain as Gum Swamp, and the
flock has been founded since 1870. The ewes are of the large-framed, plain-bodied type,
and they cut heavy fleeces of very profitable wool. Mr. Simpson goes in largely for breed-
ing rams for sale, and he generally has from
500 to 600 to dispose of each year. There is
a ready sale for the Nowranie rams, which,
besides going on to many local stations, find
their way into various parts of the Common-
wealth. Mr. Simpson has bred the flock en-
tirely within itself, so that the rams should
have prepotency strongly developed. The Now-
ranie sheep generally are of the robust-woolled
type, and they have great constitutions. The
wool is very long in staple, and is free and
bright. The sheep are not pampered in any
way, in fact, they are entirely grass-fed, and
get no artificial feed. The estate in a fair
season provides very nutritious pasture, and
it is due to the natural grasses and the coun-
try that the sheep attain the size they do. The
2
MR. FERGUSON SOMPSON.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CORNER OF THE HOUSE AND GARDEN, NOWRANIE, N.S.W.
3
The Nowranie Estate, New South Wales.


THE HOMESTEAD.
THE BACK ENTRANCE AT NOWRANIE.
4
Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TYPICAL NOWRANIE STUD RAMS.
lambing takes place in April and May, and the shearing in August. The percentage of
lambs in an ordinary season ranges from 75 per cent, to 80 per cent. The clip is sold
at the Sydney Sales, and it is generally well up with the best prices obtained by Riverina
wools. Between 30,000 and 40,000 sheep are shorn annually on Nowranie, and the shed
where all this busy
work is carried out is
the old original building
erected many years
ago. Despite the hun-
dreds of thousands of
sheep that have passed
through it the shed is
almost as good as ever
it was. It is, of course,
brought up to date, be-
ing fitted with twenty
stands of Burgon shear-
ing machines, driven by
an 8-h.p. steam traction
NOWRANIE STUD RAM.
5
The Nowranie Estate, New South Wales.


ONE-YEAT-OLD SALW RAMS.
ONE-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES.
FLOCK RAMS IN USE AT NOWRANIE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MOB OF ONE-YEAR-OLD EWTHERS.
engine. It may be here stated that this engine is also used for ploughing, cleaning out
tanks, and a variety of other useful work. Mr. Simpson has recently had the whole wool
shed lighted by an acetylene gas plant. Of course, the estate is chiefly used for graz-
ing purposes, but a few hundred acres are put under crop each year for station use. At
the present time there are about 800 tons of hay stacked on various parts of Nowranie,
each stack being pro-
tected by galvanised
iron roofing. These
stacks form a grand
standby for droughty
seasons, and Mr. Simp-
son considers he has
quite two years’ supply
of hay now stacked on
the run.
In addition to the
sheep, there is a small
Shorthorn stud at Now-
ranie, which was found-
ed by Mr. Simpson’s
NOWRANIE STUD RAM.
7
The Nowranie Estate, New South Wales.


THE WOOLSHED.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FOLCK OF ONE-YEAR-OLD EWES.
9
The Nowranie Estate, New South I Nates-


THE CULTIVATION PADDOCK.
father. There are also some hne brood draught mares on the station, and Mr. Simpson
makes a speciality of breeding this class of stock. The stallion at present in use is by a
son of Marshal Keith, imported by Mr. Simpson at a cost of 1000 guineas. Marshal
Keith was a great type of horse, and he took champion and first prizes at the Narandera,
Wagga, Sydney, and
Melbourne Shows. The
dam of the stallion now
in use was a very high-
class mare, purchased
by the late Mr. Simpson
for 120 guineas from
Mr. Brady, of Kyneton,
Victoria. She was
champion mare at all
the shows in Rivenna,
and had an unbeaten re-
cord in the show ring
generally. Mr. Simp-
son also has an Arab
THE ARAB STALLION, “SLEET.”
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SHORTHORN CATTLE.
11
The Nowranle Estate, New South Wales.


THE STABLES.
stallion called Sleet, bred by the late Mr. J. D. Cox, of Cullenbone, Mudgee.
Ihe Nowranie House is the original homestead erected many years ago, and is still
very comfortable, though, of course, additions have been made from time to time. It is
surrounded by a pretty garden, well cared for, and altogether makes an ideal station
homestead. There is telephonic communication with Urana and Gum Swamp, and also
with the woolshed and outstation and boundary riders’ quarters.
[Personal.
Mr. Ferguson Simpson is the second son of the late Mr. G. F. Simpson, and he was
born at the Nowranie homestead in iB;6. He received his education at the Toorak Col-
lege and the Brighton Grammar School, and on completing his studies took up station
work under his father’s guidance. On his father’s death in 1895 he continued to work the
properties with his brother George, and in 1903 he took over Nowranie as before mention-
ed. In 1909 he married Eileen, the daughter of Mr. O. A. Willans, of Wagga.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Athole Estate.
The Property of Messrs. James Robertson & Sons.
IN a fine pastoral and agricultural district, and on the bank of the Yanko, about two
and a half miles from the Coonong Siding, is situated Athole Station, the property
of Messrs. James Robertson and Sons. Few properties in the Riverina district possess
better advantages for sheepbreeding. With a splendid growth of natural herbage to feed
on, the stock make wonderful progress, and the sheep are of a class showing plainly the
result of good pasturage.
POLO PONIES.
Athole comprises about 34,000 acres, with a frontage of about ten miles to the Yanko
River, with broad stretches of plain land extending into the boree country. The flats
fronting the Yanko carry a very heavy growth of herbage, trefoil, crowfoot, &c., which is
cut in the spring for grass hay as a provision against shortage of feed in a dry year. Over
1


MR. JAMES ROBERTSON.
MR. STUART ROBERTSON.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The At hole Estate, New South Wales.


TEH YANCO AT ATHOLE BRIDGE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A WELL-TIMBERED PADDOCK.
200 tons were put up last year, and it is expected that even a larger quantity will be
stored this spring. Originally a portion of Goree Station, Athole, in 1907, was cut off
from that property, and Mr. James Robertson took possession of it, the balance, Goree, to-
gether with the old homestead, being retained by his brother, Mr. Duncan Robertson.
Athole is wire-netted on all its boundaries, and is subdivided into twenty-four paddocks. The
position of the property in relation to the river is such that the question of water has
STACK OF BUSH HAY IN ONE OD THE ATHOLE PADDOCKS.
5
The Athole Estate, New South Wales.


STUD EWES AND LAMES.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOL SHED.
never been one to cause any concern. Precautionary measures, however, have been taken
to avoid any scarcity in this respect by the sinking of four wells, which so far have never
been needed. For the watering of the homestead, gardens, and outbuildings, a special well
is used. Adjacent to
the shearing shed a
bore has been sunk,
and from this an abun-
dance of water is ob-
tained for all the re-
quirements of the shed.
The woolshed, si-
tuated about a quarter
of a mile from the
homestead, is a well-
built iron structure
with sixteen stands of
Cooper sheep-shearing
machines driven by a
THE STABLE AND YARDS.
7
The Atho/e Estate, New South I Nates.


YELLOW BREEK.
8
The Paatoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
6-h.p. steam engine. Ihe homestead is a well-designed new steel building, lighted
throughout with acetylene gas, and having its internal arrangements designed upon the
most modern principles. A \ery fine flower and vegetable garden, under the care of an
experienced gardener, is a very pleasing feature in connection with the home. So far the
property has not suffered in any way from the depredations of rabbits, the pest being
fortunately almost unknown. Careful
watch, however, is maintained for any
encroachment in this respect.
Stock.
The flock, all Merinos, consists of
about 30,000 sheep. In addition to
this, a stud flock is kept. The lambing
takes place in April to May, the per-
centage being in fairly good years
about eighty. The shearing starts
about the middle of August, the wool
being dumped in Sydney and shipped to
ATHOLE STUD RAM.
9
The Athole Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW ON YELLOW CREEK.
London for sale, where it usually commands an average price of is. per lb.
A few Shorthorn cattle are bred on the station with satisfactory results. In addition,
a fine class of draught horse is also being bred, for which purpose the draught stallion
Moira Glen Gyle is
used. This stallion
was purchased from F.
S. Falkiner and Sons’
Moira stud. The blood
stallion Refraction, by
the well-known sire
Sun rise, is also in use
on the station. This
stallion was bred by the
late Mr. H. Devlin, of
Silver Pines. Mr. Ro-
bertson has a number
of good polo ponies,
and keeps a few fine
THE FERNERY.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TWO PICNICERS—WYAMBEE AND CAROON.
TWO POLO PONIES—KYLIE AND NOVELTY,
11
The Atho/e Estate, New South Wales.


picnic racers, the best known being Wyambee (the West Australian word for “perhaps”),
with which he has won many races. In connection with these wins he possesses numerous
valuable trophies.
personal.
Mr. James Robertson takes little or no active part in the management of the estate,
having retired a few years ago. He and Mrs. Robertson now live on their property,
Runnymede, Beaconsfield Upper, Victoria, but spend the winter months at Athole.
WYAMREK.
Athole is managed by Mr. Robertson’s eldest son, Stuart Struan Robertson, who gain-
ed pastoral experience for many years with Messrs. Falkiner and Sons at Tuppal. Mr.
David Robertson and Miss Robertson also live at Athole. Miss Robertson keeps house
and takes a keen interest in anything connected with the station; she has a fine flock of
American bronze turkeys, as well as several breeds of fowls.
T 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Merribee Estate.
The Property of Mr. W.W Killen
IN a position about ten miles west of Barellan railway
station stands Merribee, the property of Mr. Wil-
liam Wilson Killen. Comprising 33,000 acres of
country (about 26,000 of which is freehold) it presents
an alternating picture of hills and flats. The two ranges
of low hills which run through the estate add much to
the general appearance of the scene. Practically the
whole area is timbered, nearly half with boree and the
balance with pine, box, yarran, and kurrajong. '1 he
principal grasses are white top, barley, trefoil, corkscrew
AN IRISH HAUNTING CAR.
and crowfoot. The property is well watered by tanks, wells, and bores, the underground
water being raised from about 150 ft. by windmills.
Merribee (until lately called North Gogeldrie) was originally the property of Mr. God-
frey McKinnon, who worked it in conjunction with North Goonambil. In September, 1908,
Mr. Killen purchased it after having disposed of his Bull Plain property, between Corowa
and Berrigan, for closer settlement. Upon acquiring Merribee he transferred from Bull
Plain about 7000 of the pick of the sheep, principally ewes and weaners. These have for
the past seventeen years been bred mainly to South Australian strain on an original foun-
THE OLD HOMESTEAD.
i


dation of Wangamong, Quiamong, and Wan-
ganella blood, added to the pick of the old Bull
Plain flock, and later on two importations of
ewes from Rhine Park and Cappeedee. Ihe ori-
ginals of the Meiribee flock, though drawn
from more than one source, were all of the
large-framed, plain-bodied type, carrying long-
stapled wool, ranging in quality from medium
to strong, and, on the whole, were a pretty
even lot. The first South Australian sires in-
troduced were of Pitts-Levels blood, but for
the last thirteen years the stud rams have
been drawn almost exclusively from Mt. Craw-
ford, Rhine Park, Cappeedee, and Wirra
Wirra, all pure Murray blood. There is also on
MR. W. W. KILLEN
Merribee a small flock of pure Wanganella blood ewes, from which rams are bred for sale.
The originals of these were Wanganella Estate and Deniliquin Stud Park ewes, with which
were mated Wanganella Estate selected stud rams. The aim of Mr. Killen, who has al-
ways done his own classing and purchasing of stud sires, has been to produce a uniform
type of hardy sheep, combining profitable fleeces with weight of mutton, and the large
and increasing demand for his rams and the repeat orders constantly being received from
breeders who have used them, is satisfactory evidence of their profitable qualities. About
MERRIBER STUD RAMS.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


i 500 rams are bred an-
nually for sale. Prac-
tically all of this sea-
son’s offering have
been sold. The Merri-
bee sheep are noted for
their large symmetri-
cal frames and heavy
fleeces. The flock at
present consists of
about 15,000 Merinos.
The average clip last
year was 12 lbs. 3 ozs.
per head of grown
sheep. The tops of
TYPE OD MERRIBEE STUD EWES.
station-bred stud rams this year averaged over 26 lbs. per head. Shearing is done by
hand, Mr. Killen having discarded machines after two years’ trial of them at Bull Plain,
where the results were unprofitable. The wool is sold in London market, and realises good
prices, considering the dusty character of the country in summer, and the prevalence of
burr. High quality of wool is not aimed at, Mr. Killen being convinced that over
by far the greater part of the sheep country of Australia the best type of
strong-woolled sheep, combining, as they do, quantity of wool with weight of
carcase and robust-
ness of constitution,
are more profitable
to the breeders than
the more delicate,
lighter fleeced, and
more attractive fine-
woolled sheep.
Experience shows
that the latter do not
carry their wool to so
great an age as their
strong-woolled rivals
but deteriorate very
much more in yield
of wool after middle
TYPE OF MERRIPEE STUD RAM.
3
The Morribee Estate , New South Wales.


A MOB OF EWES AND LAMBS.
age. Body wrinkles never had any attraction for Mr. Killen, and all through
the time when they were fashionable he kept steadily to the large-framed, plain
bodied type, feeling sure that they were more profitable, and that the craze for wrinkles
would be short lived. It was, however, of longer duration than he expected, but in the end
he had the satisfaction of seeing the type he had always believed in take first place in the
estimation of the great
bulk of breeders, and
notwithstanding that
the show-yard awards
still generally favour
the “wrinklies,” Mr.
Killen is confident that
the rival type has
“come to stay.’’ His
watchwords in breed-
ing are quantity of
wool, symmetry, size,
and constitution,” and
his goal the most pro-
fitable combination of
DRAUGHT STALLION, BRED BY MESSRS. GLEESON BROS., TYLDEN, VIC.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia c


wool and mutton, re-
gardless of minor
points and show-yard
fads. He believes that
too great importance
has generally in the
past been attached to
density as against
length of staple, the
latter being, in his
opinion, essential to
weight of clean wool,
and there has, he
thinks, often been a
sacrifice of quantity to
THE CILTICATION PADDOCK.
quality without corresponding gain. In-and-in breeding is avoided on Merribee, Mr. Killen
believing that it tends to a weakening of the constitution.
Some years ago the Corowa Show used to be noted for a sheep test, carried out as fol-
lows:—The sheep were taken to the show, and were shorn in the presence of the officials.
The fleece was not taken into account that year, but the following year the sheep were
shorn again, and the fleeces were scoured and valued. Ihe sheep were weighed, one-third
of their weight being allowed for offal, and the balance was valued at a uniform rate of
lid. per lb. The prize was awarded to the sheep returning the most valuable combination
of wool and mutton. Mr. Killen won this prize every year but one —six times out of seven
A GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
5
The Merribee Estate, New South Wales.


A MOB OF DURHAMS ON MERRIBEE.
There are on Merribee, in addition to the old North Gogeldrie herd, over thirty pure
pedigree Shorthorn cattle, which were brought up from Bull Plain, the originals of which are
descended from the old D in diamond herd, and latterly Derrimut blood has been introduced.
A few young bulls are bred for sale.
A few horses are bred for use on the station, in connection with which a fine trotting
stallion, a grandson of Childe Harold, is kept. This horse, which was purchased from Mr.
Glenn, of North Yathong, has been very successful at local shows. There is also some
good draught stock, in-
cluding a two-year-old
Clydesdale stallion,
which took champion
honours at Jerildene
and Narrandera Shows,
lately purchased from
the breeders, Messrs.
Glenn Bros., Tylden,
Victoria, and two pedi-
greed Clyde s-
dale mares lately im-
ported from New Zea-
land.
THE TROTTING STALLION.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


When at the Dub-
lin Show in 1909, Mr.
Killen was so much im-
pressed with the super-
iority of the Roscom-
mon Sheep compared
with other British
breeds shown along-
side, that he purchased
six ewes and a ram,
which are now running
at Merribee, and are be-
ing experimented with
by crossing with the
Merino for producing
fat lambs. The Roscom-
IMPORTED ROSCOMMON SHEEP.
mon breed is noted for its early maturing qualities, and for weight of carcase. Wethers of
this breed, 15 months old, weigh from 100 lbs. to 112 lbs. dressed, and full-grown rams up
to 448 lbs. live weight. The fleeces average from 11 lbs. to 12 lbs. for ewes, and 16 lbs.
for rams. Mr. Killen’s are the first Roscommon sheep imported to Australia.
A large area of Merribee is eminently suited for wheat-growing. Three hundred and
twenty acres are under wheat and oats this year, and crop is looking well. Clearing of a
further area is proceeding, and it is intended to crop annually 2000 to 3000 acres. The
extension of the railway from Barellan to the irrigation area will skirt the northern bound-
ary of the wheat land.
The main Barren
Jack canal runs for
about 3 miles through
the south-western por-
tion of Merribee. Mr.
Killen intends irrigat-
ing a portion when the
water comes through,
which it is expected to
do in about a year.
Nearly in the
centre of the estate a
new two-storey stone
house is being built on
SHEARING AT MERRIBEE.
7
The Merribee Estate, New South Wales.


EXCAVATING A CANAL OX MERRIBEE.
PART OF BARREN JACK’ IRRIGATION SCHEME.
a picturesque site on
the slope of one of the
hills. This was ren-
dered necessary on ac-
count of there not be-
ing sufficient accom-
modation for Mr. Kil-
len’s family in the old
homestead. An orchard
and shade trees have
been planted at the site
of the new homestead,
and grounds have been
laid out. The district is
free from any stock dis-
ease, and the average rainfall is about 1/ in. The homestead is connected by telephone with
Narrandera telegraph office, and the post town is Barellan.
personal.
Mr. W. W. Killen was born in County Antrim, Ireland, educated at the Belfast Academical In-
stitution, and came to Australia with his parents and other members of the family in 1876,
so although Irish born, he may be considered an Australian. His first experience was
gained on his father’s property, Carnerney, near Jerilderie. From there he was sent by his
father to form Elsinora, a large tract of over 250,000 acres of unstocked, unimproved, and
waterless country, 160 miles beyond Bourke, west of the Paroo River, and over 250 miles
from the then nearest railway station. He spent seven years there, leaving Elsinora, with about
70,000 sheep on it, to the management of his younger brother, Edward, who is now the
owner of Nymagee and other properties. After leaving Elsinora he managed for Messrs.
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. Pirillie, on the Warrego River, for three and a half years. In
1893 he, with Mr. R. E. Young, leased Bull Plain Estate, near Corowa, and in 1903 he pur-
chased over 16,000 acres of that property, the bulk of which he held until 1908, when he
sold it in several lots before purchasing Merribee. In 1891 he married Marion, third daugh-
ter of Hon. C. Young, who for nearly twenty years represented Kyneton in the Victorian
Parliament, and has a family of three sons and one daughter. Mr. Killen’s town residence
is Ingleholme, Turramurra, near Sydney.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Big Springs Estate.
The Property of Mr. George p. Wilson.
BIG SPRINGS STATION is a well-known pastoral holding in the Wagga district,
situated about 19 miles north-west of the Wagga township. It was taken up in 1855
by the late Mr. John Peter, of Tubbo, who married Mrs. Bourke, widow of the
late Mr. Bourke, of Gumly. He held it until iB6O, when he gave it to his stepson, Mr.
James Bourke. It was sold in 1863 to Mr. John Donnelly, of Bywong, Gunderoo, who
held it for two years, when it passed to Messrs. George Wilson and George Paterson
Wilson. This was in 1865, the year Morgan, the bushranger, was shot. Messrs. Wilson
held it until 1872, when Mr. Geo. P. Wilson retired, selling out to his partner. He went
to England, and spent three years there, and on his return, in 1876, he bought Pomingalarna
from Dr. Morrison, of Scotch College, Melbourne. After holding it for about twelve
years, and putting 20,000 acres of the land together, he sold to Messrs. Mackay and
A VIEW FROM THE WOOLSHED.
I


Copland. His old partner, Mr. George Wilson,
then wanted him to take over Big Springs,
which he did in the year 1886.
At that time Big Springs comprised about
18,coo acres, but this has been added to
at different times until the property now
consists of 25,000 acres. When Mr. Wilson
took over the estate it was fairly improved,
and a considerable amount of ringbarking
had been done. It is all undulating country,
and for the last twenty years the average
rainfall has been in. There are two
creeks running through the estate, namely,
O'Brien’s and Cox’s, the land along which is
of excellent quality, both for grazing and
farming. In addition, there are numerous
springs giving a never-failing supply of water
MR. GEO. P. WILSON.
dotted all over the run. Droughts are hardly known, and when other parts of the Riverina
have been dry and without feed Mr. Wilson has taken on agistment as many as 55.000
sheep, which he kept for four months, in addition to his own flock of 35,000. This was
done from three to four years in succession. The grasses are all indigenous, and the
general carrying capacity of the estate is now
about a sheep and a-half to the acre, but in
the summer, as before mentioned, as many as
four slice]) per acre have been carried for four
months.
Jmprovcments.
The homestead was built in 1887, though
Mr. Wilson has since considerably added
to it at different times. It is a single-story
house, built of brick, and contains ten
rooms. A fine billiard room has been built
a little apart from the house, and the whole
establishment is lighted with acetylene
gas. Labour-saving appliances surround the
house, which has telephone connection with
Wagga.
2
MR. G. PATERSON WILSON.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOME PADDOCK.
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.
3
Big Springs, New South Wales.


A CORNER OF THE DRAWING ROOM.
THE BILLIARD ROOM.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A PART OF THE GARDEN.
There is a fine lake in front of the homestead, covering an area of from 7 to 8 acres.
In some places it is as much as 8 ft. deep. The springs from which the property derives
its name are wonderful. One alone supplies all requirements for household water.
Another is very similar to the famous Perrier water which is manufactured in the Pyrenees.
This is such fine water that Mr. Wilson is seriously thinking of converting it to more
practical use. From another spring it is easily possible to bring water to the homestead
at the rate of from 80 to 100 gallons per minute. The possession of these springs makes
the property unique among the pastoral homes of Australia, and the matter of water supply,
so urgent on most stations, is very easily solved. Twenty acres of lucerne are irrigated
by water gravitated from one of the springs.
There are over sixty miles of wire netting fencing on the estate, which is divided
into eight netted blocks. In six of these divisions the rabbits have been cleared out
entirely, and before the year is over Mr. Wilson expects to have the remaining divisions
free of the pest. Not the least important of the improvements is the swimming bath,
into which the overflow from the well at the homestead runs. It is 5 ft. deep, 20 ft.
long, and 10 ft. wide, and has a uniform temperature of 60 deg., which seems mild in the
winter and cold in the summer. The supply for the house comes from a spring half a mile
5
Big Springs, New South Wales.


away, is laid on by
pipes, and brought
down by gravita-
tion. There is a very
modern sheep dip on
the property, with a
60-.lt. swim, the water
for which is pumped
up from the adjoining
creek. Mr. Wilson
finds that dipping
serves three purposes
THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE LAKE.
if done about six weeks after shearing—it kills the ticks, bursts the grass seeds, and is a
splendid preventive for the fly pest.
The shearing shed is a very modern centre-boarded building of corrugated iron, and
fitted with twenty stands of Burgon and Ball machines. These are driven by an 8-h.p.
Buffalo Pitts engine.
Cultivation.
it is only within the last twelve years that Mr. Wilson has gone in for cultivation,
which is principally done on the share system. Last year (1908) he had about 6500 acres
under crop, which produced 90,000 bushels of wheat, 2000 tons of hay, and 2000 bags of
oats. In other words, this area produced 13,000 tons of produce. When Mr. Wilson first
took up the property it only produced 20 tons. This year (1909) there are 8500 acres
under crop, all on
the share system, and
there is every indica-
tion of a bountiful
season. Fresh areas
are being cleared for
the plough continu-
ally, and at the time
of writing (Spring,
1909) 1000 acres, in
addition to the 8500
mentioned above, are
being fallowed. There
are fifteen share far-
mers on the place,
THE WOOLSHED AND HUTS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A NICE FIELD OF WHEAT.
Nine reapers and binders, Belonging to Mr. A. Brunskill, at work in one of the Big Springs paddocks.
This crop was grown by Mr. Brunskill on the share system.
7
Big Springs, New South Wales.


CROSSBRED EWES AND LAMBS ON SUGAR LOAF CREEK.
who cultivate from 200 to tooo acres each. It is sufficient to say that all arc doing- well
for themselves.
£he Stock.
At the time of writing the shearing season is close at hand, and Air. Wilson will
this year put through about 11,000 sheep and 7000 lambs. The flock is of Merino descent,
though pure Lincoln blood has been largely used. Mr. Wilson is now going in more for
a comeback type, which he finds is better suited to the country than the pure Merino.
They pay well, returning good fleeces, and grow big carcases which fatten readily.
Mr. Wilson has also a small herd of pure Shorthorn cattle running with a Urangelinc
bull, and he is a lover of good horses. He has on Big Springs some very choice brood
mares, several being the progeny of Ready Money, a winner of the Cootamundra Cup
and other races.
<Lbc Bio fire.
The Ist January, 1905, will long be remembered by residents in the Wagga district
on account of the terrible bush fire which swept across the country. Big Springs Station
was right in its track, and the run was completely burnt out. Every acre of grass, the
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


standing crops, thou-
sands of bags of
wheat (it happened
in the middle of har-
vest), many miles of
fencing, the woolshed,
and about 3000 sheep
were destroyed. How-
ever, in a way, Mr.
Wilson was more for-
tunate than his neigh-
bours, for while they
A TENANT FARMER’S HOME ON THE ESTATE.
had to send their sheep away for agistment, he was able to keep his at home. This he
did by feeding them on roasted wheat for four months on end. The diet evidently suited
the sheep, for they actually fattened on it. Although the fire did so much damage, this
was to a large extent counterbalanced, inasmuch as it cleaned the country up wonderfully.
Many places that were before densely timbered and littered were left almost open plains
after the visitation. Hardly a hollow log was left on the run to shelter a rabbit, and in
this general clearing up it is estimated that the fire did good to the extent of about 2s. per
acre. Mr. Wilson personally had a very unpleasant experience at the time. He was
driving a lady from Wagga to the homestead when fire overtook them. The buggy
caught fire, and as he had no means of extinguishing it he had to take the horse out
and leave the buggy to its fate. It was only with considerable difficulty that the lady and he
THE LAKE IN FRONT OR' THE HOMESTEAD.
9
ultimately reached a
place of safety.
(Brcoaboo.
In addition to Big
Springs, Mr. Wilson
also owns Gregadoo,
a freehold property of
about 4500 acres, situ-
ated about ten miles
from Wagga. This is
one of the oldest dairy
farms in the district,
and it was there that
the first bag of wheat
Big Springs, New South Wales.


was ground by water
power in 1858. Grega-
doo has other histori-
cal associations. The
first wine produced in
the Wagga district
was grown there, and
a bottle of it was used
in the naming of the
first bridge built over
the Murrumbidgee in
1862. The holding is
GROWING WHEAT.
at present let to Messrs. Hutchinson and Wilson, the latter being one of Mr. G. P.
Wilson’s sons.
personal*
Mr. George Paterson Wilson was born in 1840 at Renton, which is on the banks of
the Leven \\ ater, Scotland, and within a stone s throw of where the immortal Tobias
S mol let was born. He came to Geelong in 1858 in the sailing ship “Tasmania,” and settled
at Narumbool, near Ballarat. Subsequently
he became engaged in mercantile pursuits
in Ararat, and later on took over the man-
agement of Wanga Lake Station, where he
remained for about eighteen months. On
relinquishing the management of this es-
tate, Mr. Wilson went over to the gold
diggings in New Zealand, and was one of
the first to settle at Lake Wakatipu. On
leaving New Zealand, he returned to
Geelong, and again took up mercantile pur-
suits with the firm of Wilson and Crosby,
and remained with them until he first came
to Big Springs.
Mr. Wilson married, in 1870. Fanny, the
second daughter of the late Captain S. J.
Lindsay, of Glencoe Station, near Mt. Gam-
bier, South Australia. They have six sons
and one daughter, who is now Mrs. H. E.
Bullivant, of Gillenbah, near Narrandera.
A VIEW ON O'BRIEN’S CREEK WHICH RUNS THROUGH
THE ESTATE.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Two Views from the top of Sugar Loaf Hill in the centre of the Estate.
No. i is looking West, and No. 2 towards the North.
11
Big Springs, New South Wales.


COMEBACK EWES.
Mr. Wilson takes a keen interest in all matters connected with his district. He is a past
president of the Murrumbidgee Pastoral and Agricultural Association, patron of the Wagga
Amateur Picnic Race Club, and one of the oldest members of the Turf Club. He was
one of the first members of the Kyamba Shire Council, and is senior magistrate of the
Wagga district. He is also president of the St. Hilda Bowling Club in Melbourne.
Mr. Wilson and his sons are enthusiastic members of the Wagga Picnic Race Club.
1 he latter lide then own horses, and have been very successful, as the numerous trophies
at the Springs testify.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bethungra Park Estate.
The Property of Mr. C. R. Westmacott
A MONG the many fine estates made prominent by the stock raised on them is Bethungra
/ \ Park, the property of Mr. C. Rendel Westmacott. On this property Mr. Westma-
-1 V cott is devoting himself to the production of a high quality commercial type of Me-
rino sheep, and as his flock (originally the Melool stud flock) was started on very sound
foundations over thirty years ago, and has been bred on the same lines ever since, the pro-
gress he is making must be of a very permanent nature.
VIEW FROM HOMESTEAD, LOOKING EAST.
Bethungra Park is on the main southern line close to Illabo, about half-way between
Sydney and Melbourne. The line runs through the property, and the homestead is easily
seen from the train. The property, which comprises about io,ooj acres, was originally
taken up by Mr. Frank Cowley, who built on it a very substantial homestead. It was
next purchased by Mr. David Robertson, and it later on passed into the hands of the Aus-
x


tralian Mortgage and Agency Company. In
1898 Mr. Westmacott purchased the estate,
and set to work to improve it where required.
It was originally forest country, and in con-
formation forms a sort of basin of fertile hills,
with rich alluvial flats in the centre. It has
all been ring-barked, and over 2000 acres have
been cleared for cultivation purposes. The
boundaries are wire-netted, and the run is sub-
divided into five blocks, also securely netted.
Rabbits once severely infested Bethungra
Park, but Mr. Westmacott went for them thor-
oughly. The wire-netting boundaries and sub-
divisions, combined with the destruction of all
harbours, resulted in making the estate prac-
tically free from the pest. The Billabong
Creek runs through the property, but the
water supply is augmented by convenient
tanks and one well, 240 ft. in depth, giving a
supply of 10,000 gallons per day.
MR. C. R. WESTMACOTT.
Though the run is well stocked with the best natural grasses, Mr. Westmacott has
successfully grown several artificial varieties such as Rhodes and prairie grasses. About
300 acres are under lucerne, and each year a large quantity of ensilage and hay is made.
The agricultural area on Bethungra Park is about 2000 acres, and on this wheat and oats
are grown for hay and gram. As much as 4 tons of hay per acre has been harvested,
though the average is between 2\ and 3 tons; the grain yield averages between 16 and 20
bushels.
The Bethungra
Park homestead is a
substantially - built
brick bungalow, situ-
ated on a hill, from
which there is a most
extensive view of the
estate. The house
was built in 1885,
but Mr. Westmacott
TWO-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


BETHUNGRA PARK HOMESTEAD.
has considerably added to it, and has erected several outbuildings and offices in the
vicinity.
Ihe woolshed, which is situated within easy distance of the homestead, is an iron
building, fitted with ten Wolseley machines, driven by a Hornsby oil engine. About
12,000 sheep are shorn annually, and the flock averages about 10 lbs. right through. The
lambing, which takes place about April and May, generally yields from 83 to 85 per cent.
This season (igio) 93 per cent, of lambs were marked from 700 first stud ewes.
This, then, is a brief description of the estate on which the Bethungra Park stud Me-
rinos are bred. The main characteristics Mr. Westmacott claims for his sheep are, first,
that they are large-framed and exceptionally well covered; and, secondly, that they are
bred absolutely true to one strain of blood —viz., the Scone flock in Tasmania.
It is only recently that Mr. Westmacott has become an exhibitor of stud sheep,
but his flock is one of the oldest in the State. When he decided to take up
stud breeding he laid the foundations on very sound lines. He decided on the type and
the blood which would best suit his country, and he bought nothing else, A start was
3
The Bethungra Park Estate, New South Wales.


GROUP OF TWO-TOOTH STUD EWES.
made by purchasing the entire stud flock from Melool, which was established as far back
as 1866 with Bordiallock ewes, all Tasmanian bred. Only Tasmanian rams were used,
with the exception of one imported Gadegast ram in the early days of the stud. The Be-
thungra Park stud was founded with these ewes, which had been bred to one strain for
thirty years. Other ewes were purchased from Messrs. Dangar and Macdonald, Wanta-
badgery, who are al-
most entirely users of
Scone blood. Only
rams from Melool, Zara,
and Scone studs have
been introduced, with
the exception of one
ram of Royal Hero
blood from Eskvale, so
that the Bethungra
Park stud is now prac-
tically a pure Scone
flock. It is in this res-
pect that Mr. Westma-
cott has a great advan-
THE MEN'S QUARTERS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM, BY YOUNG OAK.
tage. By keeping to one strain as he has done, and progressing by sound culling and care-
ful selection, the improvement has been sound, and the sheep have acquired a remarkable
degree of prepotency. Some breeders attempt to get what they want by the introduction
of a different type of
Merino, but very often
the outcross has been
so violent that the pro-
geny has lost all type
and fixed character.
Mr. Westmacott
is breeding decidedly a
commercial type of Me-
rino. His ewes are
plain-bodied, though
well covered, and he
does not favour any
form of feeding ex-
cept on lucerne and na-
FOUR-TOOTH FLOCK RAMS.
5
The Bethungra Park Estate, New South l A/aim a.


OPENING FLEECE ON A FOUR-TOOTH RAM.
tural grasses. Ihe Zara rams have achieved good results in the flock, as also the Scone
rams have done. Amongst the latter was the sire of Radium, one of the most noted rams
produced at Scone during late years.
Several stud rams
are leaving a good im-
pression in the Hoc!:,
among them Young Oak
by Royal Oak, the
Scone ram,which sheep-
men will remember at
Sydney and Melbourne
Shows in 1904. Royal
Oak was by Royal
Leader, by Royal Esk,
&c. Young Oak is a
ram very much resem-
bling his sire. He has
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM, BY BARON.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FOUR-TOOTH SELECTED RAMS.
the big frame and the extreme brightness in the wool, but the latter, if anything, shows
more character. He has proved a great sire, and amongst his progeny is a stud ram
called Great Oak. The same Royal Oak appearance is noticeable on this ram, but his
wool, while very bright, is more of the style which Mr. Westmacott is breeding on Beth-
ungra Park. Another good-looking and successful sire by Young Oak is known as 32.
Altogether Young Oak’s progeny seem to be amongst the best in the stud. Ram lambs by
him are all excellent handlers, and they reveal his leading characteristics. They are all
big and strong looking. In referring to Mr. Westmacott’s leading sires it would never do
to leave out Baron, the great Esk Vale ram he purchased at the Sydney Sales in 1906.
Baron was then a two-year-old, and was by Baronet IT, by Baronet, by the champion fine-
woolled ram Sir Allan. Baron was the champion at Campbell Town, Tasmania, in 1906,
and Mr. Westmacott secured him for 425 guineas. At the time this sale attracted a good
deal of attention, because the Baron was then almost quite a plain-bodied ram. Since then
he has developed several big folds, but
he is a good hardy type of ram. He
has an immense frame, and Mr. West-
rnacott is entirely satisfied with his
progeny. He achieved the purpose
for which he was bought—to get good
lengthy ewes with his high quality
wool.
The Bethungra Park stud is al-
ready making a name in the show
ring, though it is only of late years
BUILDING A LARGE STACK OF ENSILAGE.
7
The Bethungra Park Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW OF WOOLSHED AND OUTBUILDINGS FROM THE HOMESTEAD. CULTIVATION PADDOCKS IN THE DISTANCE.
8
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FOUR-TOOTH FLOCK RAMS.
that Mr. Westmacott has exhibited. His sheep since 1907 have been shown at Sydney,
Wagga Wagga, Narandera, Albury, and Junee, and have won three grand champions, six
champions, fifty-two first, forty second, and twenty-eight third prizes.
It can be mentioned that one of the South African sheep-breeders who recently visited
Australia was very favourably impressed with the general standard of the Bethungra Park
sheep, especially with their large robust frames and good, true quality of medium to fine
wool.
IPersonal.
Mr. Charles Rendel Wesrmacott came to Australia to settle in 1898. He was born in
1870, and is the fourth
son of Mr. Percy West-
macott, one of the ori-
ginal members of the
famous firm of Sir W.
G. Armstrong, Whit-
worth and Co., and who
only retired from the di-
rectorate of the firm
this year, though he is
eighty years of age.
Mr. C. R. Westmacott
was educated at Win-
chester and Oxford,
and he studied for, and
CAHFFCUTTING.
9
The Bethungra Park Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW LOOKING NORTH-EAST
The Pctsiora/ Homes of Australia,


VIEW OF CULTIVATION PADDOCKS, LOOKING SOUTH-EAST.
i i
The Bethungra Park Estate, New South Wales.


began, a legal career.
However, his health
broke down, and he was
compelled to live out
of England. He came
to Australia in the year
above mentioned, and
took up Bethungra
Park. In 1898 he mar-
ried Beatrice, the eldest
daughter of the late
Mr. Charles Fisher, of
Adelaide, and his family
consists of three sons
HARROWING.
and two daughters. Mr. Westmacott has been president of the shire council, and in many
other ways takes a practical interest in the affairs of the district.
VIEW FROM HOMESTEAD LOOKING EAST.
T 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Burnimna.
The Property of Mr.H. T . Edwards.
BURNIMA, the property and home of Mr. Henry Tollemache Edwards, is one of the
well-known estates in the Monaro district of New South Wales. ft is situated
about 90 miles from Kiandra and Kosciusko, and 20 miles from the famous Snowy
River. The nearest township is Bombala, 4 miles from the Burnima gate on the main
coach road to Cooma, which is some 50 miles distant. The estate comprises some 7000
acres, bounded on the north by Bibbenluke, and on the west by Bukalong, and is divided
BURNIMA STUD RAM “ROSEMEATH.”
into twenty-eight paddocks, including several small stud paddocks. It has a frontage of
some four miles to the east side of the Bibbenluke River. There are about 3000 acres
around the homestead of undulating stony basalt country or downs naturally clear, with
occasional patches of timber on the volcanic hills. This part of the estate is excellent
grazing country, and fattens stock rapidly.
i


Burmina, as far as can be ascertained, was taken up by a Mr. Galbraith in the early
da\ sof the Monaro, about 188(1 or 1887. He came from either Bernma or Camden districts.
Burnima next passed to the late Mr. Ihomas Mbore, and then to Mr. Donald Gunn, and
next to Messrs. Wallace and King, and then to Messrs David and Alick Ryrie and to other
owners, and finally to Mr. H. T. Edwards, tne present owner.
I he homestead is built on the top of a hill drained from all sides, and commands a fine
extensive view of the surrounding country. Mr. Edwards has a very fine plantation of
ornamental tiees and. shrubs around the homestead, collected from various parts of the
MR. H. T. EDWARDS
world. Ihere are varieties of pines, conifers, spruces, cedars, &c., all of which have
thriven remarkably well. Some of the cedars and spruces are of very choice varieties.
Ihe tonalosa hedge round the tennis court is a feature in itself. Of the English trees
Mr. Edwards finds the oaks and elms (including the cork elm) are very strong growers,
also the mountain ash and Spanish chestnuts do well, but the horse chestnuts seem delicate.'
He has also many of the native Australian trees doing well, mostly grown from seed, also
a large variety of shrubs.
The homestead is supplied with water pumped from wells to tanks on a tower, from
whence it is distributed to the house, plantation and garden, also to troughs for watering
the stock in house paddocks.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
Burnima, New South Wales.


THE DRAWING ROOM.
THE HALL.
260
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE, STABLES, AND TENNIS COURT.
Mr. Edwards goes in for a big-framed, robust type of sheep, and while retaining good
fronts, keeps clear of wrinkles as far as possible. The flock originally started from
Collaroy sheep, then some Rambouillet blood was introduced. Some years later Tasmanian
rams were used, with varying success, but it was not until 1897 that he hit upon the class
of Merino best suited to his country. In that year he went through some of the best
flocks in South Australia, and was much taken with them. He bought a draft of rams
from the flocks of the late Messrs. T. H. and W. Murray, of Mount Beevor and Cappeedee,
and later on he bought some hipdily-bred pedigree ewes from the same flocks. During 1909
some very fine stud rams were purchased from the Koonoona Estate, South Australia.
These sheep have a lot of Murray blood in them.
The Burnima sheep are large-framed, robust, and well shaped, and good doers,, and cut
heavy fleeces of long combing wool of good quality, and it sells well up amongst the top
lots in the Sydney markets. These sheep give a good all-round return both for wool and
carcase.
Mr. Edwards breeds his own rams, having a double stud flock of pedigree ewes.
There is a ready local market for these rams.
5
Burnimci, New South Wales.


VIEW OF PLANTATION AND TENNIS COURT FROM WATER TOWER.
DELEGATE RIVER AT QUIDONG, SHOWING LIMESTONE CLIFFS.
262
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


In addition to the sheep, Mr. Edwards at one time had a fine herd of Shorthorn cattle,
but the herd for various reasons has been much reduced in numbers during the last few
- earb ’ burnima fat bullocks have scored many victories at the southern and other
shows, including the “Queensland Breeders’ Sweepstakes ” for best fat ox at the Brisbane
Show some years ago, the prize being about £5(5 or over, and they also topped the Mel-
bourne market on several occasions.
Mr. Edwards takes a keen interest in horses of a useful type. Some six vears ago
he purchased m Victoria the Welsh pony stallion Bonnie Doon, and he proved to be an
immense success. All the best general purpose horses on the estate are sired by him.
FAT CATTEL.
He showed wonderful prepotency, and got good stock out of any kind of mares, having
excellent bone and good feet, very quiet, and great stayers. He was sold to Mr. White
of Pikedale, Queensland, and is well liked there, and is keeping up his reputation.
The original homestead on Burnima was the first brick building erected in the Monaro
district. It was built by the late Mr. Thomas Moore, a relative of Mr. Galbraith’s, and
is now occupied by the manager, Mr. J. B. Sautelle. About eleven years ago Mr. Ed-
wards erected the present homestead, which is a two-storied residence of brick and
cement, and one of the most complete and lovely homes in the country. It is lighted bv
acetylene gas, and has all the attributes of a city mansion. The house is surrounded bv
well-laid-out garden and grounds, which contain beautiful ornamental trees and flowers.
7
Burnima, New South I Nates.


GROUP OF BURNIMA STUD RAM
The gates and fences are spick and span, and there are two woolsheds, one at Burnima
and one at Mernngah, each fitted with fourteen Moffat-Virtue shearing machines.
In addition to Burnima, Mr. Edwards holds Quidong, Merianga, Coolumbook, and Back
Creek.
(SUufcoiuj.
Quidong Estate, situated on the east side of Delegate River, comprises some 10,000
acres of rugged country, partly C.P. and freehold and partly Crown leases. Some 3000
acres of it are limestone formation, and though light carrying is first-class grazing land for
sheep.
HDe namja.
Merianga Estate adjoins Quidong, but it is situated on the west side of the Delegate
River, and is watered by that river, also by the McLaughlin and Snowy Rivers, which pass
through it. It comprises some 9000 acres of very rugged country, part C.P. and freehold
and part Crown leasehold. It is good, sound grazing land for sheep, but light carrying
capacity.
Bach Grech.
Back Creek Estate,
of 8000 acres C.P. and
freehold in the Wyalong
or “ Bland district,”
which he keeps for fat-
tening purposes only
and moving stock to it
from Burnima to avoid
the cold winters of the
tableland there.
BURNIMA STUD EWES.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DELEGATE RIVER, QUIDONG.
9
Burnima, New South Wales.


BURNIMA STUD RAM, SHOEING FRONT.
BURNIMA STUD RAM, “ SILVER KING.”
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEWS OF THE DELEGATE RIVER, QUIDONG.
11
Burnima, New South Wales.


CoolumboolE
This estate, compris-
ing 4000 acres of free-
hold and C.P., is some
4 miles from Bombala
and to the east of it,
and the Bombala or
“ Back River ” passes
through it. Originally
it was very heavily tim-
bered, but the timber
has been killed and
burnt off, leaving belts
here and there as shel-
ter for the stock.
WELSH PONY STALLION. “ BONNIE DOON”
IPersonal.
Mr. Edwards was born at Parramatta in 1837, being the second son of the late Cap-
tain Edwards, of the 17th Infantry Regiment, then stationed there. He comes of
a military family, for the three preceding generations of his father’s family were
army officers, and they all lived and died in harness in various parts of the world. He
was educated privately and also at a public school at Balmain. He has been associated
with pastoral matters all his life, and his opinion on pastoral and stock matters generally
is valued very highly, because it is the outcome of long practical experience. He is a
fine judge of cattle, especially the Shorthorn breed. He has always taken a keen and
active interest in the affairs of his district. He was one of the original members of the
Board appointed under
the old Diseases of
Sheep Act. and has
been for thirty years a
member of the local
Pastures Protection
Board, having occupied
the position of chair-
man for some years.
Mr. Edwards was also
president of the Bom-
bala Exhibition Society
for about twenty years,
and he has been a
magistrate of the dis-
trict for nearly forty
years.
BURNIMA STUD RAM.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Hazeldean, Woodstock, and
Springwell Estates.
The Properties of Messrs. A.J., E.H. and O. C Litchfield.
IF comparisons could be made of the hardships of the early days of New South Wales, it
is more than likely that the most stirring stories would come from the Monaro. This
district is situated m the south-eastern corner of the State at an elevation averaging
about 2000 ft., and ranging up to 7300 ft., the summit of Mt. Kosciusko. The rugged scen-
ery, the snow-clad mountains, and the Snowy River and its tributaries, are every year
bringing the Monaro more prominently before the public, and it is increasing in popularity.
The railway line runs to Cooma, 266 miles south of Sydney, and an increasing motor ser-
vice has brought all the mountain and nVer scenery of the district within the range of con-
venient accessibility.
GROUT OF HAZELDENA FLOCK RAMS.
But it was not so in the early days, and anyone now visiting the fine homes on the Mon-
aro would hardly realise the change that has been wrought within a little more than one
generation. The severe climate and the rugged country have their effect on all living
things, and the district has long been famed for its hardy horses, sheep, and cattle.
Among the Monaro stockowners none are better known than Messrs. Litchfield Bros.,
I


who own Hazeldean, Spnngwell, and Woodstock Stations,
now among the best-improved properties in those parts.
The brothers are the sons of the late Mr. James Litch-
field, one of the first settlers on the Monaro. The late
Mr. Litchfield was born in Elmdon, Essex, England, in
1825, and he came to Australia in 1852. After spending
a few months in Sydney and Goulburn, he went on to the
Monaro, and gained his first experience at Coolringdon.
Subsequently he took the management of Myalla, then
owned by the late Mr. William Bradley. In 1862 he took
up Springwell, and there commenced the hard pioneering
well, Mr. E. H,
Litchfield Wood-
stock, and Mr. G. F.
MR. E. H. LITCHFIED.
Litchfield Matong. The last-named station lias since
been sold, but Hazeldean, Spnngwell, and Woodstock
have always been worked by the three brothers. With
the death of Mr. James Litchfield, the State lost one of
her most active pioneers. He was the first to move in
the matter of getting the railway line constructed from
Goulburn to Cooma, and he was the principal mover in
getting the present site granted to the Cooma Pastoral
and Agricultural Association. He worked very hard for
this institution, and was one of the first bondsmen for
the debt of the buildings. Mr. Litchfield did a great deal
2
work. The nearest
railwa}-' station was
at Mittagong, 188
MR. A. J. LITCHFIELD.
miles away, and he built his cottage on the bleak undu-
lating plain, for that part of the country is practically
devoid of timber. Mr. Litchfield gradually stocked the
place, and he and his family endured the hardships, and
the present fine estates owned by the brothers are the
result.
The late Mr. Litchfield died in 1905, but in 1801 he
divided the estate between his four sons. Mr. Arthur
Litchfield took Hazeldean, Mr. Owen C. Litchfield Spring-
MR. O. C. LITCHFIELD.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HAZEDEAN HOMESTEAD.
3
The Hazeldean, Woodstock, and Springwell Estates, Hew South Wales,


THE GARDEN AT HAZELDEAN.
dean stud Merinos have made the name very widely known.
fer the Monaro dis-
trict, and his busi-
ness qualifications,
pluck, and kind dis-
position endeared
him to all who en-
joyed his friendship.
The firm of
Titchfield Bros, has
carried on the good
work of developing
the country in spite
of various climatic
disadvantages, and
the famous Hazel-
Though each brother lives on a separate estate, they have worked in conjunction, and
their success is very largely due to the way they have pulled together. They have improved
the estates in every possible way; the three stations are practically netted in, and a good
deal of netting subdivision is going up. The natural springs have been utilised to the full
extent in the way of providing facilities for stock to water. They have each built for them-
selves large modern houses replete with every comfort, and these are surrounded with
beautifully laid-out and well-cared-for grounds. Acetylene gas and hot water are laid on
throughout the houses, which have telephone connection with each other and Cooma. Hazel-
dean and Springwell are about I I miles from Cooma, and 3 miles from each other, and Wood-
stock is only 5 miles from Cooma.
The part of the Monaro occupied by these stations is open, expansive country, prac-
tical!} devoid of timber. Hazeldean is of basalt and granite formation, and what little tim-
ber there is is principally white gum, Manna gum, and peppermint. On Springwell there
is no timber worth speaking of, and the country is of basaltic formation entirely. Wood-
stock, however, has rather more timber and shelter, but a great deal of the country is of
an open, undulating character. On Hazeldean there are about 200 acres under lucerne, but
it is more suitable for grazing than for cutting. On Springwell it is about the same, ex-
cept that the area under lucerne is only about 100 acres. On Woodstock the lucerne areas
are about the same as on Hazeldean, and from limited portions of these flats magnificent
crops of lucerne can be cut and converted into hay. With these exceptions, the stock de-
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOODSTOCK HOMESTEAD.
5
The Hazeldean, Woodstock, and Springwell Estates, New South Wales.


pend entirely on natural grass and herbage, and barley grass, wild carrot and mallows, tre-
foil, &c., provide plenty of feed when the seasons are anything like favourable. Ihe area
of Hazeldean is about 12,000 acres, Springwell 12,300 acres, and Woodstock 12,000 acres.
In conjunction with these estates Messrs. Litchfield Bros, work snow lease country in the
mountains, and they also own Marfield Station, comprising 320,000 acres leasehold, near
Ivanhoe, in the Western Division of New South Wales.
GbC Stub Jflock.
Though Hazeldean, Springwell, and Woodstock have all played an equal part in the
breeding of stud sheep, the flock has always been known as the Hazeldean stud. It was
founded by the late Mr. James Litchfield as far back as 1865 by a selection of sheep, the
progeny of pure Rambouillet Merinos. When Mr. Litchfield first started stud breeding he
was emphatic in regard to size and constitution. He never altered his ideas one iota, and
his sons have followed exactly on the lines he first laid down. In i 881 he purchased a draft
of ewes from Mr. John Taylor, of Winton, Tasmania, whose flock was then pure St. John-
stone blood. It is interesting to note that when Mr. Litchfield selected these sheep, he
placed size and constitution before everything, and chose a type of ewe winch was then
losing favour with Tasmanian breeders, who were at that time going for density and style,
and consequently developing smaller frames. About the same time he purchased several
high-priced stud rams from the flocks of the Hon. James Gibson, of Belle Vue, and Messrs.
W. H. Gibson, of Fairfield, and David Taylor, of St. Johnstone, and in the selection of
these sires he never lost sight of frame and constitution. Since the seventies many valuable
Tasmanian rams and
ewes were introduced,
and one of the most no-
table was dense-woolled
Golden Tom, bred by
Mr. James Gibson, pur-
chased for 270 guineas
at the Sydney sales in
1884. Tater on Sir Wil-
liam, bred by Mr. Thos.
Gibson, Esk Vale, was
purchased for 380 guin-
eas, and King Arthur,
bred by Mr. Geo. Clark,
of Talgai (pure Tas-
WOODSTOCK AND SURROUNDING COUNTRY.
5
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE SPRINGWELL HOMESTEAD
7
The Hazeldean, Woodstock, and Springwell Estates, New South Wales ,


manian blood), for 100
guineas. By this time
the Hazeldean sheep
had been bred into a
most distinct type, that
is, they were large in
frame and had a long
staple, more like River-
ina sheep than Tasman-
ian. This being so, n
1893 Mr. Litchfield pur-
chased a ram called So-
vereign from Messrs.
Millear and Austin, of
Wanganella, and his
SPRINGWELL, IN THE DISTANCE.
judgment proved correct, for this ram played no small part in further establishing the
strong, bold type of the Hazeldean Merino of the present day. Sovereign got a ram called
Baron, whose strain is one of the best in the stud, and it should be stated that Messrs.
Litchfield Bros, have ever since bred principally to the Baron strain right through. There
is, therefore, now a strong infusion of Wanganella blood in the stud. Since Messis.
Litchfield Bros, took over the stud, wherever they have purchased a sire they ha'\ e bought
only big strong-constitutioned rams, of course paying due consideration to style and den-
sity of wool. A very notable addition to the stud was made about 1900, when the}' pur-
chased Radical, a strong-wool ram, bred by Mr. Russell Gibson, now of Barton, Tas-
mania, for 190 guineas. Radical was by the great Wmton ram Primus, by President,
which sold for 1000 guineas. He was a tremendous sheep, with bold front and heavy
thigh, but comparatively plain body. His fleece was on the strong side, but it was essen-
tially a sire’s wool. He was used for many years in the stud, and the impress he made
on the flock was a further step towards the ideal Messrs. Litchfield Bros, were aiming at.
In 1904 they purchased No. 121, another Wanganella ram, for 205 guineas, and he again
was selected for constitution and length and quality of fleece. In 1905 they purchased
Alliance for 390 guineas from Mr. John Taylor, of Wmton. This ram was by a grandson
of Sir Allan, by President, &c. He is another of the bold, hardy-constitutioned type, and
is still m use in the stud. He is a big, active sheep, with strong head
and horns, bold front, and big arms and thighs, and as a two-} ear-old
was devoid of body wrinkles, but he has developed a few with age.
He is low set and well-woolled all over. Another recent introduction was Kitchener IT,
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


HAZELDEAN STUD EWE. CHAMPION AT SYDNEY SHOW.
9
The Hazeldean, Woodstock, and Springwell Estates, New South Wales.


TYPES OF HAZELDEAN STUD RAMS.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


purchased from Mr. David Taylor, of St. Johnstone, in 1905, for 210 guineas. This ram
was by Kitchener, a ram that created a great deal of admiration at the Campbell Town
Show a few years ago. He was considered to be one of the most symmetrical and perfectly
cohered rams ever seen at that show, but owing to a, run of adverse seasons he was on the
small side. His progeny, however, lacked nothing as regards size, and Kitchener IT is
another of the type of rams which have contributed to establish the big symmetrical Ha-
zeldean sheep. He has left several very promising sires.
GROUP OF HAZELDEAN STUD EWES.
In addition to the rams mentioned, Messrs. Litchfield Bros, have, of course, used a
number of sires of their own breeding. They have never deviated from the original ideas
laid down by the founder of the flock, despite sudden changes of fashion. They realise
as all other prominent breeders do, that a certain amount of fold development is neces-
sary in stud rams to maintain density of fleece, but they make a very marked distinction
between a few pure folds on neck and, thigh and numerous tight body wrinkles. The
Hazeldean sheep possess size and length of staple principally because those objects have
never been lost sight of since the stud was founded in 1805. The local conditions have no
doubt, contributed in some degree, but if the owners of the Hazeldean stud had pandered
to the recent craze, now absolutely dead, for excessive folds and yolky fleeces, they
T T
The Hazddcan, Woodstock, and Springwel/ Estates, New South Wales.


would have lost size and
length of staple, as
many breeders have
done. Though every
year Messrs. Litchfield
Bros, breed a number
of high-class stud rams
for sale purposes, the
main business is the
THE WOOLSHED, SPRINGWELL.
production of flock rams. These are sold in large and small drafts to woolgrowers in
many parts, and for the last eighteen years drafts of representative rams have been sold
at the annual Sydney sales. There is always a great demand for these sheep, and the
selected rams generally bring up to 20 or 30 guineas. They always attract attention as
being some of the biggest rams in the sales, and the fact that they are entirely grass-
fed and unhoused counts a long way in their favour. Nothing in the way of pampering
or hand-feeding is done; indeed, on that portion of the Monaro that could not be attempt-
ed. The stud sheep gain their size and quality on natural grasses, with occasional runs
on light lucerne country, and they never see the inside of a shed. They are therefore
sound commercial sheep, and the conditions of the Monaro are so severe that it is no
wonder that the rams thrive so well when they get into more favoured localities. The Ha-
zeldean sheep are widely known, and they have gone into every State of the Common-
wealth and New Zealand, and are making their way in South Africa. Quite recently
Messrs. Litchfield Bros, received a letter from a South African who had purchased
rams from Hazeldean. He wrote as follows:—“I wrote the other day to order again
from you for next season forty rams highest grade selected flock 4-tooths, like those I
got from you last year, and am glad to inform you that your rams have given great satis-
faction so far, and that very possibly I may supplement this order later; also, perhaps,
I may order some ewes. It is essential that they should be well grown, in good order,
good length of staple, well sprung ribs, good close tops, and good neck folds. Condi-
tion and size are two strong points, and hitherto your sheep have filled these require-
ments.”
South African breeders have also written to Hazeldean for rams and ewes for show
purposes, so it is very evident that the sheep are specially suited to African conditions.
It should be said that the class of wool on the Hazeldean stud sheep lean towards the
strong and robust type, as Messrs. Litchfield Bros, have found it the most profitable on
their country.
[The firm of Litchfield Bros, was dissolved on the Ist of January, 1910, since when the three Estates, Hazeldean. Wood-
stock, and Springwell have been worked as entirely separate properties.
On account of the dissolution of partnership a dispersal sale of the whole of the Hazeldean Stud Flock took place on the
12th of October, igio.]— Editor, Pas total Homes oj Australia.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Lanyon Estate.
The Property of Mr. A. J . Cunningham.
LANYON Estate, now the property of Mr. Andrew J. Cunningham, is situated about
fourteen miles south from Queanbeyan, on the south bank of the Murrumbidgee
River, and anyone now journeying to the locality would find it hard to picture the
country when it was first taken up.
1 he name of Cunningham is closely associated with the settlement of that portion of
New South Wales, as the father of the present owner of Canyon was one of the earliest
to settle on the land in the Queanbeyan district and face the innumerable and unknown
MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER BELOW THE HOUSE.
difficulties of the pioneer. He was from Fifeshire, Scotland, of the old Ayrshire Cunning-
ham family. He was a banker by profession, and was managing a bank at the age of
twenty-one years, and at that age he wrote a short work on the banking business which
he afterwards gave up to try his fortune in Australia. Reaching Sydney in 184 s, he imme-
diately made a home for himself and family in the Queanbeyan district, taking up Crown
leases known as Congwarra, and about three years later purchasing Canyon from Mr. James
Wright, who was one of the original grantees. Here he spent the remainder of his life in in-
-1


dustriously, and with much judgment and intelligence, steadily developing and improving
the property towards its present-day conditions.
Mr. James Wright, who was an energetic and thorough class of colonist, purchased an-
other pioperty in the district, and some of his descendants are now well and favourably
known in different parts. Amongst the original grantees contemporary with Mr. Wright,
and adjoining Lanyon, was Mr. Thomas Hyam Macquoid, who, when returning from a visit
to his friends in the Old Country, lost his life in the wreck of the ill-fated “Dunbar,” at
Sydney Heads, m 1857, and Mr. Cunningham afterwards became the purchaser of his
property.
Mr. Macquoid, like the late Andrew Cunningham, was an ideal specimen of the early
type of settler. They were original and self-reliant men, and their advice was valued and
MR. A. F. CUNNINGHAM
sought after by neighbours for many miles round. They willingly gave their valuable help
whenever required, and were often called upon to arbitrate on matters of dispute between
neighbours. Mr. Cunningham early devoted himself to the improvement of his stock, and
it is interesting to put on record that he was awarded at the New South Wales Agricultural
Society’s Intercolonial Metropolitan Exhibition in 1869 the first prize for fine-woolled rams,
and the present owner of Lanyon still holds the handsome piece of plate representing it.
Mr. Cunningham was also a good judge of horses, and had a keen eye for “a good one.”
He went in more for producing useful and saleable horses than racers. He sold drafts for
the Indian market, and his Yin circle brand horses were well known locally as “good
sorts.” He also bred the best class of cattle, contending that a “good beast did not eat
as much as a bad one, and gave much more in return.”
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE HOUSE FROM DRIVE ENTRANCE.
3
The Lanyon Estate, New South Wales,


THE HOMESTEAD.
Ihe Lanyon Estate, since the subdivision between the two brothers, Mr. A. J. Cun-
ningham and Mr. J. Cunningham, consists of only about 12,000 acres. Much of it is hilly
country, and most of it is good grazing and hrst-class woolgrowing land. It has been
highly improved and opened up by the destruction of useless timber and the burning-off of
same, in process of rabbit destruction. The beginning of improvement was judicious ring-
barking, which was done very many years ago. Many acres of originally thickly-timbered
land have been grubbed, and completely cleared of all timber. There have been large sums
of money spent in this as well as personal energy in the work of subdivision by fencing into
numerous wire-netted paddocks, also necessary homestead buildings and outbuildings. The
rabbit pest has been a serious proposition for many years in the Queanbeyan district, and
Mr. Cunningham has fought hard, and with much success, against it. For instance, in addi-
tion to rabbit-proof boundary fences, the property is subdivided into many wire-netted pad-
docks, so is well fortified against the pest. It might be calculated in the aggregate that
from the beginning of occupation by the late Andrew Cunningham, the money spent per acre
on this small estate in improvement would represent nearer three pounds than two. And this
is the class of landowners that our present socialistic Federal Government is endeavour-
mg to tax “out of existence.” Where are they going to find men to replace them and do
their work?
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF MUKRUMBIDGEE.
5
The Lanyon Estate, New South Wales.


DISTANT VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
It is hard now to realise what the early settlers’ difficulties were in the days when all
sheep had to be shepherded by day and hurdled and watched by night to protect them from
the ravages of the native dogs. These were very numerous, and could be heard howling
in packs on the hills at night. If the shepherd happened to allow any to stray from his
flock during the day and failed to yard them at night there was sure to be destruction
amongst them. The habit of these dogs was not only to kill and eat what they could, but
to worry and tear to pieces great numbers. It took many weary years to reduce to any
appreciable extent the numbers of these dogs, and the method of attack was chiefly
strychnine poisoning. They were, however, gradually got under, and Mr. Cunningham was
the first in these districts to fence extensively and turn his sheep at large in secure pad-
docks. Lanyon has a frontage of about twelve miles to the Murrumbidgee River, which is
the chief source of water supply to the estate.
The Lanyon homestead is a charming, homely, substantial residence, having a wide ver-
andah nearly all round and walls of stone 2 feet thick, which ensures coolness in the hot-
test weather. This house was built by the late Mr. Andrew Cunningham in 1859, and is
surrounded by well-kept garden and grounds, with numerous fine trees and shrubs. The
late Mr. Cunningham, who was one of the earliest magistrates in the district, was a man of
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DRIVE IN FRONT OF THE HOUSE.
7
The Lanyon Estate, New South I Vales.


AT THE REAR OF THE HOUSE.
clear and quick intellect, and a keen observer. He possessed a good and well-cultivated
memory, and from early training his business habits were strict and reliable, and in all
business matters he was integrity itself. He was from boyhood a great reader, and was
often heard to speak of the intense pleasure he derived from reading Sir Walter Scott’s
works when first published. He had read this author’s Waverley Novels through and
through more than once before he left the Old Country, and there is now at Lanyon one of
the first fully-revised editions of these works, in twenty-five volumes, and also a fine large
and well-bound edition of this author’s “Tales of a Grandfather,” both of which he brought
to Australia with him. His death took place at Lanyon, in 1887, at the age of seventy-
three years. Amongst those who were his schoolfellows in Kirkauldie, Fifeshire, were many
who became prominent men and leading colonists in Australia, such as the Elder brothers
and the well-known
Aitken family at
Melbourne. Mrs.
Cunningham surviv-
ing him until her
eighty-third year,
died in 1895, both
being buried on the
estate. They had
married early in life,
and left four sons
and four daughters,
their grandchildren
A DAM ON LANYON.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


COTTAGES.
9
The Lctnyon Estate, New South Wales,


AN OLD BUILDING.
now numbering over thirty. Mrs. Cunningham was an Irish lady of the most refined type,
and it is impossible to imagine what the change from her home surroundings to the wilds of
Australia must have meant to her. In speaking of her we need only quote a few words of
one who had known her for very many years: “A sincere and consistent Christian, who
carried her religion with her into all the work of life; a loving, helpful, and prudent wife;
an affectionate, careful, and judicious mother, and helpful to all by the influence of her ex-
ample. I am not speaking from hearsay, but from my knowledge and observation of her
extending over forty years, during all of which it was my privilege and happiness to pos-
sess her unbroken friendship.”
Of such were some of our early pioneers who faced, to bravely fight and overcome by
downright pluck and perseverance, the indescribable hardships connected with settling in
this country in the early days and to pave the way towards its present state of civilisation
and prosperity.
As already mentioned, the late Mr. Andrew Cunningham was a banker in his early life in
Scotland, and it was his brother, late Mr. Alexander Cunningham, who was so well and fav-
ourably known as chief manager of the National Bank of Australasia in Victoria for very many
years, and who so successfully piloted this institution (which is now a most prosperous one)
through troubled times. Mr. Alexander William Cunningham, second son of the late An-
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


drew Cunningham, en-
tered the banking pro-
fession as a youth, rid-
ing across from Lan-
yon through Gippsland
to Melbourne, where he
was appointed a clerk
in the above-named
bank, and gradually
worked himself up un-
til he was appointed
manager of the London
office, which he held
for five years, and then
returning to Melbourne,
LADIES ABOUT TO-MOUNT.
held the position of chief acting-manager until his retirement in July, 1909. On his retire-
ment he was presented with a handsome piece of plate in the midst of a large gathering
of officers and shareholders, and is now living at Mt. Macedon, Victoria, in retirement with
his family. He was educated chiefly at the old Scotch College, Melbourne.
Mr. Andrew Jackson Cunningham is the third son of the late Mr. Andrew Cunning-
ham, and he inherits many of the good qualities of his father and mother. He was born
at Congwarra, some twelve miles from Lanyon, in 1847, was educated at Macquarie Fields,
or what is the King’s School of the present day, under the late Rev. G. F. Macarthur. Ihe
old site of Macquarie Fields can be seen on a hill quite close to the railway line between
A RIDING PARTY.
1 I
The Lanyon Estate, New South Wales.


Liverpool and Camp-
belltown, the latter
being the then ter-
minus of the railway.
He used to ride to
Macquarie Fields,
where the boys used
to have the privilege
of keeping their po-
nies. His was a grey
Timor called Mungo,
and he used to ride
home again for the
Christmas holidays,
and on occasions
THE ENTRANCE TO THE DRIVE.
coach it from Campbelltown, with many schoolfellows from the district, including the Pow-
ells, Rutledges, Edwards, and amongst many visiting schoolfellows, Forsters, Blaxlands,
Isaacs, Knoxes, Gordons, &c. On one occasion when there were eighteen schoolboys on one
coach, with old Brummy as driver, and nearly every boy having a catapult, things were
very lively, and dogs, without respect of owners, had a bad time, as also had some windows
along the road. On this occasion Brummy’s horses shied near Campbelltown, and turned the
coach over on to the bank—only a few bruises, and soon all going along cheerfully again.
After leaving school Mr. Cunningham spent a few months in the Commercial Bank, at
Queanbeyan, but finding office work did not so well agree with him, he went to Mr. Samuel
McCaughey’s (now Sir Samuel McCaughey), Coonong Station, being driven all the way from
Lanyon by him, who undertook to “teach the young idea how to shoot.” In 1869 he came
to Lanyon, with which he has been identified ever since, and has long been one of the
leading men of the district. He was President of the first Queanbeyan Agricultural Society,
and is on the Council of the Pastoralists’ Union of New South Wales. He has been a jus-
tice of the peace for many years, being one of the senior magistrates of the district.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


The Tuggranong Estate
The P roperty of Mr. James Cunningham
TUGGRANONG is the home of Mr. James Cunningham, the youngest son of the
late Mr. Andrew Cunningham, one of the first settlers to take up country in the
Queanbeyan district. Ihe family name ranks with the best known of those pioneers
who left the life and luxury of Great Britain behind them and came out to try their for-
tunes in Australia. In these days of railways and fast steamers the trip from England to
Australia is but a pleasant jaunt, and in a few hours after landing one may find onself far
m the interior. But it was not so in 18451 when the late Mr. Andrew Cunningham came to
THE DRIVE UP TO THE HOUSE.
this country. With his wife and three children, he had a long voyage of four months in
a sailing ship. Sydney, as a city, was just in an embryonic state, and big, silent, un-
peopled tracts of land stretched back from the coast line. Mr. Cunningham landed in
Sydney, and elected to settle in the Queanbeyan district, and he drove through the bush in
a dog-cart, and reached his future home —200 miles distant. He first settled on a block
o r Crown land called Congwarra, but a few years later purchased the country that is now
Lanyon and Tuggranong. These estates are composed of original grants given by the
i


Crown to those who had the hardihood to try and make a
living in the bush. They were rough days, and the iso-
lation was severe; but it is due to the pluck of men like
the late Mr. Cunningham that the country’s resources
became known and began to attract settlers, lire ori-
ginal holder of Tuggranong was a Mr. I hos. Macquoid,
who was drowned in the wreck of the “Dunbar, at
Sydney Heads, in 185/. On his death the land was pur-
chased by Mr. Cunningham and developed with Lanyon
and the other properties he held at various times, and
it subsequently passed to his sons, Mr. Andrew Jackson
Cunningham and Mr. James Cunningham, who held it
jointly until 1906, when the partnership was dissolved,
Mr. James Cunningham taking Tuggranong as his por-
tion of the estate. The property is situated to the
MR. JAMES CUNNINGHAM.
south-west of Queanbeyan, and two miles from the tuggranong railway siding. It now
comprises about 10,000 acres of undulating country, especially suited for woolgrowing, and
is fairly well timbered, and has a frontage of about four miles to the Murrumbidgee
River. The river is, of course, the chief source of water supply, but it is supplemented in
various paddocks by creeks, springs, and tanks
The improvements on the estate are complete and
substantial, and telephone communication has been
established. The mail reaches the station every day,
which is a contrast to the days which Mr. Cunningham
can remember, when mails arrived once a week.
The estate is all fenced with rabbit-proof netting,
and it is subdivided into about eighteen paddocks, also
wire-netted. Rabbits were once very numerous on
Tuggranong, but by thoroughly fencing, systematic
poisoning, and burning of timber and digging out
burrows, Mr. Cunningham has practically got rid of the
pest.
While the improvements on Tuggranong are mostly
modern, there are one or two substantial relics of
MR. ANDREW J. CUNNINGHAM.
The Pastorat Homes of Australia.


IN FRONT OF THE HOUSE.
3
The Tuggranong Estate, New South Wales.


THE APPROACH TO THE HOUSE.
the old times which are still being made good use of. One of these is the woolshed, which
was erected by the first owner of the estate by means of convict labour. This old build-
ing is still in good re-
pair, and it has with-
stood the changes that
have taken place all
round as regards the
estate. Until about
twenty years ago only
hand shears were used
in the old shed at Tug-
granong, but when the
Wolseley machines were
first introduced the
Messrs. Cunningham at
once installed them, and
theyhave been used ever
A CORNER OF THE HOUSE AND GARDEN.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE RESIDENCE OF MR. P. MCLNTYRE, OVERSEER, WHO HAS BEEN OVER 40 YEARS ON THE ESTATE.
PINE ISLAND. A VIEW ON THE MURRUMBIDGEE.
5
The Tuggranong Estate, New South Wales.


A FRONT VIEW OF THE HOUSE.
since. There are seventeen stands altogether. Until about twenty years ago Mr. Cunning-
ham lived in the original homestead built over seventy years ago. In 1908, however, he
built a fine homestead fitted with the most modern conveniences. He has installed
acetylene gas throughout, and has a hot and cold water service laid on. The house
stands in pictur-
esque surroundings.
It is approached by
a growing avenue of
pine trees half a mile
in length and some
magnificent trees, in-
cluding willows sur-
round the house.
The Tuggranong
country is splendidly
adapted to growing a
FAMILY PARTY AT TUGGRANONG.
6
The PastoraJ Homes of Australia.


A GENERAL VIEW OF HOMESTEAP.
7
The Tuggranong Estate, New South I Vales,


THE SHEARERS’ QUARTERS,
fine quality of Merino wool, and Mr. Cunningham has devoted a good deal of time and
money towards the improvement of his clip. The flock was established by the late Mr.
Andrew Cunningham from the best ewes available at that time, and by the purchase of
Negretti rams. After
breeding like this for
many years Tasmanian
rams were introduced
and used until about
twenty-five years ago,
when a complete
change was made.
Rams were purchased
from Messrs. Rouse
Bros., of Biraganbil,
Mudgee, and then
sheep from the Exors.
late D. McCaughey, of
Coree, were introduced.
THE BLACKSMITH'S SHOP.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER AT TUGGRANONG.
9
The Tuggranong Estate, New South Wales.


After experimenting
with all these types,
rams bred by the Col-
laroy Company, near
Merriwa, were pur-
chased, and this
strain is used at the
present time.
About 16,000
sheep are shorn an-
nually at Tuggra-
nong. The wool is
sold in Sydney, and
THE WOOLSHED AND YARDS.
last year (1909) as high as I4Jd. per lb. was paid for it at auction. The lambing takes
place about September, and the percentage last year panned out at about 81. The blowfly
has given great trouble at different times, but Mr. Cunningham has found careful crutch-
ing to be one of the best means of mitigating the attacks. As a rule, Mr. Cunningham
dips straight off the shears, except, of course, the ewes and lambs, which are left for
about three weeks or a month. The sheep dip at Tuggranong is built of brick and cement,
and is on the long-swim principle, being 60 ft. in length. Very little cultivation is done,
and very little artificial feed is grown. The stock almost entirely subsist on the natural
grasses of the district.
In addition to Tuggranong, Mr. Cunningham owns Tidbanbilla and Congwarra, the
properties of the late Mr. Andrew Cunningham, the former bought some thirty-five years
ago. They are situated on the west bank of the Murrumbidgee, and comprise about
10,000 acres secured land, independent of leasehold. These estates include some very
rough country, and are principally used for grazing sheep. They are all fenced with dog
and rabbit-proof netting, and have about five miles’ frontage to the Murrumbidgee River,
BACK VIEW OF THE TUGGRANONG WOOLSHED.
I o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER, WITH MT. TENANT IN THE DISTANCE.
II
The Tuggranong Estate, New South Wales.


which separates trie
estates.
Mr. James Cun-
ningham is the young-
est son of the late Mr.
Andrew Cunningham,
who came to Australia
in 1845. He was born
at Canyon, now owned
by his brother, Mr. A.
J. Cunningham, in
1851, and was educat-
ed at Macquarie Fields,
now King’s School.
After completing his
A PEDIGREE DRAUGHT MARE
education he returned to his home, and entered actively into pastoral life. He has very
considerably improved what properties he has held. He has always bred the best stock, as
a visit to fuggranong will show. He is keenly interested in local affairs, and has taken a
prominent part in public matters. He was one of the first temporary shire councillors, and
he is now chairman of the Queanbeyan Stock and Pastures Board. He held office as the
president of the Queanbeyan Agricultural and Pastoral Association for a number of years,
and is on the commit-
tee of the Queanbeyan
Hospital. In 1889 he
married Mary Emily,
the eldest daughter of
Mr. Edward Twynam,
late Surveyor-in-Chief
of the Survey Depart-
ment. He has a family
of five daughters and
three sons.
THE RABBIT PACK
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Yarralumla Etate.
The Property of Mr.F. Campbell.
THE fact that the Federal capital site is in the vicinity of Queanbeyan adds no little
interest to an already interesting district. Further, it makes it almost necessary
to, as far as possible, put on record the earlier history of the district, and des-
cribe it as it is at the present time. If the Federal authorities go ahead with the building of
the capital, it is reasonable to suppose that what is now peaceful grazing country will even-
tually be converted into a busy city. Ihe fine sheep and cattle which now graze on the well-
known and well-improved runs will have to give place to the requirements of a city, and
Queanbeyan as a pastoral district will become a memory of by-gone days. All this seems
a pity, but for the present at least the district remains undisturbed, and every year it
sends its quota of wool and stock to the markets of the world.
MOB OF DEMLIQUIN STUD PARK RAMS USED IN VARRALUMI.A FLOCK.
One of the stations most likely to be affected by the construction of the Federal capi-
tal is Yarralumla, the property of Mr. Frederick Campbell. It is situated about ten miles
west of Queanbeyan, between the Queanbeyan and Murrumbidgee Rivers. It comprises
about 39,000 acres, and adjoins the area selected as the capital site. Yarralumla was ori-
ginally taken up as a summer residence by the late Mr. Francis Mowatt, who was in the
Civil Service. He kept a fine pack of foxhounds on the property, and spent many a day in
giving chase to the dingo. At this time the property was not as big as it is now, and
Mr. Mowatt held it until the early thirties, when he sold it to Messrs. Murray and Walker
i


(Sir Terence Murray, who died Speaker of the
Legislative Council, and Mr. Thomas Walker,
the celebrated philanthropist, and founder of
the Walker Hospital, Sydney). They held it
until 1858, when it passed into the hands of
the late Mr. Augustus Gibbs, who made a
specialty of breeding Romney Marsh sheep.
In 1881 Mr. Campbell purchased the
estate, and it then comprised 26,000 acres.
From time to time he added to it, chiefly by
the purchase of an adjoining property of 3000
acres from the late Captain Cliffe. Mr. Camp-
bell’s father left him 8000 acres on the oppo-
site side of the Queanbeyan River, most of
which was purchased from the late Captain
Sturt, the celebrated explorer. The Govern-
ment gave Captain Sturt 5000 acres of land
MR. F. CAMPBELL.
as a reward for his achievements, and he chose his site on what is now part of Yarralumla.
The late Hon. Charles Campbell, M.L.C., purchased this 5000 acres, and added 3000 acres
to it, and by leaving it to the present owner of Yarralumla it became part of the estate.
The country is of a picturesque undulating nature, once heavily timbered. There was
only one small plain upon it, but nearly all the timber has been ringbarked, and the estate
is now good open grazing country, with many small patches of agricultural land. The tim-
ber is chiefly blue gum,
yellow box, stringy
bark, and apple tree,
with forest oak on the
hill tops.
The estate is mag-
nificently served with
water. Altogether
there are fifty miles of
water frontage, and,
where necessary, tanks
and dams have been
constructed. Once
upon a time, in the wet
seasons, parts of this
THE. PORCH.
. he Pa.Etos-a.l .•‘iorr.es or Ausivai/a*


GENERAL VIEW OF HOMESTEAD AND BUILDINGS.
The Yarra/umla Estate, New South Wales,


A CORNER OF THE HOUSE.
country became flukey, but Mr. Campbell completely eradicated this by making 500 miles
of drains.
The original homestead, which was about sixty years old, was demolished about eight
years ago, and in
1891 Mr. Campbell
built the present
roomy home. It con-
tains about forty
rooms, and from
the roof a glori-
ous view of the sur-
rounding country is
obtained. Acety-
lene gas has been
laid on throughout,
and a sewerage sys-
tem has been install-
ed. The water for
AT THE FRONT GATES.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE JUNCTION OF THE MURRUMBIDGEE AND QUEANBEYAN RIVERS.
5
The Yarralumla Estate, New South Wales .


domestic purposes is supplied by conducting ram water run from the roof into underground
tanks. An inexhaustible supply is also obtained from the Queanbeyan River. The water
is run through a bed of sand, then through a pipe service into tanks, from which it is
raised by means of a windmill. The garden is well laid out with both flowers and vege-
tables, and the excellent water supply enables it to be kept 111 first-class order. The stables
are attractively designed, and are built of brick.
The improvements on Yarralumla have been made in no half-hearted way. Mr. Camp-
bell has almost enclosed the estate with rabbit-proof netting, and his fences generally are
well erected and of a substantial character. The property is subdivided into about sixty-six
paddocks.
THE STABLES.
The shearing shed is one of the most re:ent improvements. It was built in 1904, and
has accommodation sufficient to shelter 5000 sheep at shearing time. The building is de-
signed on most modern principles, and so that time and labour are saved during the busiest
time of the year. The wide openings facilitate working the sheep, and enable the shed to
be filled in the shortest space of time. There are twenty stands of Wolseley shearing
machines, and close to the shed is a well-constructed sheep dip. There is an underground
tank, 30 ft. x 20 ft. and 6 ft. in depth, which catches all the ram water which falls on the roof
of the shed.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE DAIRY BUILDINGS.
7
The Yarralumla Estate, New South Wales.


THE WOOLSHEP.
Mr. Campbell shears about 25,000 sheep, though he has had as many as 40,000 run-
ning upon the estate. The reduction in number is to a very large extent due to the rabbit
pest, which seriously affects the carrying capacity. The flock was originally founded on
ewes purchased from the beautiful fine-woolled flock owned by the late Thomas Shaw, of
Woonwyrite, Victoria. Collaroy rams were subsequently introduced, and later on Boonoke
and Wanganella rams. All the time the flock has been improving, and the Yarralumla clip
is among the most valuable in the State. The lambing takes place in September, and about
82 per cent, is the usual number marked. In addition to the sheep, there are about 300
cattle of mixed type on the estate. Some years ago Mr. Campbell went in for a pure herd
of Jerseys, but these have been disposed of.
A few horses are bred for station use, but Mr. Campbell does not find it pay to breed
them for the open market.
The pastures comprise native varieties of grasses, and though artificial grasses have
been tried, the results have not been successful.
‘Personal.
Mr. Frederick Campbell, the owner of Yarralumla, comes direct from pioneer stock,
as his grandfather, the late Robert Campbell, was one of the first settlers in the district.
Mr Campbell is the only surviving son of the late Hon. Charles Campbell, and was born
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW ON YARRALUMLA.
THE FEDERAL CAPITAL SITE IS AT THE FOOT OF THE DISTANT HILL
9
The Yarralumla Estate, New South Wales.


at Duntroon in 1846, about eight miles from Yarralumla. Duntroon belonged to his
grandfather, who was a merchant in Calcutta. He came to Australia in 1799 to inquire
about a ship that was lost in Bass Strait, and he liked Sydney so well that he decided to
remain. He became known as “Merchant Campbell,’’ and afterwards owned Campbell s
Wharf, Sydney, and subsequently possessed Duntroon. In the early years of the last cen-
tury the settlement at Sydney was suffering a severe drought, and as the Governor had no
grain for the people, he wanted ships to send to India for food supplies. Ihe only two in
Port Jackson suitable for such a purpose were two vessels Mr. Robert Campbell had in the
harbour loaded with seal skins. The authorities commandeered these ships, and sent them
“SENTRY BOX” ON SUMMIT OF HILL.
CURIOUS ROCK FORMATION ON THE PROPERTY, SHOWING FEDERAL CAPITAL SITE IN THE DISTANCE.
away for grain, and the only compensation Mr. Campbell got was two blocks of land, 5000
acres and 4000 acres respectively, and about 7000 ewes. It is a curiously interesting coin-
cidence that Mr. Campbell eventually selected land which was destined to become the site
for the capital of Federated Australia. An interesting story is told in regard to the settling
ol Duntroon. “Merchant” Campbell had in his employ an old trooper named Ainslie, who
had seen service with the Scots Greys, and who was seriously wounded by the French at
Waterloo. He was deputed by Mr. Campbell to take charge of the ewes which were
wanted to run on the grant of land, which was then not selected. He got the ewes in the
early twenties at Bathurst, and finding the country west of that town occupied, he came
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


south towards Goulburn and Yass. Still finding the country occupied, he went further
south, and from the blacks he heard of suitable country in what is now the Queanbeyan
district. He was led by a black gin to Duntroon Plains, and he chose the spot where the
Duntroon house now stands because it had been the blacks’ camp. The property was called
Duntroon after the family s place in Argyleshire, Scotland. Ainslie managed the property
foi several years, and grew wheat for the settlement in Sydney. He returned to the old
country somewhere in the thirties.
When eight years of age, Mr. Campbell was taken by his parents to England in the ship
“Anglesea,” and educated at the Cholmeley School, Highgate, London, where he was a
classfellow of the late Marcus Clarke, the author.
In 1864 he returned to Sydney, and after being a year at the University there, went
foi colonial experience to the late Godfrey Mackinnon, of North Goonambil, Urana, one of
the best judges of stock in Australia.
In 1868 he took his first management of sheep on Tryphena Downs, on the McKenzie
River, west or Rockhampton, Queensland. After selling this for his employers, he had
three years’ experience of mercantile life in Sydney in the office of Campbell and Co., dur-
ing which he was frequently buying wool for them. In 1874 he borrowed the capital to pur-
chase Bundabarena, a cattle station on the Barwon, with some 6000 head of cattle, and was
the first man on that side of the river to wire-fence a cattle run.
On the sale of this station in 1877, he took the management of Duntroon for his uncle,
THE RIVER NEAR THE HOUSE.
I I
The Yarralumla Estate, /Vew South Wales.


THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER.
the late George Campbell, meanwhile buying, in 1881, the estate of Yarralumla, which he
enlarged, and has never ceased improving, so that, including some 8000 acres at Belconon
(which was devised to him by his father), he has put together 39,000 acres of freehold be-
tween the Murrumbidgee and Gininderra Creek. In sheepbreeding his object has always
been to breed by selection the most valuable Merino fleece his country could produce, and
to get this he has successfully used the Boonoke and Wanganella blood.
For many years he took his seat on the Pastures Protection Board of Queanbeyan an-'
has taken an interest in all movements for the advance of the district, having been president
of the Farmers’ and Settlers’ Association there, as well as of the local hospital at the pre-
sent time. He sat on the Walgett bench in 1875, and still takes an interest in the Quean-
beyan licensing bench, whilst he has been a member of the various synods for the Diocese ol
Goulburn since 1879.
The two most successful efforts of the past he considers were his part in the formation
of the Wallaroo Football Club in Sydney in 1870, and the introduction (in conjunction with
Mr. Gale) of trout from Ballarat to Monaro and his own district.
He has been twice married, and now has three sons and two daughters living, whilst
Mrs. Campbell takes much interest in local affairs and the Queanbeyan Branch of the
Women’s Liberal League of N.S.W., of which she has been president for many years.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Springfield,
The Property of Mr. A. Lucian Faithful l
SPRINGFIELD, situated 12 miles from Goulburn and 2J miles from the railway line to
Cooma, is well known as being the home of one of the State’s leading stud Merino
flocks. The property originally belonged to the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull, and
on his death in 1896 it came into the possession of his son, Mr. A. Lucian Faithfull, the
present owner.
The estate now comprises some 15,000 acres of good sound sheep country, partly
timbered and partly open plain. The area in 1827, when the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull
first settled at Springfield, was 640 acres, which was increased to 21,000 at his death ;
this has since been reduced to 15,000 acres, some three miles frontage to the railway
having been sold. The estate is more suitable for grazing than cultivation, there being
no depth of soil. It is timbered with white gum and stringy bark, and watered by the
Mulwarree Ponds and Quialigo Creek, whidi run through the property. There is a pump-
PART OF STUD HEREFORD HERD.
I


ing plant on the Mulwarree, and 10,000 gallons
can be raised to elevated tanks daily, and
used, if required, for domestic, garden, and
irrigation purposes.
The estate is divided into about eighty pad-
docks, and nearly all the boundaries are wire
netted. Rabbit suppression is carried out
with vigour and thoroughness, digging out and
netting alone being successful. Particular
interest is attached to the woolshed, which is
one of the oldest in the State. It was built
by the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull over sixty
years ago. Being constructed entirely of
stone it has stood the wear of years remark-
ably well, and is fitted (since 1894) with ten
stands of Wolseley shearing machines. The
edifice has therefore witnessed the whole
transition from primitive methods of shearing
to those of the present time.
THE LATE MR. WILLIAM PITT FAITHFULL.
The original homestead is still intact, notwithstanding the fact that it dates from as
far back as 1840. It was built by Mr. Faithfull’s father, and was left by will to the un-
married daughters. It is now occupied by Miss Faithfull, Miss C. M. Faithfull at present
residing in England. The new homestead
was built by the present owner about fourteen
years ago, and it is situated about 500 yards
from the old home. It is a roomy, comfort-
able cottage built of bluestone obtained on
the estate, and faced with white freestone,
the joints being all tuck-pointed. The cot-
tage is surrounded by a neatly-kept lawn laid
down with Kentucky blue grass, with small
flower beds, nicely designed, cut out in the
grass.
ftbe Stub jfloch.
Though Springfield is looked upon as one
of the lovely homes of New South Wales, it
owes its chief prominence to the high-class
stud flock kept there. As with other features
of the estate the flock has a history. The late
Mr. W. P. Faithfull settled at Springfield
MR.A. LUCIAN FAITHFULL.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SPRINGFIELD HOUSE.
3
Springfield, New South Wales.


SIDE VIEW OF SPRINGFIELD HOUSE.
in 1827, and in 1838 he purchased ten rams from Sir Wm. Macarthur’s Camden Park flock,
which was directly descended from the first sheep imported into Australia by Captain
Macarthur in 1797. These sheep came from the Cape, and subsequently, in 180-1,
Captain Macarthur purchased several Merino ewes and rams at George HP’s sale at Kew.
These two lots of sheep formed the famous Camden flock, and from it the Springfield
stud originated. The late Mr. W. P. Faithfull improved the sheep by purchasing rams
from the most noted studs of that time, namely, those owned by N. P. Bayly. of Havilah ;
Edward Cox, of Rawdon; George Cox, of Burrendulla ; and James Riley, of Raby.
In the year 1871 Mr. A. Lucian Faithfull took the management of the Springfield flocks.
He had previously been with Mr. Richard Cox (then considered one of the best judges of
Merino sheep in the colony), and under his tuition he gained an insight into the breeding of
Merino stud sheep.
When Mr. Faithful! took the management of the stud he had two objects in view, viz.,
first, to breed a pure stud flock of the highest class of Merino sheep ; second, to breed a pure
stud flock of a stronger, heavier-woolled type of Merino.
Therefore he first began by selecting sixty-three ewes (out of a flock of 4500 then at
Springfield) with the highest class of wool, and eighty-two of a stronger and heavier-
woolled class. These two lots have ever since been kept separate and bred up to the two
distinct characters of wool.
4
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia.


MR. A. L.. FAITHFULL’S COTTAGE.
5
Springfield, New South Wales.


SOME OF THE STUD EWES AT SPRINGFIELD.
These are all rearing lambs, the progeny of Jubilee 2nd.
In 1872 the sixty-three high-class stud ewes were mated with a two-year-old ram, No.
43, bred by the late Hon. E. King Cox. This ram was purchased as a hogget with nineteen
others from Rawdon in 1870, and he turned out a splendid sire. On subsequent inquiry,
Mr. Faithfull was informed by Mr. Cox that he was sired by a Prince Lichnowski ram (or one
of his sons), imported by the late Hon. E. King Cox from Prussian Silesia.
The ewes by No. 43 were mated to a Lue ram, purchased from James Riley and in
1875 to ram No. 01, bred by E. S. Antill. No. 01 was sired by a David Taylor ram, pur-
chased by Mr. Antill at the sales in Sydney for dam of No. 01 being a pure Bayly or
Cox ewe. This ram was used for two seasons very successfully, being replaced in 1878
by No. 3 Viscount, bred by the late Hon. James Gibson, Bellevue, lasmania. Viscount’s
stock were large prize-takers, twenty-eight first prizes and seven second prizes having been
awarded to them, Viscount himself taking champion prize two years in succession at Yass.
In 1877 a further addition to the extra stud, flock was made by the purchase of twenty
stud ewes bred by Mr. David Taylor, of St. Johnston, Tasmania. These ewes were sold
by auction in Melbourne, and purchased by Mr. Faithfull for twelve guineas each, at that
time considered a high price.
The same year twenty stud rams were
purchased, eleven from the late James
Gibson, two from W. Gibson and Son,
Scone ; three from the late W. H. Gibson,
and four from .the late H. Gatenby. Of
these, one ram, Viscount, bred by James
Gibson, and one ram, Noble, bred by
Messrs. W. Gibson and Son, Scone, were
used in the first extra stud ewes. The
rest of the rams, with the exception of
three which were sold, were used in the
second stud flock. Noble took first prize
JUBILEE EWE, MAY QUEEN, 3 YEARS
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


FIELD MARSHALL, JUN.. 2 YEARS.
Bred By Mr. A. L. Faithfull, at Springfield, and Purchased By Messrs. Finley and Son, Bundella, Quirndi, N.S.W., for 200 guineas.
JUBILEE, JUN., 3 YEARS.
sir, Jbilee and. Bred at Springfield.
Jubilee 2nd was bred by the late. Hon.Jas. Gibson, Bellevue,Tasmania. and Puchased by Mr.A.L.Faithfull for 425 guineas
Springfield, New South Wales.


HARNESS ROOM,COACH HOUSE, STABLES AND WOOLSHED.
m Sydney in 1878. The same year a grand ram named the Duke of Richmond was
purchased. This ram was used in Messrs. W. Gibson and Son’s stud, and is fully
described in Mr. G. A. Brown’s book on sheepbreeding, page 266, as follows : —“ The Duke
of Richmond, bred by Mr. Toosey, which was placed second for the Champion Cup (in
Tasmania). Mr. Archer bought this ram and resold him to Messrs. W. Gibson and Son
for £l5O and the right to send 150 ewes to him.
The judges commended this ram for his great length of staple, quality and quantity
of wool. From 1879 to 1904 rams bred by W. Gibson and Son, Scone, were used in the
extra stud flock, with the exception of the Duke of Richmond.
In 1881 a magnificent stud ram, Grand Prince, was imported direct from Messrs. W.
Gibson & Son, Scone. This ram was subsequently sold for 490 guineas. Mr. Faithfull so
highly valued this ram as a sire that he offered Mr. Cooper, the purchaser, £lOO for the use
of him for two months. This offer being accepted, this splendid ram was again used in the
stud in 1883.
In 1883 Mr. Faithfull made a still further addition to the stud by the purchase from
Messrs. W. Gibson & Son of Royal Duke 3rd for 325 guineas, and Prince Victor for 235
guineas.
The eighty-two strong-woolled ewes were mated in 1872 to No. 32, also bred by the late
Hon. E. King Cox. No. 32 was of a stronger type of wool than No. 43, although of the
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


same breeding. In 1874, a son of No. 32 was used. In 1877 a David Taylor ram, No. 5,
Irojan was used. This ram was purchased in April, 1877, at Messrs. Mort & Co.’s sales
at Petersham, and was the largest-framed and most heavily-woolled ram sent from Tas-
mania that year, his fleece weighing 16$ lbs., 16$, and 17$ lbs. in three successive years,
being twelve months’ growth, grassfed only, and also heavily used in the stud. In 1879,
and sons °f frojan continued to be used in strong-woolled stud; 1881
to 1889 sons of Grand Prince and m 1885 sons of Royal Duke and Grand Prince
were used in both strong and fine-woolled stud flocks with the greatest success.
In 1888 an American ram named San Joachim, bred by F. Bullard, Yolo County, Cali-
fornia, was tried as an experiment in the stud flock. This ram’s stock turned out exceed-
ingly well, and his progeny were used in the first strong-woolled stud flock, the finer-wool-
led stud flock bem S ke Pt the Tasmanian strain of blood. San Joachim, unlike some Ame-
rican rams, carried a heavy fleece of long, bright, lustrous wool, perfectly free from hair
and kemp. He had absolutely no body wrinkles, and his fleece weighed 264 lbs. twelve
months’ growth, unhoused. Mr. Faithfull has spared no expense in keeping his stud flock
up to the standard he requires or has fixed upon. The extra stud flock of ewes from
which he breeds rams now numbers 1600. He has always made it a rule to never send a
ram away or to sell one he would not use with Ins own flock. In 1904 he purchased the ram
INTERIOR OF WOOLSHED.
9
Springfield, New South Wales.


Promoter, bred by Mr. John Taylor, of Winton, Tasmania. This ram is a full brother to
Pioneer, the famous Winton ram that sold for 900 guineas. Also the same year Mr. Faith
full purchased for 425 guineas at Sydney sales the celebrated champion ram Jubilee 2nd,
which ram won the championship two years successively, viz., 1903 and 1904. Jubilee 2nd
was bred by the late Hon. James Gibson, Bellevue, Tasmania. Promoter was used in the
strong-woolled stud flock, and his stock have turned out very well. Jubilee 2nd is a great
sire, and has transmitted his good qualities in a marked degree, the chief characteristics
being good length of staple, brightness of wool, and extreme softness, with fine style of
PART OF THE GARDEN LAID OUT IN IRRIGATION PLOTS.
carnage. The sires now in use (1909) are Jubilee Jun., Jubilee -2nd, Promoter, Reserve,
General, Major, Commodore, Promoter 2nd, Record. Jubilee 2nd, although nine years old,
is looking well, and this year (1909) cut 32 lbs. of wool under twelve months’ growth, and
also sired ninety-one lambs.
Mr. Faithfull has steadily improved the flock, and his sheep are now noted for their
handy, strong constitutions and high cutting value per fleece. The rams from Springfield
have gone to all parts of the State and Queensland, where they have always done well. A
bad season is always a good test for constitution, and in 1899, one of the most severe
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


droughts ever experienced, the Springfield flock, numbering 8142 sheep, cut an average of
9 lbs. 14J ozs., realising 11s. IJd. per head. In 1901 the drought, if anything, was more se-
vere, and 9435 sheep, of which 5289 were breeding ewes, yielded an average of 11 lbs.
of greasy wool. At the time of writing (1909) Mr. Faithfull is shearing about 9000 sheep—
-6000 annually—though as many as 16,000 have been shorn in a good season. He goes in for
the bold type of sheep with good heavy necks free from body wrinkles. Stud rams of this
type cut to 28 lbs. of wool for twelve months’ growth, and stud ewes of similar type to 18
lbs. of wool, whole flocks of three-year-old wethers averaging 14 lbs. 9 ozs. as shorn by
the purchaser.
Mr. Faithfull has a fine herd of Hereford cattle at Springfield. It was founded some
thirty years back with cows and bulls from Mr. Frank Reynolds’ Tocal stud. With the
exception of the introduction of six heifers and a bull, the stud has been built up from the
original purchase. Tocal bulls have
been added from time to time,
and the herd now comprises about
300 females. Mr. Faithfull also
takes a keen interest in horses. He
breeds a good type of actize
draught, using the Clydesdale stal-
lion Highlander, bred by Mr. George
Faithfull, Inveralochy. Some years
ago Ajax, imported by Mr. Frank
Hill, was used in the stud, and later
on Burlington, bred by Mr. E. R.
Deane. Ariel, bred bv Mr. Faith-
full, is now used, but the trotting
stud, owing to selling some of the
land, has been greatly reduced, and
is now limited to three special mares
and their progeny.
CLYDSDALE STALLION HIGHLANDER.
Bred by Mr. A. L. Faithfull.
Personal.
Mr. Augustus Lucian Faithfull is the youngest son of the late William Pitt Faithfull. He
was born at Springfield in 1855, and received his education zt the Sydney Grammar School.
On leaving school he went to Mr. Richard Cox at Rawdon, Mudgee, and from him gained
his first experience in stud sheepbreeding. Mr. Cox was one of the leading sheepbreeders
at that time. In 1871 Mr. Faithfull returned to Springfield and took over the management of
the stud flock. In 1896, about the time of his father’s death, he took over the estate on
his own account. In 1895 he married Ethel, the daughter of tne late R. C. Joplin, manager
of the Commercial Bank at Goulburn, and there are three daughters by the marriage. Mr.
11
Springfield, New South Wales.


WATERHOLE WHERE IRRIGATION PLANT IS FIXED.
Faithfull takes a wide interest in pastoral matters generally and he has done, and is still
doing, much to advance the standard of the pure Merino sheep of Australia. This is his
particular hobby, and judging by the annual sales of 500 to 600 rams, which are often
booked ahead by buyers, in order to definitely secure them, it must be a paying hobby as
well as a benefit to the State in improving the breed of Merino sheep.
328
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Inveralochy Estate.
The Home of Mr. George E. Faithfull.
INVERALOCHY is a property of 7500 acres, situated about 15 miles south of Goulburn, and
within miles of the Cooma railway line. It originally comprised 13,000 acres, and,
as far as can be ascertained, the first owner was a Mr. J. Macfarlane, who acquired it
eighty years ago, and did a great deal of work on the property. The orchard is situated on a
black soil flat, and Mr. Macfarlane carted soil from an adjoining flat, and raised the or-
chard in some places as much as 2 ft. Subsequently the property was leased for many years
to a man named Cutmore, who for many years farmed a considerable area of the land.
STUD SHROPSHIRES.
The estate is more suited to grazing than agriculture, and Cutmore often said that farming
operations did not pay him, but he liked the work, and made a hobby of it. In 1875 Mr.
Macfarlane sold the property to Mr. Walter Douglas, and it fell into the hands of Dr. R.
L. Faithfull, of Sydney, some years later. In 1902 he leased it to his brother, Mr. George
E. Faithfull, the present occupier.


DISTANT VIEW OF FARM HOUSES.
THE STAHI.ES, COACH HOUSE, AND GARAGE
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DRIVE UP THE LAWN TO THE HOUSE.
Inveralochy may be described as fairly good grazing country. It consists of black
sod flats, intersected by stony ridges, and it is lightly timbered with stringy bark, pepper-
mint, gum, and messmate. All the more useful timbers were destroyed by the early owners
of the estate.
The average rainfall on the station for the last eight years has been 19.01 in., which
is too low an average for successful agricultural operations. Inveralochy is well watered
by the Mulwaree Ponds, which run right through the estate, and there are also the Covan
and Oak Hill Creeks.
Owing to the undulating nature of Inveralochy, rabbit proof fencing has been a big ques-
tion. There are so many gullies liable to fill with rushing water during floods, that special
precautions have to be taken. The general style of fencing is two rails and three wires, and it
costs from £7O to £BO per mile. All the boundary fences are wire-netted, and as they cross
numerous gullies and small tributaries, a large number of gates, which will open and let rub-
bish through, are required. Mr. Faithfull has as many as twenty-eight of these gates in
one place on a creek. He has found that the best way to construct them is to have double
gates, each 8 ft. in length, made to close over a 16-ft. sleeper. They are held there with
a hook of wire, which bends under a little pressure, and allows both gates to swing open
and let the rubbish through. Where there is not a great rush of water, Mr. Faithfull has
3
The Inveralochy Estate, New South Wales.


INVERALOCHY.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


a number of self-shutting gates. He
has also invented a style of fencing
for flood country which falls bodily
when the flood comes along.
Inveralochy is subdivided into
twelve stock paddocks, and there
are several cultivation paddocks in
addition. Mr. Faithfull puts in
about 30 acres of rape, which he
finds pays very well, and he also
grows considerable quantities of
hay and grain.
A large sum of money has been
PRINCE AND HUS OWNER, MR. G. E. FAITHFULL.
spent on Inveralochy in improvements. The necessary ringbarking costs about a shilling
an acre, and general clearing about 2s. (id., that is, for burning off timber and trees, and
not grubbing stumps. The water supply round the homestead has been well arranged.
A direct-action Tangye pump raises the water from the Mulwaree into six (300-gallon tanks,
from which it is distributed for garden and domestic requirements.
The shearing shed is a large brick building, fitted with eight Wolseley shearing ma-
chines driven by ash h.p. Hornsby oil engine. The sheep dip is a solid piece of work, being
constructed of brick and cement, and backed up with 8 in. of lime concrete. It is 40 ft.
long, and gives every satisfaction. The stable is a brick gable building, 90 ft. by 36 ft.,
and it contains eleven stalls, one loose box, five rooms, and three feed lofts.
Mr. Faithfull runs
about 4000 sheep on In-
veralochy, and also a
few cattle and horses.
The Merino ewes are
bred from cast for age
ewes bred by his bro-
ther at Springfield, and
Mr. Faithfull also uses
Springfield rams. The
Inveralochy sheep cut
up to 13 h lbs.
In addition to the
Merinos Mr. Faithfull
has a flock of 300 pure
AN ANCIENT PINE TREE PROBABLY 80 YEAR'S OLD.
5
The Inveralochy Estate, New South Wales .


HOUSE AND CORNER OF GARDEN.
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOUSE, GARDEN, STABLES, AND MOTOR GARAGE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE FARM HOUSE AND SHEARING SHED.
Shropshires, bred from sheep purchased from Mr. C. W. Reid, of Balruddery, New Zea-
land. He also keeps an extra stud of Shropshires bred from sheep purchased from the
famous Mt. Vernon stud, Tasmania, owned by Mr. Andrew E. Mansell. The fleeces of all
sheep on Inveralochy, including both Merinos and Shropshires, averaged 10 lbs. 2 ozs. last
year (1009). The lambing percentage among the Merinos has been 75 per cent., and 115
per cent, among the Shropshires. Mr. Faithfull pursues a system of crossbreeding by put-
ting about 1200 Merino ewes to Shropshire rams each year. As a result he gets good lambs,
which are usually sold before the end of the year. He does not keep the Shropshire cross
wethers; they are sold as lambs or hoggets. It is interesting to note that while the dead
weights of Merinos at Inveralochy range about 65 lbs., the Shropshire ewes range about
90 lbs.
Mr. Faithfull does not run many cattle ; he just has a few dairying types, which are
kept for milking purposes only. As regards horses, like his brother at Springfield, Mr.
Faithfull delights in having a few good equines round him. He has about six or seven fine
draught mares which he mates with Highlander, the Clydesdale stallion at Springfield. He
also has three thoroughbred mares, which he puts to various stallions. He breeds from
them every second year, having proved that he gets far better stock by so doing.
7
The Inveralochy Estate, New South Wales.


THE MULWAARE E CREEK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF DIVIDING RANGE.
INVERALOCHY BRIDGE OVER MULWAREE CREEK.
q
The Inverci/ochy Estate, New South Wales.


A SPLENDID TEAMA
TO
77ie Pastoral Homes of Australia .


The Inveralochy homestead is a big brick
building, cemented over, containing fourteen
rooms and offices. It is built on an elevation
which commands a fine outlook of the sur-
rounding country, and it is surrounded and
approached by tall picturesque pine trees. It
is fitted with all the conveniences of a modern
city mansion, and is looked upon as one of
the show places of the district.
personal*
Mr. George Ernest Faithfull was born at
Springfield, being the second son of the late
Mr. William Pitt Faithfull, one of the pioneers
of the district. He was educated at King’s
MR. GEORGE ERNEST FAITHFULL
School, Parramatta, and went from there to Sydney University. There he took his B.A.
degree, and later on his M.A., and was then articled to the late Mr. E. 0. Monarty, En-
gineer-in-Chief for Harbours and Rivers. Mr. Faithfull served his time as civil engineer.
Later on he passed as a licensed surveyor, and practised on his own account.
During this period he was secretary and surveyor to the Sydney Water Commission,
and later on secretary and surveyor to the Hunter River Commission. In 1877, however,
MARES AND FOLS AT INVERALICHY.
11
The Invera/ochy Estate, New South Wales.


ENGINE MOUSE ON MULWAREE CREEK.
he rented Brewarranna Station, comprising 30,000 acres, near Narrandera, from his father,
who before his death gave him the property outright. In 1900 Mr. Faithfull sold Brewar-
ranna and took up his residence in Sydney until 1902, when he rented Inveralochy from his
brother. Mr. Faithfull has seen great progress in the districts with which he has been so
long connected; indeed, he has seen stirring times in the old days. During 1865 he had
an engagement with the notorious bushrangers, Ben Hall, Gilbert, and Dunn. For his con-
nection in this affair the Government presented him with a gold medal. He has always
been a keen follower of sport, and he is one of the most valued supporters of the Go-al-
burn Racing Club. In addition he takes a general interest in the advancement of the
Goulburn district, and renders practical assistance wherever he can, and the Church of
England in that city has not a more staunch supporter than Mr. G. E. Faithfull, of Inver-
alochy.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Belmont Park Estate.
The Property of Captain philip Charley.
There are few homes in New South Wales more beautiful than Belmont
Park, Captain Philip Charley’s estate near Richmond, and there are few stud
stock establishments more widely known. The property comprises some 2500
acres, purchased by the present owner in 1890. It was then unstocked, and Captain
Charley has since established one of the most famous horse and cattle studs by valuable
importations from England. In conjunction with Belmont Park Captain Charley works
Clarendon Park, 4 miles away, comprising 620 acres of river flat subdivided for cultivation,
THE LODGE GATES.
and Mount Tomah, in the Blue Mountains, which is used for developing young stock. He
has another property of 3000 acres at Port Macquarie, a historic place owned by the late
Major Innes. This estate is chiefly used for carrying the surplus stock from the head
station. He is also the owner of the well-known Greystanes Estate, comprising 454 acres
near Parramatta.
Belmont Park lies in a district saturated with the early history of New South Wales.
i


BELMONT PARK HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE DRAWING ROOM.
A CORNER OF THE DRIVE.
The Belmont Park Estate, New South Wales,


IN FRONT OF THE HOUSE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


It is five miles out of
Richmond, a quiet
little town on the
Hawkesbury River,
and 38 miles from Syd-
ney. The estate is
beautifully situated on
the banks of the river.
The Blue Mountains
for many years proved
an impenetrable bar-
rier to the spread of
early settlement,
which had to wait till
Lawson, Blaxland, and
BELL BOY, 3 YEAR OLD HACKNEY STALLION.
Wentworth discovered their famous road across. Then a pioneer called Archie Bell dis-
covered a rood stock route through the mountains, and it is known as Bell’s-road to the
present day. It was Archie Bell’s father, Lieutenant Bell, who came out with the 102nd
regiment in 1803, who first took up the land now owned by Captain Charley, and he called
it Belmont. It therefore figures largely in the past history of the State, and in the hands
of its present owner it will play a prominent part in its future. Space does not permit
much reference to the
estate, because it is re-
quired for the stock.
Ghc Iboreca.
When Captain Char-
ley took up Belmont
Park he decided to re-
establish a type of
horse then fast disap-
pearing from Australia.
The strong, powerful-
quartered horse was
giving place to a finer-
boned and lighter type,
and he went in for
producing horses com-
ENGLISH HACKNEY STALLION VANITY FAIR (IMP.)
5
The Belmont Park Estate, New South Wales,


binmg size, stability,
quality, speed and action.
The breeds Captain Char-
ley selected for this pur-
pose were the English
hackney and the English
coach horse. It is now
nearly twenty years since
the Belmont stud was
formed, and the experi-
ments in crossing the
GROUP OF HACKNEYS.
hackney with other breeds have been emme icly successful. In 1902 Captain Charley
imported the hackney stallion Moncrieffe Statesman (7192 E.H.5.8.), who still does service
at the stud. He is a brown horse, standing 16.1 hands, foaled 1897, sired by Carton Duke
of Connaught (1453) from Lady Salisbury (4183). Moncrieffe Statesman possesses a very
aristocratic pedigree, and he is a magnificent animal in himself. He has great substance,
quality, and action, standing on short sound legs. His canon bone measures 8J in., and
hindquarters are exceptionally powerful and heavy. He has a short back, well sprung
ribs, deep chest, and fine sloping shoulders. He ha,s been very successful in the show-ring,
having won six first prizes and one reserve championship in English and Scottish shows, and
five firsts and four
champions at the Syd-
ney Royal, three firsts
at the Sydney Stallion
Parade, besides nume-
rous prizes at Hawkes-
bury and Bathurst
shows. Captain Char-
ley purchased this
horse at a very high
figure from Sir Robert
Mon crieff’s stud at
Brig o’Earn, near
Perthshire, Scotland.
The other hackney
stallion at Belmont
Park is Vanity Fair
(6224, E.H.5.8.). He
COACHING STALLION BRIGADIER, BRED AT BELMONT PARK
Sire freedom (imp.); dam Belladonna (imp.)
6
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


is a black-brown horse,
standing 15.2£ hands.
He was foaled in 1895,
and was by Last Fash-
ion (4343) from Lady-
bird (697), whose pedi-
gree goes back to the
famous Yorkshire sire
FrifHts Fireaway. Van-
ity Fair possesses im-
mense quality and sub-
stance, and is a great
mover and has a splen-
did temper. He was
bred by Mr. Burdett
BUGLER, 3 YEAR OLD HACKNEY STALLION.
Coutts, who did not exhibit his horses, therefore Vanity Fair has no English show record.
Since being in Australia, however, he has secured reserve champion and other important
prizes.
Captain Charley’s coaching stallion is Brigadier, bred by himself, rising ten years old.
He is a rich dark bay, with black points, and he stands 16 hands in height. He is by
Freedom (imp.) (833
Cleveland Bay Stud
Book) from Belladonna
(imp.) (602 Cleveland
Bay Stud Book). He
shows an immense
amount of substance
and quality. His body
is thick and short,
head well set on, and
his neck of fair length
and nicely arched. His
canons are short and
measure 8f in.
Brigadier has won
the following prizes :
First at Hawkesbury,
ENGLISH HACKNEY STALLION, MONCRIEFFE STATESMAN (IMP.)
7
The Belmont Park Estate , New South Wales.


1902 ; first Sydney,
1903 ; first Adelaide
against all comers for
carriage and harness,
1907 and 1908 ; first
Adelaide, Cleveland
Bay class, 1907 ; first
Mount Barker, South
Australia, against all
comers in roadster
class, 1906 ; first Lake
Albert, South Aus-
tralia, in roadster
class, 1907.
ACTON DKWSTONE (IMP.), 9524 RED Polled Herd Book.
Brigadier’s sire Freedom (imp.) has a remarkable record, having taken six firsts and
seven champions at the Royal Show, Sydney, and eleven firsts at Hawkesbury, Wagga,
Albury, Singleton, and Bathurst.
The dam of Brigadier, Belladonna (imp.), has also a great show record, which is
referred to below.
These stallions are used with very high-class mares. Captain Charley has at different
times imported several pedigree mares. Among these were Barbara (493), a Teautiful
mare with hue action. She was a great prizewinner, and was the champion two-year-old
filly at the Royal Agri-
cultural Society of
England Show in 1890
She was also champion
at the Royal Agricul-
tural, Sydney, 1894.
Another imported mare
was Beadlam Tulip,
winner of five first
prizes and a silver cup
in England and cham-
pion three-year-old filly
at the Royal Show,
England, in 1890. She
ACTON AJAX-(IMP.), 9655 Red Polled Herd Book.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


also won important
prizes after arriving in
Australia. Then there
was Belladonna, the
champion yearling of
England in 1890. She
won sixteen first prizes
in England as a year-
ling, and was also a
successful pnzetaker in
Australia. Other Eng-
lish prizewinners of
note were Semolina,
Georgiana, Queen of
Yetholme, and Aislaby
HONINGHAM ALAFE (IMP.), 9438 Red Polled Herd Book.
Lass. Mention of a few mares like the above is sufficient to indicate that Captain Charley
spared no expense in starting the Belmont stud on the very soundest foundations. He
has now got round him one of the largest studs of hackney and coaching horses in Australia,
and no better pedigrees could be obtained in the world.
Cbe IRcfc IPolleb Cattle.
Just as Captain Charley imported a breed of horses little known in Australia, so he did
in regard to cattle. Recognising the great qualities of the Red Polled breed, and their suit-
ability for general purposes in Australia, he laid the foundation of his present well-known stud
in 1891. He was the first to import Red Polled cattle into Australia. The first shipment
PEDIGREE YEARLING RED POLLED BULLS.
9
The Belmont Park Estate, New South Wales.


comprised the bull Laureate (1563), winner of first honours at the English Royal and other
important shows, and was leader in the collection which won both county champion cups.
Laureate was by the famous bull Falstaff (sold at a high price for the United States) from
Laura, a noted milk producer. One of the cows was Doris (4523), also by Falstaff from
Dolly, who came of the famous Necton Minnie strain, one noted for milk. Another cow
was Prize (5077), a most successful prizewinner, and one of the champion cup collection.
PEDIGREE RED POLLED HEIFERS.
She was by Cromwell out of Prim (3064), who represented the best Red Polled blood. One
cow of this strain gave 12,253 lbs. of milk from 4th May, 1889, to 25th May, 1890, and was
at that latter date, when exported to America, giving 157 lbs. of milk per week. Another
notable cow in the shipment was Marham 2nd, by the Royal winner lago from Marham,
a great milker. That first shipment also contained the bull Marcus (1924), by Ferdinand
(1184) from Rosalie (2495), and the heifers Cherry Bud (5334), Gas Lass (4921), Jenny
(4961), Spot (5136). There were also two heifer calves as highly bred as the females
above mentioned. In 1902 Captain Charley made a further importation of three high-class
bulls. One was Champion (T. 1) (5370), bred by Mr. Garrett Taylor. He was champion
of England, besides possessing a long string of other prizes. He was a very massive bull,
weighing over a ton in normal condition, and combined with his beef proclivities was the
fact that his dam Coronet 2nd was a phenomenally good milker. This bull, however, died
io
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia .


THE STEADING
on the way out. The second bull was Magician (N. 4) (5021), also champion of England.
His sire was the great prizetaker Majiolini (3600), who gained many prizes for the Necton
herd, and his dam Mempris gave 5918 lbs. of milk in 1891. The trio was made up by
Antic (7799), a grand two-year-old, thought a great deal of in England. He was by
Pope (4581) out of Auburn (9969). Auburn’s dam Anemone gave 9113 lbs. of milk as the
year’s record. In 1907 Captain Charley again imported bulls, this time getting four from
the studs of Sir Walter Corbet, of Acton Reynold, and the Right Hon. A. E. Fellowes, of
Honingham Hall, Norwich. The first bull in this shipment was Honingham Alake, bred by
Mr. Fellowes. He was by Advocate (9098) from Ada (13113). The second bull, Honing-
ham Archbishop was
by Davyson 262nd
(9228) out of Ardent
(14469). The third
bull was Acton Dew-
stone, bred by Sir Wal-
ter Corbet, by Albert
(7789) from Acton
Dewdrop (18977). The
fourth bull was Acton
Ajax, from the same
stud, being also by Al-
bert out of Dardy
(12175). This ship-
ment comprised some
BELMONT COTTAGE
11
The Belmont Park Estate, New South Wales.


of the best cattle that
could be bought in
England. Honingham
Alake was champion of
England in 1907, and
the other bulls were
noted pnzetakers.
The above notes are
sufficient to indicate
that the Belmont Red
Polled herd contains
some of the finest speci-
mens of the breed in the
world. The stud at
present comprises 150
CLARENDON PARK.
head, and the sires in use are Honingham Alake, Acton Dewstone, and Acton Ajax. The
Red Polled cattle possess the dual purposes of beef and milk production. Their soft, even
mellow flesh and rich colour and absence of horns, coupled with adaptability to any soil
and climate, make them particularly suitable for Australian conditions.
Personal.
Captain Philip Charley was born at Ballarat, Victoria, in 1863. After leaving school
he was for some time in a solicitor’s office, dll d then he went on to a station to gain pastoral
experience. He became one of the original seven holders of the Proprietary Company’s
shares at Broken Hill, and subsequently purchased the various properties above referred
to. Some years ago he purchased Naming Station, in South Australia, but
this has since been resumed by Government, with the exception of 700 acres round the
homestead, used for stud breeding. The pure stock Captain Charley has on his various
properties are Hackney horses, Red Polled and Hereford cattle, and Lincoln and Shropshire
sheep. He is vice-president of the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales, and
was seven years president of the Hawkesbury District Agricultural Association. He was
captain of the Hawkesbury squadron of the Australian Light Horse for nine years] and is
now officer commanding the Australian Volunteer Automobile Corps. The Stud stock at
Belmont Park and the several estates are under the superintendence of Captain Charley’s
brother, Mr. W. T. Charley.
Note.—Just as this article is going to press, news comes of the death of Moncrieffe
Statesman, the hackney stallion above mentioned. [Editor, Past. Homes of Australia.]
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Lue Estate.
The Property of the Erecutors of the late Vincent I. Dowling.
MUCH of the pastoral history of New South Wales centres round the Mudgee dis-
trict. Several of the early pioneers settled on that tract of country which now
surrounds the township of Mudgee, and in a few years the district became fam-
ed for the quality of its stock. Merino sheep were taken in hand by the early Mudgee
sheepbreeders, and the result of their skill and attention to their flocks placed the Mudgee
Merinos in the very front rank. They became famed for a magnificent quality of dense,
bright clothing wool, and the demand for them was great. In regard to the horse, the dis-
THE STABLES.
tnct has also played a prominent part in the early days, and from then to the present
time it has been the home of noted studs.
Of all the old pastoral holdings in those parts, Lue Station, the property of the
Exors. of the late Mr. V. J. Dowling, is one of the best known. The late Mr. Dowling
was one of the State’s leading authorities on pastoral matters, and he will always be re-
membered for his skill in the production of high-class Merino sheep and horses. The estate,
j


which is twenty miles from Muclgee, comprises about 21,000 acres of secured land, and it
is subdivided into seventy paddocks. As far as can be ascertained, it was originally
taken up by a Mr. William Walker, in 1823, when the district was thickly infested with
blacks. He was evidently attracted there by the same reason as the blacks, namely, it
was about the first naturally open, undulating country after leaving the mountains. It was
attractive and well watered. In those days the natives gave a great deal of trouble, and
were counted among the dangers of the pioneer’s life. However, as time went on, they
were gradually civilised, and made use of as shepherds, and now they have become quite
extinct. When Mr. Walker took up Lue there were no improvements of any kind, and
THE LATE VINCENT J. DOWLING.
sheep roamed over a radius of fifty miles, under the care of shepherds. Out-stations were
established at Green Hills, near Cassilis, Sportsman’s Hollow, near Gulgong, and ah Cooyal
and Bara, besides at places nearer home. These out-stations consisted of a shepherd’s hut
and log-yard.
Mr. Walker sold Lue to Messrs. H. Blomfield and J. Riley, who sold it to Dr. J. C. Cox,
from whom the late Mr. V. J. Dowling purchased it in 1877. He purchased Gumin Gumin
from the late Mr. Geo. Rouse, and the two properties nave ever since been worked in con-
junction by the late Mr. Dowling and his executors. Mr. Willoughby Dowling now manages
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


the property. The country on Lue, as it at
present stands, is basaltic in nature, with red
soil and granite ridges, timbered chiefly with
box. Ihe rich black soil flats, timbered with
apple tree, run right back into rough sand-
stone mountains on the boundary. There is a
good natural wader supply, the numerous run-
ning creeks and springs obviating the neces-
sity for many improvements in the way of
tanks and dams. The rainfall for the past
twenty years has averaged about 30 inches
per annum. The fencing has been well ar-
ranged and thoroughly done. There are about
fifty miles of wire netting dividing the estate
into about ten rabbit-proof paddocks, and the
rest of the fences are of six or seven wires,
posts 15 feet apart, with two battens in be-
MR.EILLOUGHBY V.DOWING.
tween. Nearly all the fencing on Lue has been renewed during the last few years. As far
as rabbits are concerned, all the netted paddocks have been cleared of the pest, by dig-
ging out the burrows and burning off.
Ringbarking Lue was a considerable un-
dertaking, and on some parts of the run the
cost was well over 10s. per acre. All the tim-
ber has now been completely killed, and the
scrub is being gradually cleared off. This is
done by treating blocks systematically and
suckering them for three years in succession.
This treatment has proved sufficient to kill the
most vigorous growth. The indigenous grasses
on Lue are hardy varieties, which provide
plenty of good feed, though not of a fattening
nature. The flats, however, produce a thick
sole of herbage, clover, and prairie grass,
which fatten stock quickly. This herbage, and
also barley grass, is increasing every year,
due, no doubt, to the sheep brought in from
Gumin Gumin Station.
3
MR.FRANK O.DOWLING.
The Lue Estate, New South Wales.


A LUCERNE PADDOCK.
Taking the various netted blocks on Lue separately, the description is as follows :
1 and 2 comprise 1500 and 1000 acres respectively, and during the last twelve years they
have been cultivated and laid down in lucerne. Blocks 3, 4 y and 10, comprising 600 acres,
500 acres, and 3500 acres respectively, are looked upon as the best sheep country. Block
5 consists of 600 acres, set apart for the stud sheep, and blocks 8 and 9, of 50 acres and
700 acres respectively, are utilised for maize growing and cultivation generally. There
are 100 acres around the homestead (block 6), and 200 acres in the horse paddock (block
7).
Over 3000 acres on Lue have at different times been cultivated, chiefly for wheatgrow-
ing on the share system. The method has been to clear and fence the land, lease for
three years, the tenant to do all work, and hand over one-third of the crop each year. The
third year he has to sow lucerne with the wheat. The average wheat yield on Lue has
been 16 bushels per acre, though up to 55 bushels has been obtained. . The above method
has paid for the expense of getting the lucerne in, and the crop has been satisfactory for
grazing purposes, but if it is required for cutting, Mr, Dowling does not recommend the
system —lucerne grows better if sown by itself.
All the improvements on Lue are of a substantial nature. The stables are built of
weatherboard and iron, and they contain five loose boxes, three inside stalls, and twelve
stalls under skilling, with passages for feeding in front. There are also three harness
rooms, feed room, and two detached roomy stallion boxes, each with a separate yard. The
coachhouse will hold twelve vehicles, and there are also machinery sheds, blacksmith’s
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
A CROP OF LUCERNE HAY.
5
The Lue Estate, New South Wales.


shop, engine room,
chaff house, and gran-
ary. The shearing shed
is a modern building
made of iron, and it
contains twelve stands
of Wolseley machines
driven by a 7 h.p. port-
able engine. The shear-
ers’ huts more than
meet the requirements
of the Act, and the
overseer is provided
VIEW FROM LUE GARDENS.
with a comfortable cottage close by. The drafting yards, in good repair, are situated on
most convenient portions of the run.
£bc Stub jfloch.
The Lue stud flock was founded in 1823 by the late Mr. James Walker with a number of
imported sheep descended from the pure Merino flock owned by King George III. With
these sheep were used rams bred by Mr. E. Riley, of Raby, whose flocks were descended
from sheep selected from the pure Merino flock bred by the Elector of Saxony. In 18o5
and 1856 Mr. Archibald Walker imported some rams from Germany, and they were the last
additions made to the stud until 1877. In that year the late Mr. V. J. Dowling took over
Lue, and he introduced a couple of rams from the Rawdon stud. The next year he pur-
chased a ram bred by the late Hon. James Gibson, of Belle Vue, Tasmania. In 1891 fresh
blood was introduced into the flock by the purchase of several rams and ewes from the old
Saxony flocks of Gadegast and Steiger. Among the notable sires bred in the Lue flock
were Waxy, who cut 21 lbs.; and Clinker, who cut 21f lbs.; and Wrinkly, who cut 21f lbs.
In 1892 two high-class ewes by Sam (by Waxy) were sent to the Havilah ram Progress,
and the progeny, two rams, subsequently proved good sires in the Lue stud. Mr. W. V.
Dowling, the present owner, is going out of the old wrinkly type of Mudgee sheep, and is
aiming at bigger frames, plainer bodies, longer staple, and good constitution. Already he
has derived advantage from the change, for the sheep cut 2 lbs. more per head, and the
wool brings a better value. This change is being done with the pure Lue blood, and with-
out outside aid. In 1908 500 stud ewes with lambs at foot, averaged 12i lbs., and the aver-
age all round of the station clip was 9J lbs. As showing what strides have been made in
the Lue stock, it is interesting to note that, when the late Mr. Dowling purchased the
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MARKS AND FOALS ON LUCERNE.
7
The Luc Estate, New South Wales,


STUD RAM “ BANNERMAN.”
PRIZE WINNING PEN OF RAMS, MUDGEE SHOW, N.S.W., 1910,
(Under 2 Year Old)
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


estate the average
weight of the station
clip was 5 lbs. 12 ozs ,
considered an unusu-
ally good weight at
that time. Lambing
takes place about Oc-
tober and November
after shearing, and Mr.
Dowling finds that time
for lambing is an effec-
tual method of guard-
ing against the fly pest,
as it obviates the ne-
cessity for crutching.
LUE STUD EWES.
Crossbreds have been tried at Lue with satisfactory results. The sheep do not fatten
readily on the native grasses, but the results on the cultivated areas are surprising, the
weights being nearly double.
£be Ibor6C6.
In the late Mr. Dowling’s time Lue became noted as a horsebreeding establishment,
and Mr. W. V. Dowling has continued to breed useful sorts. The thoroughbred stud was
originally founded by the purchase of mares from the late Mr. Andrew Town, of Rich-
mond, and the progeny were carefully culled. The sires used at various times at Lue
include such horses as Penrith, by Yattendon, from 1877 to 1883 ; Blenheim, by Yattendon,
from 1887 to 1891. Meangra, by Waxhght, in 1895, from 1899 to 1901 Lycergus, by Julian
Avenal from Richmond Belle. From 1902 to 1905 the sire was World, by Atlas from Fleck,
by Glenavon, bred by Mr. Hunter White, of Havilah.
In breeding utility horses both Arab and coaching stallions have been used, the for-
mer to impart quality and endurance, and the latter to give stoutness. The imported Arab
sires used at Lue were Farharn, in 1884; Arab Chief, from 1894 to 1898; Snow, from 1896
to 1901; and Marvel, still in use. The Norfolk trotter Confidence was used from 1885 to
1889, and Norfolk (by Confidence) in 1891. Prickwillow (by Confidence), bred by Mr. J. L.
Brown, of Caigan, was used from 1893 to 1896. In the year 1893 Mr. Dowling obtained use-
ful results from St. Patrick, an Irish hunter, and in 1906 Gilbert, an imported Oldenburg
stallion, still doing service at Lue, was purchased.
9
The Lue Estate, New South Wales.


HOMESTEAD AND BUILDINGS.
TO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The stud of draught horses now numbers about forty mares, and among the sires used
were the following Clydesdales:—First King (first prize, Hawkesbury and Sydney Shows,
1878), from 1878 to 1883; Clinker, by First King, from 1884 to 1890; Caigan (bred by Mr. J.
L. Brown), from 1895 to 1898; Heart of Oak (first prize, Wollongong), from 1899 to 1901;
and Westward Ho, bred at Mudgee, from imported stock. The last-named is still in use.
Careful records of breeding have been kept at Due during the last thirty-three years, and
the system carried out by the late Mr. Dowling and his successor has been a very profit-
able one.
About fifteen years ago there was a herd of pure Hereford cattle on Due, but at that
time the demand for that breed fell away to nothing, and Shorthorns were substituted,
and they have been bred ever since.
THE WOOL SHED.
personal.
The late Vincent J. Dowling died on sth November, 1903, after a pastoral life of great-
activity in New South Wales and Queensland. He was born in Sydney in 1835, being the
eldest son of the late Willoughby Dowling, who came to New South Wales in 1830 as asso-
ciate to his uncle, Sir James Dowling, Chief Justice of the Colony. He received most of
his education in England, and on returning to Australia he entered pastoral life in the
back country of New South Wales and Queensland. He gained his first experience at Po-
meroy, near Goulburn, and then he spent some years overlanding cattle to Victoria at the
time of the mining boom. Later he established Fort Bourke Station, on the Darling, then
he pushed out on to the Paroo, the Warrego, Cuttaburra, and Yantabulla. Subsequently
he entered into partnership with the late Hon. G. H. Cox, and formed stations on the
Bulloo and at Thargomindah.
11
The Lue Estate, New South Wales.


LAWSON’S CREEK.
In 1875 Mr. Dowling sold out and took an extended trip to England, and on his return
two years later he purchased Lue Station. His Queensland pioneering days were hard and
eventful. When at Thargomindah he was the farthest out magistrate, and it was his lot
to administer justice, register births and deaths, and solemnise marriages—there being
no ministers of religion in those parts at the time. Mr. Dowling took considerable interest
in the Royal Agricultural Society of N.S.W., the New South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Associa-
tion, the Stockowners’ Association of N.S.W., the A.J.C., and similar institutions. He mar-
ried the fifth daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Chaplin Breillat, of Sydney, and his family
consists of three daughters, viz., Mrs. R. H. Dangar, Mrs. J. H. Fairfax, and Miss Lue
Dowling, and two sons, Messrs. Willoughby Vincent Dowling, educated at Eton, and Frank
Oborne Dowling, at Armidale. Mr. W. V. Dowling has taken up some of his father’s
duties such as representing his district on the Council of the Pastoralists’ Union and the
New South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Association, and on the Mudgee Pastures Protection Board.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Eumaralla Estate.
The Property of Mr. Hugh R. Denison.
THIS estate, formerly known as Guntawang, was purchased by the present owner,
Mr. Hugh R. Denison, from the Trustees of the late Richard Rouse at the
beginning of 1908.
The inception of the estate dates from the year 1819, when an original Crown grant was
made to the late Mr. Richard Rouse, and was added to from time to time by that gentle-
man and his descendants. It was thus held by the Rouse family for a period of nearly
ninety years before passing into the hands of the present owner.
JERSEY CATTLE.
During that ownership the famous Gulgong goldfields were discovered, and several of
the alluvial leads were found on this property, from which over £200,000 worth of gold was
taken. The well-known novelist, Rolfe Boldrewood, was mining warden at the time, and
had his residence near the homestead.
The property thus early became well known throughout Australia, and its fame
was further added to by the high-class character of the stock (particularly horses
and sheep), which were bred on the estate, the well-known crooked R brand being a hall-
mark of excellence. T


During recent years, however, most of the best
stock was disposed of, so that when the present
owner came into possession it was decided to pro-
cure new strains of various kinds, and to dispose
of the stock then remaining, which has gradually
been done.
The estate is situated on the Cudgegong River,
4 miles S.W. of Gulgong, and 15 miles N. of Mudgee,
and it comprises 7520 acres of freehold land, of
which 1000 acres consist of river flats of great
strength, capable of intense culture, and the bal-
ance, excepting a few basaltic stony nobs, may be
regarded as good wheat land, a portion of the latter
being deep red soil, and the balance a light loam,
famous for the fulness of grain produced on it.
MR. H. R. DENISON.
The homestead stands on a hill overlooking the river flats, and a magnificent view is
obtained from the wide verandahs. It consists of an exceptionally well-built and hand-
some house of about twenty-four rooms, of which fourteen are on the ground floor, and ten
(including kitchen and other domestic offices) are built in the basement, rendering them
beautifully cool in summer. Around the homestead the grounds are beautifully laid out
with flower gardens, orchards, lawns, and fine wide footpaths, while the drives to both back
and front entrances—each of which is nearly a quarter of a mile long-—are planted with
glorious avenues of pines and other fine trees.
The house has recently been handsomely decorated, and is lighted throughout with
electricity. A complete hot and cold water service has also been installed throughout,
each bedroom being connected thereto, and a very efficient system of sewerage by means
of septic tanks has been connected.
The estate has a 4|-mile to the eastern bank of, and a 4-mile double frontage
to, the Cudgegong River, also five tanks in paddocks cut off from the river. All the small
paddocks in the neighbourhood of the homestead are watered by a series of troughs, fed
by T|-in. pipes leading from tanks of 15,000 gallons capacity. These tanks, at a distance
of two-thirds of a mile from the river, and at an elevation of 62 ft., are filled by a 3-in.
galvanised pipe main, a 5-h.p. National engine and bulldozer pump being the power used.
Jrngatton.
With a view of enabling the river flats to be cultivated to their fullest extent, an ex-
tensive system of irrigation has been initiated. The water is pumped from the river at two
2
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Eumaralla Estate, New South Wales.


separate points by 10-in. and 4-in centrifugal pumps, driven by oil engines, and the dis-
tribution of the water is made by large galvanised pipes, to which are connected several
lines of smaller pipes fitted with sprays at intervals of 12 ft. This ensures a very even
distribution of water, and with absolutely no waste. The initial cost of this scheme was
somewhat heavy, but the results have more than compensated for the outlay, and in con-
sequence all fear of droughts and shortness of fodder in future is considerably obviated.
Seven crops of lucerne are now reaped each year off these paddocks, while immense crops
of maize, sorghum, rape, kale, and other crops are secured, the bulk of which is then
stored in five large silos.
The timber on the estate is principally box and apple tree, together with small clumps
of pine and stringy bark, with a sprinkling of gum, the river banks being thickly studded
with willow and sheoak. Rmgbarking on an extensive scale was done many years ago,
and suckers were kept well in check, while on the river flats are clumps of planted trees,
which, together with a few scattered gums and other river timber, makes sufficient shelter
throughout the estate.
RIVER SCENE.
All external boundaries—six and seven wire fences—have been rabbit-proofed with
Lysaght’s A-grade 17 x42x 1J netting, and again subdivided into five sections. This is
excepting an isolated block of 600 acres cut off by one-chain road.
Considering the proximity to the market, comparatively little had been previously done
as regards cultivation. Some 200 acres of the flats are now under lucerne, while a 20-acre
maize crop stands at an average height of 10 ft., and 15 acres are also under sorghum. Last
season rather over 150 acres were put under wheat, barley, skinless oats, and rape. With the
more modern appliances on the ground to-day, including a 14-h.p. traction engine and ■ set
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WOOLSHED.
ploughs and harrows, the area cultivated during the ensuing year should approach 1000
acres. This area will be added to each year until at least half the estate is under
cultivation.
Experiments have been made with various grasses and salt bush, but adverse seasons
have debarred any good results up to the present.
A patch of 20 acres on inferior soil is under Sheep’s Burnett. This is an excellent feed,
making good growth in the coldest weather.
The woolshed is a hue, well-built structure, miles below the homestead, on a hill
immediately overlooking the river, and is fitted with eighteen Wolseley shearing machines,
driven by an il-h.p. Crossley engine. Dry room has been provided for 1500 sheep. This
includes adjoining covered-in and grated floor yard. All interior pens, excepting "catch-
ing,” are partitioned with balance rising gates, enabling the whole shed to be filled in
about 10 minutes.
Provision has also been made for the stacking of 200 bales of wool.
The shearers’ accommodation comprises another fine set of buildings on high, dry, and
clean position, capable of housing under the new Act some fifty men.
For the past two years 10,000 sheep have been carried on the estate. Mr. Denison is
using Dorset Horn and Lincoln rams on Merino ewes, the object of having the two classes of
rams being due to the possibility of an adverse season preventing the marketing of the whole
drop. The Lincolns may be pinched, and still be a good sheep for the clip, but are behind
the Dorset Horn in maturing and weights at any age.
A small stud of Dorset Horns was started last year, and mention need only be made of
the fact that an order has been placed for a further draft to prove that they are satisfactory.
5
The Eumaralla Estate, New South Wales.


Galopin
Vedette
Voltigeur
Mrs. Ridgway
5
Flying Duchess
Flying Dutchman
Merope
c/2
£
St. Angela
King Tom
Harkaway
Pocahontas
O
Adeline
Ion
Little Fairy
CS
4-J
(/)
0
Oh
Springfield
St, Albans
Stockwell
Bribery
S3
Viridis
Marsyas
M. of Palmyra
o
0
&H
Napoli
Macaroni
Sweetmeat
Jocose
z
0
Sunshine
Thormanby
Sunbeam
Q
td
c n
o
Musket
Toxophilite
Longbow
Legerdemain
Oh
u 1
<D
DC
Daughter of
W. Australian
Brown Bess
[5
CS
s
Sylvia
Fisherman
Heron
Mainbrace
pG
Juliet
T ouchstone
Lane. Witch
# 3
CS
►“J
Chester
Yattendon
Sir Hercules
Cassandra
OJ
hG
Lady Chester
Stockwell
Austrey
S
lolanthe
Maribyrnong
Fisherman
Rose de Florence
Rosedale
T ynedale
Thrift
£bc IRatural (Brasses on lEumaralla.
These comprise couch (several varieties), umbrella, perennial, and wild oats. Pas-
palum is also well spread over the estate, having been sown many years ago, while crows-
foot, trefoil (several), merang, carrots, and saltbush (atriplex) might also be mentioned.
£bc Stub.
As is probably well known throughout Australia, Mr. H. R. Denison is the owner of
the famous racehorse Poseidon, which put up such wonderful records in the years 1906-7,
winning the V.R.C. and A.J.C. Derbies, both the St. Legers, Caulfield Cup (twice), Mel-
bourne Cup, and twelve other races, of a total value of nearly
After Poseidon’s retirement from racing, which was caused by an accident on the track
early in his fifth year, Mr. Denison decided to send him to the stud, which he was building
up at Eumaralla, and there is no doubt that with the high-class mares already located
there, he will have every chance to prove his worth as a stallion.
Poseidon (10) was foaled in 1903, and his pedigree is tabulated herewith :
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


POSEIDON.
7
The Eumaralla Estate, New South Wales,


From this family Bayardo and Lemberg (England) also descend. Isaac Earnshaw, of
Randwick, who trained him, gives the following particulars of the horse: —
Poseidon is a hard bay, 15.3 high, 8| in. under knee, girth 6 ft. He has great heart
room, action perfect, good temper, was never sick or sorry, and a great doer. He was
never known to leave a feed.
The mares at Eumaralla consist of:—
Bay mare Trinket (1) (imp.), foaled in 1902, by I renton (a good racehorse and sire
exported from Australia to England), from Crown Jewel, by Fitz James from Rose of Lan-
caster (sister to Bend Or, one of England’s noted sires). From this family descend Lord
BROOD MARES.
Lyon, Achievement, Ladas, Janette, Chelandry, Cicero, and Flair. Trinket is a very nice
roomy mare, about 15.3 high, and full of quality.
Chestnut mare La Gloria, foaled in 1896, and bred m New Zealand, by St. Leger (imp.)
from Charente, by Nordenfeldt, from La Dauphine. From this family have descended Non-
ette (one of the best horses foaled in New Zealand, winning • at all distances under big
weights), and Crucinella out of Charente (also a good winner, having won, amongst other
races, the Wellington Cup of 1000 sovs.). La Gloria herself was a good winner, having
won A.R.C. Great Northern Guineas, Prince of Wales and City Handicaps. La Gloria is a
very big mare, standing about 16.2 high, and very roomy.
Bay mare Astolat (17), foaled in 1904, and bred in New Zealand by the late Mr. Stead.
She is by Royal Artillery (brother to True Blue) from Bellicent, by Maxim from Enid,' by
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STALLION HOUSE AND YARD.
Apremont from Idalia (dam of Sir Modred). From this family descend the greatest perform-
ers of the New Zealand turf, such as Isolt, Sir Modred, Cheviot, Betrayer, and Fait Ned
(dam of Loyalty), all noted stayers.
Chestnut mare Court Beauty (IB), foaled in 1905, and bred in New Zealand by the
late Mr. Stead. She is by Royal Artillery (brother to True Blue) from Tres Belle, by Hotch-
kiss from Formo, dam of Multiform. Forme, the dam of Cruciform, winner of Z 7268 in
stake money.
Chestnut mare Orlet (8), foaled in 1904, by Orzil (imp.), from Infanta, by Gibraltar. Her
dam Fascination, by Captivator (imp.). Orlet herself was a winner, and is full sister to
Oreillet, winner of Maribyrnong Plate.
Chestnut filly Cannie Lassie (12), foaled 1906, by Scottish King (son of Wallace, and a
brother to Mountain King) out of Timoline (imp.), by Timothy. Her dam Acra, by the
Duke. This is a fine big filly, but having met with an accident, will go to the stud in 1910.
Bay mare Pomponia (4) (imp.), foaled 1904, by Jaquemart from Countess Lilian, by
Isonomy. Her dam Lady Lumley, by See Saw from Lady Alice Hawthorn. She is a fine
upstanding mare about 16 hands.
Bay mare Pleasant Surprise (4) (imp.), foaled 1905, by Orme out of Blue Hat, by Blue
Green. Her dam Hattock, by Oberon from Almond, by Macaroon, her dam Lady Fitz James.
9
The Eumaralla Estate, New South Wales.


Bay mare Warfare, foaled 1902, by Havoc from Georgina, by Moorthorpe (imp.). Her
dam Georgina Frederick (imp.), by George Frederick (winner of English Derby) from
Phoebe Athol, by Blair Athol from Phoebe. Phis mare is full sister of Maximise, and half-
sister to Minerva.
Black mare Mynydd (2) (imp.), foaled in 1903, by Wolf’s Crag, out of Tacita, by Sterling
from Elsie May, by The Marquis from Alarum. This mare is full sister to Wolfshall, a
good performer in England, and her sire, Wolf’s Crag, is the sire of Linacre, Almscliff,
Dumbarton Castle, and other winners of races worth over .£BO,OOO. Mynydd is a very fine
mare, standing about 16 hands, and is one of the very few Barcaldine mares at present in
Australia.
STABLES, WORKSHOP AND YARD.
Gbe Jfarm anb Iberb.
A description of Eumaralla would be by no means complete without reference to the
splendid dairy farm and stock which have been established there during the past two years.
Dairying has been carried on for many years by the previous proprietors, who, however,
did not make a specialty of this particular branch of industry, being content to breed from
Durham cattle, which, after their milking days were over, were fattened and sold for beef.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Mr. Denison, on purchasing the property, determined to give this branch of the estate
a thorough trial on up-to-date lines, and his first move was to establish a first-class herd
of proper milking strains.
Jerseys and Ayrshires were picked on as being likely to give the best results, and some
60 or 70 young cows and heifers were purchased from leading breeders of these two lines.
Ayrshires were purchased from the Jarvisfield, Coolangatta, and Pritchard Estates, and
Jerseys were obtained from Mr. W. B. Rounsevell (of South Australia), and at the Royal
SILO AND MILKING SHEDS.
Agricultural Show sales, where some choice lots were purchased, notably, Bertha, by Thes-
salian 2nd out of Fawny; Rozell, by Coral’s Heir out of Rose; Faith, by Zam Buk out of
Coralie; Hyacinth, by Coral’s Heir out of Azalia Bth; Canary, by Yaralla out of Dairy Queen;
Dairy Maid, by Dairyman out of Dahlia (46), and Ginny (second prize), by Yaralla out of
Calm.
All these heifers were from proved milking strains, and will prove the nucleus of a fine
herd. The two best cows (Daisy 11. and Insie HI.), however, were obtained from the well-
known South Australian breeder, W. B. Rounsevell. These cows were both prizetakers at
the Royal Agricultural Show at Adelaide, and are grand types of Jerseys.
x i
The Eu maralla Estate, New South Wales,


The four bulls used (two each Jersey and Ayrshire) and their pedigrees are as fol-
lows:
Gipsy King 11. (Jersey), bred in 1907 by Hyam and Sons, Nov/ra, by Zam Buk from
Gipsy Queen, by Coral’s Heir (122) from Zmgara (289).
Monarch 11. (Jersey), bred in 1907 by H. R. Denison, by Wentworth’s Pride from Insie
IV., by Monarch (imp.), from Insie 111.
Silver Peak of Numba (Ayrshire), bred in 1907 by E. Pritchard, by Jamie of Numba
from Ciss Onslow of Numba, by Rising Star (imp.), from Ciss Onslow, by Ben Lomond,
N.B. —This bull’s sire was got by Champion Jamie of Oakbank.
Harebell VII. Herd Laddie (Ayrshire), bred in 1908 by R. H. Antill, by Herd Laddie of
Holehouse (imp.), from Harebell VII., by Mclvor 11. from Hannah HI., by Marmion.
Having established the milkers, the next step was to provide the necessary buildings
for the work.
New milking sheds of modern design were erected, and fitted with L.K.G. machines,
driven by electric power, and a first-class dairy was built of brick, the walls being lined
with white tiles, and the floor paved with ironite. In this building were installed all neces-
sary machines for the separation and cleansing of the milk and the production of butter,
all the machines being driven by electricity. Hot and cold water is laid on to the dairy, so
that the utmost cleanliness could be observed. With such a herd and such appliances, it
VIEW FROM WOOLSHED.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


is no wonder that Eumaralla butter very quickly grew in public estimation. The product is
at present sold locally, and commands tne highest price obtained in the district; but with
an enlargement in the number of milkers it is anticipated that a larger market will be re-
quired to absorb the surplus product, and the Eumaralla butter will then enter into com-
petition with the best factory butters which are now sent to Sydney and London markets.
jfofcbcr Conservation.
In connection with both dairying and the conduct of an up-to-date stud farm, the con-
servation of fodder is of the utmost importance. This has been recognised at Eumaralla,
and to provide for all needs should bad seasons occur, as is inevitable, provision has been
SEED DRILLS.
made to conserve large quantities of all classes of fodder. Five large silos, two large hay
sheds, and a large gram shed, have been built—the silos having a capacity of 600 tons of
ensilage, and the hay sheds will hold 400 tons of hay—in addition to which stacks of lu-
cerne hay and straw are built in the fields wherever convenient. Ensilage is made princi-
pally from lucerne, sorghum, and maize, though all waste fodder and cuttings from various
crops and the garden are used for this purpose—all being chaffed and conveyed into the
silos by a combined chaff cutter and blower, driven by electric motor.
Electric power to all the principal working parts of the estate is provided from the cen-
tral power station, where a suction gas plant has been installed. The motive power con-
*3
The Eumarallct Estate, New South Wales,


NEW COTTAGES FOR EMPLOYEES.
sists of a 15 h.p. Capels engine, driving a 75 kilowatt dynamo, from whence power is dis-
tributed to the dairy, milking sheds, chaffcutter, and engineer’s shop, besides being used
to charge the accumulators for lighting the house, stables, and grounds. This plant is run
on charcoal at a cost of a little over Id. per hour for fuel, and represents the cheapest
and simplest form in which power can be consistently maintained.
It is by such up-to-date methods that success is achieved, and in this respect Eumaralla
may claim to be considered amongst the best and most successful estates at present ex-
isting in sunny New South Wales.
IRoonbab Station.
This estate, now worked as a subordinate or relieving station to Eumaralla, was pur-
chased by Mr. H. R. Denison in June, 1909, from Dalgety and Co., Limited, into whose
hands it had passed from the original owner, Mr. W. H. Gurner, who consolidated it.
It is situated 40 miles west of Coonamble, 48 miles north-east of Warren, and 12 miles
south-west of Quambone, having 5 miles frontage to the western bank of Marthaguy Creek,
and has an area of 13,972 J acres, made up as follows: —1600 acres freehold, 2283| acres
conditional purchase, 6014 i acres conditional lease, acres improvement lease.
The records for forty years show the average rainfall to be 18.15 inches, and any annual
fall exceeding 16 inches will ensure a good season.
The estate comprises a narrow strip with full frontage to creek, Coolabah Flats, low
lying. Adjoining this, and running parallel thereto is a further narrow strip (originally
14
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


very heavily timbered) of sandy loam, carrying forest oak, pine, and gum. This is high
country, a good safety valve in flooding periods. Beyond this, and extending to the western
boundary are black soil and chocolate plains, lightly timbered with myall, yarran, wilga,
buddah, and box clumps, and intersected by lignum swamp, the whole making for variety.
Ample provision was made for shelter belts while ringbarking was in hand. Practically all
necessary ringbarking and burning off has now been completed.
Mater.
Full frontage to the Marthaguy Creek. Good artesian well situated in north-west corner.
From here, through a series of well-planned drains, the water is carried through and into
twelve paddocks, keeping full, en route to the creek, various tanks up to 5000 yards. Pro-
vision has been made to take off the surplus water in wet winters by a dram through the
homestead garden immediately on the bank of the creek in south-east corner of run.
The external boundaries are substantially fenced and made rabbit-proof by 42 in. x
17 x 1J in. netting, also subdivided by netting fence running parallel with the creek, cut-
ting off the sandy loam from open country. At intervals of half a mile pit traps are down,
single on the boundary, double on the subdivision. The property is fenced into sixteen
secure sheep paddocks, varying from 350 to 2560 acres.
The stock depend on only natural grasses and herbage, but this is so good that six-
tooth wethers make up to 56 lbs. in ordinary season.
It is now carrying 9000 Merino sheep, Haddon Rig and Rawdon blood, having big frames,
plain bodies, good necks, and thigh folds. The average cut from full-grown sheep for the
1909 season made 9f lbs., and realised up to 10id. at November sales.
The woolshed is a fine roomy building situated about 2 miles from the homestead, and
is fitted with 6 Wolseley machines driven by a portable engine. All the usual conveniences
of an up to date shed, are provided, and there is also a dry room for about 1000 sheep.
Nothing extensive has so far been attempted in the way of cultivation. Thirty-six acres
on sandy loam cut fully 3 tons to acre of wheaten hay, but this was a little on the coarse
side.
Among the grasses and herbage can be found in abundance blue, mitchell, barley, and
umbrella grasses, while in season crowsfoot, clover, merang, nardoo, and many other well-
known plants are to be found.
The Eumara.Ha Estate, New South Wales.


This property is an ideal winter country, and should prove of great help in relieving
the more heavily-stocked head station when hard, cold winters intervene in the Gulgong dis-
trict.
The homestead is situated on a rising nob, fronting Marthaguy Creek, at the north-east
corner of the station—being the first portion of freehold land which was acquired by the ori-
ginal owner.
THE FARM.
I he residence consists of two fine weatherboard buildings, connected by a covered ver-
andah, and comprise altogether twelve rooms, with bathrooms, kitchen, office, and all neces-
sary outhouses.
Water is supplied to garden, orchard, and other parts of the homestead from large
elevated tanks, situated on the bank of the creek, from which it is pumped by a windmill.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Neotsfield Estate
The Property of Mr. R.H. Dangar.
NEOISFIELD, the property of Mr. R. H. Dangar, is one of the well-known estates
on the famous Hunter River. It is always well before the public eye on account
of the notable horses bred there. The Neotsfield stud of Suffolk Punches is now
so well known in the various States of Australia that the estate well deserves inclusion as
one of the leading pastoral homes.
THE LODGE GATES.
The Hunter River district is one of the oldest settlements in the State; it was wild, rug-
ged country when the early pioneers spread out over the Bulga Mountains, and founded
Singleton, Maitland, Newcastle, and other towns on the river. The name of Dangar is en-
twined with the history of the district, for Mr. Henry Dangar, grandfather of the present
owner of Neotsfield, was one of the first to venture up there. He was one of the leading
surveyors of that period, and he laid out the present town of Newcastle, besides doing other
important work in that and other parts of the State, which will stand for all time. In
i


several old works on the old days of Aus-
tralia Mr. Henry Hangar’s name is mention-
ed, and Judge Therry, in his “Thirty Years’
Reminiscences of New South Wales and
Victoria,’’ published in 1863, frequently
makes reference to him. According to an
ancient little volume called “The Hand-
book for Australian Immigrants,’’ written
by Samuel Butler, Esq., in the year 1839,
Mr. Hangar took a prominent part in the
efforts to settle the country. In the year
1826, when surveyor to the Australian Agri-
cultural Company, he published a large map
of the Hunter River district, with a descrip-
tion for intending immigrants.
A portion of Neotsfield was granted to
Mr. Henry Hangar 111 those early days, and
it was added to by him, and later on by his
son, the late Mr. W. J. Hangar, on whose
THE HON. H. C. DANGAR, M.L.C.
death it came into the possession of the Hon. H. C. Hangar, now of Grantham, Potts
Point, Sydney. Neotsfield now comprises about 8000 acres, situated about four miles from
Smgleton and about 150 miles from Sydney, on the northern railway line. It came into
INDIAN BLACK BUCK, BRED AT NEOTSFIELD.
2
the possession of the
present owner in 1895,
though previous to that
he managed the estate
for his father for seve-
ral years. About half
the run is river flat, wa-
tered by the Hunter,
which runs through the
centre of the property,
and artificial supplies
are obtained, where
needed, by wells pump-
ed by windmills. The
other half of the land is
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


MRS. R. H. DANGAR.
3 ft. above ground, had the water through
it to a depth of several inches. The lowest
year for rainfall was 1902, the big drought
year, when the total was only 13.55 in.
£hc Ibomcstcab.
The Neotsfield house is a two-storied
brick building with a slate roof, and in de-
sign it resembles an English house. It was
built by Mr. Henry Dangar when the land
was first granted, but it was added to by
Mr. W. J. Dangar, and further additions
have been made by the present owner.
The garden is in front and on two sides
of the house, and is about two acres in ex-
tent. It includes an orchard and kitchen
garden, a vinery of table grapes enclosed
in netting, and a glass house, in which
of an undulating nature, heavily timbered
with ironbark and spotted gum. Ihe soil is
of a clayey nature, with ironstone cropping
up, and this part of the estate is watered
by a creek and eight dams. The river flats
were originally heavily timbered, but now
only ornamental trees exist. They have been
planted all over the flats in clumps for
shade and shelter purposes. They give the
country a charming park-like appearance,
so much so that one wonders why more
landowners do not so beautify their estates.
The rainfall for the district for the pas
twenty years has averaged 25.68 in., the
highest during that time being 46.11 in. in
1893. In that year there was the highest
flood ever known in that part of the coun-
try, when the house, which is raised about
MR. R. H. DANGAR.
3
The Neotsfield Estate, New South Wales.


THE HOUSE FROM THE FRONT GATE.
THE GARDEN LOOKING SOUTH WEST.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE FROM THE SOUTH WEST.
5
The Neotsfield Estate, New South Wales ,


ferns and palms are chiefly raised. The ornamental portion of the garden is laid out in
lawns, shrubs, and flower-beds. The house is lighted with acetylene gas throughout, and
water is laid on to it and to the garden from an elevated tank, which is filled by a wind-
mill from a well near the garden.
Zbc Stock.
Though Mr. Dangar has disposed of his thoroughbred stud, reference must be made
to the great horses that once roamed in the Neotsfield paddocks.
The late Mr. W. J. Dangar, a great friend and crony of the late Mr. Bruce Lowe, the
gifted discoverer of “The Figure System,” was the first to introduce high quality into
A GROUP OF POLLED JERSEYS.
Neotsfield stud in respect to the thoroughbred, as well as the Arab, and for many years
he laboured with brains and money to prove the value of the Arab as a cross with the
thoroughbred or as an improver to the same, but the fame of Neotsfield depended in the
end on the latter. Mr. Dangar imported some high-class stock Arabs and thoroughbreds
to the famous Hunter River stud, and among his importations was that pillar of the Aus-
tralian stud book, the immortal Algeria, who was foaled 1871, was a member of Bruce
Lowe’s No. 1 family, and was by Blinkhoolie from Adrastia, by St. Albans from Nemesis,
by Newminster. Though she was the dam of Algerian and Anglesey, fine racehorses, her
6
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


A GROUP OF UTILITY MARES.
greatest son was Gibraltar, who in the colours of the Hon. H. C. Dangar won the A.J.C.
Derby and the V.R.C. St. Leger. Through her female descendants Algeria reached her
greatest glory, for her daughters and granddaughters have been prolific in the production
of racehorses, and in proof of that contention need only be mentioned such racehorses
and producers as Le Var, May King, Mother Goose, Welcome Trist, Regio, Barbarossa,
Massinissa, Lady Metallist, Saida, &c. Another of Mr. W. J. Dangar’s importations that
left her mark on the stud book records of Australia was Signora, a mare by Newcastle
from Actress, by Stockwell from Himalaya, by Bay Middleton. In Cardigan, by Golds-
borough, Signora produced a racehorse of great quality and stamina, a winner of many
first-class races, including the Summer Cup under g st. Signora had two daughters—
Duenna and Mantilla. From the first
descend, among other winners, Amber-
ite (winner of the Derby, Champion
Stakes, and Caulfield Cup), Spinaway
(Adelaide Cup), and Flintlock (Perth
Cup). Among others descending in the
female line from Signora were Acetine,
Pelhsier, Watchfire, and Kilt. To Secu-
rity, a mare by Lord Chfden from All’s
Well, by The Cure from Little Casino,
who was imported in the seventies by
Mr. Dangar, Neotsfield owed much of its
success as a nursery for thoroughbreds,
ARDON (TARTAR—AKDEA), USED WITH UTILITY MARES,
7
The NeotsfielcJ Estate, New South Wales.


A GROUP OF SUFFOLK-PUNCH MARES.
as it did to Victorine, an English mare brought out at the same time. The latter was by
Victorious from Entremet, by Sweetmeat.
In Mr. W. J. Dangar’s time Hawthornden, an English St. Leger winner, was at his
best as a stallion, but Grandmaster, another English importation, was freely and success-
fully used. Three famous sons of Grandmaster came out of Neotsheld paddocks—first,
Sussex, who is yet described as the greatest all-round racehorse Australia has produced.
He won hurdle races, flat races, and steeplechases, and towards the close of his career
won the Grand National Steeplechase, carrying 13 st. 3 lbs. Highborn, by Grandmaster,
left Neotsheld for a Sydney stable, and began in a mild way, but he subsequently won the
Australian and Sydney Cups, besides running second to great Carbine in the Melbourne
Cup, and for three seasons he was the
undisputed champion of India, winning
the Viceroy’s Cup twice, where another
Neotsfield-bred one, Leonidas, by Gibral-
tar, won great fame. Gibraltar was con-
sidered the noblest Roman of them all,
and was retained for the stud as the head
of the harem. One of his best sons was
Rock Gun, whose dam Bangle was an
English mare by Barcaldine, imported to
Neotsheld, but it remained for the last
importation to the old stud, Positano,
to win the greatest honours for it.
SUFFOLK-PUNCH STALLION—RENDLESHAM SHAME (IMP.) 3431.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Positano was selected in
England for Mr. H. C.
Dangar by Mr. (now
Sir) William Cooper.
For a season Positano
carried his owner’s col-
ours successfully on the
Australian turf, and
was then presented to
Mr. R. H. Dangar by
his father. Positano is
the sire of the Mel-
bourne Cup winners
Lord Cardigan, Posei-
don, and Lord Nolan,
A LUCERNE PADDOCK.
as well as Mooltan, twice the winner of the Metropolitan; Post Town, winner of the Perth
Cup ; May King, winner of the Perth Cup ; Little Toy, winner of the Don-
caster Handicap ; Postulate, winner of the Hobart Cup ; Warroo, a fine per-
former ; and Postillion, Tattersall’s Cup. All these, with the exception
of Lord Cardigan, Postillion, Warroo, and Lord Nolan, were bred at Neotsfield.
Poseidon, the subsequent winner of over £19,000 in stakes, was sold as a foal beside his
dam at the break up of the stud to Messrs. W. and F. Moses, and Mooltan, winner of
over £7OOO in stakes, was sold with his dam to Mr. J. Noonan. Though only six years
have passed since Neotsfield stud was broken up such a collection of mares and foals to
day would easily double, perhaps treble, the amount they fetched when dispersed. Po-
sitano was retained in the stud until 1908, when he was sold to Mr. S. Green, of Victoria,
for 4500 guineas.
THE WELL AND MILL USED FOR IRRIGATING LUCERNE.
9
The Neotsfield Estate, New South Wales,


LUCERNE IRRIGATED BY WINDMILL AND OIL ENGINE FROM WELL.
In addition to the thoroughbreds, Neotsfield has for over fifty years been the home of
pure Suffolk Punch horses. The stud now consists of about forty mares, all descended
from the purest stock. From time to time sires and mares have been imported from Eng-
land. The stallions at present in use are Rendlesham Shame (imp.) 3431, bred by Mr. A.
J. Smith, of Woodbndge, and Mooki Sultan, bred by Mr. A. A. Dangar. Every year Mr.
Dangar sends a draft of three-year-old Suffolk colts to Sydney, where they have met a
ready sale at auction.
The Neotsfield Suffolks
have been very suc-
cessful at the Royal
Sydney Show for many
years, and as gen-
erally useful farm
horses this fine old
breed is steadily in-
creasing in favour.
Mr. Dangar breeds
a considerable number
of utility horses, get-
ting excellent results
from crossing a thor-
ENTRANCE TO STABLE YARD,
390
77i© Pastoral Homes of Australia.


oughbred stallion with mares got by putting a Norfolk cob on to thoroughbred and Arab
mares, and the progeny again back to a thoroughbred, the stallion at present in use be-
ing Ardon (Tartar —Ardea), sire of winners in Queensland, where he was before bought
for the Neotsfield stud. Stallions are not housed, but are out all year in small paddocks,
with shelter sheds in them. Very useful van horses result from the cross of a thorough-
bred with Suffolk Punch mares, while Mr. Dangar has bred fine riding horses the same
way. One he rode for years, and he was an excellent jumper.
Reference must also be made to Mr. Dangar’s pure Jersey herd. these are all pe-
digree cattle, and for about forty years they have been bred at Neotsfield. A very inter-
A CROSSING ON THE HUNTER RIVER NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
esting feature in connection with the Neotsfield Jerseys is that, because the herd has been
dehorned for a number of years, about 25 per cent, of the cahes are now born
natural polies. In the illustration accompanying this article a group of these polled Jer-
seys is shown. Mr. Dangar does not breed these cattle for show purposes, but they are
large-bodied and big milkers.
There are about 70 acres under lucerne at Neotsfield, and this crop flourishes if the
season is at all suitable. Mr. Dangar uses it chiefly for hay, pressing and storing it as a
stand-by for droughts, though the first spring cut is usually made into ensilage. A portion
is irrigated from a well pumped by a windmill with an oil engine auxiliary, and some of the
11
The Neotsfield Estate, New [South Wales.


A VIEW OF THE HUNTER RIVER ON THE ESTATE.
accompanying illustrations give an idea of the fine tank arrangements by which the sys-
tem is carried out. This is used principally for green food, any surplus going into the hay
supply.
A small herd of Indian Antelope (or Black Buck) has been raised by Mr. Dangar from
some brought to him from India about eight years ago; and seeing how this breed thrives
it seems a pity the authorities do not introduce it, or similar breeds, into the hot, dry
parts of Central and Northern Australia —which should suit it well -for game purposes.
The flesh is very good eating.
personal.
Mr. Richard Halifax Dangar is the eldest son of Mr. H. C. Dangar. He was born in
Sydney in 1868, and educated at All Saints’ College, Bathurst. On leaving school he en-
tered pastoral pursuits, and gained a wide experience on the various stations owned by
Messrs. Dangar Bros. For several years previous to owning Neotsfield he managed it for
his father. Mr. Dangar is a member of the Patrick Plains Shire Council, and a prominent
member of the Northern Agricultural Society, and he is a well-known exhibitor at the Royal
Sydney Show. In 1895 he married Ethel, the eldest daughter of the late Vincent J. Dow-
ling, of Lue, and his family consists of a son and a daughter.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bengalla Estate.
The Property of Mr. J. H. K eys .
BENGALLA, the property of Mr. John Hudson Keys, is situated on the Hunter
River, about four miles south-west of Muswellbrook. The estate comprises about
20,000 acres of alluvial river flats and undulating country with sandstone ridges.
It is well timbered with ironbark, box gum, and kurrajong, the ironbark, however, being a
special feature on the estate. A part of Bengalla, about 2500 acres, was originally granted
to the late Captain Wright in the early twenties. He added to it from time to time, and
when in 1853 the late John Hudson Keys (grandfather of the present owner, who then
managed properties for Colonel Dumaresq, of St. Helliers, Muswellbrook) purchased it, the
area amounted to 14,000 acres. At that time Rossgoll, another property of 10,000 acres, was
attached to Bengalla, but at the death of Mr. J. H. Keys it passed to his son, Mr. Irving
Blain Keys, now of Sydney, who subsequently disposed of it. Bengalla was added to from
A VIEW LOOKING ACROSS THE RIVER FLATS.
I


THE HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DAIRY COWS.
time to time by Mr. Richard Thom Keys, father of the present owner, and it now comprises
about 20.000 acres. He devoted the property almost entirely to fattening cattle, until
about 1899, when dairying on the share system was commenced in addition.
£bc Ibomceteab.
The present Bengalla homestead can be seen by those passing along the
Muswellbrook-Denman road. It lies across the Hunter River on a hue elevation. Ihe
house was originally built by the grand-
father of the present owner, but it was con-
siderably added to by the late Mr. R. 1 .
Keys. It is a brick structure of the bunga-
low style, situated in well-kept grounds.
3mprovcmcnto.
In anything like a good season Bengalla
produces an abundance of feed. Ihe prin-
cipal grasses are clover, crowfoot, couch,
and prairie grass. Kentucky blue grass and
THE OLD STORE.
3
Bengal la, New South Wales.


Paspalum have also been sown. Rabbits have never been a serious trouble, but they put
in an appearance, and if stringent measures had not been adopted they would no doubt have
become as great a pest as elsewhere. Digging out and fumigating have been found to be
the most successful methods of rabbit destruction. The property is nearly all wire netted,
and it is subdivided into fifteen paddocks. There is a plentiful supply of water. In addition
to a nine-mile frontage to the Hunter River, the Sandy Creek runs through the property,
and windmills and dams have been constructed on different portions of the run.
Soon after establishing the dairy farms on Bengalla, the late Mr. R. T. Keys
instituted an irrigation system. A 20-h.p. steam engine drives a centrifugal pump raising
I s o ° gallons per minute from the Hunter River. The land has all been set out and graded
in such a manner that two acres can be watered at a time. Splendid results are obtained from
this irrigation plot. Lucerne hay averages 30 cwt. per acre, and Mr. Keys gets about nine
cuttings per year. There are altogether about sixty acres under lucerne. Mr. Keys proposes
to go in largely for the preservation of fodder, especially in the form of ensilage, as he is
going to extend the dairy farming system. He is very interested in the improvement of
dairy stock, and has recently added six well-bred Jersey bulls to his herd. At the present
THE HAYSHED.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW LOOKING TOWARDS M U SWELL BROOK.
5
Bengalla, New South Wales.


THE OUTLOOK FROM THE FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD JERSEY BULL.
time he is crossing the Jersey bulls with Shorthorn cows, but it is his intention to work into
a herd of pure Jerseys. He will have about eighty cows at each dairy, and as the Overton
Butter Factory adjoins Bengalla, there is a ready market for a daily supply of cream. In
addition to the dairy stock, Mr. Keys runs about 1400 cattle for fattening.
personal.
The late John Hud-
son Keys, the first of
the family to own
Bengalla, came to
New South Wales in
1837. He met his
wife, a Miss Hether-
ington, on board the
vessel coming out.
She was on her way
to keep house for
the late Rev. Irving
Hetherington,who was
DAIRY COWS.
Bengal la, New South Wales,


the first Presbyterian minister in the Singleton
district, then known as Patrick’s Plains.
The late Richard Thom Keys was the
third son of the marriage, and being the
eldest surviving son at the time of Mr. J.
H. Keys’ death, he came into the property.
Richard Thom Keys was born at St.
Hilliers, Muswellbrook, in 1850, and re-
ceived his first schooling there. He
afterwards went to the High School at
West Maitland, and, on leaving school, he
entered the West Maitland branch of the
Bank of Australasia. After this commercial
training he returned to Bengalla, where he re-
ceived his early pastoral experience under his
father. He soon became actively identified
with, and enthusiastically entered into, any
THE LATE MR. JOHN HUDSON KEYS.
movement calculated to further the progress of the State. lie became president of the
Muswellbrook Hospital, and was a member of the Pastures Protection Boards’ Council of
Advice, the Stockowners’ Association of New
South Wales, the local shire council, the com-
mittee of the Rabbit Destruction Fund, and
he occupied a seat on the Licensing Board. He
was also a Justice of the Peace. As a member
of the Advisory Committee of the Rabbit
Destruction Fund, Mr. R. T. Keys did a great
deal to aid Dr. Danysz in his experiments at
Broughton Island. He was one of the pioneers
of irrigation on the Hunter, and as a judge of
cattle he enjoyed an unique reputation.
On his return from a trip to England and
America some fifteen years ago, Mr. R. T. Keys
was convinced that if Australian beef and mut-
ton could be placed on the English market
without freezing it would command a price
equal to home-grown or American meat.
Through his and other pastoralists’ efforts a
trial shipment of live cattle was made to
8
THE LATE MR. R. T. KEYS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
PORTION OF THE GARDEN.
9
Bengalis, New South Wales.


RIVER FLATS.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AN OLD-TIME WOOLPRESS.
11
Bengalla, New South Wales,


ON THE RIVER FLATS.
England, he himself sending seven magnificent animals. The result was only partially
successful, chiefly because there was insufficient accommodation for the stock provided on
the boats. Also, it was found that a smaller class of cattle and those which had been
subject of handling as steers, travelled better than the larger beasts. A number of
pastoralists pledged themselves to fatten the cattle for the trade if Queensland breeders would
handle their steers for the purpose. However, owing to the difficulty in getting them to do
this, and in obtaining suitable cattle boats, the trade was abandoned.
Mr. R. T. Keys was greatly interested in pastoral and agricultural associations; besides
being president of the local society he was president of the P. and A. Societies’ Union.
Pie will be remembered for his strong advocacy of judges giving the reasons for their
decisions at shows, so that these exhibitions would have a more educational influence on
the public. He also favoured single judging at shows. In 1877 he married Emily
Margaret, the daughter of the late Mr. De Loitte, of Balmain, and had one son, Mr. J. H.
Keys, and three daughters, Mrs. Bruce Campbell, of Goulburn, and Misses Maggie Dc
Loitte and Mattie Carruthers. Mr. R. T. Keys died on 17th April, 1909, while visiting Japan.
Mr. John Hudson Keys, the present owner, was born at Bengalla in 1880. He received
his education at King’s School, Parramatta, and subsequently put in two years at the
Hawkesbury Agricultural College. On leaving the college he went to Bengalla, and has
given it his close attention ever since. As before stated, he intends to extend the share
dairy farming system and go in for the preservation of fodder and the improvement of dairy
stock generally.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Turanville Estatel.
The Property of Mr. Thomas Cook.
TURANVILLE STATION is well known throughout Australia as the home of well-
bred horses. Mr. Cook has for many years past almost entirely devoted the
estate to breeding thoroughbred and general utility horses, and a long record of
success has been achieved. The estate comprises 10,000 acres, 195 miles from Sydney on
the northern line. It is three miles from Scone and twelve miles from Muswellbrook, being
situated in one of the best parts of the far-famed Hunter district. A considerable portion
of Turanville was originally a grant to the late Mr. W. Dangar, and the land comprises
very rich flats intersected by box ridges. The average rainfall is about in., and the
timber is chiefly box and apple tree.
£bc Ibomcstcafc.
The homestead is a one-storied brick building, containing twelve rooms and offices.
It is beautifully situated with an eastern aspect, and a magnificent view is obtained from
the verandah. The garden stretches from the house right down to the Kingdom Ponds
GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE RACECOURSE.
I


THE HOUSE, LOOKING SOUTH.
Creek, and from the house one can see over a rich stretch of country intersected by the
great northern railway, the main road, and the creek. The gardens are laid out with well-
kept paths and lawns, and there is a magnificent assortment of evergreen shrubs and
ornamental trees. From the house one can look down a fine avenue of trees fifty years old,
and stately pepper trees are dotted here and there. The house and grounds are well
supplied with water, which is pumped from the creek to a reservoir, from whence gravitation
does the rest. Altogether the gardens comprise about twenty acres, and, in addition to the
ornamental trees and flowers, there are all varieties of fruit trees and vegetables. Grapes
grow to perfection. Near the house is a flagstaff 70 ft. high, and in different parts of the
grounds are bush houses and conservatories. The homestead is replete with everything
which saves labour and adds to comfort, and it is connected by telephone with Scone. Close
to the house there is a large store, with underground cellars, and near by are offices and
bachelors’ quarters. The manager’s cottage contains seven large rooms. The men’s quarters
are about 100 yards from the house, and they comfortably accommodate twenty men.
Here there are four large underground tanks, holding 30,000, 25,000, 15,000, and 10,000
gallons of water respectively.
Smprovcments.
The property is subdivided into twenty-five paddocks, watered by the Dartbrook and
Kingdom Ponds Creeks. On that portion of the estate cut off from the creeks by the railway.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE.
3
Turanville, New South Wales.


AVENUE AND HOUSE, LOOKING NORTH.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


the water supply is obtained from seven dams and three windmills. One well is down 80 ft.,
and the subartesian water, which comes nearly to the surface, supplies tanks of 4000, 5000,
and 6000 gallons respectively.
In the process of clearing Turanville timber was judiciously preserved. In many
places beautiful native trees have been left for the shelter belts, and circles of swamp oak
and willow trees have been planted. These give a park-like appearance to the landscape,
apart from their great usefulness as shelters for stock. With the exception of these belts
and clumps of timber all the country was ringbarked and burnt off some years ago. Owing
to the extent horsebreeding is carried on at Turanville, some specially safe fences have been
Photo by J. H. Newman Ltd.
MR. THOMAS COOK.
erected; they chiefly consist of five plain wires and a top rail. About 300 acres have been
laid down in lucerne, and fine crops are obtained year after year. Though the estate is
chiefly devoted to grazing and breeding purposes, about 4000 acres would grow wheat and
rape. The only sheep kept are for station use, therefore there is no shearing shed. There
is one large stockyard on the property, built many years ago. It was designed for handling
horses and branding cattle, and contains cow bails, calf pens, and slaughter yards.
Horsebreeding being one of the principal industries at Turanville, stables have been
built at great cost. There are no less than forty loose boxes and twenty stalls, in addition
to foal-handling yards and breaking-in boxes. Mr. Cook has a private racecourse miles
5
Turanville, New South Wales.


GROUP OF FAT BULLOCKS.
m length. All that goes towards breeding and turning out high quality and well-handled
horses has been catered for.
In anything like a fair season the estate is covered with clover and indigenous
grasses. There are at present 500 tons of lucerne hay on the estate, stacked in sheds,
conveniently situated for use in times of drought. During severe droughts the stock have
been kept alive by hay grown on the estate. Sometimes it has been necessary to send
stock away on agistment to other parts of the State, and the results have generally been
disastrous.
IT be iborscs.
But the horses are the great feature of Turanville, and Mr. Cook has devoted many
}eais and much money to breeding thoroughbreds and general utility horses. Records in
possession of Mr. Cook show that as far back as 1834 blood horses were bred at
I uranvdle, but it is since the estate has been in the present owner’s hands that the greatest
success has been attained. Mr. Cook took up Turanville in 1854, and one of the first
thoroughbred sires he used was The Works, a fine-looking son of Fireworks and Baroness,
by Boiardo (imp.). He was a grey stallion, and his memory yet lingers at Turanville, for
he got fast, sound stock, with splendid tempers. After about ten years of breeding Mr. Cook-
had round him fully 400 brood mares, thoroughbreds and coachers. Many of the
thoroughbreds were stud book mares. This selection of horses must have cost him from
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


,£ 10,000 to ,-£15,000. Every year since 1893 Mr. Cook has held an annual sale of
thoi onghbreds and utility horses. 1 hey are always attended by a vast concourse of people,
and Mr. Cook's hospitality on these occasions has become a by-word. The Turanville
sale is now one of the great events in the horse year. The first sale was held in 1893, and
Mr. Cook offered thoroughbred yearlings by such sires as Invader, Fusileer, Ballarmin, Blue
Mountain, Splendor, Sweet William, Welcome Jack, Gemma di Vergy, Navigator, Epigram.
Mailguard, &c. At that time Mr. Cook had some fine mares at his stud, among them being
Dagmar, by Goldsbrough out of Roulette; Persephone, by Yattendon from Preserve; La
Mascotie, by Winchelsea from Black Bess; Miss Livingstone, by Livingstone (imp.) from
Virago; Honeymoon and Honey Queen by old Maribyrnong from Grey Bridesmaid; Puzzle
and brochette, who were by Grandmaster out of Prudence and Camilla respectively;
Splendora, by Splendor and Vesper. Then there was Musician, an old mare, going back
to the early days of blood stock in New South Wales. It would occupy too much space
to enumerate all the great mares to which the iuranville stud owes its fame. The names
of the sires, too, are to be found in the pedigrees of horses racing all over Australia and
in India. Old Gemma di Vergy was long at the head of the stud, and Invader, now (1909)
twenty-six years old, it still doing duty. Lie is by Grandmaster from Ida, by Gemma di
A ergy from Goldspec, by Kingston from a daughter of Littlejohn, and a mare by Camel out
of a daughter of Camerton. At the 1909 sales the yearlings offered by Mr. Cook were by
BLOOD STALLION—“ INVADER.”
7
Turanville, New South Wales.


NORFOLK COB STALLION—“ BENEDICT JUNIOR.”
Positano (imp.), by St. Simon from Ponza: Flavus (imp.), by Hampton from Aloara;
Postillion, by Positano (imp.) from Citronelle; Patronage, by Grand Flaneur from Olga;
Musketoon, by Trenton from Mona; Hardgraft, by Grafton (imp.) from Loveloch ; Patrol,
by Grand Flaneur from Terara: Merv, by Donovan from a half-sister to Lonely ; Sweet
William, by Yattendon from Touch and Go; and old Invader. At the time the first sale was
held Mr. Cook had about 1500 horses on Turanville, and rented country, and in 1897 he sold
ro6 thoroughbreds in well-appointed yards on the estate. Of late years, owing to ill-health,
Mr. Cook has had to give up breeding on a large scale, but he still retains about twenty-five
blood mares, which have been mated to Flavus (imp.), Merv (imp.), En Garde (imp.),
Roubel (imp.), Machine Gun, and Invader.
In addition to thoroughbreds, Mr. Cook has made a specialty of breeding utility
horses, and in this connection the old imported horse Flying Shales stands out prominently.
He was a fine old horse, going back to the best Norfolk Cob strains. Before leaving England
he trotted ijYi miles in an hour with 12 stone in the saddle. He stood 16 hands high, and'
was a fine dapple bay in colour. He was well ribbed, and very thickset, with good shoulders.
Among the stock he got were Purston Shales, Benedict Shales, Twinkle Shales. Barb
Sbales, and one of Mr. Cook’s favourites, Warwick Shales. Benedict Shales did long service
in the Turanville stud. Pie was out of an Arab mare imported by Mr. Dangar. The sires
now used for breeding utility horses are Benedict Junr. (a descendant of Flying Shales)
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF BROOD UTILITY MARES.
9
Turanville , New South Wales •


THE TURANVILLE CROSSING.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


and the English Hackney Fireaway, by Confident (imp.). Benedict Junr. has been success-
fully shown in the Cob classes at the Sydney Show, and has taken many prizes as a horse
for producing" weight-carrying hacks. Fireaway has been crossed with Benedict Junr. mares
with good resnlts. Mr. Cook has some high quality Shorthorns. 1 hey arc descendants
from bulls imported by Mr. Cook’s uncle, the late Mr. William Dangar. In 1878 and
1885 Mr. Cook imported hulls, and the Shorthorns now at Turanville win many prizes at
shows. Mr. Cook in 1880 produced a Durham ox 2435 lbs. live weight, and won the gold
medal at the International Exhibition, Sydney, with it, and sold it subsequently for 40
guineas. At the present time (1909) Turanville is carrying 2000 cattle, 200 horses, 100
sheep. About twenty hands are employed.
personal.
Mr. Thomas Cook was born of English parents near Hamilton, Canada, in 1834. His
parents went from St. Neots, Cornwall, to Canada, and in 1837 they returned to England,
and came straight out to Australia. After a six months’ voyage they arrived in Sydney in
November, 1837, an d went up to Turanville, then owned by the late Mr. William Dangar.
In 1841 Mr. Cook’s father went into the interior, and formed the following stations : —-
Myall Creek, Paradise Creek, Bulleroi, Bunna Bunna, and Burren Burren. The blacks
were very troublesome in those days, and Mr. Cook and his parents had many narrow
escapes. His father subsequently took up Nemingha Station, near Tamworth, and in 1854
Mr. Thos. Cook came to Turanville. At the age of twenty-one he took charge of the
station, and with the exception of a year’s absence in England, he has been there ever since.
He married a daughter of the late Captain Sibley, but she died in May, 1903, without issue.
GROUP OF STUD CATTLE.
11
Turanville , New South Wales •


Though at the pre-
sent time Mr.
Cook’s health is
not good, he lives at
his beautiful home,
and his rooms are
decorated with the
silver cups his great
horses and cattle
have won. Mr. Up-
ton, who managed
the estate for many
years, died in 1907,
and Mr. W. H.
Duckham now has
charge. He has been
GARDEN AND GROUNDS AT TURANVILLE, LOOKING EAST.
out in this country thirty years, being nephew of the late Thomas Duckham, member for
Herefordshire, and an exporter of stud cattle to America and Australia. Mr. Percy Lee
has been stud groom at Turanville for over thirty years, and he is well up in horse matters
generally.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Merton,
The Property of Mr. E. R. White.
THERE are few horse lovers in Australia who have not heard of Mr. E. R. White’s
Merton Estate, for it is one of the best-known breeding establishments in New
South Wales. Merton comprises about 9000 acres, situated on the Hunter River,
about one mile from the township of Denman, and 14 miles south-west of Muswellbrook.
The estate was originally granted to Captain Ogilvie in the twenties, but it was subse-
quently owned by Mr. Edward White, now of Sydney.
A BEND OF THE HUNTER RIVER.
Merton has about 7 miles’ frontage to the Hunter River, where there is great depth of
rich alluvial soil, and runs back to undulating volcanic country, with basaltic ridges and
timber flats beyond. The timber is chiefly apple tree and box. The river flats are
eminently suited for lucerne growing, and in one bend of the river there is an irrigation
farm worked on the share system.
i


The average rainfall in this part of the
Hunter district is 20 in., which enables agri-
cultural operations to be carried on with a
fair amount of certainty. In addition to the
river, Merton is watered by two large dams,
and a fine well supplies the homestead and
garden.
The property is subdivided into about
twenty paddocks, the fencing being chiefly
post and rails, for the better protection of the
horses. A good deal of ringbarking has been
done, and the country is now lightly timbered,
but clumps of trees have been left standing
in the paddocks as a shelter for the mares,
and a large number surround the stockyards
and stables at some little distance.
The Merton homestead is a cool brick
MR. E. R. WHITE.
building, situated on an elevation from which an extensive view of the surrounding country
is obtained. The grounds are well laid out all round the house, and are growing more
beautiful every year.
3inprovcment6.
Merton is well improved in all that affects the management of stock. The stockyards
themselves are substantial erections, with crushes attached for branding horses. For
throwing horses, a
swing gate, worked by
blocks and weights, is
used, and as the horse
is gently thrown on to a
bed of straw the risks
of injury to horses and
men are greatly re-
duced.
As one would ima-
gine, Mr. White has
everything up to date.
His stables are most
complete, even to a full
IRRIGATION PADDOCK.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


THE HOMESTEAD.
THE STABLES.
3
Merton, New South Wales.


STATION AND OUTBUILDINGS.
stock of veterinary instruments and drugs. The stables themselves comprise twenty loose
boxes 12 ft. xl2 It., with a passage 10 ft. wide down the centre. The floors are all
of concrete, and each loose box is fitted with two shutters over the mangers through which
the horses are fed. A trolley runs down the centre of the stables, and one man can
easily feed the horses by placing the fodder through the shutters to the right and left
of him. At the end of the stables are feed rooms and the necessary machinery and
engines for crushing grain, etc.
Mr. White has about 120 acres under lucerne, which grows luxuriantly. He
goes in extensively for the preservation of fodder, and stores large quantities
of hay made from lucerne, wheat and oats. Merton is well off for natural herbage.
In the winter time there is usually a luxuriant growth of trefoil, crowfoot, prairie grass,
wild carrot, &c., and in summer time couch grass and blue grass provide an immense
amount of feed.
In 1904 Mr. White purchased Baerami, a property of 21,000 acres, which he worked
in conjunction with Merton. He subdivided 8000 acres into dairy farms, and worked them
on the share system. In 1908 he sold Baerami to Messrs. Martindale White Bros., of
Martindale, of which firm he is managing director
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


OUTBUILDINGS AND BREAKING-IN YARDS.
cTbe Stub.
But it is to the blood horses that Merton owes most of its fame. In 1897 Mr. White
laid the foundations of this stud with mares purchased from Mr. Frank Reynolds, of Tocal,
and amongst them are the dams of Flavinius and Flaxen, the granddam of Flavel, and
dam of Love Lord. At different times Mr. White has added to his stud by the purchase
of such mares as Spanish Lady, by Pilgrim’s Progress from Espaniola (imp.); Eily, full
sister to Independence and dam of Flavigny, by Wallace from Elsie (imp.), by St. Simon ;
Larbert, by Trenton from Paradise ; Lady Cardigan, by Haut Bnon from My Queen, dam of
Navaho and King Hal ; Busy Bee, full sister to Gaulus, The Grafter, and Alemene, by
Gozo from Industry, by Musket ; Seamoon, imported from New Zealand, full sister to Sea-
horse and half-brother to Boondook, by Nelson from Moonga ; Latem, the dam of Specimen
and Tanami, by Metal from Limerick Lass ; Lady Kernel, dam of Flavel, bv Prince Chester
from Phil open a ; Destiny (imp.), by Desmond, son of St. Simon from Toma, by Hamp-
ton. The above are some of the most noted mares at Merton, and students of pedigree
will find them a very interesting and valuable lot.
The first sire Mr. White used at Merton was Prince Chester, presented to him by the
late Mrs. James White, of Kirkham, wife of the Hon. James White, so well known as a
breeder of thoroughbreds. Prince Chester was by Chester from La Princess (imp.), and
was therefore full brother to Cranbrook and also to Kirkham, who was sent to England
5
Merton, New South Wales.


EILY (dam of Flavigny) WALLACE FROM ELSIE (ImP.)
WITH COLT FOAL by FLAVUS(ImP)
by the late Mr. White
to try and win the Der-
by. The owner of
Merton used Prince
Chester for some years
and got several winners
by him.
In 1897 Mr. White
purchased the import-
ed horse Dalmeny from
the Kirkham stud. This
fine-looking stallion
was bred Lord Rose-
bery, and he is a true
type of English
thoroughbred, and is a
noted show ring stal-
lion. He is by Foxhall (15), by King Alfonso, grandsire of King Tom (3), and Vandal
(12), from Jamaica, by Lexington (12), from Fanny Ludlow by Am. Eclipse (1) from a
daughter of Vandal (12), by Glencoe (1). Dalmeny’s dam was Bagdad (5), by Cameliard
(2), sire of Cremorne (2) from Louise, by Marsyas (12) from Seclusion by Tadmor (12). Dal-
meny is the sire of Merton Steel, Baccaiat, Miss Rosebery, Kilmeny, Lady Primrose, White-
foot, Dalroy, Dalmer-
ton, Mascotte, Kopje,
Miss Wilton, Love Lord,
Opportune, Lord Dal-
meny, Miss May New-
bury (a champion in
Noumea), Dalmally,
Nellie G., Dalbassy,
Rosebery, Tanami, and
other winners. Dal-
meny is still at the
Merton stud, and has
his list full at G guineas.
The next sire secur-
ed by Mr. White was
Kingsley, imported by
Mr. H. C. White, of
LADY KERNEL (dam of Flavel) by PRINCE CHESTER FROM PHILOPENA,
WITH FILLY FOAL by FLAVUS(Imp)
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MANY COLOURS (dam of Flaxen) by MEDALLION FROM BLUE AND GOLD,
WITH FILLY FOAL by FLAVUS(ImP)
Havilah. Kingsley was
by Stirling from Hypa-
tia, and he got a Chal-
lenge Stakes winner in
Queenie’s Court. Un-
fortunately his career
was cut short, for he
dropped dead after do-
ing two years in the
Merton stud.
The next sire was
Diplomat, imported by
Mr. John Brown, owner
of Sir Foote and Prince
Foote. Diplomat was
by St. Simon from
Tact, the dam of Ami-
able, who won the English Oaks. Tact was full sister to the dam of William 3rd, who
was a great winner in England, and whose stud fee is now 200 guineas. Mr. White only
had Diplomat for one year, as he was tempted by the Japanese Government’s offer of
1800 guineas for him, and he sold him. The Japanese representatives also took eight
blood mares from Merton, which they stated were some of the best mares they had seen
anywhere in the world. Diplomat only had fifteen mares while in Australia, and all his
progeny, about thirteen,
turned out winners.
The leading sire at
Merton at the present
time is undoubtedly
Flavus. He is a beau-
tiful chestnut, with a
classical head and
neck. The Honorable
Henry Moses purchased
Flavus and St. A 1 wynne
in England and soon
after their arrival in
Australia Mr. White
was lucky enough
PASTORAL SCENE.
7
Merton, New South Wales.


FLAVUS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Camel (24)
Touchstone (14)
Banter (14)
Newminster (8)
CN
Dr. Syntax
c
Beeswing
2
Dau. of Ardrossan
u
Humphrey Clinker
T5
Melbourne (1 1
00
u
0
Dau. of Cervantes
6
The Slave
z
Voltaire
Cl
Volley
£
o
Martha Lynn (2)
U,
a
£
/
Rataplan (3)
The Baron
Pocahontas (3)
Kettledrum (3)
c
o
The Provost
TD
b£
Hybla
Otisina (3)
j
• id
>>
Liverpool
"3 *
T3
CS
Mango or Lanercost
_i
Haricot
Otis
£ *2
Gladiator
£
Queen Mary
Dau. of
c« Sf
Plenipotentiary
> „
< .5
Touchstone
J -a
Orlando (13)
Uh CL»
U
Vulture (13)
Pm
Marsyas (12)
Whisker
u
Malibran
-M
_CJ
Garcia (12)
>
The Baron
u
<D
Stockwell (3)
Pocahontas (3)
<
Princess of Wales
The Bloomer
Melbourne
d
C/D
U
u
CS
Lady Sarah (13)
0
DC
O
<3
Beadsman
Rosicrucian (5)
C/3
Chevron (1)
Madame Eglantine (5
<v
Stockwell
C
.2
*u
Cognisaunce
Paradigm (1)
<L»
Sir Hercules
<!
Birdcatcher (11)
Lady Trespass
Guiccioli (11)
Stolen Moments
Melbourne
Lady Elizabeth (8)
9
Merton, New South Wales.


EN GARDE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


d
Voltigeur (2)
Voltaire (12)
Blacklock (2)
Phantom(6) Mare(12)
Vedette (19)
(Derby)
Martha Lynn
Mulatto (5)
Lida (2)
|
C5
(Don. Cup)
Mrs. Ridgway
Birdcatcher (11)
Sir Hercules (2)
Guinoli (11)
’£. d
Nan Dayrell
Inheritor (4)
Nell (19)
z
>.
£
*c3
o s
Flying Duchess
The
Fly. Dutchman (3)
(Derby, St. I.eger)
Bay Middleton (1)
Barbelle
Sultan (8)
Cobweb (1)
Sandbuk (8)
Darioletta (3)
g
S «
Merope
Voltaire (12)
Blacklock (2)
Phantom(6) Mare(12
c *
£
G-dam of Moslem
Velocipede’s dam
Blacklock (2)
Juniper (9) Mare (3)
£ =
Harkaway
Economist (36)
Whisker (1)
Floranthe (36)
<53 .
(Good. Cup)
Fanny Dawson
Nabocklish (4)
d
King Tom (3)
Miss Tooley (2)
u
=
(11)
lica
Sire of Hannah
Pocahontas
Glencoe (1)
Sultan (8)
Trampoline (1)
u
OJ
dS ?
<L> J
be
< 2
55 -
Dam of Stockwell
Marpessa
Muley (6)
Clare (3)
0)
c 7i
Adeline
Ion
Sire of Wild Dayrell
Cain (8)
Margaret
Paulowitz (8)
Paynator(18) Mare(8)
Edmund (12)
Medora (4)
d
3rd daughter of Orme
Little Fairy
Hornsea (15)
Velocipede (3)
Cerberus(5) Mare(15
Q
at
<
■j-sister to Little
W onder
Lacerta
Bodiac (1)
Jerboa (11)
T3
Longbow (21)
Ithuriel (2)
Touchstone (14)
Verbena (2)
0
z
6
u
Toxopholite (3)
(Sire of Feu-de-Joie)
Miss Bowe
Catten (2)
Orville (8) Mare (21)
fcd
V
(2nd Derby)
Legerdemain
Pantaloon (17)
Castrel (2)
Idalia (17)
Musket (2
Trenton, Carbi
Martini Hen
Sister to Sleight of
Hand
Decoy
Tilko da Puta (12)
Finesse (3)
West Australian (7)
Melbourne (1)
Hump Clinker (8)
Cervantes(8) Mare(l)
to Gen.
(St. Leger)
Mowerina
Touchstone (14)
Emma (7)
C3
bC
c 1
|
Peel’s dam
Brown Bess
Camel (24)
Whalebone (1)
Selim (2) Mare (24)
w
a ~
bC S
rt m-
b£ c
Daughter of
Brutandorp (11)
Mrs.Cruickshanks(3)
OJ
X
Heron (19)
Bustard (35)
Castrel (2)
Miss Hap (35)
d
u3 g
Q
0
o
X
Fisherman (imp)(ll)
Daughter of
Orville (8)
Rosanna (19)
s
<D
'£
—■s*
(Ascot, Gold Cup)
Main Brace
Sheet Anchor (12)
Daughter of
Lottery (11)
Morgiana (12)
Bay Middleton (1)
Wliisker(l) Mare (11)
rQ
-jOu
>> J£ cs
Touchstone (14)
Camel (24)
Whalebone (1)
Selim (2) Mare (24)
“■5 s
0
Juliet (imp.)
(St, Leger)
Banter
Master Henri (3)
Boadicea (14)
0
G-dam of Robinson
Crusoe
Lancashire Witch
Timbery (8)
Idle Bay (15)
Alekina (8)
c
Kite
Bustard (joj
Olympia (13)
11
Merton, New South Wales.


King Tom (3)
Harkaway (2)
Economist (36)
Daughter of
Whisker (1)
Nabocklish (5)
0
Pocahontas
Glencoe (1)
Marpessa
Sultan (8)
Muley
C/5
<3
XJ
Ph
Merry Sunshine
Storm (20)
Touchstone (14)
Ghuznec
Camel (24)
Pantaloon (17)
•/o
6
o
J3
Daughter of
Falstaff (3)
Daughter of
Touchstone (14)
Emilius (28)
b£
Vandal (12)
Glencoe (1)
Sultan (8)
Trampoline
Selim (2)
Tramp (3)
C3
Daughter of
Tran by (21)
Lucilla
Blacklock (2)
Trumpator (14)
5
to
iTT
'5,
CS
u
Daughter of
Margrave (8)
Muley (6)
Daughter of
Orville (8)
Election (5)
Mistletoe
Cherokee (25)
Black Eyed Susan
Red Shank (15)
Tiger
cs
X
<M
Boston (40)
Timoleon
Sir Archy (13)
Daughter of
Diomed (6)
Saltram (9)
o
t-
5
Daughter of
Florizell
Daughter of
Diomed (6)
Alderman (26)
bC
Alice Carneal
Sarpedon (13)
Emilius (28)
Icaria
Orville (8)
The Flyer (17)
_o
d
D
Rowena
Sumpter (4)
Lady Grey
Sir Archy (13)
Robin Grey
U
£
Eclipse (1)
Orlando (13)
Touchstone (14)
Vulture
Camel (24)
Langar (6)
J
Gaze
Bay JVnuuleton (i)
Flycatcher
Sultan (S)
Godolphin (18)
d
cm
Molly Jackson
Vandal (12)
Glencoe (1)
Daughter of
Sultan (8)
Tranby (21)
z
GC
to
Emma Wright
Margrave
Fanny Wright
Muley (6)
Silverheels
i
0
CM
Parmesan (7)
Sweetmeat (21)
Gladiator (22)
Lollypop
Partisan (1)
Voltaire (12)
<c
Q
to
V
u
Gruyere
Verulum (1)
Jennla
Lottery (11)
Touchstone (14)
CM
V
Rigolboche
Rataplan (3)
The Baron (24)
Pocahontas
Birdcatcher(11)
Glencoe ( 1)
T3
u
cs
6
Daughter of
Card ham (11)
Daughter of
Falcon (8)
Langar (6)
'd
Lord Lyon (1)
Stockwell (3)
The Baron (24)
Pocahontas
Birdcatcher (11)
Glencoe (1)
*2
u
CD
D
Paradigm
Paragone (2)
Ellen Horne
Touchstone (14)
Redshank (2)
j
Alarum
Alarm (19)
Venison (11)
Southdown
Partisan (1)
Defence (5)
>»
u
1)
Amata
Velocipede (3)
Jane Shore
Blacklock (2)
Woful (1)
D
C/5
'S
b£
CM
Orlando (13)
Touchstone (14)
Camel (24)
Banter
Whalebone (1)
Master Henry (3)
T3
u
m
C/5
Vulture
Langar (6)
Kite
Selim (2)
Bustard (35)
0
to
C/5
U
Malibran
Whisker (1)
Waxey (18)
Penelope
Pot-8-os (38)
Trumpator (14)
X
CD
u
CQ
a;
C/5
S
Garcia
Octavian (8)
Daughter of
Stripling (2)
Shuttle (21)
J
Tadmor (12)
Ion (1)
Cain (8)
Margaret
Paulowitz (8)
Edmund (12)
•i
Palmyra
Sultan (8)
Hester
Selim (2)
Camel (24)
"
0)
Cfl
Miss Sellon
Cowl (2)
Bay Middleton (1)
Crucifix
Sultan (8)
Priam (6)
Belle Dame
Belshazzar (11)
Ellen
Blacklock (2)
Starch (23)
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF THOROUGHBRED MARES
MERTON CATTLE.
Merton, New South Wales.


to obtain a lease of Flavus from Messrs. W. and F. A. Moses, of Combadello,
Moree. At first Messrs. Moses Bros, would not sell, but after leasing flavus for two years
Mr. White purchased him, and he is now in his fifth season as a sire. His fee is 25 guineas,
and outside the Merton stud the following are among the noted mares visiting him ;
Alemene, Saucer (imp.), Pendant, Beresina, Cheapglass (imp.), and Olive Branch, dam of
Fitzgrafton. Flavus is a fine representative of the Hampton strain, which nicks so well
with St. Simon blood. He is by Hampton (10), by Lord Clifton (2), sire of Newmin-
ster (8) from Lady Langdon, by Kettledrum (3), sire of Rataplan (3) from Haricot, by
IRRIGATION PADDOCK.
Lanecost (3) from Queen Mary. The dam of Flavus was Aloara (8), by Albert Victor (13),
son of Marsyas (12), and grandson of Stockwell (3) from Allerion, by Chevron (1), sire
of Rosicrucian (5) from Lady Trespass, by JBirdcatcher (11) from Stolen Moments. Flavus
is the first and only Hampton stallion imported to Australia, and should therefore be a
valuable mate for mares of the St. Simon-Galopin strain. On the English turf he proved
himself a sound reliable horse, with good staying powers. He won over all distances,
from a mile to two miles, and besides being placed in several important races, he won the
Bradgate Plate, ran a dead heat for the Leicester Plate, won the Pontefract Castle Plate,
i 4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Great Northern Handicap at York, Doddington Stakes at Lincoln, Wynnstay Handicap at
Chester, Lincoln Handicap, Cumbermore Handicap at Chester, the Flying Dutchman Handicap
at York, Warwickshire Spring Handicap, Effingham Plate at Epsom, Middlethorpe Plate at
Vork, and other good performances. Since being at the stud out here he has sired
Flaxen, winner of Queensland Derby, Cup, and many classical races in that State ; Flavel,
winner of big races in iasmania ; Flavol, winner of six races; Flavour, winner of several
good races for the Hon. Agar Wynne ; Flavinius, winner of eight good races. Other winners
got by him are Captain White, winner of the Maribyrnong Trial Plate, and Kuringai (out
of Velox) who ran two good seconds in Melbourne and Sydney as a two-year-old, and a
first as a three-year-old at Rosehill (September, 1909), and since won six races in Vic-
toria. Flavus is also the sire of Lord Hampton, half-brother to Lord Nolan, and very likely
to be heard of as a good prizewinner. There are many minor winners amongst Flavus’
progeny, but the above are the most notable. He is just the horse to mate with Bill
of Portland, Haut Brion, Gossoon, Grafton, Gozo, or Positano mares.
Mr. White s latest addition to the stud is En Garde, which he imported in 1909. This
fine bay horse is by the great St. Simon out of Engagement, full sister to Martini Henri.
Engagement was by Musket (3) from Sylvia (13), by Fisherman (11) from Juliet, &c. En
Garde only started twice, and he won his first race (weight for age) very easily. He was
bred by Mr. Russell in England, and he was subsequently purchased by Mr. John Gubbins
for the purpose of leading the great Ard Patrick in his work. Ard Patrick was subse-
quently sold for 20,000 guineas, and En Garde was secured by the Cobham Stud, England.
Mr. White purchased him from there, and lie is now standing at Merton at a 20-guinea fee.
Mr. White purchased this sire because his breeding is eminently suited to so many Aus-
tralian mares. He should nick well with Mr White’s Flavus fillies, in securing the success-
ful Hampton-St. Simon cross. In addition to Mr. White’s own mares, some very
aristocratic brood mares visited En Garde this, 1909-10, season. Amongst them were Lady
Lybia, dam of Lord Nolan and half-sister to Lord Cardigan ; Duisdale (imp.) ; Flying Polh
(imp.) ; Charmant (imp.) ; La Tosca, by Robinson Crusoe from Nightmare, by Panic ; KaL
latina, dam of Legation ; Chaperone ; Mrs. Grundy, full sister to Ambente ; and several
others.
personal.
Mr. Edward Reginald White is the eldest son of Mr. Edward White, late of Martindale,
but now of Kigwigil, Kirribilli Point, Sydney. He was born at Merton in 1869, and ne
lived there until he went to the Sydney Grammar School at thirteen years of age. He took
up the management of Martindale when eighteen years of age, and continued until 1894
when he went to live at Merton. In addition to the blood stock, Mr. White has opened
Merton, New South Wales.


HUNTER RIVER.
up several dairies, and he established the butter factory at Denman in spite of many diffi-
culties. It is now a great success. He is president of the Upper Hunter Agricultural
Society, chairman of the Denman Co-operative Butter Factory, member of the Pastures
Protection Board and Muswellbrook Shire Council. About ten years ago he formed a squad-
ron of Light Horse at Muswellbrook, in which he now holds the rank of captain.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Martindale Estate.
The Property of Messrs Martindale White Bros.
MARTINDALE, the property of “ The Martindale White 8r05.,” and lately owned
by Mr. Edward White, lies on the Blunter River at its confluence with the
Goulburn River, about ten miles from Denman, and it dates back to the very
early settlement of New South Wales. When the pioneers spread out from Sydney some
went over the Bulga Mountains down to Singleton, then called Patrick’s Plains, and others
went up the coast and opened up country at Newcastle and Morpeth. Thus the Hunter
was settled simultaneously in two places, and much of the early history of the State centres
round these parts. Mr. Edward White, still hale and hearty, remembers Muswellbrook
when it was a small place and had many of the characteristics of an old English village,
even to the stocks in the village square, which were ofttimes used. The large holdings
FATTENING CATTLE.
I


round about were Crown grants
to army and naval officers, given
with the idea of inducing settle-
ment. The country was mostly
heavily timbered, and it required
men with the hearts of lions to enter
such a wilderness. There was no
market in those days, and though
these pioneers had large areas of
land, living was very hard. They
were big landowners, but not capi-
talists, in fact, outside mercantile
concerns and banks there was very
little capital. Among the early
THE CEDARS, OX THE BANKS OF THE HUNTER.
settlers were George Forbes (brother of Sir Francis Forbes), who owned Edinglassie ;
Joseph Bettington, who had Piercefield ; Captain Ogilvie, of Merton ; Captain Pike, of
Pickering ; Thomas Hall, of Dartbrook ; J. Cox, of Negoah ; Colonel Dumaresque, of St.
Helliers ; and Captain Wright, of Bengalla. In those days labour was cheap and efficient.
For many years the settlers had convicts assigned to them, and capital servants many of
them made. The old system was for the Crown to grant so much land in return for
settlers taking prisoners off its hands. In the course of time the land was brought into
use, and large flocks of sheep were established. Muswellbrook and Maitland grew, and a
THE HUNTER RIVER.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. E. R WHITE
(MERTON)
MR. J. F. WHITE
(SHANNON VALE)
MR. EDWARD WHITE.
3
MR. A. M. WHITE
(BOLIVIA)
MR. H. H. WHITE
(MARTINDALE)
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales.


MARTINDALE SHROPSHIRE SHEEP.
steamboat service was started from Sydney to Morpeth. The “ Sophia Jane ” was the first
boat in the trade, then followed the “Rose,” “Thistle,” and “Shamrock.” Morpeth was
the head of navigation on the Hunter, and became an important place. The first northern
railway was started from there to Maitland by a private company, but it failed, and the
Government subsequently continued the work. Wool and tallow were the only products
marketable. When land was sold it was often done on the annuity system, which was
rather unique. No cash was paid, the property was exchanged for an annuity. It was
a sporting transaction somewhat common in those days ; the vendor got an annuity of so
much for life. Of course he may have lived to a great age or have died soon, but that was
the gamble. In one case the purchaser died some fifteen years before the annuity
expired. Most of the properties on that part of the Hunter are now devoted entirely to
cattle and horses, but in those days large numbers of fine-woolled Merino sheep were run.
There were no subdivisions or boundaries ; fencing wire did not come in until about 1860,
and it was slow work erecting timber fences. With the exception of horse and sheep yards,
there were no fences at all, and flocks were shepherded by day and yarded at night. In
the course of years the finer grasses were eaten out, and sheep had to give place to horses
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales,


and cattle, and this
has been the condition
of things ever since.
Martindale has al-
ways held a great
name for horses. The
early equines were
horses of the old Eng-
lish stamp, active, with
large bone and power-
ful quarters. They
were got by blood stal-
lions out of a class of
mares then most com-
mon in the country.
THE GARDEN.
They evidently had a strong dash of Cleveland Bay or Coaching blood in them, but they were
active and very hardy. Sixty miles a day for days on end they could manage easily.
But there came a time when horses were of no value except for their tallow and hides.
There was a boiling-down establishment near Maitland where settlers could get their
horses boiled down for a few shillings and hides and oil returned to them. It used to be
the custom on Sundays to turn these horses into a yard where anyone could select and
purchase one at about 10s. per head. These horses were not necessarily derelicts ; many
were sound, splendidly bred, and of excellent stamp.
Mr. Edward White,
who recently made
Martindale over to his
sons, was born at Edin-
glassie, near Muswell-
brook, in 1839. He is
the youngest son of the
late Mr. James White,
who came to Australia
in the early twenties to
manage one of the
A.A. Company’s pro-
perties, and who sub-
sequently purchased
Edinglassie and other
properties. Mr. Ed-
PORTION OF DRIVE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


MERTON HOMESTEAD.
ROLIVIA HOMESTEAD.
7
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales.


GLEN ELGIN.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


waM White, after fin-
ishing his education in
Sydney, turned his at-
tention to pastoral pur-
suits at Edinglassie
and at his father’s
places north of Bell-
trees. The first pro-
perty he took up on his
own account was Mer-
ton, now the residence
of his son, Mr. E. R.
White. This estate
he purchased from
Captain Ogilvie in 1864,
SHANNON VALE.
and in 1875 he purchased Martindale, comprising 30,000 acres, from his brother James.
The land consists of rugged hills, with rich valleys in between. Very little feed grows on
the hills, but the valleys will produce almost anything.
Martindale is chiefly a fattening property, though it has long been famed for the high-
class Shorthorn cattle and general utility horses bred there.
The Shorthorn stud was founded on some specially selected heifers purchased from the
famous Bylong herd, owned by the late Mr. John Lee. These cattle were the very finest
and purest in the colony. Mr. White also imported very fine bulls and cows from England,
FAT BULLOCKS, MARTINDALE.
9
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales,


CULTIVATION PADDOCKS, MARTINDALL.
so the Martindale herd was started on very sound foundations. Mr. White took particular
interest in this stud, and brought it to a high standard. There are a few magnificent
roans in the herd, but reds have been chiefly bred. The stud numbers about 500 head,
and in addition about 5000 bullocks, bred in New England, are fattened there.
The original horses at Martindale were of the type referred to in the early part of this
article. Mr. White has made a specialty of putting English coaching stallions to
thoroughbred mares, and has achieved
marked success from this line of breeding.
There has always been a ready sale for the
Martindale horses. Mr. White bred Clydes-
dales for some years, but in 190 G he dis-
posed of all except those required for sta-
tion work.
In 1880 he purchased Bolivia Station,
in the Tenterfield district, from the late Mr.
Edward Irby, the pioneer of that part of
the country. In the nineties Mr. White
purchased Glen Elgin, Shannon Vale, and
Newton Boyd, in the Glen limes district,
and on these properties cattle are bred and
sent down to fatten at Martindale. He also
purchased Ballandean, a run of 200,000
acres in the Stanthorpe district of Queens-
land. He put his son Walter to manage
THE VIBRALTAR ROCK, MARTINDALL.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MARTINDALE HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS.
this property, but he contracted fever and died, so Mr. White disposed of it.
IPersonal.
Mr. Edward White was born at Edinglassie in 1839, and was educated at St. James’
Grammar School, Sydney, a very old school run in conjunction with St. James’ Church of
England. At an early age he turned his attention to pastoral matters, and gained con-
siderable experience on his father’s properties. He gradually .cquired the various
estates above-mentioned, and always improved what land he handled. In 1866 he married
Maria, the daughter
of the Hon. Archi-
bald Bell, of Picker-
ing. The family
consists of four sons
and three daughters.
The sons are Ed-
ward Reginald, of
Merton ; Archibald
Merton, of Bolivia ;
James Frederick, of
Glen Elgin ; and
Harold Hastings, of
Martindale. In 1908
MARTINDALE GARDEN.
11
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales.


BROOD MARES.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD SHORTHORNS.
Mr. White decided to retire from active pastoral life, and his sons took over the properties
under the name of Martindale White Bros., with Mr. E. R. White as managing director.
Mr. White, while engaged in station life, took a prominent part in matters affecting
the district in which he lived. He was for many years president of the Upper Hunter Pas-
toral and Agricultural Society and a prominent member of the Maitland and Singleton
societies. He is also one of the oldest, if not the oldest, members of the Royal Agricul-
tural Society of New South Wales. He was also actively identified with a large number
of public bodies,
such as the Denman,
Muswellbrook, and
Singleton Pastures
Protection Boards,
the School of Arts,
Muswellbrook, and
being a magistrate
took a fair share of
duty on the Bench
botn at Muswell-
brook and Denman.
On retiring from
pastoral life Mr.
THOROUGHBRED STALLION TAREE, BY GRAFTON FROM LADY MARY,
445
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales.


GREIG’S CREEK, MARTINDALE.
14
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


“ KIGVVIGIL,” MR. EDWARD WHITE’S HOME IN SYDNEY.
»5
The Martindale Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW OF SYDNEY HARBOUR FROM “ KIGWIGIL.”
White purchased Kigwigil, a beautiful residence at Kirribilli Point, overlooking Sydney Har-
bour. From this delightful situation there is a most extensive view of the busiest part
of Port Jackson. Here, in lovely surroundings, though a long way from the Hunter, Mr.
ana Mrs. White still take a keen interest in the events of their old district and in pastoral
matters generally. It may be added that in 1861 Mr. White went to take charge of stations
on the Barwon, near Brewarrina, where he formed one of the first sheep stations in that
part of the State. In 1864 the greatest flood ever known in those districts occurred, and
Mr. White and his brothers, Messrs. James White and F. R. White, lost 18,000 sheep—
practically their whole flock. In 1873 they sold out Boorooma, a station of 400,000 acres,
to Dr. Mein, of Victoria, and the station is still in the Mein family, and has been converted
from a cattle to a sheep station. This ended Mr. White’s connection with out-back pas-
toral life.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Brindley Park Estate.
The Property of Mr. I.B. Bettington.
THE name of Brindley Park, owned by Mr. J. B. Bettington, is closely identified with
the early settlement of Australia, and no history of the wool industry would be
complete without reference to this estate or to the name of Bettington. None
have done more to improve the general flocks of Australia than the past and present owners
of Brindley Park.
GROUP OF FLOCK EWES.
The estate, which is situated about one mile from Merriwa, was taken up in the earlv
twenties by the late Mr. James Brindley Bettington, who arrived in New South Wales in
1820. He was accompanied by his brother, the late John Henshall Bettington, and their
aunt, Susanah Brindley. The brothers were the sons of John Bettington, of Bristol, an
i


East India merchant, who married a Miss Brindley, daughter
of James Brindley. The latter was one of England’s most
notable self-made men, and it is he who is mentioned in the
work, “James Brindley and the Early Engineers.” He was
the Duke of Bridgewater’s architect for the Bridgewater
Canal, and was engaged on many other important works.
On arrival in Sydney in 1820, Messrs. James and John
Bettington, who brought considerable capital with them, be-
came interested in commercial pursuits. After some years,
however, Mr. James Bettington (father of the present owner)
took up land near Bathurst in conjunction with his future
father-in-law, William Lawson, the well-known pastoralist
MR. J. H. BETTINGTON.
and explorer. Brindley Park was subsequently taken up by Mr. Bettington, and five years
later a Merino stud was formed from which many now
leading flocks originated.
Brindley Park comprises about 80,000 acres of free-
hold land, black soil plains intermixed with basaltic
ridges. It is rich country all through, and the rainfall
averages about 25 in. Indigenous herbage and grasses
grow luxuriantly when seasons are anything like
favourable. The black soil flats are suited to lucerne
growing, but owing to the severe frosts in winter and
great heat in summer only about three cuts per annum
can be depended upon. The country is particularly
suited to the growth of the variegated thistle, which
covers a great portion of
the run in good seasons.
It sometimes attains a
height of 8 or 9 feet, and
will carry several head of
MR. A. B. BETTINGTON.
MR. J. B. BETTINGTON.
cattle to the acre for six months of the year. The stony
ridges grow very nutritious grasses in the spring and autumn
months.
Jmprovements.
The southern boundary of Brindley Park is strongly
netted, but owing to the broken nature of the country gene-
-2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEWS AROUND BRINDLEY PARK HOMESTEAD.
3
The Brindley Park Estate New South Wales,


THE SIDE GARDEN AND CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.
TWO-YEAR OLD FLOCK EWES,
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED AND BUILDINGS, BRINDLEY PARK
tally it is not possible to effectually net the northern and western boundaries. How-
ever, though rabbits were once very numerous on the estate, they have been got under, and
have nearly disappeared. The methods adopted by Mr. Bettmgton have been poisoning,
digging out, and hunting, all with most satisfactory results. The property is divided into
about eighty paddocks, which gives opportunities for spelling portions of the run when
required. Though Brindley Park is well watered by various branches of the Merriwa and
Bow Creeks, Mr. Bettmgton has carried out extensive improvements for supplying water
to stock in the summer months. About thirty-eight wells have been sunk in various parts
of the run, and each is fitted with a windmill which raises the water and distributes it to
where required. Some 200 acres are under lucerne, and a considerable quantity of wheat
and oats for haymaking.
The woolshed is of modern type, and is fitted with forty stands of Wolseley machines.
It is interesting to here
note that Mr. Betting-
ton was one of the ori-
ginal promoters of the
Wolseley machines.
When shearing ma-
chines were first in-
vented they aroused a
considerable amount
of prejudice and oppo-
sition. Their advan-
tages were not imme-
diately recognised by
STUD EWES.
5
The Brindley Park Estate, Nevj South Wales.


all, and Mr. Betting-
ton was one of those
who helped the late
Mr. F. Y. Wolseley to
fight down the preju-
dices, and it is now-
common history how
the shearing machine
has displaced the
blades throughout
Australia,
The Brindley Park
homestead is a solid
stone building of the
cool bungalow style.
THE MAIN GREEK.
There are fine old trees round it, but being built on a basalt ridge the opportunities for
gardens are somewhat restricted. There are wide verandahs and plenty of cool shade,
and water is laid on throughout the garden.
It is, however, to the Merino stud that Brindley Park owes its prominence. It is
one of the oldest and best-bred flocks in the Commonwealth, and several now successful
studs in Northern New South Wales and Southern Queensland owe their origin to Brindley
Park. Before the late Mr. J. B. Bettington came to Australia he spent some time in Ger-
many, where he learned a great deal about Merino sheep and wool. Therefore when he
took up land in Australia in 1829 the first thing he did was to send to Saxony for high-
class sheep. His first
purchase was in that
year, and it comprised
between 200 and 300
ewes bred at a place
near Ochatz. These
come out to Australia
in the care of Mr.
Henry Bracker, one of
the best judges of Me-
rino sheep in Australia
at that time. They
first went up to Mr.
Bettington’s property
near Bathurst, but
THE SHEEP DIP.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A WHEAT FIELD.
WOOL TEAMS ON THE ROAD.
The Brindley Park Estate, New South Wa/es.


WOOL TEAMS LEAVING BRINDLEY PARK.
subsequently in 1830 they were moved to Brindley Park, where they have remained ever
since. The late Mr. Bettington paid great attention to this flock, and without any fur-
ther introduction he improved the style of the sheep. In 1849 he imported a Silesian
ram, which was used until 1857. The present owner still remembers this fine old ram.
He was of the true German type, short in staple, and carrying very fine wool. He lived
to a great age, and towards the end of his life his twelve months’ fleece weighed but 4
lbs. in the grease. In 1861 two rams bred by Prince Lichnowski, the most celebrated
breeder in Prussian Silesia, were purchased from the late Hon. E. K. Cox, of Rawdon, who
imported them, and in 1868 a noted prizetaker, bred by Mr. E. C. Cox, of Brombee, was
introduced. From that time to 1885 no outside sires were introduced ; the flock was kept
within itself. “Brum,” in his work on “Sheepbreeding,” published in 1890, said:—
" The wool of the Brindley Park sheep has always realised good prices, and the weight has
been steadily increasing since the flock was established. When the wool was washed
the average weight of fleece for the whole flock, consisting of 40,000 sheep, was over 4
lbs. In 1885 the wool on the sheep of the estate (except lambs) averaged 81bs. 8 ozs.,
which would lose barely 50 per cent. The stud sheep cut heavy fleeces ; rams’ fleeces
weighed as high as 23 lbs. One ram when twelve years old cut 19 lbs. of greasy wool.
This ram was exhibited when eleven years old, and the judges thought so much of him
that they awarded him a special prize. The Brindley Park sheep have a very strong
O
The pastoral Homes of Australia.


OATLANDS.
The Brindley Park Estate, New/ South Wales.


THE LAWN, OATLANDS.
the necks with well-developed fronts.”
individuality. In their
heads, form and fleece,
they exhibit all the
signs of high breeding.
They are very robust in
frame, having well-
arched ribs and short
legs. The wool is of
excellent quality, and
has even the clearly-
defined serration
throughout the fibre. It
is well put on all over
the body, the thighs
being very good and
Ihe Brindley Park flock has made continued progress, and though Mr. Bettington does
not exhibit much now, years ago the Brindley Park wool was very successful at various
exhibitions. It is rather a pity that no record of prizes obtained for wool since 1868 has
been kept. At the Philadelphia Centennial exhibition the Brindley Park fleeces received
honourable mention, and at Messrs. R. Goldsbrough’s wool exhibition, held in Sydney in
18/8, Mr. Bettington secured a certificate o) merit for the best bale of greasy wool. At
Paris in the same year
he was awarded two
honourable mentions,
and he secured second
prize at the Sydney In-
ternational Exhibition
in 1870-80 for unwash-
ed rams’ fleeces, and
second prize for bale
of washed. This was
in competition against
the best wools in Aus-
tralia. At first only
a clothing wool was
grown on the estate,
but when the demand
THE GARDEN, OATLANDS.
I o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


for other wools arose,
Mr. Bettington altered
the type of clothing
wool, and the result
was that the average
weight of fleece per
head increased from
5 lbs. to 10J lbs. at the
present time.
Brindley Park is de-
voted almost entirely to
breeding purposes, all
the wether hoggets be-
ing disposed of at
eighteen months. In
GARDEN, OATEAKDS
anything like a fair season the lambing will average over 80 per cent.
A fair number of cattle are fattened every year, and Mr. Bettington keeps a fine breeding
herd on the property. His stud of horses, which were only bred for general purposes, was
almost entirely exterminated by the 1901-2 drought, and only horses for station purposes
are now bred.
■Personal.
The late Mr. J. B. Bettington returned to England, and died there in 1857, leaving a
family of three daughters and three sons. The present owner of Brindley Park was born
at Veteran Hall, Prospect, near Parramatta, the property of his grandfather. He was
educated at Mr. Cape’s academy at Darlinghurst, and after completing his education at
King’s School, Parramatta, went into an office to get a mercantile training. In 1858 he
took up the management of Brindley Park for his mother, and has been actively identified
with the station ever since. His father in the fifties purchased about 50,000 acres adjoin-
ing Brindley Park, and from time to time the property has been added to. It has the
reputation of being one of the oldest sheepbreeding establishments in Australia. Mr. Bet-
tington inherits his father’s love for horses, and he always had some good ones round him.
He is now the only surviving son of his father’s family. In 1804 he married Sophia
Caroline, th daughter of Ambrose Hallen, a well-known architect in Sydney. The issue
of the marriage is two sons and four daughters. The eldest son, John Henshall, lives at
Terragong, and the other son, Albemarle Brindley, manages Brindley Park. In 1840 the
11
The Brindley Park Estate, New South Wales.


BRINDLEY PARK WOOL TEAMS.
late Mr. J. B. Bettington purchased Oatlands, near Parramatta, from Captain Simpson, of
the Imperial Service, and father of the present Judge Simpson. On Mr. Bettington’s death
the property reverted to his widow, and on her death it was divided among the surviving
children. Mr. Bettington now spends most of his time at Oatlands, but he still takes an
active part in the working of his station property. He has always taken a keen interest
in the progress of the Merriwa district, and in sheepbreeding generally. He has been a
magistrate since 1858.
I 2
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Anama and Nombi Estates.
The Properties of Mr. Watter Hawker.
A NAMA, Mr. Hawker’s South Australian property, is situated ten miles from Clare and
/ \ about one hundred miles north of Adelaide. It consists of timbered hills rising
1 V. thirteen hundred feet above sea level, and having a rainfall of 22 inches, and
hot, dry treeless plains having only a 15-inch rainfall. Therefore, various conditions pre-
vail on the estate. It is all hue sheep country, and as the soil contains lime, iron, and
salt, the sheep grow to a great size, and, it is said, the only disease they die of is “ old
age.” Besides the pastoral land, about 1500 acres are farmed on shares system, and
this year the crops yielded an average of 25 bushels to the acre.
ANAMA STUD EWES, MACHINE SHORN.
Anama was originally part o r the Bungaree Estate, but, at the death of the late owner,
the Hon. G. C. Hawker, Mr. Walter Hawker received a fifth of Bungaree, and at the
dissolution of the late firm of “ Hawker Brothers,” he received, in common with his
brothers, one-fifth of all the stud and flock sheep on Bungaree.
i


The Anama flock was originally formed by the late Hon. G. C. Hawker in 1841, who
purchased 2000 ewes descended from King George IH.’s Merinos (the same blood as the
Camden Park flock) in lamb to Steiger rams. These ewes were purchased from Mr.
Thomas Icely, near Bathurst, N.S.W., and were travelled overland to Soutti Australia.
In 1858 five Negrette rams were used, but as their progeny was inferior to the home-
bred stud sheep, they were discarded from the stud. In 1861 five or six Rambouillet
rams were imported from France and used, and their stock was in every way satisfactory.
Mr. John Noble, then in charge of the stud, describes these rams as large-framed, straight-
backed, big-boned, robust sheep, well covered with a fleece of payable wool, long and
THREE PRIZE EWES AT ADELAIDE SHOW DURING THE 80’S
strong in type. About the year 1862 Mr. John Hope made Mr. Hawker a present of
another imported Rambouillet ram, which proved to be the best of them all, and it is
chiefly to this ram that the Hawker Merino owes the position it holds to-day. In 1874
three young rams were purchased from the late Mr. John Murray, of Mt. Crawford, but
these did not suit the Hawker ewes, so they were discarded. In 1887 an old ram was
bought from the same breeder, and was used with some success in the stud. In 1884
three high-priced rams v/ere obtained from Messrs. W. Gibson and Sons, of Scone, Tas..
and in 1888 two fine rams were obtained from a well-known Riverina stud. None of these
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ANAMA HOMESTEAD.
The Anama Estate, South Australia ; The Nombi Estate, N. S. Wales.


ANAMA STUD 2 TOOTH RAMS.
ANAMA STUD 2-TOOTH EWES.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD RAM “EMPEROR.”
Champion at Adelaide, 1881, 1882, 1883. Bred and exhibited by the
late Hon. G. C. Hawker.
late Hon. G. C. Hawker.
rams, however, nicked well with the
Hawker ewes, so their progeny was entirely
discarded from the stud. In September, 1907,
a valuable ram was obtained from Boonoke,
and this ram promises to be a success in every
way. Eighty-six lambs were obtained from
him the first year, and FIG the second. Being
a big bold sheep with heavy bone, and having
strong wool, spinning about sixties, he has
nicked well with the Hawker ewes. The pro-
geny seem to combine the good qualities of
each strain to a remarkable degree.
The flock for forty-seven years up to 1901,
was under the management of Mr. John Noble, and he established a very uniform type of
sheep, in which the influence of the Rambouillet blood is plainly visible. Mr. Noble’s first
aim was to produce a large-framed, sound-constitutioned sheep, and then clothe it with a
fleece of robust combing wool, with long staple, and able to stand the dry and arid country
of South Australia.
The grown sheep average from 10 to 11
lbs. of wool, according to the season ; very
few wethers are shorn, this year only 250 4-
tooths and 1197 2-tooths. On an average 90
per cent of lambs are reared from the flock
ewes, and from the studs 80 to 90 per cent.
The wethers of this flock grow to a great
size, and it is common for the full mouthed
fat wethers to average over 70 lbs. dressed.
In 1895, five fat Hawker wethers took first
prize at Adelaide, and averaged 139 lbs. each
when dressed.
The 2-tooth stud and flock rams this year
HAEKER STUD EWES.
Champion at Adelaide,1881. Bred and Exhibited by the
late Hon.G.C.Hawker.
cut 15 lbs. 15 9-10 ozs. Many of these will scour over 50 per cent, of clean wool. Four
trial fleeces scoured by G. FI. Mitchell and Sons, Woolscourers, Hindmarsh, S.A., yielded
as follows :
No. i ... Greasy weight 16 lbs. 12 ozs. .. Scoured 9 lbs. yielded 57.46 per cent.
No. 2 ... ~ ~ 16 lbs. 8 ozs. ... ~ 8 lbs. 4 ozs. ~ 50 ~
No. 3 ... ~ ~ 16 lbs. 4 ozs. ... ~ 8 lbs. ~ 49.23 ~
No. 4 ... ~ ~ 15 lbs. 8 ozs. ... ~ 9 lbs. 4 ozs. ~ 59.68 ~
5
The Anama Estate, South Australia; The Nombi Estate, N. S. Wales.


"CECIL RHODES,” DOUBLE STUD RAM USED AT NOMBI.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


As the staple is long,
strong, and of good spinning
quality, the sheep large and
free from body wrinkles,
they are eminently suited for
crossing with the small
dense, wrinkly sheep, so
fashionable a few years ago.
These sheep have given
uniform satisfaction whe-
ther sent to Western Aus-
FIRST PRIZE EWE AND LAMB AT ADELAIDE SHOW DURING THE 80’S.
Mr. Walter Hawker aims at producing a very payable sheep, avoiding all extremes.
He does not look at the price per lb. for the wool so much as the profit per sheep, and,
above all, the sheep must be robust and of great constitution.
IHoiubi.
NOMBI, the property of Mr. Walter Hawker, was purchased from Messrs. H. Moses
and Sons in 1906. It is situated about twenty-nine miles west of Gunnedah,
one of the most important towns on the far-famed Liverpool Plains. This great
expanse of country is noted for its marvellous fattening capabilities ; stock grow to a great
size, and come to maturity early. The soil on Nombi is about two-thirds chocolate and
one-third red soil, both being rich in phosphates, containing from 8 to 10 per cent. In
anything like a favourable season there is a wonderful growth of valuable natural grasses
and herbage. On the plains in good seasons the grass attains a great height, and the
whole country assumes the appearance of a wheat field. Close against the soil amongst
the tall plain grass there is usually a thick growth of the finer grasses and clovers, which
the stock eat with relish. On the red soil ridges a different class of feed is found, but
it is a rich and lasting kind, and, being well mixed with trefoil, &c., it can be relied upon
to withstand prolonged dry spells. The property is well watered with bores, wells,
and permanent creeks.
The sheep on Nombi are descended from Mr. Hawker’s famous Anama flock,
7
tralia, North Queensland, or South Africa.
The Anama Estate, South Australia; The Nombi Estate, N. S. Wales.


previously described. They are of the same
big, robust type, and this year (1909), the
breeding ewes averaged 88 per cent, of lambs.
The two-tooth ewes and wethers averaged
91bs. 12ozs. The sheep carry fleeces of long,
robust wool, bright and light in condition,
spinning sixties. They are specially noted
for their great constitution, which quality
enables the ewes to rear a heavy per-
centage of lambs. Mr. Hawker has found
these sheep far less subject to the attack of
maggot fly than most of the New South Wales
types of sheep.
IMPORTED JACK, “ BUNGAREE.”
In addition to sheep, Nombi is renowned for possessing one of the largest studs of
high-class donkeys in Australia. No expense has been spared with these, and the stud
contains many notable donkeys imported from America and Spain.
The cattle at Nombi chiefly consist of Shorthorns, and here again Mr. Hawker only
has the best. He also has some very fine draught mares on the estate, many having
SHORTHORN CATTLE, NOMBI.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


NOMBI HOMESTEAD.
9
The Anemia Estate, South Australia; The Nombi Estate, N. S. Wales.


IMPORTED AND HOME-BRED STUD JENNIES, UP TO 14 HANDS 2 IN. HIGH, NOMBI.
CLYDESDALE MARES, NOMBI.
SHORTHORN CATTLE, NOMBI.
1 c
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STACKING LUCERNE HAY, NOMBI.
WOOLSHKD AND SURROUNDING COUNTRY, NOMBI.
11
The An am a Estate, South Australia ; The Nombi Estate, N. S- Wales.


OUTBUILDINGS, NOMBI
been bred by the Weinholt Estate Company of Maryvale, Queensland, before the dispersal
of that stud.
While prolific in the production of rich natural grasses and herbage, the soil at Nombi,
in common with the whole of the Liverpool Plains, is eminently suitable for the cultiva-
tion of lucerne, maize,
and wheat. Wheat
does particularly well,
and is grown to a con-
siderable extent, 30
bushels and more per
acre being obtained, in
a good season. The
crops are usually cut
with a reaper and
binder and thrashed,
because if left until
ready for stripping
thunder storms are
liable to cause dam-
age.
IMPORTED JACK, “BUNGAREE,” 14 HANDS 3 IN., AT NOMBI.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Wamambri Estate.
The Property of Messrs. T. J. and W.Rogers.
ULAMAMBRI is one of the best-known estates in the Coonabarabran district. It
is the property of Messrs. T. J. and W. Rogers, and it comprises about 16,000
acres freehold and 35,000 acres leasehold and improvement lease country. The
estate was originally the property of the late Mr. Edward King Cox, who- held it for manv
years. It was subsequently sold to the late Mr. Ebenezer Orr, and later it passed to
Sir Patrick Jennings, from whom Messrs. Rogers Bros, purchased it in 1888.
SHOWING TYPE OF COUNTRY.
Ulamambri has an average rainfall of 28J inches, is undulating country comprising
rich basalt ridges intersecting open black soil flats. The estate is splendidly watered,
having a double frontage to the Castlereagh River, in addition to several big creeks and
numerous tanks and wells all over the run. The question of water supply has been an
important one to Messrs. Rogers, and they have gone to a great deal of expense in regard
to it. The run is a large one, and it is, recognised that convenient water is one of the
i


essentials in sucessful stock management. The owners of Ulamambri are fortunate in
being able to obtain water at moderate depths ; on many parts of the run good supplies
are tapped at from 15 to 50 feet. A large area of the estate is purely grazing country,
but there are about 9000 acres of rich red soil, very choice wheat lands, and about 1000
acres in river and creeks frontage, well adapted for lucerne growing.
The principal timber on the estate is white box, but special features of the country
are the many large clumps of kurrajong, in many places being quite a forest, one of the
most valuable of the native trees for feeding stock on in times of drought.
THE WOOLSHED AND OUTBUILDINGS.
The homestead is a wooden building situated on the banks of the Castlereagh, and
round it is a considerable area of garden. All the outbuildings are grouped conveniently
by. The estate is subdivided into about thirty paddocks, and fenced and subdivided
with wire netting. Ihe rabbit pest has been a source of trouble necessitating a good deal
of expenditure. There are altogether about eighty miles of wire netting on the estate.
Messrs. Rogers Bros, have gone in extensively for improvements. As before stated,
the water supply has received a great deal of attention. Numerous dams have been con-
structed, and they have all been from 2000 to 8000 square yards in size, and excavated
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STATION OUTBUILDINGS.
The Ulamambri Estate, New South Wales.


THE CASTLEREAGH RIVER.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


to a depth of from 12 to 14 feet. Tanks such as these have been placed in convenient
places throughout the run. There are also about five windmills on the estate. Then,
again, ringbarking has been undertaken on an extensive scale. All the thickly-timbered
country has been ringbarked, but the work has been carried out in a judicious manner.
Valuable timber has been left for shade and shelter purposes, and there are some fine
trees on the estate, especially along the river banks.
The shearing shed is one of the old landmarks on the estate. It was built about
fitfy years ago of ironbark, and is a very substantial building to this present day. It is
A CROSSING ON THE CASTLEREAGH RIVER.
brought up to date in many respects. It is fitted with twenty stands of Wolseley shear-
ing machines, driven by an 8 h.p. engine. The various yards on the place are of an
ordinary nature, but well adapted for all requirements.
The sheep dip, constructed of galvanised iron, was put down over ten years ago, and
it is now as good as ever. It is of the full length, viz., 60 yards; there are two draining
pens connected with it. There is also a weather shed capable of holding about 2000 sheep.
Messrs. Rogers Bros, run about 35,000 sheep on the property. The main portion of
5
The Ulamambri Estate, New South Wales.


the flock is Merino,
but a large number
of Lincoln rams are
used, necessitating
the keeping of a pure
Lincoln stud.
The average
weight of fleece cut
by the Ulamambri
sheep is about 9 lbs.,
and the prices ob-
tained have been up
to 18d. in the high
markets. The wool
BABY CREEK.
is dense and of long staple, and it excites keen competition at the Sydney sales, where
it is usually sold. The sheep are of a large hardy type, and they fatten readily The
lambing percentages are first rate, being in the vicinity of 90 per cent.
COUNTING OUT,
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


APPLE TREE FLATS ON RIVER.
7
The Ulamambri Estate, New South Wales.


RIVER FLATS.
WATER HOLE, BABY CREEK,
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


Messrs. Rogers
Bros, have had con-
siderable experience
with the blowfly,
and, as one of the
precautions, they
make a point of dip-
ping soon after
shearing, as they
find it prevents the
attack of the fly.
THE OVERSEER’S QUARTERS.
In addition to the sheep, there is a fine stud of Shorthorns on the estate, and
altogether there are about 1500 head of cattle, chiefly of the Durham breed.
Messrs. Rogers Bros, breed all the horses needed for the station, using a blood sire
for breeding station hacks, and a draught stallion for getting working horses required for
their various properties. The surplus is sold from time to time.
Ihe stock on Ulamambri depend entirely on the natural grasses. Very little cultiva-
tion is carried on ; what little is done is only what is required for station use.
Ulamambri has just been sold by Messrs. Rogers to Mr. M. Ingle-Browne, of Meme-
gong and Crowther, near Young.
In addition to Ula-
mambn, Messrs.
Rogers have Talba-
rea, a property of
6000 acres, situated
about twenty-five
miles from Gunne-
dah, near Mullaley.
It is all plain coun-
try, and is princi-
pally used lor fat-
tening stock for the
Sydney and other
markets. It is wire
netted, and subdivi-
ded into ten pad-
docks, and it has a
fine frontage to
CROSSBRED WETHERS FROM TALBAREA, IN THE HOMEBUSH SALE YARDS.
9
The Ulamambri Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW ON ESTATE.
1 c
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Cox’s Creek. In addi-
tion to the creek, the
water supply is abundant
at depths from 20 to 50
feet. Wells pumped by
windmills have been put
down wherever required.
It joins the famous Bando
Estate, and is all wonder-
fully rich fattening coun-
try. The natural grasses
have been well preserved,
and during ordinary sea-
sons make a fine sight.
MR. T. D). ROGERS.
There is a wealth of the
rich herbage and grasses
for which the Liverpool
Plains are justly famous,
and stock reach magnifi-
cent condition. As many
as 16,000 fat sheep and
300 head of cattle have
been turned off Talbarea
in one year. A line of
2000 wethers averaged
17s. 4d., topping the
Homebush market in
March of this year. This
MR. J. P, ROGERS.
11
The Ulamambri Estate, New South Wales.


FLOCK OF SHEEP.
property was once part of the well-known Garrawilla Estate, and it is looked upon as
being some of the finest land in the State. Fifty acres have been farmed on the property.
Wheat and oats grow very luxuriantly. Crops of wheat, showing a yield of over 30 bushels
of a very fine sample of grain, have been grown, and very heavy yields of oats. The crop
has been cut for hay during the last two seasons ; the result shows in stack measuring
over 300 tons now on the place. Plots of lucerne, rape, and turnips have been tried,
with excellent results. The difficulty with the lucerne plots, however, was found in keep-
ing the ground clean of the natural herbages, which in some cases smothered the young
plants. The average rainfall is about 26 in. Mr. W. Rogers manages Talbarea, which,
by the way, was purchased from the Hon. Henry Moses.
IPersonal.
Mr. and Mrs. Rogers, senior, live in retirement at Ulamambri. Mr. Rogers comes from
an old fighting stock, his family for many generations gave more than their share of sons
as soldiers in the cause of their Kings, many of them holding distinguished rank. He had
two brothers killed in active service in the Crimean War, and he himself served through a
portion of it, holding the rank of lieutenant : he was wounded during the siege of Sebas-
tapool, and was invalided home, the war ending before his recovery. He was attracted to
Australia during the golden days of Victoria, became interested in mining at Ballarat, and
afterwards owned several stations in Riverina. He married Miss E. Ryan, of Varnham,
Ireland, and had four daughters and five sons —two of the sons following the profession of
solicitors and three the present owners of Ulamambri and Talbarea following pastoral pur-
suits.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Warrab Estate.
The Property of The Australian Agicultural Company
WARRAH, the property of the Australian Agricultural Company, is one of the
great stations in New South Wales, if not one of the finest in Australia, and
anyone wishing to see Australian pastoral life at its best could do
so there. In the first place, it is a very large estate, comprising about 250,000 acres, and
the country is principally open plain, intersected by rich basaltic timbered ridges. In
anything like a fair season the stock are almost hidden by the grass and herbage on the
MERINO EWES ON JACK’S CREEK
open country, and on the timbered ridges it is sweet and plentiful. About 150,000 sheep
are shorn annually, and a large number of cattle are bred and fattened. The handling
of so much stock necessitates up-to-date devices and management, and in these respects
Warrah is well equipped.
The estate is situated on the northern railway line, just south of Quirindi, the railway
station, Willow Tree, being on the property. Its history goes back to the early pioneering
i


MR. F. LIVINGSTONE LEARMONTH.
General Superintendent the Australian Agricultural Co.
days, but it was not, as is generally supposed, the original
grant made by the Government to the Australian Agricul-
tural Company. It was subsequently taken up by that
company when they found that the land which had been
granted nearer the coast was not at all suitable for growing
Merino sheep. Admiral Parry, the company’s superin-
tendent at that time, negotiated with the Government, and
in exchange for their coast land, totalling some 550,000
acres, they were given the Warrah and. Goonoo Goonoo Es-
tates, the latter being now the property of the Peel River
Land and Mineral Company Limited.
Warrah then comprised a stretch of country 250,000
acres in extent, or thirty miles long by thirteen miles broad.
Since then, however, several thousand acres have, at dif-
ferent times, been disposed of, and here and there small ad-
ditions have been made.
There are very few stations that contain such beautiful country as Warrah. Picturesque
hills and valleys, after traversing half the estate, break out into the famous Liverpool
Plains, which are justly famous for their fattening capacity. These plains comprise from
30 ft. to 50 ft. of fertile basalt country and a great depth of rich black soil. The hills were
originally thickly timbered, but large areas have been ringbarked, and. the carrying capa-
city enormously increased. Discretion has, however, been used in this direction ; fine
timber has been left, and a large portion of the estate is comprised of park-like scenery.
The water supply on the Liverpool Plains has always
been a question of supreme importance, but Warrah is for-
tunate in this direction. Eight good creeks run down
through the hills into the open plains, and they all fall into
the v/atershed of the Mooki. The heads of these creeks
are permanent and water is always to be found even in the
driest season. The estate is situated at a fair altitude,
the plains being 1200 ft. above sea level, and the highest
peaks about 3900 ft. Stock do well on the plains and
lower country, but it is interesting to note that the finest
Merino wool is grown on the high country. The rainfall
averages about 27 in. all over.
Warrah is subdivided into 150 paddocks, and further
subdivisions are constantly being carried out, which gives
an idea of the operations carried on. The homestead,
2
MR. GEO. FAIRHAIRN,
Manager of Warrah Station.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MANAGER'S RESIDENCE.
3
The Warrah Estate, New South I Vales.


occupied by Mr. Geo. Fairbairn, the manager, lies about 3J to 4 miles from the Willow
1 ree railway siding. It was erected about thirty-five years ago, and is prettily situated
on a gravelly ridge. Fine trees grow about the place, indeed tree planting has been re-
sorted to all over the estate, with the exception of the plains, on which trees do not thrive.
The fencing of such an estate as Warrah has been no light undertaking. Ihe boun-
dary, about 90 miles in length, is all rabbit-netted, and the station is divided into four
rabbit-netted areas. The remainder of the fencing consists largely of wires and steel
droppers.
THE OVERSEER’S RESIDENCE AT WINDY.
Though the higher country has many natural sources of water, on the plains the supply
has to be obtained by artificial means. Plenty of water is found by sinking from 40 ft.
to 50 ft., and it nearly always rises to within 25 ft. of the surface. Where wells have to
be made in the hilly country a little more difficulty is experienced in getting water, but T
discretion is used in sinking, good supplies can be obtained. There are altogether from
00 to BO wells on the estate, and the water is raised from a large number by means of
windmills. Each windmill supplies troughs,worked by self-acting valves, and enough
water is raised at each to water 10,000 sheep.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED, WINDY.
5
The Warrah Estate, New South Wales,


BREAKING UP GROUND FOR LUCERNE.
6
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ihe shearing of about 150,000 sheep per annum necessitates very complete
arrangements. 1 here are two woolsheds on the estate, one near the home-
stead and the other on a distant part of the run known as Windy. The
Windy shed is one of the largest and most elaborate in the State. It is a very im-
posing building, and has great floor space, and is well lighted, and fitted with forty-
four stands of Burgon machines. There is also an hydraulic plant (which cost
some £1000), used for pressing and dumping the wool bales. The annual clip
generally fills from 3000 to 3500 bales, which are sent to Newcastle and shipped to
the London market.
BOORAL WELL.
Gbe Stock.
The stud Merino flock at Warrah has played no small part in making the estate so
widely known. It consists of about 7000 ewes, all of a plain-bodied bold type, with large
frames. the stud was founded as far back as 1872 on a selection of ewes purchased at
the dispersal sale of the late Mr. C. C. Cox, of Brombee, then one of the leading studs in
the colony. From time to time high-class sires have been introduced, including the fam-
ous ram Vice-President, grand champion at the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Show, Mel-
bourne, 1895. Vice-President was one of the most notable sons of the famous ram Presi-
dent.
The Warrah sheep have been bred for frame and constitution, and these character-
istics are now inherent, and are substantiated by the top prices regularly obtained at
7
The Warrah Estate, New South Wales.


Flemington for the annual draft of Warrah-bred wethers. Fleece is of good length, and
well put on, the average weights being most satisfactory. A large number of flock rams
are bred for sale, and. each year big lines are sold to buyers in New South Wales and
Queensland. A number of Warrah rams and ewes have also been sent to South Africa,
where they have attracted a good deal of favourable attention.
When carrying a normal amount of stock there are about 150,000 sheep and 40,000
lambs on Warrah. Some 30,000 sheep and lambs are sold annually, and the average
weight of fleece shorn is from 10 lbs. to li lbs. This average includes wet ewes and
everything. About 60,000 ewes are lambed every year, the season being May and June,
THE PLAINS OF HEAVEN, LOOKING NORTH.
and the percentage averages about 85 per cent., though up to over 90 per cent, is re-
turned from some paddocks. A considerable amount of crossbreeding is done at Warrah,
from 10,000 to 1 '2,000 ewes being put to Border Leicester rams every year. The whole
drop of crossbreds is generally sold when about four months old. In 1908, 14s. per head
on the station was obtained for 8000 of tnis class of lamb. The same year 18s. net per
head was obtained for one drop of 10,000 Warrah wethers.
In addition to the sheep there are generally about 9000 head of cattle, chiefly young-
steers and grown bullocks. It has been found necessary to stock fairly heavily with cattle
in order to break down the tall plain grass, and enable sheep to get through. The Warrah
Shorthorn stud was originally on the Gloucester Estate, and it was formed by valuable im-
-8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


portations. From time to time high-class sires from leading Australian States have been
introduced, and now the Warrah cattle are much sought after.
With the exception of a few acres under lucerne and other crops, the stock depend
entirely on natural grasses, and the varying nature of the country ensures a variety of
feed.
IPcrsonaL
Mr. Frederick Livingstone Learmonth, general superintendent of the Australian
Agricultural Company, Newcastle, in addition to controlling the company’s pastoral estates,
manages their coal-mining properties in the Newcastle district, and he was a prominent
THE PLAINS OF HEAVEN, LOOKING NORTH-EAST.
figure in the 1909-10 coal strike. Born in 1862 at Ercilcloucle, near Ballarat, Victoria, he is
the third son of the late Thomas Livingstone Learmonth, of Ercildoune and Bringagee,
N.S.W., and also of Parkhall, Stirlingshire, Scotland. He went home in 1868, and a few
years later began his education at Westminster School, and then went to Pembroke College,
Cambridge, ending with two years on the Continent, where he became a proficient linguist
in both French and German.
In 1883 he returned to Australia, and gamed his first pastoral experience on his
father’s station, Bringagee, on the Murrumbidgee. For many years he controlled his
interests in New South Wales, Victoria, and also in New Zealand. Fourteen years after
his return to Australia he went to Greece, and acted as correspondent to the “Times ” for
9
The Warrah Estate, New South Wales.


STORE BULLOCKS ON THE PLAINS.
1 0
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


a short period during the Graeco-Turkish war, and made an extended tour through Turkey,
Gieece, and Russia. When the South African War broke out, he at once volunteered for
active service, and left Sydney as a trooper with the first contingent of New South Wales
Mounted Infantry in January, 1900, but gained his commission as lieutenant in the field.
He was twice mentioned in despatches, and was awarded the cross of the distinguished
service order, and Queen’s medal and five clasps. Early in 1903 he succeeded Mr. Jesse
Gregson, then general superintendent of the Australian Agricultural Company, and took
over the whole of their business. In 1901 he married the only daughter of the late Rev.
STORE CATTLE ON YELLOW PLAIN.
Joseph Carlisle, rector of St. Mary’s, North Melbourne, and canon of Melbourne Cathe-
dral.
Mr. Learmonth’s military and pastoral experience has eminently qualified him for his
present position, in that it is one requiring considerable tact and management, and since
he has been in Newcastle he has gained the respect of the employees as well as all classes
of the community.
Mr. George Fairbairn, who at present manages Warrah, has been for forty years in
the service of the company. Born in Western Australia, lie came to New South Wales in
1864, and gained his colonial experience with the late Mr. F. R. White, of Harben Vale
11
The Warrah Estate, New South Wales.


STORE BULLOCKS AT UPPER HARRINGTON’S WELL.
where for three years he was in charge of Mr. White’s Timor Station. Being offered a
position as overseer at Warrah, he came there in 1870. At that time fencing was almost
unknown, there being not even a boundary fence round the estate. What sheep there
were on the place were all shepherded, and they had to travel long distances to water in
many cases. In 1880 Mr. Fairbairn succeeded Mr. Richard Hudson as manager. His
wide knowledge of stock, both sheep and cattle, has been of inestimable value to the com-
pany, and his straight dealing and kindly hospitality have made him widely known and
respected throughout the district.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Ulinda Estate.
The Property of Mr. D. I. Watt.
U LINDA, the property of Mr. David Innes Watt, is another of the fine pastoral
homes of New South Wales. Situated about 2G miles from Coolah, and 28
miles from Coonabarabran, it embraces a broad stretch of splendid country,
possessing natural beauty which makes it a nicture spot of the district. The estate com-
prises about 40,000 acres of freehold and leasehold land, the character of which is gently
BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
undulating, intersected here and there with basaltic ridges. A large amount of clearing
has been done, and the property is now well improved. A large quantity of choice tim-
ber has been allowed to remain in belts for shelter purposes. The property is ricti in na-
i


tural grasses, and it is looked upon as some
of the best fattening land in the State.
1 lie Weetalabah Creek runs through the
estate, and constitutes an excellent water sup-
ply, but Ulinda does not wholly depend upon
this. Ihe supply is largely augmented by a
number of well-planned wells, all of which
touch water at any depth from 28 to 30 ft. In
addition to these sources, there are many
tanks, while at almost any site on the pro-
perty water can be struck. A tremendous lot
of rabbit-proof fencing has been done. 30,000
acres of the property are wire-netted, and sub-
divided into twenty paddocks.
The flock, bred from Calga rams, consists
of 20,000 sheep. From time to time rams
MR. D. I. WATT
THE LATE MR. DAVID WATT.
from Messrs. Ryder Bros.’ flock, are intro-
duced, and they suit the country well. The
shearing takes place in the months of Sep-
tember, October, and November, and the wool
is baled and despatched to Sydney, where it
compares well with some of the leading clips
offered.
In addition to the flock of sheep, Mr. Watt
has a herd of 200 cattle on all the holdings,
which supply dairy cattle and killers for
station use.
The homestead, a brick structure of very
nice design, was erected about 25 years
ago. It has twenty-two rooms, and every pos-
sible modern convenience has been introduced,
the result being that Mr. Watt has a residence
which will compare favourably with what one
sees in the near vicinity of a large city.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAL.
3
The Ulinda Estate, New South Wales,


PORTION OF DRIVE AND CROQUET LAWN.
THE DINING ROOM.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ihe garden is a beautiful feature of the property, and covers an area of acres. It
is well laid out and well tended, having a good supply of water laid on.
Ihe woolshed is a well-built iron structure, and has in it twenty stands of Wolseley
shearing machines, driven by a 0-h.p. Clayton and Shuttleworth engine.
The other stations in the district owned by Mr. Watt are Gowang, with an area of
20,500 acres of freehold and 2000 acres of leasehold ; Kerbin, with an area of 5000 acres of
BACK VIEW OF HOUSE AND STABLES.
freehold; and Yarragrin, with an area of 7000 acres of freehold. On these three properties
there are about 30,000 sheep. Yarragrin has a fine woolshed, fitted up with twenty stands
of Wolseley sheep shearing machines. Altogether there are shorn at Ulinda and Yarra-
grin about 50,000 sheep, and the yield of wool each season represents about 1000 bales,
all of which are sold in Sydney. Mr. Watt sends more fat sheep to market than any other
pastoralist in the district. These sheep are fattened in the splendid paddocks of Yarra-
grin.
5
The Ulinda Estate, New South Wales.


THE WOOLSHED.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE STABLES, SHOWING GARAGE
IPersonal.
Mr. D. I. Watt is the only son of the late Mr. David Watt, one of the old pioneers, and
formerly owner of Pine Ridge and Ulinda. He was born at Murrurundi on the 7th February,
1855, and was educated at the King's School, Parramatta. It was at this school he re-
POLO PONIES
7
The Ulinda Estate, New South Wales.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE ULINDA COUNTRY.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A CORNER OF HORSE PADDOCK, SHOWING CREEK
The UUnda Estate, New South Wales,


THE HORSE PADDOCK, LOOKING WEST
ceived a training well fitting him for his after career. Like many other prominent pas-
torahsts who have passed through the old school, he has shown the value of that training
in his self-reliant independence and resource, and his thoroughgoing earnestness is a silent
testimony to the fine traditions which cling to the school. Upon his return home after com-
pleting his education, he entered upon his pastoral training at Pine Ridge, eventually as-
suming the management of that station. On the death of his father in 1880, he bought
Ulinda, and later on
purchased Gowang,
Kerbin, and Yarragrin.
He is a keen sportsman,
and has done much to
popularise and encour-
age amateur racing in
his district, in which he
has been successful in
winning more amateur
cups than any other
man. He recently pur-
chased a colt at the
yearling sales, which
promises to make a
LOCH LEVEN (by Lochiel from Saltraelle), who won eleven Amateur Cups including
the Tirranna Cup, and many other amateur races. He was one of the most success-
ful horses ever run at amateur races. The photo shows T. F. Scully, trainer,
holding horse, Mr. I). I. Watt, owner, and Mr. S. A. Blackman rider.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEWS ACROSS THE CENTRE OF ULINDA STATION.
The Ulinda Estate, New South Wales.


name. Two of his
horses, Loch Leven
and Footpad, nave
done remarkably
good work. He is
president of the
Coonabarabran Ama-
teur Race Club, in
which he takes a very
great interest. Keen
PART OF HORSE PADDOCK AS SEEN FROM HOUSE
as he is, however, in sporting matters, he does not allow them to interfere with the public
duties he is called upon to undertake, and as a member of the Pastures Protection Board
and of the Shire Council, he finds many opportunities of furthering the interests of the dis-
trict.
Mr. Watt married, in 1884, Miss E. M. Blackman, of Cooyal Station, near Mudgee, and
has four sons and four daughters.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Oalkeith Estate.
The Property of Mr. Frederick O. McMaster
SEVERAL of the finest pastoral homes in the State are situated either on, or in the
vicinity of, the well-known Liverpool Plains. In that part of the State there is a
vast stretch of interesting country, comprising deep black soil plains, intersected
with basaltic and volcanic ridges lightly timbered. Dalkeith, the property of Mr. F. D.
McMaster, is one of the best-known stations in this district, and it is situated on the rising
country overlooking the township of Cassilis. The estate, which can be reached by coach
from Muswellbrook or Mudgee (the distance from the latter place being 51 miles), comprises
THE SHEEP DIP.
I


about 88,000 acres of black soil plain and hilly
country, about 5000 acres of the plain being
on the Talbragar River. The property was
originally granted to a man named Scott, who
was one of the pioneers of the district. It
then passed into the possession of the late
Hon. William Busby. On his death Mr. Dun-
can McMaster purchased it from the executors
in 1890. He managed it himself for several
years, and in 1899 he sold it to his son, the
present owner.
Dalkeith is nearly all herbage country, clo-
ver, crowfoot, wild carrot, &c., growing in
great profusion. It is watered by the Mun-
TUELMA MURIEL MCMASTER.
murra and Talbragar Rivers and four creeks. In addition, there are numerous tanks and
wells on different parts of the property. The boundary fences are all wire netted, and so
is one subdivision fence cutting the place in half. Altogether, Dalkeith is divided into
thirty-five paddocks. Rabbits have been successfully fought, and are now well under con-
trol. Mr. McMaster finds digging out the burrows and destruction of the harbours one
of the best measures to adopt, and he keeps the poison carts going also, using jam and
strychnine. Several owners in this district use both phosphorous and strychnine against
the rabbits. The phosphorus is distributed by
the poison cart, and the jam and strychnine is
laid by hand at right angles to the phos-
phorus.
The woolshed is a large weatherboard build-
ing, with an iron roof. It was built many
years ago, but has been considerably added
to, and fitted with all up-to-date appliances.
Mr. McMaster is very fond of machinery, and
anything connected with it comes quite natur-
allv to him. He erected all the machinery in
the woolshed and engineshed himself, and no
expert could have done it better. There are
twenty-four stands of Wolseley machines, dri-
ven by a 10-h.p. double-cylinder Ruston Proc-
tor engine. The woolpress is a Perrier, work-
ed by Hangar, Gedye and Co.’s patent steam
gear. In this connection it may be interesting
2
LAN FREDERICK MCMASTER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DALKEITH HOMESTEAD.
Dalkeith, New South Wales.


MRS. F. D MCMASTER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


to note that Mr. McMaster uses an improved woolpack, with Dundee finish, and blue twine
sewing throughout.
The roof of the woolshed covers an enormous area, and some of the water caught oft
it is run into a tank alongside the sheep dip, which adjoins the shed. I his is the only water
used in the dip. The dip itself is made of cut stone, the design being on the long-swim
principle. The length is 60 ft., and it holds 3000 gallons. About 7000 sheep can be put
MR. F. I). MCMASTER.
through in a day. The floor of the draining pens is concrete, and the enclosures are neatly
constructed of sawn timber, not the untidy erections which generally characterise the dip-
ping yards.
XLbc Ibomesteab.
The homestead is a substantial stone building, situated about two miles from the wool-
shed, and commanding a delightful view of Cassihs, lying in the valley, and the surround-
ing country. It is a bungalow style of residence, made very comfortable with all modern
5
Dalkeith, New South Wales.


DRAWING ROOM.
VIEW OF DRIVE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


conveniences. It is lighted with acetylene gas throughout, and is connected by five tele-
phones with the Cassilis post office, the wool-shed, the overseer’s cottage, and two outsta-
tions. An unlimited water supply for garden and domestic purposes is obtained by pump-
ing by windmill and steam power. Mrs. McMaster has the garden and grounds under her
own supervision, and they well repay her attention. A. rather ingenious device is used for
watering parts of the garden. Parallel lengths of pipes are raised about a foot from the
ground, and spread over the area to be watered. Each pipe is perforated, the holes being
about 13 ft. apart. When the water is turned on jets of water come out of the perforations,
and very effectively water the roots of each plant.
IRRIGATING THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.
£he Stock.
The Dalkeith flock numbers about 40,000 Merinos of a very profitable type. They have
big frames, plain bodies, but bold heads and fronts. Mr. McMaster has a stud of Merinos,
from which he draws all the flock rams required for station use. The stud was founded on
Tasmanian sheep, the sires coming from such well-known flocks as those owned by the late
Hon. Jas. Gibson, of Bellevue, the late Thos. Gibson, of Esk Vale, and Mr. David Taylor,
of St. Johnston. These were the leading Tasmanian flocks at the time the purchases were
made, and they are still in the forefront of Merino studs. These Tasmanian rams did a
lot of good in the Dalkeith flock, but, requiring larger frames and greater length of staple,
Mr. McMaster, in 1909, paid 800 guineas for six special stud rams. One was from the Wan-
-7
Dalkeith, New South Wales,


ganella Estate, and
five were from Mr.
James Richmond’s
Haddon Rig stud.
Both these introduc-
tions were from two
flocks most noted for
size of frame and
length and density
of fleece.
The clip (W.8.Y.)
is well known, and
generally to be
found amongst the
good prices that
may be going. The
OVERSEER’S COTTAGE.
wool is carted from the station to Mudgee, from whence it is trucked to Sydney, and sold.
Mr. McMaster has turned off as many as 17,000 fat sheep in a year. He also fattens cattle
for the Homebush market. He runs about 500 head, chiefly Shorthorns.
£be Iborses
The horses are by no means the least interesting part of Dalkeith. About fifty are
required to do the work on the station, and Mr. McMaster breeds nearly all he requires.
Some time ago he purchased the Suffolk Punch stallion Shah from Mr. A. A. Dangar s
Mooki Springs stud. Shah was foaled 30th November, 1903 ; sire, Defiance (2960), by
Butley Boy; dam, Smiler, by Strongbow; second dam (162), bred at Palmerston. This
horse has been used on various kinds of mares, and has given complete satisfaction. He
is docile, and a great worker in harness, and his stock take after him. The other sire at
Dalkeith is the blood horse Harmony, a bay, with black points, foaled November, 1898. He
is by Melos out of Virago. Virago, by Marvellous (imp.), by Blarney out of Its Curious;
g.d. Vixen, by Grandmaster (imp.), by Gladiator out of Celerined ; g.g.d. Lady Mary, by
Rouse’s Fisherman, by Waverley out of Industry; g.g.g.d. White Patch, by Black Dia-
mond, by St. John (imp.), out of Crazy Jane; g.g.g.g.d. Lady of the Lake No. 0, by Jacky.
Crazy Jane was by Camerton (imp.). Harmony is used to get hacks for station use, and
he suits the purpose admirably.
Mr. McMaster takes a keen interest in racing, and, in conjunction with
his brother, races under the name of J. and F. D. McMaster. Their colours
are white, dark blue sash, blue sleeves, and white cuffs and cap. Amongst
the horses raced by the brothers are Lady Maltster, Collarette, Wallace
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED.
EWES AND LAMBS READY FOR DIPPING.
FATTENING PADDOCKS.
9
Dalkeith, New South Wales.


DRAFTING SHEEP.
GROUP OF EMVLOYEES.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Queen (full sister to Charles Stuart), Golden
Foote, and among others may be mentioned
Port Arthur,- who won five races in Japan
after being sold by Messrs. McMaster, and
Lady Evelyn, who ran second in the Debut-
ante Stakes at Caulfield.
IPersonal.
Mr. Frederick Duncan McMaster is the
second son of Mr. Duncan McMaster, of
Keira, Darling Point, Sydney. He was born
in Sydney in 1873, and was educated at the
Sydney Grammar School. On leaving school
he immediately took up pastoral work. He
at the age of nineteen took charge of Dal-
keith. He purchased the property from his
father in 1899, and has devoted his attention
to improving the place. He has a natural
gift for mechanics, and this trait shows out
MUNMURRA RIVER.
in the management of Dalkeith. He has labour-saving devices wherever possible, and he
has personally carried out the erection of such improvements as windmills, chaffcutters,
saw mills, and pumping plants. He owns two 6-cylinder Brasier motor cars, and practically
drives and attends to them himself. He has had the cars some years now, and has never
been stuck up, which is a tribute to his skill as an engineer. He has repeatedly done the
220 miles which separate Dalkeith from Sydney between daylight and dark.
Mr. McMaster was
married in 1901 to
Muriel, the third
daughter of Mr.
Thomas Sherlock, a
well-known pastora-
list of Kiaora, Coo-
ma, and their family
consists of one son,
lan Frederick, and a
daughter, Thelma
Muriel.
Mr. McMaster has
always taken a prac-
tical part in mat-
ters concerning the
SHEARERS’ ACCOMMODATION.
11
Dalkeith, New South Wales.


welfare of the dis-
trict. He recently
purchased some land
in the Cassilis district
for a site for the
School of Arts. He
was one of the ori-
ginal members of the
Merriwa Shire Coun-
cil, but he has not
stood for re-election
of late years. He is
a member of the local
Licensing Board, and
has been a magis-
trate for the past fif-
teen years. He is a
BOUNDARY RIDER’S COTTAGE.
member of the Australian Jockey Club and several other prominent racing clubs. He is a
director of F. W. Hughes, Ltd., a company formed in 1909, with headquarters at Botany, for
the manufacture of wool into tops, principally to supply Japan, which country is taking all
the present output.
I 3
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Oban Estate.
The Property of Mr. Ducan McMaster.
OBAN, the property of Mr. Duncan McMaster, is one of the many picturesque estates
) which are to be found in various parts of New South Wales. It is situated close
to the township of Coolah, and fifty miles from the Gulgong railway line, and
about twenty miles from the terminus of the Gulgong-Dunedoo railway extension now in
course of construction. Originally taken up as a cattle station by the late Mr. William Law-
GROUP OF AYRSHIRE CATTLE.
I


son, it was held by the Lawson family until
1800, when Mr. Duncan McMaster purchased
it. In 1902 he sold it to his nephew, who now
owns it. At the time of the sale the estate
comprised 10,000 acres, but Mr. McMaster
purchased an additional area of 13,000 acres
adjoining the old property, and Oban now con-
sists of 23,000 acres, and is devoted to sheep
raising. The estate presents an extremely at-
tractive appearance to which its undulating
character largely contributes. It is lightly tim-
bered with kurrajong, box, and other trees,
and is well covered with excellent native
THE LATE MR. JOHN MCMASTER.
grasses. Right through the whole extent of the property runs the Coolah-Burragundy Creek,
which affords a permanent supply of water. In addition to this source of supply there are
also numerous perennial springs, making this estate unquestionably the best-watered one or
the whole district. A wire-netted fence surrounds the whole of the property, and the estate
is divided into twenty paddocks, most of which are also wire-netted. Mr. McMaster has
realised fully what the rabbit pest means, and for years he has had to fight most resolutely
to keep it in check. In this crusade against
the rabbits he has adopted the most system-
atic and energetic methods for their destruc-
tion, and to-day he has the satisfaction of
knowing that by these means he has almost
succeeded in exterminating them. He is
however, alive to the fact that freedom from
this plague can only be purchased by persist-
ent and well-directed work. About 100 acres
of the property have been sown with lucerne,
and the soil is so suitable that the experiments
have proved highly satisfactory in every
respect.
The flock consists of 25,000 Merinos.
When the Oban flock was formed it was com-
posed of the old Cox-Mudgee blood, but since
Mr. McMaster became possessed of the pro-
perty he has introduced Tasmanian bred rams
MR. DUNCAN MCMASTER,
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE OBAN HOMESTEAD.
523
The Oban Estate, New South Wales,


VIEW OF COOLAH TOWNSHIP FROM THE VERANDAH OF THE HOMESTEADS
Soeing Warrumbuggle range in the distance
from Dalkeith, the property of Mr. F. D. McMaster. The wool is sold in Sydney, and
being of a fairly long combing quality, the price realised for it is invariably high.
In addition to the sheep there is a
small herd, of pure-bred Ayrshire cattle.
These are bred from the Morton and
Fraser strain of Greystanes.
A good type of draught horse is
also bred at Oban for the station work.
The homestead is a very fine build-
ing, and parts of it date back to the
time of the original owner, Mr. Lawson,
but considerable improvements and ad-
ditions have been effected by Mr
McMaster. The interior arrangements
are upon the most up-to-date lines, and
the whole is lighted by acetylene gas.
POLO PONY.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


COOLAH-BURRAGUNDY CREEK.
5
The Oban Estate, New South Wales.


LUCERNE FLATS.
ANOTHER VIEW OF LUCERNE COUNTRY,
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


STACKS OF LUCERNE HAY.
The gardens and orchard are quite a feature of the place, and were designed by Mr.
McMaster. The gardens are admitted to be the finest in the district. A splendid supply of
water is maintained for these, and is obtained from elevated tanks into which the water
is pumped from an adjoining well, which has a capacity of 10,000 gallons.
The woolshed is located about six miles from the homestead. It is constructed of
wood and iron, and has been largely added to and improved by Mr. McMaster. It con-
tains fourteen Wolseley shearing machines, driven by a 4 h.p. steam engine.
Fcrscmal.
Mr. Duncan McMaster is the third son of the late John McMaster, of Weetalabah and
Rockgedgiel, and was born at the former place on the 7th December, 1867. Educated at
Eaglesfield College, Sydney, he acquired those qualifications which, in after life, enabled
him to fill the many public positions with which he has been so long identified. After leav-
ing school he returned to Weetalabah, and commenced his training in pastoral pursuits
under his father’s supervision. Later on, m conjunction with his eldest brother, he was
sent to Rockgedgiel to gain an insight into stud sheep-breeding. With the knowledge and
7
The Oban Estate, New South Wales■


CROSSING ON BURRAGUNDY CREEK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED.
SHEARERS' QUARTERS.
9
The Oban Estate, New South Wales-


LUCERNE PADDOCK - SHEEP FATTENING.
experience, he was well fitted to assume the management of Weetalaban, which he under-
took for two years. Returning to Rockgedgiel, he remained there until in 1902 he pur-
chased Oban. In that year a drought of almost unprecedented severity prevailed, but the
way Oban stock pulled through was a tribute to Mr. McMaster’s management.
He is a member of the Coolah Shire Council, having been elected on the occasion
of the formation of that body. Upon the founding of the Coolah General Hospital he
had the honour of being elected its first president, and he is at present a member of the
committee. He is a justice of the peace, and for some years acted as coroner for the dis-
trict. For many years he was associated with the Tamarang Polo Club, and for a consi-
derable time captained the juniors. His team had the exceptional good fortune to beat
the famous Camperdcwn Club. Mr. McMaster married in 1890 Ada Watt, the youngest
daughter of the late Mr. Duncan McMaster, of Darling Point, Sydney, and has three sons
and two daughters.
Mr. McMaster’s father, the late Mr. John McMaster, was born near Oban, Scotland,
and came with his father to Australia at the age of twelve. They proceeded to the Pat-
erson River district, where they followed farming and grazing pursuits at the head of the
Isis River. After a few years’ experience of this life he and his brother, the late Mr. Dun-
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


LOOKING TOWARDS THE FLATS.
11
The Oban Estate, New South Wales.


IN FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD.
can McMaster, together with his brother-in-law, Mr. D. I. Watt, crossed the Liverpool Range
and Plains, and went out on to the Castlereagh River, where they purchased Mowbla and
Bungebah Stations, and later on buying Gidyah, now known as Wangrawally Station, in
the Coonamble district. The next purchases they made were Weetalabah, Binnia Downs,
Pine Ridge, and Ulinda. A few years later Mr Watt retired from the partnership, taking
over Pine Ridge and Ulinda, Mr. John McMaster and his brother retaining Weetalabah and
Binnia Downs. The brothers then purchased Bundella and Rockgedgiel, later on separat-
ing and dividing the properties, Mr. John McMaster taking Weetalabah and Rockgedgiel,
and later on purchasing Premer Station from Mr. Charles Lawson. He then acquired
Bugaldie and Yerinan, in the Coonabarabraa district. In consequence of ill-health he
ultimately disposed of all his properties to his four sons.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Binnia and Bundella Estates.
The Property of Mr. John McMaster.
ABOUT twelve miles from the town of Coolah, and in the centre of a magnificent
pastoral district, stands Binnia Downs Station, the property of Mr. John McMas-
ter. The estate comprises 40,000 acres of freehold and leasehold land, and con-
sists of broad stretches of gently undulating country, partly timbered, but interspersed
with a good proportion of plain land. In the early days it was closely timbered with box,
SHORTHORN STUD COWS AND CALVES IN THE PARK PADDOCK, BINNIA DOWNS.
myall, and evergreen kurrajong trees, but Mr. McMaster has done, at various times, a
considerable amount of ring-barking and burning-off, with the result that the estate now
presents the appearance of a park.
Binnia Downs was acquired by the late Mr. Duncan McMaster in 1859, and was held
by him until 1899, at which date Mr. John McMaster came into possession.
i


The homestead, which is a well-built and
attractively designed edifice, was partly built
about twenty-one years ago, and has since
been considerably added to, until now it ap-
pears in its present up-to-date form. Contain-
ing eighteen rooms, all lighted by acetylene
gas, it ranks with the many beautiful homes
to be seen in pastoral New South Wales. The
garden, which is well cared for, adds very
materially to the beauty of the homestead.
The boundary fence of the freehold is all
wire-netted, and the property is subdivided into
twenty-five paddocks, most of which are also
wire-netted. Mr. McMaster has had very
great trouble with the rabbits, and only by
THE LATE MR. DUNCAN MCMASTER.
adopting systematic methods to stay their progress has he been able to keep them in check.
He has found that the only possible chance of attaining this end is by fumigating, trapping,
and poisoning, and he realises that by these measures alone can he hope to keep the pest
under control.
Water is obtained from a number of wells
and dams, some of the former having reached
a depth of 200 ft. before striking the water.
In addition to these wells there are numerous
permanent springs, and from these various
sources the supply' is well maintained for all
requirements.
The woolshed, which still consists of por-
tions of the building erected Mr. Duncan
McMaster, is now modernised and largely
added to. It contains twenty-two stands of
Wolseley shearing machines driven by a Rus-
ton-Proctor 8 h.p. double-cylinder engine.
The flock consists of about 27,000 Me-
rinos, originally founded from Tasmanian
sheep. The annual shearing of Binnia and
2
MR. J. McMASTER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FRONT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
Bundella takes place at the former place, and the aggregate number shorn is about 40,000.
the lambing at Binnia takes place in March and April, and the percentage ranges from 80
to 85 per cent.
Mr. McMaster takes
a large amount of interest
in breeding racehorses,
and has bred some very
well-known high-class
horses on Binnia. Among
the brood mares is Marvel-
ette, by Marvellous out of
Contessa, bred by the late
Richard Rouse, Biragan-
bil, and purchased as a
two-year-old. A notable
horse bred at Binnia was
Strathroy, and also Mar-
vel Loch, who won the Me-
NEEME AND MOLLIE McMASTER.
3
The''Binnia Downs[ and Bundellal Estates, New South Wales.


STABLES AND GARAGE, BINNIA DOWNS.
STUD MARES AND FOALS AT BINNIA DOWNS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


HORSES IN PLAIN PADDOCK, BINMA DOWNS.
tropolitan and Caulfield Cups, and who also won twelve other races of more or less import-
ance. Then there were Noreen, who won the Sydney Cup and Raidwick Plate; Binnia,
who won the Sires’ Produce Stakes and other races; Antaea, who won a number of minor
races; and Cremona, by Lochiel from Hilda, a Metropolitan winner. Altogether a very
fine breeding record, and one which Mr. McMaster might well be proud of. He purchased
at the Royal Sydney Show (1910) the
fine pony stallion, Here We Come.
Mr. McMaster is now founding a
Shorthorn herd, and he is purchasing
cows from the best sources. He has
already bought a number from Mr.
Robertson, of Colac; from Mr. Flet-
cher, of Coonamble ; and well-bred
bulls from Mr. Holmes, of Bathurst,
and from Mr. Robertson, of Colac.
With this foundation, he is sanguine
of having highly satisfactory results
in the future. At the last Sydney
Royal Show he bought the first and
“ HERE WE COME,” PONY STALLION.
537
The Binnia Downs and Bundella Estates, New South Wales.


SHEARERS’ SHED AND STATION HANDS’ QUARTERS, CINNIA DOWNS.
THE WOOLSHED, BINNIA DOWNS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW FRON THE HILL AT BACK OF BINNIA HOMESTEAD.
reserved champion heifer Golden Duchess, and also two other stud heifers.
Bundella, the other station owned by Mr. McMaster, is located about twenty-five
miles from Binnia Station. It comprises 18,000 acres of freehold and leasehold land, con-
sisting of large tracts of
level country with occa-
sional undulations and
ridges. The timber on the
estate is mostly box,
apple, myall, and kurra-
jong, and the soil is, gen-
erally speaking, very good.
The sheep are shorn at
Binnia. The property is
ideal for wool-growing,
and it is managed by Mr.
Lincoln Hole.
Mr. John McMaster is
the eldest son of the late
“ MARVELETTE,” WITH COLT BY “ MALSTER.”
7
The Binnia Downs and Bundella Estates, New South Wales.


FRONT VIEW OF BUNDELLD HOMESTEAD.
BACK VIEW OF BUNDELLA HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FAT WETHERS WATERING, BUNDELLA.
STUD EWES AND LAMBS, BINNIA DOWNS.
9
The^-Binnia' Downs and Bundella Estates, New South Wales.


FATTENING BULLOCKS AT WELL, BUNDELLA.
THREE THOUSAND FAT WETHERS, BUNDELLA.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW LOOKING UP THE PLAIN, BINNIA DOWNS.
11
The Binnia Downs and Bundella Estates, New South Wales.


SHOR THORN COWS AND CALVES, BUNDELLA.
remained in this capacity
until 1899, when he enter-
ed into possession of Bin-
nia and Bundella. In
1889 he married Christina,
the third daughter of the
late Mr. John McMaster,
of Weetalabah, and has
one son (Leslie) and seven
daughters. His son is
now finishing his educa-
tion at the Church of Eng-
land Grammar School,
North Sydney.
Mr. Duncan McMaster,
formerly of Darling Point,
Sydney, and was born at
Binnia on the 2nd August
1865. After leaving the
Sydney Grammar School,
where he was educated,
he returned to Binnia, and
entered upon that pastoral
training which culminated
in his assuming the super-
vision and management of
the whole of his father’s
numerous properties. He
STUD SHORTHORN COW “GOLDEN DUCHESS.’
Mr. McMaster takes an active part in public affairs, and occupied the position of
President of the Coolah Shire Council until the end of last year, with which body
he has been associated since its inception. He is a member of the A. J. C., and of all
the amateur clubs of the district.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Glen Estate.
The Property of Mr. J. C. Manchee.
MR. J. C. MANCHEE’S Glen Moan Estate is one of the most notable properties in
the vicinity of the famous Liverpool Plains, due very largely to the fact that
it is the home of one of the best herds of pure Devon cattle in Australia. Glen
Moan also produces a high type of Merino sheep, and the horses bred on the estate are of
high class. In fact, the property is a very fine one, and it is only to be expected that it
should produce a good class of stock.
DRAUGHT MARES.
Quirindi is the nearest township to Glen Moan, and it lies on the northern railway
line, 244 miles from Sydney. From Quirindi to Glen Moan the distance is about 43 miles,
and the road crosses a very considerable portion of the wonderful plains. Mr. Manchee
1


runs a Fiat motor-car, and when the roads are good it is a fine spin out to the station. The
road after leaving Quirindi passes through portions of the well-known Walhallow and Mooki
holdings, and after skirting Kickerbil for some distance, runs through Windy, part of the
Australian Agricultural Company’s estate of Warrah, and so on to Glen Moan. After
leaving Windy, the plains are left behind, and the Glen Moan country is of undulating na-
ture, surrounded with fair-sized mountains in the distance. One curiously-shaped basaltic
peak in this range is called the Moan Rock, and it is a fine landmark, visible many miles
away.
MK. J. C. MANCHEE.
Glen Moan comprises 20,000 acres of freehold and conditional lease. In 1876
Mr. J. C. Manchee purchased this property, and for many years he carried on the
active management, but it is now managed by his son, Mr. Lionel Manchee. It would
be hard to find more picturesque country m New South Wales than Glen Moan. The station
is practically surrounded with high basalt hills, and it contains fine undulating grazing
country and rich black soil flats. There is very fine timber on the estate, giving it a park-
like appearance. It is on visiting places like Glen Moan that one realises what irreparable
loss many Australia properties have suffered through ruthless ringbarking 111 bygone
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Glen Moan Estate, New South Wales,


GENERAL VIEW OF THE GARDEN.
years. The previous owners of Glen Moan evidently possessed foresight enough to spare
the good timber, and Mr. Manchee has been equally regardful of it. The whole property
is well watered by three creeks, wells, dams, and springs.
The homestead lies on a picturesque portion of the estate, and the view from it
stretches away through scattered belts of timber to the hills beyond. The house is one
of those comfortable old
edifices which add in no
small way to the charm of
country life. There is a
big garden, well tended by
the übiquitous Chinese
gardener, and fruits of
many descriptions grow to
perfection.
The estate is pictur-
esque in the extreme, but
the natural scenery is
greatly enhanced by the
magnificent pure Devon
THE GLEN MOAN MOTOR CAR,
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
cattle which graze in the various paddocks. This is one of the biggest Devon herds in
Australia, and Mr. Manchee has spared no expense in maintaining a high standard of per-
fection in the herd. Whatever may be the respective merits of the other cattle breeds,
every inch of the Devon is good. they have not the size of the Durham or Hereford, but
they are one of the hardiest of all breeds, and they fatten up readily, and in the most at-
sible way to breed only the best. At
tractive way. Yoked to the plough, they
are as active and docile as the horse.
After many years of experience with
cattle, Mr. Manchee has decided that the
Devon is the best suited to country like
Glen Moan. They were put to a very
severe test during the drought years
which culminated in 1902, and they came
through the ordeal without a loss. Being
such a stout supporter of the Devon, Mr.
Manchee has endeavoured in every pos-
DRAUGHT MARES ANP FOALS,
5
The Glen Moan Estate, New South Wales.


GENERAL VIEW OF GLEN MOAN COUNTRY, WITH MOAN ROCK IN THE DISTANCE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


various times he has im-
ported high-class bulls
from the best-known
studs in the old country.
Among the most noted
importations was The
Count, bought at the
Royal Show, England,
in 1890, as a yearling,
also two heifers from
same breeder. The
Count was bred by Mr.
Richard Biekle, of Tavi-
stock, Devonshire, by
Champion out of Conn-
STUD DEVON BULL, POUND MERRY BOY.
tess IT Iwo other bulls were imported in 1901. One was Curley Boy, sire Merrymau,
dam Curley 4th of Pound, bred by Mr. Alfred Skinner, of Somerset, and the other was
Merry Boy, by Merryman, dam Myrtle 63rd, also bred by Mr. Skinner. The foundation
of the Glen Moan herd was laid by the purchase of pure cows, and adding thereto at the
dispersal sale of Mr. Reynolds, of Tocal. In 1884 two bulls were purchased from the late
Mr. H. C. White, of Havilah. The most recent additions were made to the stud in 1909,
when Mr. Manchee imported a young bull and heifer. The bull is Bickley Unionist, bred
by Mr. Samuel Kidner, of Bickley, Somerset, and the heifer, Pound Curley 9th, was bred
by Messrs. A. C. Skinner and Sons, of Pound, Somerset.
STUD DEVON COWS AND CALVES.
7
The Glen Moan Estate, New South Wales.


The Glen Moan De-
vons have been exhibit-
ed at the Royal Show,
Sydney, for many years,
and they have always
been well up in the prize
list, and have taken se-
veral championships.
Mr. Manchee has
also devoted much time
and money to Merino
sheep, and the Glen
Moan sheep are of the
popular commercial
type. The stud sheep
RENRORIE.
originated from Mudgee ewes, to which Tasmanian rams of St. Johnston and Bellevue
studs were joined for several years; lately a strain of Boonoke blood has been introduced,
and big frames and fine quality of wool are the result. The wool is of full character,
and very bright, and the rams bred are robust sheep, with bold fronts, but no body
wrinkles. Taking the Glen Moan Station clip right through, the wool is fine to medium,
and it commands a high price. In a fair season sixteen months old ewes have cut up to
1G lbs. The whole clip as a rule averages about lOi lbs. for grown sheep, and 3 lbs. for
lambs. Stud rams cut up to 26 lbs.
Iboraee.
The thoroughbred stallion now in
service at Glen Moan is Renrorie, by
Lochiel from Duenna —a full brother to
Amberite. The draughts are by a New
Zealand sire.
perconal.
Mr. J. C. Manchee was born in
1832 at Montpelier, a suburb of Bris-
tol, England, and is a descendant of a
Huguenot family of Normandy, France,
MARE WITH FOAL BY RENRORIE.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FATTENING PADDOCKS.
who fled from France soon after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, 1685. His prepara-
tory education was conducted at a clergyman’s school in Bristol, and in the year 1846 he
was sent to a pension at Darmstadt, Germany, where he attended the gymnasium (college)
as also the Gewerbe Schule in that town. During the period 1847 and 1848 he had some
very exciting experiences of events in the political world, ultimately resulting in the revo-
lution, which are indelibly impressed on the memory of the subject of this sketch.
Returning to England in 1850, Mr. Manchee was variously occupied until he deter-
mined to try his for-
tune in Australia, and
landed in Melbourne in
October, 1852. The gold
fields of Forest Creek
and Bendigo were then
the great attraction,
and he determined to
try the latter field, but
did not succeed in strik-
ing a big find. The al-
lurements of these gold
fields were not too en-
ticing; the surround-
ings were simply pan-
IN THE HAYFIELD.
553
The Glen Moan Estate, New South Wales,


VIEW FROM DOONDI, NEUTRAL BAY.
demonium—the result of mismanagement on the part of the Government at this time.
Therefore, he determined to leave Victoria, and try fresh fields and pastures new in New
South Wales, and came round to Sydney, where various occupations engaged his atten-
tion until 1800, when he journeyed out over the Queensland border to Doondi cattle station,
on the Balonne River, Maranoa district, and remained there for fifteen years, meanwhile
improving the herd of over
10,000 head by introducing
the best bulls, procurable
at a figure which surprises
stationowners nowadays,
25 guineas being then the
price for good herd bulls,
and store bullocks selling
at from 30s. to £2 per
head, fat bullocks selling
at from £3 to £4 per head
at Fullagher’s yards,
Western Road, Sydney.
In the year 187 G he pur-
BUSH VIEW AT GLEN MOAN.
10
The Pastoral Homos of Australia,


DOONDI, NEUTRAL BAY.
555
The Glen Moan Estate, New South Wales.


chased the property
now known as Glen
Moan Estate, and de-
voted his attention to
sheep-breeding and
maintaining a pure type
of hue Merino wool, in
which he was so far suc-
cessful as to gain many
awards at the different
world’s exhibitions,
among which he is very
proud of winning the
gold medal at the exhi-
A CORNER OF DOONDI, NEUTRAL BAY
bition in Paris m 1900 for fleece and wool in bale.
Mr. Manchee was appointed to the Queensland commission of the peace in 1864, and
in New South Wales in 1877. He is a member of the council of the Pastoralists’ Union of
New South Wales and of the Stockowners' Association of New South Wales. At both hs
is a most regular attendant at committee meetings. He was one of the founders of the
New South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Association, and as a member of council takes the
greatest interest in the work. He is also a member of council of the People’s Reform
League.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Timor Estate.
The Property of Mr. J. H. White.
Timor is one of the well-known woolgrowing properties in the Upper Hunter River
district. It now belongs to Mr. J. H. White, but previous to 1907 it was held
by him and two of his brothers, it having been left them by their father, the
late Mr. Frederick Robert White, of Booloomindah, Harben Vale, Timor, Glen Dhu, Rock-
A MOB OF TIMOR CATTLE.
wood, and other station properties. Timor lies about twelve miles north-east of Bland-
ford, on the Northern Railway line, and is about 1300 feet above sea-level. It is fine,
healthy, hilly country, once heavily timbered, but now burnt off and well improved. The
timber left is chiefly box and red gum; the country is basaltic, part slaty and limestone
I


country, and the average rainfall of the district is about 28 inches. In all, the estate com-
prises some 17,000 acres of freehold. The accompanying illustrations will convey an idea
of the character of the country, and its suitability for woolgrowing. The late Mr. Frederick
Robert White (who was born at Ravensworth, on the Hunter River, in 1835, and married,
in iB6O, Sarah Amelia Arndell, daughter of the Rev. Mr. Arndell, of Caddie, Windsor,
Hawkesbury River), took up woolgrowing on Timor in the fifties; he then bought Harben
MR. J. H. WHITE.
Vale frorn the late Mr. W ilham Henry Wa.rla.ncl, and later bought (den Dhu, owned by he
Messrs. Arndell. He managed these stations himself for many years, and in 1907 they
were eventually, with other station properties, divided among three sons, Mr. R. W
White getting Harben Vale and Glen Dhu, Mr. C. E. White, Rockwood (near Armidale), and
Mr. J. H. White, Timor, the eldest son, Mr. C. F. White, already holding Pikedale, near
Stanthorpe, Queensland.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Timor Estate, New South Wales.


GENERAL VIEW OF TIMOR, LOOKING EAST.—MAIN DIVIDING RANGE IN THE BACKGROUND.
GENERAL VIEW OF TIMOR, LOOKING WEST TOWARDS THE MAIN DIVIDING RANGE.
Granney Pass is shown with a Cross.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GENERAL VIEW OF TIMOR STATION.
The Timor Estate, New South Wales.


The estate is well watered by the Isis River and the Timor Creek, the river running
right through the property for eight or nine miles. The homestead, a wooden structure, is
situated on the Isis River, and commands a fine view of the surrounding country and of
the Main Dividing Range. Ihe fencing is the usual wire fencing, although the “old pad-
dock’’ on limor was the first piece of country this side of the Liverpool Range that was
fenced in for sheep with a log fence, all the country about up to that time being open
A PORTION OF THE GARDEN.
country and the sheep shepherded. Finding the sheep running in the paddock did so well,
it was not long before a number of paddocks were fenced in with logs.
The property is subdivided into nineteen paddocks, each paddock being served with a
permanent water supply. The stock are pastured entirely on native grasses, and only a
little lucerne is grown for station use. Mr. White goes in chiefly for woolgrowing, and he
has a Merino flock of about 16,000. These sheep are pure Harben Vale blood—Harben Vale
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CROSSING THE ISIS RIVER.
7
The Timor Estate, New South Wales.


A MOB OF WEANERS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


being the home of one of the most prominent Merino studs in the State. The sheep are
big framed and plain bodied, and they cut good, bulky fleeces. Mr. White sells his wool
in Sydney, and is generally well up in whatever good prices may be ruling. In the sea-
son 1909 he got up to 14b. Ihe lambing season is generally from April to June, and the
shearing takes place in October, the sheep being driven to the woolshed at Harben Vale.
DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS.
In addition to sheep, cattle are bred and fattened on the estate, though they only
take second place to the sheep. Mr. White comes of a family of noted stockbreeders, and
there is not one of them who is not a lover and breeder of horses; in fact, one is sure to
find tip-top horseflesh on any of the properties owned by any of the Whites of the Hunter
district. At Timor several stallions are kept, including the draught stallion Young Ben
Lomond, the thoroughbred stallion Lord Harben, and two pony stallions.
S
The Timor Estate, New South Wa!o&.


BREEDING EWES.
io
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia.


A GLIMPSE FROM THE ISIS RIVER.
11
The Timor Estate, New South Wales.


personal.
Mr. John Herbert White is the youngest son of the late Mr. F. R. White, and was
born at Harben Vale in 1881. He received his education at the Armidale School, and on
leaving went straight to Timor and took up pastoral pursuits. In 1905 and 1906 he took
a trip to Europe, visiting England, Scotland, and Ireland, and also Norway, Belgium, Ger-
many, France, Switzerland, Austria, and Italy In 1907 he married Agnes Muriel, daughter
01 Mr. Edward Wdnte, of Martindale, near Muswellbrook, N.S.W.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bergen=op=Zoon Estate.
The Property of Mr. W. M. Borthwick .
BERGEN-OP-ZOOM, the property of Mr, W. M. Borthwick, is a well-known estate in
the New England district. It is situated about three miles west of Walcha, and
about 320 miles from Sydney on the Great Northern line. The railway station
is Walcha-road, the township of Walcha being about 12 miles to the east. This New
England country came into great prominence during the never-to-be-forgotten 1902 drought,
and when stock were starving on the plains below, the well-improved properties on the
New England tableland were fairly well off for feed. Bergen-op-Zoom comprises about
5500 acres of undulating country, which was once heavily timbered. For many years it
was the property of Messrs. Boulton and Co , and Mr. Borthwick, the present owner, pur-
chased it in 1907.
BLOOD MARES AND FOALS.
1


The average rainfall for this part of the country is about 30 inches, which, if well
distributed, is ample for the grazing industry for which the land is mostly suitable. The
late autumn or winter months is when the rains do most good, and if good falls are
received then the country will stand summers which would have a bad effect on the plains.
It may be interesting to note that this New England country was some of the earliest
settled in the State. Possibly the early pioneers, on the lookout for land, crossed the
lower country when a drought was on, and on finding better conditions on the tableland,
decided to settle there. Much of it was rugged, rough country when originally taken up,
but a great deal of money has been expended, and present owners are now deservedly
reaping the benefit.
MR. W. M. BORTHWICK.
Bergen-op-Zoom is a well-improved estate, though it was once heavily timbered, chiefly
with peppermint and stringy bark timber, bat it has all been ringbarked. Those who
undertook this work wisely left useful clumps of timber for shelter purposes. These are
invaluable for stock, because extremely cold weather is experienced in winter. In the
summer, too, these clumps of timber afford welcome shade, and in addition they greatly
add to the picturesqueness of the country.
Bergen-op-Zoom is considered first-class grazing country. It is well watered by several
creeks running through the estate, and. considerable improvements have been made in
regard to the water supply. Dams and tanks have been constructed wherever necessary,
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
THE PICNIC GROUND.
3
The Bergcn-op-Zoom Estate, New South Wales,


VIEW OF HOMESTEAD FROM BACK.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


and stock have every facility for getting to water. Very little cultivation is carried on.
There are, as a rule, about 80 acres under oats, which are generally made into hay for
station purposes, and Mr. Borthwick is also putting in about 60 acres of lucerne. The
best fencing timber available in those parts is stringy bark, and the fences on the property
are generally six-wired. The estate is subdivided into about fourteen paddocks.
Pie\ious to subdividing and selling portion of the estate, Bergen-op-Zoom was used
mainly for wool-growing, but since he disposed of some 8,000 acres, Mr. Borthwick has
gn en more attention to horse-breeding. Shortly after the subdivisional sale he bought
Bedford, a propeity in Queensland, consisting of about 400 square miles, with 1000 head of
cattle. Po this place he transferred part of his Merino flock.
EXTRANCE TO GARDEN.
When Messrs. Boulton and Co., from whom Mr. Borthwick and Mr. A. S. Gill purchased
Bergen-op-Zoom, founded, the flock, the area of the estate was 18,700 acres. The flock
is bred almost entirely fiom the Collaroy stud, belonging to the Collaroy Co., near
Merriwa. Ihis is one of the oldest stud flocks in the State. It was founded about the
year 1826 with 100 ewes and 20 rams imported direct from Leipsic by Messrs Jones and
Davidson, who then owned Collaroy. After that sheep were added from the famous
Camden Park flock. In 1858 an important addition was made by the importation of six
pure Spanish Merinos from Sussex, England, being descendants from the pure Merino flock
owned by King George 111. New blood has been added from time to time, but the Col-
laroy sheep have acquired distinctive characteristics in the way of fleece and frame. They
5
The Bergen-op-Zoom Estate, New South Wales,


STATION OUTBUILDINGS.
5
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


are big, active
sheep with broad
thighs, bold heads
and fronts, and a
robust type of wool.
It is from this stud
that the Bergen-op-
Zoom flock is de-
scended.
The Bergen-op-
Zoom sheep are of a
free, hardy, profit-
able type, and the
average lambing is
generally in the
CORNER OF HOMESTEAD.
vicinity of 85 per cent. The lambing season is usually from September to October. The
average weight of fleece, taking the flock all round, is 9 lbs., and the wool has brought up
to 15id. per lb.
The shearing shed is built of iron, and it is fitted with sixteen stands of Wolseley
machines, driven by an 8 h.p. steam engine, which is also used for cutting wood and other
purposes. About 6000 sheep will now be shorn annually—the balance having been sent to
Redford.
Bergen-op-Zoom is specially adapted for horsebreeding, and Mr. Borthwick goes in for
breeding a useful type of horse, in addition to some valuable thoroughbreds. At the head
of the blood stock is the well-known sire Havoc, by Nordenfelt out of Frailty. Among the
WOOL SHED.
7
The Bergen-op-Zoom Estate, New South Wales.


MARES AND FOAIS.
8
The Pastorail homes of Australia,


mares bred from are : —Elsie (imp.), by St. Simon from Larissa ; Ringlet (imp. from New
Zealand), by Castor from Bangle ; Heather, by Goldsborough from Ricundo (dam of Eric) ;
Calluna, by Manton from Heather ; Merveen, by Mero from Eileen ; Success, by Manton
from Witch of Endor ; Sepia, by Patrol from Cuttlefish ; Starling, by Lochiel from Night-
mgale , Panne, by Jolly Hampton from Velvet; Country Girl, by Nobleman from Regalia;
Lady Beeswing, by Nobleman from Beeswing ; Regalia, by Metal from Claudme ; Toscana,
by Canzoni from Stewardess ; Plasma, by Postillion from Zinc ; Sandal, by Courage from
Clogs ; Somniloquy, by San Francisco from Moorooroo ; Gular, by Sir Foote from Diffidence ,
Pliocence, by Simmer from Sepia ; Sephir, by San Francisco from Sepia ; Mervaille, by
Mero from Success; Titian, by Jolly Hampton from Edna; Chianti, by Sir William from
Lady Thelma. Mr. Borthwick also has an active draught stallion in Young Lord of Lyons,
which gets useful stock. He also has a very fine stamp of pony stallion called Duncan.
Beyond the above-mentioned small area cultivated and under lucerne, the stock
depend entirely upon the natural grasses of the district. These comprise many of the
hardy nutritious varieties, and interspersed amongst them are English clover and rye grass.
The Bergen-op-Zoom house is one of those old-fashioned station homesteads which
ha\e been added to from time to time. It is, nevertheless, replete with every comfort,
and is installed with acetylene gas, and has hot and cold water laid on throughout. It
is surrounded by one of the most beautiful gardens in the district, and is connected by-
telephone with Walcha.
personal.
Mr. William Mur-
ray Borthwick was
born at Auburn Vale
Station, Inverell,
New South Wales, in
1856. His grand-
father, Mr. William
Murray Borthwick,
having taken up this
property in the thir-
ties. He is the eld-
est son of the late
Mr. William Murrav
Borthwick, who
from 1856 to 1870
THOROUGHBRED STALLION “ HAVOC "
9
The Bergen-op-Zoom Estate, New South Wales.


was in partnership
with Mr. Charles
Bull in Cooringoora
Station, near Bin-
"3B
gara ; then the part-
nership was dis-
solved, and Mr.
Borthwick bought
Menedebri. near
Tamwo r t h. Mr.
William Murray
Borthwick received
his education at In-
verell, and at an
early age entered
upon pastoral life.
When he became of
DRAUGHT STALLION “ YOUNG LORD OF LYON.
age his father took him into partnership in Menedebri. In 1889 he started on his own
account on a property of 10,000 acres called Mascotte, near Narrabri. In 1898 he went
to reside at Walcha, when he bought several small properties. In 1906 he sold Mas-
cotte, and, in partnership with Mr. Justin Laycock, bought Surveyor’s Creek. In 1907
he sold his interest
in Surveyor’s Creek
to Mr. Laycock, and
with Mr. A. S. Gill
bought Bergen-op-
Zoom, which they
divided between
them.
Mr. Borthwick
was one of a syndi-
cate that purchased
Attunga, near Tam-
worth, consisting of
about 20,000 acres :
Burburgate, near
Gunnedah, of about
40,000 acres ; Mene-
PONY STALLION “ DUNCAN."
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE BATHING POOL.
I T
The Bergen-op-Zoom Estate, New South Wales,


THE GARDEN GATES.
debri, near Tam worth, of about 17,000 acres ; Main Camp, near Scone, of about 10,000
acres, which properties they subdivided and sold between the years 1899 and 1907.
In 1885 he married Maud, the eldest daughter of Mr. Alexander Johnston, Mosman’s
Bay, Sydney. His family consists of three sons and five daughters.
Mr. Borthwick is considered one of the live men of the district, and takes a keen
interest in its welfare. He has been a member of the shire council for two years, and has
been president of the North and North-Western Racing Association since its formation.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Kentucky Estate
The Property of Mr. John Fletcher.
KENTUCKY is one of the well-known estates in the New England district, and it has
been in the hands of Mr. John Fletcher’s family for about fifty-four years. It
is situated in a district closely identified with the early history of the State, and
some of the hardest pioneering work was done in those parts. Roughly speaking, the New
England comprises the Northern tableland, which commences about Wingen or Murrurundi,
THE AVENUE.
and extends practically to the Queensland border. Wingen is 1004 feet above sea level
then there is a continual rise for 195 miles until Ben Lomond is reached, which is the high
est point, viz., 4973 feet ; the descent is gradual from there to the Queensland border
which is on an elevation of 2875 feet.
T


The New England district is one of the
most favoured in the State. At such an eleva-
tion the climate is magnificent, and the aver-
age rainfall is from 27 inches to 31 inches. A
large area of the country was originally hea-
vily timbered, and was rugged in nature, but
now that it has been improved it is fine healthy
stock country, and it produces some of the
best of the hardy natural grasses. Inter-
spersed with the hilly country are rich black soil
flats, capable of producing almost anything.
The winters are, of course, much colder than
on the plains, and stock require to be in good
condition before the cold weather sets in.
Therefore it is the autumn rains that stock-
owners attach most importance to.
Kentucky Station lies on the northern
THE LATE MR. JOHN FLETCHER.
railway line, about eight miles from Uralla. It is a very beautiful estate, and was pur-
chased by the late Mr. John Fletcher, father of the present owner, in 1856, from Captain
Williamson As far as can be ascertained, the original owner of the estate was a Captain
Innes. The late Mr. John Fletcher took an active part in the working of the estate up to
the time of his death in 1890, and it then came
into the hands of his sons, Messrs. John and
William Fletcher. Subsequently Mr. W. Flet-
cher sold his interest to the present owner,
who has worked at it on his own account ever
since.
Kentucky comprises about 17,000 acres of
healthy grazing country. It was originally
heavily timbered, but extensive ringbarking
and scrubbing operations, extending over
many years, and costing large sums of money,
have greatly increased its stock-carrying ca-
pacity. Apart from the destruction of timber,
it takes many years to bring a New England
estate into such good condition for wool-grow-
ing as Kentucky now is. At first the pasture
is inclined to be coarse in nature, but as time
2
MR. JOHN FLETCHER,
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
THE GARDEN AND ORCHARD.
The Kentucky Estate, New South Wales.


THE OAT PADDOCK ON THE CREEK.
MERINO EWES AND LAMBS.
-T
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


goes on, with judici-
ous grazing, the
harder grasses give
place to the finer va-
rieties. This is the
present state of Ken-
tucky—the coarse
grasses are disap-
pearing, and the fin-
er nutritious varie-
ties are taking their
place.
The estate is
THE CULTIVATION PADDOCKS.
well watered by natural creeks. The Kentucky Creek runs through the property, and wa-
ter is made easily accessible to stock by means of tanks, waterholes, and dams. The
house and the garden are supplied by water pumped by a Rider-Ericsson hot-air engine
from the creek. There are numerous springs on different portions of the estate, and the
severest drought does not materially affect their supply.
Kentucky is subdivided into twenty-five paddocks, the fences all being of a substan-
tial nature. The boundaries along the railway line are wire-netted, but as the rabbits
have never been a serious nuisance in that part of the country Mr. Fletcher has not netted
all his boundaries. However, he is aware that prevention is better than cure, and he has
now decided to securely net the estate.
The woolshed is
a large wooden
building, with gal-
vanised iron roof. It
is fitted with sixteen
stands of Wolseley
shearing machinery,
and, with weather
sheds, has a hous-
ing capacity for
3500 sheep. The
machinery is driven
by an B h.p. engine.
The original
WATER HOLE IN HOME PADDOCK.
5
The Kentucky Estate, New South Wales.


PUMPING WATER FROM CREEK TO HOMESTEAD.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


homestead on Kentucky was built in 1873. It was a stone building of the cool bungalow
type, and of late years it has been considerably remodelled and improved. It is approach-
ed by a fine avenue of pine trees, which were planted by Mr. Fletcher eleven years ago,
and it is surrounded by a well-kept garden and orchard. As regards the latter, a fine
assortment of English fruits are produced. The house is prettily situated, as it is only a
few hundred yards from the creek, along the banks of which grow some magnificent
weeping willows. It is also connected by telephone with the township of Urafla.
VIEW OF HOMESTEAD AND OUT-BUILDINGS.
£bc Stock.
Mr. Fletcher usually runs about 20,000 sheep on Kentucky, and the flock consists en-
tirely of Merinos. Soon after he took over the property he purchased rams from Mr. A
A. Dangar’s Gostwyck Estate, from which good results were obtained. The Gostwyck
flock, which is pure Tasmanian bred, is looked upon as one of the best fine-wool studs in
the State, and as Kentucky produces a good staple of fine wool, the Gostwyck rams suited
well. Mr. Fletcher, however, recently introduced some Boonoke rams, and the results
have, so far, been entirely successful. The Kentucky clip is now unique, inasmuch as
it differs from the short, fine staple for which the district is so noted. The Boonoke
rams have given a length and robustness to the wool that is not usually found in New
7
The Kentucky Estate, New South Wales,


England clips; at the
same time the dis-
trict has had its in-
fluence on the wool,
and it is clean,
bright, and handles
well—New England
characteristics. It is
free from burr, and
being more robust in
nature it is lighter in
condition than the
THE WOOL SHED.
usual New England wool. Altogether, Mr. Fletcher’s departure from the usual style of
breeding in the district is full of interest, and the success he has so far obtained justifies
his action. The whole of the 1909 Kentucky clip has not been sold (up to the time of
writing), but what has been disposed of brought prices which pay a tribute to Mr. Flet-
cher s judgment. The top price so far obtained was 14fd., but the average is even better
than that figure indicates. For instance, thirty-three bales of necks sold up to 12fd.,
which is a remarkably good price for necks; broken pieces sold up to 12 Jd., and another
feature of tne sale was the locks bringing 6Jd. These figures indicate that the Kentucky
clip is high-class wool throughout, and when the whole clip is disposed of, the figures
should give a most satisfactory average.
On account of the bold free type Mr. Fletcher is going for, the sheep thrive well, and
return good lambing percentages—about 79 per cent, of lambs are usually marked. There
is a small stud flock on the estate, from which Mr. Fletcher now breeds all his rams for
station use. The stud comprises a select
number of ewes, and the rams used are from
the famous Fladdon Rig stud, owned by Mr.
James Richmond. The Fladdon Rig stud
originated with Wangamong sheep, and Wan-
gamong had practically the same origin as
Boonoke, so that the Fladdon Rig sheep
should nick well with the progeny of the Boo-
noke rams at Kentucky.
Mr. Fletcher runs from 400 to 500 head of
cattle for fattening purposes. He is going in
8
A RED-POLLED BULL.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


RED-POLLED CATTLE.
9
The Kentucky Estate, New South Wales,


THE STABLES.
strongly for the Red-polled breed, which he finds suit his country excellently. They are
good doers, and fatten up into very saleable cattle. The cows are excellent milkers, and
rear good cakes. Air. Fletcher has been working into a grade herd by putting pure Red-
polled bulls with his ordinary station cattle, and the pure bulls with the progeny. He
has not spared expense in regard to sires, and he has purchased bulls from such well-
known studs as those owned by Messrs. Osborne Bros, and Captain Philip Charley. The
most recent purchase comprised the bull Young Sprat, and a yearling, both bred by
Messrs. Osborne Bros. Young Sprat was by Magnus Boy (imp.), from Sprat by Dollar,
and the younger bull was bv Delegate (imp.), from Topsy (imp.).
personal.
Mr - John Fletcher is a native of New South Wales, having been born at Branga
Plains Station in 1853. He is the third son of the late Mr. John Fletcher, who came to
the colony in the early forties, and became one of the leading pastoralists in New Eng-
land. Mr. Fletcher, the present owner of Kentucky, was educated at Camden College,
Newtown, and on leaving school he went on to his father’s station to gain experience. He
remained there for two years, and then went to Wollomombi, his father’s place near Ar-
id
7/ie Pastoral Homes of Australia.


“ AMBI.KSIDE,” MR. JOHN FLETCH ER'S RESIDENCE AT ASHEIELD.
1 1
The Kentucky Estate, New South Wales.


THE GARDEN.
midale, and he remained there for twenty-five years. On his father’s death, he and his
brother, Mr. William Fletcher, came into possession of Kentucky, and later on, on the bro-
thers dissolving partnership, the estate became his entirely. In 1899 he married Effie, the
daughter of Mr. Alfred Wauch, of Branga Park, Walcha, and his family consists of one
son and two daughters. Mr. Fletcher takes a keen interest in the progress of his dis-
trict, though of late years he has been living most of his time near Sydney. A few years
ago he purchased Ambleside, a beautiful house, at Ashfield, and here he resides with his
family, paying periodical visits to his station.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Narramine and Weemabah Estates.
The Properties of Mr. Frank Mack.
NARRAMINE and its owner, Mr. Frank Mack, are well known throughout the
length and breadth of New South Wales. The property, comprising about
20.000 acres, is situated on the central western slopes, in a fine wheat-growing
district. It lies on the Macquarie River, 30 miles below Dubbo, and adjoins Derribong on
the west, Collyburl on the east, Buddah on the north, and Enromadah on the south.
The nature of the country is chiefly level plain, intersected with box pine. A great
deal of the timber has been killed, but Mr. Mack has reserved useful patches for shade and
ornamental purposes.
Narramine was originally held by Messrs M. and E. Maher, and in those days it
comprised 190,000 acres, but, with the exception of the 20,000 acres held by Mr. Mack,
it has all been resumed by the Government. In 1884 the present owner and the late Mr.
Sidney Austin joined partnership, and had joint interests in Narramine until 1906, when
the partnership terminated. Mr. Mack retained Narramine as his inteiest, and Mr. Austin
took Cobbora. The estate is well known on account of the extensive wheat-growing
operations carried out on it, and by the high-class sheep and wool grown theie, to say
nothing of the popularity of the owner, who takes a keen and active inteiest in pastoi al
matters generally.
£bc Ibomesteab.
The Narramine homestead, which was built twenty-four years ago by the present:
owner, is a one-storied building of the bungalow style. It is one of those comfortable
station homes, which are a feature of Australian country life. It is lighted thionghont by
acetylene gas, and is supplied with water by a hot-air engine. The garden covers about
two acres, and is full of fruit trees, flowers, and vegetables.
1


Jmprovcments,
Narramine is all very securely netted, and rabbits are rigorously kept down. In
addition to judicious ringbarking, a great deal has been done to improve the water supply.
There is a considerable frontage to the Macquarie River, the water from which is often
used, but the chief water supply on the station is from large excavated tanks, from which
the water is pumped into small receiving tanks, and drawn into troughs by means
of gravitation. The woolshcd is built of wood and iron, and is large enough for fortv
stands, though only twenty-five are used. Wolseley machines are used, driven by a 12-h.p.
traction engine. The stock on Narramine depend chiefly on natural grasses, though Mr.
Alack has an area of about 1000 acres under lucerne.
Photo by Kerry & Co.
MR. FRANK MACK.
Cultivation is indulged in on an extensive scale. In all, about 9000 acres have been
cleared and cultivated, but at present only about 5000 are under wheat. Mr. Mack started
wheat-growing some fifteen years ago, and from 1000 acres he has gradually increased it to
the present area.
During this period, though he has had some bad seasons, he has also had some fine
crops. In 1901 he had 4000 acres under wheat, and the crop averaged 29 bushels per acre.
In 1904 the same area yielded an average of 26 bushels per acre.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD, NARRAMINE.
3
Narramine, New South Wales,


A FISHING PARTY.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED, NARRAMINE.
5
Narramine, New South Wales.


GROUP OF STUD WEW WEANERS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Stocft.
Narramine is divided into about twenty paddocks for the convenience of stock. The
Hock is entirely Merino, the sheep being of the big plain-bodied type so universally in
demand. For the last twenty-five years Mr. Mack has only used rams of Wanganella
strain, which he is a great believer in. A stud was formed twenty-five years ago, and
large drafts of rams are freely sold, chiefly to Queensland buyers. About 600 stud rams
are available for sale annually. The special characteristics of the Narramine sheep are
their large frames and good style of medium wool. They are free from body wrinkles,
and Air. Mack attaches great importance to keeping the faces free from wool. In 1903 a
record was established by Mr. Mack selling 3800 4-tooth ewes (being the whole drop),
unclassed, at 28s. 6d. per head, all round. This was a remarkable sale, and the
accompanying illustrations give an idea of the high standard of the Narramine ewes. At
the time of our photographer’s visit the stud rams were all shorn, but the accompanying
photos of stud ewe weaners will give an idea of the characteristics of the flock. It may
be mentioned that these stud ewe weaners —486 —this year cut 1 2/ lbs. wool, nj/2
months growth, netting over 10s. per head all round.
Most satisfactory sales of rams have also been made. In June, 1909, Mr. Mack sold
300 rams at 4 guineas each to Queensland buyers. The Narramine stud is practically bred
within itself. \\ hen outside blood has been resorted to, only rams of Wanganella strain
have been purchased. The Narramine clip is sold in the Sydney market, and it is always
well up among the top values. The sheep are run entirely on natural grasses, and no
artificial feeding is resorted to.
A MOB OF STUD EWE EWANERS.
7
Marramine, Mew South Wales.


PUMPING PLANT AND CANAL AT WEEMABAH,
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FILLING A WATER-HOLE WITH THE PUMPING PLANT.
9
Weemabah, New South Wales.


About 16 miles down the Macquarie River Mr. Mack holds another property, called
Weemabah, which he purchased three years ago from the estate of the late Mr. John C. Ryrie.
It comprises 8000 acres of freehold fronting the Macquarie River, and also 3000 acres
leasehold. It is plain country interspersed with box timber, and has a carrying capacity of
about one sheep and a-qnarter per acre.
Mr. G. E. Mack (son of the owner) manages Weemabah, and it is probable that the
Narramine stud flock will be moved there on account of the amount of cultivation being
carried out at the head station. The grasses are chiefly trefoil, crowfoot, and barley grass,
but Mr. Mack is putting down a considerable area under lucerne, lie has erected a 60-h.p.
Hornsby suction gas plant, with which he can raise about 2,800,000 gallons of water per
day at an estimated cost of about 6d. per hour. During last summer this plant was
occupied in filling various swamps about the property, but there are now about 300 acres
ready for lucerne, so in future much of the water will be required for irrigating purposes.
Last summer Mr. Mack filled swamps aggregating about 500 acres with this pumping plant,
and in this way it was of immense value to stock. He arrives at the estimate of the cost
of raising this water by the amount of charcoal the engine consumes. The charcoal is made
in a retort on the property.
SHEEP RUNNING IN LUCERNE PADDOCK.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD, WEEMABAH.
11
Weemabah, New South Wales.


THE NARRAMINE POLO TEAM.
Winners of the Orange, Dubbo, Coonamble, Mudgee, and Narramine Cups, 1909.
Reading from left to right the members of the team are;—J. Perry, G. E. Mack, Les Webb, and “Boxer” Stevenson.
personal.
Air. I 1 rank Mack is the third son of the late Joseph Gardner Mack, one of the pioneer
squatters of Victoria. He was born in 1850 at Berrybank, Lismore, Victoria, and received
his education at the Melbourne Church of England Grammar School. On leaving- school
he entered the Geelong office of Messrs. Dennys, Lascelles and Austin for the purpose of
gaining commercial experience. He remained with the firm for two years, and then turned
his attention to pastoral pursuits. The first property he held was Murgha, in the Riverina,
and in 1884 he purchased Narramine, in partnership with the late Mr. Sidney Austin. In
1873 he married Catherine, daughter of the late Mr. George Carmichael, of Retreat,
Casterton, Victoria, and there arc two sons and two daughters by the marriage. Mr. G. E.
Mack manages at Weemabah. and Mr. F. M. Mack is in charge of the stud flocks at
Narramine. In addition to being president of the Dubbo Pastoral and Agricultural
Association, Mr. Frank Mack is a member of the Pastures Protection Board, and takes a
great interest in all local matters generally.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Haddon Rig Estate.
The Property of Mr. James Richmond.
H ADDON RIG is one of the best known stations on the North-West Plains of New
South Wales. It comprises about 42,000 acres of freehold, C.P. and C.L. land,
and it is watered by the Marthaguy Creek, supplemented by tanks and artesian
bores. The area of the run once comprised 270,000 acres, and at one period of its history
150,000 sheep were shorn annually. Haddon Rig was originally a cattle station and what
few lots of sheep there were, were shepherded, folding yards being made on the natural
waterholes and creeks. Now the estate is vastly changed. It is brought as far up to
date as capable management can make it, and it carries one of the most noted Merino
flocks in Australia.
MARTHAGUY CREEK.
I


The country is chiefly open plains with
belts of timber comprising Buddha, Pine, Box,
Belah, Oak, Wilgah, and small quantities of
gum. There is a little Myall, but it is now
almost extinct, and there are several varieties
of valuable edible shrub. The soil has the
characteristic of producing feed very quickly
after rain, and holding it well through dry
weather. The rainfall for the past 20 years
averages 17.878 inches.
The homestead is situated on Marthaguy
Creek, on which dams have been constructed,
throwing a fine sheet of water back from seven
to eight miles. At the homestead the water
is 14 feet deep.
MR. JAMES ROCHMOND.
The garden is about two acres in extent and it provides a plentiful supply of vegetables
at all seasons. It is watered by a windmill and a horseworks, the latter being a 5 in.
McComas lift. The orchard produces magnificent grapes and oranges, as well as many
other varieties of fruit. Some of the Haddon Rig oranges have grown up to 134 inches in
circumference.
improvements.
Haddon Rig is enclosed with wire-netting and the subdivisions are also netted. Among
the various improvements are numerous dams
and tanks throughout the run, and a fine
supply of water is also obtained from two ar-
tesian bores, one of which is down 1000 feet,
yielding a daily flow of about 500,000 gallons ;
another 2,008 feet, yielding a good supply.
The property has been rung for many
years, and all fallen timber has been picked
up and burned off twice during the last ten
years. All hollow trees have been destroyed,
as they were considered harbours for rabbits.
The results of efforts at rabbit suppression on
Haddon Rig is that the finer grasses now have
a full chance and the sheep benefit accord-
ingly.
MR. CHARLES HUNTER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Hadden Rig Estate. New South Wales


A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.
AVENUE OF KURRAJONG TREES.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


In 1890 Mr. Richmond had the misfortune
to have a large complete woolshed, fitted with
machines, burnt down. Nothing daunted,
he replaced it the following year, and the pre-
sent structure, containing fifty-eight shearing
stands, is one of the most up-to-date in the
country. The machinery is driven by a double
cylinder Marshall & Son 14 h.p. engine, which,
as a matter of fact, is too large for the work
required of it. The sheep dip is built of brick
and cement, and the length of swim is 66 feet.
Ihe stables are large and airy, and they con-
MR. C. H. NICOLL.
tain fine stalls and loose boxes, and the coachhouse and harness room are under the same
roof,
Gbc Stock
The flock comprises about 20,000 sheep, and the breeding ewes number 12,000. They
are all pure Wanganella blood and they are characterised by big carcases and dense bulky
fleeces of strong combing wool. All the grown sheep in 1909 averaged 12 lbs. 4 ozs.
The stud flock was started by Mr. Richmond in 1875, when he purchased sheep from Mr.
THE WOOLSHED.
5
The Haddon Rig Estate, New South Wales.


THE MARTHAGUY CREEK.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


HADDON RIG STUD RAM.
SOld at the Sydney Sales in 1906 for 475 Guineas.
John Sanger of Wan-
gamong. Four years
later he introduced
high-class rams from
Messrs. Austin and
Millear, of Wanganella,
and no other blood has
since ever been used in
the flock. Having such
a sound foundation,
careful selection and
heavy culling resulted
in the present high
standard of the Had-
don Rig flock. For
many years the rams
have been in great de-
mand, but it was only
within the last few years that Mr. Chas. Hunter, who manages for Mr. Richmond, com-
menced sending rams down to the Sydney auction sales. In 1906 the first draft came
down, and for several days before the sale they were the topic of conversation among the
sheep men assembled in Sydney. And when the auctioneer came to their pens the fullest
expectations were realised. One ram—the Duke of Richmond —was purchased by a
Victorian breeder for 475 guineas ; another ram brought 380 guineas, and another made
310 guineas, &c. Altogether, the twenty-five Haddon Rig rams offered at that sale aver-
GROUP OF HADDON RIF STUD EWES.
7
The Haddon Rig Estate, New South Wales.


A HADDON RIG STUD RAM.
SPECIAL STUD RAM, “CHAMBERLAIN.”
As a 4-tooth in 1907 this ram cut 28 lbs. 8 ozs. of greasy wool, 366 days’growth. Scoured yield, 13 lbs. 15 ozs. (46 per cent.), valued at £l/5/7½.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF HADDON RIG STUD RAMS.
aged £147 12s. 7d.—a record sale for such a large number, all being 4-tooth. The
following year Mr. Hunter sent down twenty-four rams, and they averaged £133. In 1909,
when prices all round were on a much lower level, twenty Haddon Rig rams averaged
£99 4s. 6d. The class of wool carried by these sheep is full of quality, but free from
excessive yolk. The staple is long, with plenty of character, and the sheep being practi-
cally plain-bodied, the fleece is very even throughout. The rams have cut great weights,
up to 30 lbs. No doubt, there have been stud rams which have cut heavier weights of
greasy wool, but Mr. Hunter prefers the scoured weight to the greasy weight.
“ Chamberlain ” cut
28 lbs. 8 ozs. of wool
(366 days’ growth),
when scoured yield-
ed 13 lbs. 15 ozs., or
46 per cent., which
was valued at £1 ss.
7|d. This is a
characteristic of the
Haddon Rig sheep ;
the bold, free wool
scours well, and
leaves a high per-
centage of free, high
quality wool.
GROUP OF HADDON RIG STUD EWES,
9
The Haddon Rig Estate, New South Wales.


STATION BUILDINGS,
SHEARERS’ QUARTERS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Another point in
favour of the Had-
den Rig sheep is that
they are entirely
grass-fed. They
come into the sales
straight off the pas-
tures, and no hous-
ing or artificial feed-
ing is ever indulged
in. Their big car-
cases and strong
constitutions render
them as near ideal
mutton sheep as it is
possible for a Merino
to be.
THE BORE.
Cattle.
In addition to the sheep there are some high-class Shorthorns on Haddon Rig. The
stud was started with a strain of Durham, bred by Messrs. Christie and Wentworth, previ-
ous owners of the estate. Mr. Richmond has purchased high-class sires at regular
intervals and has succeeded in bringing the herd up to a high standard. At the
Sydney Show Sales in 1909, Mr. Nicoll purchased a fine bull, bred by Sir Rupert Clarke, of
Belinda Vale, Vic-
toria. This bull is
by “ Duke of Thule
3rd,” from “ Belinda
Duchess of Derrimut
316th.” He is filling
up into a very nice
beast, and should
leave his mark in the
herd.
jobber.
The natural
grasses on Haddon
Rig comprise many
varieties, and a fine
lot of trefoil and
crowfoot and other
A TANK,
11
The Hadden Rig Estate, Hew South Wales.


kinds of herbage comes in fair seasons. Very little culti-
vation is gone in for, though about 80 acres are put
under wheat for hay purposes.
personal.
Mr. James Richmond, who resides most of his time
in Scotland, was born at Southdean, near Jedburgh, Scot-
land, and He came out to Australia in 1852. Notwith-
standing the gold fever then prevailing, and many flatter-
MR. DONALD GRANT.
ing offers of employment, he adhered to his original intention of taking up sheepbreeding.
He started squatting with the late Mr. Halliday, of Brookong, on a small station on the
Wimmera. From there they went to Spring Bank, on the Avoca River, and after holding
it for some time they dissolved partnership. Mr. Halliday retained Spring Bank, and Mr.
Richmond purchased Coreen, near Corowa. In 1873 he purchased Haddon Rig from Messrs.
Christie and Wentworth, and disposed of his other properties. At this time the only fence
on Haddon Rig was round the horse paddock, and all the sheep had to be shepherded.
In a very short time Mr. Richmond had the whole property fenced and subdivided, and he
soon laid the foundations of a Merino flock, which is now one of the most famous in
Australia.
Mr. Richmond’s manager and attorney in Australia is Mr. Chas. Hunter, a very familiar
figure in pastoral circles. He arrived in Australia in 1857, and his first pastoral experience
was gained on a large cattle station in Queensland. He acquired a thorough knowledge
of pastoral work there, and in 1891 he took charge of Haddon Rig. Ever since he has
devoted himself to improving the property generally, but more especially the stud sheep.
In connection with the Merinos, it is only fair to mention the name of Mr. Donald Grant,
who has classed the Haddon Rig stud flock for many years, and who is therefore largely
responsible for the high standard of the sheep. The work on Haddon Rig is superintended
by Mr. C. H. Nicoll, who is a thoroughly practical man and a keen manager.
The Pastorai Homes of Australia.


The Tondeburine Estate.
The Property of Mr. J.L Brown.
THE great stretch of plain couptry watered by the Castlereagh River is relieved by
curiously-shaped mountains called the Warrumbungles. This range is visible from
a great distance on every side, and it is one of the great landmarks of the Castle-
reagh country. Within easy reach of these mountains is Tondeburine, one of the best known
of the large western stations. It now comprises about 40,000 acres, situated about 16
miles from (iiilai railway station, which is 3 miles from Sydney. Ihe property is owned
IN THE COBBINBIL PADDOCK.
by Mr. J. L. Brown, and it has been in his family considerably over seventy years. It was
originally taken up by the late Mr. Andrew Brown in the early thirties, and being so fertile
and favourably situated, it is not surprising that it has not changed hands as frequently as
many stations do during as long a period as seventy years.
The soil on Tondeburine is rich chocolate and red loam, capable of producing almost
anything. The timber consists of white box, kurrajong, with clumps of pine and myall.
i


THE BERRIE DAM.
At the time Mr. Andrew Brown took it up, the estate comprised 150,000 acres, chiefly
Crown lands. Caigan, a property consisting of 30,000 acres, was taken up some years pre-
viously, and Cuttabulloo, of 16,000 acres, was purchased from the late Mr. Edward Cox.
Mr. Andrew Brown
held these stations
until about the year
1876, when he made
them over to his
sons, the late Wil-
liam Francis Brown,
and Mr. J. L. Brown,
the present owner.
The property was
worked in partner-
ship until 1882,
when, on the death
of his brother, it was
made over to the
THE WARRUMBUNGLES.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE TONDEBURINE HOMESTEAD.
THE DOOROOMBAH HOMESTEAD.
3
The Tondebur'me Estate, New South Wales,


PURE HEREFORD CATTLE.
present owner entirely.
All this land was originally held under lease, and by degrees over 50,000 acres were
acquired by improvement and auction. Mr. Brown has made over properties of 8000 acres
and 4000 acres to his
sons, Messrs. John
Laurence Brown and
George Leonard Brown,
respectively.
Tondeburine is all
well fenced, being en-
closed by wire netting;
it is subdivided into
thirteen paddocks, and
most of the subdivi-
sions are enclosed on
two or three sides with
netting. All other fenc-
ing is of substantial
character.
PURE SHORTHORNS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DOOROOMBH HOUSE FR OM A DISTANCE.
The Tondeburine Estate, New South Wales .


THE COBBINEIL DAM.
Ihe woolshed is complete with modern requirements. It is a wood and iron building
fitted with twenty-six Wolseley machines and all labour-saving conveniences. There is a
large wool room, spe-
cially designed for faci-
litating the work with
the fleeces, and there is
also covering for 2500
sheep. The water sup-
ply has been well cater-
ed for. There is a
large underground tank
with a capacity of 20,-
000 gallons. This is
used for engine supply
and for other purposes.
In addition, there are
two large galvanised
A GROUP OF DRAUGHT HORSES.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE DAM AND TANK IN THE RAM PADDOCK.
7
The Tondeburine Estate, New South Wales.


iron tanks at the
woolshed and also at
the shearers’ huts,
and the water from
them is laid on to the
rouseabouts’ quar-
ters and shearers’
huts. The shearers’
quarters are of re-
cent erection, and
they are built to ac-
commodate twenty-
eight men.
THE WOOLSHED.
The rainfall on Tondeburine averages about 25 in. per annum, but Mr. Brown has
made extensive improvements in regard to ensuring stock getting a plentiful supply of
water.
1 here are three bores on the property; one is down 3500 ft., throwing 2000 gallons per
day, and the others are pumped by windmills. There are also numerous wells, tanks, and
dams, and a good supply of water can be obtained at comparatively shallow depths.
Mr. Brown runs about 18,000 Merinos on Tondeburine, and they are chiefly bred from
Mudgee strains. On this country they produce a long staple, carrying plenty of condition,
and as far as weight is concerned the fleeces are very satisfactory. The lambing season
is from September to October, and on an average about 80 per cent, of lambs are marked.
The whole Tondeburine flock, including hoggets, this year (1909) cut an average of
10 lbs. 6 ozs. The wool is always well up m whatever prices happen to prevail.
The estate is fine fattening country, and several drafts of fat sheep which were sent
to Homebush last year topped the market. The figures are worth quoting, as they show a
very consistent class of sheep. The sales were as follows:
20th October, I9OS s. i>. s. n. 16th November, 1908— s . n. s
356 ewes, shorn ... ... ... 13 3 to 13 7 462 wethers, shorn I 4 2 to 0 -
369 ewes, ~ 12 4 to 12 8 454 wethers, ~ ... 2 to 6
233 ewes, ~ 10 11 to 11 1 169 wethers, ~ ... s
26th October, 1908 23rd November, 1908 —
356 ewes, shorn ... ... ... 13 3 145 wethers, shorn ... i 4 S
305 ewes, 11 6 to II 7 418 wethers, ~ .. IO ln * '
2nd November, 1908 — 238 wethers J 'o 11
163 wethers, shorn n 5 to 11 9 31st December, ’l9OB ~ 12 7
196 wethers, ~ ... ... 10 o 146 ewes, shorn ... 12
126 ewes > 12 3to 12 10 208 ewes, ~ ... ’.. " __
173 ewes, „ nlO 17 ewes, ~ ... ’’’ 'J _ 2
On 24th July, 1910, a mob of 1000 Tondeburine wethers topped the market at 16s.
gd., averaging 14s.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE CARWELL DAM.
9
The Tendeburine Estate, New South Wales,


Mr. Brown runs
about 300 head of
cattle on the estate,
chiefly Shorthorns. He
goes in for high quality,
and generally imports
the bulls he requires for
station use.
The late Mr. An-
drew Brown bred some
fine draught horses on
Tondeburine. In 1841
he imported a high-class
stallion, and in 1862
he imported another.
THE LD HOUSE, DOOROOMBAH.
The present owner has continued on these lines, and has imported four stallions during late
years. The first was in 1889, when Victory and Mosquito were brought out. In 1895 he
imported Cock Robin, and the last importation was Sylvanus, the stallion now in use. Alto-
gether Mr. Brown has about twenty picked draught mares in his stud.
The Tondeburine homestead is connected with Gulargambone by telephone, and it is
replete with every comfort. It is situated in a beautiful garden, 3 acres in extent, in which
many varieties of fruits and flowers grow to perfection.
Mr. Brown has about 800 acres prepared for cultivation next year.
Caioan.
This property lies on the Castle-
reagh, in the Coonabarabran district.
It originally comprised 30,000 acres,
and Mr. Brown has
handed over 8000
acres each to two
sons, Messrs. Fran-
cis Henry and
Charles Henderson
Brown, keeping the
remaining 14,000
acres himself. Cai-
gan consists of myall
THE SHEARERS’ QUARTERS, TONDEBURINE.
TO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


plains and ridgy coun-
try, timbered with box,
ironbark, and pine. It
has a frontage of about
seven miles to the river,
and is also watered by
wells, dams, and tanks.
A good supply of water
is obtained at very mo-
derate depth; in fact,
the deepest well on Cai-
gan is only about go ft.
The property is used
for sheep and cattle,
the former being bred
“METHVEN,” Mr. J. L. BROWN’S PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A WINTER VIEW.
on the same lines as at Tondeburine. Mr. Brown still holds 7000 acres on Cuttabullo, but
at the time of writing he has leased this.
personal.
Mr. John Laurence Brown was born in 1841 at Cooerwull, a property of 4000 acres, near
Lithgow. The Government has purchased a considerable area of this for a small arms fac-
tory, but he still holds about the area above mentioned. He commenced his education under
the Rev. Colin Stewart, of the Hermitage, Bowenfels, and in 1858 he went to Scotland, and
studied for two years at the Edinburgh Academy. On leaving there he went to the Royal
Agricultural College at Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, England. In 1862 he returned to
Caigan, where he took up pastoral work under his father’s guidance. In 1869 he married
Caroline, daughter of the late Mr. Henry Burton Bradley, solicitor, of “The Terraces,”
Sydney, and a nephew of Judge Burton, one of the State’s earliest judges.
Mr. Brown has six sons and three daughters, and, he is proud to add, twelve grand-
children. He has been a Justice of the Peace since 1866. The well-known Cooerwull Wool-
len Mills were founded by his father, who, in 1838, erected the buildings for flour-milling
purposes. For a number of years they were worked as such, but when, in the early fifties,
the community ceased growing wheat, the late Mr. Brown turned his attention to wool-mill-
ing, and converted the flour-mills to suit his purpose, and they were leased for many years.
He first entered into partnership with Mr. J. H. Gale as manager. Mr. Gale was formerly
manager of the Camden mills, but after these were burned, Mr. Wightman leased the Coo-
-11
The Tondeburine Estate, New South Wales.


erwull mills, and ap-
pointed Mr. Gale man-
ager. At the expira-
tion of the lease, Mr.
Brown took over the
mills, with Mr. Gale as
managing partner.
They have at the pre-
sent time four Govern-
ment contracts for
khaki, Bedford cord,
deerskin, and grey
woollies for the poor-
houses. Apart from
those, the mills put
“COOERWULL," MR. J. L. BROWNS'S PIKTHPLACE.
through many private contracts for such firms as Anthony Hordern & Sons, &c. At the
present time the mills are supplying a good deal of rough flannel to the Government.
Mr. Brown resides at Methven, a lovely home at Bowenfels. The house is a well-ap-
pointed two-storey building, situated in a beautiful garden. It is from this place that he
so successfully controls his numerous interests.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Quanda Estate.
The Property of Mr. Geo. L. Ryder.
OUANDA is situated on the rich extensive plains which surround Coonamble, one
of the principal north-western towns. It is now the property of Mr. George
Lyon Ryder, but it was once part of the famous Calga Estate, owned for so
many years by Mr. Ryder and his four brothers. Calga once comprised 130,000 acres, and
it was originally taken up by the late Mr. James Bettington, who subsequently sold it to the
late Hon. James White and his brother. After holding it for some years Messrs. White
Bros, sold it to Mr. James Murphy, of Victoria, from whom Messrs. Ryder Bros, purchased
it in 1882. The firm consisted of Messrs. Rupert, Henry J., Thos. K., Geo. L., and Chas.
Ryder. Mr. Thos. Ryder died in 1901. The partnership in Fiji and Calga lasted for
years, until the brothers decided to cut up the estate and divide it equally. Mr. Charles
Ryder died just after this decision was arrived at, so that the project was never carried out,
TYPE OF MYALL COUNTRY ON QUANDA.
1


and Calga was sold to the Australian Mortgage, Land and Finance Company, Limited, m
1905. Mr. Geo. L. Ryder, however, retained about 6500 acres, which he called Quanda,
a name becoming widely known on account of the stud Merino sheep bred there.
The estate is situated at the foot of the well-known Warrumbungle Mountains, the
great landmark of the Coonamble Plains. It is all level country timbered with belts of
box, myall, and whitewood trees, which give it a park-like appearance. The water problem
has always been a serious one on this country, but Quanda is now well supplied in this
direction. Large tanks have been constructed on various parts of the run, and when full
each holds about 15 ft. of water. An artesian bore has been sunk to a depth of 1800 feet,
GROUP OF MARES AND FOALS.
and originally 150,000 gallons per day came to the surface. This flow is on the edge
of the artesian strata, and 200 ft. above the country round Coonamble, and the supply has
fallen off to such an extent that the water has to be pumped into an elevated tank by a 6-in.
Rider-Ericsson engine. Two sub-artesian wells have recently been put down—one to a
depth of 150 ft., the water rising 80 ft. in the 6-in casing ; the other to a depth of 210 ft.,
the water rising 115 ft. in the casing—and these two will make Quanda independent of the
rainfall for a permanent supply of water.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
ONE OF THE DAMS.
The Quanda Estate, New South Wales .


VIEW OF PLAINS WITH WARRUMBUNGLES IN THE DSITANCE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


PEN OF 3 RAM, RAMS WINNERS OF CI TIZEN 'S PRIZE AND CHALLENGE CUP COONAMBLE SHOW, 1909.
The Quanda homestead is of the comfortable bungalow style, characteristic of the
western plains. It is surrounded by fine timber and a well-kept garden, which includes two
tennis courts.
The estate has never been overstocked, consequently, all the rich natural grasses, foi
which the plains are noted, flourish luxuriantly. Rabbits have been successfully suppressed,
which largely accounts for the present condition of the pasture. When Mr. Ryder took
over Quanda rabbits were very numerous, so much so that in one drive as many as 1700
or 2000 would be caught. After securely fencing the property with netting Mr. Ryder toox
steps to eradicate them, pursuing this work chiefly in the winter months. He cleared off
all the dead timber and rabbit harbours, and dug out all the burrows, this latter operation
being the most effective in the end.
In the course of three years the rabbit
pest was practically reduced to nil,
and the benefit has been of a
most substantial kind. One has
only to compare the Quanda paddocks
with other s in the neighbourhood to note
what rabbit suppression really means.
Quanda is divided into sixteen paddocks,
and is still being subdivided. The
boundary fence is, of course, wire netted,
and Mr. Ryder is also putting netting on
some of the subdivisions.
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM.
Best Commercial Sheep, Dubbo Show, 7909.
5
The Quanda Estate, New South Wales.


GROUB OF QUANDA FLOCK RAMS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Zbc Stub f{ ocft.
No description of Quanda would be complete without a detailed account of the stud
flock, which is becoming one of the best known in the State. And it is destined to continue
to be so, because it is being conducted on the soundest lines. Ever since the foundation
of the Calga flock (of which Quanda stud is a part) one line of blood has been adhered to.
The Quanda Merinos contain not only the pure Tasmanian blood, but they have been kept
to the pure Sir I homas strain since some time prior to 1887. Therefore the Quanda rams
possess that remarkable degree of prepotency which can only be acquired by the careful
use of one strain of blood. In addition, Messrs. Ryder Bros., when they owned the Calga
GROUP OF TWO-TOOTH MAIDEN STUD EWES.
flock, put constitution before anything, and went in only for big-framed, active sheep, the
only kind which thrive on the hot plains. Wool, of course, received due attention, and
while increasing the prepotency of the rams and maintaining frame and constitution,
Messrs. Ryder Bros, steadily improved the fleeces. They aimed at a long staple of robust
type, and in order to stand the heat and dust of the plains, it had to be particularly well
put on the shoulders and rumps. Thus it is that the Quanda Merinos are noted for these
characteristics.
Though the name of Quanda is comparatively new to the sheep world, the flock,
nevertheless, is one of the oldest in the State. The Calga Merinos, under the careful super-
vision of the late Henry J. Ryder, were long known as big-framed, long-stapled sheep of
7
The Quanda Estate, New South Wales,


“ CHUNKEY," QUANDA STUD RAM.
TYPE OF FOUR-TOOTH SELECTED STUD RAMD
As sold on the place for 25 guineas.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


pure Tasmanian strain, and the Quanda stud is but an off-shoot of the Calga flock. When
Messrs. Ryder Bros, sold (.alga they reserved for themselves a portion of the stud ewes
and rams, and with these formed the Vatua and Quanda studs. Quanda was originally
part of Calga, so that the sheep are being bred under exactly the same conditions as when
the stud was formed in 1878. In that year the stud was formed and classed by the late Mr.
James Ryrie Graham, and it comprised 1700 ewes and about 40 rams. Many notable Tas-
manian sires have been introduced into the flock. In 1887 a stud ram by Viceroy, sire by
Golden Tom, by Sir Thomas IT, by Old Sir Thomas, and two other Sir Thomas rams were
introduced, so that there is a strong fusion of this most notable strain in the Quanda stud.
The following year two more Sir Thomas rams were purchased, and in 1883 a half-brother
to President was purchased. He was called Golden King, by Golden Horn IT The
following year two rams by Golden Horn 11. and Young Jubilee respectively were intro-
GROUP OF STUD SHORTHORNS.
duced. In 1898 a Winton-bred ram of President strain was purchased. He was called
Senior, by Primus, bred by Mr. John Taylor, of Winton, and another was a Primus ram
bred by the late Thomas Gibson. Further Primus blood was introduced in 1899 by the
purchase of another stud ram from Winton. These Primus rams proved themselves
valuable acquisitions to the stud, especially the ram named Senior. 1900 saw the purchase
of an exceptionally high-class sire in Young Vice-President (by Vice-President, by Presi-
dent) from Hon. F. W. Grubb, of Bengeo, for 310 guineas, and another Primus-bred ram
from John Taylor, Winton. In 1903 another valuable purchase was made in a ram, from
Thos. Gatenby, called The Squire, by Young Jubilee, by Jubilee, for 100 guineas, and two
Bengeo-bred rams by Young Royal Hero and Conservative. The last purchases made
were in 1905, when the owners purchased, from C. B. Grubb, Young Radical, by Radical, by
9
The Quanda Estate, New South Wales,


Primus, and Young Royal Hero No. 11., and a special stud ram, Esk, by Royal Esk.
Besides the foregoing, many other rams, both stud and flock, were purchased at the Sydney
Sales, the total amount of purchase money running into many thousands of pounds, but
only rams of direct Sir Thomas blood were ever used in the stud. This brief history is
sufficient to show that the Quanda sheep have been bred on the soundest lines, that is, from
one strain entirely. No
violent ont-cross has
been introduced, so
that great prepotency
is one of the leading
features of the stud.
As for the sheep them-
selves, the accompany-
ing illustrations will
shov their type. They
are quite plain-bodied,
but they have well-
developed fronts, arms,
and thighs. They have
great size, and despite
DURHAM BALDWIN, QUANDA STUD BULL.
the fact that they are all run out on the plains on natural pastures, their wool is remarkably
clean and free from dust. This is one of the strongest indications of density, especially
when carrying the length of staple the Quanda sheep do. Having been bred on the same
lines and same country for such a long time the sheep have attained great evenness, both
as regards appearance and type of wool. The latter is long, soft, and bright, with plenty of
character, and remarkably free from surplus condition. One of the most pleasing features
is their firm backs. They are particularly good on top, being firm over the rump. They
are bred under perfectly natural conditions, so that the rams are in the right nick to go out
into the paddocks and work. That the Quanda sheep can hold their own in the show ring
is evidenced by their remarkable achievement at the Coonamble Show in competition with
several of the best-known flocks in the State. In 1008, with thirteen entries, Quanda scored
seven firsts and four seconds, and also the Citizens’ Prize and Challenge Cup, worth
At the show in 1909, the Quanda stud won the Citizens’ Prize right out, in addition to
winning eleven firsts and seven seconds. The prize above referred to was for the besi
pen of three unhoused rams over eighteen months old, bred by the exhibitor, and all of the
same drop. Several well-known studs competed, and Quanda, by winning it two years in
succession, has now won it outright.
i o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ihe Quanda sheep represent the type so popular in the western districts of New South
Wales and Queensland. They have been carefully bred on one line for a great many years.
1 hey have immense frames and strong constitutions. They have thick bulky fleeces of
blight lustrous wool, and are well covered on the bellies and points. And they have the
additional advantage of being entirely grass-fed, so that they are ready for work under
natural conditions. The following averages will give some idea of the weight-cutting capa-
bilities of the Quanda sheep :
SEASON 1909.
lbs. lbs. ozs.
530 2-Tooth Ewes (as dropped) cut 5,699 averaging n
494 cast for age Stud Ewes cut (gummies and broken) ... 4,466 ~ 9 oi
930 Ist Studs and Specials cut ... ... ... ... 13,320 ~ 14 5
750 2nd Stud Ewes cut ... ... ... ... ... 9,306 ~ 12
80 2-Tooth Special Stud Ewes cut ... ... ... ... 9S7J ~ 12 io|
31 2-Tooth Stud Rams cut ... ... ... ... 5370 ~ 17 5i
46 Stud Rams (4-Tooth to Broken Mouth) ... ... 1,073 ~ 23 5^
Crutchings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,211 ~ I 2
2861 Stud Sheep cut 38,600 ~ 13 75
All hand shorn.
In addition to the stud, Mr. Ryder runs only fattening age wethers. There are also
some fine Shorthorn cattle on the estate comprising between seventy and eighty
ONE OF QUANDS DAMs.
11
The Quanda Estate, New South Wales,


high-class cows, some of which were taken
over with the estate. What cattle are bred
are fattened up for the Homebush Market,
and the Quanda brand has frequently top-
ped the market.
■Personal.
Mr. George Lyon Ryder is the seventh
son of the late Thomas Urmson Ryder, of
Sydney, one of the early pioneers who held
station properties on the Hunter River many
years ago, and also in Victoria. The late
Mr. Rvder also had considerable connection
with the wool trade, and was a well-known
authority on pastoral matters generally Mr.
G. L. Ryder was born in Sydney, in 1844, and
TROUPHIES WON BY QUANDA SHEEP.
received part of his schooling in England. He returned to Victoria and completed his educa-
tion at the Church of England Grammar School, Melbourne. In 1864, with his two brothers,
Messrs. Thomas and Edmund Ryder, he left Australia for Fiji, but the vessel conveying them
went first to the Friendly Islands, and they were forced to voyage from thence, 350
miles, in an open boat. While in Fiji they went in for cotton-growing, and attained great
success in the growth of Sea Island cotton. They received as much as 3s. 4d. per lb. for
the first consignment they sent away. The American War was in progress at the time, and,
of course, all cottons were high in value. By careful study of the business, however,
Messrs. Ryder Bros, received as much as 4s. 6d. per lb for their cotton. They were awarded
first prizes and gold medals at the Paris and Philadelphia Exhibitions, as well as other ex-
hibitions. Altogether Messrs. Ryder Bros, spent sixteen years in Fiji, and their successful
work there in no small way made known the possibilities of the Islands, and led to the annex-
ation of Fiji.
In 1882 Mr. Geo. Ryder returned to New South Wales, and with his brothers purchased
Calga, and “ The Ryder Bros, of Calga ” became known throughout the country as success-
ful sheepbreeders.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Combadello Estate.
The Property of Messrs W. & F.A. Moses.
COMBADELLO, the property of Messrs. W. and F. A. Moses, is situated on the Mechi
River, in the Moree district, and forms part of the North-west Liverpool Plains.
The estate comprises about 60,000 acres, of which 53,000 are freehold. It was
purchased by the father of the present owners in 1883 from Messrs. A. F. and J. R. Smart, and
at that time was divided into five paddocks, which have since been increased to forty-two. dhe
MOB OF FAT STEERSD
boundary fence is rabbit-proof wire netted. The soil is black and grey chocolate, with occasional
patches of sand, and the timber consists of myall, gum, box, and coolabah, together with a
number of edible shrubs. The Mechi River and Moomin Creek run through the property. The
rainfall averages about 24 in. There is an artesian bore on the estate and from it and the Govern-
ment bore a magnificent supply of water is obtained, in addition to which there are numerous
permanent lagoons. there are 12 acres of the estate undei lucerne. this is irrigated with
1


THE MON. HENRY MOSES.
MR. W. MOSES.
MR. F. A. NOSES.
2
uho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Combadello Estate, New South Wales-


STUD EWES ON COMBADELLO.
bore water, and produces sufficient fodder for stud stock purposes. Another area of 7 acres
was placed under oats and wheat, and yielded 35 cwt. of hay to the acre. The lucerne patch
is flooded after every cutting.
£be Ibomesteab.
The homestead is a splendidly-designed weatherboard building, containing ten large lofty
rooms and fine hall. An excellent water service, obtained from the bore and well, goes all
over the house and garden, and provides a never-failing supply. There are flower and vegetable
gardens, and also an
orchard, and from these
a good supply of fruit
and vegetables is ob-
tained to meet all the
requirements of Comba-
dello and the three out-
stations. The outbuild-
ings comprise men’s
hut, blacksmith’s shop,
groom’s cottage, gar-
dener’s cottage, stables
engine-shed, &c.
STATION BRED STUD RAMSD
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BROOD MARES AND FOALS.
The Combadello Estate, New South Wales.


EARLSTON (IMP.).
Moolsbcb.
The woolshed is a large and well-built structure, and contains twenty-eight stands of
Wolseley shearing machines, driven by alO h.p. Hornsby steam engine. The building is
installed with every convenience to meet the requirements of the station.
1 here is a sheep dip, built upon Cooper s design, with a 60-ft. swim.
Stock.
The flock consists of 40,000 Merino of the Warrah, Collaroy, and Havilah blood. The
sheep aie a very fine type, and have proved from every standpoint highly satisfactory. Last
season new blood in the shape of three Deniliquin Park stud rams and one Haddon Rig ram
has been added, and it is expected that this addition will yet further improve the quality of the
sheep on Combadello. The lambing season is from the Ist April to the 31st May. The
sheep fatten well on the natural grasses and herbage on the property. Recently a mob of
23.000 Merino wethers averaged 60 lbs. freezers, and 300 sold in Sydney averaged 88 lbs.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


EMIR.
ftborougbbreb Stub.
Messrs. W. and F. A. Moses have gained during the past few years considerable distinction
for their horsebreeding operations. In a quiet, but none the less effective and thorough way,
they have carried on their horsebreeding for some years at Combadello. They have always
seemed instinctively to know the latent possibilities in the horses they have from time to
time acquired, and as a result they have had possession of as fine a lot of performers as anyone
in Australia. With shrewd judgment, they have continued to enlarge and improve their stud
of thoroughbreds, and have owned such horses as Emir, Birida, Beanba, Parsee, Courallie, and
the great Poseidon. The three fine performers—Emir, Poseidon, and Parsee —were ac-
quired by the owners of Combadello as foals with their mothers. Beanba was bought by them
as a yearling, and won for Combadello the V.R.C. Oaks. Orcus, the highest priced yearling
sold in Australia, for 3050 guineas, was bred by them. Later on they sold Emir as a yearling
for a thousand guineas, Beanba was sold to Mr. James Hennessy for a big price, and went to
France, and parted with Poseidon as a yearling for 500 guineas, while Parsee was disposed of
for the sum of 155 guineas to Mr. C. J. Britten. It is an interesting fact worth recording that
horses sold out of this stud have won over £40,000 in stakes since leaving Combadello.
7
The Combadello Estate, New South Wales.


BEANBA.
PARSEE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ST. ALWYNE (ImP.)
POSEIDON.
9
The Combade/lo Estate, New South Wales.


It was not until 1900 that Messrs. W. and F. A. Moses decided to start breeding blood
stock on proper lines, and their effort has always been to try and buy the best. The first
mare purchased was Emmie (by Robinson Crusoe —Olga) ; she is the dam of Eminence, Emir,
Beanba, Birida, Emita. Then followed Jacinth (Martini Henry—lanthe) ; she is the dam of
Poseidon, Jargoon, Caretaker. Pona, by Gozo (imp.) ; Hippona, dam of Parsee and Poinard
Wink, dam of By Play; by Off Colour out of Beanfeast (imp.) In addition to
the above, they have thirty mares, including Solution, Vanity Fair, Birida, Emita,
Nun Nicer (imp.), and others equally well bred. The two stallions in use at present are St.
Alywne (imp.), by St. Frusquin—Lady Alywne. St. Alwyne was a winner at home, and
is the sire of By Play, Lady Medallist, Lord Hybla, Asturias, Flying Alwyne, Langtoun, Lord
Alwyne, Bashful Boy, and others. St. Alwyne, who is a half-brother to Airs and Graces,
winner of the Oaks (1898) and dam of the famous French colt Jardy, is a massive, big-quar-
tered, brown horse. On the English turf he started nine times, and was only unplaced once.
The last race in which he ran —the Hastings Plate at Newmarket, i l / 2 mile race, worth £490 —
he won easily. St. Alwyne’s
sire, a champion race-
horse, is a leading stallion
in England, and is the sire
of St. Amant, winner of
the Derby; while his (St.
Alwyne’s) dam belongs to
the same line as Galtee
More and Ard Patrick
two great Derby winners,
who were purchased in re-
cent years for £20,000
apiece. St. Alwyne is the
sire of By Play (A.J.C. Eas-
ter Stakes), Lady Medallist
A GROUP OF BROOD MARES.
(one of the best performers on the New Zealand turf), Asturias, Langtoun, Flying Alwyne,
Potosi, Lord Hybla, &c. Earlston (imp.), by Love Wisely from Monday, a dark chestnut, 16
hands high, 70 in. girth, and 8 l / 2 in. under knee. He was a high-class performer and a good
winner. His progeny are now foals, and give promise of being something above the ordinary.
Earlston, foaled in 1904, was a brilliant performer in England. •He competed mostly in first-
-10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A BOM OF BREEDING COWS.
class races, and in turn beat the Derby winner, Orby, at w.f.a., and, conceding weight, ran
the St. Leger winner, Woolwinder, to half a length for the City of London Breeders’ Foal Plate,
of £llBO. He also ran a dead heat with Sancy for the Chester Vase (ij4 miles), of £1698,
Sancy was one of the
three best horses of his
time, and a winner of
over £12,000 in stakes.
Earlston won the Clear-
well Stakes at Newmar-
ket, the Little John
Plate, and other races,
besides being placed in
several important stakes,
notably second, concech
mg 12 lbs. to a good per j
former, Linacre, in the
Atlantic Stakes, of
£1721, and put up a
THE BORE DRAIN.
11
The Combade/lo Estate, New South Wales.


good race with Fui, conceding 9 lbs., for the Prendergast Stakes. Earlston's sire, Love Wisely,
won the greatest w.f.a. race in England, the Ascot Gold Cup, as a three-year-old, beating a fine
international field of horses, and the Jockey Club Stakes of £lO,OOO as a four-year-old. He
is the sire of Bridge of Canny, winner of over £12,000 in stakes, Prudent King, and other good
winners. Earlston's third dam is a sister to the great Galopin, sire of St. Simon, and his second
dam, Settling Day, is a three-quarter sister in blood to Tantrum, dam of The Baron and El
Diabolo. both first-class horses. The Baron ran second in the English Derby and Grand Prix
de Paris, and El Diabolo, a coming sire, was the winner of many races, and as a three-year-old
he defeated Orme, the best colt of the year. Remorse, a three-quarter sister in blood to Earl-
ston’s dam, produced Isobar, a first-class racehorse, and runner-up for the St. Leger. Isobar,
the sire of several good winners, among them Campanjo.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bunaba Estate.
The Property of Mr. George Paine.
IN a season like the present (1910) all that great plain country around Moree is a magni-
ficent sight. For as far as the eye can see there is a wealth of tall grass, and stock are
unable to keep it down. After such a drought as that which culminated in 1902, the
country wears quite a different aspect, and in the year mentioned it was black from hori-
zon to horizon, and the fences stood out like skeletons of past prosperity. But such are the
wonderful recuperating powers of the Moree country, that when the drought broke up, grass
came immediately, and now, after a succession of a few good seasons, the country is like a
wheat field.
A MOB EWES, WITH ARTESIAN BORE IN DISTANCE.
There are many fine estates on these northern plains, and among them is Bunaba, illus-
trations of which accompany this article. It is a property of 38,678 acres, owned by Mr.
George Paine, and at the present time it is presenting a wonderful sight, as the illustrations
will show.
The estate was originally taken up in 1842 by Mr. William Town, of Richmond, brother
of the well-known racehorse breeder of that time. It was held by him until 1863, when he
sold it to Messrs. Joseph Onus and Alexander Benson. In 1868 it was resold to Mr. John
x


Town, jun., and was held by him until 1883
Bunaba at that time had been used as a
cattle station only, but when the late Mr. G.
W. Paine purchased it in 1883, he stocked it
with sheep, and it now carries a flock number-
ing about 25,000, all Merinos.
The country is open plain, intersected by
belts of coolibah and belah timber ; the soil
black and chocolate, and very rich. The
average rainfall is about 25 inches per annum,
and if this is well distributed, and comes at
the right time, it is more than sufficient to
keep the country under plenty of feed.
Bunaba lies about fifty-five miles north-
west of Moree, the nearest railway station. It
should be mentioned that the railway from
Moree to Mungindi has been surveyed, and the
MR. GEORGE PAINE.
line passes right along the Bunaba boundary. Ihe Minister has guaranteed that in 1911 ne
THE HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF RAMS (HA DDON RIG) ON BURNABA N.S.W
PADDOCK OF BLUE GRASS.
3
The Bunaba Estate, New South Wales .


THE WOOLSHED.
will hft wool from within fourteen miles of Bunaba, which indicates that the line will soon
be constructed.
Though favoured with a great depth of rich soil, the Moree district is not so well off as
far as water is concern-
ed, and if it were not for
the discovery of artes-
ian supplies, stock raising
in that part of the coun-
try would be a hazardous
undertaking. Bunaba
largely depends on the ar-
tesian water, and consi-
derable sums of money
have been expended in
putting down a bore, and
making drains to convey
the water to stock in each
paddock. The bore is si-
MRD PAINE’S DRAUGHT STALLION “ HERDSMAN "
4
T/ie Pastora/ Homes of Australia.


THE ARTESIAN BORE.
657
The Bunaba Estate, New South Wales,


ONE OF THE MAIN BORE CHANNEIS.
6
The Pastoral Homes or Australia,


tuated five miles from the homestead, and it supplies water of splendid quality. It is
down 351 a ft., and the flow is 1,200,000 gallons per diem, the pressure being 154 lbs. to
the square inch. Mr. Paine has devised a most effective system of channels for conveying
the water from the bore to various parts of the run. There are, on Bunaba, thirty-five
miles of channels, and the entire flow is utilised. It is discharged from a 6-in. pipe into a
receiving tank, and is directly led away into channels. First it goes to the woolshed and
THE BORE DRAIN THROUGH BULE GRASS PADDOCKS.
adjoining yards, nine miles from the bore. There it is pumped from the receiving tank into
elevated tanks and reticulated through the woolshed, sheep yards, and shearers’ huts.
Around the yards this water supply is found most useful for laying the dust at shearing
time. Besides running the channels through Bunaba, the bore also supplies adjoining
properties, on which are some forty-two miles of drains. In addition to the bore water,
there are a number of surface tanks so well placed that at no spot on the whole 28,000
acres do stock have to travel more than three-quarters of a mile to water.
7
The Bunaba Estate, New South Wales,


THE WOODSHED AND SURROUNDING YARDSD
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A MOB OF HADDON RIG DBRED RAMS
This lengthy reference to the water supply on Bunaba has been made because the
country is naturally waterless, and without a very considerable expenditure of capital,
could not be utilised to anything like its present extent.
Part of the boundary fence is netted, and the estate is subdivided into sixteen pad-
docks with six-wire
fences, erected at a
cost of £Ad per mile.
The Bunaba sheep,
numbering 25,000, are
practically pure Colla-
roy blood. They are of
the large plain-bodied
type, and the average
weight cut by the whole
flock, including all ages,
is 8 lbs. The lambing
season is from March
to April, and the per-
centage obtained aver-
EXCAVATING WATER CHANNELS.
9
The Bunaba Estate, New South Wales.


THE STABLES.
1 o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AN OUT STATION.
ages about 70 per cent. Since 1909 Mr. Paine has introduced Haddon Rig rams, and it
will be interesting to note the result of this departure.
As before stated, the growth of feed on B unaba is, at the time of writing (April, 1910),
a wonderful sight. The
plains are covered with
tail blue grass for as
far as the eye can
reach, and in height is
about up to a horse’s
girth. This is the prin-
cipal summer grass,
and in winter a growth
of herbage comes which
includes lamb’s tongue,
crowfoot, wild carrot,
and parsnips, &c. Dur-
ing the recent pheno-
menal rainfall 26,000
DRAUGHT MARE AND FOAL.
11
Thefcßunaba Estate, New South Wales,


acres out of 28,000
acres were under
water, yet no stock
were lost. After
the floods receded a
deposit of from one
to three inches of
fertile silt remained.
Mr. Paine breeds
some hi g h-c lass
Shorthorn cattle on
Bunaba, the herd
containing a strong
infusion of cattle
bred by Mr. J. R.
Lomax, of Tenterfleld.
A FAITHFUL STSTION HAND.
He also breeds pure Clydesdale draught horses, his stud numbering twenty-eight pe-
digree mares. At the recent sales held during the Sydney Royal Show (1910) Mr. Paine
ARTESIAN BORE IN BUNABA.
purchased sixteen pedigree mares at an average of £6O 11s. per head; also the stallion
Herdsman (by Shepherd Lad) was purchased at the Sydney Show in 1908.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Killarney Estate.
The Property of Mr. W. F. Buchanan.
IT is no hackneyed phrase to state that Killarney, in the Narrabri district, is one
of the best known stations in New South Wales, and this is almost entirely due to
the interesting personality of the owner, Mr. W. F. Buchanan. The story of his career
right through is redolent with the ups and downs of squatting life. He has at various times
held immense tracts of country, and that most of his ventures have proved successful is due
to the skill and common-sense he brought to bear on all he undertook.
Killarney adjoins Tarriaro, and both properties were worked together until he gave the
latter (Tarriaro) to his son. The total area amounts to about 80,0C0 acres of freehold, and
it is supplemented by a considerable extent of leasehold land. The Killarney Estate has a
long frontage to the North-West line, and the homestead is about four miles from the rail-
way station. All that country facing the railway line is extensive open plain of rich choco-
late soil, while further back it becomes undulating, and the soil is of a rich loamy character
and sound sheep country. Limestone permeates the soil throughout, and the estate


is intersected with belts of ironbark, pine, myall, wilgah, and birlah timber, all of which
have been judiciously ringbarked. The estate is all subdivided into paddocks of most con-
venient size, and a good system of water supply has been installed. There are numerous
wells and tanks all over the estate, as water can always be obtained, even in most
droughty times, at depths ranging to about 35 feet.
The Killarney homestead is very prettily situated, and besides being very roomy and
comfortable, is surrounded with a luxurious growth of shrubs and flowers.
Killarney is essentially grazing and wheat-producing country, but the only cultiva-
tion done is what is required for feeding the working stock. The general improvements
THE HOMSETEAD.
on the estate are in keeping with the great business done,, and many labour-saving devices
are in evidence. The woolshed is without doubt one of the most notable in the State, and
the accompanying illustration will give some idea of what an imposing edifice it is. Mr,
Buchanan designed it himself, and also supervised its erection, and, further, all the tim-
ber used in its construction was cut on the estate. The shed is 350 feet long and 00 feet
wide, and is supported on piles 8 feet from the ground. In addition, and under the same
roof, there is a large wool-scouring room measuring 80 feet by 80 feet. The shearing board
is 21 feet in width, and lined on each side with strongly-constructed sheep pens, one to
every two shearers. These catching pens are fed from the larger one at the north-west
end of the building, in which 3000 sheep can be placed at one time. The shed is fitted
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WOOLSHED
SHEARING BOARD
3
The Ki/larney Estate, New South Wales.


WOOL TEAN AT THE OLD WOOLSHED.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


KENNEL OF DINGOES.
with sixty stands of Wolseley machines, and a shoot leads from each stand into the tally
pens below the elevated floor. A feature of the KiUarney shed is the travelling belt running
down the centre of the board carrying all the fleeces from the shearers into the wool-
room. The fleece after being shorn is thrown on to the belt, and the work of the picker-up
is very considerably minimised. In connection with the woolshed is a fine dipping tank,
through which the sheep are passed after being shorn. Mr. Buchanan scours the KiUarney
clip on the property, and his plant for doing this is Hall’s patent, one of the most up-to-date.
DRYING WOOL.
5
The Killarney Estate, New South Wales .


The water used for this department is raised from a well underneath the shed by a steam
pump into a cistern 20 feet above the floor of the building. The whole plant, including the
scouring plant, is worked by a 20 h.p. Marshall steam engine.
Mr. Buchanan carries, on an average, about one sheep to the acre on Killarney and
Tarriaro, but he treats his country generously, and carefully avoids overstocking. His good
management has enabled him to turn off fat stock when feed on many of the other stations
in the district has reached vanishing point. He places a large number of sheep and cattle
on the market per annum. The sheep on Killarney chiefly consist of the Lincoln-Merino
GROUPO OF SHEARERS.
cross. The sheep are conspicuous for their large frames and heavy, dense fleeces, which
are also soft and of even quality. On Tarriaro only pure Merinos were run, and they grow
a very high-class wool. The Killarney cattle were originally the purest type of Short-
horn, but some years ago they were crossed with pure Aberdeen-Angus bulls. The re-
sult is a shapely, weighty beast and a ready fattener. Mr. Buchanan’s experience with
cattle has been unique, and what he does not know about them cannot be worth knowing.
Many thousand head have travelled vast distances, sometimes averaging seven or eight
months on the road, to Killarney, where they have been fattened for the Homebush mar-
ket.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DROVERS AFTER DELIVERIN G CATTLE AT KILLARNEY
7
The Killarney Estate, New South Wales.


personal.
Mr. William Frederick Buchanan
has been identified with the pastoral
industry for over fifty years, and he is
well known throughout Australia as a
successful breeder of sheep and cattle.
He was born in Dublin in 1824, and
came to New South Wales in the early
thirties. His grandfather commanded
in the Royal Irish Artillery in the grea (
PRIZE BULLOCKS.
rebellion of 1798, and his great grandfather, who was in the army of William Prince of
Orange, fought in the Battle of the Boyne. In 1836 Mr. Buchanan’s father came into pos-
session of the Mersheen Estate (now known as Dartmouth), on the Hunter, and he devoted
his time in pastoral pursuits. He gradually extended his operations and secured two pro-
perties in the Gunnedah and New England districts, and in the management of these pro-
perties, his son, the subject of this article, rendered valuable assistance, though only a
boy in years. In 1849 he went prospecting in Gippsland, Victoria, and on the discovery of
gold at Ophir, he noticed that the geological formation of that part of the country resembled
the New England district, and he returned and prospected there. He found colour all over
the district, and opened up the Uralla Goldfield and several others, but decided to return
to pastoral pursuits, and after selling hi s station in New England in 1852 to Mr. Stitt, he
bought Breelong Station, near Gilgandra, and went in for sheep and cattle breeding. In
GROUP OF POLLED ANGUS CROSSED WITH SHORTHORN.
8
Pastoral Homes of Australia.


1804 he bought the well-known Warrana
Station, and shortly after added Yoolun-
dry, Coonamble, and Magometon to his list
of properties. His cattle then numbered
about 20,000 head, and they were consider-
ed the best stock in the district. After
buying Warrana Mr. Buchanan turned his
attention to sheep, and purchased 15,000
Merinos from the Hon. E. O. S. Ogilvie,
of Yulgilbar, on the Upper Clarence. These
sheep were of high-class Spanish blood,
having been sired by rams bought in Spain
by Mr. Ogilvie. In 1860 Mr. Buchanan sold
his vast properties in the Coonamble dis-
trict and purchased Killarney from Mr. A.
MR. W. F. BUCHANAN.
A. Doyle. About the same time he extended his operations to the Northern Ter-
ritory, and took up on the Victoria River, Wave Hill and Delamere Downs Stations,
and stocked them with cattle. These properties now embrace over 7000 square miles, and
Mr. Buchanan gradually stocked them up to about 50,000 head of cattle. In addition to
the properties above-mentioned, he owns Iban, near Collarenebri, N.S.W., and Burrundilla
and Glengyle in Queensland. He now resides in Sydney, from where he still controls his
vast interests. He has, however, time for other affairs, and is a keen patriot. He offered
GROUP OF POLLED ANGUS CATTLE.
9
The Killarney Estate, New South Wales.


FAMILY GROUP IN MOTOR CAR.
a sum of £lO,OOO to the fund for building an extra “Dreadnought” for the British Navy, and
in numerous other ways he has rendered practical assistance to great public movements. He
took a great interest in the early efforts to establish an export trade of frozen meat, and
FLOCK OF SHEEP IN PADDOCK.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MOB OF CATTLE TRAVELLING TO KILLARNEY.
1 J
The Killarney Estate, New South Wales.


OVERLANDER’S CAMP.
was one of the first executive committee formed for that purpose. He has remarkably
keen foresig'ht, and is still a very active man. He is a Fellow of the Royal Historical So-
ciety, and a Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute, a member of the Royal Geographical
Society) England, and a member of the Clothworkers’ Company of London, the freedom and
livery of this company being formally conferred upon him on the 21st July, 1886, on which
occasion the late Sir William Clarke, Bart., was honoured in the same way. The event was
marked by a banquet in the evening in the company’s magnificent hall in Mincing Lane,
London, and at which were present many very distinguished personages. Mr. Buchanan
and his three daughters had the honour of being presented to Her Majesty Queen Vic-
toria. Mr. Buchanan is a member of the Union Club and Warrigal Club, Sydney, and a
member of the Royal Society’s Club, London.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Gragin Estate
The Property of Messrs. B. H. and F. E. H. Gordon.
GRAGIN Estate, the property of Messrs. G. H. and H. E. H. Gordon, is situated on
Reedy Creek, thirteen miles easterly from Wanalda, and comprises 66,000 acres.
It is on the boundary of the Central Division, and it adjoins on the West Gunnee
Estate, which was recently purchased by Messrs. Warner, McLean, and Bacon. Gragin is
the black’s name for the sugarloaf, winch is situated about three miles from the home-
stead, and means sharp-pointed. This peak is shown in one of the accompanying illus'tra-
STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
tions. The district has an annual rainfall of inches, and the country is undulating, with
rich black chocolate soil, growing heavy lucerne, without irrigation, on the lower ground.
The best natural grasses are to be found there, and a proof of the quality thereof is to
be seen in the stock and the fat cattle. Blue grass, myall grass, kangaroo and oat grass,
trefoil, crowfoot, geranium, and various good fodder plants abound. Artificial grasses
such as prairie, paspalum, Rhodes grass, guinea grass, have been planted, but do not stand
1


THE GRAGIN HOMESTEAD.
the wear the natural grasses do. Lately Phalaris commutata is being tried, but so far
there has not been time enough to test its stability.
When the property was purchased in 1864 it comprised Gragin, go,ooo acres; Graman,
84,000 acres; and Gournama, 46,000 acres, and the carrying capacity was fixed at
acres to a sheep, and now, with improvements that have been effected, Gragin and Graman
will carry a sheep to three-quarters of an acre, and have plenty to spare. Gournama,
then considered the pick of the lot, was sold in 1865 to Mr. 0. Bloxsome. There are
some fine properties ad-
joining the Gragin Es-
tate, viz., Myall Creek
(taken for closer settle-
ment), Gunnee (being
cut up for settlement),
Gournama, Coolootai,
and Wallangra. All
these properties have
passed out of the hands
of the original owners
long ago, but Gragin
and Graman alone re-
main.
The water supply is
THE TENNIS COURT, GUAGIN.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTED
3
The Gragin Estate, Now South Wales.


A PORTION OF THE HOMESTED.
abundant, Reed}' Creek, Gragin Creek, Middle Creek, Road Station Creek, Mosquito Creek,
and Graman Creeks are all plentifully supplied with water in all seasons, and the
estate generally has numerous never-failing springs. Tanks have been excavated
on portions of the run not served by springs, and they are hardly ever empty. Then,
again, windmills are used in places to make better use of the water from the springs, which
is pumped into 5000-gallon tanks which feed the troughing. The country generally is
splendidly watered, and there is no trouble to get water from 12 to 30 ft. if desired.
The homestead is situated on an ideal spot opposite the junction of the Gragin Creek
with Reedy Creek, and on beautiful hard, dry ground. The house is built of wood, and
has every convenience, with water laid on from a 5 00 °-gallon tank, which is filled by a
Tangye engine and pump, there never being any scarcity. All necessary buildings are
in proximity thereto. A store with all the necessary appurtenances and two sets of stables
with eight large loose boxes. A horse-power is adjacent to two large hay sheds where hay
is chaffed, and a large More-room for this adjoins. On the opposite side of the creek is
the residence of the overseer and a large number of the buildings used by employees the
year through. In addition, there are shearers’ accommodation buildings as well as that for
the general hands. All these buildings are of sawn timber covered with iron, and all build-
ings are supplied with large galvanised tanks.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia c


THE GRAGIN HOMESTEAD.
5
The Gragin Estate, New South Wales.


BROOD MARES AND FOALS.
The woolshed is one of the finest in the State, built by and under the superintend-
ence of the senior partner, Mr. G. H. Gordon. It is of massive sawn timber, and has ac-
commodation for twenty-four stands, and room to cover 3000 sheep, with a wool room
capable of holding, if
necessary, 500 bales of
wool. The design of
the shed is most com-
plete, and with a floor
10 ft. on each side,
there is ample room for
the men. There is
abundance of room at
the wool tables and in
the bins. The ventila-
tion and lighting is all
that can be desired,
and, what is most be-
neficial, the shed is a
FAT BULLOCKS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


cool one. Attached to it are all the necessary yards for drafting, and a splendid dip of
wrought iron, which is supplied by a ground tank. This, though, is only used about
every three or four years, and then only when bought sheep bring lice on the place. How-
ever, the sheep generally are free from such pests. By looking at the picture of the
shed one can easily see that it is a design out of the common.
Ihe garden is very complete, with all kinds of plants and flowers, and on the opposite
side of the creek is an orchard of over 100 trees and 100 beautiful assorted table grapes,
including the Muscat of Alexandria, Snow’s Muscat, Black Humbro, Bowood Mus-
STUD SHORTHORN COWS.
cat, brown and white muscatel, and various other kinds. The trees comprise all the well-
known stone fruits, as well as quinces, apples mulberries, pears, &c. Adjacent there is
also a large vegetable garden, over which a Chinaman has control, and plenty is assured
to all on the place. The garden and orchard are all fenced with wire-netting.
The whole of the estate is fenced with a wire-netting fence, and it has been subdivided
once. All the lucerne paddocks are wire-netted, but otherwise six and seven wires are
used in subdivision. There are practically no rabbits, the estate being fenced in 1903-4,
before the rabbits got a show, and what few there were have since disappeared.
7
The Gragin Estate, New South Wales.


The whole estate has been ring-barked, much of it over twenty-five years ago, but a
considerable amount has been expended since in getting rid of suckers and clearing off.
Ample timber has been left for shade and shelter purposes
There are two large stockyards capable of working 1500 cattle at one time, and one
new horse yard, to which is attached a cemented milking yard and bail, and cemented
killing yard.
Ihe cattle on Gragin number about 2700. Of these the greater number are bullocks,
of which about 600 a year are turned off as fats and always command a high price on the
place, being bred for quality and substance. The stud cows, 200 in number, are a beau-
tiful lot, being the descendants of a bull called Will-o’-the-Wisp, imported by Messrs. Cheek
and Broadhurst about 1862. It was in 1864 Mr. Hugh Gordon, the father of the present
owners, purchased the property, and nothing but pure-bred Durham bulls have been used
THE WOOLSHED.
ever since. In the early times purchases were made from Dr. Jenkins, of Nepean Towers,
then from Mr. Robert Lowe, of Wilbertree, Mudgee, and subsequently from Mr. Tindale, of
Young Court, and twenty-five Lee blood heifers. Then a Noble Arthur bull was purchased,
and later still Angas bulls from South Australia, of which there are now three stud bulls
on the estate, and one bull bred by Mr. Jas. Holmes, of Bathurst. About four years ago
twenty heifers were purchased from Mr. Lethbridge, of Bridgeman, and lately nine were
bought at the disposal of Thos. Edols and Co.’s Burrawang stud.
The general herd comprise about 700 splendid cows, thick and flesh} - .
The horses comprise a fine lot of well-bred mares with quality and substance. The
sires that have been used being Vainhope, by Kelpie (imp.) from Panacea, bred by Wynd
harn Bros., and going back to old Penelope. Then Senator by Hawthornden (imp.), dam
Black Dot by Kingston. Then Tricolor, by Rapid Boy, dam Parisienne (imp.). Then Locks-
-8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ley, by Ferry Boy, a Fisherman horse. Then Wayward Jack, by Welcome Jack; and now
Booroomooka, by Marvellous (imp.) from Sea Breeze. The horses are of the weight-
carr> ing class, and are large, with quality and substance, and of a type hard to get now.
Ihe sheep have been bred on very careful lines since 18/2, being originally of Col-
lar©} blood, then Tasmanian, but of late years Hazeldean ranis have been largely used.
1 here is a choice lot of about 500 stud sheep, from which the owners breed their rams for
their own use. Ihe average of 49,000 sheep shorn last year, 1909, was 9 lbs. 6 ozs., and
of these 30,000 were ewes. No wethers are kept over three years.
PRIME CATTLE.
The lambings average about 84 per cent., including maidens. As high as g6l per cent,
has been marked on 13,000 ewes. At the last sales Mr. G. H. Gordon purchased three of
the highest-priced rams from Messrs. Litchfield Bros.’ Hazeldean flock.
Very little cultivation is done. About eighty acres are under lucerne, which do remark-
ably well, giving four to five cuts in a season without irrigation. Much of the estate is
adapted for farming. During the whole time, extending over forty-six years, no stock
have had to be removed for feed, if 1903 be excepted, when there was practically no feed
anywhere.
9
The Gragin Estate, New South Wales.


“ KAMILAROI,” MR. G. H. GORDON’S RESIDENCEA T DARKING POINT, SYDNEY.
IC
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


personal.
Messrs. G. H. and H. E. H. Gordon
are the sons of the late Hugh Gordon,
of Strathbogie, Emmaville, N.S.W., who
came out from Scotland in 1839, and took
up that property. It was held by him un-
til his death in 1893, and subsequently by
his sons nil 1901, when it was sold to Mr.
E. C. Body.
MR. G. H. GORDON.
Messrs. G. H. and H. E. H. Gordon were educated at the Sydney Grammar School,
and after that at the University, and for a time they went into banking prior to going to
their respective properties.
Mr. H. E. H. Gordon took up the management of Strathbogie in 1868, and Mr. G. H.
Gordon that of Gragin in 1869, which he has personally superintended ever since. Dur-
ing the last seven years Mr. G. H. Gordon has been living in Sydney at Kamilaroi,
Edgechff, and his son, Mr. Hugh Gordon, resides at Gragin, and manages the property.
MR. H. E. H. GORDON.
MR. HUGH GORDON.
11
The Gragin Estate, New South Wales.


During his resid-
ence in the district,
Mr. G. H. Gordon was
chairman of the Stock
and Pastures Board for
twenty-one years, and
for many years presid-
ent of the Wanalda
Pastoral and Agricul-
tural Association. He
was also returning offi-
cer under the Electoral
Acts, besides being
connected with many
other offices for the
benefit of the town and
FATTENING CATTLE.
district. He was born in Sydney in 1846, in the Royal Hotel .
Mr. Hugh Gordon, the present resident manager at Gragin, is the only son of Mr. G.
H. Gordon, and was born at Gragin, and received his education at the Armidale School. He
then entered the Bank of Australasia, and thereafter the office of the Pastoral Finance As-
sociation, and subsequently took up the management of Gragin. At the present time he
is away in America travelling for his health, and he will resume the management at the
end of the year. In the interim his father is attending to all station matters.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Inverell Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Campbell Bros.
ABOUI three miles from the township of Inverell stands Inverell Station, the property
of Messrs. Campbell Bros. The town is built upon a portion of the station, and de-
rived its name from that circumstance. The word Inverell is Gaelic, and
signifies the mouth of - the swan.” Ihe propert}' originally comprised over 30,000
acres, and was taken up in 1836 by the late Mr. Alexander Campbell, father of
the present owners, who came out from Scotland just prior to that date under
engagement to Messrs. Mclntyre, of the Hunter district. Shortly after his ar-
rival in Australia, Mr. Campbell took up Byron Plains for the Messrs. Mclntyre,
and Inverell for himself. At the conclusion of his engagement he de-
voted himself exclusively to the management of his own property. With considerable good
A DISTANT VIEW IF THE STATION.
judgment he developed Inverell upon lines which largely contributed to its early success. He
retained active management of the property until his death, which took place in 1858, when
a manager was temporarily appointed by the family. Six years later, viz., in 1864, his
eldest son, Mr. Peter Colin Campbell, at the early age of twenty years, assumed the man-
agement, and, with the exception of a period of a few years, during which he was managing
Wellingrove, a station near Glen Innes, and of which lie was part owner, has had control of
it ever since.
1


THE HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BILLIARD ROOM.
3
The Inverell Estate, New South Wales-


DRAWING ROOM AT INVERELL HOMESTEAD.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD EWES.
Inverell now comprises 26,000 acres of undulating country and open plains, and em-
braces large areas of what is considered to be some of the best wheat-producing land in
the State. About one thousand acres of the property are under lucerne cultivation. The
station is subdivided into about thirty paddocks, but as the district is practically free from
the rabbit pest, it has not become necessary to have these paddocks wire-netted. The pro-
perty is watered by the Swanbrook Creek, which affords a never-failing supply, but in ad-
dition to this all possibility of a shortage of water is obviated by the existence of numerous
wells and springs.
The original homestead built by Mr. Alexander Campbell about three-quarters of a
century ago is still standing, and is occupied by his daughter, Miss Campbell. Twenty-
DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS,
5
The Inverell Estate, New South iVales-


VIEW FROM SIDE OF VERANDAH.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


VIEW FROM GARDEN.
7
The Inverell Estate, New South Wales.


one years ago Mr. P. C. Campbell erected a fine residence about a quarter of a mile from the
old homestead, and in this he and his family reside. This house, which commands a splen-
did view, is an attractive architectural feature, and is surrounded by a very well laid-out
garden and orchard.
The woolshed, erected forty years ago,
is situated about 300 yards from the home-
stead, and is installed with eighteen stands
of Wolseley shearing machines, driven by an
8 h.p. steam engine. The sheep dip is on
the bank of the creek, and is supplied with
water pumped from a well in the vicinity.
Zb c Stocft.
There are at present about 26,000 Me-
rinos on Inverell. From the very first the
utmost care has been exercised in the build-
ing up of this flock, the ultimate object being
to secure a good sound constitution and a
good marketable wool. In this Messrs.
Campbell Bros, have managed to achieve
success, and have every reason to feel satis-
fied with the results obtained. The shearing
MR. P. C. CAMPBELL.
operations begin in October each year, and the cut averages from 9 to 10 lbs. The wool,
which is of a good strong combing character, is shipped to London, and invariably realises
FLOCK RAMS.
8
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


a highly satisfactory price, the rams now used in the flock are the well-known Collaroys.
In addition to the sheep a few cattle are bred on the estate. Messrs. Campbell Bros,
have also gone in for draught horsebreeding, and have succeeded in producing a stamp of
horse admitted to be the best in the district.
Ihe history of Inverell Station is one of absorbing interest, and is largely identified
with the growth and development of the town and district of Inverell. Within the past ten
DAAUGHT MARES.
years this portion of the New England district has demonstrated in a remarkable manner
its wonderful productiveness and agricultural capabilities, and every year sees some fresh
evidence of this. Nature has been most prodigal in her bounties to most of the Inverell dis-
trict. In addition to the magnificent pastoral and agricultural areas which abound, there
are other tracts of rich mineral country, from which are being obtained large quantities
of tin and silver, while other portions are yielding a fair number of diamonds. The rich
9
The Inverell Estate, New South Wales.


A RIVER VIEW ON INVERELL STATION.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD VERANDAH, INVERELL STATION. N.S.W.
11
The Inverell Estate, New South Wales.


agricultural lands of the district are at present attracting considerable attention from out-
siders who are on the alert to acquire holdings. Large numbers of settlers realising the
wonderful possibilities ot the district are devoting themselves to the dairying industry, and
in all cases obtain highly remunerative results.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Stratbbogie Estate.
The Property of Mr. E.C. Body.
AT an altitude of 2470 feet above the sea in the Inverell district stands Strathbogie
/ \ -Station, the property of Mr. Edmund Cuthbert Body. It lies about 40 miles north-
-1 V. east of the township of Inverell, and 25 miles west of Deepwater. It covers about
50,000 acres, consisting of basaltic, undulating, open country. The timber on the estate,
which consists of white box, is almost wholly ringbarked, and much of the property js
cleared.
A GROUP OF FLOCK RAMS.
laken up originally by Mr. Hugh Gordon in 1839, it was held by his family until 1901,
when it was purchased by Mr. Body. It is all fenced and wire-netted, and subdivided into
about twenty-five paddocks, most of which are also wire-netted. Running practically
through the whole extent of the property is the Severn River, winch furnishes a source of
water supply of considerable value, while in addition to this there are Vegetable Creek anJ
other creeks all contributing their quota of water to the estate. The natural grasses are
all good and plentifully distributed. Experiments in the cultivation of lucerne have been
tried, and the result has been fairly successful.
i


MR. E. C. BODY.
MR. F. E. CAMPBELL BODY.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE STRATHBOGIE HOMESTEAD.
3
The Strathbogie Estate, New South Wales,


Stock.
When Mr. Body took possession of Strathbogie there were only wethers on it. He
has built up a fine flock of Merinos, which now comprises 35,000 sheep. His early purchases
were 3000 ewes and a number of rams from Bundemar, and also ewes and rams from In-
verell Station. He has started to form a stud flock which it is his desire to bring as near
to the Wanganeila as possible. His sheep are large-framed, with strong combing
wool and lengthy fleeces. In good seasons he has cut an average of 10 lbs. per fleece,
while in poor seasons the clip has averaged 8 lbs. The wool is marketed in London and
realises good prices.
A CORRER OF THE GARDEN.
The lambing season at Strathbogie is from June to September, but the best lambing
takes place in June and July. The percentage taken over a number of seasons averages
about 85.
In addition to the flock, Mr. Body has a fine herd of about 1000 Hereford cattle. The
herd was originally formed by purchases from Tocal, and by importations from New Zea-
land. There are also very useful studs of well-bred mares, saddle and draught. For
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF THE SEVERN RIVER AT THE HOUSE.
5
The Strathbogie Estate, New South Wales-


VIEW OF ROVER FROM THE GARDEN.
6
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


GROUT OF STUD CATTLE.
VIEW OF STATION BUILDINGS, TAKEN FROM THE WOODSHED.
7
The Strathbogie Estate, New South Wales.


DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


THE WOOL SHED AND YARDS.
The Strathbogie Estate, New Couth Wales.


the former the sires used recently are Bradley, by Goldsbrough from Queen’s Head, bv
\ attendon ; and Mandrake, by Trenton from Henbane, by Yattendon from Mandragora
(imp.), by Mandrake.
Mootebcfc.
Ihe woolshed is a recently-erected wood and iron structure, fitted up with the latest
improvements, with cover for 3000 woolly sheep. There are sixteen stands of Moffat-Virtue
shearing machines driven by a 6 h.p. Ruston-Proctor steam engine.
“ MANDRAKE.” BY TRENTON FROM HENBANE.
Ibomcstcafc.
The homestead, built in 1868, is constructed of granite, and has a very imposing ap-
pearance. All the walls are two feet thick. The whole of the building is lighted by acety-
lene gas, and all the internal arrangements are well in keeping with the style of the fine
edifice. Telephonic communication is established between Strathbogie and Emmaville
eight miles distant. The water and sanitary systems all over the house are comparable
with what is to be found in a city.
The garden is well laid out and well kept, and is recognised to be one of the finest in
the district. There are some splendid fir trees around the house which add to the beauty of
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A BACK VIEW OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
11
The Strathbogie Estate, New South Wales.


the place. An excellent water service has been laid down all over the garden, and com-
municating also with the shearers’ quarters and woolshed, the source of supply being a
l ink of 15,000-gallons capacity.
IPersonal.
Mr. E. C. Body, who was born in Devonshire, England, is the third son of the late Mr.
h. E. Body, who in the year 1850 acquired by purchase from the late Mr. Sydney Watson, of
the Upper Murray, a Crown Leasehold on the Tumut, on part of which the town of Tumut was
afterwards built.
Mr. Body, after leaving school, gained experience on a western station in the pioneering
days, and afterwards assisted his brother, the late Mr. F. E. Body, of Bundemar, in the
management of a large sheep and cattle station. In 1880 Mr. Body married Catherine,
youngest daughter of the late Mr. Alexander Campbell, of Inverell Station, and in the same
year bought Jindabyne West, Monaro. In 1910 he bought Strathbogie from Messrs.
STRATHBOGIE HOME PADDOCK.
G. H. and H. E. H. Gordon, and is assisted in the management by his eldest son, Mr.
Campbell Body, an enthusiastic and prominent member of the polo and picnic race clubs.
Mr. Body, who is still a member of the Inverell Picnic Race Club, was the first secretary of
the club, established in 18/9, and rode his own horses at the earlier meetings.
He has a family of five sons and three daughters; four of the sons are now being
educated at the King’s School, Parramatta.
Although a busy man, Mr. Body has found time to attend to many public duties, and for
six years was chairman of the Tenterfield Protection Board, and for seventeen years was a
member of the Cooma Pastures Protection Board. He was made a Justice of the Peace in
1885, and is a member of the Licensing Bench for his district.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.






P fiS VO /V LiS £ & OLj , . sbL> r ' o






