

THE LAND TENURE
OF
FIJI.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CORRECT BASIS OF
NATIVE TITLES TO LAND IN FIJI,
And an examination of the basis on
which European claims to land
in Fiji have been dealt
with by
SIR ARTHUR GORDON AND HIS SUCCESSOR.
Being a series of Articles, reprinted from the
FIJI TIMES,
And published for general information by the
PLANTERS’ ASSOCIATION OF FIJI,
And presented with the Petition of those Claimants to
/
lands dissatisfied with the decisions on their claims .




INTRODUCTION.
The accompanying Pamphlet is forwarded with the Petition of
those dissatisfied with the decision upon their claim to land in
Fiji, as being a fair and just exposition of the views of an able
and impartial critic on the subject matter of their Petition. The
articles comprised in the Pamphlet are from the pen of Mr. T. H.
Prichard, Editor of the Fiji Times. They have already
appeared from time to time in the editorial columns of that
Journal and express in part the objections to the policy
adopted by Sir Arthur Gordon and followed by his successor
in the settlement of claims to land in Fiji.
While, however, many of the objections of the Petitioners
are set forth in this Pamphlet and in the accompanying Petition,
it must not be supposed that either solely or jointly these docu-
ments embody all the causes of objection, urged by the
Petitioners to the policy, or principle, adopted in the settle-
ment of their claims.
The present object of the Petitioners is to obtain an enquiry
into their grievances ; when this is granted, particulars of their
complaints, too numerous to detail, will be brought forward.
The Petitioners as one matter not set forth in their Petition
or the Pamphlet would mention that though innocent purchasers
for value of land represented by Crown Grants of the late
Government of Fiji giving an indefeasible title according to the
laws in force, governing the grants under which they bought;
still such titles have been repudiated by the Governor in Council
and their title rendered void.
That though in many cases it has been proved to the
satisfaction of the Governor in Council that the claimants have
purchased the interests of a majority of those originally entitled
to the land claimed by them, no equitable portion of such land
has been made, but the claim thereto has been disallowed in toto.
on the ground that the consent of the whole of the native owners
had not been obtained to the sale.


Such are some of the grounds of objection to the disallowance
not set out in the Petition of many of the claims to land of the
Petitioners, and many more might be urged.
In conclusion, it should be mentioned that the number of
names to the Petition do not include the greater proportion of the
claimants as many of the claimants had so far mortgaged their
lands as to have no beneficial interest in them, and in such cases
the claim was put in by the mortgagees in the name of the
mortgagors.
In illustration of this fact it may be mentioned that Messrs.
F. and W. Hennings alone presented claims on behalf of some
hundreds of claimants.
The Petitioners would also draw attention to the fact that the
rules of procedure and system of land tenure adopted by the
Governor in Council and applied to the claims of the Petitioners
was so adopted and established on the ex parte motion of the
Governor in Council and not after an enquiry into the subject of
Native Land Tenure, at which the Petitioners might adduce
proofs of the fallaciousness of the system adopted.
JOHN NEWMAECH,
Secretary, Land Claimants Protection Association of Fiji.


REPRINTED FROM THE “FIJI TIMES,”
“ Fiji Times,” January SI, 188 S.
BY the next mail steamer, leaving Levuka for Sydney, the
hon. Victor Williamson, Chairman of the Lands Commission,
proposes returning to England, having completed the onerous'
duties he had undertaken, at least in so far as the preliminary
investigations into claims to land is concerned. The official
rendering of the matter therefere, is that the Lands question is
disposed of np to a certain point, that it is fast approaching its
complete and final settlement, that there only remains to
announce the decision of the Governor in Council, to go through
formula of hearing and determining petitions of appeal
against such decisions, to complete the surveys, issue the Grants,
and to definitely close this most important chapter in the history
of the colony. If in all decisions relative to land claims those
principles of eqity and justice had been respected which constitute
m the individual a right to have and to hold that property he
has lawfully acquired it would indeed be a happy day for Fiji
when it could be said the land question is settled. Commission
and appellate tribunal having achieved the object for which they
were instituted are now abolished, and the titles having been
established upon a sound basis, all minor matters in dispute
concerning them must be referred to the Supreme Court of the
colony. Most unfortunately such has not been the case ; decisions
have been arrived at in open violation and in distinct contra-
vention of these principles; every right of property has been
invaded and set at nought, and therefore an iniquitous wrono-
would be consummated by the promulgation of any edict which in
accepting these decisions as final closed the door of further appeal
against the unfortunate victims of a mistaken policy.
Throughout the length and breadth of the colony there is but
one opinion as to the manner in which Mr. Williamson has
discharged the important functions he assumed in accepting the
position of Chairman of the Lands Commission, and there is
every disposition freely and fully to acknowledge the obligation


under which he has laid the colony by gratuitously uudertaking
an office which has not only entailed severe and sustained mental
effort, but has also subjected him to bodily hardship and personal
inconvenience. To quote a hackneyed phrase, he has won
“ golden opinions from all sorts of people,” but unfortunately a
wide distinction must be observed between the administrator
and the system he has been called upon to administer, and while
acknowledging the personal qualities which Mr. Williamson has
brought to bear upon the matters under his immediate direction
and control, it can but be sincerely regretted that in so many
cases the result of his labor should be so eminently unsatisfactory.
It may be accepted as a foregone conclusion that no one has
more fully weighed the result of his connection with the Lands
question in Fiji than has Mr. Williamson himself. He voluntarily
undertook an office which virtually constituted him, to a certain
extent, the arbitrator between the Government as trustee for the
native, and the European land claimant, knowing full well that
it would be impossible for the award to give equal satisfaction
to all concerned. He could not have overlooked the fact that the
parties to the arbitration were not joint parties to the conditions
under which it was to be conducted, therefore he must have
recognised how thankless was the office he was undertaking, and
it can well be believed is fully prepared for temperate though
adverse criticism upon the results arrived at.
It must not be forgotten that the final award did not lie with
Mr. Williamson further than as a member ol that Board jointly
decreeing it from his own report and that of his colleague. But
it should also be remembered that his position before the
Executive was a most authoritative one. He was the gentleman
specially selected as the possessor of that high order of intelligence,
that trained ability, that discriminating power, and that judicial
faculty which fitted him to weigh well the value of the evidence
laid before him in support of claims to lands. He was the
gentleman who personally conducted the examination of the
witnesses and from the manner of the deponent as much as from
the matter adduced was in a position to form an accurate estimate
of its reliability. He it was who reported the result of his
personal observation and examination, and these reports were
laid before the Executive, not to guide but almost to govern the
Board in its decision, and either the awards are in consonance
with these reports or they are not.
With respect to many of the cases of disallowance it is
difficult to conceive how the report of the Commissioner could
possibly be adverse to the claimant unless it is presumed to have
been framed under such conditions as reduced the investigation
to a judicial farce by leaving the claimant to fight with shadows


while that which formed the gravamen of the matter in the
official mind was neither indicated or approached. Yet if the
award was contrary to the report we conceive it to have been
Mr. Williamson’s duty to have entered his protest against it, and
we opine that even the arbitrary genius of the despotic Sir
Arthur Hamilton Gordon would sarcely have dared to give effect
to a decision which was opposed by the Chairman of the Lands
Commission on the ground that it was not in accordance with
ascertained fact as set forth in his report upon the case. It is
here where the effect of the system administered extends to the
administrator and it is in this most important connection that
dissatisfaction attaches to Mr. Williamson’s association with the
land claims of Fiji,
While in the interests of those unfortunates wbo have been
unjustly stripped of Iheir lawful possessions we cannot refrain
from pointing out the important matter in which we conceive
Mr. Williamson to have failed, still it would be ungrateful,
ungenerous and unjust to do other than give equal prominence to
those in which he has been eminently successful. In entering
upon the duties of his office the Chairman of the Lands Commis*
sion found himself confronted with difficulties of no ordinary
magnitude. He was called upon to administer the affairs of an
institution which had become a byword and a reproach through-
out the colony, and he was required restore that respect and
confidence in its operation which had been so signally forfeited
by the Commissioners who had proceeded him.
The Lands Commission, as originally constituted under the
instructions of Lord Carnarvon to Sir Arthur Gordon, was
composed of several gentlemen acting conjointly so that oppor-
tunity was afforded for careful consideration and impartial report
upon each case submitted for investigation. Many of the original,
and it may be said all the influential members of this Commission
ceased to act shortly after its inauguration. New Commissioners
were then appointed, possessing nc other qualification for the
position than that conferred by the Governor’s favor, and these
gentlemen w ere detailed to carry on investigations separately,
thereby violating the spirit of the instructions and destroying all
confidence in the competency of the Court and in the impartiality
of the report. What these gentlemen were deficient of in ability
and experience they endeavored to atone for by their assurance
and supercilious manner of treating all those so unfortunate as to
have dealings with them. Claimants saw themselves despoiled
through the incompetence, or something worse, of those oppointed
to investigate their cases, and distrust of the whole proceedings
was one prevailing sentiment. After a somewhat lengthy interval,
during which the inquiries came to a standstill, Mr. Williamson


assumed the duty of conducting them, and from that day no
complaint has been heard as to the mode of proceeding en
preliminary investigation. Ability replaced incompetence,
courtesy and urbanity was extended to everyone having business
before the Commission, and the most patient attention instead of
its distinct opposite was the chief characteristic of the enquiry,
while the social position and professional standing of the Chair-
man re-established that confidence in the impartiality of the
investigation which had aforetime been so rudely shattered.
Under these auspices Mr. Williamson has concluded his
labors, and if it where possible to dissever the Chairman of the
Commission from the Member of the Executive and Board of
Appeal his success could only be pronounced as most complete.
Unfortunately this cannot be done and the colonists can but
regret the mistaken policy which has compelled the adoption of a
basis of operation that has in so many instances stultified the
praiseworthy labor bestowed upon it. Mr. Williamson will leave
the colony rich in the esteem of everyone of its residents with
whom he has come in contact, and if many of them have to
commence the battle again, at least it will not be by assailing
the capacity or integrity of the Court, but by demonstrating that
the verdict has been arrived at from improper premises. The
system adopted has been radically wrong, therefore the conscian-
tious labor bestowed upon it has been thrown away. The whole
question lies between the feudal and patriarchal character of the
Fijian land tenure at the time of sale. The Government has
assumed that to have been which most emphatically was not, and
a gross wrong to European claimants has resulted, but as this
opens up a wide field for argument the subject must of necessity
be deferred to a future occasion.
“ Fiji Times,” January 25, 1882.
JN the concluding paragraph of the editorial contained in
our last issue we have indicated the matter which forms the
very core of contention between the land claimants and the
Government in the following words : —“ The whole question lies
between the feudal and patriarchal character of the Fijian land
tenure at the time of sale. The Government has assumed that
to have been, which most emphatically was not, and a gross
wrong to European claimants has resulted.”
Various attempts have from time to time been made to
elucidate this much vexed question of native land tenure, and


various conclusions have been arrived at according to the amount
of attention devoted to the subject, the native source from which
information has been derived, but more particularly the period
over which the retrospective glance in search of data was allowed
to extend. Of necessity the attempt at a thorough investigation
has been a most laborious one, since with nothing to guide him
but the existing evidences of a definite and elaborate social polity,
governed by no written laws but established by customs of
remote antiquity, the enquirer has had to grope his way to a
more or less correct comprehension of this system and in so doing
to be dependent for information upon those whose personal bias
would naturally influence the conclusions arrived at. As above
stated, the question each enquirer endeavors to determine in his
own mind is that of the feudal or patriarchal nature of the native
land tenure ; whether the title vesred in the chief or in the heads
of families. It will be evident that information on this point
would naturally be affected by the source, chief or commoner,
from whence it was derived, hence the difficulty experienced in
forming a definite judgement and hence the differences of opinion
recorded.
For present purposes it would be well to place clearly
before our readers the views entertained by three writers, who it
will be generally admitted are pre-eminently qualified to speak
with the voice of authority on the subject. To take them in
chronological order we will first quote Consul Pritchard’s “ Poly-
nesian Reminiscences,” published in 1866. Referring to this ques-
tion the writer says : —“ Every inch of land in Fiji has an owner.
The proprietorship rests in families, the heads of families being
the representatives of title. Every member of a family can use
the land attaching to a family. Thus the heads of families are
the nominal owners. The whole family are the actual occupiers.
The family land maintains the whole family and the members
maintain the head of the family.” ’1 his comprehends a purely
patriarchal tenure, in which no trace or tincture of feudalism is
apparent, but the opinion expressed on the same subject by the
hon. J. B Thurston, in 1874, is of a widely different com-
plexion.
In his memorandum attached to the report of Commodore
Goodenough and Consul Layard, on the offer of cession, occurs the
following paragraphs;—“ The ownership of the land in Fiji,
whether absolute or qualified, is based upon well settled law or
custom; in some matters of detail only is this law or custom
obscure. Since the advent of Europeans, Fijian customs have
been slowly altering; old ideas and usages have undergone
important changes and in no respect have they changed so much
as in the relation existing between the chief and his people. * *


From lonoj and careful inquiry I am of opinion that the
people hold their land from their chiefs, that is to say, from their
fathers or their gods, under a feudal system which has existed
from the time immemorial. The principle of this system recog-
nises the supreme chief as the grantor of land and leaves the
usufruct only, subject to certain conditions in the hands of the
grantee, i.e. quali chiefs and people. * * * When a cahora
(presentation) is made by any quali (subject province or town)
its mata or herald lays hands upon the offering and says, address-
ing the chief, ‘be favorably disposed to us, accept this. We
know it is little, but if it is little, keimami na kenai kuri (literally,
our bodies can be added' to it to make it more) be favorably
disposed to us, accept this that we may continue to occupy your
land.’ * * * All these well established customs point to the
fact that the lands belong to the head or ruling chief of the tribe
and are held by his subordinate chiefs or vassals, subject to a
service called ‘ lala.’ * * * All evidence tends to show that
the lands of Fiji are vested in the ruling chiefs of tribes, occupied
by their subordinate chiefs or vassals and people, in consideration
for past, present, or future service. * * * I do not think
any subordinate Fijian land-holder or occupant can or should
alienate land without the consent of the ruling chief inasmuch as
the chief holds most important rights in respect to such land,
the loss of which would seriously affect his position in regard
to other chiefs and possibly render him unable to perform certain
obligations due by him to other families of the tribe. Nor, on
the other hand, do I think the ruling chief should alienate land
except with the consent of the occupants, so long as they (the
occupants) render the services demanded by such chief and
sanctioned by immemorial usage and custom.” In a foregoing
paragraph the writer observes “ The idea of selling large
blocks of land in fee simple, whereby the ruling chief lost his
signorial rights, has only been acquired gradually and since the
steady influx of Europeans commenced. None, or very few of
the old grants have been questioned, probably because land and
not people has been in excess, and therefore the descendants of
the first settlers (i.e. white men adopted into tribes) may now
reasonably claim to hold their estates by prescriptive right.
Nevertheless it may be safely assumed that the act of conveying
land to a European and his assigns 'for ever’ was a thing not
understood twenty years ago.”
This opinion which comprehends a system as purely feudal
as that of Mr. Pritchard is patriarchal, was that held on the
subject by the hon. J. B. Thurston, in 1874. We have quoted
from it at length because it touches upon the effect produced in
the social polity of the Fijian by changes then in active operation,


because it produces to a concrete form that which other writers
treat of in the abstract, because it was the view on the subject
adopted by the Imperial authorities when the cession was
accepted and acted upon in conducting the first investigations
under the Lands Commission, and lastly, because it is the view
expressed by a member of the Executive and Board of Appeal,
who in that capacity has been content to utterly ignore it, and
to assist in arriving at conclusions based upon premises diametri-
cally opposed to it. It will be seen that we have italicised
certain words in the quotation and this has been done for the
purpose of emphasising, first, the formal admission of the subject
tribe that the title to lands vested in the superior chiefs, and
secondly, the clear distinction which the writer draws between
power on one hand and propriety on the other, the power of the
inferior Fijian land-holder to alienate, and the propriety of the
act when done by the ruling chief. It will be necessary to make
further reference to these matters and therefore the expressions
are specially noted.
The third writer we propose to call in evidence on this
matter is unquestionably the gentleman whose superior qualifi-
cations for the task he has undertaken stamps his opinion as one
even more authoritative than those already quoted. It will be
remembered that in 1880 the Rev. Lorimer Fison, M.A., delivered
a lecture on the “ land tenure in Fiji ” at the Mechanics’ Institute,
of which, by special request, no note was then taken by local
reporters. This lecture has since appeared in the journal of the
Anthropological Institute, for the pages of which we believe it
was originally prepared. It is therefore now available for
present purposes, but as it would be impolitic to break ground
in a new direction without sufficient space to follow up the
argument, further reference must be reserved for a future issue.
“ Fiji Times,” February 1, 1882.
PURSUING the enquiry into the subject of the Fijian land
tenure, we next arrive at the valuable evidence rendered
available through the publication of the lecture upon this subject,
delivered by the Rev. Lorimer Fison. It will be remembered
that the opinion of Consul Pritchard has already been quoted to
the effect that, the tenure is a purely patriarchal one, the
title vesting in the heads of families. This view of the matter
is combated by the equally authoritative opinion expressed by
thehon. J. B. Thurston in 1874, who maintained the tenure to be


a n entirely feudal one, the title vesting in the ruling chief, from
whom the subordinate chiefs and subject tribes held in consider-
ation of past, present, or future service. Into this apparentlv
direct conflict of opinion the Rev. lecturer strikes in support of
~ e patriarchal view of the question and in doing so opens with
the following preface.
“ It would be quite possible to stir up in Fiji a controversy
about land tenure similiar to that which has raged so hotly in
India. An investigator who will listen to that only which the
chiefs have to say about it may easily come to the settled
conviction that they alone are the owners of the land, and indeed
of everything else ; while another who takes the statement of the
commoners (i.e. the taukeis ) only, may as easily satisfy himself
beyond all doubt that it is they who are the real proprietors of
the soil. Both of these inquirers would be right to a certain
extent and both would also be wrong. The statement of the
commoners I believe to represent ancient custom. That of the
chiefs sets forth the extent to which they have been able to
over-ride that custom ; and her Majesty’s Government has now
to decide the question between these two parties. It will in all
probability be impossible to satisfy both ; but each of them has a
right to a fair hearing and there can be no undue leaning either
to one side or the other, without injustice. The question is
between ancient custom on the one hand, and what is called
valavala raka-turaga, (chief-like doing) on the other. This is
equivalent to saying the question is between law and depotism
with the reservation that it has yet to be decided how far the
long prevalence of valavala v . ka-turaga may have established a
custom in their favor.”
This pieface admirably defines the field of argument, but
before proceeding further we would point out that there is one
matter of opinion imported into it which either requires to be
more clearly explained or else is open to most decided objection.
Ihe writer says: “ The statement of the commoners, I believe
to represent ancient custom. That of the chiefs sets forth the
extent to which they have been able to over-ride that custom;
and her Majesty’s Government has now to decide the question
between these two parties.’’ If this is intended to imply that the
Government has to decide upon the abstract question, as to
whether the ancient land tenure of Fiji was a patriarchal or a
feudal one, and to deal with the European land claims accordingly,
we take most decided exception to the position, since we conceive
it to be the duty of the Government to accept that tenure as their
lawful and legitimate basis of operation which did actually
obtain at the time the lands were acquired by the Europeans.
This may indeed have been the writer’s meaning, since he says


further on “ it is yet to be decided how far the long prevalence of
valavala vaka-turaga may have established a custom in favor of
the chiefs,” but as the gist of the whole matter is contained in
these two propositions, it is decidedly advisable to relieve them
of every possible ambiguity.
Following the foregoing, Mr. Fison proceeds to a most
careful and at the same time a most lucid exposition of the
manner in which the various Fijian communities were originally
constituted, premising the examination to be conducted in
heathen days to get at “the unadulterated customs of the
people.” He notices that even these customs cannot be accepted
as being of universal application, since succession is agnatic in
some places and uterine in others, as in certain parts of Yanua
Levu. The general custom is also affected by the fact that the
chiefs in some places are all powerful, while in others they have
but little authority. It will, however be readily conceded that
these are exceptional cases, and as such only tend to establish the
general rule. Mr. Fison traces the constitution of a community,
where the descent is agnatic from the Kalou Fu, or God ancestor
who stands at the head of the line and becomes the father of
sons, who are mataveitacini or bretheren banded together, the
elder brother standing next in succession. These brethren
become the heads of vuvale, or households; the descendants from
the vuvale constitute a yavusa ; the united yavusa make up a
mataqali and a number of mataqali make up a koro or the
community taken for the purpose of example. The koro (village
or town) is divided into sections each belonging to that division
of the community called the mataqali , this section being again
divided into lands apportioned to each yavusa, and again into
still smaller lots, so that each family or household may have its
own lands. This disposition concerns only the town lands, but
there are also the qele or arable lands and the veikau or forest
lands belonging to each koro. In some places the qele is subdi-
vided as are the town lots, in others it is used by the community
in common, while the veikau lands are also used in common by
the people of the koro , special care being taken that one commu-
nity or koro does not trespass on the lands of another.
The right of the taukei or land-holding head of the family
over that division of the town land apportioned to his family
appears to have been distinct and clear. It was his property,
but his property strictly entailed upon the next in succession.
He was the absolute owner of all that grew upon it and the
chief had to ask for any portion thereof he wished to apply to his
private use. The house built upon it was inviolable; no man
outside his own kindred had a right to enter it against the will
of the owner. It was his sanctuary in time of commotion


amongst the people of his own koro, and could only be lawfully
invaded by a foreign enemy, that is, the men of another koro at
war with his own. Its shelter even entitled the owner to
exercise a temporary right of protection over one flying from the
anger of the chief, and if the chief disregared the right it would
be considered valavala vaka-turaga, which in this sense would
mean a masterful wrong. Even if driven away by war his
interest in the land was not considered forfeited, and the title
could only be extinguished by the annihilation of the tribe. It
is claimed that this undoubted proprietory right over the yavu
or town lot, establishes, or goes far to establish a corresponding
right over the arable and forest lands, and hence arises the taukei
right which the government began by ignoring, and ended by
fully recognising in deciding upon European claims to land.
Mr. Fison then goes fully into the matter of the other
constituents of the koro evolved during the lapse of time by force
of circumstances. He treats of the status of the taukei vulagi, or
stranger taukei , who marries into the tribe and becomes possessor
of his wife’s dowry; the base born of the tribe who have no
rights whatever, and whose descendants in separate communities
become the qali lewe ni kuro, contents of the pot qali, their duty
being to grow food for the over-lords: the bati, or fighting men of
the tribe, and the emigrant subject tribes who cultivate land
allotted to them for sustenance and are tenants at will, paying
tribute for their holdings. The land tenure is, however, fully
established from this point of view without following further the
proofs afforded by the tribal positions of these minor sections.
With regard to the soroqele, or surrender of a vanquished tribe
accompanied by a presentation of earth, Mr. Fison is of opinion
that even this only effected the title temporarily. It ceded the
fruit of the soil and not the soil itself, and after a term the land
reverted to its original owners. From all these premises the
Rev. lecturer comes to the conclusion that the land tenure is a
purely patriarchal one, and he concludes with the following
words. “ Certainly neither chief nor taukei had any right,
independent of one another to dispose of the fee simple, nor do I
believe that the combined consent of the chiefs and commoners
could establish such a right. The land was a public estate,
belonging to all full born men, and it was strictly entailed, the
heir being the posterity of those men to all generations. It is
impossible to cut off* an entail such as this, for the heir can never
be a consenting party.”
We have now submitted to our readers the three views upon
this subject most worthy of consideration, two favoring the
patriarchal and one supporting the feudal aspect of the case.
Paradoxical as the assertion may appear there can be no doubt


that each writer is strictly correct in his view, but it must be
observed that the gentlemen supporting the patriarchal aspect of
the subject deal exclusively with ancient custom while only the
writer who arrives at the opposite conclusion takes into consider-
ation the important changes, in many cases the entire revolution,
to which these customs were subjected by the event of the
white man and the introduction of firearms. Upon examination
we think it can be satisfactorily proved that these events
exercised such an influence upon the affairs of the people as to
subvert ancient custom, and to convert what undoubtly had
been patriarchal into a feudal system. Under this system the
security of the people absolutely demanded that the chief should
be invested with the right and power to alienate the lands, and
they were so alienated in the interests of the community. This
is the line of argument we adopt in the full conviction that of its
correctness there can be no doubt, and to this phase of the subject
we will address ourselves later on.
“Fiji Times,” February 4,1882.
REVERTING again to the subject of the Fijian land tenure, it
must be obvious to the least reflective mind that however
accurate may be the conclusions arrived at by the Rev. Lorimer
Fison in his statement of the ancient custom which formed the
basis of Fijian polity, still it is only valuable as a most interesting
scientific research amongst the mouldy relics of antiquity. It is
a theory, admirable in all detail and perfect in coherency, a theory
based upon what was at one time an existing fact, or rather the
theory upon which existing facts were at one time based j but
nevertheless a theory which is absolutely valueless as a touch-
stone by which to test the validity of modern titles to lands. To
have made it available for this practical purpose, the lecturer
should have continued his subject and have proved that the
system indicated had force and vitality at the time when the
lands passed by purchase from the chiefs, who, according to his
statement, had no right to alienate, to the Europeans now
claiming to hold from them. He should have proved it to
have been something more than the letter of a dead law which had
become obsolete though unforgotten, and which had been abrogated
more in consequence of the pressing necessities of the times than
by the fiat of that wide-spreading, that absolute and supreme feudal
influence which those very necessities had called into active
operation. Mr. Fison has simply indicated the existence of such


an influence in liis reference to valavala vaka-turaga , or chief-
like doings, which has he points out represents the opposing side
of the question, but he has devoted all his energies to working
out the system based upon the statement of the taukei , and has
not traced the origin, the extent, and the strength of the feudal
influence operating against it. Hence the statement of case is
imperfect since no opportunity is afforded for arriving at a
conclusion as to the strength of the relative positions.
It must be clear to any average intelligence that such a
system as that concisely referred to by Mr. Pritchard, and more
definitely described by Mr. Fison, could only have had a practi-
cal existence under certain very favorable conditions. A posi-
tively Arcadian phase of society was necessary to give it effect.
Such a state of things might have prevailed where no disturbing
elements were at work, where all human passions were at rest,
where discord, strife and contention were unknown, and where
from the peaceful agriculturalist returning contented and happy
at the close of his daily labor, to the patriarchal chief smiling
with dignified approbation upon his united people, all were
mataveitacini, a band of brothers in heart as well as in name.
But it is well known that the state of Fijian society, so far back
as even tradition can trace it, was precisely the opposite of all
this. The people lived in an atmosphere of strife and contention ;
treachery and bloodshed was their delight, and war their normal
condition of existence. Such a state of things is utterly incom-
patible with the maintenance of a patriarchal system. The
father of his family and their descendants developes into the
warlike leader of the tribe. His power and importance increase
as his ability and prowess marks him as the man upon whom the
tribal existence depends. His habit of command raises him
above the old relation in which he stood to his brethren, and
the military despot succeeds the constitutionally ruling patriarch
of his people. As in civilised, so in uncivilised communities, the
rule obtains “ that laws are silent in the midst of arms,” and
when war is in the chronic state of a people the will of the
commanding officer becomes the law of the land.
That such should be the case implies no wrong done to the
community at large, however injuriously it may affect isolated
individuals. It does not follow that it indicates the triumph of
might over right, since that is right which conserves the greatest
good for the greatest number, and when the exigencies of the
situation requires that all authority and all power shall be vested
in one head, it is a fallacy to say, this is in contravention of
ancient custom, it is wrong, therefore everything done under
pressure of this necessity shall hereafter be declared illegal and
of no effect


In this manner the power of the chiefs began to overshadow
the rights formerly vesting in the people. Of course the people
would naturally cling most tenaciously to the recollection of that
system under which his accident of birth was the only advantage
the chief could claim over them, yet in many instances for all
practical purposes their actual titles became as shadowy and
unreal as that of the taukei referred to by Mr. Fison who, though
driven from his yavu by a foreign foe, still held himself its
possessor and owner by a title which nothing but the annihilation
of his tribe could extinguish. The theory is admirable, but there
can be little doubt that for all practical purposes, the title of the
foe in possession was a much more real and satisfactory one.
It requires no vivid stretch of the imagination to understand
how a system such as Mr. Fison describes would become affected
even by the intertribal commotions occurring before such extra-
ordinary agencies as white combatants and arms of precision were
imported into the matter, but when the effect of this importation
is considered the revolution thereby created will become but the
more plainly apparent. This occurred a nout the year 1804, when
a number of convicts escaped from New South Wales and settled,
some at Rewa and some at Bau. These men allied themselves
with the native chiefs in all their warlike expeditions, and the
effect of their firearms first gave to their native allies that
importance and superiority which they have retained through all
later times. Their enemies were beaten in every direction, the
bravest warriors opposed to them fell dead as if by enchantment,
they were masters of the situation and what then remained for
those with whom they were at feud, after the cause of their
discomfiture had been discovered, but to procure arms for the
purpose of repelling attacks and preserving themselves from utter
extinction. What valuable chattel had they to offer for these
arms? Nothing! nothing that could be utilised in the emer-
gency but the land. The safety of the tribe depended upon the
chief, their necessities invested him with a supreme authority,
and he sold the lands, to them comparatively valueless, that the
people might become possessors of the comparatively invaluable
musket. It was a struggle for existence, and in that existence
was comprehended the minor matter of their title to the unalie-
nated lands, so that it was merely the politic parting with a small
portion to preserve the great remainder. Even supposing the
patriarchal system had survived in full force and vitality up to
this period, the disposal of the first block of land for firearms
would have revolutionised it throughout Fiji, since it compelled
every tribe to resort to the same measures in self-defence.
From the date above indicated up to 1874, that is for
seventy years, but more particularly for the last twenty years of


that term this cause has in been active operation. The introduction
of firearms made the old struggle for existence but the more
bitter and determined. The acquisition of every score stand of
arms by a powerful chief made it necessary for his enemies to
place themselves on the same warlike footing. The lands were
sold often in the very last extremity, and but for these sales the
chances are that in hundreds of cases the dissatisfied tankers who
now oppose the specific performance of the contract would never
have survived to give expression to their dissatisfaction.
At the time of sale the feudal power of the chief had, in a
great majority of cases, become so firmly established over the
ancient customs of the people that he was master, absolute
master not only of the tribal lands but of the lives of every mem-
ber of his tribe. Such chiefs were Tui Cakau, Eitova and Koro-
iduadua, and is there a person in Fiji who knows anything of the
power exercised by these chiefs who will doubt what would have
been the fate of an y faukei advancing his right to be consulted in
the sale of lands. The answer would have been a sharp, short
and a decisive one, a club stroke or a spear thrust, and his voice
would have been silenced for ever. It is to this state of things
Mr. Thurston refers when he says, “ Since the advent of Euro-
peans, Fijian customs have been slowly altering, old ideas and
usages have undergone important changes, and in no respect have
they changed so much as in the relation existing between the
chief and his people.”
But, it may be objected, this only establishes the might; it
does not prove the right, since as Mr. Fison observes, “ the land
was a public estate belonging to all free born men, and it was
strictly entailed, the heir being the posterity of those men to all
generations. It is impossible to cut off an entail such as this, for
the heir can never be a consenting party.” With all proper
submission to so authoriative an opinion we contend that upon
the broad basis it proves both might and right. This system is
founded upon customs of remote antiquity. In savage communi-
ties custom has the force of law. Law is in itself the embodi-
ment of the highest form of common sense” “ for nothing is law
that is not reason.” If this law had remained irrevocable as the
canons of the Medes and Persians, what would have been the
result and what would have been the state of Fiji at this moment.
In the first place the entail would have been cut off from the
unborn posterity to all intents and purposes by the extinction of
tlie progenitors. In the next place Fiji would .have remained
closed as a field for enterprise, and as a sphere for the operation
of civilising influences, and lastly it would never have become a
British dependency, *a position to which it has attained only
through the abrogation of this very law which it is contended


cannot be set aside. Whatever Fiji owes of progress to the
European, it owes in the first place to the violation or rather to
the repeal of this law, and whereas “ nothing is law that is not
reason” it would be the acme of unreason to preach a blind
adherence to an obsolete custom and to denounce that as illegal
and wrong which has redeemed a nation from the lowest depths
of barbarism, which has converted sterility into fruitfulness, and
which has moreover given a value to those lands the natives still
possess, far surpassing the value of the undivided whole if they
had remained upon their hands an unconvertible chattel.
To our mind this line of argument sufficiently establishes a
conviction that the disposal of the lands by the chiefs was an act
performed in the interests of the community that it secured the
greatest good for the greatest number, that it was right, and
therefore that it was lawful. That no abuse of this feudal power
ever took place we are far from saying, but as the general subject
is one which cannot be disposed of hastily we shall make no
apology for again reverting to it, when this matter will receive
attention in its place.
“ Fiji Times,” February 8.
IN our last article on the subject of the Fijian land tenure we have
endeavored to show not only how the system changed from
a patriarchal to one of a purely feudal character, but also that
such change was absolutely necessary to the existence of the
people, and was rendered inevitable by the force of surrounding
circumstances. This explains the seeming contradiction in the
opinions expressed by those gentlemen who have been quoted as
authorities on the subject, and reconciles the apparently conflict-
ing statements made by Mr. Fison on the one hand and Mr.
Thurston on the other, since the gentlemen first named makes an
“examination into heathen times to get at the unadulterated
customs of the people,” while the latter, writing in 1874, describes
the state of things actually existing in the more immediate past,
with a view of throwing light on the practical question at issue,
namely, the ownership of the lands. Nothing can be clearer than
the proof supplied in support of the opinion that “ the modern
system ” recognised the supreme chief as the grantor of the lands
and left the usufruct only, subject to certain conditions, in the
hands of the grantee ( i.e ., qali chiefs and people). That it was
so understood and acknowledged by the people is evident from
the formula quoted by Mr. Thurston as that adopted by any


qali on the presentation of food; “be favorably disposed towards
us, accept this. We know that it is little, but if it Keimami
na kenai kuri” literally, “ we are the wherewithal to increase it
( i.e you may eat us if the food is insufficient). Be favorably
disposed to us ; accept this that we may continue to occupy your
lands.”
Mr. Fison objects to the seemingly very logical deduction to
be drawn from this, and says:—“ Mr. Thurston quoted a speech
made at the presentation of property as a proof that the land
belonged to the chief alone, but as I have stated, these speeches
have very little weight as evidence on such a matter. Fijians
use the most extravagant expressions on occasions of ceremony.
I myself once heard a chief deliver himself of the following
graceful hyperbole : —‘We cannot express our thankfulness. Our
words are to short for the length of our joy. Oh that we were
dogs ! for then would our gladness be seen by the wagging of our
tails.’ Here the hyperbolical strain is self-evident, but we fail
to see that it affords any proof of metaphorical significance in the
presentation speech; the contrary is apparently clear, from the
well-known fact that life and death did absolutely rest in the
hands of the chief.
While giving evidence before the Lands Commission, Dr.
Brower, who for so long held the position of United States Consul
in the group, described a personal visit to the Macuata Chief,
Bitova. On the beach in front of the chiefs house a number of
black balls were rolling about in the tide-way, and these he
found on enquiry to be the heads of certain young chiefs who
had violated a tabu which Bitova had placed on a certain grove
of nuts. If for the offence of taking a few nuts, the heads of the
privileged chiefly class fell at pleasure of the tribal despot, what
hyperbole was there in the admission of subject commoners that
they also held their lives and lands at his disposal.
Keeping in view the relationship existing between the
chiefs and people, it can now be clearly understood how forcible
was the distinction drawn by Mr. Thurston between power on
the one hand and propriety, or policy on the other with regard
to the alienation of lands when he said : I do not think that any
subordinate landholder can, or should alienate without the consent
of the ruling chief, nor do I think the chief should alienate
without the consent of the people. The people were powerless
to sell that over which their control had ceased, while with
respect to the chief the power was indisputable, and only the
propriety or good policy of the act assailable. Clearly the only
person who could sell lands, the only person with whom pur-
chasers could treat were those who had the actual power to place
and to maintain the purchaser in possession of his property. To


have bought from the taukei would have been to have bought only
a barren title at best, and to have had the land immediately sold
by the chief who would have maintained his client in possession;
therefore the Europeans did exactly what the British Govern-
ment did subsequently, in the matter of cession. They accepted
the title as they found it, and were content to take over from
those who had the power to give.
Nothing can be clearer than the fact that if the patriarchal
tenure is the proper basis from which to decide upon titles to
lands, the British Government have no legal or legitimate voice
whatever in the matter of that decision, since it was by acknow-
ledging the feudal tenure to be that in actual operation that it
came into possession of the estate. After full and ample investi-
gation, conducted at various times and by different agents, but
more particularly by Commodore Goodenough and Consul
Layard, assisted by Mr. Thurston and others, the Imperial
Government professed itself satisfied of the power and right of
the chiefs to cede not only their seignorial rights but “ the
absolute proprietorship of all lands not shown to be now
alienated,” vide Deed of Cession. Acting upon this conviction
the cession was accepted from the thirteen signatory chiefs. It
follows as a logical sequence that either the feudal tenure must
be maintained, or by its own act the Imperial Government places
itself out of court.
As a matter of historical fact the right of the chief to
dispose of the estate was so acknowledged, and on the strength of
such acknowledgment it is provided in the fourth clause of the
Deed of Cession, “ that the absolute proprietorship of all lands
not shown to be now alienated, so as to have become bond fide
the property of Europeans, or other foreigners, or not now
in the actual use or occupation of the tribe, or not actually
required for the probable support and maintenance of some chief
or tribe, shall be and is hereby declared to be vested in her
Majesty, her heirs and successors.” This clearly defines of what
her Majesty became possessed, and the extent of the authority
the chiefs assumed the right to cede. It plainly divides the land
under three heads. First, that alienated so as to be the bond fide
property of Europeans or other foreigners ; secondly, that in the
actual occupation of or required for the future probable mainten-
ance of the people; and thirdly, the remainder, of which the
Crown was declared the absolute proprietor. Those under the
first head never did come into the hands of the Crown, since
they are expressly barred by the clause recited, and Crown
Grants issued for them are only certificates to the effect that
they were so alienated before the cession, and that as such the
Crown as no control over them. The lands under the second


head would be in like case but for the fact that the Government
accepts the position of trustee for the natives, and holds these
lands in trust for them ; while the third class of lands became
the absolute property of the Crown, and have been dealt with as
such; sales having been affected of certain portions, while Sir
Arthur Gordon in his public speeches made during his visit to
England publicly invited capitalists to buy Fijian lands from the
Crown.
Further proof that this was the basis accepted at the time of
cesssion is supplied by the tenor of Lord Carnarvon’s despatch to
Sir Arthur Gordon with respect to this matter. In this docu-
ment, although the meaning of the fourth clause above quoted is
most decidedly strained and distorted, it is still clearly stated
that “ the Queen has full power of disposing of the whole of the.
lands in such manner as to her Majesty may seem fit, having due
regard to such interests as may be entitled to recognition under
article four of the Deed of Cession.” The instructions further
direct that European purchasers shall be required to give
evidence of their purchase, “ and if the land appears to have been
fairly acquired at a fair price (the Crown) should issue to the
persons accepted after due enquiry as owners, a Crown Grant in
fee simple.” In a subsequent despatch on the subject Lord
Carnarvon comments upon the fact that Sir Arthur has appar-
ently been supplied with an incorrect copy of his former despatch,
and continues, “ the difference, however, is not very material,
since neither versions would afford grounds for supposing her
Majesty could contemplate any harsh or unjust proceedings, and it
seems hardly necessary to say now and once for all that as a
matter of course her Majesty will deem all interests based upon
legitimate transactions as deserving of recognition.”
Can it possibly supposed that these terms “fairly
acquired at a fair price ’ and “ legitimate transactions ” have any
reference to an obsolete patriarchal right which the Imperial
Government completely ignored when placing itself in a position
to decide on the question of bond fide acquisition. Is it not clear
that the intention was to acknowledge the fact that the same
chiefs who ceded the whole possessed equal power to alienate a
part, and that the duty prescribed was not to search out the
ancient and antiquated tribal right to sell, but to clearly arrive
at the fact that they had done so and to endorse the act. Admit-
ting, for the mere sake of argument, that a theoretical wrong had
been done by chiefly usurpation in years long gone by, it was
purely a Fijian wrong arising out of a purely Fijian state of
affairs, long before the association of Great Britain with the
politics of the group, and for which it was in no wise responsible;
therefore it was no part of the Imperial duty to profit by the wrong


for the purpose of placing the Government in a position to redress
this wrong only so far as it could be done at the expense of its
natural born subjects. Ihe only legitimate line of policy open
for adoption was to accept the state of things actually existing at
the date of annexation as the normal condition of affairs and to
decide upon all matters from that stand-point. This was
undoubtly the light in which the Colonial office regarded the
position in the outset, and that such was the case will appear in
continuing the subject.
“Fiji Times,” February 15.
1J ESUMING the thread of our enquiry into the Land Question,
\ we are of opinion that we have already advanced facts and
arguments proving conclusively and most incontestibly not oiily
that the tenure was a purely feudal one at the time of European
acquisition, but also that it was so accepted by the Imperial
Government at the date of Cession. Up to a certain point every
successive step taken in pursuing the course of official investiga-
tion into the land claims will hut afford stronger evidence of this
incontrovertible tact. It will but the more clearly demonstrate
how thoroughly the chiefly right to alienate the lands was
recognised, and in so doing will prove beyond the power of
refutation how utterly unjustifiable, how distinctly nefarious was
the change of front that by adopting the patriarchal tenure as
the basis of title has led to the latter day spoliation against
which claimants are now protesting.
It must be remembered, as we have before pointed out, that
the fourth clause of the Deed of Cession clearly divides the land
under three distint heads. First—■“ lands shown to be alienated
so as to have become bond fide the property of Europeans or other
foreigners.” Secondly—lands “in the uctual use or occupation
of some chief or tribe, or actually required for the probable
future support and maintenance of some chief or tribeand
thirdly, the remainder of the estate not so alienated, occupied, or
required. The Cession to the British Crown of the lands
comprehended under the two heads first named is barred by an
exception as plain and definite as words can formulate, to
distinguish them from the lands under the third head, the
the absolute proprietorship of which is declared to vest in Her
Majesty, her heirs and Successors. Clearly then the duty of the
Government was to ascertain, first, what lands were alienated,
and to whom, and this being determined to issue a so-called


Crown Grant, an instrument which should he in effect merely a
declaration that the lands were alienated to the purchaser prior
to the cession of the gronp, and therefore had never come under
the proprietorship of the Crown. Secondly, to determine what
lands were comprehended within the second class, and to notify
that such were held in trust for the natives, and thirdly to
appropriate the remainder as constituting the public estate.
Evidently this was Lord Carnarvon’s view of the case when in
directing the appointment of the Commission of Enquiry, and
indicating its duties he pointed out that, “in the case of native
claims also, great care should be taken to protect the interests of
the Crown by allowing no more than a fair and liberal interpre-
tation of the fourth article of the instrument of Cession.”
We now come to the appointment of the Lands Commission,
and to the radical blunder made in its constitution which has
been the fruitful cause of so much and such well-founded dissatis-
faction. In directing Sir Arthur Gordon as to the establishing
of the Court of Enquiry, Lord Carnarvon says : —“ In appointing
the Commission, you should be careful not to confer upon its
members any further powers' than those of enquiring and
reporting to you; and it will be for you, with the advice of your
Executive Council, to direct the action to be taken in each case.”
Further on his Lordship continues : —“ As it is most important
that the Commission should be independent of local influences
it will be desirable that it should be composed, as far as possible
of persons unconnected with the colony prior to the Cession; and
the Secretary for Native Affairs, with the Royal Engineer Officer
who will probably be appointed to act as Surveyor General,
would probably be suitable members of the Commission, with
perhaps one or two other persons who may be selected in
Australia and New Zealand.” Now note the nature of the issue
to be tried, and the constitution of the Court appointed to try it.
According to these instructions the question for the Commission
to enquire into, and for the Governor, sitting in Executive Council
to definitely determine from the evidence taken by the Commis-
sion was, whether certain lands claimed by Europeans had been
“ fairly acquired at a fair price,” and whether it was a “ legitimate
transaction.” If this question was decided in the negative a side
issue might arise: was it, “in the actual use or occupation of
some chief or tribe, or actually required for the future probable
support or maintenance of some chief or tribe.” If this was also
decided in the negative, to whom did it revert? Clearly it
became part of the lands comprehended under the third heading
above set forth, the absolute proprietorship of which vested in
the Crown, and what follows ? The Crown being one of the
parties to the suit appoints its own officers members of the Court


of Enquiry ; delegates to its own representative the right of
absolute decision on the evidence taken, and naturally that
decision is to the effect that neither European or native right is
sustained, and that the lands are the absolute property of the
Crown.
Here the anomaly is presented of a quasi-judicial body
violating and ignoring the first fundamental principle of all juris-
prudence, that no man can be a judge in his own case ; yet in
this matter the Crown nominates the jury, appoints its represen-
tative as judge, and profits by the decision in its own favor for
the securing of which this double assurance has been taken. Of
course it can be objected that in consequence of the change of
front before referred to, the Crown does not now claim the
disallowed lands, but to preserve a right of decision affects to
hold it in trust for the native. This transparent fiction will be
dealt with in its proper place, but that it did so appropriate
disallowed lands as the absolute property of the Crown under the
earlier operation of the Commission witness the Totoga land
which being in the occupation of the Crown was claimed by the
French Mission and was most illegally disallowed, the Crown
remaining in possession to this day. Witness again the disallow-
ance of lands claimed by the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, on the
Rewa, the disallowed portion of which was immediately put up
for sale, and the plunder converted into coin through its purchase
by Mr. W. F. Parr. If then any doubts remain as to the justice
or legality of the action taken, let it be remembered that when
the despoiled proprietor threatened to contest his right in higher
quarters and to expose the iniquity of the whole proceeding, his
silence was purchased by a grant of land elsewhere equal in
assumed value to that unlawfully disallowed and sold. If space
would permit, such instances could be cited by the score but the
above will suffice for all necessary purposes of illustration.
Even in the earlier constitution of the Commission the
instructions of Lord Carnarvon were but partially complied with,
and although certain gentlemen of high official standing, notably
Sir William Hackett and Colonel Pratt, by their association with
it gave a guarantee for its integrity, still no persons were selected
from Australia or New Zealand as advised, who by the fact of
their independence and entire freedom from local influences
would have further assured its impartiality. Soon after its
inauguration those of highest standing from one cause or
other ceased to act, and their places were supplied by persons
utterly unfitted for the position. In some instances by raw
inexperienced youths whose only notions of the matters they
were called upon to deal with had been instilled into them by
Sir Arthur Gordon himself, and in others by persons so notoriously


subject to local influences that their official existence depended
upon their pandering to those in power. Then in distinct viola-
tion of the spirit of the instructions these piiant members were
detailed to hold enquiries singly and the result was such that it
may be fairly supposed even Sir Arthur Gordon stood aghast at
his own success. The iniquitous manner in which land claims
were disposed of called forth a storm of reprobation and indignant
protest, and having failed in securing that which should have been
established at the offset, namely, an independent Lands Court
before which the Crown and claimant woukl stand on an equal
footing as before a Court of law, the public voice demanded the
institution of an independent tribunal as an ultimate court of
appeal.
Here the operation of the Commission was suspended for
over a twelve-month and before following its further action it
must be noted that up to this point the feudal right of the chief
had always been accepted as the basis of title. Ostensibly the
chief object of the investigating commissioner or commissioners
was to ascertain that the chiefs signing the deeds were the true
over-lords at the time of sale. It was on this point that the
Commission put forth its strength, and then followed the minor
questions, which of the various deeds sometimes presented were
entitled to recognition by virtue of priority, and was the land
“ fairly acquired at a fair price.” The deciding of these questions
opened up a magnificent field for confiscation and annexation,
and the Commission were not slow to avail themselves of it, but
the chiefly right was never disputed except upon the grounds
that they were not the true over-lords but had either been driven
away by conquest, or, on the other hand, that the conquest they
claimed was not of so complete a nature as to justify the sale.
We take it that it was in the matter of deciding upon what
was a “ fair purchase at a fair price ” the Commission was
entitled to take cognisence of the abuse of feudal rights referred
to in a previous article. If a man pandering to the debaucheries
of a vicious and depreved chief took advantage of his vices to
obtain from him a title to large tracts of land for a case or two
of gin, that man was joint participator in a fraud and knew he
was dealing fraudulently at time of sale. Such lands Were not
“ fairly purchased at a fair price,” and the sale was not “ a
legitimate transaction ” therefore his title was properly subject
to disallowance. But from the drift of the enquiry, and subse-
quent results it became apparent that the Commissioners went a
great deal further and claimed a right to say that if such and
such merchandise was equivalent to the monetary value of so
many acres. They fixed a value in their own minds on lands,
and seemingly decisions were arrived at in accordance therewith.


To all appearance the surrounding circumstances of the case'were-
seldom taken into consideration, nor any attempt made to arrive
at the exact value of a case of muskets and a few kegs of
ammunition to the people whose very existence depended upon,
their possession of them. To this circumstance may be attributed
many of the cases of disallowance even where the feudal right of
the chief to alienate lands was admitted. When, after Sir
Arthur Gordon’s return from England, this right was denied, the
claimant was entirely at the mercy of the court, and to illustrate
the change we will in the next article’ refer to decisions in
parallel cases but given at different periods and under the
different assumption as to the basis of title.
“ Fiji Times,” February 18,1882.
IN continuing our review of the Land Question, we next ap-
proach that period which ushered in the second era in the
history of the Commission appointed to investigate titles."
Shortly after his return from England in the latter part of 1879,
Sir Arthur Gordon called a meeting of the colonists at Nasova,.
and amongst a mass of other matter he announced to them cer-
tain changes which it had been decided to make in the general
conduct of the enquiry. He admitted that it had always appeared
to him but reasonable that there should be an opportunity afforded
for the deliberate rehearing of disallowed claims, and with cha-
racteristic modesty he posed as one entitled to a considerable
amount of credit for having ensured the establishment of this
Court of Appeal. He then introduced the enactment which has
since passed into law as the Lands Appeal Ordinance of 1879,
which provided inter alia for the appointment of a barrister not
connected with the colony as a member of the Commission.
We will not at present dwell upon the constitution of the
Court, the decisions of which were intended to give finality to the
whole proceedings, except for the purpose of quoting the opinion
of Lord Selborne as to the question of the proprietory right of
the Crown, now by some politic fiction supposed to be entirely
set aside. On this matter Lord Selborne remarks: “The right
to make such provision ( i.e ., for ensuring finality) is clearly an
incident of the Queen’s full sovereignty and dominion, it being
only absolute proprietory right over lands to which 'private or
tribal titles could not be shown which is renounced by the fourth
and seventh clauses of the Deed of Cession.” It will thus be
seen that the absolute proprietory right of the Crown in the
remainder, which is now denied, is here most unquestionably


accepted and most firmly asserted. It will also be noticed from
the above utterance that no alteration is intended of the system
hitherto adopted. The indications are indeed to the contrary
effect, that under the new as under the old regime the claimant
was to be required to establish his “ fair purchase at a fair price”
from the chiefs signing his deed, and that if these chiefs proved
to be the true over-lords, his claim should be allowed. Theoret-
ically speaking, this was the system adopted, since there was no
sudden substitution of a patriarchal for a feudal tenure as the
basis of title at that time.
The new era was initiated when the hon. Victor Williamson,
the barrister provided for by the new Ordinance, assumed the
conduct of the investigation as chairman of the Commission, and
very soon thereafter claimants found that a totally different ele-
ment had been imported into the contention, and one which it
was almost impossible for them to combat against, with any
chance of success. Formerly they were required to prove that
they had indeed bought from those whose signatures were attached
to their deeds; but now they were asked to establish the apparent
irrelevancy that they had purchased from persons who had not
signed the deeds, from persons whom they had never heard of in
connection with the matter, and whose lives would not have been
worth one moment’s purchase had they disputed the chiefly right
to sell at the time of alienation. This was the first that was
practically heard of the patriarchal tenure and the taukei right,
under which it was supposed that the chief held in trust for his
people, that they, the taukei were the true owners of the lands,
and that no sale was valid to which they were not consenting
parties. Now, as in no one instance the signature of the com-
moners were associated with those of the chiefs on the deeds, the
strict adherence to this position would have meant the disallow-
ance of every claim preferred under such conditions. This would
have effected such wholesale spoliation as even Sir Arthur Gordon
was unprepared for, consequently there was an evident necessity
to temporise, and this was effected by accepting the consent of
the taukei as having been conveyed through his enjoyment of a
portion of the consideration. The claimant was therefore called
upon to prove that the taukei, of whom he knew nothing, had
received a part of the consideration paid for his lands, or failing
that, disallowance awaited him. No wonder that the decisions
arrived at under such a system have been so prolific of disaster
to the European claimants, and no wonder that in the Royal
Gazette,” published on Wednesday last, no less than ONE HUNDRED
AND twelve disallowances are notified.
In this new state of affairs the anomalous position occupied
by the Crown could not be overlooked. Its representative sat in


the seat of judgment by virtue of an act distinctly asserting a
chiefly right to cede not only “ full sovereignty and dominion,’]
hut also “ absolute proprietorship.” To this cession the tanker
were no parties. By his decisions on land claims the representa-
tive of the Crown asserted that no title was valid unless the
taukei was a consenting party to the transfer of proprietorship
hence the necessity for that grand coup, which by a politic fiction
divested the Crown of its rights as absolute proprietor, made it
merely a trustee for the natives, and placed the hon. J. B. Thur-
ston, a member of the Appeal Court, in a position to on
oath before the Supreme Court in the Times contempt case, “ The
Crown in this country has no lands to dispose of.”
As we have remarked above, for a length of time the adverse
element of the taukei right thus introduced into land claims in-
vestigation was an undefined influence, and as such all the more
dangerous to those who were called upon to combat it blindfold.
But & in October, 1880, it assumed form and consistency, in the shape
of Ordinance No. XXI., “ Relating to Native Lands.” In study-
ing this Jesuitical piece of legislation it is impossible to come to
any other conclusion than it is expressly designed to despoil
the European claimant, and while affecting to uphold the position
which the Government had assumed in recognition of the patri-
archal tenure, still to preserve to the Crown as absolute proprietor
the ultimate reversion of all its original interest in the general
estate. The preamble of the Ordinance sets forth, “ Whereas it
has been ascertained by careful enquiry that the lands of the
native Fijians are for the most part held by mataqalis or family
communities as the proprietory unit, according to ancient customs,
and that it is expedient and desirable until the native race be
ripe for a division of such community rights amongst individuals
to provide for the sanction of such rights, and the mode of their
use and enjoyment, in conformity with the present institutions of
the Colony: Be it therefore enacted by the Governor with the
advice and consent of the Legislative Council. 1. The tenure of
the lands belonging to the native Fijians as derived from their
ancestors and evidenced by tradition and usage shall be the legal
tenure thereof ” Now, either this Ordinance has legitimate force
and effect and the Deed of Cession is so much waste paper, or it
is contrary to fact and reason, and every decision arrived at
under such an assumption is invalid.
But this Ordinance goes a little further: so far it would
only have aided in stripping the European of his lawfully
acquired possession, and it is also required to endow the Crown
with the property thus made available. Clause XIII. therefore
enacts, “If any matnqali should cease to exist by the extinction
of its members the the lands shall fall to the Crown as ultimus


hares to be allotted to the qali, of which it is a part or other
division of the people which may apply for same, or to be retained
by the Crown or dealt with otherwise upon such terms as the
Governor may deem expedient.” As a matter of fact a case has
come under the notice of the Commission where the sole
representative of a powerful matdqali was one little boy, and
this will sufficiently explain the position. The Crown dispossesses,
or rather affects to dispossess itself that it may sit in judgment
between European and native. The European claims are
disallowed wholesale, and the Crown finally inherits, as ultimate
heir. The fiction is transparant, the iniquity is gross and
palpable ; the Crown cannot dispossess itself of that conveyed by
the deed of cession except by a deed of retrocession as formally
and solemnly executed as was the original instrument, and it
violates every principle of law and equity by sitting in judgement
on a case where, even on its own specious representation, its
reversionary interest is of so immediate a character.
To thoroughly understand the effect of this change of front on
the prospects of land claimants it is only necessary to contrast the
results arrived at after investigation into the claims where the
basis of title, as shewn on the deeds, was precisely similar, but
where the assumption as to the correct basis of title in the minds
of the Commission w T as exactly opposite. Let the old native
chieftancy of Cakaudrovi, under the late Tui Cakau, be taken for
purposes of illustration. In the dominion over which he ruled,
Tui Cakau, like many other Fijian chiefs, was absolute lord and
master, supreme autocrat, arbiter of life and death, exercising an
iron despotism over both the people and the estate. For an act
of rebellion he dispossessed the people of the Island of Rabi, drove
them over to the mainland, and gave the island to King George
of Tonga, who sold it to the representative of the present
proprietors. For a similar act of rebellion Tui Cakau dispossessed
the people of Laucala, killed the majority, scattered the remainder
abroad, and-afterwards sold the island, half • to Mr. McComber
and half to Mr. Beddoes, whose representatives still hold
possession. He also sold the Island of Mago to Mr. Hennings,
who sold to Messrs. Ryder Bros., and at their request the chief
removed the people to another island. Messrs. Ryder Bros,
have lately transferred to the Mago Island Co. All this he did
in the exercise of his chiefly right, and in pursuance of what
Mr. Fison correctly terms valavala vakaturacja. The European
claims to these islands were investigated before the first
Commission, or that Commission accepting the chiefly right at
the basis of the title, and in each case the title was confirmed
and Crown grants were issued to the claimants in possession.
Now mark the difference in a precisely similar case,


investigated under the new Commission working on the
assumption that the patriarchal tenure was the correct basis of
title, as set forth in the Ordinance above quoted. In 1863 two
American citizens, Messrs. Gillam and Thompson, purchased
from Tui Cakau, for two hundred and fifty dollars paid in gold,
the three islets known as the Kingold Islands. The deeds were
signed by the chief and witnessed by Captain Cocks, the present
harbor master, Mr. William Graburn, of Nadroga, Mr. Thomas
Ryder, of Mago, and Mr. Oliver Brown, of Taviuni. In 1864
the British Consul, Mr. Owen, while visiting Taviuni, officially
interrogated Tui Cakau as to the sale, and received his full and
free acknowledgment. This the Consul endorsed on the deed,
Tui Cakau signed it in his presence, and Mr. Owen attested the
acknowledgment under the Consular seal. Shortly after the
proprietors returned to America, leaving Mr. McComber in
charge, who was then resident on Laucala. In J 868 the islands
were sold to Mr. John Barber. This purchaser also left Mr.
McComber in charge, nor was his charge disturbed when Barber
subsequently sold half to Dr. Brower "and half to Mr. Hoisted,
Dr. Brower sold his half to the Valentine Bros., and in 1878
these brothers entered into possession.
It must be mentioned that the islands are destitute of
water, and have never been inhabited. They have been useful
only as a turtle fishing station, and after the oiiginal sale, in
acknowledgment of the European title, Tui Cakau always asked
Mr. McComber’s permission before sending fishermen to the
islands, and always gave him some portion of the take as the
taukei or owners share. When the Lands Commission satin
Taviuni, under Colonel Pratt, the investigation into this matter
was commenced. Tui Cakau again acknowledged the sale, but
as he was in no fit state to admit of proceeding with the enquiry,
it was indefinitly postponed, a circumstance which the unfortunate
proprietors have now to deplore.
The death of Tui Cakau happened after the brothers
Valentine entered into possession, and shortly following his
demise, two natives, w 7 ho said they came there to fish, & were
allowed to remain for a week or so, and once having effected a
lodgment they defied the proprietors to eject them. Trouble
ensued and the Vuna Magistrate was called in, wlo decided that
no action could be taken until the claim to the islands was
finally disposed of. The investigation into the title took place
under the new Commission last year, and the claimants found
themselves opposed by a man calling himself Buli Laucala, who
claimed that the islands belonged to the Laucala people, that he
was one of the taukei , that he had never been consulted as to
the sale, and that he had received no portion of the consideration.


This man, strange to say, was the messenger whom Tui Cakau
periodically sent, in recognition of the European right,, to ask
permission from Mr. McComber, before fishing the islands. Not
one word had ever been heard from him while the chief was
alive, yet upon his evidence the chiefs acknowledgment of sale
was disregarded, the deeds were coolly ignored, the evidence of
the witnesses was passed over, the claim was entirely disallowed
and the possession of nearly twenty years treated as though it
never had been. Is this equity, justice, or high-handed spoliation ?
Upon what principle will the decisions in the cases of Rabi,
Laucala, Mago, and the R ingolds square with equity or common
sense ? The three islands first named are extensive and valuable
possessions, and were thickly inhabited; yet Tui Cakau dispos-
sessed the people and sold the islands, and his right to do so is
supported and maintained by the Lands Commission. The
Ringolds, as to his equal chiefly right over which question
arises, are comparatively barren, unwatered and uninhabited,
yet upon claim of a man, a Laucala man, whose right in his own
island has been overruled, the chiefly right to sell these unoccu-
pied islands is denied and the European claimants ousted. If
the Laucala man is entitled to the Ringolds, which he claims to
have been an appendage of his own island, although separated
from it by twenty-five miles of sea-way, how much more is he
entitled to Laucala, his own home and tribal heritage. Clearly
by these decisions the Commission stands convicted of an infam-
ous wrong inflicted either on the European or native, and as it
follows that if Tui Cakau had no right to sell the Ringolds, he
had no right to sign the deed ceding the absolute proprietorship
of the rest of Cakaudrovi to the British Crown, the fact is
established that the European is the wronged party, or else the
English Government are wrongfully in possession of the group.
This is but one case out of scores that can be cited, and evi-
dence can be produced to prove how iniquitously the decisions of
the Commission have operated to the prejudice of the European
claimants, whose energy and enterprise have made these lands
worth disputing. To allay dissatisfaction arising from this
source the great panacea of an ultimate Court of Appeal was
established, and in our next we will take the liberty of reviewing
its constitution and the effect of its operations.
“ Fiji Times,” February 22,1882.
OUR last article on the Land Question promised in continua-
tion a review of the constitution and operation of the


Appeal Court, but before approaching this portion of the subject,
to provide for its thorough comprehension it will be neccessary
to sketch the method of procedure through the preliminary
stages.
In the outset, claimants having sent in their applications,
accompanied by all deeds and documents in support of their
claim to the Lands Department, a flying survey of a given dis-
trict was ordered,.and the boundaries of each claim were laid off
on the plan, exactly as set forth in the deeds, irrespective of the
encroachments or confusion of the lines. Thus a flying survey
plan often presented a maze of intersecting lines, one claim im-
pinging upon another, while a third would overlie both, a fourth
perhaps embracing the entire area comprised in the three fore-
going, and so on in charming confusion. This would indicate
where land had been sold twice or oftener to Europeans, either
by the same or different chiefs, or, in some instances, where un-
scrupulous Europeans had sold lands on bogus deeds, the effect
of the whole being to give the claimant when he could get a
sight of the plan, an idea as to who were the opposing European
claimants, and to a certain extent what was the nature of the
adverse claim. As soon as this plan was completed, a tracing
of it was placed in the hands of a gentleman acting as native
advocate who would proceed to the district in question, explain
to the natives the nature of the claims, enquire into the original
sale, and prepare for a general meeting of the natives, at which
Chief Native Commissioner would attend, and the plan of the
campaign would thereupon be definitely adopted. In these
meetings it was decided what sales should be admitted, what
sales should be opposed, and on what grounds.
There can be no doubt that but for this system nothing
would have been heard of the wholesale objections which were
raised to the European claims. The people were in a great mea-
sure perfectly satisfied that with certain exceptions the lands
claimed had been fairly purchased, and had become bona fide the
property of Europeans, but when the way to dispute this matter
was pointed out and the chances of success enlarged upon, no
doubt the temptation to oust the Europeans became irresisible,
and not only was the opposition organised but a delightful
unanimity was secured in prosecuting it.
This system has been defended by the argument that “If
Europeans were at liberty to retain skilled advocates to prosecute
perhaps worthless claims, surely it was equally permissible for
the Government, as protector of the native interest, to provide
them with the means of fighting the matter on equal terms, and
therefore the appointment of the native advocate, and organ-
ising of the opposition was legitimate and proper.”


There is sound sense in this argument up to a certain point, and
tha point is the equality of the footing on which the opposing
parties were placed. But while the native advocate had access
to all the deeds and documents in the Lands Department, while
he was able to organise his opposition with a full knowledge of his
opponent’s case, while he was supplied with a tracing of the fly-
ing survey plan months before the Commission of Enquiry sat,
all this was refused to the European claimant up to the day of
enquiry, and when to this is added the fact that the Chief Native
Commissioner after organising the opposition sat in judgment on
the contention as a member of the Appeal Court, the question
naturally arises, what has become of the equality o± the footing
upon which the parties are placed ?
It must be here stated that while Mr. Williamson was
Chairman of the Commission copies of the flying survey plans
were always to be had, by the courtesy of that gentleman, some
time before the silting of the Commission, but up to the last they
were withheld by the Government, and when the time approached
for the sitting of the Ba enquiry while Mr, Williamson was still
absent from the Colony, application was made to the Lands office
for them and they were peremptorily refused.
The enquiry before the Commission followed in due course,
and here it must be noticed that special credit has been claimed
that neither before this or either of the higher Courts has a rigid
legal scrutiny been exercised over the matter of the documentary
or oral evidence received in support of claims. While readily
admitting this fact it does not appear to be a matter for which
claimants should be especially grateful. These contracts of sale
were entered into subject to no existing law, they were indepen-
dent transactions based simply upon those generally recognised
principles of equity which nature instils and which reason ap-
proves of. The deed merely reduced the contract to a formula
of words outside any set legal rule, the connection of the Imperial
Government with the politics of the group was a thing which no
one could foresee, and to have required that contracts so entered
into should square with Imperial law would have been to have
given those laws an improper and illegal retrospective aspect, and
to have ensured a miscarriage of justice under the guise of
legality. A certain degree of latitude was therefore of necessity
allowed to the claimant, but at the same time a more than equal
degree of latitude was exercised by the Commission which often
seriously imperilled its character as a court of equity. On occa-
sions, the right of claimants to adduce evidence has been peremp-
torily refused to them, and instances have been known where the
investigation has proceeded, not only in the unavoidable absence
of the claimant, but in the absence of his deeds, which had been


left behind in Levuka. This fact, however, did not prevent the
investigation of the sub-claims founded on the absent deed, but
when the original claimant applied for a hearing the application
was refused, and the anomalous result followed that both original
and sub-claims were disallowed without an opportunity being
offered of adducing one iota of evidence as to the validity of the
deed upon which all claimants founded.
After the close of the preliminary enquiry, the reports of the
Commission were forwarded for the consideration and decision of
the Governor in Council, the Chairman of the Commission being
one of the executive. This tribunal was originally established
without legislative sanction and simply on the strength of a
direction from the Right hon. the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, but after operating three years it was legalised by an
Ordinance to give effect to the past and future decisions on land
claims. As claimants were not allowed to appear either personally
or by counsel before the Governor in Council it would naturally be
supposed that such decisions would be in consonance with the
reports of the Commission holding the enquiry at which they
were present, since the admission of any other element into the
consideration shut out all chance of rebuttal and refutation.
Such, however, was not the case. Lord Carnarvon’s instructions
to Sir Arthur Gordon were : —“ In appointing the Commission
you should be careful not to confer upon its members any further
powers than those of enquiry and reporting to you ; and it will
be for you with the advice of your Executive Council to direct
the action to be taken in each case.” Upon this Sir Arthur
thought proper to place so liberal a construction that he himself
has admitted to allowing and disallowing claims, directly con-
trary to the unanimous report of the Commissioners. Can there
be any question as to whether or not Sir Arthur Gordon here
overstepped the bounds of his legitimate function, or can there be
any doubt that the above quotation from Lord Carnarvon’s des-
patch implies the obligation to direct action in each case conson-
ant with the spirit of the Commissioners’ report. From the
effect of this policy sprang the petition of the Fiji Agricultural
Society in June, 1879, praying that an independent tribunal
might be established, and the result was the appointment of the
hon. Victor Williamson as Chairman of the Commission and the
establishment of the Appeal Court, the constitution and operation
of which we next proposed to review.
This matter is, however, one which cannot well be dealt with
in the space now remaining at our disposal, and in consideration
of its grave importance it will be advisable to reserve it for our
next issue. We make no apology to our readers for what might ap-
pear to those uninterested such persistent harping upon one string.


The general subject is the most serious that can at present occupy
the attention of the public journalist. It is the one that has
called into existence the Land Claimants’ Protection Association
of Fiji, an organisation destined to have neither an impotent or
an ephemeral existence, and to enable that society to press the
claims of the settlers of Fiji upon the Imperial Government with
a fair chance of success, it is necessary to endeavor to create an
outside interest in the subject. This can only be done by making
so full a statement of the case as shall afford an opportunity for
forming an intelligent opinion on its merits, and with this end in
view we have tried to work up from what our American cousins
would call the bed rock of the whole matter, namely, the native
land tenure. With the same object we shall pursue the subject
to its conclusion in the confident hope that the time and attention
bestowed on it, both by the writer and the reader, may not
ultimately prove an unremunerative expenditure.
“ Fiji Times,” February 25, 1882.
IN dealing with the question of the constitution and operation
of the Lands Appeal Court, established by Ordinance No.
XXY. 1879, the chief causes which called it into existence
must be clearly borne in mind. These may be summed up by
the following words : because Sir Arthur Gordon had publicly
admitted that it was but reasonable there should be an oppor-
tunity for the deliberate rehearing of disallowed claims ; because
it was felt that by vesting the final decision in the Governor in
Council, the Crown was occupying a false position in that it sat
as a judge in its own case ; and because claimants, through the
Agricultural Society, had petitioned for an independent tribunal.
Now let the Ordinance be examined under which the Appeal
Court is established, and it will at once be seen that never has a
specious promise been more utterly belied by a jesuitical perfor-
mance. The presumed object was to provide for an appeal from
the decision of the Governor in Council, and the Court to which
the appeal was carried was constituted by the Governor in
Council, with the Chief Justice and Chief Commissioner for
Native Affairs sitting as extraordinary members. To his former
function of organising the opposition, the gentleman last named
now added that of engineering the preliminaries of appeal in all
native cases, admitedly as a departmental matter, and without
consulting the unconscious automata which the Crown set up, as
appellants to a court in which the Crown sat as judge, in cases


where disallowance meant increasing the estates of the Crown.
This statement certainly strips the matter of all illusion, but we
contend that it is a plain and truthful one, since we utterly
refuse to he blinded with the transparent fiction of a native
proprietory, and a Government trusteeship.
Having placed matters en train , the Native Commissioner
takes his seat on the Appeal Board as a thoroughly impartial
judge and the case proceeds. It would he an insult to a man’s
intelligence to ask him what chance the European had of a
reversal in his favor from such a quarter, since even a liberal
minded man must of necessity bring an unconcious bias to bear
on that side of the subject to which all his sympathies are
engaged ; how much more then would that mind be warped from
a strict impartiality, the prevailing characteristic of which is a
notoriously narrow minded and crass illiberal! by, that can see
nothing in such contentions but a European spoiler and a native
victim. The matter then stands that the Chief Justice is the
only ne w element introduced into the Court, and that but for this
solitary exception it would have been impossible to preserve any
analogy even to that faint distinction implied in the historic
appeal from Philip drunk to Philip sober.
It might naturally be supposed that a sufficient guarantee
for the ultimate result had been taken in the constitution of the
Court itself, and therefore that in all other matters it would have
been politic to have made some such demonstration of impar-
tiality as would have at least appeared to place European
appellants on a fair footing. Evidently Sir Arthur Gordon
thought otherwise, and therefore he formulated certain rules of
practise which stripped the last rags of decency from this miser-
able subterfuge, and left it a bare and naked sham, exposed to
public contempt and general derision. These rules restricted the
appeals to the hearing of the counsel for the petitioner, or the
petitioner personally, and allowed no fresh evidence to be
advanced unless cause should be shown to the satisfaction of the
Court why such witnesses were not produced on the preliminary
hearing. This seems very fair, but the difficulty was to find any
reason which the Baard would hold as satisfactory, and virtually
it enabled the Court to close its ears to any evidence that might
possibly operate in favor of the appellant. Another rule made
the report of the Commissioner, upon which the decision appealed
against was presumably founded, a State document of a private
and confidential character, and when counsel, in search of the
grounds of disallowance he was expected to combat, applied for
this document, it was refused and a bare statement placed at his
disposal, couched in general terms, to wdiich he could only apply
himself in a general manner. No opportunity was afforded him


of learning in what definite point his case was weak so that he
might strengthen it by applying himself to that particular matter.
He was condemned to fight with shadows, and to combat proba-
bilities ; therefore it is little wonder if the result was a confimation
of the original disallowance. When a claimant was thus called
upon to prove his title under such terrible disadvantages, common
honesty should have dictated that no unfair advantage should
have been given to his opponent. Yet while the counsel for
European claimants were informed that the reports of the Com-
missioners were held to be State documents of a secret and
confidential nature, the fact remained that they were so held
only as against the Europeans, and on a certain well remembered
occasion when a missing report was suddenly asked for by the
Board, the clerk navely informed the president that it was in the
hands of Mr. Hobday, who as Crown solicitor was appearing on
behalf of the natives, and if this course was adopted in one case,
who shall doubt but that it was adopted in all.
Amongst other rules so laid down for the confusion of the
European claimant, the following were especially well designed
to secure their object. That when a petition for rehearing had
been lodged with the clerk to the Board, and entered by him, it
should not be removed from the list without the consent of the
Board. That in cases where a certain proportion of the lands
originally applied for had been granted, the appeal against the
disallowance of the remainder should open up the whole case,
admit of fresh disputants entering the list against the appellant,
and subject to the chance of disallowance even that portion in
which his right had been previously admitted. A third rule
laid down that when a claim had been disallowed as of right, but
a certain proportion of the land had been allowed ese gratia (so
called) the appeal of the claimant against the decision should
involve the absolute revocation of the grant already decreed
unless he succeeded in improving his position by establishing his
title as of right. Is it not palpable that every one of these rules
is a standing menace to the claimant, especially designed to stop his
mouth by making him cautious lest his outcry against injustice
should but end in his further spoliation ? Except where the appli-
cant is residing outside the colony the petition for rehearing must
be lodged within two months of the gazetting of the decision. The
Court of Appeal might not sit for an indefinite time. Might not an
appellant discover during the months intervening between the lodg-
ingand hearing of his appeal, good cause for withdrawing the same ?
Then wherefore should the Crown assume control of his case and
compel him to prosecute the appeal by which every acre allowed
was again placed in jeopard} 7 . In opening upon appeal the
entire case of the original claim without even confining the


contention to those formerly engaged in it, the menace is still
more palpable. The threat is distinct. Accept what we have
oiven you or you shall have nothing, and those unfortunates
whose lands have been disallowed on their own petition know
how mercilessly the threat has been carried into execution.
But if these cases are flagrant what shall he said of the rule
relative to (so called) ** gratia grants, where the menace has
been emphasised by the examples made under it. The action of
the Appeal Court on its very first sitting was to carry this threat
into effect by pronouncing the revocation of a Crown grant
which had been issued for two years, and had passed through the
hands of two innocent holders. Little does it matter that even
the Crown found itself impotent to consummate so gross an in-
justice The menace had its desired effect in gagging every
claimant to whom policy had decreed an e* gratia grant, It was
held in terror em over them as an evidence of what they might
expect if they dared to exercise their lawful right of appeal, and
it was signally successful in intimidating claimants from protest-
ing against the injustice to which they were subjected. That
such was the object of this rule has been denied upon oath by the
hon the Colonial Secretary in his evidence on the Times con-
tempt case. We contend that the actual effect,_ and not the ob-
ject is the matter at issue, and we unhesitatingly assert that
which the land claimants throughout the whole colony will
readily endorse, namely, that such has been the effect produced
by this most arbitrary rule. .
It does not require a very acute intelligence to understand
how utter was the sham thus foisted upon claimants under the
title of a final Court of Appeal. It was established by an Ordi-
nance ostensibly designed to preserve to the claimants a recog-
nised and equitable right, and appellants were punished by the
wholesale confiscation of their lands for daring to exercise that
rio-ht. It was constituted of precisely the same elements as the
court pronouncing the decision appealed against, with the addi-
tion of a bitterly adverse element in the Chief Native Commis-
sioner and a presumeably neutral one in the Chief Justice;
therefore it consummated the absurdity of an appeal from the
Governor in Council to the Governor in Council praying
him to reverse his own decisions. Its conscience was in
the keeping of Sir Arthur Gordon, therefore it presented
the anomalous spectacle of the hon. J. B. Thurston con-
curring in decisions which maintained the land tenure ol
Fiji to have been a purely patriarchal one, and pronouncing a
fiat of disallowance against all claimants deriving from the Chiels
alone, notwithstanding the fact that in 1874 he had so clearly
and definitely asserted : —“ The lands of Fiji are vested in the


ruling chiefs of tribes, occupied by their subordinate chiefs or
vassals, and people, in consideration of past, present, or future
services.” It was a political instrument of torture ingeniously
contrived to smother the outcries of its unfortunate victims, by
holding over them the consequences of that appeal which it had
virtually converted into a crime. Its title was a miserable mis-
nomer, and instead of an Appeal Court it should properly
have been designated a Court for the further confirmation of
disallowances of claims to lands originally arrived at. Its fair
seeming promise was a falsehood, its constitution reduced it to a
pitiable farce, and the history of its operation has become that of
a “ mockery, a delusion and a snare.”
By referring to ex gratia grants as grants so called, close
observers will notice that we are here for once in charming
accord with certain members of the Appeal Court and, wonder-
full to relate, even with the l Chief Justice himself, who, in that
defence of the Court into which the Times contempt case re-
solved itself, became at one with us by referring to them as “so
called ex gratia grants.” The novelty of the situation has its
charm, but there is room fer something exceeding a doubt as to
whether the coincidence is not one depending for its maintenance
more upon sound than fact. In our next, however, we will treat
more fully on this subject, and see how far these grants are
entitled to receive the gracious designation thus doubly objected
to.
■“'Fiji Times,” March 1, 1882.
Relative to the so called ex gratia grants, in our last article
we directed attention to the fact that our doubts as to the
actual character of these instruments were evidently shared in
by no less a person than his honor the Chief Justice, one of the
members of the Appeal Court. This, however, does not imply
any endorsement of the view we have taken of the subject, since
it is sufficiently evident that although the conclusion arrived at
in the respective cases are couched in the same terms, there is a
material difference in the sense sought to be conveyed, as they
are founded on totally dissimilar premises, and established by
processes of reasoning having no grounds whatever in common.
When in the course of the Times contempt case the Chief Justice
referred to “ex gratia grants (so called),” it was palpable that
this doubt was cast upon them out of deference to the new de-
parture taken by the Government in adopting the patriarchal


tenure as the basis of title, and constituting itself trustee for the
natives instead of “ absolute proprietor ” as set forth in the Deed
of Cession. In perfect consonance with this assumption the hon.
J. B. Thurston deposed that the Crown had no lands. It followed
then as a natural sequence that, “ having no land,” the Crown
could not possibly exercise a legitimate right of free gift with
respect thereto; and the Chief Justice was too good a logician to
permit himself an indulgence in terms which implied a political
paradox, and a distinct refutation of his own position. These
instruments were therefore referred to as “ex gratia grants (so
called),” and no doubt his honor congratulated himself upon
escaping so cleverly from the horns of what appeared to be a
rather awkward dilemma.
It is decidedly to be regretted that the Chief Justice did not
proceed a little farther, and clear up a still more knotty point by
explaining how any grant can issue, either as an act of grace or
in recognition of a presumed right, if the patriarchal tenure is the
one to be accepted. The very essence of this position is in the
assumed force of the contention that “the land was a public
estate belonging to all free born men, and it was strictly entailed,
the heir being the posterity of those men to all generations. It
is impossible to cut off an entail such as this for the heir can
never be a consenting party.” Jf the Government maintain this
tenure to be the legitimate one (and to accept it in part implies
the obligation to accept it in toto ), then not only is the obnoxious
chiefly right to alienate finally disposed of, but it is also proved
that every European in the group, from his Excellency down-
wards, is an intruder and an interloper, since it is impossible for
any legitimate transfer of lands to have taken place. But then on
the other hand, if the feudal tenure is admitted, the Crown
becomes invested with an absolute proprietory right in all lands
other than those alienated to Europeans and required by natives
for occupation and sustenance. In such case the Crown would be
in a position to decree a grant ex gratia , and how would this
affect the argument of the Chief Justice ? Possibly something
more will be heard about the matter when the Government has
found time to elaborate a plan to meet these difficulties. Mean-
while the extremely irritating fact remains, that whichever
theory is adopted it immediately develops the unpleasant quality
of demonstrating a wide divergence between its own proper
principles and the course of action taken by the Crown.
We take exception to the designation ex gratia , as applied
to a certain class of grants, upon the simple grounds that they
are merely certificates of title issued in recognition of an equi-
table right, after this right has been fully proved in evidence
before the Lands Commission and the Governor in Council. We


contend it is no “act of grace ” to grant a claimant that to which
he is justly entitled, and failing the proof that he is justly en-
titled to the lands so granted, the deed of gift could only issue in
perpetration of a public wrong. Issued under the assumption of
the Crown’s absolute proprietory right, it would be an unwarran-
table alienation of the public estate without fair consideration,
while viewed from the patriarchal basis, it is equally objection-
able and improper as an act of spurious generosity performed at
the expense of another. It must be remembered that in dealing
with land claims it was absolutely necessary to deal with them
from an equitable and not from a strictly legal basis. The
reason of this we have pointed out in a former article in the
following words: “ These contracts of sale were entered into
subject to no existing laws. They were independent transac-
tions based simply on those generally recognised principles
of equity which nature instils and which reason approves of.
The deed merely reduced the contract to a formula of words out-
side any set legal rule. The connection of the Imperial Govern-
ment with the politics of the group was a thing which no one
could foresee, and to have required that contracts so entered into
should square with Imperial law would have been to have given
those laws an improper and illegal retrospective aspect, and to
have ensured the miscarriage of justice under the guise of le-
gality.” Under such circumstances one can easily understand
cases in which claimants acquired their lands ten, fifteen or
twenty years ago, but whose documentary evidence of their
titles might be so meagre, so bald, and so utterly informal or
absolutely worthless so as to preclude its reception before any
court proceeding under even the most elastic rules. But if the
man has settled on his lands, if he has held undisputed possession
for a long term of years, if his relations with the original tribal
occupiers have ever been of the most friendly character, if he has
cleared it, improved it, cultivated it, planted it with cocoanuts,
fenced it, drained it, and converted a comparative wilderness into
a smiling homestead has he acquired no equitable right in his
holding ? If he has spent thousands of pounds, if by devoting the
best ;years of his life to his plantation he has increased the value
of every acre tenfold, if he has done a portion or all of these
things, is not his equitable right so firmly established that the
mere absence of sufficient documentary title cannot legitimately
upset it ? But to such a one the Crown would extend its cle-
mency by directing the issue of a grant, as an act of grace, for
some ten or twenty per cent perhaps, of his holding, with the
proviso attached that an appeal against this decision would
ensure the absolute revocation of the grant unless he succeeded
in proving his title as of right (i i.e .) by documentary evidence.


In such a case there can be no doubt that it was because of
the equitable right which the claimant had proved to his lands
that the grant was ordered to issue. No matter what the area,
though it may have been but fifty out of five thousand acres, the
grant is in itself an admission that the equitable right to that
fifty acres has at least been fully proved. How then does the
claimant divest himself of this right by his act of appeal, and
does not the revocation which follows after the appeal most
distinctly say in effect: “ Your right to the area comprehended
in the grant was proved and authoritatively admitted, but
because you presumed to suppose you were entitled to a fuller
measure of justice; although your actual right cannot be
annihilated after its formal admission, still we will refuse to
recognise it, and the grant is revoked.” This is done because
forsooth the grant is decreed as an “ act of grace,” whereas an ex,
gratia grant, properly so called, out the spontaneous benevolence
of the donor confers upon the recipient that with which he had
no previous proprietory connection, that to which he could prefer no
claim, could establish no title, which involved no question of
right, and which therefore descends to him the free gift of open-
handed generosity. What comparison is there between such a
case and thal of the land claimant above cited. None whatever,
since not only was there a previous proprietory connection, and a
claim preferred, but the right and title was made clearly
manifest before the grant was decreed, and issued under such
conditions we say that it is a clear misnomer to designate that
an act of grace which simply recognises a proven right.
But for the proviso relative to the appeal it would be a
matter of little moment whether all grants issued were styled
acts of grace or otherwise. Indeed they might all have been so
styled without any greater stretch of the official imagination,
since in decreeing them the representative of the Crown appears
to have been bound by no rule, but to have soared above all
ordinary considerations, and to have dispensed his favors from a
thoroughly independent standpoint. Viewed, however, in
connection with the absolute revocation proviso it will be seen
how great an injustice has been inflicted upon a considerable
section of claimants through the medium of the so called “ act of
grace ” which graciously (?) closed the door of the Appeal Court
in their faces or forced on them a risk that few were in a position
to accept. The claimant with a family around him dared not
jeopardise the last remnant of the estate on which they depended
for support. The man for whose business engagements his lands
were answerable could not risk the only tangible asset left to his
creditors, in the attempt to recover that in which they were not
interested, therefore he had perforce to submit, and by so doing


accept the anomalous position of one who finds himself irretrievably
ruined by an “ act of grace,” His Honor the Chief Justice was
quite right when he doubted the correct application of the title,
however erroneous may have been the premises on which his
conclusion was founded. We have endeavored to prove that
conclusion to be right from a totally difierent point of view, and
we cherish a confident hope that the attempt has not been
unsuccessful.
“ Fiji Times,” March 4, 1882.
JN concluding the series of articles through the medium of which
we have endeavored to throw light upon the land tenure of
Fiji and to demonstrate from thence the arbitrary, the illegal and
unjust treatment to which applicants for Crown grants have been
subjected through the general action of the Government in respect
to land claims, we will as concisely as possible review the chief
positions laid down and briefly recapitulate the conclusions that
naturally follow.
In the outset the grounds of contention were set forth in the
following terms : —“ The system adopted has been radically wrong,
therefore the conscientious labor bestowed upon it (by the hon. Y.
A. Williamson) has been thrown away. The whole question lies
between the feudal and patriarchal character of the Fijian land tenure
at the time of sale. The Government has assumed that to have been
which most emphatically was not, and a gross wrong to European
claimants has resulted.” In support of this contention we ad-
vanced argument to show that although according to customs of
remote antiquity the theory upon which the land tenure was estab-
lished was of a purely patriarchal character, yet during the lapse
of years the force of circumstances, notably the introduction of
firearms, had converted it into a feudal tenure of the most distinct
and emphatic nature, and that such conversion had become abso-
lutely necessary to the existence of the people. Under this tenure
thirteen confederate chiefs ceded to Great Britain, not only full
sovereignty and dominion over the entire group, but also the abso-
lute proprietorship of all lands not previously alienated to Euro-
peans, and not required for the occupation and sustenance of the
natives. The chief conclusions that here follow are that in accept-
ing this sovereignty and absolute proprietorship, the Crown
accepted the feudal system, and it is either bound to maintain the
chiefly right to alienate, or to withdraw from the possession of Fiji;


and secondly that the lands alienated to Europeans before the ces-
sion never did pass under the proprietory control of the Crown as
claimed in Lord Carnarvon’s despatch of March 4th, 1875.
The next position of importance is that in appointing the
Lands Commission upon its original basis, instead of establishing
an independent Court of Enquiry, the Crown constituted itself
judge in its o.vn case. The conclusion is evident that every deci-
sion arrived at under conditions so opposed to equity and reason
are liable to be regarded with the gravest suspicion. Following
upon this we have the change in the constitution of the Board,
the retirement of those members whose standing and position gave
a guarantee for its proper conduct, and the nomination of improper
persons to sit singly, in distinct violation of Lord Carnarvon’s
instructions, the only authority under which the Commission was
constituted. Here the conclusion as to the illegality of the whole
proceedings is but strengthened and confirmed, and the pitiable
character of the farce enacted by requiring claimants to submit
their cases to such a Court of Enquiry is sufficiently established
by Sir Arthur Gordon’s admission that he had both allowed and
disallowed claims directly contrary to the recommendation of the
Commissioners.
The reconstruction of the Commission, under the chairmanship
of the hon. Victor Williamson, brings us up to the period when
the idea of a patriarchal tenure was introduced, to the serious pre-
judice of the claimants, and their ultimate discomfiture. In this
connection we contend that the action of the Crown is indefensible,
and it is in diametric contravention of the deed of cession, which
is in itself based upon the feudal tenure. The conclusion cannot
be avoided that either the patriarchal tenure or the deed of cession
is founded on a fallacy, and that if the former is to be maintained,
no lands whatever have been alienated or can be alienated, either
to the Crown or to individual claimants, since the estate is entailed
upon posterity to all generations, and it is impossible to cut off
such an entail. This new departure on the part of the Govern-
ment introduces the Appeal Court, “ for the deliberate rehearing
of disallowed claims,” in connection with which the position laid
down is to the effect that it was absolutely valueless for the purpose
intended, being simply an appeal from the Governor in Council to
the Governor in Council, that its constitution still preserved the
Crown in the anomalous position of sole judge in its own case,
that it was conducted contrary to all principles of equity and jus-
tice, that it was made the means of intimidation for the purpose of
compelling claimants to an unwilling compromise, and that the
effect of its operation has been the wholesale spoliation of the
claimants whose cases have been brought before it. Here the una-
voidable conclusion is that which sums up the whole gist of the


matter, namely, that decisions arrived at under such conditions are
so utterly vicious in principle as to be absolutely unworthy of
acceptance, and that to restore public confidence it is necessary
that a thoroughly independent tribunal should be established to
rehear and determine all cases in which decisions of disallowance
have been pronounced.
The necessity for the constitution of such a tribunal as that
above referred to might have been emphasized by dwelling upon the
marked spirit of hostility which all claimants encountered before
the Appeal Court. The presumption in the gubernatorial mind
appeared to be that every land claimant was by virtue of his peti-
tion a self-convicted swindler, and such indignities were often
heaped upon the heads of those appearing before the Board as no
one with a proper feeling of self-respect could possibly submit to
without a sense of burning indignation. The result on one occa-
sion was a public protest from the reverend gentlemen of the Wes-
leyan mission body, in which they defended themselves in dignified
terms against the abuse and calumny to which they had been sub-
jected at the hands of Sir Arthur Gordon. All these matters and
a deal more might have been paraded, but if the application of
claimants for an independent tribunal to rehear cases of disallow-
ance is unsuccessful when based upon principles appealing so dis-
tinctly to every sense of right and justice there is little hope that
the end would be attained by importing mere matter of minor
detail into the general case.
We have now given our readers outside this colony an oppor-
tunity of forming their own opinions upon that system to which
Sir Arthur Gordon referred in his farewell deliverance at Nasova
in that unctious paragraph, “ I cannot conceive an investigation
carried out in a more liberal or indulgent spirit than has been that
into the land titles of this colony.” We have entered fully into
all the important issues comprehended in the matter so that those
who take an interest in it may be enabled to judge between the
land claimants and the official eulogists of the system which has
reduced so many of our colonists from a position of comparative
independence to one of indigence and poverty. Most unfortunately
while these cases were in progress any organization amongst the
claimants for the purpose of opposition and protest w r as found im-
possible. The issue was felt to be of too vital a character for any
individual whose case had not been decided to venture on a course
which it was felt would prejudice his judges against him and lead
to the disallowance of his land; therefore each one stood aloof
from his neighbor in the hopes of escaping the general ruin,
and the result has been that the decisions have grown
more flagrant in character till in the issue of the Roy at Gazette ,
under date 11th ultimo, one hundred and twelve disallowances were


were notified in one batch, while to point the application the
allowances in the same Gazette amounted to twelve.
It is with the object of ultimately securing the appointment of
an independent tribunal to rehear cases of disallowance, that the
Land Claimants’ Protection Association of Fiji has been called into
existence, and its first step has been taken by preparing a preli-
minary petition to the Right Hon. the Secretary of State for the
colonies setting forth the grounds for dissatisfaction, and praying
for redress. It is certainly to be hoped that this may have the
desired effect, but in the event of failure there is not the slightest
probability that this will be the last heard of the matter. Amongst
those whose lands have been improperly disallowed there is a large
proportion of Americans and Germans. These claimants have
already addressed their own Governments on the matter through
the proper channels, and in each case the leply has been to the
same effect: “Exhaust every possible means at command to obtain
redress and in the event of all efforts being unsuccessful your com-
plaints will then receive a careful consideration.” If therefore the
Imperial Government decides to turn a deaf ear to the supplica-
tion of its own subjects when they appeal against injustice and
oppression, it will still remain to be seen what answer will be
returned when foreign cabinets make it an international question.
The agitation for rehearing of disallowed claims before a pro-
per, that is a thoroughly independent tribunal has been charac-
terised by the Chief Justice as one “ That may very well be a
desirable object for those land claimants whose claims have been
rejected, or those who are acting in their interests, but it cannot be
the object of any journalist who thinks only of the public good
and if it succeeded, which it cannot do, it would only throw the
colony into confusion.” With regard to the first part of the judicial
remark we may reply that of course it more particularly affects
those whose claims have been disallowed, since they are the per-
sons who through this means have been subjected to bitter injus-
tice. That it cannot be the object of any journalist who thinks
only of the public good we take leave to doubt, and hold so dis-
tinctly to the contrary opinion that while we feel little disposed to
yield precedence even to the Chief Justice in concern for the public
good, we will promote the movement by every legitimate means in
our power. Then as to the statement that the agitation cannot
succeed, his honor may, or may not be right in this public expres-
sion of his private opinion. At anyrate that remains to be seen,
and in the meantime the despoiled land claimants will put forth a
very vigorous effort in the hope of falsifying this official prediction,
while as to it throwing the ahairs of the colony into confusion, the
expression sounds ominous, but as an assertion without proof it is
entitled to very little consideration. There is no necessity that


anything of the sort should occur, and nothing is further from the
wishes of land claimants, since it is to reduce to order the wild con-
fusion created in the past and not to add to the confusion of the
present that they now seek for the intervention of an independent
and final Court of Appeal.
