

H. SOLOiViON, (Jaxton Friutiug O'iice, 247 ( J lc!'' rr « i S.-iw*. Wvrijmv


DSSCRZPTIOZf
Of this Wonderful Piece of Mechanism, which
every body should see, and which no one
having once seen, will ever forget.
This beautiful and gigantic modal la divided Into four sections or parts, and la twelv*
feet In height. The lower part or base stands three feet high, six feet long, by three feet
deep. The sphere in front la a terrestrial globe which revolves from west to east in a mean
solar day; It shows the time under this meridian, and the exact hour of the day and night
over every part of the earth’s surface. Behind the globe Is the grand Orrery, after the
Copernioan system, In the middle of which is the golden sun, surrounded by the planets,
visible to the naked eye, each planet performing its revolution exactly at the allotted time.
On- the dial also are calculated the solar cycle and the eclipses of the sun from 1861 to 1900.
An index on the dial, making a complete revolution in twenty-four houra, points during the
day to the figure of Apollo and during the night to Diana, These figures are stationed at
either side of the Orrery, In the corners are paintings representing Clovis, Dagobcrt 11..
Charlemagne, and Louis XIV, ’
Above the dial are seen the seven days of the week, represented by seven heathen deities,
seated in chariots and drawn by the animals dedicated to them. The figures change daily,
and at five minutes before the hours and half houra the figure representing the present day
leaves his plaee, and figures representing the other days appear in succession.
In the compartment on the right of the Orrery are three pendents, illustrating the
equation of time and the geocentric northern and southern declination of the sun. In the
compartment on the left is an eeclosiastioal compute, with all its indications calculated forever.
On the ends of the base are beautiful paintings, emblematic of the begglning and the end of
time.
The second section contains the Grand Calender, calculated for one hundred years, from
1801 to 1900. It contains the years, the leap years, the golden numbers, the epacts, the
Dominical letters, the months, the days of the month, the days of the week, and the day of
the week upon which any date will fall from 1801 to 1900. In the four coign e* are repre-
sentations of the seasons. Below, in a semi-circular dial, are representated the phases of the
moon; the enlightened side of the sphere increasing or diminishing as the moon actually
does. At either side are golden lions supporting the arms of Btraaburg and of the directors
of the church.
In the third section Is the dial which marks the hours and minutes of mean time. On
the left 1s seated a cherub with a bell on which he strikes the first note of each quarter. The
cherub on the right holds an hour-glass with sand In it which he reverses. Above the dial in
a niche stands the figure of Death, a scythe in one hand, a hammer in the other, before him
two bells; every quarter of an hour a figure steps forward, first a child, then a youth, then a
man In armor, then an old man ; as they pass, the quarters are struck on the smaller bell and
Death strikes the hours on the other. Above the niche at either angle of the case stand the
angels of Life and Death.
The fourth section is the superstructure. It is a riobly-ornamented chapel of the
perpendicular style of Gothic architecture, surmounted by elegant flying buttresses and open
spires, enriched by gilded crockets and trefoil ornaments. On the loft of the main body of
the clock is a tower, divided into three sections, and surmounted by a cock. The front panels
contain a painting of Urania the Muse of Astronomy, and portraits of Nicholas Copernicus
and J. B. Schwilque the constructor of the present clock in Btrasburg. The paintings on the
side represent the fates, Laohesis, Olotho, and Atropos. On the right is the circular stairway
leading into the clock. The clock strikes in this manner: Every quarter of an hour the
ohernb on the left of the dial strikes a warning note on the bell, then the figure representing
the quarter completed moves slowly off through the door on the right as the quarter is struck
on the bell in front of Death, the cherub holding the sand-glass reverses It, the door on the
left opens and the figure representing the next quarter steps forward and takes hie position •
should it be the hour, Death strikes the number on the large bell—a burst of music is now
heard, the door in the right portico of the chapel opens, and the Apostles appear in procession
As they advance the angels of Lift and Death simultaneously tarn toward them. Meanwhile
the centre doors gradually open, and the Saviour advances to the edge of the platform holding
the Banner of Redemption. As the Apostles approach, each turns and bows lowly to the
Saviour, who blesses them. As Peter approaches, Satan appears, and by his motions seems
to tempt Peter, who alone does not bow, but turns bis bach in denial upon his Lord then the
oock on the weight-tower flaps his wings and crows in memory of Peter s temptation. Then
Satan again appears, and with eager eyes watches Judas, following him stealthily »f oni? 0 ni? the
balcony till the door closes upon him, and the great bell, which has tolled one for each
Apostle, now gives the signal that the procession is over.


Of this
ever)
Thu beaut
feet In height,
deep. The spfa
solar day; it si
over every per
Copemioan sysl
visible to the n
On- the dial als<
An index on th<
day to the figu
either side of 1
Charlemagne, a
Above the <
seated in ohari<
and at five min
leaves his plaee,
In the oon
equation of tin
i, which
io one
rU, and la twolv*
ng, by three feet
to tut in a mean
he day and night
Orrery, after the
1 by the planets,
the allotted time,
•om 1861 to 1900.
>ointa during the
i are stationed at
is, DagobertlL,
i heathen deities,
res change daily,
; the present day
, illustrating the
1 the sun. In the
* °? aloulated forever.
ends of me case are eeauufui pain tings, easMematie of the begglning and the end of
The second section contains the Grand Calender, calculated for one hundred years from
1801 to 1900. It contains the years, the leap years, the golden numbers, the enacts, the
Dominical letters, the months, the days of the mouth, the days of the week, and the dav of
the week upon which any date will fall frees 1801 to 1900. In the four coignes are repre-
sentations of the seasons, Below, in a semi-circular dial, are representated the phases ofthe
moon; the enlightened side of the sphere increasing or diminishing as the moon actually
does. At either side are golden lions supporting the arms of Strasburg and of the directors
of th 6 church.
In the third section Is the dial whieh narks the hours and minutes of mean time. On
the left is seated a cherub with a bell on which he strikes the flret note of each quarter The
cherub on the right holds an hour-glass with sand In it which he reverses. Above the dial in
a mohe stands the figure of Death, a saythe in one band, a hammer in the other, before him
two bells; every quarter of an hour a figure steps forward, first a child, then a youth, than a
man in armor, then an old man; as they pass, the quarters are struck on the smaller bell, and
Death strikes the hours on the other. Above the nlohe at cither angle of the case stand the
angels of Life and Death,
The fourth section is the superstructure. It Is a richly-ornamented chapel of the
perpendicular style of Gothic architecture, surmounted by elegant flying buttresses and open
spirea, enriched by gilded crockets and trefoil ornaments. On the left of the main body of
the clock is a tower, divided into three sections, and surmounted by a cock. The front panels
contain a painting of Urania the Muse of Astronomy, and portraits of Nicholas Copernicus
and J. B. Sohwilquo the constructor of the present clock in Strasburg. The paintings on the
aide represent the fates, Laohesis, Olotho, and Atropos. On the right is the circular stairway
ieading Into the clock. The clock strikes In this manner: Every quarter of an hour the
ohernb on the left of the dial strikes a warning note on the bell, then the figure representing
the quarter completed moves slowly off through the door on the right as the quarter is struck
on the bell m front of Death, the cherub holding the sand-glass reverses It, ths door on the
left opens and the figure representing the next quarter steps forward and takes his position-
should it be the hour, Death strikes the number on the large bell—a burst of music is now
hoard, the door m the right portico ofthe chapel opens, and the Apostles appear in procession
As they advance the angels of Life and Death simultaneously tarn toward them. Meanwhile
the centre doors gradually open, and the Saviour advances to the edge of the platform holdinv
the Banner of Redemption. A* the Apostles approach, each turns and bows lowly to the
Saviour, who blesses them. As Peter approaches, Satan appears, and by his motions scorns
to tempt Peter, who clone does not bow, but turns his back in denial upon hi* Lord then the
cook on the weight-tower flaps his wings and crows in memory of Peter » temptation Then
Satan again appears, and with eager eyos watches Judas, following him stealthily »lomr the
balcony till the door closes upon him, and the great bell, which has toiled out for each
Apostle, now gives the signal that the procession Is over.


HISTORY OF THE MODEL.
This Model is remarkable not only for Ita extreme fidelity to the great original, but for
the vicissitudes and fate of ita unhappy maker, The ancient oity of Strasburg possesses two
great points of Interest to the traveller—the famous Cathedral and the marvellous Clock.
Proudly does she preserve the one, eagerly yet carefully repairing the ravages of time, and
jealously does she guard the other. Since the time when her Inhabitants put out the eyes of
the maker of the olook, in the fourteenth century, lest he should construct another, down to
the present day, at the elose of the nineteenth, they have looked with jealous eye, or
threatened with condign punishment, all who attempted to investigate ita mysteries, or
imitate ita wonderful movements. Qreat indeed was their surprise when the jealousy of a
rival in the affections of Madeleine Maybaum impelled Fritz Yon Augle to disclose to the
authorities that their lynx-eyed vigilance had been evaded, and that a model, one-fifth the
size of their cherished original, was completed by Ulrio Goldschmidt, a fellow-workman.
Ulrlo was a native of Wissemberg, apprenticed, when an orphan lad some fourteen years old,
to Maybaum, the celebrated watchmaker of the Bue dos Arcades.
▲ stranger in the city, his first visit was, of oourse, to the Church and the world-
renowned Cloek, Astonished and bewildered, he returned to his master’s shop, there to begin
his daily life of an apprentice. But his toil was a labor of love. Steadily and earnestly he
devoted himself to his art, longing for the time when his maturing mind could grasp the
wonderful mechanism of this giant of horology. After four years’ hard application to his
business, he had far outstripped his fellow-apprentices, and was as conversant with all the
endless delicate details of the business as those who had grown gray in its pursuit. Kindly
the elder Maybaum encouraged the youth, while the gentle Madeleine smiled her sweetest on
the fair-haired studious apprentice. Fritz Von Augle, a graceless, idle youth, who on the
strength of his good looks alone, dared to raise his eyes to his master’s daughter, saw this and
hated him accordingly. But Ulrio heeded him not j engrossed in his business, secure in the
affection of Madeleine, he was at peace with the world. Mid-day always found him in the
Church; midnight poring over dusty parchments, pamphlets, treatises, and every work
devoted to the measurement of time. On his eighteenth birthday, which he had been spend-
ing with his master’s family, he returned to his lonely chamber, when suddenly a flood of
inspiration seemed to fall upon him; he seemed to see the last difficulties cleared from his
vision ; he saw the secret movements of that mechanism which haunted his life; he started
from his chair, and cried with the ancient Greek, “ Eureka I Eureka I” “ I will make another;
other nations shall see what Strasburg guards so Jealously: I will be rich ; I will return, and
then Madeleine will be mine.’’
After his daily labor he retired to his lonely ohamber and there commenced the darling
work of his life. Allowing himself the barest necessities, he devoted the remainder of his
scanty resources to the purchase of materials; for six years he struggled on, enjoying the
esteem of his and the love of Madeline, buoyed up by the hope of final success, and still kept
hu secret, even from Madeleine. In vain had she questioned him on the cause of his close
application to studies ; smiling he answered she should knew in time, and would be proud of
him some day. Yon Angle’s jealous soul looked with envy on their happiness, and deter-
mined to mar it. He whispered in Madeleine’s ear that Ulrio had another lover; but she
knew the worthlessness of his character, and boldly answered that he slandered his fellow-
workman. Incited by hatred and jealousy, he determined to discover the true reason. By
stealth and cunning he gained admission to Ulrio’s lofty, bare, old-fashioned chamber on the
very night that Ulrio had completed his weary task. Astonishment was the first feeling that
mastered him —then hate; he remembered the fate of the maker of the first clock, he
remembered the old edict, still extant on the statutes of the city ; he rushed so the nearest
magistrate and told his vengeful tale. Ulrio was arrested, taken from the side of Madeleine,
to whom he was breaking the joyous news of its completion. The model was seized by the
city and placed with portions of the old olook In the Frauenhans. Next day he was arraigned
and sentenced to be banished frem the oity, never to return to it again. He departed to his
native town of Wissemborg, with tearful eyes and breaking heart; but there he found no
rest. He thought of Madeleine ;he thought of the labor of long weary years, and ha
determined, come what may, to regain the model radely snatched from him in the very
moment when, in the full glow of honest pride, he related to his bethrothed ths achievement
of his wonderful undertaking.


Stainkig hi* skin, tni iy sing hi* long Hair hair, he returned In disgnlse to Stneborg, and
day after day he hannted the building that ©detained hi* treasure. Ohanoe at la*t befrier
him. A little politic, though trifling, osshUnee rendered to the old porter at the
led to an acquaintanceship, and after the apace of a few day*, he was installed as assistant
porter, he haring given the old man to understand that he waa in quest of employment, Nov
was his golden opportunity ; with the keys of the building at his girdle, he searched for and
at last found his darling model, lie embraced it, he wept over it aa if it had been a living
thing. But, would he worship it In secret P No ; he would show it to the world ; he would
bid defiance to the narrow-minded laws of Strasbarg. Armed with this resolution, he
commenced the work of carefully removing to a place of safety, all the intricate mechanical
movements, all the loved figures and statues on which so many happy hoars he had p« ntly
wrought; everything in the oases that waa portable he concealed, till at last the aose
stood denuded of all that gave it life.
Two years ago, the boy Ulric stood garing in speechless wwader at the greet sleek In the
vast Cathedral—to-night, the man Ulric, furtively guarding twe Immense oases, is impatien.il/
waiting for the midnight train to convey him and hia dismembered mechanism far fr-rm tk«
hated walls of Btrasburg.
He arrived in Paris, thence to London his destination. He landed in safety bet penniless
and in ill health. He applied for work, but his ignorance of the language, and hi* absent
ways (for his mind was with the object of his youthful passion, er that which equally shared
his thoughts—his model), made him ill-suited to hia new masters. Finally, driven to
desperation by want, he offered his mechanism for sale. No one would purchase it; he
explained its meaning—he was laughed at aa a monomaniac Then he fell sick. In hia
delirium he constantly raved of Madeleine, of his Model, of his master, of all his forme; iife
and acquaintances. The kind old landlady, a German woman, wrote to Madeleine, and she,
true woman as she was, left her father and her home to minister at the sick bed of h?-i lover.
When he awoke to reason, the first face he saw was that he loved best on earth. By careful
nursing he soon recovered, and they were married ; but fortune seemed to frown on them,
and his utmost endeavours could scarcely keep the wolf from the door. One absorbing
thought filled the mind of Goldschmidt; that was —the re-construction of his clock. By dint
of saving and self-denial, it was soon completed ; but, alas, the privations he had endured,
the want he had suffered, his utter helplessness in a foreign land, the unnatural strain upon
his faculties, proved too much for his mind, taced as it had been from too early a period with
thoughts and calculations unsuited to his age, so that on the day a son was bom to him, the
last remnant of reason fled from him forever. Though they suffered from want, be could not
he separated from the work of his hands; so the loving wife and mother, unused as she waa
to toil and labor, performed the meanest drudgery for their daily cruat.
At length death closed the eyes of Ulric Goldschmidt, after a short life devoted with
unceasing thought to cue object—fulfilment of the dream of his boyhood. The present
proprietor of the Model, being in London at the time, and accidently hearing the circum-
stances from a bystander, as the humble funeral cortege passed by. determined that such a
mechanical marvel should not be lost. Some days after the funeral he called on th widow
Goldschmidt, who delivered it over to him, though reluctantly, this marvellous monument of
patience, ingenuity, and devotion to science, for a sum that will enable the widow Madeleine
to spend the remainder of her life in competence, and, it is to bo hoped, bring up the youthful
Ulrio to lead a happier life, than did his gifted, ill-fated father.
JUT The Procession of the Twelve Apostles takes place every quartet of an hour, and is
then repeated immediately, so that visitors can see at any time during tha day and evening
the workings of this most wonderful Clock.
This Model has been Exhibited
IN All THE PRINCIPAL CITIES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD,
A?id endorsed by ?iearly 7,000,000 People as the
Finest 'Piece of Mechanism.
THE WORLD HAS EVER SEEN !
SR S, S.
