

The Armidale Red Cross
Cookery Book
(2nd Edition)
of Tested Recipes
Compiled by the Armidale Branch Red
Cross Society for
The Armidale War Memorial 1920.
[FOR INDEX SEE END OF BOOK.]


The Advantage is Yours
When you replenish your Stock of Household Drapery,
■Clothing, Millinery, Mercery, Etc., at the Store where
■Good Values abound.
"You are assured of satisfaction with economy.
When You Shop at
Curtis’
Our Stocks are always replete with the latest fashion
goods for Ladies and Children’s wear. The most ser-
viceable lines in Household Drapery, the most up-to-
date styles in Men’s and Boys’ Clothing and Mercery,
and a full assorfluent of Babies’ Clothing.
The predominating feature is value—always empha-
sied here by quality goods at reasonable prices.
Those who wish to save money in the purchase of
dependable goods should-make a selection from our
stock.
You will find it an advantage to shop here —where
values and store service arc unequalled.
We shall appreciate the opportunity of proving this to
you. Call in the lirst time you are in town.
W. Curtis
“Where the Best Values are”
Armidale & Uralla
2


The Red Cross
Cookery Book
Things Worth Knowing.
When cooking- string beans, try adding a teaspoon-
ful of vinegar to the water in whioli tliey are boiling.
They will get tender much more quickly, and the
vinegar will not affect the flavour of the beans.
A solution of salt and turpentine is good for clean-
ing porcelain baths or sinks. Use in proportion of half
a cup of salt to one pint of turpentine.
After washing the kitchen oilcloth, rub it over
with skim milk. This will look as bright as varnish,
and will dry more quickly.
To clean brass, cut a lemon in half and dip it in
kitchen salt and rub over the brass till the stains dis-
appear. Then rinse in warm water and polish with a
duster dipped in powdered whiting.
To clean a burnt saucepan, lilt it with cold water,
put in a good large lump of soda, and let it stand about
an hour or so; then let it come slowly to the boil. The
burn should then come off quite easily.
■ TO PREVENT DOWN COMING THROUGH
CUSHIONS.
Iron the cover on wrong side before making it up,
and rub the surface, while warm, with white wax.
, A GOOD SILVER SOAP.
Sunlight soap Jib., washing soda Jib., water 2
quarts. Boil slowly for 4 hours, stirring often.
Leave the mixture in the saucepan whilst it is cooling,
and keep well stirred till it thickens, then place in
jars If not sufficiently boiled, the mixture will not
set firmly. Use 1 teaspoonful of the silver soap to 2
quarts of boiling water. Wash silver,, dry quickly,
rub with chamois cloth.
3


FOR WASHING BLANKETS AND WOOLLENS.
Four tablespoons of soft soap, 2 tablespoons borax
Dissolve in 2 quarts boiling- water, mix quickly into
a, tub of cold water. Place blankets in tbe water
and leave all night. Stir them about well in the
morning; let the water off and keep rinsing till the
water is clear. Place on the line without wringing.
PAN MIXTURE.
For Cleaning Saucepans, etc.
(Mrs. Blencowe).
Soft soap ilb., 1 bath brick (powdered), whiting
lib, water 1 quart. Put all ingredients into a pan
and boil over the Are till all are well dissolved and
well mixed, stirring at frequent intervals when well
boiled. Stir at times whilst cooling. Apply with a
rag.
TO CLEAN A SPONGE.
To clean a large sponge, put one pennyworth of
salts of lemon into some hot water (about 2 pints),
then steep the sponge in it; after it is clean, rinse it
in a little clean water.
FURNITURE POLISH (simply made).
Use equal parts of turpentine, linseed oil, and
methylated spirits of wine. Put on with a flannel,
and polish with a soft cloth, a brilliant surface
will be obtained.
ANTS.
Ants will entirely disappear if saucers of the follow-
ing mixture are kept about: —To one cup of boiling
water add one large tablespoon of borax and two of
sugar; dissolve thoroughly, and when cool place in the
saucers.
TO MAKE STEAK TENDER.
Put 3 tablespoonfuls of salad oil well mixed with
1 of vinegar into a flat dish. Put the steak in the
mixture half an hour to a side. -Never put salt on
steak before cooking.
A VERY GOOD BAKING POWDER.
Half pound cream of tartar, 6ozs. carbonate of
4


soda, 2ozs tartaric acid. Mix all thoroughly together,
and use 1 teaspoonful to a cup of flour.
TO BLACKEN STEPS.
' Put into a pickle bottle 2 tablespoonfuls oT vasa-
line, and a. small bottle of salad oil. Stand the bottle
in a pot of water on the Are, let it come to the boil,
and boil it until it is all mixed; about a quarter of an
hour shake the bottle well to mix it.
LINOLEUM CREAM.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Five ounces beeswax, 1 pint boiling water, 1 pint
turpentine, 3 dessertspons ammonia. Boil water and
beeswax. Take off the fire, add turps, then ammonia;
stir well. Put into a vessel and stir occasionally till
cold.
SOAP.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
One pound caustic soda, 11b. resin, 4 cup kerosene
or 4 cup borax, 2 gallons of water, 51b. fat; boil 3
hours, stir occasionally; let it set, then cut into bars.
Ready tor use in one month.
TEST FOR A DAMP BED.
Place a hand mirror between the sheets for five
minutes. If it is at all blurred or misty, the bed is
damp.
ANT POISON.
Two ounces corrosive sublimate, 1 pint methylated
spirits. Mix together in bottle, shake well. Paint
shelves or legs of tables.
LINOLEUM CREAM (Good).
One pound of beeswax, 2ozs. of bicarbonate of pot-
ash, 9 cups of water, 1 quart of turpentine. Gut the
beeswax into shreds and boil with the water and pot-
ash till melted. Remove from the fire. Pour into a
large vessel; then add the turpentine till the mixture
becomes a thick cream.
FRECKLE CURE.
One teaspoonful best borax, 1 teaspoonful best
5


Fielder’s
Famous
Flour . .
is Always the Best.
MANUFACTURED BY
Geo. Fielder & Co.,
Tamworth, N.S.W.
A. McDonald
High - class Tailor
and - -
Ladies’ Costumier.
NO FIT, NO CHARGE.


icing'or sifted sugar, juice of 1 lemon. Strain through
muslin. Apply night and morning.
TO KEEP MOTHS FROM WARDROBES.
Wet a cloth with spirits of turps, rub all joint and
layers of wood inside wardrobe and chest of drawers.
FOR WASHING BLANKETS.
Half-bar soap, \ pint turps, , 2 tablespoons am-
monia, i kerosene can water. Thread soap and boil
in water till it is dissolved; then add other ingredients.
Boil up and stir well.
FOR CHAPPED HANDS.
Three tablespoons boiled starch to 1 of glycerine.
TO REMOVE STAINS.
Tea. —Pour boiling water through the stained ar-
ticle.
Ink. —Try spreading over the surface made mustard
—if not effective, then rub gently with “Clever
Mary.”
Egg Stains on Spoons —Rub with damp salt.
Fruit Stains.- —Rub with salt, then pour boiling water
over the article.
For Coffee. —Moisten with glycerine, let stand aside
for half an hour, then wash in warm water.
A GOOD LINIMENT.
Three blocks of camphor (large) dissolved in \
pint of methylated spirits of wine, and 1 pint of tur-
pentine.
Soups.
SCOTCH BROTH (E. Cameron).
Gut 31bs. scrag-ehds of mutton into small pieces,
put into stewpan with 3 quarts water and 1 teaspoon
salt, cook gently for 2 hours. Wash 2 tablespoons of
Scotch barley, cut one onion, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, a strip
of celery, into dice, and add to pan, cook another hour
(making 3 hours in all), strain, and return broth to


stewpan when quite hot, season to taste, and serve
with fried tomatoes or squares of toast to garnish.
SPLIT-PEA SOUP.
. Take 3 quarts good stock and 1 pint of soaked split-
ptas, stew gently for 1 hour with 1 carrot leek, or
onion, parsnip, celery, 3 or 4 sticks mint, seasoned
with salt, and pepper to taste. A ham-bone, or piece
of bacon, boiled in the soup, is a great improvement.
BATTENBURG SOUP.
Put 1 calf’s foot, 31bs. of gravy meat, 31bs. carrots
into a stew-pah, 4 onions stuck with 4 cloves, a stick
of celery, some parsely, a bay-leaf, thyme, a small
piece of mace, a pinch of salt and pepper, 3 quarts
and a half of water. Boil all gently together, then
take out the foot and cut the meat oft the bones, then
put back the bones and let simmer for three hours. Let
pieces of foot stand in a little stock in a basin. Next
day strain soup, thicken with flour and cream, put in
pieces of foot and one glass of sherry, and serve hot.
RED SOUP.
Half pound of haricot beans, 2 or 3 tomatoes 1
beet root, loz. butter or dripping, small bit of celery,
1 small onion, pepper and salt to taste, and 2 quarts
of water. Method: Soak beans and put on in 3
quarts of water, with butter, then add sliced vege-
tables and seasoning. Boil for 2i hours, press
through a sieve, and serve hot.
POTATO SOUP.
Make a good white stock, free from fat and sedi-
ment. Mash smoothly 31bs. potatoes, boiled dry.
Mix with them slowly two quarts of the stock, pour
through, strain into a clean saucepan, boil gently for
five minutes, removing scum. Thicken the potato
soup with two tablespoons of flour, mixed with a cup
of milk. Boil five minutes. Scald and chop some pars-
ley and throw into tureen before serving. Serve with
fried bread in dice.
OX-TAIL SOUP.
Gut the tail into joints and soak in cold water, wipe
dry, put into a frying-pan with 21bs. of gravy meat;
8


cut up a turnip and a carrot in small pieces, brown
well, put into a saucepan with a salt-spoonful of salt,
some celery, pepper-corns, and a bunch of sweet
herbs. Cover with cold water, cook slowly. When
the tail is tender, take it out, cut the meat off the
bones; strain, and thicken the soup, using a little
brown sugar with corn-flour; put it and the meat
back in the saucepan. Serve with force-meat balls.
A bacon bone improves the flavour.
BARLEY SOUP.
Two quarts white stock, 2ozs. well-washed barley,
2ozs. carrots, cut in dice, 2ozs. turnips, cut in dice.
Boil the carrots and turnips in a saucepan of water;
soak the barley two hours, add it to the stock and
boil two hours. Strain the carrots and turnips into the
soup, sprinkle chopped and scalded parsley into the
tureen before sending to table. If there be no
stock, boil the meat in one pot and the barley and
vegetables in another. Strain the soup and add the
other ingredients without draining off the water they
have been boiled in. About i-pint of milk improves
the appearance of the soup, to be added five minutes
before serving.
VEGETABLE SOUP.
Twopence worth of mutton bones, 4ozs. barley, 6
pints water, 2 turnips, celery, 3 teaspoons of salt, 14
teaspoons pepper, 3 carrots, 2 parsnips, 2 onions, 1
tablespoon chopped parsley. Method: Free the bones
from meat, place in a saucepan with water and well-
washed barley, add salt, and bring slowly to boil.
Skim soup at boiling-point, add vegetables and pepper,
allow to simmer gently 14 hours, skim well and add
chopped parsley. Serve hot.
ARTICHOKE SOUP.
Take about I peck artichokes, boil gently in 1
quirt good white stock, with a bayleaf added. Rub
thoroughly through a wire sieve, add 2ozs. butter
and 1 oup boiling cream, pepper, and salt to taste.
APPLE SOUP.
Peel and quarter a pound of good cooking apples,
9


Hixnmelhoch Brothers
Imperial Buildings :: ARMIDALE.
WORKING WATCHMAKERS, JEWELLERS,
AND STONECUTTERS.
SPECTACLES TO SUIT ALL SIGHTS,
Fitted While You Wait.
All Work Done on the Premises.
K. R. Bain
(Licensed by Metropolitan Board of Water Supply
and Sewerage).
Dangar-Street ARMIDALE.
(Next Lane's Auction Mart).
PLUMBER, GAS-FITTER & GENERAL IRONWORKER
Water Service installed in any part of the Town.
Telephone: 186.
W. D. Lovelock
GENERAL MERCHANT, ARMIDALE.
THE PRICE REDUCER.
GIVE US A TRIAL, AND WE ARE SURE YOU
WILL BE WELL SATISFIED.
Telephone: 81 P.O. Box, T 7.
•S,
Kum-in-Side
And Try our Famous TEA and COFFEE. The Best In
Town. Home-made Sweets a Speciality.
Mrs. STREET & Miss PARTRIDGE, Proprietresses.
(Near Commercial Bank).


put them into 3 pints of medium stock, made from
bones and trimmings of meat, etc., seasoned with
cloves, cayenne to taste, a little white pepper, stew
gently for half an hour, rub through a sieve, pepper
and salt to taste. Boil and serve.
OYSTER SOUP.
Scald 6 dozen oysters, in their own liquor, take
them out, beard them, and put in soup tureen. Take
1 quart white stock, add beards and liquor, which
must be previously strained, and stir gently tor 'half
an hour. Take off the fire, strain again, add about i
quart more stock, salt, cayenne pepper, and mace to
taste. Bring to a boil, thicken 'with 2ozs. flour, and
2ozs. butter, simmer for 10 minutes, stir in 1 cup
boiling cream, pour over oysters in tureen and serve.
TOMATO SOUP.
41b. tomatoes, 3 pints good stock, 1 teaspoon sugar,
1 small bunch mixed herbs, 3ozs. flour, 3ozs. butter,
1 cup cream, pepper, and salt to taste. Put tomatoes
and stock with herbs into a saucepan, and boil gently
for about an hour, then rub through a sieve. Put
butter and flour into a saucepan, put on fire, and blend
till it becomes a smooth paste, add strained soup by
degrees, and stir till it boils. Turn into tureen, add
sugar and seasoning, also cream, which should be
boiling.
TOMATO MILK SOUP.
Eighteen tomatoes, 3 pints milk, Zioza. butter, J
teaspoon carbonate of soda, salt, pepper, and sauce to
taste. Gut tomatoes up, and stew gently, without add-
ing any liquid, add soda, then strain, and press pulp
through a sieve. Have milk boiling, with other in-
gredients thicken it, and add strained tomato pulp to
it. Stir in i cup boiling cream, and serve at once.
Do not put back on fire after tomatoes are added, or
it will curdle.
11


Fish.
BOILED FISH.
Chose a thick-shouldered fish, have boiling salted
water, a little lemon-juice, a few parsley spriggs; trim
fins, wash dry, and rub with lemon-juice, put into
the boiling water, cook very gently until the flesh will
leave the bones readily, if a skewer be inserted at the
thickest part; drain and dish on fish d’oyley, garnish
with rounds of lemon, whipped white of eggs, and
chopped parsley or lobster coral; serve any suitable
fish sauce in tureen; anchovy, oyster, shrimp, egg, or
plain melted butter are the usual sauces for boiled
fish..
TO'GRILL FISH.
There are two methods. The only kinds of fish are
wrapped in greased paper and grilled over a very
slow fire. The more delicate kinds of fish are brushed
N
svith olive oil or butter, and basted every time they
are turned, and in all cases rub with lemon-juice, salt,
and pepper. Serve lemon with it, and if liked, a
little oiled butter.
FISH AND POTATO PIE.
Take 41b. cooked fish, 41b. potatoes, 1 desertspoon-
ful of butter, 1 teaspoon of flour, 1 gill of fresh milk;
have the fish free from skin and bones; boil and mash
potatoes with a dessertspoonful of milk; put the butter
and flour in a saucepan and mix over the fire till
smooth, then stir in the milk; boil and season with salt
and pepper. Put a layer of half the fish in the bot-
tom of a pie-dish, pour over half the sauce, then the
rest of the fish, and cover again with sauce; spread
the potatoes on top with little pieces of butter. Mark
and put in oven for about half an hour.
SALMON RISSOLES.
Use scraps of cold salmon, or the contents of a tin
of salmon, remove bone and skin, mince salmon finely,
add pepper and salt to taste and some fine bread-
crumbs, moisten with beaten egg, mound Into round
cakes and fry in boiling fat; a little finely-chopped
parsley may be added.
12


SARDINE EGGS (F. F. White).
Boil four eggs for 10 minutes, and put them in
cold water, scrape four sardines gently, and pound
them in mortar. Shell the eggs and cut in half
lengthways, take out yolks and add them to sardines
in the mortar with loz. of butter and a little white pep-
per and salt, and insert a spoonful of parsley. Pound
all together, then fill the whites and put the halves
together and serve in a nest of small salad, sprinkled
with oil and vinegar.
SOUSED FISH.
One fish (about 41bs.), two onions, cloves, white
spice, ginger, vinegar. Method: Put fish (when nicely
cleaned) in a baking-tin or pie-dish large enough to
hold it, cover with vinegar, cut onion in fine slices,
put them on the fish, with cloves, spice, and ginger.
Bake until fish is well-cooked, allow to get cold, put
on a dish and garnish with cucumber and tomatoes.
Meats, Entrees and Breakfast
Dishes.
BAKED CHOPS AND ONIONS.
(E. Cameron).
Place some rib chops in a baking-dish with enough
water to stop their burning. Allow one onion to each
chop. Slice onions and cover chops with them; sea-
son with salt, pepper, and a few herbs, and bake in a
hot oven. Cover pan at first, and then remove lid to
allow chops and onions to brown. Serve very hot,
with mashed potatoes. Thicken gravy with flour and
pour around.
ROAST RABBIT.
Soak rabbit in water for a few hours in which a
little vinegar has been added; dry and fill with a
usual filling, which contains a little fat bacon cut in
small pieces. Place rabbit in a stew-pan with one
pint water and four or five tablespoons dripping (or,
if preferred, all dripping K add a sprig of thyme and
tomato sauce to taste (about two tablespoons). Cook


over stove tire lor ten minutes, then stand to side
and allow to cook slowly (a young rabbit takes an
hour). Serve with following sauce; Pour off a
little of the gravy in pan and add to remaining half a
cup of browned breadcrumbs and a little cornflour.
When browned, add enough boiling water to ' make
mixture the desired consistency, strain and pour over
rabbit just before serving.
PIGEONS A LA DUGIIESSE.
Three pigeons, Jib. quenelle moat, egg, and bread-
crumbs, i pint brown sauce, macedoine of vegetables
to garnish. Split the pigeons in halves, remove the
breast bone, and beat them flat. Scute them with 2
ozs. of butter, pepper, and salt. Then press them
flat. When the pigeons are cold, spread the quenelle
meat over the cut-up birds, then egg and crumb, and
fry in fat. Uish in a circle, brown sauce round, and
macedoine in the centre.
QUENELLES OF VEAL.
One pound of fillet of veal, loz. butter, j pint milk,
'2 eggs, salt. Mix loz butter and 2ozs. of flour together
in a stew-pan; add one gill of slock, and cook these
well together* until quite thick, and the mixture
leaves the sides of the stewpan quite clean; then
put it on a plate to cool; cut up veal into small pieces,
removing all the fat and skim; pound it in a mortar
with one egg (raw), and pound it to a cream; then
half the veal pepper and salt, and the other half egg,
and again pound up well together and rub through a
wire sieve.
CANAPES A LA FIFE.
Croutons of tried bread, lay upon each crouton two
fillets of anchovy, season with pepper and salt, and
drop over each a little whipped cream. Serve on a
serviette.
WHITE STEW.
Remove fat from any boiled mutton, and cut the
meat into slices. Put into a stew-pan with equal
parts of milk and water (enough to cover); add a
blade of mace, some parsley, a few herbs and pep


per corns, salt to taste. Stew quickly for half an.
hour. Remove herbs; thicken with flour mixed with
milk and butter; carefully skim off any fat. Serve
decorated with hard-boiled eggs in rings. Grumble-
the yolk of the egg and sprinkle over. Sippets of
toast may ho served with this dish,
ABERDEEN SAUSAGES (Very Good).
Two pounds buttock steak, Jib. bacon, 2 cups of
breadcrumbs, tablespoon Worcester sauce, 1 egg,
pepper, and salt to taste. Mince steak and bacon
through machine, add breadcrumbs and sauce, beat up
the egg. Mix all together; squeeze into long roll,
flour pudding cloth, and boil 1J hours. When cook-
ed roll in brown breadcrumbs.
BRESLAU OF BEEF.
(Tested by Mrs. T. L. Docker) .
.Mince ilb. of beef with 4ozs. of breadcrumbs, 1
teaspoontul of minced parsley three leaves of thyme
and marjoram), 2ozs. butter, broken small, \ cup of
gravy or cream, a high seasoning of pepper cayenne,
nutmeg, a little salt, and three large eggs well whisk-
ed. Bake in well-buttered dish for half an hour.
Send good, brown gravy to table with it.
BEEF SHAPE.
Ingredients; The meat and gristle from a shin of
beef, li pints of soup, ilh. cooked ham, 3 or 4 cooked
sheeps’ tongues, 2 teaspoons Worcester sauce, 1 des-
sertspoon vinegar, , 3 sheets gelatine, nutmeg, pepper,
salt. When the meat on shin of beef has been boiled
until it leaves the bones freely and the gristle is
quite soft, take the best parts of it and cut up finely,
with ilb. of cooked ham and a small tin of sheeps’
tongues. Mix well together and flavour with nutmeg,
freshly-ground pepper, and salt. Soak three sheets of
gelatine in a cup of water. When soft pour off the:
water and dissolve in about a pint and a half of the
soup from the shin, adcl 2 teaspoons of Worcester
sauce and 1 dessertspoon of vinegar. Decorate the
bottom of an enamel or China mould with hard-boiled
eggs, put in the meat until it is a little more than
three-parts full, and then fill up with the soup in


J. Browning and Son
MARSH-STREET ARMIDALE.
PICCANINNY TRADERS.
WOOL, HIDES, & SKINS BOUGHT.
Telephone: 284.
Support Local Industry !
BUY YOUR FURNITURE FROM THE LOCAL
MAKERS.
Prater and Mills
FALCONER-STREET ARMIDALE.
H. Stanley Whybrow
Beardy-Street :: ARMIDALE.
’Phone: 218.
AGENT FOR PALING’S PIANOS, ORGANS,
AND PLAYER-PIANOS.
G. Booth
BOOKSELLER & STATIONER.
Toys, Fancy Goods, Photographic Supplies, Developing
and Printing, Sporting Materials.
Agent for Rubber Stamps, Flower A Vegetable Seeds,
Plants, Shrubs, Floral Bouquets, & Cut Flowers.
(Next Arcadia Picture Palace).


which the gelatine has been dissolved. This quantity
will fill two ordinary moulds.
SCOTCH BRAWN.
Pig's head and feet, or pair of px cheeks, clean and
divide, put into stewpan with enough water to cover
them, simmer four or five hours, or till meat falls to
pieces and off the bones, turn into dish and remove
bones and cut or tear meat into shreds, season to
taste, salt, pepper, nutmeg if preferred. Put into
wet moulds, strain gravy over. When cold, turn
out, and it is ready for use. Cooked haricot beans
(washed) and slices of hard-boiled eggs may be ad-
ded before putting the brawn into wet moulds.
SCALLOPED BRAINS.
(Miss Marie Jackes).
Ingredients; 1 set of brains, i pint white sauce,
small piece onion, 2 sage leaves, 2 tablespoons bread-
crumbs, squeeze of lemon-juice, salt, and cayenne.
Method: Wash brains and soak in salt and water for
half an hour, put on in cold water, with onion and
sage leaves, bring slowly to boil and cook gently for
five minutes. Strain, remove skin, cut into small dice,
add to the white sauce, add lemon juice, salt, and
cayenne. Sprinkle thickly with breadcrumbs some
well-greased piedish, All with mixture, cover with
crumbs, put small pieces of butter on top, return to
oven till lightly browned (about ten minutes). Serve
with small sprigs of parsley.
RABBIT PIE.
Ingredients: 1 rabbit, ilb. bacon or ham, 1 hard-
boiled egg, 1 dessertspoon chopped parsley, 1 table-
spoon flour, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon pepper, stock,
ilb. pastry. Wash the rabbit in warm water, dry
and cut into neat joints, dip into the flour, salt, and
pepper, covering well-sliced egg thinly, and out the
ham or bacon into neat pieces. Arrange in the pie-
dish in alternate layers -rabbit, ham, and egg, sprink-
ling over a little chopped parsley; add the stock, cover
with pastry, ornament the top with leaves cut from
scraps of’pastry, make four holes in pastry, glaze
with a little milk. Bake in a hot oven for fifteen


minutes; then lessen the heat, and cook an hour lon-
ger. If getting too brown, cover with a piece of kit-
chen paper.
HOME-MADE POTTED MEAT.
Required: 11b. of shoulder steak, 1 tablespoon of
water, salt, pepper, mace, and 2ozs, butter. Gut the
steak up in fair-sized pieces and put them into a
jam-jar. Add the water, cover the jar with greased
paper, and put it into a saucepan of hot water. Let
it cook for four hours. While the meat is hot, put
it through a mincing machine twice, then pound it,
adding sufficient seasoning to suit taste, and the gravy
that came out of the meat. Put Hie mixture into
pots. When cool, cover them with butter that has
been melted, so as to run over the tops of the pots.
RECIPE FOR CONVERTING FRESH MEAT INTO
CORNED IN ONE OPERATION.
(Mrs. T. L. Docker).
To four quarts of water add -Jib. salt, Jib. sugar
(coarse brown), piece saltpetre the size of a nutmeg,
piece of washing soda Hie size of a nutmeg. To this
mixture add, say, 71b.s. fresti beef, mutton, pork, or
longues, and boil in the ordinary way until cooked,
when you will iind the product will be more appetising
than anything of its kind before tasted. When used,
boil Hie liquor for 15 minutes (to sterilise) and set
aside in a cool place and use a second time.
ENTREES.
Gut and boil French beans till cooked, season to
taste with pepper and salt (cayenne may be added in
small quantity), have ready some buttered toast, and
on these spread beans to cover. Serve at once.
SAUSAGES.
Remove skins and roll in Hour, fry nicely, place in a
dish and keep warm while preparing the following;
Fry in a little fat two or three sliced tomatoes, one
boiled carrot, a little pepper, Hour, salt, and sauce to
taste, add a little boiling water to make mixture a nice
consistency, pour over sausages and serve.


KIDNEY ON TOAST (M. White) .
Six kidneys chopped finely, put into a pan with piece
of butter larger than a walnut, let it stew for four
minutes, add salt, pepper,’ 1 teaspoon mustard, and
one tablespoon vinegar. Heat and serve on hot but-
tered toast. Must not stand, or it will be tough.
SAUSAGE EGGS (D. F. White).
Five eggs, 41b. mincemeat, flour, pepper, salt, pars-'
ley, and breadcrumbs. Method; Boil four eggs for
ten minutes, remove shell, season sausage meat with
little salt, pepper, and: 1 teaspoon chopped parsley,
cover eggs with it, using a little flour, brush over with
beaten egg, and cover with breadcrumbs, fry them
in boiling fat, drain on paper, cut in halves and serve
hot.
GOLD MUTTON CROQUETTES.
Boil a quarter of a pound of rice, chop a good
half-pound of cold mutton (free of skin) and 3ozs. of
beef suet. Add this to the rice and mix well toge-
ther. Chop finely a eschalot, add this to the mince,
with a seasoning of pepper and salt, and moisten with
a beaten-up egg. Roll into balls, roll in flour, and
then dip into beaten egg and breadcrumbs. Fry in
boiling fat or butter until a nice golden brown. Pile
the balls on a disli and pour round them tomato
sauce, heated with a small piece of butter and a des-
sertspoonful of vinegar.
CHEESE FONDU.
Quarter pound of dry grated cheese, 1 egg (yolk
and white beaten separately), a saltspoon of pepper
and salt, J cup of warm milk into which put a pinch
of baking powder, i dessertspoon of butter (cream-
ed), 2 tablespoons of grated bread-crumbs.
Method.—Put crumbs in a pie-dish, moisten with
milk, stir in the well-beaten yolk, then cheese. Then
add the milk, and just before baking add the white of
egg (well beaten) . Time, 20 minutes.
CORNISH PASTIES.
Half a pound of steak, Jib. potatoes, 1 small onion,
Jib. flour, 2 teaspoon salt, J teaspoon pepper, Jib.


EVERYTHING REQUIRED TO
Furnish the Home
Gan be bought at the Lowest Price (either Gash
or Terms) at
A. T. Neil’s
Furniture Arcade
BEARDY-STREET ARMIDALE.
Be sure you visit NEIL’S ARCADE first, else you
will surely regret.
WHEN YOU DON'T FEEL INCLINED TO COOK, AND
YOUR INGREDIENTS ARE TOO DEAR,
CALL AT
Scurry Brothers
THE MOST UP-TO-DATE BAKERS AND
PASTRY COOKS & CONFECTIONERS.
And you will get your Requirements.
The White Rose
Tea Rooms
Beardy Street *. Armidale
’PHONE: 272. & URALLA.


dripping, J teaspoon baking powder. Method: Chop l
steak into very-small pieces, prepare vegetables, and
also chop very finely. Mix together potatoes, onions,
meat, and place on one side. Make a short crust.
Turn on to a floured board, knead and divide into eight
equal parts. Roll each into a round shape the size of
a saucer. Place one-eighth of the mixture half-way
across the middle of each division of pastry, moisten
the edges half-way and fold over, bringing the edges
together near the top, making the paste the shape of
a orescent, pinch a frill on'edges, and bake 40 min-
utes, glaze.
MACARONI CHEESE.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Quarter pound chose, ilb. macaroni, 1 pint of water,,
2ozs. breadcrumbs, 2 teaspoons mustard, 1 cup cream
or milk, a little pepper, salt, and cayenne, loz. of but-
ter. Boil the macaroni in water till tender; butter a
flat dish and put macaroni into dish; mix cheese and
breadcrumbs together with pepper, and salt, sprink-
led through the macaroni; put mustard into cream and
mix well. Pour over the other ingredients, put the
butter in small lumps over all and dust with cayenne.
Bake brown about threcquarters of an hour. If cook-
ing too quickly cover with pie-dish.
CURRIED EGGS.
Make a sauce with 2 tablespoons each of butter and
flour, i heaped teaspoon salt, 1 of curry. Mix with
milk and boil a pint of milk .(instead of all milk, half
as much meat stock may be used). When this boils,
stir in the above sauce, boil some eggs (about 6 to
the above quantity) hard, shell, cut in half, and lay
carefully in the sauce, boil up, for a minute, and dish
up. Put fingers of toast round the dish.
MARINADED STEAK.
Gut a steak 1 inch thick, and score it crosswise on
each side, put into a dish, 1 teaspoon each of salt,,
pepper, and sugar, 1 tablespoon of sauce, 1 tablespoon
vinegar. Lay the steak in this mixture 6 hours be-
fore using, turning several times. Broil the .steak,
using the mixture for the gravy made in the usual
way.


POTTED HAM,
To 41b. lean ham, allow ilb. fat, 2 teaspoons
pounded mace, J a nutmeg grated, 1 large teaspoon
cayenne pepper, clarified lard. Mince the ham, fat,
and lean together, in above proportions, pound well in
a mortar, seasoning with cayenne, nutmeg and pound-
ed mace. Put the mixture into a deep baking dish,
and bake for half an hour, then press it well into a
stone jar. Fill up the jar with clarified lard or but-
ter, cover it closely, and paste over it a piece of thick
paper. If well seasoned, it will keep a long time in
winter, and will he found good for sandwiches for
afternoon lea.
RISSOLES.
Pass meat through mincing machine, make a
thick, white sauce, season with pepper, salt, and onion
to taste. Mix all with meat, and let It stand till
quite cool. Roll into shapes, and dip in egg and
breadcrumbs. Let stand again, Then fry. Boil mac-
aroni in gravy, and serve with rissoles.
SAUSAGE ROLL.
One pound steak or mutton, Jib. ham or bacon, 1
cup breadcrumbs, 1 egg, seasoning. Put meat and
ham through the mincing machine, mix all ingredi-
ents well together, binding with the egg. Tie in a
floured cloth like a roly pudding, and boil for two
hours. Let it get cold, then glaze it, and it is ready
for table. Roll as tightly as possible in cloth to keep
it in shape.
SHARP STEAK.
One pound steak, 1 teaspoon brown sugar, I tea-
spoon salt, a little grated nutmeg, a sprinkle of cay-
ene, 1 tablespoon flour, 1 dessertspoon each of vine-
gar and-Worcestershire sauce (or raushrom catsup or
tomato sauce), J pint water, a few capers, and
gherkins. Trim the steak, rub well into it sugar, nut-
meg, salt, cayenne, then flour. Put into a deep dish,
add to it the water, vinegar and sauce, cover with
another dish, put into rather hot oven for 10 minutes.
Then lessen heat, and let cook very slowly for half an
hour. Lift on to a very hot dish. Remove any fat
22


from the gravy, and strain it over the meat. Garnish
it with gherkins, cut in strips, and a few capers.
WHITE SAUCE FOR GOLD MUTTON,
One pint milk, onion, mace, 1 tablespoon flour, i
pint cream. Bring milk to the boil with onion in it,
then take out onion, add other ingredients, and boil
till thick.
YORKSHIRE PUDDING (1).
If pints milk, 6 large tablespoons hour, 3 eggs, a
pincli of salt; bake 1 hour, then put under the meat
for half an hour.
YORKSHIRE PUDDING (2).
8ozs. Hour, a little salt, 2 eggs, 1 pint,milk; mix
into a hatter, pour into the boiling fat round the roast-
ing joint, and bake for J hour.
YORKSHIRE PUDDING (3).
Three eggs, loz. butter, 1 pint or li pints milk, 5
tablespoons flour, a little salt. Pul flour into basin,
add sufficient milk to moisten it, rub down all lumps,
then pour remainder of milk and sdir in butter pre-
viously melted. Keep beating the mixture, add eggs
and a pincli of salt, and when smooth pour batter into
well- buttered basin or dish. Tie tightly, and boil ii
hour, or bake about 1- hour. All of the above three
recipes are to be eaten with roast beef.
Puddings (boiled)
HANNAH MORE PUDDING (Mrs. F. White).
Time to boil three hours; —Six ounces apples, of
breadcrumbs, of suet, of raisins, and of sugar, 6. eggs,
2ozs. candied peel. Mix the chopped suet, bread-
crumbs, tlje apples minced very tine, the raisins chop-
ped, or if preferred currants, sugar, and citron peel.
Well beat the eggs and stir all together. Boil in a
wel buttered mould for .1 hours.


Your Friends
Can buy anything yon
can give them, except
Your
Photograph
Make an
Appointment
To-day
Solomons’
Studio
Armidale Phone 89
A. W. FINCH
DRAPER AND MILLINER
ALWAYS—" THE HOME OF GOOD VALUE”
24


GINGER PUDDING.
Hall pound of flour, J cup suet, 1 teaspoon ginger,
ill), treacle, little grated lemon-peel, i pint of milk, in
which J teaspoon soda has been dissolved, and 1 egg.
Steam two hours.
APPLE DUMPLINGS.
Take 6 large apples, 11b. flour, 6ozs. dripping, 1
teaspoon baking powder, J teaspoon salt, 2ozs. sugar..
Pare and core the apples. Rub the dripping lightly
into the flour, baking powder, and salt until it be-
comes like fine breadcrumbs; make it into a stiff
paste with cold water, and divide into six pieces of
equal size. Place an apple on each, and fill the cen-
tre of the fruit with sugar. Gradually work the
paste round the apples until they are completely cov-
ered. When all the dumplings are thus made, place
them on a greased tin. Brush them over with a little
milk and bake them for about half an hour. Apple
dumplings may be boiled instead of baked, in which
case use suet instead of dripping. Tie them in separ-
ate cloths and boil threequarters of an hoar.
DOUGH BOYS.
Two cups of flour, 2 teaspoonfuls of baking pow-
der, 1 tablespoon of dripping, a pinch of salt; wet with
water. Roll into balls, put into boiling water, and boil
for 20 minates.
BACHELOR’S PUDDING.
Ingredients: One egg, with its weights in minced
apple, flour, sugar, currants, breadcrumbs, and suet.
Method.—Mix these with the egg and add a little
milk. Boil in a mould from one and a half to two
hour*. Serve with white sauce.
NINA’S PUDDING.
One sup flour, 1 cup currants, J cup sugar, 1 cup-
milk, 1 teaspoonful spice, 1 small teaspoonful soda, 1
tablespoonful dripping. Mix flour, currants, sugar,
spice together; boil the milk, dissolve soda in one half
and dripping in the other half of milk. Add altoge-
ther; put in buttered basin and steam two and a hhlf
hours. All must be done quickly. Serve with cus-
tard or sauce.
25


FEATHER PUDDING (F. F. White)|
Quarter pound of Imtter, Jib. sugar, Jib. Hour, 2
eggs, 1 teaspoon baking powder, J cup of milk, jam.
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add eggs well
beaten, then milk; lastly, Hour, in which baking pow-
der is sifted. Grease well a basin, spread it over with
Jam, pour in the mixture, and steam 1J hours.
FREE KIRK PUDDING.
Two tablespoons each of raisins, currants, bread-
crumbs, ground rice, and Hour, 3 of line-chopped suet,
J teaspoon mixed spice, 1 teaspoon carbonate soda, J
gill milk, little candied peel, pinch salt. Mix dry in-
gredients; add milk in which soda has been dissolved.
Steam in buttered basin two hours.
WELLINGTON PUDDING (Mrs. M. Campbell).
Pare, core, and mince 3 apples, mix with them
Jib. breadcrumbs, 3ozs. sugar, 3 of currants, a little
salt and nutmeg to taste; grated rind of half lemon.
Steam 1J hours. Serve with sweet sauce.
FIG PUDDING.
Ingredients: Half pound suet, Mb. flour, Jib. figs,
Jib. sugar, 1 egg, a little milk or water, «
Method. —Chop the suet and figs very fine: mix all
well together; lastly, the egg (which should he well
beaten), with enough milk or water to make it the
usual thickness. Steam in a buttered mould for three
hours.
SPONGE PUDDING (Very Good) .
One tablespoon butter, -J cup of sugar, 2 eggs, 1
cup of Hour, 1 teaspoon of baking powder, and little
milk.
Method.—Mix butter and sugar: add eggs well
beaten; lastly, (lour and powder, and enough milk to
make the mixture the thickness of a hatter. Steam
one hour.
DATE PUDDING (No. 2).
Two cups flour, Tj cups dates (stoned), i cup
sugar, J cup boiling milk, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 tea-
spoon baking soda. Rub butter intoftlour, then add


sugar and dates and mix together with boiling milk
into which has been dissolved the baking soda. Steam
three hours.
CANARY PUDDING.
Three eggs, their weight in butter, sugar, and flour;
peel and nutmeg. Beat sugar and butter together;
add eggs, then peel and nutmeg; lastly flour, with a
little baking powder. Steam 2i hours. '
FIG PUDDING.
One cup of flour, 1 cup of breadcrumbs, i cup of
suet, 1 cup of tigs (chopped), ,| cup sugar, a pinch
of salt, 2 eggs, and 1 cup of milk. Mix well and boil
in a basin or mould for four hours.
CURRANT PUDDING may be made in the same
way, putting currants and peel instead of figs.
GINGER PUDDING may be made in the same way,
using water instead of milk, and a teaspoon of ginger
and a tablespoon of treacle.
TREACLE PUDDING.
One cup flour, 2 tablespoons of sugar, 1 teaspoon of
salt, I teaspoon of soda, 1 large teaspoon of ground
ginger, 2 tablespoons of treacle, 2 tablespoons of but-
ter or dripping, 1 cup of milk. Beat butter and sugar
to a cream, add treacle and milk, then dry ingredients.
Mix well and steam two hours.
RICH PLUM PUDDING.
Two pounds flour, tlh. sugar, Mbs. raisins (stoned),
21bs. currants, l.Jlb. mixed peel, 8 or 10 eggs, 3 nut-
megs (grated), •} pint brandy, j pint milk, 2lbs. suet.
Mix well the night before cooking, sufficient for two
puddings. Boil, each seven hours. Cock in a mould
is tile best.
CANDIED GINGER PUDDING.
Take four stale penny sponge cakes, .‘sozs. dried
candied ginger, 2 eggs, I pint milk, i dessertspoon of
sugar: butter an ordinary pudding basin well; lay in
the cake sliced through it the ginger cut
into dice, heat Op the eggs, add milk and sugar to


them, and pour over the cake. Cover with a buttered
paper and steam one hour.
BOILED BATTER PUDDING. V
Four eggs, 4 tablespoons of flour, i pint milk, a
pinch salt. Beat eggs well, add milk, and lastly flour
and salt. Steam in a buttered basin two hours.
CUSTARD PUDDING.
Two cups flour, 1 cup sugar, J cup of butter
(melted) or dripping, 4 cup milk, 2 teaspoonfuls bak-
ing powder, or 1 teaspoon carbonate soda, and 14
teaspoons cream tartar, 2 eggs, a little salt, mix but-
ter and sugar, then add milk and eggs; lastly, the
flour, powder, and salt. Put in a buttered pie-dish,
.and bake about an hour. Serve with boiled custard.
It may be turned out and split, and served with Jam
between. Steam 14 hours. It is also good cold.
WRABNESS PUDDING (Very Good).
The weight of two eggs each in flour, butter, and
brown sugar, 1 tcaspoonful baking powder. Mix the
eggs and butter well together; then add the remain-
ing ingredients. Add a little milk to soften, and boil
in a buttered basin tied up lightly for one and a half
hours.
DATE OR FIG PUDDING.
Four tablespoons of sago, soaked over-night in a
small cup of milk, add a large cup of breadcrumbs, 1
tnhlespoonful of butter, 1 cup of cut-up dates or figs
or raisins, 3 cup of sugar, grated rind of a lemon, 1
level teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Put into a
buttered mould, cover with paper, and steam for
three hours. Serve hot.
ORANGE SNOW BALLS.
Small pudding cloths as are necessary; spread each
•with a good layer of cooked rice; put a peeled orange
on each and tie up, so that tiie orange is surrounded
by rice. Boil an hour, turn out, sprinkle with sugar
or pour over with goldei syrup. _ Serve with sweet
•custard. '


JJROWN BUDDING.
One and a half cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 3 teaspoons
tart jam, 1 tablespoon dripping, 1 teaspoon soda, 2
eggs, J cup milk. Steam two hours.
K OF K,
Four tablespoons' butter, 6 tablespoons flour, 2
tablespoons jam, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg, i tea-
spoon carbonate of soda dissolved in a little hot
water; beat well. Steam two hours.
WHITESIDE PUDDING (Good).
(Mrs. F. J. White).
Half-pound breadcrumbs; pour over this i pint of
boiling milk, flavoured with lemon or vanilla; stir;
should be thick; 3ozs. of butter, 3 ozs. of sugar;
beat well, add 3 well-beaten eggs. Line a well-
buttered tin thick with apricot jam; pour in mixture;
steam for 14 hours. Turn out on a hot dish.
GLASGOW PUDDING (Very Good).
Quarter pound flour, Jib. butter, Jib. sugar, 1 large
tablespoon of apricot jam. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, add 3 well-beaten eggs, then jam, and, lastly,
the flour. Then steam for two hours.
PLUM PUDDING,
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Half pound butter, 11b. sugar, Jib, raisins, Jib.
currants. Jib. lemon peel, 7ozs. breadcrumbs, al-
monds, nutmeg, a little ginger and cinnamon, 1 tea-
spoon baking powder, salt, 4 eggs, J cup milk, sozs.
flour. Steam 5 hours.
A PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
One and a half cups of flour, J cup of sugar, 1 cup
of raisins and currants, a little peel, 4 teaspoon of
spice, 1 tablespoon of dripping in half a cup of hot
water, 1 teaspoon of baking soda. In another half-
cup of hot water a little salt make a hole in the dry
ingredients and pour both lots of water in; mix well
and put into a buttered mould or cloth. Boil three
hours. Make it two or three hours before cooking it.


Burgess Brothers
(Late WALTER BURGESS).
NEW ENGLAND’S PREMIER PRODUCE
MERCHANTS.
Established over 20 Years, and still going Stronger
' than Ever.
We are Cash Buyers of Wool, Hides, Sheepskins,
Tallow, Etc. Furred Skins a Speciality.
Our Prices are Equivalent to Sydney Rates.
Dangar Street - Armidale
P.O. Box: 34 Telephone: 12.
Morgan Stephens
GENERAL PRINTER.
ALE KINDS OF PRINTIN'!; DUNE, ILLUMINATED
ADDRESSES & RUBBER STAMPS.
/
Faulkner-Street :: ARMIDALE.
Box 42. ’Phone 357
Bankers
Balance
Their
Cash!
We
Balance
Our
Deals!
\\c have full control over second costs, and we
eliminate them. Agent for the famous HARLEY
DAVIDSON MOTOR CYCLES.
M 3
m
■V
t’T
ms
ns
ns
J. B, Sullivan, BEARDY "^“ T 3ir M,DALE
30


SAGO PLUM PUDDING.
One large cup of breadcrumbs, 1 eup brown sugar,
k tablespoons of sago soaked for 3 hours in 1 cup of
milk, J’ teaspoon carbonate soda, 1 dessertspoon but-
ter, 1 cup mixed fruit, mix all together; steam in a
buttered mould 25 hours or longer. Serve with cus-
tard of sauce.
AUNT NELLIE’S PUDDING.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Half pound suet chopped line, Jib. flour, Jib. of
treacle, the rind and juice of 1 lemon, a few strips of
candied peel, 2 tablespoons cream, and 2 well-beaten
eggs. Beat the pudding well, and pul into a buttered
basin. Tie down with a cloth, and boil i hours.
DATE PUDDING.
One large breakfast cup of flour, 1 cup suet, 1 cup
brown sugar, 1 small teaspoon of ginger, 1 teaspoon
of linking powder and i of salt, Jib. of chopped dales,
1 ceg, and a little milk. Steam 3 hours.
HIGH CHURCH PUDDING.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
.Mix thoroughly 5 cup of finely-chopped suet, with
Jib. flour, add a tea-cup of any kind of jam, and 1
tea-cup of milk and a teaspoon of soda and a teaspoon
of sugar. Put into butlered basin and boil 2 J hours.
FRUIT PUFFS. :
(Mrs. H. T. Vyner).
Mix 1 pint flour, 2 teaspoons baking powder and J
teaspoon of salt. Then stir in sweet milk till a thick
batter is formed, put a tablespoon of the batter into
buttered teacups until half the batter is used; place
on it any kind of jam or stowed fruit without the
juice. Put a spoonful of hatter on the fruit in each
cup and steam 20 minutes. Serve up with juice.
APPLE SNOWBALLS.
Two cups rice, apples, sugar, cloves. Boil rice in
milk till nearly done, and-strain it off. Pare and core
apples without breaking them, put a little sugar, and a
clove, in each apple, put rice round them, tie each
ball separately in a cloth, and boil for an hour.
31


MARGUERITE PUDDING (Miss Dight).
Two ounces butter and sugar, 2 eggs, J cup flour,
about a tablespoons milk, 1 teaspoon baking powder.
Cream butter and sugar together, then add eggs, milk,
and flour (keeping a little flour back to mix baking
powder in). Lino a basin,or mould thickly with jam,
put in the batter, and steam 1J hour. Do not All basin
—must leave room to rise.
OLNEY PUDDING ROILED.
Four eggs, 8ozs. butter, 8ozs. flour, 4ozs. sugar, J
teaepoon soda, 4 teaspoons essence lemon, 4 large
spoonfuls jam. Dissolve the soda in a teaspoon of
cold water, mix well, and steam 2 hours. Serve with
sweet sauce.
SPONGE PUDDING.
One tablespoon butter, J cup sugar, 2 eggs. Beat
well together, then add 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking
powder, and a little milk to make the mixture the con-
sistency of butter. Put in a well buttered basin, and
steam 1 hour without once raising the lid,
PLUM PUDDING.
(Mrs. A. Purkiss).
Half pound breadcrumbs, Jib. sugar and treacle mix-
ed Jib. flour, Jib. raisins, Jib. currants, Jib. butter, 4
eggs, Jib. peel, nutmeg, essence lemon, vanilla, cin-
namon, 1 teaspoonful baking powder. Boil or steam
for seven or eight hours.
SOUTHPORT PUDDING STEAMED.
Six ounces breadcrumbs, 6ozs. sugar, i teaspoon
baking powder, 3ozs. suet, loz. lemon-peel or raisins,
Gozs. apples, a pinch of salt, a little nutmeg and 2
eggs. Mince apples suet and peel very finely. Mix in
order named, and add a little milk if required. Steam
two hours.
PUDDINGS (BAKED).
PICNIC PUDDING (B. P. White).
Quarter pound butter, Jib. sugar, Jib. bread


crumbs, 2 eggs, rind 1 lemon grated, juice of two.
Line a flat disli with puff pastry, a layer of raspberry
jam. Then add other ingredients beaten to a mixture.
WORCESTERSHIRE PUDDING.
Beat two tablespoonfuls of Hour and two table-
spoonfuls of sugar with sufficient butter to make a
paste. Then pour 1 pint boiling milk to nearly fill
the dish, and while still hot add three well-beaten
eggs and a little flavouring. Bake in a rather quick
oven.
BAKED LEMON PUDDING.
Three eggs well beaten, add juice of 3 lemons and
the peel of two grated, Jib. of lump sugar, 3ozs. but-
ter melted to an oil. Line a dish with puff paste, put
in the mixture, and bake threequarters of an hour,
BISCUIT PUDDING.
Half cup of sugar, 2ozs.'butter, 2 eggs, 4 cup flour,
3 cups milk. Mix sugar, butter, and eggs well toge-
ther; gradually add the flour, then the milk. Bake in
pic-dish in moderately hot oven.
LEMON PUDDING.
Two tablespoons arrowroot, grated rind and juice of
2 lemons, sozs. sugar, yolks 2 eggs, 2ozs. butter.
Beat sugar, butter, and yolks together. Mix juice
and rind of lemon with' arrowroot, and pour boiling
water on it till thick. Mix in the beaten-up sugar,
butter, and egg, and pour into dish. Make an icing
with the whites of the eggs and sugar, flavoured with
lemon juice, and drop on top.
MOCK LEMON SPONGE.
The same as lemon pudding, only use the whites
well beaten, instead of the yolks of the eggs, and beat
them in when the rest of the pudding is cooled.
FRENCH APPLES (Miss Johnstone).
Peel amt core six apples, cut in slices and put into
pio-dish, sprinkle sugar over them. Mix 1 table-
spoon butter and 2.-tablespoonfuls flour very smooth,
and add slowly 2 cups boiling water, stirring all the
while. Pour this mixture over flhe sliced apples and
bake in slow oven about an hour.


UP-TO-DATE HINTS
FOR THRIFTY, THOUGHTFUL, & WISE PEOPLE.
The Thrifty Person makes Provision for hours of
Sickness.
The Thoughtful Person makes Provision for the time
when the wage or salary earner loses time.
The Wise Person makes sure ef his Membership in
the Manchester Unity 1.0. Oddfellows for the
above two reasons.
Those who arc about to be married, and those who
are, should study very carefully the above three para-
graphs, and if they require any further information to
enquire from Mr. B. T. WILLIAMS, Secretary of The
Armidale Branch; or MORGAN STEPHENS, Secretary
New England District. Box 42, P. 0., Armidale.
IP YOU HAVEN'T GIVEN
D. Milne,
Beardy-Street ARMIDALE.
A TRIAL FOR FOOTWEAR—DO IT NOW.
Large Stock of Men’s, Women’s, <& Children’s
Footwear to select from.
Repair Work Undertaken by Competent Staff.
Low Prices Rule in our Grocery
and Provision Departments. . •
But not a single lino is Stocked before we make sure
it comes well up to our High Standard of Quality.
When you can get these belter GROCERIES and
PROVISIONS for Jess Than you pay elsewhere, why
not send your order here and be sure of satisfaction.
T. Lambert
’Phone 47. Armidale.


MARMALADE PUDDING.
One cup bread crumbs, 14 cups milk, 1 cup marma-
lade, 1 tablespoon of sugar, 4 eggs, a little butter.
Mix all up together; lastly add whites of eggs well
beaten. Bake in a pie-dish one hour.
QUICK PUDDING.
Take 1 egg, 2 tablespoons sugar, 3 tablespoons
Hour, 1 teaspoon of baking' powder, \ cup milk. Mix
and bake in a greased tin. Bake in a .brisk oven.
When turned out spread with jam and fold together.
QUINCE SPONGE. ; .
Two epgs,.J cup sugar, It teaspoons baking pow-
der, d tablespobnful butter, flour and water to make
a thin batter. Pour over quinces previously cooked,
and bake threequarters of an hour or until done.
SNOWDON TART:
(Mrs. H. F. White). ;
Beat 3 tablespoons butter with 2 dessertspoons
sugar, and the yolk of 1 egg; a little milk; then 4
cup each of flour and cornflour, 1 teaspoonful baking
powder. Roll out size of plate to bake on, and bake
until light brown. Spread jam on top, and the beaten-
white of one egg with a little sugar, and brown.
ALEXANDRA PUDDING.
(Mrs. N. Taylor).
Line a pie-disb with pastry and spread with a little,
jam. Take 2 eggs, beat 3ozs. sugar, J a lemon, 3ozs.
breadcrumbs, and 1 teacup of milk. Mis breadcrumbs,
sugar, juice, and grated peel of lemon with milk and
eggs, put into the pie-dish and bake all half an hour.
VELVET PUDDING.
One pint milk, yolks of 2 or 3 eggs, 2ozs. butter, 3
tablespoons or less of cornflour or arrowroot, 2 table-
spoons sugar, and a few drops of vanilla. Beat all
together, and stir in when the milk begins to boil; boil
for a few minutes, turn into a buttered pie -dish and
leave till cold; then beat whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth, adding a little sugar and vanilla, and bake a pale
yellow.


PUDDINGS (COLD).
TRIFLE (Miss Bight) .
Quarter pound macaroons, 6 small sponge cakes.
Jib. ratafias, Ipt. of cream, 1 quart custard, 1 wine-
glass of sherry, strawberry conserve. Split the cakes
and spread thickly with jam. Arrange them in the
bottom of a trifle dish and lilt up all spaces with
macaroons and ratafias. Soak with wine as you pro-
ceed. When the jam is put between, keep it
nicely piled in the, centre; when altogether pour over
the custard and let it stand tw r o or three hours before
using. At the last minute just before serving pour
over the whipped cream.
PINE APPLE CREAM.
Beat J pint of cream until stiff; peel and finely
chop a pine-apple, add the juice of a lemon and Jof
a cup of powdered sugar. Dissolve an ounce of
isinglass in a little hot water and mix all lightly toge-
ther. Pour into a mould, and when cold turn out.
PASSION FRUIT SHAPE.
Five sheets of gelatine, 1 dozen passion fruit, juice
of half a lempn, 1 cup of sugar, 1 cup of boiling
water. Soak gelatine in enough water to damp it,
then scoop out fruit; add sugar and boil call together
.for five minutes; strain and set aside. When quite
cool, add well-beaten whites of 2 eggs and pour into
a glass dish, and when cold serve with cream or cus-
tard.
PASSION FRUIT CREAM.
One cup of passion fruit juice, 1 cup of cream,
Joz. of gelatine, Jib. of sugar. Soak gelatine in a cup
of cold water then stand the cup in hot water to melt
well. Pour over the sugar and stir; add juice and
stir occasionally till thick as whipped cream; add
cream (after whipping) gradually until set.
PINEAPPLE PUDDING.
Two tablespoonfuls of sago, i pineapple, juice of
half a lemon, sugar to taste. Put sago in a double
boiler with a little water and cook till tender; grate
pineapple in a bread-grater, add that with the sugar


and lemon and boil till of a proper consistency -to
set. Pour in a mould and let cool. Serve with boiled
custard or cream.
TAPIOCA AND COCOANUT CUSTARD PUDDING.
Soak over night 3 tablespoonfuls of pearl tapioca in
a cup of water. In the morning put it into 1 quart of
milk and boil until soft; add 3 tablespoonfuls of dessi-
oated coooanut. Beat yolks of 4 eggs, i-cup of
sugar, and add. Cook a few minutes longer, then
turn into a pie-dish. Beat whites of eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls of icing-sugar, until quite stiff. Place
over custard and sprinkle with cocoanut and slightly
brown in the oven.
CHAMPAGNE JELLY.
Whites of 2 eggs, 2 cups water, 1 cup sugar, rind
of 2 lemons and juice, 2 tablespoons cornflour, 2 of
wine. Boil lemon rind in water; take out and sfJf in
cornflour; add sugar and lemon juice; whisk whites
of eggs to a stiff froth and then beat into cornflour;
add wine. Pour into mould. Make yolks into cus-
tard and pour round shape.
FROSTED CINGALEE PUDDING.
Three bananas, 3 eggs, 3ozs. currants, thin bread
and butter, sugar, and nutmeg. Line a buttered pie-
dish with bread and butter; place over this a layer of
sliced bananas, sprinkle witli currants and other sea-
soning. Continue this until the dish is full. Beat
the yolks of three eggs; add milk, pour the mixture
over the contents of the dish. Bake very gently for
half an hour.- Remove from the oven and cover with
meranguc made from the whites of the eggs; sweeten
and flavour.; replace in the oven and Jot it get a nice
light brown. Serve with cream.
CARAMEL CUSTARD.
Take Jib. white sugar and very little water, put
into a saucepan over a slow fire until it is a light
brown colour; turn into a buttered basin. Take 3 or
4 eggs, 1 pint milk, i tablespoon of sugar, and little
grated sponge cake. Beat well as for a custard, and
pour into the melted sugar in the basin; set the basin


We claim to Supply you
with Good Furniture. . .
At a Lower Price than anywhere else in town.
Gall and inspect our Showrooms, and make your
selection, and wc will arrange terms.
H, W. Lane
Dangar Street Armidale.
"WHAT W DO, WE DO WELL.”
Comino’s
FOR HOME-MADE SWEETS AND CHOICE FRUIT
OF THE SEASON.
ALLEINE FLETCHER,
LEADING .iEWRLLER OF THE NORTH.
A. Horner Fletcher, mj.o.
(Late A.1.F.).
CONSULTING OPHTHALMIC OPTICIAN.
BEARDY-STREET ARMIDALE.


in a steamer and steam slowly for half an hour or till
the custard is set. Leave till cold and turn out;
flavour to taste.
BLANC MANGE.
One quart milk, 4 tablespoons sugar, 4 tablespoons
cornflour, ioz. butter, pinch salt, any flavouring
essence. Method; Mix cornflour, sugar, salt, and
essence with a little of the milk, bring the remainder
of milk to a boil, putting in butter. When boiling,
add cornflour and stir until it boils and thickens. Sim-
mer very gently for five minutes, pour into a mould,
set aside to cool. Serve with stewed fruit.
STEWED APPLES.
Eight apples, 4 tablespoons sugar, 4 gills water.
Method; Make a syrup by, boiling sugar and water
together for 10 minutes, add prepared apples, allow to
simmer gently till tender. Serve on a glass dish.
MYSTERIOUS PUDDING.
(Miss Hope Docker).
Decorate a mould with sliced banana, and about half
fill'll with pieces of sponge sandwich or plain sponge
cake (if preferred) ; dissolve a packet of White’s jelly
crystals as directed on packet, and pour on to the cake
till the mould is full. When cold, turn out and serve
with whipped cream.
WINK JELLY.
(Made without Boiling).
Soak loz. gelatine in i pint cold water for 3 hours;
then add fib. loaf sugar, J pint sherry wine; soak a
pinch of saffron in one tablcspoonful of boiling water
for a few minutes, and strain in; add a small lump
(about the size of a threepenny piece) of citric acid,
a few drops of essence of lemon; then pour on one
pint of boiling water: be sure to stir till all is dissol-
ved; a wine-glass of brandy added is an improvement.
Strain through muslin, and place in moulds to set.
LBGHRB GREAME (Mrs. F. White).
Beat up three eggs, leaving out the whites of two;
add gradually 1 \ pints milk; then mix very carefully 3
tablespoonfuls flour, the grated rind of a lemon, or
39


vanilla. Cook over a slow fire. Then prepare a dish
with sponge cakes ,and ratafia biscuits. Spread with
raspberry jam, pour over the above mixture, putting
through seive if necessary. Decorate with fruits, if
liked. ‘
CHOCOLATE BLANC MANGE.
Four cups milk, 1 small packet gelatine, 1 cup
sugar, 1 cake chocolate, G eggs (if you like). Soak
the gelatine in 1 cup milk, put the other 3 cups on to
boil, and, when boiling, stir in the gelatine, then add
the chocolate and eggs; let it almost come to the
boil, then pour it into a shape, and let it get cold.
Will do as well without the eggs, sugar goes in with
the chocolate. Flavor with vanilla.
LEMON SAGO.
One cup sago, soaked in 3 pints cold water, 2 cups
sugar, grated rinds of 2 lemons, and about 6 table-
spoons treacle; simmer gently till clear, add lemon
juice when cold, turn into moulds, and serve with
cream.
SAGO CREAM.
Half cup sago, 2 pints milk, 3 eggs, sugar, and van-
illa to taste. Beat whites separtely, and when the
rest is cooked, beat in the whites and leave to cool.
This pudding is best cooked in an enamel jug put in a
saucepan of boiling water.
CHOCOLATE CUSTARD.
Two eggs, J pint milk, 1 dessertspoon castor sugar,
IJozs. chocolate, |oz. gelatine, essence vanilla. Put
milk with vanilla on to boil, melt chocolate, add it and
eggs, pour in the pan and bring to the boil When
cool pour in the mould and set. •
ROILED CUSTARD.
Two eggs, 2 teaspoons cornflour, 1 pint milk, 1
tablespoon sugar, and flavouring. Method: Bring milk
to boil and thickened with moistened cornflour, boil 3
minutes, then pour very slowly on to the well-beaten
eggs and sugar. Stand in a saucepan of boiling
water, stir till a coating comes on the spoon. Remove
from the fire, stand aside till cool, and add flavouring
essence.


Pastry
One cup of flour, 1 small cup of dripping, 1 tea-
spoonful baking powder, pinch of salt.,
Method; Mix flour with water and salt into a stiff
dough. Roll out and spread layer of dripping,
sprinkle one-third of baking powder and a little flour.
Repeat this three times. Then roll into a lump and
let stand for an hour (if possible). Then roll out
into a thin paste, cut in rounds or squares. Bake in a
quick oven.
SHORT CRUST.
Ingredients; One pound flour, Coz. butter, 4ozs.
lard, 1 tablespoonful of white pounded sugar, 5 pint
of water. Mix flour and sugar and a pinch of salt to-
gether; rub in the butter thoroughly, also the lard;
roll out on a floured pastry-board two or three times,
folding each time. Bake in a brisk oven.
Cake & Pastry Fillings
LEMON CHEESE.
(Mrs. A. N. Jowett).
Quarter pound butter, Jib. sugar, 3 lemons, 3 eggs,
1 tablespoon arrowroot, and sufficient water to blend
the arrowroot. Beat eggs thoroughly. Put butter
and sugar in an enamel pan, place over a very gentle
heat until the consistency of honey; then add the
juice of lemons; carefully stir for just a little while,
then add the well-beaten eggs. Pay great attention to
adding the eggs, and do not allow to boil. Then add
the dissolved arrowroot in water allow just sufficient
time for the mixture to thicken. Remove from Are
and bottle.
MOCK CREAM FILLING.
Ingredients.—One tablespoon butter, 4 tabelspoons
icing sugar, J teaspoon essence vanilla.
Method.—Beat butter and icing sugar to a cream;
add essence; stir in well. Spread between layers of
cake.


ALMOND ICING.
(Mrs. N. Taylor).
Jib. almonds (grounded), 11b. icing sugar, 1 egg, 1
tablespoon of vanilla, almond and lemon (mixed).
Beat egg well and add essence; then get icing sugar
and put in basin; make a well in it and pour in egg
and essence; make into a very stiff paste, roll out
till it will cover the cake, then put to set.
BUTTER ICING,
Mix 1 tablespoonful of butter with a oup of icing
sugar till it is quite smooth; then add 1 teaspoonfui
vanilla and 1 teaspoonfui coffee essence,
PASSION FRUIT CAKE FILLING.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Bake an ordinary sponge sandwich. Pilling: Six
tablespoons of sugar and 4 of passion fruit juice.
Bob together slowly for live minutes. Take off fire
and beat till it thickens; put between the cake.
CARAMEL ICING.
One cup brown sugar, 2 tablespoons of milk or
cream, 1 tablespoon of butter. Boil seven minutes,
take off, and stir in vanilla to taste, and beat till of
the proper consistency.
Jams & Preserves.
PRESERVES (Miss Cameron).
Make u syrup of 31bs, refined sugar and 1 gallon of
water. Boil for half an hour, add fruit. Time to cook
as follows:
Table of Cooking:
Quinces, 30 minutes.
Peaches, 20 minutes.
Pears, 20 minutes.
Apricot, 10 minutes.
Pineapple cut in slices, 25 minutes.
Plum, 10 minutes.
Apples, 15 minutes.
I use tins syrup for all jny preserves, and they are
excellent.


RHUBARB JAM.
(E. Cameron).
Eight pounds rhubarb, 61bs. sugar, 2 lemons, 1 cup
water. Cut up fine and boil an hour and twenty min-
utes or until a nice brown. •
LOQUAT JAM.
Gut off ends and stone, Jib. sugar to each nound of
fruit, and a gill of water to each pound of sugar; strew
with sugar overnight. Boil sugar and water for fif-
teen minutes, then add fruit. Boil till clear and well
cooked.
ORANGE MARMALADE (No. 1).
Seville Oranges.—Cut the oranges into the thinnest
possible slices, rejecting the seeds. To every 11b. of
fruit add three pints of cold water; let it stand all
night. Next day boil quickly for one and a half hours.
Then let stand again until the following day. .Add
IJlbs. of sugar to each pint of mixture. Boil from 1
to IJ hours—not longer, as it spoils the color.
MARM/LADE (No. 2).
Twelve Seville oranges, 3 lemons. Gut up over-
night and leave to soak in 12 pints water. Next day
boil for an hour; then add sugar and boil two hours
longer or until it jellies.
PIG JAM.
To every pound of figs allow |lb. sugar and half cup
of water. If the figs are dry, add more water. Gut
figs in half and boil in the water till soft ; then add
sugar and boil till they look clear, and the jam is done.
A little green ginger cut up and added to the figs is a
great improvement.
GREEN TOMATO JAM.
(Tested by Mrs. T. L. Docker).
To every pound of tomatoes allow fib. of sugar and
the rind and juice of a lemon. Peel tomatoes and cut
into small blocks. Cover with sugar and let stand till
next day; add the lemon and boil till clear. '


J. A. Henderson
FRUITERER AND CONFECTIONER.
£
BEARD Y-STREET ARM! DALE.
Telephone;' 183.
REFRESHMENTS AT ALL HOURS.
Arthur Robins
HAIRDRESSER AND TOBACCONIST.
BEARD Y-STREET ;; ARMIOALE.
Cleanliness and Satisfaction Guaranteed.
Presentation Smoking and Shaving Outfits
At Lowest Local Prices.
B. Weaver
CHEMIST & STATIONER,
BEAROY-STREET ;; ARMIDALE .
Telephone: 13.
Prescriptions Carefully Dispensed.
All the Latest Novels and Publications.
Toilet Requisites a Speciality.
44


SWEET ORANGE CONSERVE (No. 1).
(Tested by Mrs. T. L. Docker).
Six oranges cut into fine rings, removing the pips,
10 cups of water. Let stand all night. Put on the
fire and bring to boil. Leave till next day. Add 511>s.
of sugar. Boil very fast for li hours, or till it jellies.
ORANGE CONSERVE (No. 2).
. To 6 large oranges allow 6 pints of boiling water,
61bs. of sugar, 1 heaped teaspoon of salt.
Method.—Gut the oranges in six or eight quarters —•
leave on the peel, remove pips. Cover with the boil-
ing water and lib. of sugar; add the salt next day.
Bring to the boil and simmer till the peel will easily
cut with a fork. Then add the rest of the sugar and
boll till the. syrup will jelly. .Remove the quarters of
fruit and arrange in preserving bottles. Strain the
syrup over the fruit while hot, and cover when cold.
ORANGE MARMALADE (No. 3).
Six Seville oranges, six lemons, and 121bs. sugar.
Place the oranges, .thinly sliced, in four quarts of
water overnight. Slice the lemons separately, leaving
them, too, to remain in enough water to cover them
overnight, into which you have put about a teaspoonful
of salt. Drain off the salty liquid in the morning and
add tlie lemons to the oranges. Boil all together until
quite soft, before adding the sugar; this should be
added gradually, and the marmalade should be boiled
until it jellies.
QUINCE HONEY (Mrs. H. Warner).
Take 51bs. of sugar and three cups of water- and
boil together for twenty minutes. Peel and quarter
five quinces and grate into the syrup, boiling all toge-
ther for 20 or 30 minutes.
QUINCE MARMALADE.
(Mrs. J. Slade) .
Six large quinces, 51bs. sugar, 4 quarts water. Gut
the quinces into small dice, leaving on skin and pips.
Pour over them the water, and 1 small teaspoon of
salt. Gently.simmer till soft and slightly pink. Then
add the sugar and simmer till the liquid will form a
jelly. ,
45


GOLDEN QUEEN TOMATO JAM.
(K. Thorpe).
Take 201bs .of fruit, wipe dry, and slice, add Jib.
sugar to every pound of fruit; boil slowly for four
hours; add few drops essence of lemon, previous to
taking off the tire. When cold, put into jars and seal.
A delicious jam.
MELON AND LEMON JAM.
(K. Thorpe).
To every pound of melon, allow Jib. sugar, and six
lemons to every 12ibs. of melon. Cut up the melon,
and put in preserving pan, with half the sugar sprink-
led over; add .rinds of lemons (finely cut), and the
juice. Let it stand over-night, then add (lie rest of
the sugar. Boil till cooked.
LEMON JELLY. ■
Slice thinly three lemons, removing seeds; soak
three days in water, changing water daily; strain and
add one pint water; cook slowly for two hours; add
two pounds white sugar and simmer for twenty min-
utes. Bottle and tie down tightly. Makes about four
pounds jelly.
Pickles.
GREEN TOMATO PICKLES.
One gallon tomatoes, 2 or 4 onions sliced, 2 quarts
vinegar, rather more than half a pint of treacle, 2
tablespoonfuls mustard, 1 teaspoon each of allspice,
.cloves, and pepper corns, cayenne to taste; stir
tomatoes, sprinkle salt between each layer, stand 12
hours, drain off liquid, add onions, boil treacle and
vinegar together for ten minutes, add other ingredi-
ents, and boil till thick. Pit for use in a fortnight.
PICKLE BEANS.
Two pounds small French beans, vinegar, Joz. mix-
ed pickling spices. Prepare beans as for boiling,
cover them with salt-water made strong. Stand for
two days in cool place, then drain and dry them In a
■ cloth; pour over them enough boiling vinegar to cover
46


with spice boiled in it. Stand three days, drain, and
boil vinegar again, popr over, and stand three days.
Then boil all together till beans are tender; cover
closely. Keeping improves them.
Sauces.
TOMATO SAUCE.
Six pounds tomatoes, |lb. onions, Joz. garlic, ioz.
ground ginger, ioz. cloves, 3ozs. salt, cayenne, or
chillies to taste. Boil onions and tomatoes till tender;
pass through colander, and one pint of vinegar, ilb.
brown sugar. Boil half an hour, or. till thick.
TOMATO SAUCE, No, 1 (Airs. H. Warner).
Twenty pounds ripe tomatoes, 2lbs. cooking apples,
lib. onions, ilb. garlic, 2-llhs. brown sugar, Jib, salt,
2ozs. whole pepper, 2ozs. cloves, 2ozs. allspice, 2ozs.
cinnamon, IJoz. ginger, loz. mace, 'loz. cayenne pep-
per, 3 pints vinegar. Boil tomatoes and apples until
mashed; then strain through colander, bruising well
with a wooden spoon; then put the strained part into
a pan with Hie vinegar, sugar, and salt. (Tie in a
muslin hag onions, garlic, and spices). Boil all fast for
2i hours. Just before taking off add the cayenne.
Bottle when cool, and cork down securely. This
sauce will keep for years.
TOMATO SAUCE, No. 2 (Mrs, T. L. Docker).
To every seven pounds of tomatoes allow ilb.
onions,' ilb. sugar, ilb. whole ginger (bruised), 2ozs.
salt, 1 pint vinegar, a few cloves and blades of mace, 1
saltspoonful of cayenne. Gut up the tomatoes and
onions and boil together till soft; rub through a col-
ander; add the vinegar, sugar, and salt, etc. The
bruised ginger and spices must be put into a large
muslin bag, and can be put in the first boiling if liked.
Boil 1 ill thick, bottle and cork, and seal as quickly as
Possible.


Chutney.
SWEET CHUTNEY.
Four pounds cooking apples, -41bs. tomatoes, 21bs.
•onions, 21bs. brown sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of salt, i
teaspoon of cayenne pepper, 1 quart vinegar. Boil al-
together for about five hours, or till quite clear.
TOMATO CHUTNEY, No. 3 (Miss Blaxland).
Twenty pounds green tomatoes, G onions, a little
garlic, G large apples, 6 chillies, J teaspoon cayenne
pepper, loz. ground cloves, £ tablespoonful salt, 21bs.
brown sugar, 2 quarts vinegar, 4 large pieces pre-
served ginger, loz. ground cinnamon, Jib. sultanas,
21bs. treacle. Boil all to the consistency of jam.
TOMATO CHUTNEY, No. 1 (Miss M'Gregpr).
Ten pounds tomatoes; peel and cut into thin slices,
add 51bs. brown sugar, half a small cup of salt, 21bs.
■chopped apples, 11b. chopped onions, loz. whole gin-
ger (bruised and tied in a muslin bag), also 1 table-
spoon of cloves and cayenne pepper to taste. When
the chutney has boiled for one hour, add one pint of
vinegar. Stir and boil two hours longer, or until thick
enough. Bottle when hot.
TOMATO CHUTNEY, No. 2 (Miss M'Gregor).
Two pounds apples, 21bs. brown sugar, 21bs. toma-
toes, 11b. preserved ginger, 21bs. onions, 2ozs. garlic,
1 teaspoon cayenne, 1 dessertspoon pepper, 3 chillies, 3
dessertspoons salt. Slice all ingredients very finely;
.add a little vinegar; boil slowly for five hours. When
nearly done, add enough vinegar to make it just a nice
consistency.
TOMATO CHUTNEY.
(K. Thorpe) .
Two dozen tomatoes, J dozen green apples, 3 lem-
ons, 2 cups sugar, 11b. raisins, Jib. salt, loz. pepper-
corns, loz. each whole ginger and cloves, Idoz. chil-
lies, 3 bottles vinegar, 1 teaspoonful cayenne pepper;
tie the peppercorns, cloves, and ginger in a fine bag;
out tomatoes, lemons, and apples Into small pieces.
Then put all ingredients into a stew-pan and boil two
hours.


TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Mrs. R. T. Yyner).
Tomatoes 81bs., apples -libs., onions lib., brown
sugar lib. salt ilb., 1 teaspoonful each of mace, all-
spice (whole), cloves, black pepper, vinegar 1 pint,
i pint sherry, 3 chillies, 1 saltspoon cayenne pepper.
Pour boiling water on tomatoes to remove skins. Put
into colander to drain; peel and core apples, and cut
■up; chop onions finely, tie spices in muslin, chop
chillies, put all into an enamelled pan. and 'Simmer
gently for six hours, pressing out all lumps with
wooden spoon. The sherry put in just before lifting,
as it is to preserve the chutney, and if.boiled with it
will evaporate.
APPLE CHUTNEY. (No. 1).
Four pounds sour apples, 21bs.‘ brown sugar, 2
■onions, 10 cloves of garlic, 2 teaspoons salt, 1 tea-
spoon ground spice, 1 teaspoon cayenne pepper. Put
in saucepan, cover with good vinegar, and boil gently
four or live hours. One ounce white spice and pep-
per corns, loz. whole ginger, 4 blades mace and
cloves put into a bag and boiled with it may be added
to improve it.
APPLE CHUTNEY (No. 2).
Three dozen apples, 1 dozen tomatoes (green), 1
•dozen onions, 61bs. plum jam, Jib. ground ginger, Joz.
salt, IJlb. sugar, 2ozs. pepper corns, 2ozs. cayenne
pepper, 2 bottles vinegar.. Put apples, tomatoes,
and onions through sausage machine, add other ingre-
dients, and boil slowly until a rich brown.
APPLE CHUTNEY. .
Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Two pounds apples, peeled and cored, 1 cup course
brown sugar, J teaspoon cayenne pepper i teaspoon
ground spice, 11b. onions cut fine, 1 teaspoon of salt.
Put into an enamelled saucepan and cover with good
vinegar. Boil gently for three or four hours with lid
on saucepan.


Don’t Worry !
YOU’LL HAVE NO FAILURES
If you buy
ALL YOUR INGREDIENTS AT
F. Braimd & Co, Ltd.
“ITS’ VALUE AT BRAUNO’S.”
Armidale
Mallam and Co.
Family Chemists
Booksellers and Stationers
Armidale
P.O. Box 34. Telephone No. 12.


Cakes.
GINGER SANDWICH.
Guo tablespoon butler, i small cup of sugar, J cup
treacle, J cup milk, 1J cups of Hour, 1 teaspoon each
cinnamon and carbonate of soda, J teaspoon ground
ginger, 1 egg. Beat butter and sugar well together,
then add egg, treacle, and milk, in which the soda has
been dissolved, flour and spices. Bake about ten
minutes.
SPONGE CAKE.
Seven eggs, putting three whites out, 31b. sugar, -Jib.
flour, J cup water, vanilla essence. Mode: Put the
water and sugar on and boil, pour on the eggs and
beat for 15 minutes; then the flour,-warmed and sift-
ed into mixture; add vanilla; then put in tin. » Have
the oven quick at first and bake for half to three-
quarters of an hour.
PLAIN CAKE.
One tablespoon butter, J cup of sugar, 1 egg, 6
tablespoons milk, i cup flour, 1J teaspoons baking
powder, pinch salt, essence vanilla. Beat butter and
sugar to a cream, add egg, then flour (in which bak-
ing'powder is sifted) and milk alternately. Bake in
sandwich tins 10 to 15 minutes, or 20 minutes in one
cake in a moderate oven.
SAND CAKE (1).
Five ounces flour, sozs. cornflour, Jib. sugar, Jib.
butter, 5 eggs, 1 small teaspoonful baking powder.
Mix flour, cornflour, and butter together to a cream
with the hands, beat eggs and sugar till very light;
mix together and add baking powder . (mix baking
powder with tablespoonful of flour), 1 teaspoonful
vanilla. Bake ij hours. Must not be cut the flrst
day.
SAND CAKE, No. 2.
. (Tested by Mrs. L. Braund).
Cream together Jib. butter, 6ozs. flour, Gozs. corn-
flour, until soft and white. Then whisk 3 eggs with
Jib. sugar until thick, add the egg and sugar mixture


to the butter and flour mixture, and, lastly add suffi-
cient powdered ammonia to cover a threepenny piece
dissolved in one tablespoon of boiling water. Put into
buttered tin and bake in moderate oven about one
hour. When cold, cover with lemon iciryj. You can
buy special tins for this cake; if not, an ordinary tin
will do, with a cup in the middle.
SCOTCH CUDDLES.
One egg, Jib. butter, Jib. sugar, Jib. flour, J tea-
spoon cream of tartar, J teaspoon soda. Mix with
little milk into moderately-stiff dough, roll out thin,
and cut in rounds. As for biscuits, place in centre of
eacii a stoned date, roil up, and bake in moderate oven.
This mixture will also do for kisses; instead of rolling
in date bake plain and spread jam between and fold
one on the other; ice or leave plain.
CHRISTMAS CAKE,
One pound butter, 11b. sugar, eight or nine eggs
(nine if small), l!h. currants, lib. sultanas, 11b. peel,
pinch salt, 1 teaspoon soda, little spice, wineglass of
brandy, lib. 4ozs. flour. Mix as usual, and bake three
hours in good.oven.
POUND CAKE.
One pound butter, lib. sugar, lib. flour, grated
nutmeg, pinch salt, 8 eggs, lib. raisins, lib. currants,
11b. crystallised eberrios or dates. Juice of one orange,
ill), almonds, 2 teaspoons baking powder. Mix as,
usual, bake in moderate oven three to four hours .*
When cold, icc with almond icing.
MARBLE CAKE (Miss U. Vickers) .
One cup of sugar, J .cup butter, J cup milk, 3 eggs,
2 cups flour, 1J teaspoons baking powder. Method;
Beat as usual, take a little of the batter out and mix
chocolate with it, put alternately into a buttered tin
,and bake in quick oven.
CREAM PUFFS.
One and a half cups of water, 2 tablespoons butter,
let boil in saucepan and stir in briskly 1 cup of sifted
flour and 1 tablespoon baking powder. Stir well and


put tu cool. Beat 4 eggs to a stiff froth and add to-
the coid mixture. Drop on buttered tins and bake in
moderate oven for half an hour without opening the
door. When cooked and cool, split open and fill with
whipped cream or custard.
SPONGE SANDWICH (firs. J. Ward).
Four eggs, 1 cup flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 4 tablespoons milk, ioz. butter.
Method.—Beat eggs and sugar until quite spongy,
add flour and baking powder well sifted, and lastly,
boiling milk and butter. Mix very lightly, pour into
prepared (ins, and bake eight minutes.
CINNAMON SANDWICH (Mrs. J. Ward).
Ingredients.—Pour eggs, 1 cup flour, 1 cup sugar,
1 itaspoon linking powder, f> tablespoons milk, 2ozs.
butler, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, 2 teaspoons cocoa.
Method.—Beat eggs and sugar until quite spongy,
add flour, baking powder, cinnamon, and cocoa (well
sifted), and lastly boiling milk and butter. • Mix very
lightly, pour into prepared tins, and hake eight min-,
uies.
ANGER CAKE (F. P. White),
Cream well'together Gozs. butter and Gozs. castor
sugar;' add--Jibs, arrowroot, the whites of 5 eggs (very
well beaten till quite stiff). Beat ail together for
quarter of an hour, adding any flavouring preferred.
Turn cake into a carefully-buttered cake-tin, sprinkle
top willi castor sugar, and bake jn moderately hot
oven,
PASSION FRUIT SANDWICH.
Make the ordinary mixture for sandwich, but fla-
vour with passion juice. Strain the juice of,l* dozen
fruit; divide into three lots a very little to flavour—
one lot for jelly and the other for icing. The jelly is
made by boiling the juice mixed with a little water,
ami-made (hick with a little cornflour; allow to cool,
and then spread between cakes; icing is made the
same as for cocoanut ice, except Jay using juice mix-
ed with a little water instead of milk. Icing: Half
cun passion fruit juice to iwo cups of sugar.


WINDSOR CAKE.
One cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 4 cups flour, 1 cup
milk, 4 eggs, i teaspoon cream of tartar, 4 teaspoon
•carbonate soda. Beat butter and sugar to a cream,
then add eggs (well beaten) next milk. After adding
flour, bake immediately. Cook in patty tins.
THE MODEL SANDWICH.
One cup brown sugar, piece butter the size of an
egg, 2 cup treacle, J cup sour milk or butter-milk, 1
egg, pinch of salt, 1 teaspoon each of ground cinna-
mon, doves, and soda, about 2 cups flour or enough
to make a batter that will run off the spoon. Rub
butter and sugar together, add egg (well beaten),
skim milk, then treacle with soda dissolved in a little
hot water; stir in well; then stir in flour and spices.
Bake in two sandwich tins and put together with cara-
mel icing, and ice top with same.
Caramel icing: Two cups brown sugar, 4 cup cream
or milk, 1 tablespoon butter. Boil about five min-
utes; take off Are and add 1 teaspoon vanilla. Beat
■ until cool.
*
DR. LEE’S POUND CAKE. .
Half pound sugar, 41b. butter, 5 eggs, 1 cup milk,
4 teaspoon baking powder, |lb. peei, lib. flour. Beat
butter and sugar to a cream; add eggs well beaten.
OAKLAND’S SWISS ROLL.
Quarter pound flour, 41b, sugar, 3 eggs, 1 table-
spoonful of cold water, 4 teaspoon cream of tartar, 4
'teaspoon soda.
Mode. —Beat eggs and sugar together for from 10
to 15 minutes. Sift flour, cream of tartar, and soda
Into well beaten eggs and sugar; mix quickly. Add
water, put into prepared sandwich dish, and cook
from 6 to 10 minutes.
ICED CAKE.
Half-pound flour, Jib. butter, 1 cup sugar, 3 eggs
well beaten). Beat butter and sugar together, then
add eggs; lastly, flour, in which baking powder has
been mixed (1 teaspoonful baking powder).


ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR CAKE.
One cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 3 flour, A eggs, J
cup milk, a little salt, flavouring of grated lemon peel.
Sift in flour, together with 2 teaspoons of baking pow-
der. Beat butter and sugar to a cream, break in eggs
one at a time, niix in flour, and lastly milk. Bake in a
flat tin. This cake may be iced.
DELICIOUS CAKE.
Three cups flour, i cup butter,-It cups sugar, A
eggs, 1 teaspoon carbonate of soda in a cup of milk,
2 teaspoons cream .of tartar in flour. Beat butter and
sugar to a cream, add eggs (well beaten), then milk;
lastly flour. . '
SNOW CAKE.
Half pound arrowroot, Jib. flour. Jib. butter, Jib.
sugar, whites of six eggs, essence of vanilla. Beat
butter to a cream, stir in sugar and arrowroot gradu-
ally at the same time, beat for a while; then add
whiles of eggs whisked to a froth. Beat for 20 min-
utes longer. >
CORNFLOUR CAKE.
Half-pound butter, Jib. sugar, Jib. cornflour. One
cup flour, 5 eggs, and 1 teaspoon baking powder. Put
buffer, sugar, flour, and cornflour into a basin; - rub
well together; then add well beaten eggs; beat all
together for 13 minutes until like cream: add powder
and essence and bake in patty tins.
PRUDENCE CAKE. .
Ten ounces flour, 1 cup sugar, J cup butter, 3
eggs, 1 teaspoon baking powder, J cup milk. Beat
sugar and butter well; then add flour and whites of
eggs (well beaten) and milk if necessary. Bake in
sandwich tin. Icing—yolks of eggs and 1 cup of cas-
tor sugar and a little cinnamon.
SULTANA CAKE.
Beat jib. of butter and 6oza. sugar to a cream, add
3 eggs (well beaten) and J cup of milk. Stir in Jib.
flour and 1 teaspoon baking powder (mixed) ; flavour
with essence of lemon: add Jib. sultanas and beat all


W. A. Hirschberg
WATCHMAKER, JEWELLER, & OPTICIAN.
Beardy-Street ARMIDALE.
’Phone: 203.
Finest Stock of Jewellery in the North. Repairs
promptly executed. All Articles engraved on prem-
ises.
Imperial Hotel .V Armidale
(H. E. CANTOR, Proprietor).
First-Class Accommodation for Tourists. Guests
assured of every Comfort & Convenience.
The new Bar is stocked with the Best Brands of
Liquor. Single Bottles at Reduced Rates.
FOR BOOT AND SHOE REPAIRS, TRY
D. B. McDonald
BEARDY-STREET ARMIDALE.
No man leaves our Establishment
Wearing an Unbecoming: Suit . .. .
Studying Men’s Clothing Requirements we .have a
very accurate knowledge of the right kind of suit for
every kind of man. The result of our careful study is
shown in the stylish appearance of every man who
wears a suit from SAVAGES.
The very next time you want a Suit, let us be your
Tailors. We are convinced that no better Suits than
ours are made irr Australia. •
C. Savage & Sons,
’Phone 213. Beardy-strect, Armidale.


well together. Grease and paper a tin, pour in the
mixture and bake about an hour in a moderate oven.
DATE CAKE.
Beat together a slightly heaped cupful of sugar and
' half a cup of butter; add two well beaten eggs, a few
drops of essence of lemon, and a dust of nutmeg.
Then put in one cupful of sweet milk, with one tea-
spoonful of carbonate of soda dissolved in it, and
finally add two and a half cupfuls of flour, with two
teaspoonfuls of cream of.tartar sifted through it. Stir
in gently'a well-heaped cupful of prepared 1 dates.
Bake in shallow pans and cut into squares for serving,
and if liked the squares may be iced.
SPONGE ROLL.
Beat three eggs well, add I cup of sugar, and beat
again; then add J cup of flour, and a teasponful of
baking powder, a pinch of salt, and some flavouring.
Bake in a moderate oven.
, POETICAL POUND CAKE (Good).
One pound of the finest flour that may be within your
, power,
Lump sugar likewise lib., and let the same be nicely
ground; . ■
11b. fresh butter (neat allow) made from the cream
of the red cow,
10 new-laid eggs likewise get that never hen did on
them set; ' . .
10 of Ihe yolks, only half of the white, and that will
make it fine and light.
Beat well together. To the oven take it, and let the
baker nicely bake it,
And when it is done, and cold as a stone,
You may either eat it or leave it alone.
Method.—Beat the butter to a cream, add the
sugar (nicely pounded), beat until fine and light; add
eggs gradually, stirring all the time; lastly, mix in
the flour lightly without beating, and a good, light
cake will he the result, if baked in an oven of moder-
ate heat.


SULTANA CAKE (Mrs. B. Cooke).
Ingredients.—One cup butter, 1J cups sugar, it
eggs, 1 heaped teaspoonful baking powder, 3 cups
Hour, cream, butler, and sugar; add one egg at a time
and beat well. Then add flour and baking powder,
and lastly Jib. sultanas. Bake in a moderate oven one
and a half hours. Add flavouring, if liked.
SULTANA CAKE (Jib. Mixture) .
Beat Jib. butter to a cream, Jib; sifted sugar, add
2 eggs and beat for a few minutes, and so on until
you have added 6 eggs. Then mix lib. sultanas and
Jib. flour, Jib. lemon-peel; stir gently into the butter
and eggs. Line a tin with greased paper, pour in the
mixture, and bake in a moderate oven for ij hours.
• "
EXCELLENT LITTLE CAKES.
(Mrs. H. Cooke).
Take 1J cups sugar, 1 cup butter, 4 eggs, 2J cups
flour, one-third cup milk, 1 teaspoonful baking powder.
Mix sugar and butter, add eggs (well beaten), mix
the powder with the flour, and add to the butter, etc.
Mix all together, and bak . m patty-tins.
CREAM SANDWICH CAKE.
(W. Fletcher).
Three eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 dessertspoon
butler melted in J cup hot water, 1 teaspoon baking
powder. Beat eggs and sugar for 20 minutes; then
add flour and baking powder; last of all water and
butter. Bake quarter of an hour in a hot oven. Put
whippejJ cream in middle.
COFFEE CAKE.
Beat 4ozs. sugar and 4ozs. butter to a cream; then
add 4 eggs, one at a timer then sift in 4ozs. flour that
has had J teaspon soda added. Lastly stir 2 table-
spoons very strong coffee essence. Bake in a moder-
ate oven.
DAY AND NIGHT CAKE.
To one cup sugar put 2 cups flour, the yolks of 3
eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 cup milk, 2 teaspoons
baking powder. Beat sugar and butter to a cream,


add eggs and beat well; then add the milk, flour, and
baking powder. Put into one-half (divide mixture
into half) 1 cup sultanas, 2 teaspoonful of essence of
vanilla, and enough chocolate . or cocda to make it
dark. Flavour, the other half with essence of lemon.
.'Bake separately in sandwich tins. Whip up the
whites of three eggs with a cup of icing sugar. When
■.the cakes are done, spread half the icing on one cake,
and sprinkle with desicated cocoanut. Lay the other
>Jialf cake on the top, and spread with the other half
of the icing and cocoanut.
GRANNIE’S CAKE (Without Eggs).
, One pound flour, Alb. sugar, 1 breakfast cup of
milk. Jib. butter, J teaspoonful of soda. Jib.sultanas,
2ozs. candied pee). Mix butter and sugar together,
add milk and soda, fruit, and flour. Stir well. Put
into a tin lined with.buttered paper and bake in a hot
oven for 1J hours. Try with a straw to see if it be
cooked..
BUTTER-MILK CAKE.
Five cups flour, 2 cups sugar, 2 cups fruit, 1 pint
butter-milk, 2 teaspoons so9a, or 5 teaspoons baking
powder, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, J packet mixed spices,
1 tablespoon butter. Rub butter into flour, add other
ingredients; milk last. Cook in moderate oven in flat
tin.
COFFEE SANDWICH.
Five ounces butter, 6ozs. sugar, lOozs. flour, 1 tea-
spoon baking powder, 3 eggs, J gill table-
spoons coffee essence.
Method.—Beat butter to a cream, add sugar and
ettam well together; add well-beaten eggs, then milk
and coffee essence, then flour and baking powder. Put
in sandwich tins and bake about 20 minutes.
Filling)—Beat- ?ozs. butter to a cream, add four of
icing sugar, 1 tablespoon coffee essence, some vanilla.
Icing.—Put lOozs. icing sugar into a saucepan with
1 tablespoon coffee essence, and make hot; add' van-
illa, if liked. Pour over oakp.and decorate with wal-
nuts.


GINGER CAKE.
Ten ounces flour, 4ozs. butter, 3 eggs, 4ozs. castor
sugar, Sozs. preserved ginger, J teaspoonful ground
ginger, 1 tcaspoonful baking powder, 1 tablespoonful
syrup from ginger, rind Of half a lemon. Beat butter
and sugar to a cream, add grated lemon-peel and
grpund ginger, then the eggs well beaten,' and the
sifted flour alternately; add ginger syrup and a little
milk, if required, and the preserved ginger cut into
dice. Mix thoroughly and add baking powder last
thing. Line tin with paper and bake in a moderate
oven 1J hours,
ORANGE CAKE (No. i).
Beat up the yolks of 3 eggs, work in gradually 5
ozs. of sugar, 4ozs. tine flour, 1 tcaspoonful baking
powder, the'juice and linely-grated peel of an orange,
and lastly the whites of two well-beaten eggs.
Icing.—oozs. of icing sugar, juice of half an orange,
warm over the fire till smooth and use.
ORANGE CAKE' (No. 2)..
Half-pound of sugar mixed with the grated rind of
an orange, and Jib. butter beaten to a cream; add to
this 3 eggs well beaten and J a cup of milk; mix ii
teaspoons of linking powder in §lb. flour and sift it in;
add a squeeze or two of orange juice and bake in two
layers in well-buttered tins.
To Ice. —Warm the juice of two oranges and add
enough icing sugar to make it moderately stiff. Put
between the layers, and also on top.
RAINBOW CAKE,
Five eggs, Oozs. butter, Oozs. sugar, 12ozs. flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder. Rub butter and sugar to
a cream, add eggs well beaten; lastly, flour and baking
powder, divide into three parts, colour as required.
Bake in separate tins, and join with a thin layer of
jam.
SEED CAKE.
One and a half cups of flour, 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar,
1 teaspoon baking powder, 4 cup butter, some cara-
way seeds, £ cup milk.- Beat butter and sugar to a


cream, add yolks then flour and seeds, then whites
beaten to a stiff froth, and lastly the baking powder.
Bake in moderate oven about half an hour.
SULTANA CAKE.
Half-pound butter, Jib. sugar, 4 eggs, J-cup warm
milk, jibs, flour, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, sul-
tanas, peel, essence. Beat butter and sugar .to a
cream, add egg yolks first, and then whites beaten to
a stiff froth; then fruit, essence, and flour, and last of
all warm milk in which baking powder has been dis-
solved. Bake about 1J hours in moderate oven.
PASSION FRUIT CAKE.
Quarter pound of butter, 1 gill of milk, 2 eggs, 1
teaspoon of soda, and 1 teaspoon of lemon juice, J tin
of icing sugar, sozs. of sugar, a teaspoonful of cream
of tartar, 6 passion fruit, Jib. flour. Beat butter well,
add sugar, beat, separate whites and yolks of eggs,
beat both lightly, add yolks and then the whites; dis-
solve the soda in the milk and add to mixture; lastly
add flour and cream of tartar. Pour into sandwich
tins and bake 10 minutes. Beat the passion fruit, add
icing sugar and lemon juice and spread between two
cakes.
PEARL CAKE.
Whites of 3 eggs, i tea r cup white sugar, 1 cup each
of flour‘and cornflour, J cup of milk, J cup butter, 2
teaspoons of baking powder, and teaspoons of essence
of lemon. Beafbutter to cream; add sugar and
other ingredients; lastly, eggs (whites only), well
beaten. Bake at once in a moderate oven.
SULTANA CAKE.
Half-pound flour, Jib. sugar, Jib. sultanas, sozs.
butter, 2 eggs, J teaspoon baking powder, lemon peel
to taste. Bake in a quick oven.
WOLLUN CAKE (M. C. Blaxland).
Four eggs, weight of 3in sugar and butter and of
1 in flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, fruit to taste.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs one by
one,.and beat thoroughly; sift in flour and baking
powder, add fruit. Bake in moderate oven.


AFFUA CAKE (M. G. Blaxland).
Three eggs, Jib. flour, -ill), sugar, i teaspoon cream
of tartar, J teaspon carbonate of soda. Beat eggs and
sugar for i hour. Sift in Hour with cream of tartar
and soda carbonate; add 2 or 3 tablespons boiling
water. Bake in sandwich tins in quick oven.
BEATRICE CAKE.
Four eggs, ibeir weight in sugar and flour, 2 table-
spoons butter, 3 tablespoons milk, 1 teaspoon baking
powder. Beat sugar and butter to a cream, add eggs
one at a time and beat well; add flour and baking
powdgr, and lastly milk. Bake in sanfawich tins.
ROCK CAKE (Without Eggs).
One pound flour, -Jib. sugar, Jib. butter, lb. cur-
rants, 2 teaspoons baking powder. Mix well and add
very slowly a little warm . milk till very rocky and
stiff. Bake in meat tins.
SPONGE CAKE.
iNine eggs, li cups sugar, heaped tca-cup flour.
Break eggs one by one on sugar, beating all the time.
When all broken in, beat half an hour. Add flour
quickly, put in buttered tin. Bake | hour in moderate
oven.
LITTLE CAKES.
Half-pound butler, |-lb. sugar. Jib. flour, 3 eggs,
2ozs. bhopped almonds, 2 ozs. currants, 2ozs. lemon
peel, 2ozs. raisins. Cream sugar and butter; add eggs
well beaten, then fruit: lastly flour. Drop on tins in
small pieces, and bake in quick oven.
FRUIT CAKE.
One and a quarter pound flour, 11b. sugar, lib.
butter, 8 eggs, 11b. sultanas, lib. currants, Jib.
lemon-peel, 10 drop 3 of essence of almonds.
Method. —Mix butter and sugar to cream, add eggs
well beaten yolks and whites, then flour and fruit.
Bake three hours,
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
The half of following ingredients is sufficient • for
two cakes;—Three dozen eggs, 31bs. sugar, 31bs. of


currants, lib. sultanas and raisins, 4 Jibs. Hour, 31bs.
butter, lilb. almonds, 11b. mixed peel, 2 nutmegs gra-
ted, 4 teaspoons lull ol baking powder. Work butter
and sugar to a cream; add eggs one at a time (un-
beaten) ; add all other ingredients and beat well.
MOCHA CAKE (Miss K. B. Jackes).
Two heaped tablesponfuls of butter, 1J cups of
sugar, 2 eggs, 14 cups of milk, \ teaspoonful of salt,
i teaspoonful of vanilla extract, 2 cupsful of Hour, 2
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 4 squares of chocolate
of 14 dessertspoonsfulmf cocoa.
Mode.—First cream the butter and sugar; then
add the yolks of the eggs (beaten), the milk, salt, van-
illa, flour, baking powder, and the chocolate melted;
Mix well and add the beaten whites of eggs. Divide
Into buttered sandwich tins and bake In a fairly hot
oven. When cool, ice and fill with the following: —
1 oup of icing sugar, 1 tablespoonful of butter, 4 tea-
spoonful of vanilla extract, 2 teaspoonfuls of cocoa.
Mix with two tablespoonfuls of strong coffee.
, OSWKGO SPONGE OAKE.
Ingredients.—Bozs. cornflour, 6ozs. /white sugar,
4ozs. btitter, 3 eggs, 1 teaspoon baking powder.
Method.—Beat all well together. Bake in small
tins in a slow oven.
FROSTED DATE CAKES (Miss K. Jackes).
One cup x of chopped dates, one-third cup of butter,
1 cup of sugar, 4 cup of milk, 13 cup of flour, 2 eggs,
2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 4 teaspoonful pow-
dered ginger, \ teaspoonful grated nutmeg, J tea-
spoonful powdered cloves.
Mode.—Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add the
beaten eggs, then the milk, flour, baking powder,
spices, and dates. ■ Bake in patty-tins in a moderate
oven twenty-five minutes. Ice with soft icing and
ornament with a stoned date.
COGOANUT CUBES.
Two eggs, 1 cup of sugar, 1 oup of flour, % tea-
spoonfuls of baking powder, 6 tablespoonfuls of boil-
ing water, 1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract, 11b. of


icing sugar, Jib. chopped cocoanut, 1 lemon. Have the
yolks of the eggs beaten up with the sugar, then add
the hour, baking powder, and the whites of the
eggs well beaten. Stir in the boiling water and the
vanilla. Bake in a buttered pan in a moderate oven.
While slightly warm cut into 2-inch cubes. Make the
icing with the icing sugar and the juice of half the
lemon, adding enough water to make it moderately
stiff. Ice the cubes on all sides and roll in the cocoa-
nut.
SPONGE CAKE.
Three-quarters of a pound of sugar, 31bs. flour, 8
eggs, -J pint water, grated rind of a lemon. Beat 8
yolks and four whites together for few minutes, put
sugar and water on fire to melt. Take off and let get
nearly cool; add the mixture to, the eggs, and beat
half an hour. Then stir in the sifted flour and lemon
rind, stir flour in lightly and not long. Bake in but-
tered tins.
CHAMPAGNE CAKES.
(Tested by Mrs. T. L. Docker).
Four ounces butter, 4ozs. sugar, Bozs. flour, 2 eggs,
1 tcaspoonful baking powder, a few drops of essence
of almonds. Beat butter to cream with sugar; add
eggs one at a time, a little milk, add flour and baking
powder, put a small teaspoonful in tin, 2 in a row with
a half almond in centre. Bake in a quick oven. These
cakes are baked in special tins.
PASSION FRUIT CAKE.
Two eggs, their weight in flour and sugar, and light
weight in butter, juice of two passion fruit, cream,
butter, and sugar; add eggs and 1 tablespoon of milk;
stir in Hour, add fruit: lastly, 1 teaspoon of baking
powder. Ice with icing sugar amt juice of , passion
fruit.
POUND CAKE.
One pound of sugar, 11b. butter, 11b. raisins {chop-
'ped), 2lbs. sultanas, 1 Jibs, flour, Jib. mixed peel, Jib.
almonds (finely chopped), teaspoonful of ground gin-
ger and any other flavouring liked; 12 eggs (leaving
64


out whites of three for icing)- Beat sugar and but-
ter to a cream with the hand; add eggs one by one r
beating well; then the flour gradually. Bake in a
slow oven four hours.
CARRAWAY SEED CAKE.
Half cup sugar, i cup butter, 1 cup flour, 2 eggs, i
cup milk, 1 egg-spoon baking powder, and a few
sarraway seeds. Bake in round tin.
CHOCOLATE CREAM CAKE.
(K. Thoipe).
IJlhs. each butter, sugar, and Hour, 14 eggs. Beat
yolks separate with sugar and butter. Beat whites
separately, and add to above. To \ the batter mix
ilb. chocolate, and bake of each part (dark and light)
six cakes. In place of jelly for filling,, put f pint of
cream and yolks of eggs; sugar to taste; flavour with
extract vanilla. Put on the fire, stir until it thickens,
and put between the cakes. Very rich and delicious.
LAMINGTON CAKE_
(Mrs. N. Taylor).
1 cup butter, 1J cups sugar, 3 smalll cups flour, 1
small cup milk, 5 eggs (leaving out two whites), 1
small teaspoon C. soda, 2 small teaspoons cream
of tartar dissolved in milk. Beat butter and sugar
together, add the eggs well beaten, and milk in which
the cream of tartar has been dissolved, then the flour
and soda. Bake 20 to 30 minutes in a flat tin. When
cold, cut in blocks and ice.
Icing: jib. butter, 11b. icing sugar, beaten together;
then the whipped whites of eggs
chocolate or cocoa. Cover the blocks; then roll in
dessicatcd cocoanut.
CHESSBOARD CAKE.
(Mrs. N. Taylor).
Half pound butter, Jib. sugar, ilb. flour, 4 eggs, 2
tablespoons chocolate, essence of vanilla, J tea-
spoon baking powder. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, add well-beaten eggs, then flour and baking
powder; divide in two and add chocolate to one.
Look in flat tins. When cold, cut in strips and stick
with jam filling, and almond icing.
65


CINAMON CAKE.
(Mrs. N. Taylor).
Five eggs, weight of 4 eggs in butter and sugar,
weight of 5 eggs in hour, 2 tablespoons of cinamon, 1
teaspoon baking powder; if small eggs a little milk.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add well-beaten
eggs, then Hour, cinamon, and baking powder. Bake
in moderate oven half an hour.
Icing: Jib. of icing sugar melted in 2 tablespooasful
of boiling water and pour over.
BUTTER SANDWICH.
(Mrs. A, N. Jowett).
Take 4 eggs and their weight in sugar, butter and
flour (self-raising flour). Mix the butter and eggs till
the consistency of cream; add the well-beaten eggs,
then the flour. Pour into buttered tins and bake for
20 minutes. This sandwich will keep quite fresh
from five to seven days. ( »
BELGIAN POUND CAKE .
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Beat together Jib. butter and Jib. sugar, add 4 or
5 well-beaten eggs, Jib. flour, 1 teaspoon baking
powder, a little essence, 1 cup mixed fruit.. Cook
1-J hours,
PEACH BLOSSOM CAKE.
Cream together 1 cup sugar, J cup of butler; then
add i cup of milk, the slightly-beaten whites af 3
eggs, and, lastly 1J cups of flour, to which has been
added 1 teaspoon of baking powder, i teaspoon of
cornflour, and a little essence of lemon. Cook in sand-
wich tins and put together with pink icing, sprinkled
with cocoanut.
JEWISH CAKE.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
One and a half cups of flour, 1 cup of sugar, 3 table-
spoons of butter, 3 eggs, 1 gill milk, 1 teaspoon cream
of tartar, J teaspoon of soda and 1 of cinnamon,
cream, butter, and sugar; add eggs and milk, then dry
ingredients. Bake in sandwich tins 10 minutes in a
moderate oven.


CORNFLOUR CAKES.
Two tablespoons flour, i cup cornflour, i cup sugar,
•4 tablespoons butter, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 4
eggs.
KISSES.
Take 2 eggs, their weight in flour, butter, sugar,
and cornflour, 2 teaspoons baking powder. Beat but-
ter and sugar to a cream, then beat in eggs, and add
dry ingredients. If very stiff, add a little milk; drop
on buttered dish, bake until brown, spread with jam,
and stick together.
RUSSIAN DAINTY CAKE.
The weight of 4 eggs in butter, sugar, and flour, 1
teaspoon baking powder, grated rind of 2 lemons.
Beat butter to a cream, add sugar and eggs well
beaten; mix baking powder with flour. Bake in two
flat tins, and spread each cake with jam or lemon
cheesecake. The white of an egg beaten up with
sugar, and the rind and juice of a lemon, makes a
good filling. Ice if preferred.
RICH SEED CAKE.
Beat 11b. butter to a cream with 11b. sugar, beat
yolks and whites of 8 eggs, separately; mix' with
the sugar and butter, then add IJlb. flour and 2os. car-
raways. Bake in a quick oven for about tw T o hours.
SNOW CAKE,
One cup butter, 1 cup white sugar, whites of 4
eggs, 2 cups arrowroot, cream the butter, then add
sugar or arrowroot, and eggs last, beaten to a stiff
froth. Mix for 20 minutes, and bake for 1J hour.
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
(Mrs. A. Purkiss).
One pound flour, not quite Jib. of butter, 1 sugar,
2ilb. currants or half sultanas, 8 eggs, nutmeg and
lemon peel to liking. Beat well, and bake in moderate
oven for four hours.
RICH GINGERBREAD (Excellent).
One cup molasses, 1 cup butter, 2 cups brown
sugar, 4 eggs, 3 cups flour, 1 cup sweet milk, 1 tea-.


spoon soda, 1 tablespoon ginger, cream, butter, and
sugar. Beat eggs and add them to the molasses and
milk. Then add this mixture to the butter and sugar.
Dredge in the flour to which the ginger and soda
have been added.
BROWNIE.
Four cups flour, 1 of sugar, 1 cup currants, 1 table-
spoon baking powder, milk, cinnamon, and a pinch of
salt. Make into a soft dough, and bake in a flat cake
in a meat dish.
GINGER-BREAD.
Jib. flour, Jib. sugar, Jib. treacle (or golden syrup),
3ozs. butter, \ cup milk, 2 or 3 eggs, 1 tablespoon
ground ginger, 1 teaspoon baking soda. Mix all dry
ingredients well together. Warm treacle and add it
with the milk, mixing well into dry ingredients; lastly
eggs, well beaten. Bake in moderate oven for about
half an hour.
RIMBANDA SHORT-BREAD.
One pound flour, Jib. butter, Jib: sugar; cream-the
butter and add sugar to it. Mix in the flour and press
with the hand into a greased tin. Cut into strips and
mark with a fork before baking.
Biscuits.
GOGOANUT BISCUITS-
Ingredients.—Half pound Hour, sozs. sugar, 4ozs.
butter, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, i teaspoonful of
essence of lemon, 1 egg, 3 tablespoonfuls of cold
water, 2 tablespoonfuls of cocoanut. Mix butter,
sugar, egg, water, and essence; then add flour, baking
powder, and cocoanut. Drop in teaspoonful on a greas-
ed tin, and bake in a good oven.
BISCUITS.
One cup butter, 2 cups sugar, J cup of milk, 2 eggs,
1 tablespoonful soda, 2 tcaspoonfuls cream of tartar,
flour as required. Mix butter and sugar; add eggs,
beat well, and add milk, then sufficient flour to make
very stiff.


BISCUITS.
Ingredients.—Jib. flour. Jib. oP pounded white
sugar, 3ozs. butter, J teaspoonful of carbonate of am-
monia, a few drops of essence of lemon, yolks of 2
eggs, white of 1 egg.
Method. —Mix the dry ingredients well together,
taking care that there are no lumps in the ammonia,
then add the well whisked eggs; roll out, cut into bis-
cuits not very small, and bake in a brisk oven.
JORDAN BISCUITS.
Two cups of flour, i cup sugar, 4ozs. of butter, 2
eggs, 2 teaspoons baking powder. Beat butter and
sugar together, add eggs, then flour and baking pow-
der. Mix into a stiff paste, roll out thin, cut into
shapes, and bake 15 minutes, Spread with jam and
lay one on another.
CANDIED PEEL DROPS,
Half pound of flour, 3ozs. butter, 3 of candied peel,
grated rind of one lemon, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
i egg, a little milk, 3ozs. sugar. Sift flour, rub in
butter, add baking powder and lemon rind, using only
the yellow part; cut candied peel up in small dice and
add it. Grease an oven sheet, add milk to the egg and
pour in. Put mixture on oven-sheet in small lumps,
put into a quick oven and bake twenty minutes.
GINGER NUTS.
One and a quarter pounds flour, Jib. brown sugar,
Jib. or I cup dark treacle, Jib. butter, i teaspoonful
mixed spice, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, a little salt, J
cup milk, small teaspoonful of soda, 2 teaspoonsful
ginger. Beat-the butter and sugar to a cream, add
treacle warmed, and all the other ingredients, then
the flour. Make it stiff enough to roll into balls; put
in a buttered tin not too close together. Bake in a
moderate oven.
LEMON BUTTONS.
Five ounces flour, 2ozs. sugar, J tespoonful soda,
1 egg, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 teaspoonful cream of
tartar, flavouring of lemon. Rub the butter in flour,
stir in sugar, soda, and cream of tartar; mix into a
69


stiff dough with the egg and flavouring. Roll into
small balls about size of marbles, roll in coarse sugar,
place on a greased baking-sheet and bake for eight or
ten minutes.
BUTTER AND CINNAMON BISCUITS.
One pound flour, Jibs, sugar, Jibs, butter, 2ozs.
cinnamon, 1 or 2 eggs. Make into a paste, roll out
thinly, ancf cut into small biscuits.
DATE CRACKERS.
, Half-pound stoned dates, 1 cup sugar, i-cup cold
water, a few squeezes of lemon. Put these into
saucepan and boil till soft; allow to cool; i cup butter
2J cups rolled oats, 1 cup brown sugar, 24 cups of
flour, 1 teaspoonful baking soda, 4 cup warm water,
cream the butter and sugar, add rolled oats and flour;
mix well with the hands; add warm water in which
soda has been dissolved; divide the dough into two
equal parts, roll out very thin, spread'ilate mixture on
one layer, place the second layer oik, lop, cut into
squares or fingers and bake in a hot oven'.-
ROLLED OAT BISCUITS.’•
Mix together 2 cups rolled oats, | cup flour, 1 cup
brown sugar, 4 cup melted butter or lard, and lastly
add 4 teaspoonful carbonate of soda dissolved in 2
tablespoonfuls of boiling water. Allow to stand ten
minutes or longer. Roll into balls between the
hands, and then flatten out and bake in a moderate
oven.
OATMEAL BISCUITS.
(Mrs. P. J. White).
Tozs. flour, Oozs, oatmeal, 3ozs. butter, 3ozs. sugar,
1 egg, pinch of soda. Melt the butter, pour into the
centre of flour and oatmeal, etc.; break in the egg, mix
with a little water, roll out thin, and bake in a mod-
erate oven. This can he made without sugar, accord-
ing to taste.
WHBATEN BISCUITS.
Huh three ounces of butter into half a pound of
wbeatmcalj add one saltspoon of salt; work with very
little water into a short paste. Roll well to a quar


ter of -an inch thickness; stamp with a round pastry
cutter two to three inches in diameter. Put the bis-
cuits in a good oven for ten or twelve minutes. Sugar
may be added if liked. (These biscuits are for people
who must not have sugar).
BUTTER BISCUITS.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
One cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon of
milk, a pinch of salt, 1 teaspoon of baking powder and
as much flour as will roll them out. Roll thin, .and
bake in moderate oven.
ARROWROOT BISCUITS.
Jib. flour, Jib. butter, Jib. white sugar, 6ozs.
arrowroot, 6 eggs. Beat butter to a cream whisk the
eggs'to a stiff froth and add them to the butter; stir
in the flour a little at a time, beat well, sift arrowrofft
also, mix with sugar, and add to other ingredients.
Mix .all well together, and drop the dough on a well-
buttcred tin in pieces the size of a shilling. Bake in a
slow oven for j hour.
BRANDY SNAPS (Miss Dight).
iOozs. treacle, lOozs. sugar, 7ozs. flour, 6ozs. but-
ter, Joz. ground ginger, 1 nutmeg grated. Melt but-
ter in a basin, add treacle, then add slowly the dry
ingredients; mix well, and put in teaspoonfuls on well-
huttcrcd tins, leaving wide spaces in between Bake
in a slow oven, and roll round a stick or your Angers
while still hot.
BACHELORS’ BUTTONS,
lib. butter, 21bs. flour, fib. sugar, 4 eggs, a handful
of dessicated cocoanut. Mix butter and flour well toge-
ther, add sugar and cocoanut, mix well with the eggs,
and roll into small balls; cover with sugar, and bake
quickly.
CHAMPAGNE BISCUITS.
Two ounces sugar, 6ozs. flour, 3ozs. butter i tea-
spoon baking powder, 2 yolks egg, lemon or vanilla.
NMiip butter -and sugar together, then then
(lour. Put through a forcer or roll into biscuits.


Scones.
THE“BONZA”SCONE.
(Mrs. A. N. Jowett).
Two cups flour (large cup), 1 cup milk, 1 teaspoon
■carbon soda, 2 teaspoons cream of tartar (smooth
teaspons), pinch salt, 1 tablespoon sugar, 1 table-
spoon butter, 1 egg Beat sugar and butter, add egg,
and beat again. Sift half the flour, then sift the re-
maining half together with cream tartar, carbon soda,
and salt. Add the plain flour and milk alternately. Put
in tiie remaining flour (cream of tartar, etc.) last, and
mix quickly. Grease a tin, and bake in hot oven.
CREAM SCONES (No. 1).
One pound of flour, 1 teaspoon baking soda, 2 tea-
spoons cream of tartar, 1 tablespoon cream, salt.
* Method.—Mix cream of tartar with the flour. Mix
the cream and baking soda with enough milk to
make a soft dough, roll lightly, and bake in a hot oven.
CREAM SCONES (No. 2).
One pound self-raising flour, 1 lablespoonlul of
cream, pinch of salt. Mix cream in sufficient milk to
make a light dough; roll lightly. Rake in a hot oven
■ quickly.
.DROP SCONES.
Mix Jib, flour, j teaspoonful carbonate soda, J lea-
spoonful cream of tartar, large pinch of salt. Stir
enough butter-milk in to make a batter as thick as is
used for pan-cakes; grease the baking tin, then drop
the batter on in tablespoonfuls, keeping them separ-
ate. When rather Arm and bubbles rise, turn them
with a broad knife. Serve them, when cooked, hot.
SCONES.
(Mrs. R. T. Vyner).
Four cups flour, a piece of butter the size of an
•egg, a little salt, 1 dessertspoon of soda, 2 dessert-
spoons of tartar; mix with milk. . Bake in quick
oven,


PUMPKIN SCONES.
(Mrs. A. Purkiss),
Three cups flour, 1 cup of milk 2 teaspoons of
cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon carbonate of soda (or 3
teaspoons of baking powder), 1 tablespoon of butter,
lb. of sugar, 1 cup of cold mashed pumpkin. Beat
butter and sugar to a cream, add pumpkin, then milk
with soda dissolved in it; lastly, add sifted flour and
cfeam of tartar.
Soda bake.
One cup butter or good dripping, rubbed 2
cups of flour, 1 of sugar, 1 teaspoon baking powder.
. Mix with 1 cup sweet milk warmed, 3 eggs well--
■ beaten, 1 cup currants, and a little peel. Beat all to-
gether for } hour, then hake in a moderate oven for
two hours.
NUT BREAD
Two cups flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, i
even teaspoonful salt, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1
egg, 1 cup milk, J cup nut meals.
Method. —Sift flour, baking powder, salt, and sugar
together; add milk, then eggs (well beaten) ; lastly I
cup nut meats. Place this in a pan, and let it rise for
half an hour. Bake it one hour.
SODA BREAD.
Sift together 3 cups flour, 1 teaspoon carbonate
soda, 2 teaspoons cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon of salt.
Mix into a soft dough (using a fork) with 1J (more
or less) milk and water. Bake in a brisk oven for
about half an hour. A little butter may be rubbed into
the flour.
Tea Cakes, etc.
TEA CAKE.
Take the weight of two eggs in butter, beat it to a
■cream, mix in lb. sugar, Jib. flour, and grated rind of
one. lemon. Beat the eggs well, flavour with lemon
essence, add th® other ingredients. Turnon a board,
halve the dough, and roll out into two rounds. Bake


on a buttered baking sheet for half an hour in a mod-
erate oven. When done, butter the lower half, and
spread over a thin layer of marmalade. Place on the
other half and serve as hot as possible.
TEA CAKE.
Two cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup milk, 2 eggs, 2
teaspoons baking powder. Bake in two tins, spread
thickly with butter and serve hot.
TEA CAKE.
Two < small cups sifted flour, J cup sugar, 1 cup
milk, 1 egg, 1 teaspoon baking soda, 2 of cream of
tartar, piece of butter size of a walinut. Beat butter,
sugar, and egg together, then add the milk. Butter a
flat tin and bake ten minutes.
ROLLS (Nice)'.
lib. flour, 4ozs. sugar, 2ozs. butter, 2eggs, 1 tea-
spoon baking powder, a pinch salt. Mix all well toge-
ther, make into a stiff dough, with a little milk, roll
out 2in. thick, and cut into rolls. Throw them into
boiling water on the lire, and directly they rise to the
top, which will be about a minute, take out, and bake
for 20 minutes in quick oven. If not ready to bake
them immediately, throw into cold water, and, if
needful, may be loft one or two hours.
COFFEE ROLLS.
Three ounces of sugar, 3ozs. butter, 1 egg, 1 cup
milk, lib. flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1
spoon soda. Beat butter and sugar to cream; add
eggs and milk, then flour, with cream of tartar and
soda added and a pinch of ’salt. Mix well together,
roll IJ inch thick, cut out and double, and cook in a
hot oven for ten minutes.
SPICED LOAF.
Four cups flour, 1 cup brown sugar, 1 cup cur-
rants, 3 tablespoons butter, 3 teaspoons baking-pow-
der, 1 dessertspoon each of spice and cinnamon. Mix
with milkffeame as soda loaf, into loaves. Bake about
an hour.


GINGER LOAF.
One pounil treacle, 2 eggs, 3 breakfast cups of
Hour, g of a breakfast cup of butter, 1 teacup of
sugar, 3 tablespoons of ginger, 2 tablespoons cinna-
mon, 2 teaspoons baking soda dissolved in a break-
fast cup of milk and a little shredded lemon peel.
Place butter and treacle in a saucepan on Are until
thoroughly melted; add flour gradually and then all
other ingredients. Bake in a hot oven for -f of an
hour.
MADEIRA BUNS.
Quarter of pound butter, 2 whole eggs,, and the
yolks of three (that is leaving outgone of the whites],
6ozs, flour, 1 tablespoon of milk, i castor sugar, 4
teaspoon of baking powder. Beat butter and sugar to
a cream, add eggs well beaten, then flour and baking
powder; lastly, the milk; stir all the time; flavour with
vanilla. Bake in a moderate oven in rather large
patty tins.
Pancakes & Fritters.
A HATTER FOR FRITTERS.
Use Cozs.'of flour, 4 pint milk, legs. Beat egg'
thoroughly, yolk and white separately. Add the milk
to the flour, gradually pour in the egg, and heat again
for 10 minutes. Let stand an hour Before cooking.
TO MAKE RATTERS AND FRITTERS.
It is essential to whip batter ingredients very thor-
oughly. Allowing the air to become mixed well
through the mixture, and to’ ensure lightness, the bat-
ter must be mixed quite an hour before cooking.
When mixing ingredients, beat yolk and whites of eggs
separately.-
FRENCH PANCAKES.
Rutter 2 ounces. Beat to a cream with 2ozs. o'f
sugar; then a,dd the same weight in flour, add 2 eggs,
and 2 a pint of milk. Rutter saucers, tile
mixture, and bake in a slow oven. When cooked, turn


the cakes out, placing one on top of the other, and.
spread jam between.
PANCAKES.
Beal 3 eggs well, add 3ozs. Hour, | cup hot water
to a smooth paste; add i cup milk and a little salt; put
into frying pan with fat, and cook for a few minutes.
PANCAKES.
Beat three eggs, add enough dour to make a stiff
dough, mix well, add enough milk to make it the con-
sistency of thin cream. Mix early and leave stand
about an hour before frying.
PUMPKIN FRITTERS.
One cup of cooked pumpkin, 1 saucer of flour, 1
egg, 1 cup of milk, J a teaspoonful of carbonate of
soda, the same of cream of tartar. Mix to a thick bat-
ter, and fry in boiling fat. •
Confectionery.
CHOCOLATE CREAMS.
Pi:t two cups of white sugar and J cup of water on
Are and boil three minutes, stirring constantly; then
add J cup cornflour; flavour with lemon. Work up
very quickly into little balls. Melt half a cake of
chocolate, dip in balls, and place on a plate to har-
den .
FRENCH JELLIES.
Soak loz. gelatine in ? of cup of cold water for half
an hour; then put it in the saucepan with J of a cup
more cold water and two cups of sugar. Boil for 20
minutes, take off and stir until nearly cold; add a tea-
spoonful of citric acid and a little essence of lemon (or
any other essence preferred) ; wet two soup plates,
pour mixture into> them, and let stand all night. Next
day cut into slices and roll in icing sugar.
CREAM WALNUTS.
balls of fondant and press halves of
English'walnuts on each side. Sprinkle with icing-
sugar and leave to harden.
76


CARAMELS (Mrs.'J. Ward).
Half pound brown sugar, |lb. butter, 1 tin conden-
sed milk.
Method.—Boil all ingredients together for twenty
minutes, stirring all the time. Roll in halls and dip in
icing sugar. •
Beverages.
BOSTON CREAM (Miss Docker).
Three quarts of water, teaspoonfuls of lemon
essence, 2ozs. tartaric acid, IJlbs. white sugar, whites
of 2 small eggs. Boil the water and let get cold.
Beat the whites of the eggs well and stir in with the
other ingredients; mix well and bottle for use.
When using put half a saltspoon of bicarbonate of soda
into half a tumbler of water, pbur in a wineglassful of
the cream, stir quickly, and drink at once.
INDIAN SYRUP (Miss H. Docker) . .
Four ounces citric acid, 61bs. sugar, 1 gallon of
water, the rind of a lemon, essence of lemon. Peel
the rind of the lemon very thin and put into the
water, add the sugar and boil for live minutes; add
the acid and strain. When cold. add the essence
(about three teaspoons), bottle, and cork well.
LEMON SYRUP.
Two pounds sugar, 2 pints water, loz. citric acid.
Boil twenty minutes. When cool, add 35 drops es-
sence of lemon, strain and bottle. •
ESSENCE OP CTOPFEE.
(Tested by Mrs. T. L, Docker),
Half pound of coffee to 1 quart of water. Boil
slowly; reduce to a pint, strain, cork well when cold.
When used. All up your cups with boiling milk. It
will keep for a few days.
Invalid Cookery.
dinner for an invalid.
A Stewed Chop.—lngredients: A good chop from a
loin of mutton, 2 tablespoonfuls of water, salt.
Method.—Trim all the fat from the meat and put
it jn a et'\crcd jar (a salt jar does very well for the
purpose) with the water; stand it in a moderately hot
77


oven; let it steam for half an hour, and a few min-
utes before serving, add a pinch of salt. Serve very
hot, with the gravy poured over it. Steak or chops
cooked in this manner are very tender and easily
digested.
INVALID PUDDING. •
Ingredients.—Two tablespoonfuls of breadcrumbs,
1 egg, nearly } pint of milk, a little sugar, flavouring
if liked.
Method.—Mix all well together, pour into but-
tered cup or mould, and boil for an hour. This is also
a nice pudding for a child.
GUP CUSTARD.
Ingredients.—One egg, i a breakfast cup of new
milk, 1 dessertspoonful of white sugar.
Method. —Stir the sugar into the milk, add the egg,
which,should be well beaten; pour into a breakfast
cup and bake until quite set—about a quarter of an
hour. Turn out on a plate and serve alone, or with
a little stewed fruit.
A NOURISHING DRINK FOR AN INVALID.
Ingredients.—One new-laid egg, 1 teaspoonful of
brandy, 1 teaspoonful castor sugar, soda, or seltzer
water.
Method.—Beat file egg, white and yolk separately,
the white to a stiff froth; mix together, add sugar and
brandy, stir well, and fill the tumbler half way with
soda or seltzer water.
Note. —-An egg can be taken by an invalid in this
way when it cannot be taken in any other form. It
should not be mixed till required. Give a slice of
sponge cake with it.
EGG FLIP.
Ingredients.—White of 1 egg, J pint of milk, tea-
spoonful of brandy, teaspoon of sugar, a little white
pepper.
Method.—Boil the milk and meanwhile beat the
egg to a stiff froth and sprinkle the pepper over it.
Pour the boiling milk on to this, stirring quickly, add
the sugar and brandy, and serve with sponge cake or
biscuit'..*
JELLY WATER.
Ingredients.—One large teaspoonful of black cur


rant or other sharp jelly, i tab'lespoonful of boiling
water, nearly 4 pint of iced water.
Method.—Beat the jelly in the hot water till dis-
solved, and fill up the tumbler with the cold water.
Note.—Jam may be used instead of jelly, if more
convenient, but double the quantity is required, and it
should be strained before serving.
BARLEY WATER.
Ingredients.—Two ounces pearl barley, 2 quarts of
boiling water, 1 pint cold water, thin rind and juice of
a lemon, sugar to taste.
Method. —Wash the barley, put it in a saucepan
with a pint of cold water, and simmer for a quarter of
an hour; then strain, oft' the water and throw it away;
pour the boiling water on to the barley, and boil till
the liquid is reduced one half; then strain, add the
lemon juice and rind, sweeten and put aside to cool.
Remove rind and serve.
ARROWROOT.
Half-pint of milk, 1 teaspoonful arrowroot, 1 tea-
spoonful sugar, sippits of toast.
Method. —Put nearly all the milk on to boil; moisten
arrowroot with remaining milk, add to boiling milk and
simmer five minutes to cook the starch in tire arrow-
root . Serve in a pretty cup, on a daintily arranged
tray.
GRUEL.
Three gils milk, 1 pinch salt, 1 tablespoon Scotch
oatmeal, sugar according to taste, 1 teaspoon sippits
of toast.
Method. —-Have a niee, clean enamelled saucepan.
Put 24 gills milk in it and put on to boil. Put oat-
meal in a basin and moisten with the remainder of
milk; stirring well pour on the boiling milk. Allow
oatmeal to settle in the bottom of the basin. Pour
the liquid into the saucepan, leaving oatmeal in the
basin. Stir the gruel till it boils, and then simmer for
ten minutes; add sugar. Serve daintily on ajray. The
tray for an invalid should have a nice on
it, and the China should be the daintiest available, and
a spray of flowers nicely arranged should be placed on
the tray.
79


By Buying Richardson’s
Groceries .
YOU ENSURE
GOOD RESULTS WITH YOUR COOKING
Our Motto is :
Quality Goods at Economy Prices.
Keep down the Cost of Living and Buy all your
, Supplies at Richardson’s
J.Ejchardson & Co Ltd
ir General Merchants
c -
Armidale
INDEX
Things Worth Knowing ■ 3
Soups ... ... ... z
Fish ... ... ... 12
Meats, Entrees & Breakfast Dishes 13
Boiled Puddings ... ... 23
Baked Puddings , ... 32
Cold Puddings ... ... 36
Pastry ... ... ... 41
Cake and Pastry Filling ••• 41
Jams and Preserves ■■■ ... 42
Pickles... ... ... ... 46
Sauces ... ... ... 4 z
Chutney ... ... ... 48
Cakes ... ... ... 51
Biscuits ... ... ... 6e
Scones ... ... ... £2
Tea Cakes, etc ... ... zi
Pancakes and Fritters ... ...
Confectionery ... ... ?6
Beverages ... ... ZZ
Invalid Cookery ZZ


Good-bye to Failures
Repeated failures are enough to discourage any cook,
but most of them are due to the use of unreliable
baking powders.
Settle that difficulty once and for all by using the
leavener that has proved the best for three genera-
tions.
Aunt Mary’s
Baking
Powder
This excellent cream of tartar product gained and holds
its reputation by its consistent, perfect quality and reli-
ability.
It is compounded of the purest ingredients only.
Aunt Mary’s goes twice as far as the slightly cheaper
“phosphate” preparation.
Ask your grocer for it.
Save the lids for the big No. 10 Competition.
£100 GIVEN AWAY IN CASH PRIZES.


