

1 ivrSb
SECOND EDITION.
AN OLD HOUSEKEEPER.
Author of “Men, and How to Manage Them," “Comfortable Cookery," tfc., sc.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
A.. JET. IS/EA.SS XTTA. Sz CO
PUBLISHERS, MELBOURNE,


the high ARM ™
DAVIS
BIVIS@ SMSISB
la acknowledged to b 2 the
PERFECTION OF SETTING- MACHINE MECHANISM.
Variety and Eange of Work unequalled.
Stitch can be changed when running the Machine. Steps over any seam
with ease. The latest, lightest-running, and best Machine in the market.
THE DAVIS
WAS AWARDED
THE ONLY FIRST PRIZE AND GOLD MEDALS
AT THE
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide Exhibitions, 1880-81.
Imposters ;
HENRY BISHOP & CO..
79 BOURKE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
Sole Agents fob
The Matchless, Rudge, Humber, and Sanspareil Bicycles.
Matchless, Coventry, Rotary, Humber, Omnicycle, Royal Salvo, and
Caroche Tricycles.
CATALOGUES FREE ON APPLICATION.


THE
Australian Journal
20th YEAR OF PUBLICATION.
THE BEST FAMILY NEWSPAPER IN THE COLONIES
PRICE SIXPENCE,
CONTENTS OF EACH MONTHLY PART :
New Ideas The Essayist
New Writers Scientific Notes and Comments
Continued Stories The Detective’s Album
Complete Tales News and Notes
Historical Notes Fun and Fancy
Biographical Notes The Riddler
The Ladies’ Page Poetry
Short Complete Sketches, &c., &c.
Remember! —Yearly Subscription, Post Free, in advance,
only 6s. 6d. anywhere.
The Journal is posted from Victoria or New South Wales to any part of
the World at the same rate as a Newspaper. If you wish to send
it home after you have read it, you can do so for One Penny.
ALL NEWS AGENTS THROUGHOUT the COLONIES.


THIRD EDITION JUST PUBLISHED,
REVISED AND CORRECTED.
AUSTRALIAN
Plain
Cookery.
BY A PRACTICAL COOK.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
By Post, Is. 3d.
A. H. MASSINA & CO.,
LITHOGRAPHIC AND GENERAL PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
26 Little Cojliks Street East, Melbourne.


W. CHIPPERFIELD,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
POST OFFICE PLACE,
MELBOURNE,
§WAN STREET, RICHMOND,


10 MEDAES AWARDED
S. BL JEANS
GAS STOVES, &c.
fon ETNA IMPROVED PATENT
CO
« 5
as >
>• O
C 5 • -f->
0: CO
O
<=> s,
can o 0>
<=r “
E-< Q
I=l S
o <?
a-, 'r* •QJ3
CL3 Zir
S=3 S .E
S—. Zn
=3 S: 2?
02 -J
i?
"OD t'
-2 §
CO ,->.
g 2 ■£
£ ®
<=> Ol
CTj £_
rC O
2 Q-
-S co
S o
S- O CO
crs ■
‘jj «■_
e<3 o
Sw CQ
M f
§ $3 >
Co
g CO
W <c
ROASTS, TOASTS, & BAKES TO PERFECTION
These Stoves can be Rented from Company, or
Purchased from thejManufacturer,
S. E. JEANS, Plumber & Gasfltter, Ac., High-si, St. Kilda,
VICTORIA.


I" (s 5Cd
SECOND EDITION.
THE AUSTRALIAN
Housewives’ Manual;
% §ooh for §ecfrmicrs mxb |jeo|ile
Ixritb Small Incomes.
AN OLD HOUSEKEEPER ,
Author of “Men, and How to Manage Them,” “ Comfortable
Cookery ,” dc ., dc., dc.
XMlelboam:
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
26 Little Collins Street East.


HOUSEHOLD SCREENED COALS.
TO HOUSEHOLDERS
HUDDART, PARKER & CO..
COAL IMPORTERS
STEAMSHIP OWNERS,
Beg to inform Householders that special attention is devoted to the
supply of Families, both in the City and Country, with Householders'
DOUBLE SCREENED COAL, and they deliver in quantities to suit.
A BOON TO BLACKSMITHS—Patent Machine Washed Forge
Coal, free from sulphur and other impurities, is now very largely used hy
the Government in thei • Workshops and by an increasing number of
Blacksmiths throughout Victoria.
STEAM TO SYDNEY-
Steamers are despatched Every Week to and from Sydney.
Fares:—Saloon, Single, £1 10s.; Return, £3; Steerage, 15s.
Steerage Passengers are found in Food and Beds.
For Particulars see daily papers.
STEAM TO GEELONG AND PORTARLINGTON.
The Splendid Steamships EXCELSIOR and ALERT, built expressly
for this trade. Leave Queen’s Wharf daily. The Excelsior calls at Port*
aldington on Mondays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, on the way to and from
Geelong. ./
Pares Fore Cabin, Single, Is. ; Return, Is. 6d.; Saloon, Single, 2s. *
Return, 3s.
HUDDART, PARKER & GO., Coal Importers,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, GEELONG, AND BALLARAT.


M2*>6s/riiSU
2, flrfZ
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1.1
On Setting Up in Life
Early Marriages the Best—Don’t Set Up in Debt—
Save enough to Furnish and have a little Money in
Hand—Life Assurance—Building Societies—Proper Age
for Preparation—The Man’s Part in Making Ready for
Setting Up in Life—The Girl's—Preliminary Expenses—
The Marrying Age—The Sum Necessary for Starting—
Economy of Married Life—Seeking for a House—The
Rent—Advantages of Living In or Out of Town—Three-
roomed Cottages or Four-roomed —One Parlour enough
for Sitting and Dining Room—How to make it do
CHAPTER 11.
On Furnishing a House.
The Kitchen the Room to begin with—Shelving—Dressers
and Safe—How to Utilise Recesses—Prices of Kitchen
Furniture—List of Articles Required—New Things Best
—Sales to he Avoided—Utensils and Brushware—
Cooking Utensils —Cutlery and Electro-plate—flow a
Small Saving may he Effected—Crockery—Cloths and
Cleaners—Total Expenses for this Department—Articles
Omitted—Reason Wbv ... ... ... ... 13


CHAPTER 111.
Parlour and Living-Room,
The Parlour Carpet—What to Buy—Parlour Furniture—
List of Articles for £35 Os. 6d.—For £23 3s. 6d, —Desira-
bility of Buying the Best, if possible—How to Ornament
a Room—Flowers and Flower Glasses—Pictures and
Picture Frames—Brackets, and their Cost—How 'to
Decorate them Cheaply—lmitation Side Tables; how to
Make and Cover Them—Ugly Chimneys, howto Improve
them—Napery and Glass
CHAPTER IY.
The Bedroom and Passage,
One Good Bedroom enough to begin with—Articles to be as
Good as you can Manage to Buy—List for £2l 10s.—
List for £ll ss.—Full-sized Furniture Necessary in any
case—Lists of Linen, Bedclothes, and Napery—Toilet-
ware—Folly of the Advertisements offering Complete
Furniture for a House for a small sum—Passage Cloth—
Mats—Conclusion of Purchases
CHAPTER Y.
Furniture and the Care of it.
Moving In—lmportance of Repairs being Completed first
—House to be Thoroughly Cleaned before Furniture is
Moved in—How to Begin—Wall Papering—Ceilings—
Blinds—Carpets, how to Lay Them, how to Improve
Them if they Set Badly—Curtains—Ornaments—Position
for Bedstead—lmportance of Fresh Air—Draughts and
Direct Sunshine to be Avoided—Bed Curtains, their Use
and Abuse—Disposal of the Furniture


CHAPTER YI.
Three Pounds a Week.
How to Manage the Income—Life Assurance—Friendly
Society—Building Society—Rent—Fuel—Housekeeping
—Clothes and Baby Fund ... ... ... ... 34
CHAPTER VII.
Marketing and Supplies.
Importance of Personal Dealing with Tradespeople—Of
Cash Payments—Rules of Marketing—The Best of its
Kind is the Best in the End—How to Choose Supplies—
Tests for Meat, Poultry, Fish, and Vegetables
CHAPTER VIII.
On the Care op Stores.
Difference between Good and Bad Cookery—Flavourings
Required—Spices and Herbs, how to Prepare and Keep
Them —Labelling Stores—Economical Methods of Storing
Supplies ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
CHAPTER IX.
Economical Cookery.
How Four People Dined for a Shilling, and had a Good
Dinner too—How it was Prepared, who came to it, and
how it went off ... ... ... ... ... 42
CHAPTER X.
Cheap Dinners.
Six Dinners at a Shilling each—What to do with a Leg of
Mutton—With a Joint of Veal—With a Fowl or Turkey
—With a Goose or Duck —With a Piece of Beef


CHAPTER XL
Housekeeping.
What to Buy—How to Take Care of it—Amount of Stores
Required—How two Persons can Live Comfortably on
a Pound a Week, and Give a Friend or two a Meal now
and then
CHAPTER XII.
Scraps and Savings,
Importance of having no Waste Bread—Gravy Dripping—
How to Use and Take Care of them—Cheese —How to
Utilise Scraps of Cheese —Bacon—Cold Boiled Eggs—
Cold Melted Butter—Cold Potatoes—Other Cold Vege-
tables—Cold Pudding—Gold Meats—How to use up a
Sunday’s Dinner’s Cold Remains on a Monday
CHAPTER XIII.
Before Breakfast.
The Women who do a great deal without Puss and the
Women who make much Worry for little Work —The
Secret of Good Management—Early Rising—Duty of
Personal Cleanliness and Neatness—Best Way of Pro-
tecting Person and Dress—Best Time for the Bath—The
Toilet—The first Work of the House—Fires—Cleaning
Kitchen, Parlour, and Passage—Sweeping and Dusting—■
Preparation of Breakfast—How to Make Tea and Coffee
—Boiling and Frying—The Best Place for a Husband
while a Wife does her Morning Work—Best Time for
Breakfast ...


CHAPTER XIY.
The Duties of the Day.
Importance of System—The Bed and its Coverings—The
Washing up and Cleaning—Once a Day enough—New
and Old China—Our Great-grandmother’s Ways—The
Utensils used at each Meal—How to Wash Chiua, Glass,
and Lamps—How to Clean Tinware, Electroware, Plate,
and Cutlery—How to make Jug-mops and Saucepan-
cleaners—The Week’s Work and its Division—How to
get the Day’s Work done by Noon ... ... ... 84
CHAPTER XY.
On Taking Care of a Husband.
The Right and Wrong Way of Working—General
Principles to be Remembered—Personal Charms and
Mental Graces Compatible with the Care of a Home—
Duty of Taking Care of the Person—The Yalue of a
Woman’s Work —The Way to win a Man’s Approbation
—How to Prepare for Him on a Hot-wind Day—On a
Winter’s Day—The Evening’s Nap—The Evening’s
Comfort to Follow—The Triumph of the Good Wife—
The Husband’s Part of the Bargain ... ... ... 91
CHAPTER XVI.
The Happiness of Home.
Before and After Marriage—The Duties of a Wife —The
Competitors for the Man’s Society—The Possibility of
Regrets —The Way to Avoid Them—The Power of
Devotion —Action, Not Words —The Secret of Success—
The Husband’s Old Friends—The Way to Deal with
Them—The Way to Spend an Evening Out—To Prepare
for Going and Coming Home—The Wife’s Reward—The
Importance of Small Matters—The Tremendous Yalue
of the Stake you Play for—The Pleasure of Working and
Planning for Those we Love... ... ... ... 96


CHAPTER XVII.
Rest and Recreation.
Importance of G ood Health—The Care of It—The Mid-day
Nap—lts Value as a Beautifier—The Siesta Universal
out of England and among the Lower Animals—lts
Proper Duration —The Walk —The Preparation for
Dinner—A very Small Amount of Labour in Good
Cookerj—Occupation for Leisure Hours—Spending the
Evening—The Way the Landlady Attracts Her Guests
to an Hotel—The Importance of Listening Quietly—
The Way to Make Silent Men Talk—Value of a Change
—Visiting—Visitors—The Theatre—Games for Recrea-
tion—Necessity for Sufficient Sleep—Bed Time—On
Taking Leave
CHAPTER XVIII.
The Management of Children.
The Mother should Nurse Her Own Infant—Exceptions to
the Rule—Proper Food for a Child a Few Days Old—
On Bringing Up by Hand—When the Food should be
Changed—The Appearance of Teeth—lmperative Neces-
sity for Cleanliness—Ailments Incidental to Teething—
Proper Time for Feeding an Infant—lts Bed and Hours
of Slumber—Fits—Convulsions —lts Clothing—lts Baths
—Air Baths—Temperature—Soap—Towels—Sponges—
Danger of Inferior Violet Powder—On Short-coating—
On Keeping the Feet and Legs Warm—Exercise—
Learning to Walk—Crying—The Open Air—Oatmeal
Porridge—Meat —Fruit—Food after a Year Old—Drinks
.—Hours of Rest—Hours of Meals—On Eating between
Meals—Conclusion —On the Treatment of Children by
Kindness—Cruelty and Wickedness of Severity—Com-
fort and Ease of Kindness—Example of Nature


In Household Management Cooking by Gas is Proved to be
*r COMFORTABLE I
•r EFFICIENT I
«■ ECONOMICAL I
Avoids all Unpleasantness arising from DUST, SMOKE, and
SOOT.
In summer especially, when fires-are not wanted for other purposes.
THE GAS STOVE
Will be found quite a Treasure. It prevents irritation arising from
difficulty in lighting and looking after any other kind of range or oven—
requires no attention, involves no loss of heating power whilst waiting for
the fire burning up, as it is always ready, day or night—there is less loss in
the weight of meat whilst being cooked, no burnt dripping, and in every
respect as a mode of cooking will be found the best. The
Metropolitan Gas Company
IS PREPARED TO
SUPPLY GAS STOVES FROM ANY MAKER
On Hire, at a Monthly Rental from Two Shillings and upwards,
According to requirements of the household, from the small family to
the large hotel or public institution.
SAMPLES
Can be seen and every information obtained at the Office,
LITTLE FLINDERS STREET EAST.


INTRODUCTORY,
The general objection to the number of cleverly-written
works upon Household Management is that they are calculated
for the use of people who possess good incomes, large houses,
and one or more servants. They are, consequently, of little use
to that large class of persons who are obliged to do without
servants of any kind, to look at both sides of a shilling before
they spend it, and to make both ends meet upon a workman’s
wages, or a clerk’s salary.
I have planned this little manual for the use of persons whose
entire incomes do not exceed three pounds per week, who cannot
keep any servants at all, who are, notwithstanding, properly
ambitious of living in decent comfort, and of keeping up a
respectable appearance in the world.
There are tens of thousands of people in Victoria who do this
with more or less success, but, as a rule, their success is bought
by long and difficult practice, by many failures, and by some
hardships. I desire, so far as long experience and anxious
consideration will enable me to do so, to ease the way for those
who desire to achieve this strictly honourable end.
I have not attempted to make this into a cookery book,
because Messrs. Massina and Co. already publish an admirable
little volume which will fulfil that purpose. But I have given a
set of bills of fare, with the exact prices of every article used, and
with precise directions for preparation of the simple, every-day


■dishes of which they are composed. It will be easy for those who
desire to supplement the bills of fare I have given to do so from
the “ Australian Plain Cookery.”
In some instances my directions may appear needlessly minute
and precise; but old housekeepers, who know all about the
matter themselves, will remember that there was a time when
they had it all to learn, and they will not, I venture to hope,
forget that the young people who are now beginning life require
far more particular information than those who have conquered
its early difficulties.
My little book is intended to advise young people who are just
setting up in housekeeping what to buy, what to do, and how to
manage the limited means which fall to the lot of those whose
daily bread depends upon daily work. It will be very easy for
them to increase their expenditure as their means increase, and
they will find themselves, I think, none the worse off for having
a silent adviser at hand to remind them that all the necessaries,
and most of the decent comforts of life, are entirely within the
reach of those whose entire income is confined to the three
pounds per week, which is, as a rule, to be obtained by every
skilled Yictorian workman.


1874
973
£
319,700
£
10,797
£
15,500
1877
3,772
765,000
27,000
53,470
1880
6,674
1,667,000
56,000
129,000
1883
14,250
3,640,000
122,000
304,000
BONUS YEAR 1883.
THE NATIONAL MUTUAL
Hi it of Himitoir
THE FIRST OFFICE IN THE WORLD
To apply the Surrender Value of Life Policies in paying the Premium,
thereby preventing the Lapse of Policies till the Surrender Value
is exhausted.
PROGRESS OF BUSINESS.
Year. Policies in Force. Assuring. 16 " Funds.
Manager-ALEX. H. YOUNG.
Head Office: No. 1 Market Buildings, Collins Street West, Melbourne.
THE
TEMPERANCE LAND & BUILDING SOCIETY.
SHARES, £5 each, payable in Contributions of Is. per week. Is. per fort-
night, or Is. per month, at the option of the Contributor.
INTEREST payable on all Investments 8 per cent, per annum.
INTEREST payable on Fixed Deposits up to 7 per cent, per annum.
Deposits from Is. upwards received at any time.
SHARES are issued and Contributions received daily. No Entrance Fees
are charged, nor any premiums on advances or repayments.
ADVANCES may be paid off at any time without prospective interest, or
time of repayment may be extended, if desired, to any number of years
not exceeding twelve.
FINES, both as to Contributions and Repayments, are remitted in case-
of illness or other misfortune, for such time as may be necessary.
OFFICE : 110 RUSSELL ST., MELBOURNE
(Immediately adjoining the Temperance Hall).
J. W. M‘CUTCHAN, Secretary,


AUSTRALIAN
HOUSEWIVES’ MANUAL
CHAPTER I.
ON SETTING UP IN LIFE.
Early marriages always lead to long life, happiness, and
prosperity if both persons are healthy, saving, industrious,
suited to each other in tastes and habits, and determined to
get on. Late marriages are no better if any of these qualifi-
cations are wanting. Therefore a young couple, who truly
love each other, should not scruple to face the world together,
but will find the best and purest happiness life can afford
them in helping each other on to prosperity, and in training a
young family to be the mainstay of their maturity and the
comfort of their old age.
No matter how profound their affection may be, or how
uncomfortable their solitary condition, they should not attempt
to marry until they have saved enough to pay for the plain
and decent furniture necessary to start upon in a small way,
and until they can also be sure of beginning married life with
five or six months’ income in hand. Sometimes friends and
relations will be able to squeeze out a little to help them to
set up housekeeping, but even then they will be happier and
more prosperous if they have undergone a year or two of
waiting and saving for the time before them.
There can be no prosperity if the married life is begun in
debt of any kind, and there will be little real happiness if
from the very start there is anxiety about claims coming due,
and possible expenses unprovided for. The man’s life should


be insured before he marries for some amount consistent with
his means and station. A young man of eighteen can insure
his life for a hundred pounds for about one pound seventeen
shillings per annum, or ninepence per week. He ought, if he
contemplates marrying at about twenty or a little later —a
very popular age, and not at all an unreasonable one—to
insure his life for two hundred pounds as soon after he
reaches eighteen as he possibly can. This will cost him one
and sixpence per week, and will enable him to look the possi-
bility of accident calmly in the face, and make his recovery
from any illness of a dangerous character far more probable,
because his mind will be easy about the future of those he
leaves behind him.
A small sum invested in a building society will give a con-
stantly increasing profit, and in a very few years amount to a
decent provision against misfortune. The subscriptions for
three or four societies are before me at this moment. One of
them gives sixpence per week as the rate for each twenty-
pound share ; another half-a-crown a month for each twenty-
five pound share ; a third ten shillings per month for each
hundred pound share, and so on. Now, at the rate of sixpence
per week for each twenty pound share, the investor pays in
eight years and a quarter, which is the average run of a share,
the sum of eleven pounds seven shillings and sixpence. The
accrued profits at eight per cent., constantly reinvested as the
money is, make up the remainder of the twenty pounds. A
young man of eighteen, for instance, who, in addition to
insuring his life for two hundred pounds, at a weekly cost of
eighteenpence, paid four shillings and sixpence per week to a
building society, would, by the time he was a little over
twenty-six, have a hundred and eighty pounds to his credit.
His total savings would only be six shillings per week, and as
he should certainly have proper comfort for himself and his
wife, I think a young fellow of twenty or twenty-one about to
get married may very reasonably confine his savings to about
this amount, especially if, in addition, he be a member of any
friendly society, so that he is assured of medical attendance
during sickness.
Suppose then our young couple are fairly ready to marry,
the man somewhere about twenty or twenty-one, the girl of a
suitable age, the investments spoken of already begun, six
months’ income laid by for contingencies, and from seventy to
a hundred pounds in hand to furnish a cottage with, there is


no reason why the marriage should not take place at once, and
the home set up directly.
This is no fancy picture, but sheer right down reality, easy
of achievement by every young couple with brains and sense.
The two years between eighteen and twenty will enable any
young man with a trade on his fingers, or a decent situation
in an office, to accomplish all this. The girl, on her side,
should take care that, if she cannot bring her husband a few
pounds toward the furnishing, she can at least bring herself
into her new home with a fair stock of clothing, so that she
does not have to add the expense of her outfit to the outlay
contingent upon the first year of matrimony.
If I have made myself understood, it will be seen that I
advise every young man of ordinary health and strength to
begin saving, at the latest, by the time he is eighteen years of
age with an express view to matrimony, to lay by every
shilling he can spare, after paying for plain and decent
clothing, board, lodging, and those popular sports he may
favour, which, to the credit of our young Victorians, it may be
said, are not particularly costly. No young fellow was ever yet
ruined by his subscriptions to the Eowing Club, the Football
Club, or the Cricket Club. A young working man can board
well enough for from sixteen shillings to a pound per week,
and with care another ten shillings should be sufficient for
his other expenses. What he has to aim at is to amass a
sufficient sum, so that, when he reaches the age of twenty or
one-and-twenty, he may be in a position to marry in his own
station of life. He will find it the most economical, as well as
the happiest method of existence, and he will also find that
he will outstrip in the race for fortune his more showy
associates, who found themselves too poor to save, and too
poor to marry, but not too poor to waste money in bars,
billiard-rooms, and other traps for the careless, the unthrifty,
and the dissipated.
The first care of the young couple will then be to select and
furnish a house, and this is a pleasant employment for the
period immediately preceding marriage. It is one also which
they ought to undertake themselves. It is quite impossible
for anyone to please them as well as they will please each
other in the choice of their future home, and although they
will do well to seek advice occasionally upon specific points,
they will be wise to refrain from casting the responsibility
of choice upon any friends or relations.


The rent is the first consideration, and this should not, at
the outside, exceed ten shillings per week. For this sum a
cottage of three or four rooms can be procured. Three good
rooms are better than four small ones, and a detached house
is better than one in a row. To procure a detached cottage
it is necessary to go into one of the suburbs, but in that case
the rent of a three-roomed cottage will generally be less
than ten shillings. Indeed they are to be had for seven
shillings and eight shillings per week quite frequently by wise
people who look for them a little out of the main roads. In
this case, however, the money saved will be wanted for
railway fares, and therefore ten shillings per week is a reason-
able sum to set apart for rent.
Three rooms nicely furnished will give a young wife quite
enough to do to keep them in good order. The fourth, if
there be a fourth, will do for boxes and stores at first, and
will be found very handy at a later period. The furnishing of
these three rooms, as sitting-room, bedroom, and kitchen, will
take a good deal of money, if it be properly done, and will be
found quite enough to begin with. At first it will be wise
only to have one sitting-room, and make that both dining-
room and parlour. The fourth room can be furnished at any
time, either as an extra bedroom, or as an extra sitting-room,
according to circumstances. But two young people beginning
life, and doing their own work, will not want to have their
dining-room and sitting-room separate. They will be wise to
make one room serve both purposes, and to keep it as nice
and attractive as they possibly can.
There will be very little difficulty in doing this if the meals
are not brought into the sitting-room until they are wanted,
and are cleared away into the kitchen directly they are over;
nor need the young wife spend her time away from her
husband in cleaning up after them. A very few minutes will
serve to pack away the utensils and crockery that have been
used in such fashion that they may be cleaned and washed up
the next morning after he has gone to business, and of course
she will, if she be a wise woman, have his meals ready by the
time he comes into the house for them. All the utensils that
must really be cleaned at once to preserve them will not take
a quarter of an hour, and, long before he has finished that first
pipe which he is safe to light as soon as his dinner is over, she
may be back again in the room ready to sit and talk to him, if he
be in that mood, to sit quietly at her needlework if he wishes to


read in peace or doze, or to go out with him if he so desire.
The ways and methods of managing this part of the business
will be told in their turn ; at present, what we have to do is to
set about our house furnishing.
CHAPTER 11.
ON FURNISHING A HOUSE.
The Kitchen is the first room in the house to be furnished,
and the most important of all. It should be plentifully
supplied with all really necessary utensils, but these should
not be too numerous, or the labour of keeping them in good
order will be incessant. Few cottages in the suburbs of
Melbourne are provided with properly fitted kitchens. Usually
the kitchen, so called, is merely a back room with a colonial
oven in it, and frequently there is not even a cupboard.
Generally there is a skillion outside, in which there is a
copper for washing, and, in choosing a cottage, one which is
provided with this convenience should be preferred. Sup-
posing the kitchen to be without cupboards or shelves, the
first thing to be bought will be a safe, and the second a
kitchen dresser. Excellent safes are made in plain white
wood with perforated zinc sides. The best for use, however,
are those which have the outer wood work stained and
varnished. They are easier kept clean. The inner shelves,
of course, must be of smooth, unpainted deal.
In choosing a safe see that the doors and shelves fit tightly,
and have no cracks wherein dust can lodge or insects hide,
or water accumulate in scrubbing. Do not buy a second-
hand safe, but a new one, and one that appears strongly
made. Such a safe will cost about thirty shillings, and a
small dresser will cost two pounds ten. Then get a carpenter
to put in shelves of plain inch thick deali in the recesses on
either side of your kitchen chimney. You will not want
many. Two in each recess will be plenty. The lower one
should be about three feet six inches from the ground. The
upper one about eighteen inches above that. They should
rest upon plain blocks of wood fastened to the walls by screws,
and should be as deep as the recesses are. Then the shelves


Shelving, as described
.. £0
10
0
3 Dozen Brass Hooks, for shelving and dresser
0
2
0
Carried forward...
.. £0
12
0
can be taken out to be cleaned when necessary, and the
blocks can be unscrewed and taken away when you leave the
house. Nothing that is fastened by screws to the walls
becomes a fixture, but everything you nail to the walls is the
landlord’s property. Many young fellows can do this kind of
work for themselves, and like doing it, but a carpenter’s price
for furnishing and fixing the four shelves will not be more
than ten shillings altogether. With a dresser, a safe, and
these four shelves, you will be quite independent of your land-
lord so far as your kitchen is concerned.
Your dresser will have two drawers in it, a potboard at the
bottom, and two shelves above. Into the fronts of these
shelves you should screw brass hooks at distances of six or
eight inches apart, and you may very well screw two or three
into each of the blocks which support your lower shelves in
the recesses by the chimney. These last will do for hanging
up such things as short brooms, fryingpans, gridirons, toasting
forks, and other things of that kind which it is important to
have quite close to the fire whenever you want them. These
shelves fixed, you are ready to begin furnishing your kitchen,
and these are the goods you will require. The prices I have
taken from the best Melbourne houses. You may, very likely,
choose to give more for some articles and less for others, but
you will find that those I have set down are so near to what
you will have to expend that a pound or so less will be the
very least you will get them for if you resolve to try, and if
you have special advantages.
Now and then, when a fairly furnished house is being sold
off, you may get a few things cheaper at sales, and sometimes
good things are to be bought second-hand. But real oppor-
tunities of the kind are rare, and it is more satisfactory to have
everything quite new. They are easier kept in good order,
and the work of cleaning them and keeping them fresh is
more pleasurable.
In the kitchen list I have included all table cutlery, brush-
ware, crockery, and laundry requisites, and with these added
you will be rather astonished to find that the kitchen costs,
in proportion, more to furnish properly than any other room
in the house.
KITCHEN FURNITURE.


Brought forward ... ... ... £0 12 0
Meatsafe, as described ... ... ... ... 110 0
1 10 0
(You may save on this, but not wisely.)
Kitchen Table, sft. x 3ft., strong and stout... ... 1 0 0
2 good comfortable Chairs, 6s. 6d. ... ... ... 0 11 0
Fender ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 8 6
Kitchen Fireirons ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Strong Fire Shovel ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Dust Pan, strong... ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
0 2 0
Mat, for kitchen door ... ... ... ... 0 6 6
Strip of strong Matting, for centre of kitchen, 3 yards,
at about 2s. 6d. ... ... ... ... 0 7 6
2 short Curtains, for kitchen window, each will last
clean a week. Clear muslin is best ... ... 0 16
Blind, for kitchen window ... ... ... 016
Blind, Boiler, Brackets, and Rack fpr do. ... ... 0 1 6
jjjLiiivA, itcncij cuiu lyi U.U. ... ... yj jl
Towel Roller ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 3
£5 10 3
UTENSILS AND BEUSHWAEE.
2 Galvanised Iron Tubs, lat 95., lat ss. ... ... £0 14 0
Washing-up Basin (tin) ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
G-alvanised Iron Pail ... ... ... ... 0 2 6
Washing Board ... ... ... ... ... 0 16
3 Flatirons ... ... ... ... ... 0 4 6
0 4 6
Knife Board ... ... ... ... ... 0 16
Strong Broom ... ... ... ... ... 0 4 6
Hearth Brush ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Blacklead Brushes ... ... ... ... 0 3 3
Scrubbing Brush... ... ... ... .. 0 2 0
Set of Shoe Brushes ... ... ... ... 0 4 0
Bellows ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 6
Clothes Line and Pegs ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Clothes Basket ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Water Can ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Filter ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Scales and Weights, |oz. to 41b. ... ... ... 014 0
£4 11 3
COOKING UTENSILS.
Oval Iron Boiler, 4 gallons ... ... ... £0 9 0
2 Iron Saucepans, 3>pints,2s.; 6 pihts, Bs. 6d. (tinned
insides) ... ... ... ... 0 6 6
Small Egg Saucepan (iron) ... ... ... 016
Carried forward ... ... ... ... £0 16 0


Brought forward ... ... ... £0 16 0
Steamer, for large saucepan ... ... ... 0 2 0
Tin Billy, 2 quarts, very handy ... ... ... 0 10
Iron Kettle, 4 pints ... ... ... ... 0 4 6
Iron Digester ... ... ... ... ... 0 7 6
Butcher’s Knife ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Mincing Knife ... ... ... ... ... 0 13
Colander ... ... ... ... ... 0 19
Gravy Strainer ... ... ... ... ... 0 19
Slice ... ... ... ... ... V 1 0 16
0 16
Set Skewers ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Egg-beater, Dower’s American pattern ... ... 0 3 0
■* J bo'' ucc * l ' CJ -5 X/UWCi o ALugllCdili jJclbLtJIIl ••• ... u O v
Toasting Fork ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Cook’s Fork ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Gridiron ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Fryingpan ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Small Stewpan ... ... ... ... ... 0 3 6
Basting Ladle ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Tin Dipper ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Pasteboard and Bolling Pin ... ... ... 036
Flour Dredger ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Tin Pepper Box, large, for peppering in cooking ... 0 0 6
Bread Grater ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Nutmeg Grater ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Lever Knife, for opening tins ... ... ... 010
Strong Large Scissors, for cutting fins from fish or
slits in poultry, &c., &c. ... ... ... 0 2 6
Tin Coffeepot ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 6
Baking Tin, large ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
2 Cake Tins, round or oval, Is. ... ... ... 0 2 0
Kitchen Spoons ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Fish Kettle ... ... ... ... ... 0 9 6
£4 2 3
This last article may be omitted where fish is scarce or
seldom used. It is, however, very handy for boiling various
joints or poultry which it is necessary to take up now and
then to see if they are done.
CUTLERY AND ELECTRO-PLATE.
Half-dozen Table Knives... ... ... ... £0 14 0
„ Dessert Knives ... ... ... 0 9 0
Carving Knife and Fork ... ... ... ... 0 7 6
Poultry Carver and Fork ... ... ... ... 0 8 6
Carried forward ... ... ••• ... £1 19 0


Brought forward ... ... ... £1 19 0
Half-dozen Table Forks, good ... ... ... 10 0
„ Table Spoons „ ... ... ... 10 0
„ Dessert Forks „ ... ... ... 014 0
„ Dessertspoons,, ... ... ... 0 14 0
„ Tea Spoons „ ... ... ... 0.86
1 Steel 0 5 0
2 Gravy Ladles, Bs. 6d. ... ... ... ... 017 0
Soup Ladle ... ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
Set of Dish Covers ... ... ... ... 2 0 0
2 Wire Dish Covers ... ... ... ... 0 4 0
Cruet Frame ... ... ... ... ... 110
Good Teapot ... ... ... ... ... 0 15 0
0 15 0
Butter Dish and Knife ... ... ... .». 010 6
Bread Platter and Knife ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Plate Basket ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 6
£l2 11 0
It will be very readily seen by any young couple who may
be thinking of marrying that in the list of electro-plate there
is always a chance of being helped out by wedding presents.
It is, consequently, wise to postpone the purchase of these
kinds of things until after the homecoming. There is room
for economy here if money is a very great object, because,
undoubtedly, much lower priced articles may be got than I
have set down. But good cutlery and good electro-plate lasts
a lifetime, while common articles wear out directly. It is
certain that everything in this list will have to be bought
before even a small home is complete. I should advise that,
if the money for furnishing is short, fewer of these articles be
purchased, but the same standard kept up. Even yet, how-
ever, we have not got out of the kitchen. Before that apart-
ment is done with we want a plain dinner service. I recom-
mend those with a plain white ground and a line or two in
colours round the border, because they are easily matched.
A dinner service of fifty-four pieces comprises twelve meat
plates, twelve pudding plates, twelve cheese plates, two ten-
inch dishes, two twelve-inch dishes, one fourteen-inch dish,
and one sixteen-inch dish, two vegetable dishes and covers,
two sauce tureens with covers, ladles, and stands. The
ladles soon break, and cannot be mended, but I have
allowed for the purchase of gravy ladles in the electro-plate.
A dinner service may be had complete of the kind mentioned
for one pound three shillings and sixpence. To replace the
large plates at any time will cost six shillings per dozen, the


vegetable dishes about two shillings and sixpence each, so
that the complete service is much the cheapest thing to buy.
Then we have for crockery :
Dinner Service ... ... ... ... ... £l3 6
Tea Service, plain, white, and gold, 28 pieces, 12 cups
and saucers, 2 plates, basin, and ewer ... ... 0 12 6
Set of (8) Jugs ... ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
Set of Pudding Basins ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
2 Pie Dishes ... ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
£2 4 0
The purchases for the kitchen department must be finished
up with the necessary cloths for keeping all these articles
clean.
These are what you should buy :
6 Dusters (check) ... ... ... ... £0 2 3
6 Glass Cloths ... ... ... ... ... 0 3 6
6 Crash Towels, Is. ... ... ... ... 0 6 0
1 Chamois Leather ... ... ... ... 0 10
1 Plate Brush ... ... ... ... ... 0 16
1 Jug Mop ... ... ... ... ... 0 13
£0 15 6
Lastly come the two most important articles of all—a good
kitchen clock, for which I would give a pound were I you—one
of those octagon-shaped American levers is best —and a strong
thermometer in a metal case, marking up to the heat of boiling
oil or fat. One that marks only forty-two degrees is useless.
Now then to see what we have spent already:
Kitchen Furniture ... ... ... £5 10 3
Utensils and Brushware ... ... ... ... 411 3
Cooking Utensils ... ... ... ... 4 2 3
Cutlery and Electro-plate... ... ... .. 12 11 0
Crockery ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 0
Cloths and Towels ... ... ... ... 0 15 6
Clock 10 0
Thermometer ... ... ... ... ... 0 10 6
£3l 4 9
This seems a great deal of money for furnishing a kitchen,
but it would be very easy to make the amount half as large
again. I have set down nothing that is not necessary, and


many housekeepers will say, “ Dear me ! there are no coffee
and tea canisters, no kitchen teapot, no housemaid’s boxes, no
coffee mill, no spice mill, no this, no that, no the other.” Very
likely they are right; lam only providing for young people
with about three pounds per week—not so poor but what they
can live comfortably, and give a friend or two a cup of tea or
a bit of supper now and then, but not great folk prepared to
entertain company every day.
I want to do with as few articles as possible. The boxes in
which various goods come home will do very well for soap-
boxes, housemaid’s boxes, and other things of that kind. The
grocers send coffee in neat canisters, which come in very
handily for various things; and, in short, if people buy the
articles which I have set down they will be all right. Now we
will go to the living-room and sleeping-room, and see what we
must spend there.
CHAPTER 111.
PARLOUR AND LIVING-ROOM.
The first thing that any young woman of good taste will
think of is her parlour carpet, and here I think she may be
excused for being a little bit extravagant. A well-chosen carpet
of good quality does a very great deal towards furnishing a
room, and makes it look really comfortable. It is all nonsense
to talk about carpets being hot, dusty, unhealthy, and so on.
When we have hot-wind days boards are hot, everything is
hot, and if the dust be properly excluded by keeping the
windows shut and the blinds down, even the north wind will
not hurt the carpet.
Don’t buy felt, because it wears into holes and the patterns
are ungainly. Don’t buy tapestry, because it gets threadbare*
and looks shabby. But buy a real Brussels, which will wear
for ever, and make bedroom carpets afterwards. You can get
very good ones, of admirable quality, though not quite of the
latest patterns, for five shillings per yard. Every season the
principal warehouses in Melbourne have their windows full of
them at this price, and I always see something to fall in love
with them.


26 yards Carpet, 5s.
£6
10
0
Making Carpet, 26 yards, at 3d.
0
6
6
Hearthrug, say ...
1
0
0
Fender ...
1
1
0
Set Pireirons
1
1
0
6 various Chairs (not a set), say 2 at 8s. 6d., 2 at 10s,,
2 at 14s.
3
5
0
Table, 6ft. x 4ft., strong cedar, with or without cedar
top. If the former ...
3
0
0
Carried forward ...
£16
3
6
In little cottages a very common kind of parlour is the one
that stands back to back with the kitchen, so that the
chimney goes up through the middle of the house. If this
be your case the parlour will probably be longer from front
window to fireplace than it is broad. However, in any case
you will be pretty sure to find that your room will not
measure more than about fifteen feet by twelve, with, perhaps,
a recess or two over. You will, therefore, want your carpet to
be five yards by four, and to give you this area you will have to
buy at the least twenty-five yards of carpet, even if you have a
small pattern that will match in any way without cutting to
waste, Five widths of Brussels carpet will not measure quite
four yards, since the widest of them are not beyond twenty-
eight inches in width ; but it is not the fashion now to have
the carpet right up to the skirting board on either side, and,
consequently, five-and-twenty or six-and-twenty yards ought
to give you about enough. The carpet must be so laid that
its length runs from the principal window to the fireplace,
and if you prefer the old-fashioned method of putting the
carpet right into every corner of the room, you must be con-
tent to see it cut to waste. It is much better to have it as
near as may be to the size of the clear floor, and let those
nooks it does not cover be stained or covered with drugget
or India matting. In nailing the carpet down use large flat-
headed carpet pins. They are to be bought at any iron-
mongery for sixpence per dozen. Their bright brass tops are
not unsightly, and they do no damage to the carpet. They
are easily removed with a little care when it has to come up.
The upholsterer’s or draper’s where you buy your carpet will
sew it for you better than you can yourself. They generally
charge about threepence per yard for doing this. Suppose,
therefore, we allow you for your parlour twenty-six yards of
carpet, the account will stand thus: —


Brought forward... ... ... ... £l6 3 6
2 Easy Chairs, lat £3, lat £2 10s. ... ... 5 10 0
Sofa, say ... ... ... ... ... 4 0 0
Tablecover ... ... ... ... ... 110
Pair Lace Curtains ... ... ... ... 0 16 0
Pair Damask or Stuff Curtains ... ... ... 200
Window Blind, say ... ... ... ... 0 3 0 1
Outer Green Blind ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
Rollers, Back, and Brackets ... ... ... 046
Cornice Pole, say ... ... ... ... 0 15 0
Parlour Mat ... ... ... ... ... 0 4 6
Chiffonier ... ... ... ... ... 3 0 0
£35 0 6
There are various ways in which a little of this money may
be saved, as thus :
26 yards Tapestry Carpet, 3s. ... ... ... £3 18 O
Making do., at 3d. ... ... ... ... 0 6 6
Hearthrug ... ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
Fender, 18s., and Fireiross, 10s. 6d. ... ... 18 6
Chiffonier ... ... ... .. ... 3 0 0
6 various Chairs, at an average of Bs. 6d. each ... 2 110
Table, with white wood top and cedar or stained legs 2 0 0
Easy Chair, Gentleman’s ... ... ... ... 3 0 0
Rocking Chair, of cane and bent-wood ... ... 12 0
Sofa ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 0 0
Tablecover, printed cloth .. ... ... ... 0 12 6
Pair Lace Curtains ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
Cornice Pole ... ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
Rollers, Rack, and Brackets ... ... ... 046
Blind ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
£23 3 6
But you will find that the dearer things will give you the
most comfort. I have not allowed in this list anything for
ornaments, and I have not even given you side-tables. The
ornaments it is impossible to advise upon with certainty.
because so much depends upon individual taste. The side-
tables I am going to tell you by-and-bye how to manage
without.
In ornamenting a room, to give it a look of home, there are
certain standards which cannot mislead. Pictures, flowers,
brackets, and books are the best ornaments you can have, and
they are not very dear.


In the first place, for flowers you should have the specimen
glasses, which are to be bought in such pretty forms for mere
trifles of money. I should not buy them all alike, but in
pairs, and in a room of the size mentioned from three to six
pairs of various sizes and kinds will go a long way. They are
only from sixpence to ninepence each, and therefore a dozen
of them may be bought for about seven shillings and sixpence.
One flower in each glass, with a sprig of greenery, is enough.
Three pairs of such glasses on a mantelshelf in front of a glass
or picture will look very nice. The other three pairs can
stand about the room, either on the brackets, on the make-
shifts for side-tables, or on the chiffonier, an article which you
cannot well do without.
The coloured pictures now sent out with the bettermost
illustrated papers are so good that the walls can be artistically
covered for a mere nothing. These prints, together with the
best woodcuts which are also found in their pages, are always
worth cheap frames, and it happens that the cheapest frames
of all —the plain Oxford, as they are called—are the most
satisfactory by far in an artistic point of view. The Art
Union Pictures, both of the Victorian and the London Societies
of Arts, are extremely good, and if you can squeeze out the
yearly guinea it is a good thing to subscribe. Fretwork
brackets and carved brackets are to be seen in every fancy
shop, picture-frame makers’, and ironmongers’ in Melbourne,
and in most large towns, at prices varying, according to size,
from one to five shillings each. With a bracket of this kind
on either side of your window, midway between the window
jamb and the wall, at about four feet from the ground, and
with one or two more in other corners of the room, the lines of
the wall will be agreeably broken. Specimen glasses, with
single flowers in them, may stand on these, or little china
ornaments, or little parian or china figures, all cheap and all
pretty. The brackets will look very well if their shelves are
trimmed with needlework, or with falls of lace, or with gold
coloured braid. I have some trimmed with lace and gold
coloured braid, laid over the top edge of it. The lace is just
lightly hemmed at the top, and the braid and the hem of the
lace fastened to the edge of the shelves of the brackets with
tiny brass-headed tacks. The total cost of these ornaments is
very trifling, thus; —


2 Carved Brackets, 2s. 6d. ... ... ... £0 6 0
1 yard Lace, Tin. deep, with scalloped edge ... 0 1 P
1 yard gold coloured Braid, lin. wide ... ... 0 0 4|
Tacks ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 0
£0 7 3
Upon each of these I have a little photograph in a velvet
frame—the frames cost a shilling each—and a specimen glass
with any flower in season in it. The glasses cost eighteen-
pence the pair, so the total cost of these ornaments all told
was ten shillings and ninepence per pair. Photographs in
little carved frames, or Oxford frames, or velvet frames, look
very well, and so do the coloured Christmas and presentation
cards of the best houses. I have the four little children which
were issued by the Society of Arts at the end of 1881. The
four cost two shillings, and the frames one shilling and
sixpence each. Everybody looks a second time at them.
Again, Van Prangs of Boston issued two pieces, one of hearts-
ease and one of geraniums; I bought them for three shillings
the two, put them in black and gold mounts with an oval
opening, which I bought for sixpence each in Melbourne, and
then in German gilt frames fourteen inches by ten, which
cost me two shillings and ninepence each, glass and all. The
vivid and beautiful colours of the flowers are so thrown up by
the black and gold mounts that the effect is admirable, and,
as the mounts hide the inscriptions, no one can tell what
they are, except that they are very pretty flower pieces.
Twenty years ago no money could have purchased such
treasures of true oil as you can now ornament your rooms
with at a trifling cost. A picture was widely distributed
gratuitously some time ago by a Melbourne publisher as an
advertisement for a book. It was a view of London Bridge,
Portsea. I covered all its margin with a grey mount, and
put it into an ordinary Oxford frame, seventeen inches by
twelve, which I picked up in a saleroom for half-a-crown. It
happened that the view was a very good one, though I believe
the book of which it afterwards formed a part was unsuc-
cessful. This I know, that everyone admires it, and no one
suspects its origin. Some of the illuminated crosses wreathed
with flowers, sold by the fancy shops, are very lovely, and
worthy of a place upon anyone’s walls. With these things
three or four pounds and a little taste will make your room
look pretty, but no one can tell you exactly how to put them
or where they should go.


Only one thing is to be avoided in a small room. Don’t
attempt to make them look too regular in appearance. The
eye loves variety. If you have two prints, two photographs,
two illuminated crosses, or two of anything else, do not put
them side by side or staring at each other. Let other things
come between them.
Now for my sham side-tables, which I promise you are very
useful. It is ten chances to one that your chimney will be
built in the middle, or nearly in the middle, of one end of the
room. In this case have a stout shelf the full depth of the
recess put into each of the recesses at the same height from
the ground as the top of a table—that is, twenty-eight or
twenty-nine inches. Have the shelves fastened with screws
just as described in the last chapter on kitchen furnishing.
Make covers of plain cloth. Satin cloth will do very well of
the same colour as the groundwork of your tablecover for
these. Let the covers be exactly as wide as the shelf is long,
and let them just touch the wall at the back, and hang over a
quarter of a yard in front. Then, just where the edge of the
shelf will come, tack a fall of heavy valance lace with scalloped
edges, but without any fullness. Hide the join of the lace and
stuff with a row of the same gold-coloured braid with which I
advised you to trim your brackets, and let the covers be
fastened down at the back of the shelves quite close to the
wall with brass drawing pins. The recesses trimmed in this
way will look very dressy and nice, and the two shelves thus
covered will make admirable side-tables. Underneath them,
and against the wall, you can fasten, also with screws, smaller
shelves or wooden boxes, such as come with whisky or brandy,
turned on their sides and placed close up to the shelves.
These are concealed by the fall of lace and cloth in front, and
are very handy for holding any odds and ends you wish to
have near you, but out of sight. A nest of hanging book-
shelves hung above one of these imitation tables will finish
off that recess beautifully, and a bracket or two or a picture
will do the like for the other.
I have two recesses trimmed in this way, which look very
well indeed. I made the shelves myself from the lids of two
large wooden boxes I bought of a draper for half-a-crown
each, and by turning the boxes on their sides and driving
screws through the back and ends of them into the walls I
made them answer the purpose of supports and cupboards
too. This is a chance that does not always happen, because
the boxes, which were shallow for their breadth, just fitted


1 dozen Dinner Napkins ...
£0
10
6
4 Table Cloths, white damask, about 14s. each
2
16
0
6 good Glass Tumblers
0
7
6
6 clear Large Wine Glasses (the round shape known
as Port Wine Glasses are handiest where you have
only one sort) ...
0
9
0
1 Crumb Brush ...
0
1
6
2 pairs Cut Salt-cellars, 2s. 6d.
0
5
0
the recess. But the shelves could have been bought, ready
planed and smooth, for the same money. The trimming of
satin cloth, lace, and braid cost two shillings and eightpence
halfpenny for each recess.
If you happen to have an ugly mantelpiece or chimney
jamb in your cottage, which you very likely may, you can
ornament it at a very moderate rate in one or two ways.
Firstly, you can make a mantelpiece trimming of coloured
cloth, lace, and braid for two or three shillings. This is
applicable if the mantelpiece is mean-looking or too high up.
Or, secondly, if it happens to be painted a dark, heavy colour,
you can buy, for one shilling or eighteenpence, a length of
gilt moulding, and tack it carefully to the underside of the
mouldings of the chimney jambs. The lengths in which it is
sold are about eight feet, and you can get it at almost any
painter and paperhanger’s shop. Two lengths will do for both
uprights and for the horizontal piece to join them.
In short, if you like to take the trouble, you may turn the
most common-looking little room into a perfect nest of
comfort and prettiness, and that at trifling expense. But in
these matters no one can do more than point out the way.
It is not possible to lay down any strict rules.
Before leaving your parlour, however, we must remember
that it is also your dining and breakfast room, and therefore
we must ask you to expend a little money on it to fit it for
those capacities.
For crockery and cutlery we have already provided, but
your chiffonier must hold the following articles :
A Glass Water Jug, to hold a quart or 3 pints ... 0 4 0
£4 13 6
Dinner mats are no longer used, and never were necessary.
It is a very good plan to lay a clean napkin under any dish
that has gravy in it in case the carver is clumsy, as he gene-
rally is.* Another may be laid on the cloth where any careless
person sits who slops coffee about. These precautions will save
vexation, and it is easier to wash napkins than tablecloths.
♦ See Hints on Carving, “ Australian Plain Cookery,” Is.


4 feet 6 inches Half-tester or Canopy Iron Bedstead,
a good solid make, japanned in—for choice—red,
bronze, and gold, or, of course, any colour you
prefer, say
£4 10
0
Pair of Palliasses
0 18
6
Good Pulu or Kapok Mattress
3 0
0
Hair Bolster
0 12
6
2 Feather Pillows, good ...
0 18
0
Chest of Drawers, 8 drawers
7 7
0
Washstand, double, with towel rail
1 10
0
Toilet Table, large size, with drawer
1 1
0
Toilet Glass, a good size ...
... ...
1 1
0
f
2 Cane-seat Chairs
0 13
0
£21 10
0
CHAPTER IV.
THE BEDROOM AND PASSAGE.
A neat, orderly, inviting-looking bedroom, with a nicely
draped couch, pretty window curtains, bright furniture, and
glittering toiletware, is the ambition and the pride of every
housekeeper worthy of the name ; and just as I have advised
you to spend a fair sum in furnishing one sitting-room nicely,
in preference to furnishing two barely, so I advise you to
postpone furnishing a spare bedroom until a later day, and
make your own room as attractive and pretty as you possibly
can. The actual furniture of a bedroom does not consist of
many articles, but you will find, notwithstanding, that you
have spent a good deal of money before you can turn the key
in the door and say, “ How, that’s all ready for immediate
use.”
For standing furniture the list is very short, and here is what
I recommend :
These things will be all good and serviceable. They will
last a lifetime with care, and will make your home comfortable.
When you get rich, as you will, if you follow the advice in this
little book, they will answer admirably for a guest chamber.
Indeed, they will furbish up for ever. However, you can get
very much cheaper articles. Here is a list of the cheapest
goods I know of : —•


Iron French Bedstead, nominally 4 feet 6 inches,
really about 4 feet 2 inches ... ... ... £1 12 6
Pair Palliasses ... ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
Flock Mattress ... ... ... ... ... 18 0
/''a.t\,,„— o j m.; „ a * n.
Chest of Drawers, 8 drawers, Chinese make ... 4 5 0
Bolster, ss. 6d.; 2 Pillows, 3s. 6d. each ... ... 012 6
Washstand, double ... ... ... ... 110
Toilet Table, Chinese make ... ... ... 0 10 0
Toilet Glass ... ... ... ... ... 0 12 6
2 Chairs, 6s. 6d. ... ... ... ... ... 0 11 0
£ll 6 0
You can go all the way between these two lists, rising at a
shilling or two on each article. I cannot recommend these
goods for lasting wear, but I hare known very nice people who
were obliged to put up with them. As a rule, however, those
were people who were compelled to begin housekeeping a
second time, by some accident, when every shilling was an
object.
You will note that in the cheapest set of bedroom furniture
I have still advised full-sized chests of drawers, washstands,
and so on. It is quite possible to be comfortable with the
cheapest articles, if they be quite clean, and nice, and large
enough, but not if they be scrimpie. Then discomfort comes in
indeed.
Necessarily, however, the standing furniture is not all. We
have now to think of carpet, curtains, linen, blankets, and
toiletware, and so you must prepare to receive bills and
provide payment.
Here is a list of necessaries for one bed :
Coverlet, white, fine quality ... ... ... £llO
3 pairs Sheets, 3 yards long, 100 inches wide, twill,
at 3s. ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 14 0
1 pair Under Blankets ... ... ... ... 110
2 pairs Over Blankets, 30s. ... ... ... 3 0 0
2 Bolster Cases ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
6 Pillow Cases ... ... ... ... ... 0 7 6
£8 8 6
You may save a little on these articles if you like, because
you can get a fairly good coverlet for 165., decent sheeting at
2s. 6d. per yard, and can have your over blankets as thin as
your under blankets. But you will not be as comfortable.
Even in the summer it is generally cool at night in Melbourne,
and one pair of good blankets, with a coverlet, can always b®


borne. The under blankets I have put down at a guinea,
because they do not need to be large enough to turn in. They
should be just big enough to cover the bed, and hang over far-
enough to touch the palliasses.
Then you will want: —
6 Bath Towels, good, Is. 9d. ... ... ... £0 10 6
6 good Huckaback Towels, Is. 4d.... ... ... 0 8 0
6 Diaper Towels, Is. 6d. ... ... ... ... 0 9 0
1 pair Cretonne Curtains, for window, 3 yards long,
at Is. ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6 0
1 pair Book Muslin Curtains, for window, about same
price ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6 0
1 White Blind, 35.; Back Roller and Brackets, 3s. ... 0 6 0
1 Green Holland Blind ... ... ... ... 0 3 0
6 yards of good Felt Carpet, the yard wide will do, 3s. 018 0
Double Set of Toilet Ware (plain white is best) ... 15 0
2 Toilet Carafes, with glasses, 2s. ... ... ... 040
Dimity, for valances for bed and for top of tester and
back of bed ... ... ... ... ... 010 0
Net, for side curtains, to be tied back in winter and
brought round in summer, for protection against
mosquitoes ... ... ... ... ... 0 8 0
£5 13 6
And now I have come nearly to the end of all I want you
to buy. Two young people only want three rooms really, on©
for preparing their food and cleaning up in, one for sleeping,
and one for living in. If these three rooms are nicely furnished,
and the wife takes the natural pride in keeping them in good
order which may fairly be expected of her, they will be fai
more comfortable and attractive than six rooms over which
the same amount of money had been eked out sparingly.
What can be more miserable than the wretched little make-
shift, shabby-genteel homes one constantly sees among shiftless
people, where nothing is what it pretends to be, and nothing
is large enough for its proper use.
It makes me shudder when I see the wretched, wicked,
untruthful advertisements which line the newspapers, whem
one tradesman advertises a four-roomed house completely
furnished for <£l9 2s. 6d., and another insists that a three-
roomed cottage can be furnished for £l2 10s. What is there,
pray, in all my lists that is superfluous ? Take these lists into
any house you like, where people live in decent comfort, and
ask the house-mother what can be done without. She may
reply, “Well, you could do without such or such a utensil at


Erst.” Ask her how long first ? She will say, “ Well, until
the cold weather sets in, or the hot weather, or by getting
some one to lend it to you,” and finally will have to confess
that she has them all herself and more.
I am not writing, be it remembered, for the unfortunate,
ground down farm labourers and factory hands of the old
country. lam writing for young Victorian working men and
women. I know very well that there is not the slightest reason
why in two years a young mechanic, tradesman, or clerk, should
not lay by a hundred pounds to marry upon at the least, and I
think in the same time the girl, if she be a servant, a shop-
woman, a teacher, or even a factory hand, badly as they are
paid, may herself save twenty or thirty pounds toward setting
up in life. If they begin with three rooms, furnished at a cost
of a hundred pounds, they will have everything nice about
them, as the saying is, and will find the refinements of
their pretty little home reflected in their personal habits.
The passage wants half-a-dozen yards of oilcloth, which
will cost three shillings and sixpence per yard if it is to be
worth anything, and a good firm rope mat, which should cost
nine shillings—thirty shillings in all. If you can afford it, a
couple more small Axminster mats may be laid, one at the
bedroom door and one at the parlour door. They give a finish
to the place, and can be had for from two shillings and sixpence
to four shillings and sixpence each.
CHAPTER Y.
FURNITURE AND THE CARE OF IT.
Supposing all the furniture to have been bought that is
mentioned in the foregoing lists, and the house taken in which
it is to be placed, the next grand job is that of moving in and
setting everything to rights, work in which the immediate
relations of the bride and bridegroom generally gladly assist.
Everything is, of course, got ready, and the house is put in
epic and span order before the marriage as a rule, so that
the young couple, after whatever holiday they can afford
themselves by way of honeymoon, come home to a place


which is to a certain extent familiar to them. They have
nothing to do but to renew their acquaintance with their
new movables, which have, of course, been properly cared for
in their absence.
There is a great deal more to be done, however, than the
mere purchasing of the goods and the taking of the house.
The latter will generally want very careful preparation before
it will be fit for the reception of new furniture, and for the
housekeeping of a newly married couple.
As a general rule, a landlord who knows that he is going to
get respectable tenants, in easy circumstances for their station
in life, will not object to do a little toward making the house fit
for them. He will usually make the roof watertight, whitewash
or paper the ceilings, re-paper any rooms that are in a dilapi-
dated condition, and put the house in structural repair.
These matters must all be determined before the tenancy is
commenced, and if he be a respectable man, of good character,
it is generally advisable to make the tenancy yearly, even if
the rent be paid weekly. It is then worth your while to add
a trifle to his intended expenditure, so that you may have
matters rather nicer than it would pay him to make them.
Supposing, for instance, he is willing to paper your parlour
walls with a paper costing fifteen or eighteenpence the piece,
it will then be a good plan to add another sixpence per piece to
the price out of your own pocket. This will make a vast differ-
ence in the appearance of the room, and cost you a mere trifle.
Thus the papering of a parlour the size I have described, fifteen
feet by eleven feet, and twelve feet high, would take nine pieces
of paper. You can get really handsome papers for two shillings
per piece of twelve yards, and if he gives eighteenpence, the
difference for you to pay will be only four-and-sixpence. It is
quite possible indeed, if there be two windows in addition to
the door and fireplace, that eight pieces may do. The extra
money will make your room look very much nicer, and will
enable you to choose such a pattern as will show your furniture
to advantage. For papering the ceiling of a cottage parlour
landlords often choose the white watered paper, looking
something like watered silk, which, if it have not a good sur-
face, soon gets dingy. It costs from tenpence to one shilling
per piece, and to paper the ceiling of a room this size will take
three pieces. Now, for an extra sixpence per piece, you
can get a white moire antique ceiling paper surfaced, i.e. y
glazed, which will look six times as well, and last ten times as
long. Therefore, for six shillings added to his outlay at tb e


proper time, that is, when he is making it, you may add
greatly to your pleasure in your home, and to the consequent
happiness of your life.
The papering, whitewashing, painting, and repairs being
done, a charwoman should be turned into the empty house to
make it as clean as soap and water and scrubbing will make it.
She will only charge for thoroughly cleaning a little three
or four roomed cottage a few shillings, and will take her
own utensils with her, so that you have no bother of any
kind, and your own goods need not be sent in until the house
is entirely clean. The skirting boards, window frames, jambs
of the doors, and mouldings above them, should be com-
mended to her particular attention, so that your house, when
you move into it, should be as clean inside as a new bandbox.
You are going to take new furniture into it, which cannot
help hut be clean, and it is astonishingly easy to keep every-
thing in good order if you begin with absolute cleanliness and
determine never to let any dirt accumulate.
The first thing to be done is to put up the blinds at all the
windows. This is a task of no difficulty when all the fittings
and blinds are quite new. The tools necessary are a gimlet,
a screwdriver, a bradawl, a hammer, and a few screws and
tacks. The blinds being properly hung, the curtain poles or
rods should go next, and you will be astonished to see how
the proper shading of the rooms with the blinds will facilitate
the process of furnishing by showing every article of your
furniture at once in the light in which it will be seen in
every day life. The curtains, of course, should not be hung
until all the furniture has been placed in its proper positions.
After the blinds are up, the next thing to be done is to
prepare the floor for laying down the carpet. Sometimes the
floor is a good, firm, even one, hut generally it has imperfec-
tions of some kind. If it be very bad you will probably have
to call in a carpenter to plane off rough places, and to knock
firmly down all nails that may have started. But, as a general
rule, there will be nothing the matter that you cannot remedy
yourself by examining it carefully, taking out any old carpet
tacks that remain in the floor, and hammering in firmly any
large flooring nails that project. Then the entire floor must
be covered with sheets of thick brown paper, laid smoothly
down, overlapping each other two or three inches. The outer
edges of the paper may he fastened with small tacks, and the
overlapping edges must be glued together. For a floor five
yards by four you will want about half a quire of the largest


brown paper, which measures about fifty-six inches by fortj-
five, or double the quantity of the commoner size, twenty-nine
inches by forty-five. If the paper is carefully laid down, with
the overlapping edges of each sheet properly glued to those
underneath, the trifling inequalities of the floor will not hurt
the carpet, nor will dust work up from between the boards to
injure it. The glue will not go mouldy, as paste does, nor will
it take the colour out of the carpet as paste would do. It
dries quickly, and in a short time will be quite ready for the
carpet to be laid down.
If the carpet, when down, proves to have been puckered in
the making, don’t be worried about it. Get it as straight as
you can. Then take a sponge and a basin of clean warm
water. Lightly damp all the seams, and for an inch or two
on each side, or as far as the puckering shows, but do not rub
the carpet in wetting it. Then take a moderately warm, heavy
flatiron and press all the seams, laying a sheet of thick brown
paper or a cloth between the iron and the carpet. Set the
doors and windows open unless the day be dusty, and when
the carpet is dry it will be quite flat, and will set well. It will
not hurt it if you have to damp it all over, but of course it is
much better not to do so. It may, however, be advisable to
damp it round the outer edges and press it, as it will then set
better and will allow a door to pass over it more easily.
The carpet being in its place, there is nothing to be done but
to move in the standing furniture, which will not take long,
and, when this is disposed in the manner best suited to your
taste, put in the ornaments of various kinds and hang your
pictures. These should always be last, because it is not
possible to say which will be the best positions for them until
the furniture is in its place. Last of all hang up your curtains,
and your room is complete.
In furnishing a bedroom the first thing to be done after the
blinds are up is to put up the bedstead while the room is
empty of everything else, so that its position may be studied.
All other articles of furniture must be secondary to this one.
There is a well-grounded idea that the healthiest position
for a sleeper is due north and south, so that, if possible, the
bedstead should be placed in that direction. But to my mind
it is of much more importance that there should be no direct
draught across it, and that it should be so placed that the light
from the window does not strike upon the sleeper’s eyes.
Direct draughts are decidedly dangerous. You cannot have
too much fresh air, and you will do very wisely to keep your


bedroom windows open night and day, too, if you possibly can.
They need not be wide open, of course, at night; an inch at
the top and an inch at the bottom will do. At the Consumption
Hospital in London the windows will actually not shut by this
much. But if you adopt this plan it must be strictly on
condition that the bedstead does not stand in the draught, for
if it does the current of air will rob you of heat while you
sleep, and of vitality into the bargain. In small rooms much
attention must be given to this point. When you are up and
moving about you may safely open all windows and doors, and
let in the free air and sunshine to any extent. But warmth
and darkness are both essential to healthy sleep, and your bed-
room, if it be properly aired all day long, as it should be, will
be sufficiently, purified at night with the small opening of the
window I have mentioned. A room twelve feet square and
twelve feet high will contain seventeen hundred and twenty-
eight cubic feet of air, and if it be quite fresh when you go to
bed, as it should be, if the room have a chimney, as it certainly
should, and if the window be open an inch at the top and an
inch at the bottom, it will be as fresh when you rise in the
morning as it was when you went to bed at night.
There is a great outcry against bed curtains, and undoubtedly
the effect of the heavy moreen hangings in which our grand-
fathers used to shroud their great four-post bedsteads was to
make a little room almost impervious to the outer air within
the bedroom itself. The space enclosed by the curtains of an
old-fashioned, full-sized, four-post bedstead would be about
seven feet long by five feet wide and eight feet high, equal to two
hundred and eighty cubic feet. Had this space been impervious
to the outer air the result would have been fatal in a short
time. The truth probably is that old-fashioned doors, windows,
and chimneys were, for the most part, ill fitting and clumsy,
admitting draughts in all directions, which the curtains warded
off to a great extent, if not entirely. Now that our houses are
better built, the old-fashioned four-poster is quite out of
fashion. At the same time, a nice light arrangement of dimity
and net around the canopy of a half-tester bedstead looks well
■and is comfortable. It shades the eyes and prevents draughts
and colds. I should risk the doctor if I were you, and stick to
it for the sake of neatness and beauty, which are worth some-
thing in this world.
There is little to be done in moving in if the instructions as
to the places of the goods mentioned in the various lists are
kept in mind. The lists of goods bought should be at hand,


and everything as it is moved from the vans carried at once
into the room it is to occupy. This is easily managed by
having the blinds and carpet and bedstead sent in first, and the
rest of the goods to follow. A short time since we managed a
flitting from one ten-roomed house into another in one long
day’s work, and when we sat down to dinner you would not
have known that we had not been six months in the house,
excepting that we were heartily tired, and all we had done on
the previous day was to lay down carpets and put up blinds.
I should not have had even this done on the previous day only
that the carpets were new ones, and the result was that about
eix hours of disorganisation was all that we had to endure.
THREE POUNDS A WEEK.
Out of the three pounds per week which forms the whole
income of our young couple I have advised that one and six-
pence per week shall be paid for life insurance, and four and
sixpence per week to a building society. This gives ten per
cent, of the money to be saved. Another shilling per week to
a benefit society will secure medical attendance for the family
and a small allowance during sickness. Two pounds thirteen
shillings therefore remain for all other expenses. Ten
shillings of this money will go for rent, if they live within
walking distance of town, or for rent and railway fares if they
live in the suburbs. One pound per week carefully managed
will buy the food for two people, and will include also in the
groceries the soap, starch, blue, soda, blacklead, blacking,
bedroom candles ; everything, in short, for the house but fuel
and kerosene or gas. Light and fuel it is difficult to price,
because the cost of gas and wood or coal varies in different
parts of the colony. But, taking winter and summer together,
the outside cost of these two items should not, in a three or
four roomed house, exceed four to five shillings per week.
Thus for absolute necessaries we have :


Rent £0 10 O
Household Expenses ... ... ... ... 10 0
Fuel and Light, say ... ... ... ... 0 5 0-
£1 15 0
These are the necessities of decent life. They leave, after
the savings and insurance and friendly society’s money is
deducted, eighteen shillings per week for dress, pocket-money.
and for a special fund for the increase of the family. Out of
this money the wife, if she have begun with a fair stock of
clothes, will be able to replace them as they wear out upon a
shilling per day, or seven shillings per week—eighteen pounds
four shillings per annum. The man, also beginning with a
good stock of clothes, will want less. Ten pounds a year will
do for him, but, as he must put his hand in his pocket now
and then, let him be ever so careful, he shall be allowed the
same amount as his wife, eighteen pounds four shillings pen
annum, or one shilling per day.
Thus we get to the end of our expenditure, which runs out
as follows .-—
Life Insurance ... ... ... ... ... £0 1 ft
Building Society... ... ... ... ... 0 4 ft
Friendly Society... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Rent, <fec. ... ... ... ... ... 0 10 O
Housekeeping ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Fuel and Light ... ... ... ... ... 0 6 0
Man’s Expenses (Clothes, &c.) ... ... ... 0 7 0
Wife’s Expenses (Clothes, &c.) ... ... ... 0 7 0
0 7 0
£2 16 0
The balance of four shillings per week should be set aside
in a Savings Bank from the first week of married life for a
baby fund. The expenses of keeping children for the first
few years of their lives are small, and they do not destroy
clothes until they arrive at a romping age. But nurses must
be paid, and there are many expenses attending the arrival of
children which need not be specified here. A working man and
woman cannot lay by much toward these calls, but as the doctor-
will come from the friendly society, and his fees are assessed
at a smaller sum by reason of your weekly contribution to-
that association, the ten pounds eight shillings per annum
which this four shillings per week will amount to will see you
through the first five or six years of married life. By that


time, if you have lived up to your opportunities, your income
will have improved. Indeed, if the young man began his pay-
ments into the building society at eighteen, as he was advised
to do, his first shares will have run out, and he will be in
possession of one hundred and eighty pounds, with which he
can buy such a cottage as you will have been living in, and so
add the sum he has been paying as rent to his income. t
MARKETING AND SUPPLIES.
Do not be too grand to do your own marketing. It is not
absolutely necessary that you should go out with a large
basket and bring in all your supplies, nor is there any special
reason why, if you have forgotten anything you required, or
can foresee anything you will require the next day, that you
should not give an order to the messenger who brings your
goods home that will ensure your getting it when you want it.
But make a rule of going yourself to the tradespeople you
deal with, inspecting what you are going to buy, seeing the
parcels weighed and made up, and paying the money then and
there. By this means you will ensure getting good things and
good weight, and you will soon give your tradespeople the
profitable impression that you know what you want and must
be properly served. French women of the middle classes
always go to market and choose everything they require.
They thus get great advantages their English sisters miss, and
they are certainly more economical managers as a rule.
The advantages of this system are obvious. If, for instance,
you let a butcher call for orders and never go near the shop
yourself, you may, and often will, order the very goods upon
which he may have a special run that day. You consequently
get an inferior cut or short weight; or you miss the chance of
a bargain* which he might be glad to sell you if he had a
chance. You go into a butcher’s yourself and you see at
a glance that he has fine mutton but little beef, or perhaps has
a large supply of good lamb or veal which will be sold at
moderate prices simply because it is plentiful. You save a


halfpenny or a penny per pound on a joint of meat by altering
your mind, and in housekeeping all savings are made in pence.
In addition, your butcher learns silently that you "will have
good weight, will not take inferior cuts at the best prices, and
consequently knows how to serve you when by any chance you
cannot go to the shop. You will also get many a wrinkle and
hint as to the way to make savoury dishes, gravies and soups
from materials you would not have thought of using.
Suppose, again, that you take it into your head to have
a fowl or a duck. If you send to the poulterer, it is
impossible for him to exercise any discretion on your behalf.
If you go yourself, you may find one scarce and dear, and
the other cheap. The question between economy and
appetite is one nobody can settle but yourself. No trades-
man, be he ever so clever, can possibly choose tea, butter*
bacon, or cheese, to your taste unless, by constantly seeing you
choose for yourself, he learns your taste, and so knows how to
please you when accident keeps you away. Again, business
men constantly have goods to clear out at reduced prices. By
going yourself to their shops you get the chance of partici-
pating in these advantages. If you pay cash, and are courteous
in your manner, you will find yourself treated as a valued
customer, however small your dealings may be, and you will
see that in a year or two you will have acquired the goodwill
of a number of people who may very probably in some
instances be of service to you in your later life.
It is a good thing to get into the habit of weighing the stores
sent you when they come home, even after you have seen them
weighed yourself. Not that it is advisable to make a
tremendous fuss about any trifling blunder. But if you weigh
what yon get, and quietly note the result, you will be able to
tell who treats you fairly and who takes advantage of you.
If you detect anything like systematic cheating, you can kindly
but firmly point it out if you believe the tradesman himself
honest, or you can quietly shift your custom if you feel sure it
is intentional. It is never worth while to quarrel with people,
but it is still less worth while to be cheated.
Make up your mind to certain rules of marketing, which, I
think, from long experience, are golden rules.
Never buy an inferior article. The best is the cheapest.
This applies to everything you eat, drink, or wear. It does
not mean that you should buy early asparagus when you
cannot afford it, nor champagne when you only want ale, nor


satin when alpaca is good enough. But it means that of two
•commodities of the same kind the best is the cheapest.
Screened and sorted potatoes, those which housewives call
“ sizable,” are honestly worth a shilling a bag more than those
of which a bag will contain every size from that of marbles
up to that of pumpkins. Beer of a good brand is worth a
shilling a dozen more than that of an inferior brand, which
has, perhaps, been carelessly bottled or packed, and a strong
stuff of fine quality will last out three of an inferior kind at
two-thirds of its price.
It is a proverb among men that one pair of trousers at
thirty-five shillings will do more service than three pairs at a
guinea, and men are keen judges of bargains affecting their
■own comfort.
2. Never buy of tradesmen who do a large credit trade
but yet make no allowances in price to cash customers. Every
tradesman who sells the bulk of his goods upon credit finds it
necessary to count at least five per cent., or a shilling in the
pound, for bad debts. Why should you pay a shilling in the
pound more for other people’s dishonesty ? There are now in
every suburb and in every town men who devote themselves
to cash trade, and you cannot do better than take your cash
to them. The larger their transactions the better for you.
3. Never take credit from your tradespeople for anything.
Pay them cash, and insist on all the advantage you can get for
it. Your humble sovereign or half-sovereign will often come
in very handily to a credit tradesman of quite large means
when he has bills to make up, and as long as you are a purely
cash customer you will be a valuable person in his eyes.
When once you get into his books your occasional payments
will count for nothing, and your trifling credit transactions
will be the sole measure of your importance.
4. Never give your tradesmen needless trouble by inspecting
numbers of articles you do not want, and cannot buy. Ask
for what you want, and, if you desire to inquire the price of
anything you do not intend to buy at the moment, tell the
man in plain language w r bat you wish to know. You will
thus insure respect and attention, no matter how small your
purchases may be.
5. Always courteously receive any suggestion your trades-
men make, and act on the information if it happen to suit
you, but never let any persuasion induce you to buy anything
you don’t require. If you do, you will be pestered with solicita-
tions and led into extravagance.


6. Butcher’s meat should be firm, not soft, nearly dry to
the touch, never wet, and elastic when pressed. It should
have an agreeable smell and an agreeable look too. The lean
should be red, and rather a dark red, the fat white, if it be
mutton, and a warm, nice yellow, if it be beef. Meat that does
not please the eye will rarely please the palate.
7. Vegetables hould be firm and rather springy to the
touch, resisting pressure. They should always have a nice
fresh smell, and, if they be earthy, the earth should smell
fresh. If they are soft they are stale, and if they are stale
they are worthless. They should always be bright in colour,
no matter what their colour may be. Thus a savoy cabbage
should be a bright dark green, a summer cabbage a bright
light green, a lettuce a bright light straw colour inside
inclining to white at the heart, and a bright clear light green
outside, with the centres of the leaves white and silvery.
These qualities of brightness and firmness cannot mislead you.
Dull-looking, flabby vegetables are always stale. They should
always be heavy for their size.
8. Fish should be perfectly fresh, with clear, clean-looking
gills and eyes, the skin firm, elastic to the touch, and the fish
heavy. It should have no odour whatever. The brighter the
colours the fresher the fish will be. Never buy any that has
been knocked about. Goods that have been bruised are
worthless.
CHAPTER VIII,
ON THE CARE OF STORES.
“ It’s the seasoning as does it,” Sam Weller tells Mr. Pick-
wick when he describes how the pieman “ turns a kidney into
a mutton, or a beef, or a weal and ’am,” and, as a matter of
fact, it is the seasoning which makes all the difference between
thoroughly savoury appetising dishes and mere messes which
no one cares for. The difference between plain beaf tea and
admirable gravy soup is simply one of flavouring, and when
you can make beef tea properly, you can, by adding flavour-
ings, thickening, and vegetables, make any brown soups in the
world. Now, flavourings are so cheap that, if you begin by


laying out three or four shillings upon them at the outset, a.
shilling a year will pay for all that is necessary to keep them
up. The flavourings required are not numerous. They
are :
Allspice Sage Mace
Cloves Knotted Marjoram Nutmegs
Whole Pepper Thyme Mint.
Ground Pepper Lemon Thyme
These, with the addition of lemon peel, which is never out of
place, and is easily preserved, and dried onions, also easily
prepared and preserved, will enable you to make nearly every
dish you can find in a first-class cookery book. The best
means of preserving them is in wide-mouthed stoppered bottles,
small jars with corks, little tins, or any similar receptacles, and
these will not cost anything if you take care of those that come
in the ordinary way of trade. For instance, in a cottage
house I recently furnished I had allspice, cloves, mace, whole
pepper, ground pepper, nutmegs, dried sage, dried thyme,
dried marjoram, and shredded lemon peel in the bottles in
which Eno’s fruit salt had been sent. I had the labels washed
off, and wrote plain labels, which I gummed on to each bottle.
The dried onions I kept in a tin which had come from the
grocer’s with a pound of coffee, first washing it in hot water,
which brought off the grocer’s label in a jiffy. It so happened,
of course, that I had been compelled to use a lot of Eno’s fruit
salt in the family in the preceding year, and I had saved the
bottles. You will find it a good plan never to throw away any
bottles of this kind at all. Jam pots, not tins, are useful for
this kind of thing, and should always be saved, and so should
the wide-mouthed pint and quart pickle bottles, especially
those which come from Crosse and Blackwell’s, which have an
india rubber rim to the stopper, that is loosened by lifting a
catch on the top. In setting up housekeeping buy the spices
in small quantities of a quarter pound each, and when any one
of them is exhausted, replace it at once. Cloves, allspice, mace,
nutmegs, whole pepper, and ground pepper will keep literally
for ever if the bottles are quite clean and dry when they are
put into them. The stoppered pickle jars, well washed and
dried, will answer admirably for keeping pearl barley, lentils,
sago, starch, blue, salt, emery powder, and other things which
would otherwise he lying about loose in the papers in which
they are sent home. For thyme, marjoram, sage, and other
vegetable flavourings you will generally have to rely upon the
Chinese gardener or other dealer who brings you green stuff.


These men will, when such things are in season, bring you
handfuls of them for a penny. They must then he picked
clean from the stalks and dirt, and laid upon sheets of paper
in the oven after the cooking for the day is all over, and left
to dry until the next day. They must not, of course, be put
into a warm oven nor exposed to the fire. Next day they only
have to be put into their proper bottles or jars. If you are
quite without jars, bottles, gallipots, or any thing of the
kind, you will find little difficulty in getting a few from friends,
and by-and-bye you will find they will accumulate so that you
will have them to spare.
One of the shelves you have had put up in the recesses of
your kitchen should be kept solely for these things. Then, as
they are all properly labelled, you will be able to find them at
a glance. Nothing should be kept on this shelf that is nob
labelled, and, as the recess is safe to be from eighteen to>
twenty inches deep, it will hold all you require. Every now
and then you can overhaul them when you have time, and see
that they are all right. Lemon peel should be pared off
thinly in small pieces whenever you use a lemon, should be left
in the oven over night to dry, and should be put away in ita
proper bottle or jar tightly closed. Onions will require
stronger treatment. They may be put into an oven in a dish
or tin after the dinner is taken out, and slowly baked to a very
dark brown. They should not be too large, not bigger round
than a five shilling piece at the outside, and the outer skins
should be carefully removed first. They will want turning
two or three times, and may be left in the oven until the next
day. The Yictorian onions are the best in the world, but they
are very dear sometimes, and a jar of onions dried in this way
will make you quite independent of John Chinaman when he
comes and says, “ Onion welly dear, Missee ; six-penca
pound.” Do not he afraid to bake them as brown as the crust
of a rich cake, and as dry as a piece of wood. They will be
all the better for use. They must not be put away until they
are quite hard, and they will give a splendid colour and flavour
to your soups and stews.
Parsley I should not advise you to attempt to dry. It
grows very nearly all the year round, and a pennyworth of
seed sown in any corner of your yard will give you all you
want for ever when it is scarce. When it is not scarce your
Chinaman will throw in a handful when you buy other things.
Mint you will get plentifully in the same way, but this you can
dry and store.


Flour should be kept in a tin such as biscuits are sent out in
by the makers. These tins have a glass in front of them. You
can get them from the grocer’s for the same price which the
biscuitmakers allow them on returning them, a shilling or
eighteenpence, according to size. But a tin of arrowroot
biscuits is about the handiest thing you can have in your own
house, and these are usually charged at sevenpence halfpenny,
or eightpence per pound, with the price of the tin extra.
When you have emptied the tin you can either return it and
get the money allowed, or use it for holding stores. These tins
are excellent for keeping soap, of which you should buy two or
three bars at a time, cut it into convenient pieces, leave it in
the air to dry, and then pack it loosely away. In cottage
housekeeping one of your recesses by the chimney should, in
short, be entirely devoted to labelled stores, and every one of
them should be kept closed and dust tight.
By keeping all these things together, and having them all
labelled, you will find you save a great deal of time. Nothing
is so vexatious as to have to hunt all over the house for what
you want, and to open half the jars and tins to see what they
contain. Everything but bread, butter, butcher’s meat, milk,
bacon, eggs, and “cheese should be kept in this manner. These
are the proper things to be kept in your safe, and none others
whatever.
CHAPTER IX.
ECONOMICAL COOKERY.
One example is worth a thousand precepts, and so I propose
to show you how four people dined for a shilling, and had a
capital dinner too I had taken it into my head one day to
try an old country dish, a lamb’s head and pluck, and as there
would be no one but our two selves, as I thought, at dinner,
I did not much care how it turned out. I felt with Ruth Pinch
that “it must come out of the saucepan in some shape” or


other, and we could not suffer much at the worst. I had no
end of difficulty in getting my butcher to let me have anything
Df the kind. The pluck, he said, was offal, the tongues were
sold by the hundred to the preservers, and the head could be
worth nothing to any one. My ideas were different, but I said
nothing about them, and stuck to my point. The next day was
a killing day, and a reeking mass was brought me in a basket,
at which an English housekeeper would have elevated her nose.
The price of the lot was sixpence, which I paid, of course, gladly.
It would have cost me half-a-crown in England —that is, a
shilling for the head, and one-and-sixpence for the pluck. I
■split the head in halves with a chopper, and then threw the
whole lot into a pan of warm water, and left it there for a
couple of hours while I went on with the rest of my work. It
was nearly twelve o’clock when they came, and at two o’clock,
j ust before I took my afternoon outing, which I never miss, I
took them out of the water, trimmed off the ugly pieces (the
■dog ate them, you may depend, quite willingly), and put the
head, the brains, and the pluck on separate dishes to drain.
At four o’clock the head and the pluck were put into a sauce-
pan with cold water, enough to cover them, with one small
onion stuck with six cloves, with a teaspoonful of minced
savoury herbs, a teaspoonful of salt, and a saltspoonful of
pepper, and a bunch of fresh parsley. They were quickly
brought to simmering point, and lifted to the side of the lire
to keep simmering. While they were coming to this point, a
second saucepan more than half full of water was making its
way to boil, and I was concocting a common black cap pudding
—two eggs, half a pint of milk, three heaped tablespoonsful of
flour, and one of sugar, all well beaten up, a well buttered
pudding basin, lined with currants, the batter poured in, tightly
tied down with a floured cloth, and this was put into the
second saucepan, just as the water began to boil fast and the
pluck to simmer. It was twenty minutes past four when
the pudding went into the pot, and when the saucepan
with the pluck in it was lifted to the side of the fire;
the brains were then thrown into the simmering broth, which
already began to smell savoury. There was a biggish dish of
cold boiled potatoes left from the day before, rather better than
two pounds in weight; these I chopped up small, and mashed
with a half cupful of milk, two ounces, good weight, of beef
dripping, a strong seasoning of salt and white pepper, and one
egg well beaten up. By the time I had finished this concoction
it only wanted twenty-five minutes to five, for if you chop cold


potatoes you find black specks which want picking out, and
you must beat the mixture as smooth as possible. Just then
came a clatter of hoofs, and a bang at the door, and in stalked
a bright, bonnie, big lad of sixteen, the son of an old friend, who.
is in the habit of doing pretty much as he likes with me and
with everybody else. His father is a rich man, but they none
of them disdain pot luck with the old housekeeper. His pony
was tied to the side fence, munching odds and ends of grass
thereby, and the rider presented himself in high good humour.
“ I’ve come to see you, and I’ve come to stop; will yon
give me some dinner ?”
“You may go into the parlour and stop, for I’m busy ?
You may have some beer, if you like to get it; you may pub
your horse in the paddock yourself, and you may stop to dinner
—if you like to take your chance !”
“All right!”
Off he went, and, being an Australian country boy, took a
whiff at a pipe while he settled his pony in the paddock.
When he came back, he went into the parlour, first drawing
himself a jug of beer, of which I am bound to say he only drank
one glass, and I popped my dish of cold mashed potatoes on one
side, and laid the cloth while he was gone. At a quarter past
five o’clock that dish of potatoes went into the oven, by that
time moderately hot, and five minutes afterward they were
joined by the lamb’s head on a separate dish. The five minutes
had been spent in brushing it over with a little batter made
from one egg and a pinch of flour, only a part of which was
used, and in covering it thickly with bread crumbs. The brains
were taken out then, and left to cool, and the whole of the
pluck, by this time quite tender, was lifted out and plunged a
minute into cold water, and then chopped up small. This took
ten minutes sharp work, and brought it to half-past five. The
liquor in which it had simmered was turned through a hair
sieve into a pan, so that it was quite clear. The saucepan was
wiped out, and the mince put back into it, with just enough of
the liquor to cover it, and half a teacupful more of the liquor
was thickened with two teaspoonsful of flour, and a table-
spoonful of mushroom catsup. This added to the contents of
the saucepan, and a good stir round given to the lot, put that
off my mind, and brought the time to twenty-five minutes to
six o’clock. Then the brains were rolled in the rest of the
batter the head had been brushed with, covered with bread


■arumbs, and put in the oven beside the bead, which was by this
time beginning to brown nicely, as were the potatoes. I went
to my room and devoted ten minutes to smartening up, and at
ten minutes to six, as I left it, I saw, with no little amusement,
not only the hungry master of the establishment coming home
to his dinner, but with him no less a magnifico than a rather
pompous hotelkeeper, a magistrate, who thought he did us
infinite honour when he called to say, “Ah ! how do ? Ah S”
in the choicest tones he could copy from his richest customers.
“Ah! how do? Ah!” he began. “Smith said” (of course
liis name isn’t Smith, but that’s no matter) —“ Smith said you’d
give me something to eat, and so I’ve come.”
“ Precisely so,” said I; “ you shall have something to eat, but
whether you will find you have made a good bargain is another
■matter!”
“ ’Pon my soul,” said he, “it smells monstrous good.” By
this time they were in the parlour, and, as the house had only
four rooms and a kitchen, there was no difficulty in smelling the
dinner at the proper time.
“ All right!” I replied; “go and wash your hands, and we will
provide for you as well as we can.” I whipped into the kitchen,
turned my minced pluck into a big dish, laid the halves of the
browned head on the top of it, and the browned brains on each
side, and placed the tongue, cut in thin slices, around them, and
■covered it all over with a dish cover. I ran a knife across and
•across the dish of potatoes, by this time baked into a capital
light cake, and lifted them out in segments on to another dish,
which I also covered. I took these dishes into the parlour (it
was only the next room) and at six precisely they sat down.
I was hungry, and so were they. I always enjoy my own cookery,
■and eat a lot of it. We tried our hardest to clear the dish.
Everybody was helped three times but me, and I was helped
twice; the magnifico stared when he saw only one dish for his
dinner, and no vegetables but my potato cake, but his surprise
■did not injurs his appetite. When they could not possibly eat
any more, I slipped into the kitchen, and took out my pudding,
which had been boiling all the time, dipped basin, cloth and all,
into cold water, which made it come out at once, dusted a little
white sugar over it, and took it in as it was. You want no
sauce, but a little cold butter to this pudding. A morsel of
cheese finished this dinner, but the dinner was not finished
when they were, quite the contrary. There was enough left to
warm up nicely the next morning at breakfast time.


Now this is what it cost:—
s.
d*
Sheep’s Head and Pluck
0
&
Pour Eggs, i.e., one for the cold potatoes, one for the
batter, and two for the pudding
Two pounds Cold Potatoes, say
0
3
0
li
Onion and Herbs, say
0
o#
Value of Catsup and Currants
0
i
1 0
Of course my trouble was not counted, nor the fire. I should
hare had to take trouble if I had thrown away the cold
potatoes and peeled fresh ones, more trouble, in fact, than I did.
I should hare wanted a fire if I had cooked a couple of ducks
worth four shillings. I had made up my mind to dine for a
shilling. I expected no company; they came; I shared my dinner
with them ; there was enough and to spare. They liked it, and
so will you if you try it.
Now I will make you a wager, and that is, that any four
people you can get will like that identical dinner, and that it
will be an ample supply for them, and if I prove wrong I will
give you this book for nothing, so that the price of your loss
will be made up to you.
The fun of the whole thing was that the magnificent hotel-
keeper went home and bragged to his wife of the monstrous
good dinner he had eaten, and of the admirable potato cake,
and of the excellence of my black cap pudding, until the poor
woman was fain to come and ask me about it. You may
depend upon it I had not mentioned to him at table how
extremely simple and cheap all the ingredients were, and I had
to write it all out for her, not pricing it as I have done for you,
but putting it down in cookery book fashion, thus :—“ Take
the fry of a lamb, soak, and parboil it,” and so on, making it
look quite a costly affair. But I have many a time chaffed the
rich man’s son, and his father also, over the idea of his dining
for threepence, and he avows he is ready to try it again.
You cannot make such dishes as these cheaply when eggs are
dear, and I never try. There are lots of cheap dishes to be had
at all seasons of the year. This was at the end of November, in
a country town, and eggs were eightpence per dozen, so that
the four I used did not really cost me threepence. I could, if
I chose, deduct the value of the remainder after we were done,
but I prefer to leave the matter as it is. Here are half-a-
dozen dinners, each of which will not cost more than a shilling,
applicable to various seasons of the year, but I think they
deserve a chapter to themselves.


CHAPTER X.
CHEAP DINNERS.
Iv a wife will take the trouble to spend two hours every day
in the preparation of her dinner, I will engage for two things
which ought to be entirely satisfactory to her. The first of
these is that she shall be able to convert one shilling’s worth of
material into such a thoroughly good dinner for two persons as
she could not procure for them at a restaurant under three or
four shillings at the least. Consequently she will have earned
as much money in reality while she has been preparing her
dinner as her husband has in his shop or factory. For his ten
shillings a day for eight hours’ work is only fifteenpence an
hour, and if she can turn a shilling into an average value of
three-and-sixpence in the time mentioned she will have done
as much as he has —a gratifying reflection in itself for a help-
meet, to say nothing, of course, of the extra comfort and
happiness created by her exertions. The second undertaking is
that the whole process, including cloth-laying and tidying
herself for dinner, that is, supposing that she was as clean and
neat when she began to cook it as she ought to have been, shall
not occupy more than the two hours agreed upon.
I propose, therefore, to begin by pointing out how six
dinners, each ample for two persons, can be made at an average
cost of a shilling each, and I am sure that any average girl of
good sense and determination will, after trying these six, find
no difficulty in devising six hundred more. It would be quite
possible, and quite easy, too, for a girl who gave her mind to it
to get up a different dinner for herself and her husband for
every day in the year and never to exceed the shilling, the
whole of the dinners being, at the same time, good, respectable
meals, such as no two people need mind being disturbed at by
an accidental caller.
I do not pretend that the farthest limit of economy is reached
even then. On the contrary, when I come to deal with large
joints it will be seen that they involve a less expenditure and a


greater number of meals. But many young housekeepers are
afraid of large joints, and many young husbands imagine that
any method of re-cooking or of warming up food must be what
they call “ a mess,” and they consequently will get on better
with changes and fresh dinners every day for a while.
In estimating for my shilling dinners, I have reckoned the
cost of rump steak at fivepence per pound, and that of all other
kinds of meat at fourpence. These prices are fair averages for
the colony. Sometimes, of course, mutton may be a little
cheaper, and occasionally rump steak a little dearer ; but the
girl who wisely goes to market for herself, as I have advised,
will find very little difficulty in getting her meat at the prices
mentioned. She will not find the smart butcher’s man in the
least uncivil simply because she only wants a pound of cutlets,
or loin chops, or steak ; on the contrary, my experience of
these gentry is that they like to have an opportunity of
showing their skill to their customers, providing the latter be
courteous to begin with.
I knew a French lady in London, a princess, whose name was
famous all over Europe, who was absolutely beggared by the
fall of the empire in 1870. She came over in that bitter
winter, poor soul, without one solitary sovereign, without a
second dress, or a warm wrapper. A ring, of no great value,
was, by an accident, on her finger when she escaped in her
maid’s clothes from the rising in Paris which followed the
news of Sedan. She sold it on her arrival in London for
seventeen or eighteen pounds, and set up her modest house-
keeping in two little rooms, supporting herself, with the usual
industry and independence of her nation, by a little teaching,
a little lace darning, and a variety of respectable, but not lucra-
tive, expedients. She dropped her title, but not her family
name, and went about her daily life with a modest resignation
and a cheerful dignity that were both beyond all praise. In
the early morning—not too early, but just at that time when
butchers and cheesemongers, having scrubbed their counters
and chopping boards to snowy whiteness, are looking round
proudly on the result of their labours, and thinking how good
it all looks —Madame would be seen making her little
purchases. A gown of buff or pale yellow cambric that just
cleared the ground, entirely plain, but hanging well, and fitting
exactly, a little shepherd’s plaid shawl (this was in 1870-71
remember, before ladies took to going about the street with
out mantles of any kind), a neat, dark bonnet, and, of


course, well-fitting shoes and gloves, comprised her ordinary
morning dress when the weather was warm enough. In the
cold weather a purple merino replaced the buff cambric, and
the plaid shawl gave way to a warm cloak. Thus clad, and
with a neat little basket, not so small, however, as to be unequal
to the task of holding everything she wanted, would Madame
sally out. She would calmly walk into a first-class West End
butcher’s shop, where, probably, the master tradesman was
worth a hundred thousand pounds, and every journeyman in
the place earned as much in a week as she could in a month,
and lay out sixpence or less. She never gave any trouble,
asked exactly for what she wanted, and always came away, not
only satisfied herself, but leaving perfect satisfaction behind
her. Eor three years, good measure, she lived this life, doing
all her own work, making all her own marketing, earning every
penny she expended, and very often helping those who were
less fortunate than she was. Her entire earnings during the
whole time never exceeded a guinea a week, and probably did
not average a pound. When she returned to Paris a very
wealthy tradesman stopped me one day in the act of leaving
his shop. -
“ I beg your pardon,” said he, “ are you not a friend of a
French lady who used to come here often; I have seen you
speaking to her sometimes ?”
“ Yes,” I said, “ certainly I am. Why do you ask ?”
“ Because,” he replied, “ she used to be here every day
almost, and she has not been here now for some time. I
do not think she can have been offended here, and I feared
she might be ill.”
“Ho,” I said, “she is not ill, but her circumstances have
changed, and she is unlikely to come again.”
“ I hope,” he began earnestly, and yet hesitatingly, “ that
she is not in any trouble ; I should like —”
I stopped him. “ You are very good,” I said ; “ she is not
in any trouble ; on the contrary, she is a woman of large
fortune. She was worth forty thousand a year three years
ago, and, now that affairs are settled in France and she has
been able to return, she is probably worth twenty thousand a
year now.”
I do not expect our young Australian girls to have the
savoir-faire which generations of fluctuating fortune have


implanted in Frenchwomen of rank, who usually take
naturally to the change from a palace to a garret, and back
again, but I wish them to understand that a woman is just as
truly a lady, if she be a lady at all, when she is buying a chop
from a butcher boy or a cabbage from John Chinaman. All
tradesmen make a profit by their sales, and every customer
helps them to earn a living.
And now for my shilling dinners. You will observe that,
in all the recipes wherein the meal is stewed or baked in a
pie, I have allowed only one pound of meat for two persons.
That is because in these cases there is no waste in cooking.
The meat, by itself, will not weigh as much after cooking as
before, it is true, but you eat the gravy and other contents
of the stewpan or pie-dish, and the one pound of meat is
therefore an ample allowance. But, when I advise broiled or
roasted meat, or boiled meat, whereof the water in which it is
boiled forms no part of the dinner at the moment, I have
allowed more.
Eoughly speaking, in roasting, meat loses very nearly a third
of its weight, but about half of this loss will be represented
by gravy and dripping, both of which, of course, are of the
highest value for food. In boiling, it loses about a fourth in
actual weight, and a little more than half of this loss may be
taken as representing what is left in the water. Consequently,
when you throw away the water in which a joint of meat has
been boiled, you actually throw away about twopence half-
penny of every shilling the joint cost, and when you let the
contents of your dripping pan be wasted, you throw away
nearly fourpence out of every shilling you paid for your meat.
Comforting, isn’t it ? However, you are not obliged to throw
them away, and after this, perhaps, you wont. What you are
obliged to do is to allow a little extra for each person in
calculating for dinner when you are going to serve roast or
boiled meat instead of stew, pies, meat puddings, or any
other dish of which the whole is eaten.
Half a pound of meat for each person at table is an ample
allowance. I very much question if station hands and farm
labourers eat more, although there is a good deal more given
out for them, but the waste in such places is tremendous. As
the six dinners I am about to give have to be eaten entirely, it
is all, I think, you will find necessary.


Yery likely the amount I have allowed for puddings and
stewed fruit will seem very small. But, as a matter of fact,,
when you have already eaten heartily, these things are not
taken in large quantities. An egg, a half pint of milk, am
ounce of rice, an ounce of sugar, and a morsel of butter, with-
a drop of any kind of flavouring, will make a pudding for two.
people at a cost, when eggs are moderately cheap, of not
more than threepence at the outside. The rice may be
replaced with thin slices of bread and butter and currants,,
with tapioca, semolina, sago, or corn flour, without increasing
the cost, Tor stewed fruit, again providing that fruit which
is in full season, plentiful, and therefore cheap, is bought, no-
expense is incurred worth mentioning. Fourpence per pound
is the outside it should cost, and half a pound of fruit, with a
quarter of a pound of sugar, placed in a little basin with a
plate over it, and baked gently in a stew oven, will give a very
nice little dish of stewed fruit in about three-quarters of am
hour.
The price of eggs varies more than anything else in house-
keeping, and this is a piece of national bad management.
Poultry farmers could, if they took the trouble to keep fowls-
warm and well fed, produce just as many eggs in the depth of'
winter as in the height of summer. However, they wont, and
don’t, and the result is that eggs are dearer all the year round
in Melbourne than they are in London, where they have to be
imported, and vary in price in most Australian towns during
the year from sixpence per dozen all the way to three
shillings. I should regularly give them up after they reached
eighteenpence a dozen, excepting on special occasions, but I'
am under the impression that we shall see a speedy improve-
ment in the supply.
In submitting my six little dinners I have only counted a.
shilling a dozen for eggs. They will not average more than
that price for about eight months in the year, and the
remaining four months you can take other dishes, some of’
which I shall indicate.
Butter I have reckoned at eighteenpence per pound in
casting out these prices. You can buy it for much less during
a great part of the year, and I question whether, on the-
whole, it averages more. Dripping I have not reckoned ae
causing any outlay, because you must have occasional joints*,
and if you do not save it your housekeeping is a mere sham*,
and past all possible improvement.


DINNER No. 1.
Stewed Steak —Mashed Potatoes —Baked Rich
Pudding-,
Materials and Cost. —lib. steak, 5d.; 21b. potatoes, lid.;
butter, Id.; 2oz. rice, id. ; |-pint milk, Id.; eggs, 2d.;
seasonings (onions, &c.), Id. Total, Is.
Method : Cut the steak in neat, small pieces, fry them for
five minutes, turning them twice, in a little clarified dripping ;
» piece as large as a walnut is enough. Put them in a sauce-
pan, chop an onion fine, and fry in the fat the steak was fried
in until it is a light brown. Don’t let it burn. Put the
onion in the saucepan too. Then shake a heaped teaspoonful
of flour into the fat in the fryingpan, and stir it over the fire
till it browns. Add a teacupful of boiling water, and stir
again over the fire until it makes a thick gravy (called roux),
which will be soon after the water boils in the pan. Pour
this into the saucepan over the steak and onion. If all these
■directions have been carefully followed the pan will be left
■quite clean, with nothing sticking to it at all. Add to the con-
tents of the saucepan four cloves, four allspice, a salts poonful
of pepper, and a teaspoonful of salt, not heaped up, but flat,
and, if you have it, a teaspoonful of catsup, either mushroom
or w T alnut. Stir it all well, set the lid on, and put the sauce-
pan by the side of the fire to simmer for an hour and a half.
This will have taken a quarter of an hour, or twenty minutes at
the outside. Now turn your attention to your pudding. Wash
.your rice carefully, set it on in a saucepan, with plenty of hot
water, and let it simmer for half an hour. And at the same
time let half a pint of milk be standing beside the fire, with a
strip of lemon peel or a morsel of cinnamon in it to flavour
it. The milk should not come to a boil at all. Beat up a
•couple of eggs with a couple of heaped teaspoonsful of sugar,
and have a buttered dish ready. At the end of the half-hour
strain the rice out of the water in which it was boiled into a
basin. Add the milk slowly to the beaten eggs, stirring hard
all the while, and add these to the rice. Stir it all well, pour
it into the dish, set it in the oven and bake for three-quarters
■of an hour. The eggs should be beaten up, and the disk
buttered while the milk is getting flavoured and the rice ii
boiling. Eive minutes will then serve to stir them all


together, and put the pudding in the oven. It will be richer
for putting in it an ounce of clarified dripping or chopped
suet, but these are not necessary. The first hour will not have-
expired by the time the pudding is in the oven, and there is.
then ample time to peel and boil and mash the potatoes before
the steak is done. Ido not mean to direct you how to boil
and mash potatoes, because you can get that information in
Massina’s “ Australian Plain Cookery.” Although I have only
allowed a pound of steak, yet if you are to have the other
things I have set down, you will have nearly four pounds of
cooked food. Remember that in a stew you eat everything
that goes into the saucepan. A pound of meat before it is
stewed, with six ounces of water added to it and a two ounce
onion, will give you a pound and a half of stew. Tour twe
pounds of potatoes, when peeled and cooked, will weigh at
least a pound and a quarter ; your rice pudding will be fully
three-quarters of a pound more, and, with a little bread, you
will have more than you will manage if you be ever so
hungry.
DINNER No. 2.
Sea Pie—Potatoes—Stewed Fruit.
Materials and Cost.— ilb. flour, Id.; Alb. suet, Id.; i-pint
milk, |d. ; 11b. lean beef or mutton, 4d. ; 11b. potatoes,
weighed after peeling, Id.; onions, Id.; fruit, 2d.; sugar.
Id. Total, llfd.
Method : Slice the potatoes, cut the meat into small pieces,
chop the onion fine, and, after chopping it, throw it into a
cupful of warm water, and drain it. Put half the potatoes at
the bottom of a three-pint saucepan ; then half of the meat
and onions, with a good seasoning of pepper and salt; then
the second half the potatoes, and next the second half the
meat and onions. Press it all down tightly in the saucepan
with a large spoon. Pour in half a pint of boiling water, or a
little more. There should be enough water just to show round
the edge of the top layer of meat. Set it by the side of the
fire, with the lid on, to simmer. While it boils, make a crust
with the suet, flour, and milk, and a saltspoonful of salt.
Roll it out to the shape and size that will just fit into the
saucepan, and lay it on the meat. As soon as the contents of
the saucepan begin to simmer make a round hole, half an inch


across, in the top of the crust, with the handle of a spoon, aa
soon as the crust is in the saucepan. Cover it lightly, and let
it simmer by the side of the fire for a couple of hours. Never
take the lid off, but just give the saucepan a gentle shake now
■und then to prevent the contents from sticking. When you
•dish it, lay the crust in the centre of the dish, and cut it
across and across with a sharp knife into six or eight seg-
ments. Then lay the meat neatly over it, and the vegetables
round it, and pour the gravy over all.
While your sea pie is cooking, you can let the fruit gently
stew in the oven. Nothing is simpler. Take twopence worth
■of any fruit that is in season and is cheap. It will be at least
half a pound. Add half its weight in sugar. Put it in a
basin with a plate over it, and set it in a moderate oven until
it is wanted. Apples should be peeled and cored, and a
spoonful or two of water should be put in the basin with
them. Currants, gooseberries, cherries, plums, mulberries,
and soft fruits of all kinds require nothing but the sugar.
DINNER No. 3.
Haricot Mutton—Potatoes—Cauiieioweb—Bread
and Butter Pudding.
Materials and Cost. —llb. mutton (loin or neck cutlets),
4d. ; potatoes, l^d.; cauliflower, 2d.; milk, Jd.; egg, Id.;
bread and butter, Id.; currants, Id. ; seasonings, Id.
Total, Is.
Method : Exactly as for stewed steaks ; the mutton to be
■cut into thin chops or cutlets before frying. When nearly
finished, if there be any cold carrots or turnips in the house
they may be cut into dice or thin slices, and added as directed
in Chapter XII.
For the pudding, cut thin small slices of bread and butter,
flavour the milk as directed for making rice pudding, stir it to
the egg well beaten. Lay the bread and butter in a small
buttered dish, with the currants in layers between the slices,
pour the beaten egg, add milk to it, and bake in a moderate
oven for half an hour. Boil the cauliflower as directed in the
Australian Plain Cookery.”


DINNER No. 4.
Beer Steak Pie —Mashed Potatoes —Stewed Eeuit.
Materials and Cost. —ilb. flour, Id.; ilb. suet, Id. ; lib.
steak, 5d.; 21b. potatoes, l^d.; butter, Id. ; fruit, 2d.;
sugar, Id. Total, Is. O^d.
Method : Make a crust of the flour and suet with a
teacupful of water. Cut the meat into small pieces, dust
them well with pepper and salt, lay the meat in a pie dish,
border it with crust, pour in water enough to half fill the dish,
put the top crust on, press down the edges lightly with a fork
and trim them. Make a small hole in the top with a skewer,
lay a leaf of paste made from the trimmings over it, and bake
for an hour in a hot oven. Steam the potatoes, and when
done mash them with about an ounce of butter, a couple ol
table-spoonfuls of milk, and a little salt. For stewed fruit
proceed as before.
DINNER No. 5.
Stewed Lamb or Yeal, with Peas or Yeo-etables and
Potatoes —Fondue.
Materials and Cost. —11b. lamb, 4d.; vegetables, Id. ; i-pinfc
peas, 2d. ; new potatoes, Id. For Fondue.—2 eggs, 2d. ;
the weight of one in cheese, Id.; half the weight of
cheese in butter, Id. Total, Is.
Method : Cut the meat into small thin pieces, with half a
dozen green spring onions cut into inch lengths, a carrot
cut lengthways into thin segments and then into inch lengths,
a few new potatoes, a teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs, and
a teaspoonful of minced parsley. Put all into a saucepan,
packed close. Add a saltspoonful of pepper, a teaspoonful of
salt, half a pint of boiling water, and stew gently for one
hour, never taking the lid off, but shaking the saucepan gently
from time to time. Have half a pint of green peas, boiled
separately, ready by the time the meat is done. Put the
peas in a dish, take out the meat and vegetables and add to the
peas, thicken the gravy the meat has boiled in with a tea-
spoonful of flour, and flavour it with a teaspoonful of catsup.
Stir it over the fire till it boils and thickens. Then pour
it over the moat, vegetables and peas, and serve. When peaa


are dear omit them. A few French beans are very good
boiled separately, and added instead of the peas; so is a young
cauliflower broken into branches and boiled separately, or a
small measure of Brussels sprouts.
For the fondue take two large eggs, the weight of one egg
weighed in its shell in rich cheese, and half the weight of the
cheese in butter. Beat the yolks and whites of the eggs
separately, grate the cheese, and break the butter into crumbs :
add these to the yolks of the eggs, beat the mixture well, and
flavour it with pepper and salt. Then whisk the whites of the
eggs to a froth, stir them lightly to the mixture, and bake it in
a buttered dish or small round tin for a quarter of an hour. It
should only just half fill the tin or dish as it will rise very much.
Bo not mix the whites of the eggs to the remaining ingredients
until you have dished your veal, as the fondue should be put in
the oven directly it is mixed and eaten as soon as it is done. It
will be exactly ready by the time you have eaten the veal if it
be put in the oven the minute before you begin your dinner.
It must be brought to table in the dish it is baked in, which
may be slipped on to another, and may have a nice white
napkin folded neatly and laid round it.
Of course, to keep this dinner within a shilling, you can only
do it when the lamb or veal and the peas are cheap. Even
without the peas it is very good, and the fondue comes in
delightfully to finish it up with.
DINNER No. 6.
Toad-In-The-Hole —Mashed Potatoes, French Beans,
Cabbag-b, or Second Vegetable Liked.
Materials and Cost. —lib. beef or mutton, 4d.; i-pint
milk, Id.; 2 eggs, 2d.; ilb. flour, fd. ; potatoes, ;
butter, Id.; and beans or any second vegetable required,
2d. Total, Is.
Method : Make a batter of the milk, eggs and flour, with
a saltspoonful of salt, grease a pie dish well, cut the meat
into small thin slices or chops, dust them with pepper and salt,
pour a little batter into the dish, lay the meat evenly in it,


pour over the remainder of the batter, and bake in a moderate
oven for a full hour. Steam and mash the potatoes as before,
and have the second vegetable ready by the time the meat is
baked. Send the meat to table in the dish it is baked in,
which should be placed on a flat dish and have a napkin
round it.
This homely but enticing dish requires no pudding to follow
it if a second vegetable be served with it. But the second
vegetable may be omitted, and one of the eggs in the batter, in
which case less milk by one-third must be used, and the batter
will be stilfer and hardly as light. But it will still be very
nice, and the threepence thus saved may be spent in stewed
fruit, the only thing that goes well after a toad-in-the-hole.
Now, I ask you whether I have not shown you six good
dinners at a shilling each, and whether there is any diffloulty
in making them for the money? I ask you, also, whether you
will not have plenty of time between the intervals of cooking
them to lay your table-cloth and to wash your hands and tidy
yourself up before you sit down to dinner ; and, finally, I ask
you whether you do not know that for two people to dine as
well at any decent restaurant in the city of Melbourne would
cost at least one shilling and ninepence each, or three shillings
and sixpence for the two dinners ? Outside Melbourne,
Ballarat, Sandhurst, and G-eelong there are few restaurants,
so people who do not prepare dinners or live in boarding-
houses must dine at hotels and pay two shillings and sixpence
each for dinners, and very good and fairly cheap most hotel
dinners are. But you can make the same dinners at home
for less money, and, indeed, the addition of a couple of plates
of soup which you could make for twopence would turn either
of these meals into a fair hotel dinner. However, the ordi-
nary restaurant price is one shilling and threepence for each
plate of an entree or joint with vegetables, and sixpence extra
for sweets. I’ll warrant you that the amount of food I have
allowed you will be a great deal more than you will get for
your one shilling and ninepence each at a restaurant. As for
the cooking, ’tis mere child’s play, fun, amusement.
Now, I will just mention six more dinners for two persons,
each of which may be easily made complete for one shilling.
I shall give no recipes nor instructions for these, because,
with what I have said already, you ought to be able to make
them easily with the help of the Cookery Book to which I
have referred.


2STo. I.— lrish Stew and Apple Pie,
No. ll— Mutton Cutlets, Tomato Sauce, andd Boiled
Cabinet or Chancellor’s Pudding-.
No. lll.— Eump Steak, Pried Onions, Boileed Apple
Dumplings.
No. IV. — Boiled Steak and Kidney Pudding, PPotatoes,
Stewed Ehubarb.
No. V. — Curried Pork, Boiled Eice, Potatoesis, Baked
Apples or Apple Fritters.
No. Vl.— Mutton Pie, Potatoes, French Beanss, Cheese
Straws or Stewed Cheese.
I could easily go on for a month and name shillinjig dinners,
each ample for two ordinary persons, each consissting of a
dish of meat with one or two vegetables, and a tasfety dish of
fruit, or pudding, or savoury cheese, macaroni, or other
entremet to finish. But I think I have said quite ennough for
the present on this score.
Now, I want to show you that you have nothiing to be
afraid of in buying a large joint of meat, though theire be only
two of you, and so I am going to tell you
What to do with a Leg op Mutton.
Buy a leg of good sound wether mutton, not ttoo small,
weighing, say, nearly, or quite, seven pounds, and ccosting, at
present prices, about a couple of shillings. You mnay know
the wether leg by a knob of fat at the thick end of iiit. After
you have bought it, ask the butcher to saw off abouht two and
a half pounds of the knuckle end in one piece ; this I gives you
a nice joint for boiling. Then get him to cut two gojood slices,
nearly three-quarters of an inch thick, from the piecce that is
left, sawing right through the bone. Your leg of muutton will
now consist of the following divisions : —l. The thick c end, with
the wether knob of fat on it. This will be a nice e piece for
roasting or baking, will be about four inches thick,k, and will
weigh about three pounds. 2. The two cutlets oor steaks,
which will weigh, together, about a pound and a half.f. 3. The
knuckle, which will weigh two pounds and a half.
The knuckle should be the first part cooked. It si should be
boiled, putting it in boiling water enough to cover it, a and, after
boiling three minutes, cold water should be poured I in down
the side of the saucepan until the heat of the water isis reduced
to a hundred and eighty degrees. It should then be Meft at the


side of the fire until it is done, which will be in an hour. It
should never boil again, only slowly simmer. The water it ia
boiled in should be poured into a jar, and left till it is cold.
The cake of fat on the top will be the best of all things for
making pies with, and the water itself will be a good basis for
stock or gravy.
The knuckle should be served with caper sauce, and any of
it left cold should be carefully put away on a dry plate, and
the sauce and gravy from the dish in a cup or basin. The
next morning the remains of the cold boiled mutton should b©
minced very fine. They may either be made into minced
mutton, and served inwalls of mashed potatoes, or into rissoles
■or croquettes. The gravy and remains of the caper sauce
will come in bandy in either case. The bone must be saved.
The two cutlets or steaks will make an admirable mutton
pie, or a mutton pudding, or will be good broiled, and served
plain or with fried onions, or they will make a toad-in-the-hole,
or an excellent haricot, or a curry, or they may be spread with,
veal stuffing, rolled, tied firmly with tape, and baked or stewed
gently in a gravy made from a little of the liquor in which the
knuckle was boiled, to which any vegetables may be added.
Either of these nine methods of using them will make a capital
dinner'for the second day, with no thought of sameness about
it to the boiled mutton of the day before, or to the croquettes,
rissoles, or minced mutton of the morning. Any left on this
occasion may be cooked with cold potatoes in any one of the
various methods mentioned in the chapter on Scraps and
Savings.
The third day take the thick end, which will be in admirable
■condition for roasting, trim off all the fat which is not required,
slice it thinly, and lay it over the top of the meat before you
put it in the roaster or oven. This will aid in the basting. It
may either be plainly roasted or the bone may be taken out
and a stuffing put in its place. The dripping should be very
carefully saved for clarifying. The gravy in the dish should
have a little of the liquor that the knuckle was boiled in added
to it, should be thickened with a little flour, flavoured with
pepper, salt, and mushroom catsup, boiled up, and served in a
tureen, not poured over the meat. When the remains of this
meat come from table the gravy in the meat-dish should be
added to that in the tureen and set aside until the next day.


There will be a good piece of this joint left cold, quite
enough for the fourth day’s dinner ; and, as the leg of mutton
has already furnished three hot dinners, all quite different, and
two hot breakfasts, besides making a quart of good soup, for
which I will give you directions presently, you can afford to
make a little more outlay to turn the remains of it into a fourth
dinner.
Take, therefore, the gravy left from the day before, of which
there will be probably two-thirds of a breakfast cupful.
Add to it a large wine-glass of common colonial Burgundy or
red wine of any kind. As this is only a shilling a bottle, a
large wine-glassful will cost only three halfpence. (I use
the St. Hubert’s, at twelve shillings per dozen, for such pur-
poses, but everyone has a different taste, and you can do as
you like.) Add also a large teaspoonful of red currant jelly,
and a little dust of cayenne, as much as would lie on a three-
penny piece. Stir these over the fire in a clean saucepan until
the jelly is quite dissolved and the sauce is nearly boiling.
Then cover it, and leave it by the side of the fire while you cut
the cold mutton into pieces about the size of a five shilling
piece, and about twice as thick. Trim off any brown edges,
and if the mutton be a little underdone so much the better.
Put these into the saucepan, and let the whole remain near the
fire, where it will keep hot until you want it. Serve in walls
of mashed potatoes, or in an entree dish with sippets of fried
bread. The man does not live who will call this “ a mess,”
and you will have none of it left for the next day—not a scrap.
The leg of mutton has thus furnished you with four
capital dinners and with two excellent breakfasts. Ido not
recommend you to use any of the cold roast mutton after the
third dinner for breakfast on the fourth day, because you will
want all there is for the fourth dinner. But you should, on
the third day at latest, have made soup of the water the leg of
mutton was boiled in, although, if it was boiled up daily it
would keep for a week. To do this, you should add to the
liquor the whole of the bones of the leg, not only that from
the knuckle, but that from the roasted part of the leg,
also any trimmings of meat you may have in the house, and
any pieces of bacon rind you may have saved for flavouring
soup, also six cloves, six allspice, and twelve whole pepper-
corns. Break the bones up with a hammer or hatchet, and put
them in your digester with the liquor the knuckle of mutton


was boiled in. Add enough water to make it up to about a
full quart or more if you have much meat, for the bone of a
leg of mutton will make a quart of soup by itself, put in a
teaspoonful of salt, screw the lid on the digester, and let it
remain for eight or ten hours by the fire to slowly simmer.
Now strain the bones out of it, and either set it aside in a
jar till you require it, or use it at once in the following
manner:—
Cut a large onion into rings, and then chop it fine, and
fry it in a little clarified dripping until it is a light brown.
Cut up into small slices as much young carrot and turnip as
when together will fill a breakfast cup, with a small stick of
young celery, chopped fine, and a heaped teaspoonful of dried
savoury herbs. Have the stock made from the bones boiling
in a saucepan on the fire, put these vegetables into it, and let
them boil gently for half an hour or more. Then take
any gravy you may have in the house, and a couple of tea-
epoonfuls of mushroom catsup, with a couple of spoonfuls of
wine if you like it, and a heaped dessert spoonful of flour,
beat these smoothly together, dip out a small cupful of the
boiling soup and add gently to the thickened flavouring,
stirring all the time, and when it is quite smooth pour it into
the saucepan of soup and stir well. Let it boil another quarter
of an hour, as raw flour is horrible, and you have nearly three
pints of an excellent soup.
The first day you use this soup you will, of course, use it
just as it is. But as you will only use a pint at the outside,
you will have a quart left. Strain the vegetables out of it.
Set it away in a jar, and boil it up the next day. You will
then have a quart of flavoured stock fit for making gravies, or
for serving as gravy soup.
Suppose, however, for a change, you make a pint of it into a
fish soup in the following manner: —Take half the contents
■of a tin of potted lobster, chop it small, mix it with butter,
bread crumbs, egg, ground mace, pepper, and salt, into a force-
meat. Have the pint of soup boiling; make the lobster force-
meat into small balls ; drop them into the boiling soup; let
them boil for a quarter of an hour, and, just before serving,
squeeze into the soup the juice of half a lemon, and add a
couple of teaspoonfuls of anchovy sauce. You will want very
little more dinner after a plate of this soup, if you make it


carefully, I promise you. Take care, however, thait the lob-
ster, when opened, smells fresh and good. Of the (other half
of the lobster you can make salad, hot lobster, a oajpital dish,,
or patties.
The remainder of the soup may he turned into pottato soup,
or green pea soup, advantageously. It is already iflavoured,
and all that is required is to make the vegetables into a puree,
and add them to it when it is boiling.
Now let us see what one leg of mutton has done for us. Ife
has given us three hot dinners of fresh meat; one boiled,
one roasted, and one of mutton steaks. It has given us
a fourth dinner, a ragout, which I will back against any
concoction of the kind that ever was seen in the Palais Royal.
It has given us two good breakfast dishes, and soup for three
days, and the outside cost of all the ingredients we have
added to it, put together, to make four dinners, two break*
fasts, and three days’ soups, does not amount to eighteen-
pence. If, therefore, you begin, say, on a Friday (a good
killing day) by buying the leg of mutton and boiling the
knuckle, the mutton steaks will come on the Saturday, the
roast mutton on the Sunday, the ragout on the Monday.
Three of the shilling dinners I have mentioned will fill up the
week, and so, for six shillings and sixpence in all, you have
had seven dinners, two breakfasts, and soup on three of the
days. If you care for soup every day, another sixpence would
make it for the other three days, with the various household
scraps that must accumulate. Consequently, you are within
the shilling a day for your dinners, and have no need to be
frightened of a joint either.
The one thing you have to do is to make up your mind to
take trouble. Keep my little book near at hand to) set you
thinking, and keep the “ Australian Plain Cookery ” close by
to direct you in the best method of making anything you want,
and there will be no difficulty.
A piece of beef will lend itself to more methods off cooking
than a leg of mutton, A small piece boiled, fresh,i, like the
knuckle of mutton, will be very good. Another pieece may be
braised, and a third roasted. As for ragouts of beef,', they are
numberless, and all excellent. They are good with muusbrooms,
oysters, olives, kidneys, tomatoes, and walnuts, or iwith any
two of them, no matter which, or with all togetheer. You


cannot do wrong with a piece of beef excepting you let it boil
bard or become over-roasted. All the directions I have given
for using a leg of mutton and the liquor thereof are equally
applicable to beef, and also to veal, which latter meat is finer,
I think, in Australia than anywhere else, simply because it is
not so scientifically killed as it is in Europe. English and
French butchers give you whiter and more delicate-looking
veal than their Australian brethren, but it is insipid and
flavourless beside that which you can buy of any decent Aus-
tralian butcher.
A fowl is an economical thing for a young housekeeper to buy,
because there is no waste at all about it. The giblets will,
with the neck, head, and feet, make a little soup, quite enough
for two persons. The feet and head should be scalded and
skinned and chopped up. They should then be put, with the
remainder of the giblets and a seasoning of salt and pepper,
into a pint and a half of water, with an onion stuck with half
a dozen cloves, and a teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs.
This soup should simmer slowly for a couple of hours. It
should then be strained, and the eatable parts of the giblets
minced or cut small and put back into the liquor, with a
teaspoonful of flour for thickening, and a teaspoonful each of
wine and catsup. Boil it up for another ten minutes and it is
ready for use. The next day the bones of the fowl, supposing
it to have been roasted, may be put on to boil in a pint of cold
water, with any stuffing that may be left from the fowl and a
seasoning of salt and pepper. After gently stewing for a
couple of hours, the liquor should be strained and set aside till
it is cold. It will then give nearly a pint of strong jelly. If,
after it is strained, and before it cools, the pieces of cold fowl
are arranged nicely in a basin, either with or without any
other cold meat, cut in thin small pieces, and seasoned, and
the boiling liquor from the bones poured over them, there will
be a mould of cold chicken which will make a splendid break-
fast dish. The cold chicken and hot liquor should just fill the
basin they are placed in, and a plate should be laid on the top.
If there is not much of the cold chicken, a soup plate or even a
saucer may be used for the mould, and the liquor may be
added in proportion ; or, if there be no cold chicken left, the
liquor will be useful for strengthening other soup. Supposing
that some of the bones have been used, and you have only those
of the carcase left with the stuffing, it is still worth while to
boil them down into a little stock, which may be made into a


stiffer jelly by adding a quarter of an ounce of gelatitine. It is
quite surprising that meat which would hardly be j looked at
on a joint will be eagerly accepted if it be cut into srsmall pieces
and minced, stirred into boiling savoury jelly of thisis sort, and
let to get cold in a mould or basin.
The liquor in which a fowl has been boiled should! be saved,
and the next day added to the bones of the ca*arcase and
boiled again for a couple of hours. It makes a goood founda-
tion for a little mullagatawny or leek soup.
The liquor in which a turkey has been boiled is of no use
at all. But the bones and small pieces of the tturkey will
make a jelly afterwards exactly as directed for a fowtd.
All small pieces of poultry of any kind will make delightful
rissoles or croquettes, and all poultry joints are > excellent
devilled.
CHAPTER XI.
HOUSEKEEPING-.
The art of housekeeping depends almost entirely upon the
carefulness with which the stores are bought and expended.
Any one can keep house if there be no limit of outlay at all,
and many people do keep house in that way. That is to say,
they pay half as much again as is fair for everything they buy,
and waste half of it when they have got it. No scraps and
savings for them, indeed. Certainly not. Nor would they be
so mean as to weigh a joint after the butcher, nor to find out
whether he charges them more than he does other people.
Let him ! They can afford it, they tell you, and so they go on
paying ten per cent, more than anyone else in nominal price,
never asking for any discount for cash, accepting fourteen
ounces to the pound quietly, and never casting up a bill to see


If there be a mistake in it. The cold meat, pieces of bread,
and table odds and ends go to the milkman’s pigs if he will
take the trouble to remove them for those animals, and, if not,
they are cast among the refuse, where they form a breeding
ground for flies.
This is not an overdrawn picture ; on the contrary, it is an
exact representation of the way in which money is wasted in
many working and middle class households. But I do not
contemplate the waste of one morsel of wholesome food, nor
do I expect you to take one grain less than your due, albeit
that I do not wish you to be litigious and exacting.
To keep two persons comfortably upon an outlay of a pound
a week is an easy matter at present prices. You have to
provide about three pounds of food per diem for each person,
and the more varied it is the better. You will want a good,
nourishing, wholesome, and tasty breakfast, a light, but yet
sustaining, luncheon, and a hearty, Jolly dinner when your
husband comes home in the evening, having done his work for
the day. This is the best way of managing ; but, of course,
if he prefers dinner in the middle of the day, he must have it.
In that case, however, you will have to bustle to get all your
work done and the house nice before he comes home to dinner,
for, were I you, not a shred of housework should be left
till after dinner, whether he dines at noonday or at six in the
evening. If you dine in the middle of the day, nothing but
early rising can save you, but that may, after all, be a necessity
of your position.
In any case, you must have three good meals a day, and
you must always contrive to have something to eat in the safe
in case of an emergency or a sudden fit of hunger. Men are
not machines, and sometimes they want food at unusual
hours, while women always were subject to what Lord
Beaufoy calls “a sinking and a swimming” now and then,
which nothing will alleviate half so well as a comfortable
meal.
Now, first and foremost of all household requisites I place
tea. Q-ood tea turns a poor meal into an enjoyable one, and
is always welcome to nine people out of every ten at all sorts of
times and seasons. Don’t stint yourself in tea, and don’t buy
an inferior quality. The best teas I have had for a long
while are the Indian teas, and a quality which I find really


excellent can be bought for three shillings per ppound. If
you do not use coffee, you will find that you wwill want a
pound of tea every ninth or tenth day. I know tlthis is more
than most housekeepers say they find necessary, , and more
than they allow station hands in calculating rationms. But I
find that two people who do not use coffee, but t make tea
always twice a day, and sometimes three times, have r e used this
quantity regularly, and it is the quantity I find neiecessary in
my own household. You get a slight reduction in buying
a seven-pound tin, and a greater reduction in buyinpg a larger
one, but I don’t think it worth your while in a small 1 household
to go in for large quantities.
Two pounds of coffee will go as far as one pound oof tea, and
you can buy very good Ceylon coffee for eighteenppence per
pound. A great deal of nonsense is talked ahbout tho
adulteration of coffee, but I find that at all respectabble grocers
I can buy a tin containing a full pound of fragrannt, freshly
ground coffee for one shilling and sixpence, and I shoould only
blame myself if I went to an inferior house and ppicked up
rubbish.
If you are economical in the use of tea and cobffee, two-
pounds of coffee and one pound of tea may last yyou three
weeks, but I prefer to reckon that they will last j you only
eighteen days. As the tea will cost three shillings thee pound,
and the coffee eighteenpence the pound, that is six t shillings
for eighteen days, or fourpence per day for tea and cobffee, less
than a penny a meal for each person.
You will want a pint of milk every day for the tea and
coffee, but you will generally find enough left out »of it to
make a little melted butter when you want it, or too give a
drop to your kitten. You will always have to buyy half a
pint extra when you make a pudding, but that I have
accounted for in the expense of dinners.
_ Sugar you will use a good deal of, because you winll have
pies, cakes, and stewed fruit. Consequently, one wee-ek with
another, you will require three pounds per week. YYou get
very good sugar, white crystallised and sparkling, four four-
pence per pound.
With regard to butter you should be moderate, t though
not stingy. A pound should be an ample allowance ffor two


persons for one week, as you make your pie-crusts of dripping
and your puddings of suet. There are generally, in the-
suburbs, persons who make butter, and if you can find one
you will get it cheaper and better by fetching it on the day
she makes it. Usually, I have found such people charge from
tenpence to fifteenpence per pound, according to the season,
but I am going to allow you eighteenpence per pound all the
year round, and you can also have a shilling’s worth of eggs,
for which sum you will get six sometimes, and sometimes
sixteen. In the first case, you can go in for cakes and
custards, and in the second you cannot. The best thing is to
take everything when it is in full season.
A little bacon now and then is a very good thing, but it.
should not be used too often. About half a pound per week
on the average is enough, and it should not cost more than &
shilling per pound.
Cheese is also a necessary in a house, but not one of which
you will require a vast quantity. A pound will be ample for-
two persons for the week.
I have already explained the allowances you will require
for dinners, and I have shown you that a seven-pound joint,
costing from two shillings to two shillings and fourpence,.
with about one shilling and sixpence in accessories of various-
kinds, will furnish you two good breakfasts, four fresh hot
dinners, and soup for three days. I have also shown yovk
how excellent dinners for two persons can be cooked every
day at a total cost of a shilling each. Consequently, I need
not go over that ground again, and am fast drawing to an.
end of what I have to ask you to buy.
Bread I have left almost to the last, because it is important
that you should be very careful about it. You must buy it of'
some baker where it is really light and well made. Scotchmen
are generally the best bakers, and those whose wives look after-
the shop are usually clean in all their appliances. Germans-
bake splendidly, but they are less careful. It is all a matter
of experience, however. For a household of two persons
cottage loaves are the best, as they are better baked than the
square household loaves. They are not fancy bread, and so
should be weighed on delivery. You will only want one loaf
every second day, but as occasionally you want a little for-
cooking I have allowed you four loaves per week.


Tea and Coffee (at the rate of 11b. of tea @ 3s., and
21bs. of Coffee @ Is. 6d., every nine days, 4d. per
day) ...
£0
2
4
Slbs. Sugar
0
1
0
7 pints Milk
0
1
2
4 21b. Loaves
0
1
2
11b. Butter
0
1
3
Jib. Bacon
0
0
6
11b. Cheese (colonial)
0
0
9
Eggs ...
0
1
0
7 Dinners. (See Chapter X.)
0
7
0
£0
16
2
Now then see what you have to spend :
Now I am well within my pound, but I have not done yet.
You will get, as I have said, two good breakfasts out of the
dinner bills, and you will get at least two more out of your
eggs and bacon, which make four. But I am going to allow
you three pounds of fresh meat extra and beyond that in the
dinner bills, for which you will pay one shilling, making
seventeen shillings and twopence in all for your weekly
expenditure on food. This leaves you two shillings and
tenpence for the remaining articles I mentioned in Chapter YI.
—(Three Pounds a Week) —and those things certainly mount
up. Soap, starch, blue, soda, whiting hearthstone, blacking,
bedroom candles, knife powder, rotten-stone, and matters of
that sort, will not cost you two shillings and tenpence per
week, believe me. However, there should always be a margin,
and you have got it.
Now let us see what you have in food allowance per week :
Slbs. Bread.
71bs. Fresh Meat (in dinner bills).
31bs. do. do. (in breakfast bills),
gib. Bacon,
ilb. Butter.
11b. Cheese.
31bs. Sugar.
Idoz. Eggs (at least).
7 pints Milk.
lOJlbs. Cooked Vegetables (in dinner bills).
s|lbs. Cooked Puddings or Fruit (in dinner bills).
Slbs. Soup (in dinner bills).
(Exclusive of tea, coffee, herbs, and sundries.)


This total of food will show you why I have not counted
any separate expense for luncheon. Three pounds weight of
food is the outside that a healthy human being will get
through daily, and that would be only forty-two pounds in a
week for two persons. You have seven pounds per week
more than that, or one average meal per diem.
For luncheon I should recommend, therefore, anything you
have in the house remaining over from the day before, served
cold, nicely garnished, and accompanied with tea or coffee,
and followed by cheese. Remember that where I have
counted any viand in the dinner bill, I have also counted the
price of it extra and beyond that set down in the list. Your
cheese, therefore, will come in towards luncheon, and so will
any cold viands of the kind mentioned in Scraps and Savings.
Out of your two shillings and tenpenoe margin you will be
able to buy a little salad now and then, or a little fish, and,
with the hints I have given you, there should be no difficulty
in arranging to have a luncheon easily and nicely served. Two
hot meals a day should be plenty, except in the very depth of
winter, and even then you will find in Chapter XII. many
ways of making hot and appetising luncheons out of scraps
and savings.
Without going over the ground again already covered in
Chapter IX., I may say that potatoes are best bought by the
hundredweight rather than by the bag, as you can then get
them screened. They ought not to cost more than six shil-
lings per cwt. one month with another, all the year round, and
may often be bought for less. I have counted them as costing
you that price, or rather more, in my recipes in this book, as I
have allowed three farthings per lb., which is seven shillings
per cwt. They will certainly not cost more than this, and you
will do well to buy not more than half a hundredweight at a
time. New potatoes boys generally bring round from the
market gardens. They are not worth having until you can get
them at about a penny per pound.
Of flour you should buy seven pounds at a time, and keep
in a cake tin. (See Chapter YIII.)
Currants, raisins, candied peel, pearl barley, sago, tapioca,
and other matters of that sort should be bought in small
quantities, half pounds or so, and stored in empty coffee
canisters which have been washed in boiling water and neatly
labelled.


The values of these stores are all counted as they are used
in the dinner hills, but you will not, of course, buy them in
■such small quantities as those mentioned in the daily account.
But a supply of the whole of them will not cost half-a-crown,
und, as you do not want them all at once, you will have no
■difficulty in buying them one or two at a time, without using
np your margin, which has nothing to do with them, or going
beyond your pound a week. The real use of your margin is to
buy a little extra nicety now and then, such as a fowl, a duck, or
■even a turkey, instead of a joint, for the long list of necessaries
I set down to be bought out of it will not cost sixpence per
week one week with another.
CHAPTER XII.
SCRAPS AND SAYINGS.
There should literally be no waste at all in a properly
■managed house. Everything that comes into it of an eatable
character should be eaten, and nothing at all suffered to be
thrown away or to become uneatable. Ido not mean that you
should set to work to eat up little cold scraps of meat, bread,
•cheese, and vegetables, but that you should save them and
convert them into savoury dishes for breakfast, luncheon, or
supper, which you may very easily do at trifling expense.
The first item on which there is usually considerable waste
is that of bread. The cut surface of a loaf, if it be ever so
evenly cut, looks and feels dry at the next meal. In this ease
a very thin slice should be cut right off at once, and set aside
und added to the little knobs and pieces that remain when the
loaf is all used. The crusts should be grated, browned on a
■sheet of paper or a dish in the oven, and packed away in a jar,
labelled. These crumbs answer admirably for colouring soup,
for sifting over any articles that may have been brushed over
with batter, for baking or for frying, or for sifting over fish
which are to be baked. The slices from which the crusts have
been cut will serve for making bread puddings or bread and
butter puddings, if there be enough of them, or they may be
cut into small sippets and fried in clear dripping for garnished
hashes, minces, and stews. Or, if there be but a very few of


them, they may be placed in the oven over-night and rolled
into crumbs with a rolling-pin in the morning, and stored away
like the others.
The gravy from roast meat should be poured away into a
cup or jar when the dish comes from the table, if there be
only a tablespoonful of it, and added to the soup which is
made the next day, or to any stew or hash which is made from
the cold meat, or to any one of the dishes which are made for
breakfast from the cold vegetables and other leavings of the
day before.
Dripping should be carefully kept in clean jars, that from
beef and that from mutton being best kept separate. If there
be only a little of each, they may be put together, but they are
best apart. In order to save dripping well, it should be put
into a basin with a little salt, say a saltspoonful, and boiling
water poured upon it until the basin is nearly full. It should
then be carefully stirred up until it is all well melted, and left to
settle, with a plate over the basin to keep the dust out. The
next day the calje of clear dripping may be lifted off the basin,
the under side, which will be wet, slightly scraped, and then
put into the jar where the dripping is kept. Every two or
three days this process of clarifying the dripping on hand
should be repeated. Beef dripping is useful for making meat
pies, and for the best kinds of frying ; mutton dripping requires
more clarifying, and is only useful for frying. It must be
carefully watched while it gets hot in the fryingpan, so that it
■does not catch.
Dripping that has been used for frying should be poured off
and clarified. It will be useful two or three times. You will
thus require three jars for keeping dripping in, but it will be
worth the trouble. It is far less difficult to fry in clarified
dripping than in butter, and very much less expensive. Indeed,
you should make up your mind never to use butter for frying
at all.
Here it may be advisable to say that for frying you should
use a great deal of dripping, enough to completely cover what-
ever you intend to fry. It should be allowed to get hot very
slowly, so that it does not burn, and, as it must be nearly
twice as hot as boiling water, it will take a long while to come
to the proper heat. But, as it will do for the same purpose
again and again, there is no extravagance in filling your pan
decently full of it. I need hardly say that the dripping in
which fish has been fried will only do for fish again. If you


are fortunate enough to be able to get fish often you will
therefore require a fourth jar for the dripping used for that
purpose.
Cheese should be very carefully scraped, so that the hard
pieces left, and the crumbs that fall in cutting it, may be all
perfectly clean. The hard pieces should be grated, and the
grated cheese put away in a jar. The soft pieces should be
pounded up with a little butter, and put into a separate jar.
When wanted for use, small slices of nicely-made buttered
toast should be taken, and either the grated or pounded cheese
spread very thickly, not sparingly, upon them. They should
then be put into the oven for a few minutes on a dish or plate,
which may be lifted out on to a cold dish or plate of the same
size, so that they go to table hot in the dish they were baked
in. This forms an admirable addition to breakfast or luncheon,
or even to a winter’s day dinner. Grated cheese is also
extremely useful for using with macaroni and with various-
savoury dishes.
Bacon fat should be very carefully saved; it is the most
valuable of all. It should be clarified with boiling water,
without salt, once or twice, until it does not taste salt. It is
the very best fat that can be used for making savoury pastry,
far better than lard or butter, and it is admirable for delicate
frying.
Bacon rind should be scraped carefully, washed in hot water,
and put away. A strip of it is most useful in making soups,
stews, and gravies. It gives them all an excellent flavour, and
answers, indeed, all the purposes for which ham is advised to
be added to these dishes in the cookery books.
Small pieces of cold bacon left on the dish at breakfast,
whether fat or lean, should be carefully put away. If they
are very small, they can be minced fine and added safely to
any stew or hash. If they be large enough to reappear as
slices, they can be served with a roast fowl, or they may be
minced and added to the stuffing of a piece of veal, or a bird
of any kind, or to a savoury omelet. In short, they will
come in handy in almost any savoury dish you can mention.
Boiled eggs, left by chance, should be put into water and
left to boil for an hour. They should then be put into cold
water, and left till they are stone cold. The yolks can then be
pounded for salad dressing, and the whites cut into rings to
garnish the salad; or the hard eggs will make a capital
enriching for a meat pie if they are cut into slices and laid


among the meat. Or they may be cut into slices and slipped
into a stew about three minutes before it is sent to table —at
the moment it is dished, for instance. A hard-boiled egg,
which has been boiled for an hour, is a very much better affair
than one which has only been boiled for ten minutes, and it
will keep in its shell for a week, perhaps more. I never heard
of one going bad at any time.
Melted butter left from table should always be saved care-
fully. If there is only a very little, it will do very well the
next day, with an extra spoonful of flour, for thickening a
stew. If there be a lot, it may be used for mashing potatoes
after the fashion described in the chapter on Economical
Cookery. A couple of pounds of cold potatoes, with an egg,
a cupful of melted butter, and as much beef dripping as will
make the whole into a paste, will make the potato cake therein
described.
Cold potatoes may be used in a score of appetising dishes.
They may be made into a potato cake, they may be cut into
thick slices and fried in dripping, they may be chopped up and
fried, in which form some people prefer them. They may be
mashed, made into a high border round a dish, and browned
in the oven, and have a stew or hash poured into the centre of
the wall thus formed for it, which always goes well with this
kind of border. They may be mashed and laid in layers in a
buttered pie-dish, with layers of minced cold meat, or cold fish,
or cold poultry laid between them, a layer of mashed potatoes
forming the top, and then the whole baked for half an hour
in an oven ; or they may, after being mashed as described in
making a potato cake, have scraps of cold meat, cold bacon,
or cold poultry minced fine, or cold fish, baked, and stirred to
them, and the whole mass pressed into a buttered basin, which it
must fill, tied tightly down with a floured cloth, and boiled
like a pudding for a full hour. In this last case, for boiling,
two pounds of potatoes will require three eggs to set the mass
firmly. In mashing cold potatoes, either for potato cake or
for any of the baked dishes mentioned, one egg will he
enough. The pudding must be served in the basin it is
boiled in.
Cold cabbage cut fine, with pepper and salt, is very good,
fried with slices of cold meat, for a breakfast dish.
Cold carrots may be cut into thin slices, and these, if it is
preferred, into slips. They may be slipped into stews, haricots,
or hashes just before they are served, or into gravy soup. In
the latter case they must be cut very finely.


Cold turnips, if they do not happen to he discoloured, and
have not gone sour, may be cut into dice, and utilised in the
same way, or they may he mashed with cold potatoes, cold
boiled onions, beef dripping, and plenty of pepper and salt,
and baked in a dish, and served with roast meat. Or the mass
of cold turnips, cold onions, and cold potatoes may be placed
in layers alternately with minced cold meat of any kind, and
baked.
Cold meats, even the smallest, will make minces, hashes,
stews, toad-in-the-hole (a capital savoury winter dish), meat
rolls, rissoles, croquettes, and a thousand different dishes ; but
for these you had better refer to the “Australian Plain
Cookery,” as to enumerate a tenth of them would take too
much of my space.
Cold puddings of all kinds are most valuable. Thus the
fruit from a cold boiled fruit pudding may be mashed up with
a well-beaten egg or two if there be much of it, and a little
sugar. The mass should then be pressed into a basin that
will j ust hold it, and tied down with a floured cloth, and boiled
for an hour. The crust should be cut into neat thin slices
and browned in the oven. It may have a little sugar sifted
over it, either when it is put into the oven or just before it is
done. When the fruit has been boiled long enough, turn it
out into the middle of a dish, arrange the nicely browned
slices of crust carefully about it, and either sift a little white
sugar over all, or else pour over it a little sweet sauce. It will
be much better this way than when it was made.
Cold batter puddings, cold plum puddings, and cold bread
puddings may all be cut in slices and baked or fried, or
they may be cut in thin sippets and piled in a buttered
pudding basin, which should then have a plain batter poured
into it until it is quite full. The batter should be made as
directed in the recipe for the black cap pudding in the chaper
on Economical Cookery, and the whole tied down and boiled
for an hour and a quarter. The pudding thus made is
excellent.
Finally, cold gravies, as I have said, enrich soups, and small
quantities of cold soups, with the vegetables strained out of
them, make excellent gravies.
Suppose, for instance, you find yourself on a Monday with a
dish of cold potatoes, a cold leg of mutton, a couple of cold
turnips, half an apple pudding cold, a part of a cold fish, half
a pint or thereabouts of cold soup, and a tablespoonful of


the roast mutton gravy in the bottom of a teacup, together
with, perhaps, half a teacupful of melted butter made when
the fish was boiled. This is not an uncommon state of things.
Now then.
For breakfast, mash some of the cold potatoes with the cold
melted butter and a good allowance of dripping; put them in
layers in a buttered pie-dish with the fish, properly flaked,
between the layers; bake the mixture for half an hour or more,
till nicely brown ; broil a slice or two of the rawest part of the
mutton over a clear fire ; stir up the tablespoonful of cold
gravy with a teaspoonful of mushroom catsup or Worcester
sauce in a little s-uacepan, pour it boiling hot over> the slices
of boiled meat, and serve. The only difficulty you will have
will be to leave off. Certainly, if you have been up a couple
of hours cleaning your house and making breakfast, you will
■enjoy the nice, hot, baked fish and potatoes, and the savoury
broil (or devil), to give it a proper name.
For dinner, mince finely enough of the mutton to serve you ;
put it into a saucepan with the cold soup, first straining out
the vegetables, and let it all slowly get hot, not boil, together.
A strip of lemon rind, if you have it, will improve this dish,
and so will a strip of bacon rind. They are not indispensable,
however, and, if used, must be lifted out before the dinner is
■dished. Make walls of the cold potatoes, as directed just now,
and cook the cold pudding in the manner described ; cut the
■cold turnips into dice, and stir them into the mince just
before you turn it out of the saucepan. When the wall of
mashed potatoes around your dish is golden brown and
crisp, turn your mince into it, and, with your apple pudding
re-cooked as directed to follow, you will have a capital dinner
at the outlay of one penny for the egg. The breakfast will
have cost nothing at all.
The next day there will be nothing left but the remains of
the leg of mutton, which will make a capital toad-in-the-hole,
which should be served with fresh vegetables, and may be
followed with some stewed fruit, and a dish of toasted cheese,
sandwiches made with grated or pounded cheese as just
described. The bone of the leg of mutton may be chopped
up and left to stew by the side of the fire half the day until
all the goodness is boiled out of it, and the liquor may be
saved for a little soup for the next day.


CHAPTER XIII.
BEFORE BREAKFAST.
You cannot make some women dirty any more than you
can wet a duck’s back ; and you cannot keep some women in a
presentable condition though you give them a dozen servants
to save them the smallest occasion of exertion. The first sort
are always neat and attractive, no matter how much they
work, and the second sort are invariably slovenly, no matter
how little they do. It constantly happens that broken-down
ladies, whom poverty compels to attempt unaccustomed
labour, manage to retain a considerable share of their earlier
attraction of manner and appearance, and it just as frequently
occurs that pretty, healthy, industrious, experienced girls
continue to make themselves in a mess over very slight com-
parative exertion. “It was wonderful,” says David Copper-
field, in describing the first day of his new life in the Bucking-
ham-street chambers, after his aunt came to stay with him,
“ how much Agnes accomplished in her quiet way, and how
little even Peggotty seemed to do in comparison with all her
bustle and clatter.”
Now, Peggotty was his attached and faithful servant, who
had been his mother’s efficient helpmeet before he was born,
and had for years been the thrifty and careful wife of a
frugal, miserly carrier. Agnes, as the orphan daughter of a
wealthy professional man, could have had no such opportuni-
ties of practice. We have all met women like Agnes in this
matter, and women like Peggotty also. The difference between
them is the difference between intelligently directed labour and
sheer blundering goodwill and roughly-gathered practice. Pro-
bably there is not a human being who reads these lines who does
not know a Miss or Mrs. Somebody who never is caught doing
anything, but contrives, notwithstanding, to keep her house
like print, and another who can never manage to be done till
near midnight, and leaves work untouched then.
Early rising is one secret of this excellent management, for
necessarily the world sees nothing of the work which is done
while it is still asleep. But a far more important part is the
determination to do all work in a manner which shall not
make more; and that can only be put into practice by care
and thought, rather than by heavy labour. Of what use is it t'


clean a saucepan or a floor if you make yourself so dirty in
doing it that you are occupied twice as long afterwards in
cleaning yourself ? If you spoil your personal appearance for
the sake of your house you do very little good, since the most
attractive home loses its charm if the mistress becomes, and
looks, a poor drudge in the midst of it.
There is no real necessity for a woman who finds it necessary
to do the whole of her own housework to be slovenly, dirty, or
disfigured—unless, indeed, the house is such a large one as to
render the work beyond her strength ; but that can never be
the case in a home of three or four rooms such as that we are
considering.
Personal cleanliness and neatness are the first requisites
toward good housekeeping, and no woman who wishes to
preserve her husband’s affection, or to make him comfortable,
should ever waver for one moment in those attentions to her
own person which will preserve whatever share Of beauty she
may have. Yenus herself would look hateful with cloudy
nails, dingy teeth, and dusty hair, and a husband’s affection is
not likely to prevent him from being worried into ill-humour
if his temper be tried by the constant presence of a slattern.
Besides, men are creatures of habit, and slovenliness is catching.
If you begin by disregarding cleanliness, so will he, and the
result will be that your home will become a disorderly den,
unfit for pigs to live in.
The climate of Victoria makes the cold bath a luxury all
the year round, and there are few persons of either sex so
delicate that they could not, even in our severest weather,
endure a cold bath at some period of every day. The best
time for bathing, of course, is on first rising in the morning,
but women are not always able to bear cold bathing before
breakfast, and in that case it should be postponed until about
three hours after breakfast. If your breakfast is taken at
half-past eight, or thereabouts, and cleared away at nine, you
ought to have the whole of your housework done by half-past
eleven or twelve, and then, if you ate a hearty breakfast, you
will be admirably strong to resist the slight shock of a cold
shower-bath.
There is no objection to your taking your bath warm if you
find cold water really disagree with you, but I am quite sure
that cold water is the best both for the health and for the
skin. If a daily hath be taken, with a plentiful use of some
good emollient soap (I think Pears’ transparent soaps the best,


but there are some admirable glycerine soaps made by the
Apollo Candle Company now), the skin will, in a few weeks,,
acquire and long retain a satiny smoothness and gloss which
cannot be overrated.
One reason why cold water is best, and best in the form of
a shower-bath, is that the tension of the skin is stimulated and
restored, and wrinkles, big and little, are prevented. The face
and neck may be greatly improved in this matter by the daily
use of a small quantity of bay rum, eau de cologne, or toilet
vinegar. After the bath is over, the corner of a soft, fine
towel should be dipped in water and wrung nearly dry, laid
over the hand, and about a teaspoonful or so of either of these
spirits poured upon it, and applied at once to the face and
neck, particularly to the brow, eyelids, temples, and sides
of the face, where wrinkles are most apt to appear. The
slight stimulant excites healthy action in the skin, and after
the first application improves it sensibly. In a few weeks the
smoothness and elasticity induced by this simple process are
surprisingly satisfactory.
If you begin by being perfectly clean yourself, and if you
resolve to clean up your house every morning, so that there is
never more than the wear and tear of the one day to deal with,
you will have no difficulty in keeping yourself and your place
in admirable order, and you will also prevent your husband
from slipping into those disorderly habits which spoil domestic
comfort.
The first thing to be done on rising in the morning is to
make yourself perfectly neat, attending to hair, teeth, and
nails as carefully as if you were going to make a call instead
of light a fire. Then put on a working dress of any neat print,
cotton, or stuff that suits your fancy, and a large, coarse apron
with a bib covering it all over. The dress should be high up
in the neck, and should have long, close sleeves, which can be
turned up or down, as may be requisite. Your house boots,
though soft, should be well fitting, and you will do well to
protect your hair with a cap. In your housemaid’s box (for
you may as well keep a housemaid’s box though you cannot
keep a housemaid) you should keep, in addition to the brushes,
leathers, and powders which it is meant to contain, one, if
not two, pair of housemaid’s gloves. The result of this method
of dress is that, by laying aside your apron, removing your
cap and gloves, washing your hands and face, and just running
a brush over your hair, you are all right in five minutes—a
very important matter in the morning. Of course, if you have


the knack, as some women have, to slip out of your working
dress and into a becoming breakfast wrapper, why, it is all the
better for you and your husband. But it is not advisable to
attempt this proceeding if you are a fussy dresser, because
•your husband will not relish being kept waiting for breakfast
while you are rushing here and there in search of something
you have forgotten. You will do well, therefore, to let your
working dress be as attractive as perfect neatness and reason-
able fit can make it, and then to protect it as directed, so that
you can be ready to sit down in five minutes after breakfast is
ready.
The first thing to do when you begin your work is to open
all doors and windows excepting those upon which a hot sun
may be shining through. This, of course, rarely happens
early in the morning. Then take up your parlour hearthrug,
your passage mats, and any loose rugs you may have about.
Take them outside to be beaten or shaken. If they are done
every day there will be very little dust in them. The heavy
mats may be laid on their faces on the ground in the yard, if
the weather be dry, and a little gentle beating on the back
with the head of the broom will dislodge most of the dust
without sending it over you. When they are raised upright a
gentle tap of one edge on the ground, while you hold the other
in your two hands, will get rid of the remainder. A hearth-
rug can be thrown over a line, face inward, and gently tapped
with the handle of the broom. These ceremonies will both
have to be omitted in wet weather unless you have a dry
verandah or shed in which they can be performed. But if
they are attended to every day, except when rain prevents, the
dust will not be overpowering.
The next matter is to sweep your kitchen, to clean your
kitchen fireplace, and to light your kitchen fire, and for these
purposes your housemaid’s gloves will be found extremely
useful in preserving your hands. When your kitchen is in
good order, which will not take long if it was left over-night
in proper trim, you can turn to your parlour, first, of course,
putting the kettle on to boil. Here the grate must also be
attended to, the carpet swept, the room dusted, and the cloth
laid for breakfast. Don’t sweep a room, especially a carpeted
room, as if old Nick were after you. Your business is not to
bang the dust into the air, so that it may settle down on you
and the furniture, but to gather it together by silent, steady
strokes, so that there may be no difficulty in getting it into a
dustpan and taking it away. This is the great secret of


cleaning a room properly, and of keeping yourself neat while
you do it. Take away all dirt wherever you find it directly.
Do not, for instance, if you find a fireplace full of light wood
ashes, sweep the dust of the room into the fireplace, and then
try to remove all the dirt together. Even if you do not drop
the lot, which you may, the flying dust from the ashes will
make the rest of the room nearly as bad as it was before. The
ashes should be very gently lifted into a pail with a shovel
and taken away. They are very useful, and it will be well to
store them. After the ashes are taken away, and the grate or
fireplace cleaned, the room should be swept, not before. The
tea leaves of the day before, sprinkled over the carpet, are the
proper things to keep the dust down in sweeping the room,
and, so that the broom be carefully used, it matters very little
what sort of broom is used.
The dusting should be thoroughly done. A feather brush
may be used for picture frames, books, and ornaments that it
would not be advisable to take down just then, but it is of no
use for any other purpose. Furniture must be carefully
wiped, even though it appear to be all right; so should
shelves, window frames, and skirting boards. The secret of
never having much dirt in a house is to clear away, every
morning, the little that forms in the day and deposits itself
in the silence of the night. After the room is swept, and
before the dusting is begun, a gentle patting and shaking will
dislodge any dust there may be in the curtains or sofa
cushions, and then the dusting may be done in earnest. It
will not be a lengthy process. Ten minutes should be enough
to do the fireplace and sweep the room ; a quarter of an hour
will do the dusting, and five minutes more will lay the cloth.
The crockery, table linen, and other materials for breakfast
are all to hand in the chiffonier ; and probably, the weather
notwithstanding, at least one window in the room can be open
either top or bottom.
Half an hour will put your parlour all right for breakfast,
and during that half-hour the kettle has, no doubt, boiled;
and probably you have protracted the half-hour a moment
or two by running out to make your tea. It is, however,
much better not to make your tea till you want it, which you
don’t just yet. The best thing you can do now is to shut
your parlour door, leaving the cloth laid, the window open,
and the room clean and tidy, and go and clean up your
passage. There is a very good reason why you should clean
up your parlour as soon as you have swept your kitchen and


lighted your kitchen fire, and that is, that if by any chance
your husband wants breakfast before you have finished the
rest of your work there will be no difficulty in getting it in a
few minutes and giving it to him in neat order. He will
never take a second look at the passage if he be hungry, but
the sight of an ill-laid breakfast-table in a dusty, untidy
room will take away his appetite, and his temper, too, and
serve you right. If you did not mean to make him comfort-
able you should not have married him.
An hour briskly spent will have sufficed to sweep your
kitchen, parlour, and passage, light your kitchen fire, dust and
replace your mats and rugs, dust your parlour, and for the
laying of your breakfast cloth. If you cannot at first do this
in an hour, make up your mind to rise a little earlier, so as to
have it all done before breakfast. By-and-bye you will get
into the way of doing it quickly, and will find an hour
ample time. Twenty minutes or so will have sufficed for
your toilet before beginning the work, and then there is
nothing to be done but to cook your breakfast, which will not
take long to prepare, as your kettle is boiling, your fire strong,
and your oven hot. lam not going to trench upon the
province of the “Australian Cookery Book,” but I have one
or two hints to give, notwithstanding, with regard to breakfast
preparations.
Tea and coffee are best made in bush fashion, thus : —Have
as much water as you require tea or coffee bubbling and
boiling in a clean saucepan or billy ; remove this from the fire,
and instantly throw into it the exact quantity of tea or coffee
you intend to use. Stir it round and cover it with the sauce-
pan lid. Set it in a warm place near the fire to draw, but do
not let it boil. The tea will be fully drawn in four minutes,
and the coffee in six or seven. Do not let the tea draw for
more than five minutes at the outside, or it will be bitter.
Strain the tea or coffee through a piece of muslin, or fine
strainer, into a hot teapot or coffee-pot, and either beverage
will be absolutely perfect.
The quantity of tea and coffee used varies according to
individual taste. A fair allowance of tea is a full, but not
heaped, teaspoonful to each large breakfast cup of the beverage
required, and a heaped tablespoonful of coffee to each break-
fast cup will hardly be too much if strong coffee is liked. If
a heaped tablespoonful of coffee be used to each breakfast cup,
about two-thirds of the quantity of hot milk will be necessary
to make the beverage sufficiently bland for breakfast.


Let both your tea and coffee be the very best money can buy.
They are the most economical in the end. Besides, if the
ingredients of a simple meal are of the very best kind, the meal
will be better enjoyed than if it consisted of a dozen inferior
dishes.
A very simple and easy operation, that of broiling, is often
spoiled by the want of attention. I have again and again
seen people put steaks and chops on a fire, busy themselves
about other matters until they considered that one side was
done, then turn them, and leave them again until they were
quite done, and then dish them. Now, I confidently assert
that the best beef ever bred by Robertson, or Manifold, or
Neil Black would be ruined by that treatment. In broiling,
you cannot turn your meat too often. Once a minute, at least,
it should be turned, and in this manner a steak will be cooked
at the eighth turn, and a chop at the fourth, unless the latter
be very thick indeed. Use steak-tongs for turning broiled
meat, not a fork.
Bacon should, if fried, always be placed in a cold frying-
pan. If at all salt, it should be soaked for an hour before it
is cut at all. Fish, on the contrary, must be fried in plenty of
very hot fat, almost twice as hot as boiling water. The fat
for frying will have to be carefully made hot over a steady,
slow fire, and care must be taken that it is really hot enough,
or everything placed in it will be spoiled. It will take from
fifteen to twenty minutes to make hot enough for frying if
there be any quantity of it. There should be enough fat to
completely cover the article which is to be fried.
To turn the food in a pan with a little butter is not to fry,
but to saute , and a very nice mode of cooking it is for certain
classes of eatables. Sliced kidneys, sweetbreads, cold potatoes,
and many other things may be used in this way.
All things considered, twenty minutes ought to be ample
time to cook your breakfast, and five minutes more will
suffice for washing your hands and slipping off your apron, so
that you can eat it in peace, comfort, and decency.
I would advise you not on any account to get into the
habit of eating breakfast in your kitchen, however humble
your home may be. A kitchen is a workroom, not a living-
room, and should be kept for its proper purposes. Besides,
men are quizzical creatures, and if you breakfast in your kit-
chen your husband is bound to come in during the cooking, and
probably will begin to advise, if not to admonish you, things
which no well-regulated woman can bear, or ought to bear.


All things considered, I think the best place for a husband
in the morning is bed. Of course, if he have a fancy for
gardening, or for any other class of handiwork that can be
pursued out-of-doors, why, he can go about it in his own
fashion. But he will probably be tired enough to care for an
extra hour’s sleep, and he will not have the chance you have
of getting a nap after lunch. An afternoon’s sleep is an
excellent thing for a woman, and every housewife can get it
if she likes. A man cannot.
If you rise at six in the summer, and half-past six in the
winter, you can have breakfast by eight o’clock all the year
round. If you prefer to breakfast at half-past eight, you can
lie half an hour later if you have a mind. You, of course, are
the only judge how long your husband takes to dress, and, if
you call him sufficiently long before breakfast to give him
ample time for his toilet, you will find as a rule that you have-
adopted the best plan.
An eight o’clock breakfast is, in my opinion, preferable to
one at a later time. If your husband has not to goto business
so early, he will have ample time for his newspaper, or for a
chat. Of course, you must in all cases be ruled by his hours
of business ; but the best time is not later than eight, and the
best rule to adopt is to allow at least an hour and a half
between the time of your rising and that of your breakfast.
Be sure not to let your husband bother about household
duties of any kind. It is far better to pay the extra cost of
short wood than to worry him to chop long wood. It is better
to give any of the tradesmen’s boys a sixpence or a shilling
now and then to do any little job too hard or too heavy for
you than to bother your husband. A wise wife will take care
that her voice is not associated in her husband’s ears with any
distasteful or inconvenient requirements. Besides, if your
husband is a tradesman, capable of earning the minimum wages
of three pounds per week, which we have taken as our lowest
standard, it will be poor economy to put him at a labourer’s
work. He would be far happier in spending an extra hour or
two in his own business, so as to earn a little more money for
you, than in helping you in household duties quite foreign to-
his habits.
Make up your mind to do the work of your house yourself
until you can afford a servant, and let your husband confine
his industry to providing tbp money.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE DUTIES OF THE DAY.
After your husband has left the house in the morning for
his business, you will do well not to lose one moment in
getting to your real work, which will not take you very long,
or give you very much trouble, provided you go about it in a
systematic fashion. The very first thing to be done is to
remove all bedclothes from the bed, open it out, and expose
all as much as possible to the air, by leaving door and window
open. Your parlour has already been swept and dusted before
breakfast, and your kitchen and passage also. Your morning’s
work will therefore consist chiefly of the following duties :
The washing up, not only of all utensils used at the break-
fast-table, but the cleaning of every utensil of any kind which
has been used since the same time the day before. And here I
may linger to say that a great deal of unnecessary trouble is
taken by young housekeepers sometimes over this same
washing up, which some of them consider a duty to be
religiously performed after every meal at any sacrifice of time
or convenience. With this theory I do not at all agree. It
applies very well under certain circumstances, but not under
all. What can be more silly, for instance, on a hot-wind day,
than for a young housekeeper, who has taken a light luncheon
with her husband or a friend, consisting perhaps of a little
preserved fish, a slice of cold meat, a salad, a piece of cheese,
and a glass of ale or aerated water, to set to work to light a
fire and make water hot enough to wash the six plates and two
dishes that will have been used during the meal. If you have,
as a young housekeeper probably has, a decent and complete
dinner service, you will be able to serve three or four such
meals easily without running short of china, and a daily wash-
ing up will be sufficient. After tea, I acknowledge, especially
where thin china has been used, it is advisable to wash it and
put it away at once, but that is a light operation, easily per-
formed on the tea-tray, and the great reason for its immediate
performance is that teacups are so fragile that the less they
are moved about the better. Our great-grandmothers,
at the close of the last century, prided themselves as
much on their egg-shell china as the modern aesthetes do over


the bric-a-brac and blue plaques of the present day. They
used to hold solemn tea-drinkings as largely attended and as
fashionable as the fire o’clock tea is now. After these meals
were over, and before the party turned to the card-tables, all
ready set out with candles, snuffer-trays, and whist-markers, the
hostess would have a basin brought in, and would then and
there, with her own fair hands, before her assembled guests,
carefully and delicately wash every tiny cup and showy saucer,
every fragile plate, quaint ewer, or other appurtenance of the
tea table, and would, while so engaged, receive, as a simple
matter of course, the congratulations of her friends upon her
possessions, and on the skill with which she managed them.
She would finish by depositing them carefully in a glass
buffet in the same room, deeming them far too precious to be
trusted out of her own sight, and far too beautiful to be
hidden from that of her visitors. After this performance, she
would turn with alight heart to her card-tables, and, as Charles
Lamb makes Sarah Battle say, delight herself with “A clear
fire, a clean hearth, and the rigour of the game.”
With such a respectable authority before me, therefore, I
shall not find fault with you if you decide to wash up your
pet china after tea, always provided you can do it without dis-
turbing your husband, who is very likely either to drop off
to sleep after his tea or to get to work at any home
pursuit that may occupy his leisure. In either of these cases
I would postpone the washing up entirely, so as not to disturb
him, or to be in his way. Indeed, I would even risk a broken
cup rather than break a husband’s comfort..
You would not like your husband to bring his office work
home of an evening, and you should, therefore, be equally
careful to have no duty to perform that will prevent you from
spending the evening with him when he comes home.
After each meal of the day, if plates are just scraped and
placed in a tub or basket until they are wanted for washing
they will take no hurt. Knives and forks should be wiped
quite dry and laid aside in their basket or box for the daily
cleaning. Saucepans and cooking utensils require a little
more care. They should be emptied directly after they have
been used, and should have water at once poured into them,
and boiled, in which case they will only require wiping, unless
their contents have been of a specially greasy or adhesive


character. They can then safely be turned upside down
until the proper cleaning time comes. If you clean all
utensils every morning, no matter how little soiled they may
appear to be, you will have no real trouble. In cleaning
■saucepans, washing dishes, and in similar work of any kind,
there is no reason why you should spoil your hands, and a few
simple rules will tell you how to preserve them.
Do not use boiling water, which is quite unnecessary. Hot
water of about 160 to 170 degrees, or what is known as
scalding water, is the proper thing. Do not use soda, but soap
powder or extract of soap, which will remove grease a great
■deal better; and, lastly, do not put your hands into the water
at all. A very little practice will enable you to avoid this.
Make a small mop of a few strips of cloth or linen, about half
an inch wide, and three or four inches long, and tied firmly in
the middle to a piece of stout cane or stick, eight or nine
inches or even a foot long. Have two bowls or basins of
water —large tin washing bowls are best. Have one filled
with cold water, and one with scalding water. Pass your
dishes and plates one by one into the hot water, and rub them
while in the water with your mop, which you can occasionally
rub in soap extract. As each plate or dish is cleaned, turn it
up out of the water with the mop, catch hold of it by the rim,
and if it be quite clean, pass it through the cold water, and
stand it up to drain. Repeat this process with each plate or
dish until you have done them all. You need only touch the
rim of each plate with a finger and thumb in taking them
from the hot water into the cold, and in taking them out of
the cold water again. You can wear gloves during the
process, but they should be of coarse, thick white cotton,
•easily washed and dried. It is not absolutely necessary,
however, for your protection to do this, and if you let the
tips of them get very wet with hot water they will hurt your
fingers. When all your plates and dishes and stone china have
been cleaned in hot soap and water, and rinsed in cold water,
begin polishing them with a soft, dry glass-cloth, taking those
which were first washed to be first polished. They will be
very nearly dry before you touch them, and will take so high
a polish that they will look exactly as they did when new.
Glass should be cleaned exactly in the same way, but the soap
and water should not be so hot. It should be not hotter than
may be easily borne by the hands. Lamp chimneys, lamp
globes, and all articles of that kind should he washed in the
same way —first cleaned in warm soap suds with a little mop.


next rinsed in clean, cold, water, then drained until dry, and,
lastly, polished with a soft, dry cloth. Lamp glasses and
globes, which cannot be too bright, may be finished off with a
leather after the polishing with a cloth.
These little mops that I have recommended are extremely
useful. In England they can be purchased of any oilman at
about eightpence per dozen, but I have not seen any in shops in
Australia. They are, however, very easily made in all sizes,
and enable you to wash the insides of lamp chimneys and
bottles, the necks of decanters and claret jugs, and a variety
of articles which you can otherwise only rinse. They
also entirely prevent you from finding it necessary to dip your
hands in the scalding water, or to handle a hot dish-cloth.
Indeed, you do not want dish-cloths at all if you use these
mops, which you can make out of any refuse cloth, flannel,
linen, or cotton cuttings. I made two dozen once out of a
worn out merino singlet, which, after it had been carefully
washed, I cut into pieces and unravelled. It is not always
necessary to take all that trouble, but they can be made of
any clean rags, old or new.
The soap-suds in which the glasses or plates and
dishes have been washed need not be thrown away at
once unless they are very greasy. They may be poured
into any saucepans that want cleaning, and set on the
fire to warm up. When warm enough, the saucepans
may be easily scrubbed in the insides by means of
a little broom, which you can specially prepare for the
purpose in the following manner : —Buy of your oilman an
ordinary birch broom-head. Divide the twigs into bundles
just large enough to be comfortably grasped in your hand,
tie them firmly about, or a little above, the middle, and
continue winding the string round until you reach the top.
You will thus have a kind of minature birch broom with a
handle which will give you a splendid command over it. By
plunging this into the soap-suds in your saucepan, and
scrubbing it round and round, you will thoroughly cleanse
them, excepting at the sides, for which you can use a scrubbing
brush. The soap-suds may be poured from one saucepan into
another, beginning with the cleanest. They should be rinsed
with cold water, dried with soft cloths, and put away turned
upside down. A little soda may sometimes be necessary in clean-
ing a very greasy fryingpan, or one which has accidentally
been caught by the fire. In this case your broom brush will be
very handy. Place the fryingpan on the fire half full of


hot water with a little soda therein. Let it get quite hot, and
then remove it, and clean it with your birch brush. Rinse it,
dry, and hang it up. Saucepans and fryingpans heated in
this way will seldom or never require any other form of
scouring. When they do, they may be cleaned with very
finely-powdered brick-dust. A rather large mop should be
taken, and a piece of flannel tied over the top of it firmly,
to make a kind of pad. This may be damped and soaped, and
then rubbed in the powdered brick-dust. The insides of
tinned saucepans may be made as bright as when they were
new by rubbing them in this way with fine brick-dust and
soap, but afterwards they must be most carefully washed,
rinsed, and dried, so that no grittiness may remain. Sauce-
pan lids may be brightened with this mixture, or emery
powder may be used in the same way if preferred.
Forks of all kinds, spoons, and all articles of plate, or of
Britannia metal, or fine tin, should be cleaned by rubbing them
sharply with finely-powdered whiting, applied on a soapy rag
or flannel. They should be left to dry with the mixture
on them. When quite dry it should be rubbed off with a soft
cloth dipped in a little fine whiting, and, finally, the articles
should be polished with a leather. The whiting used should
oe pounded very finely by rolling it in a paper with a rolling-
pin. The paper will prevent the whiting from working into
the pores of the wood. Knives are cleaned by rubbing them
briskly, but very lightly, on a knife-board, which may be
bought for a shilling or one-and-sixpence. The knife-board
should be previously dusted with knife powder or very fine
brick-dust. Housemaid’s gloves should always be worn when
saucepan lids, plate, knives and forks, and other articles
requiring cleaning powders are being dealt with. These
powders will spoil the skin, and grind away the finger-nails
very quickly.
These processes take a long while to describe, but they are
very easily performed. Suppose, for instance, that your
husband was home to luncheon and dinner the day before,
and that he had a little snack of some kind before he went to
bed. In addition to the utensils used at these meals, and in
preparing them, you will have all the breakfast things of the
same morning. What will it all amount to ? At luncheon on the
previous day you will each of you have used two dinner plates
and a cheese plate, and, probably, two tumblers, two knives and
forks, and a cheese-knife. At dinner you will have each used


the same number of articles, and, in addition, a pudding-
plate and a dessert-spoon and fork. After dinner you may
each of you have used a cheese-plate, a knife and fork, a glass,
and a cup and saucer. At breakfast you will each have added
to these a couple of plates, a breakfast-cup and saucer and
spoon, and, probably, two knives and forks. You will also
have used at luncheon two dishes, at dinner two dishes and
two vegetable dishes, and, probably, a pie-dish, or a glass
fruit-dish. In the morning you will have used two more
dishes, and you will also have changed the meats left from the
day before into clean dishes. Your total list of articles to wash
will therefore be twenty plates of various sizes, four cups
and saucers, ten glasses, and eight dishes, You will have to
clean fourteen knives and ten forks, three saucepans, and a
fryingpan. Now, none of these last things will be really
dirty, and their cleaning will be very light work. The washing
will soon be very swiftly done if you do it exactly as I have
directed, and although an unpracticed girl will find it difficult
at first, yet, after a week or two the whole business will not
occupy more than three-quarters of an hour at the very
outside. Surely this is not a long time to expend per day on
making all your table and cooking utensils clean and bright.
It must, however, be noted that any neglect will entail a much
longer expenditure of time. The great secret of easy cleaning
is to clean everything every day.
The week’s work being divided into washing for Monday or
Tuesday, ironing on Wednesday, house cleaning on Thursday
and Friday, and general preparations for Sunday and Satur-
day, necessitates about a couple of hours being spent in one or
other of these occupations every morning. On washing day,
an hour and a half at least may be spent before breakfast at
that occupation by rising that much earlier. Something might
be gained perhaps on the morning of a washing day by post-
poning the sweeping and dusting of the passage, but I think
the gain would be purchased dearly. The great art of a
working housekeeper is to give all her meals in good time in
clean, neat rooms, and without any interruption from other
work. If she allows a weekly break in those arrangements,
for the sake of her washing, she will soon make breaks upon
other accounts. The washing for two people and their home
should not occupy more than three or four hours, and the
ironing of all the clothes that require ironing would not take
more. Sheets, towels, pillow-cases, napkins, and table-cloths
should be mangled, although the latter will generally require


ironing afterwards, to give them the proper gloss. The
mangling will make the ironing a very easy process.
Washing and ironing must be both learned from some
experienced person, and, when you hare learned how to do
them, put on your considering cap, and learn for yourself how
to compress the work. You cannot learn well of an ordinary
laundress, because she is so accustomed to work on a large
scale that she will turn your little house out of window, and
fill it with steam and suds, by preparations which would suit
the laundry work of an hotel or large family. The best thing
you can do, if you have never taken any share in the family
washing at home, is to ask some neighbour, whose circumstances
are like your own, to allow you to help her for a day or two.
If you are inspired by a genuine desire to make your husband
happy, you will soon learn how to improve upon her methods
and adapt them to your own needs.
The devotion of three-quarters of an hour to cleaning up,
of a couple of hours to a portion of your washing, ironing, or
house cleaning, will bring you nearly on to noon, when the
last thing you do to the house should be done, that is the
making of your bed, which will, by this time, have been
thoroughly aired, and the tidying of your bedroom. This
business over, your rough work for the day is actually done,
and it will not be much past twelve o’clock, if anything, by the
time you have finished it, leaving you quite time enough to
prepare a one o’clock luncheon.
If you are obliged to get a twelve o’clock luncheon or
dinner for your husband, you will have to put off a part of
your work, but it is so much the fashion now for men to
take the great meal of the day in the evening, that few of
them care about elaborate mid-day dinners, unless, indeed,
they go to work very early in the morning.
In matters of this kind no one can entirely plan your time.
You must note carefully the instructions I have given for the
preparation of meals, and the time they take, and must divide
your day in accordance with your circumstances. I have taken
the case of a young couple who breakfast at eight or half-
past eight, who get luncheon or a light dinner at one, and
dinner or a high tea at six. In any case you will find an
hour and a half before breakfast, and about three hours after-
wards, amply sufficient for the whole of your housework of
every kind, excepting the cookery, which, if well managed, is
a recreation.


CHAPTER XV.
ON TAKING CARE OF A HUSBAND.
I cottld easily fill up the remaining chapters of this little
Ibook with directions for various domestic duties, but no book
will contain all that might be written upon that subject, and
I shall have done enough if I have indicated to you the truth
that lies under two or three general principles equally applic-
able to all kinds and classes of housekeeping. These are :
1. The right way of performing any domestic work what-
ever is always, in the long run, the most effectual, the most
elegant, and the most economical.
2. The four or five hours of daily work necessary to keep
•a home of three or four rooms in decent order need not
impair one mental or personal charm, nor lessen one single
grace of manner.
3. That the preparation of food, especially for those we
love, is a labour of a pleasant character, richly repaid in the
eight of the gratification it gives to others, and in the know
ledge that it conduces to the health, prosperity, and enjoyment
of the household.
4, That with careful attention to cleanliness, and a deter-
mination never to let dirt of any kind accumulate, household
work may be so lightened as to retain scarcely any disagreeable
characteristics.
5. That it is the duty of every housewife to take all
possible precautions to protect her hands, hair, face, and dress
while she is engaged in her domestic duties, in order that she
may retain those womanly charms of neatness and tidiness
which are among the most powerful of personal attractions.
6. That waste is always vulgar, dirt inevitably degrading,
and slovenliness an inexcusable fault almost as bad as a vice.
If you will bear these maxims in mind, you will have no
difficulty in keeping your home in perfect order. You may
often find some emergency for which I have been unable to
provide in this book, but I venture to say that you will not
find any wherein the consideration of these general principles
will not bear you through. If your cookery seems to be


troublesome, reflect that, at the cost of a few pence, you are
preparing delicacies for your husband which a purse three
times as long as that he possesses would not enable him to
pay for. Every time you turn out a dinner for a shilling, by
means of your skill, which would cost him five or six shillings
if you both went to a restaurant, remember that you have
practically made him a present of four or five shillings by
adding the value of your labour, and still more of your
intelligence, to the money he has furnished you with. If this
reflection does not reconcile you to the pleasant task of pre-
paring delicacies for his refreshment you must have very little
love for him, or he must have a very thankless nature. In
either case you are much to be pitied, but in either case
your duty is the same, and that is to keep on in the right
course, and trust to time to develop a proper appreciation of
each other.
As a matter of fact, it is unlikely that you will ever be
troubled in this way. On the contrary, you will find that your
husband’s appreciation of your skill will grow greater every
time you exercise it. His home will become more charming
to him with every succeeding week, and you more valued as
its presiding genius. You will be so delighted every time you
see a look of pleased surprise on his face that you will never
tire of devising means to gratify him, and he will be so touched
by your devotion as to look eagerly forward to the time he
spends with you.
Think for a moment how easy it is for you to make him
comfortable if you will but try.
It is a hot-wind day, we will say, and about half-past five
o’clock, just as the sun gives its fiercest glare before going
down, a wearied, perspiring, irritated man walks up to his
own door. Every stitch he has upon him is sticking to him*
and he has more dust in his eyes and whiskers than it is quite
nice to have on one’s boots. He is just in that frame of mind
when the smallest demand upon his system would make him
as fierce as a hungry bear. You, on the other hand, have—
that is, if you have been guided by my advice —finished your
light housework at least three hours before. Your house has
been shut up on three sides, with the blinds down, the whole
day, and in front of the south side, where no wind blows or
sun shines, you have had an open window or two guarded by
wet clothes, so that what air there is in the house is cool. You
have had three clear hours of rest, so that you are cool, too,
and are lightly clad in some pleasant, cool-looking stuff, so


that your very presence, as you open the door, shows him
something comforting and nice. You don’t say much, because
he is too much irritated to be talked to, and you are not too
demonstrative because he does not want to be touched in his
sticky, uncomfortable condition. But he passes into his bed-
room, and there he finds a clean, dry suit of clothes, perfectly
complete down to the smallest article of under wear, and quite
ready to put on. Beside them are a couple of clean, large,
white, bath towels, his sponge, flesh gloves, and anything else
he uses for his bath. This is a sign that the bath-room is
ready for him, and off he goes. Ten minutes’ splashing, and
five minutes’ towelling, five minutes more for dressing, and
ten for that adornment so dear to every man, and a very
different husband comes out of the bedroom. He has on a
loose, home jacket and pantaloons, in which he can lie and 101 l
at his ease, a shirt made roomy at the neck, so that he does
not feel the collar, cool socks, and easy slippers. He casts
himself on the sofa in your little sitting-room, and a dish of
cold meat, a potato, salad, a fruit tart, also cold, a crisp lettuce,
a dish of cold fish, with cold, clear filtered water, a jug of cool
ale, and perhaps a pot of hot tea, very refreshing even on a
hot-wind day, if everything else be cold, meet his eyes. You
still forbear to make much fuss during the meal, and you
wisely take it away without any great clatter, reserving your
washing up for the cool of the next morning. You go back to
your sitting-room and find that, with heat and fatigue, he is
half asleep, perhaps entirely so. You noiselessly sit down to
your knitting, answering gently if he speak, but not speaking
first, and he sleeps for half an hour. No woman worthy the
name lives who will not enjoy herself more truly in that half
hour, in the knowledge that she has charmed away her
husband’s pain and discomfort, than she would if he were
subduing his weariness to attend to her whims and fancies.
But he wakes long before you think he does, and through
his eyelashes sees you, careful, patient, striving for him,
anxious for his comfort, and successful in securing it. The
subdued light glances on your smooth hair and busy fingers ;
your face, in its quiet repose, takes back the charm of girlhood,
and it is a refreshed, rejuvenated lover that startles you back
into the world with a kiss, and with whom you enjoy that
blissful evening’s chat before your early bed-time.
Is there anything in this home picture out of the reach of
any working man’s wife in Australia ? What does it want to
realise it ? A very little forethought, a very little self-control,


a very little self-denial, the exact qualities which every woman;
who loves rejoices in exercising for the benefit of those whom
she loves. Take the companion picture, and see what these
same qualities may do for your husband on a blusterous, rainy
night, when he has had a wet tramp from his work, and comes
home chilled, muddy, and perhaps with the least taste of a
cough in his throat, for a great many of our handsome*
stalwart Australians are apt to be a little touched at the chest.
This time there is a cheerful light in your passage, a bright
fire in your sitting-room, and another in your bedroom. You
may not have the means of putting a warm bath in your bath-
room, very likely have not, but you have set your largest foot-
bath on a square of oilcloth in your bedroom, and you have
poured a boiler full of boiling water into it. A large can of
cold water stands by its side, and the bath towels and other
paraphernalia are displayed invitingly over a chair close to it.
Such clothes as he is most likely to want, warm, dry, and com-
fortable, hang over another chair by the fire or lie on the bed,
and a kettle of boiling water simmers in the chimney, so that
he may use it if he pleases. There is nothing like hot water
to charm the chill out of cold feet and cramped limbs ; nothing
like warm, dry clothing to put new life into a drenched, half-
frozen specimen of humanity. Again, in half an hour or less,
your husband emerges from his bedroom. You are clad in
a dress of purple or claret coloured stuff, relieved at the
throat and wrists with white linen or lace. Your homely
little dinner is on the table, and, as it is wintry weather, you
have chosen wintry dishes. You have a nice savoury stewed
steak, or , a dish of haricot mutton, with potatoes baked in
their jackets, a dish of baked apples, and some toasted cheese
to follow, a bottle of stout, and, of course the inevitable tea-
pot. The hungry man falls to, and once more you let him
take forty winks in peace on the sofa while you remove the
dinner things, and set them carefully away for the morning’s
cleaning up. He wakes to find his pipe and tobacco ready by
his side on a little table, with the beer jug handy likewise, if
he be given to that form of refreshment, and sees you neat,
smiling, cheerful, opposite to him, ready either to go on with
your knitting in silence, while he smokes and thinks, or to
chatter to him as much as he will.
How do you think the evening will go ? My dear, lam an
old housekeeper, and I know men well, and women, too.
Believe me, if you treat your husband like that, his inmost
thoughts will be yours, his home will be his sure haven of


rest, his paradise, the pride and joy of his life, and you will
be what, thank heaven, many, very many women are—the one
central point upon which everything turns, upon which his
hopes and aspirations will be fixed, on which his faith will be
so firmly planted that not the testimony of the whole world
shall shake one iota of his confidence in you.
“ But what a lot of trouble,” you say, thoughtlessly. “Why
should a woman do all this? Who is to look after her when
she is cold or hot ?” My dear, who is it that does in effect
look after you at those times by giving up his days to labour
and his nights to thought in order that he may find you the
material to work with. There is no comfort you provide for
him that you do not share. The home, which is his paradise,
is your handiwork, your refuge, your pride, your castle, your
very, very own, your actual self, a part of you inseparable.
It is your heart and brain translated into the arrangement of
daily life, and you need not fear but that it will be duly
valued for its own sake and for yours, and that you will be
honoured in proportion to the skill you bestow on it.
CHAPTER XVI.
THE HAPPINESS OF HOME.
Beeoee marriage a woman is necessarily taken upon trust
by her lover. He may, if he be wise, prudent, reflective, and
not too madly in love, satisfy himself as to her character, tem-
per, and disposition, hut he has no opportunity of judging as
to her ability to minister to those material comforts upon
which the happiness of life depends. Before marriage his
whole mind is bound up in the one enterprise, which has for
its object the winning her affection. After marriage he may
find that in his success there is yet a something wanting. He
may have won the love of a woman who has not sufficient
knowledge or energy to be his helpmeet, or who does not fully
appreciate the tremendous responsibility she undertakes at the
altar, which is no less than to provide for the temporal happi-
ness of her husband. Under heaven a wife is really absolutely
responsible for her husband’s happiness. She is invested


with his means: she is the trustee of all that most valuable
and important portion of his property which is comprised in
his home, and she is the ruler of those actions of his life upon
which his health and comfort depend. If she be not fully
aware of the responsibility, and heartily determined to cope
with it, she is likely to suffer considerably, and her husband
will suffer even more than she will; for she will make her
own atmosphere of home, and he will have to take it as she
makes it.
But it will not do for a wife to console herself with the idea
that, even if she fail to make her husband comfortable, he will
have no other resource than to endure discomfort. There are
always plenty of competitors for the society of a man who is
worth notice in any station of life, and although the wife has
at first enormous advantages, yet, if she use her power unwisely,
she loses the opportunities of her position. No one can dis-
lodge the wife who acts up to her opportunities, but they are
easily lost if too long neglected. Old friends will do their best
to comfort him if they see that he is not happy; relations will
hold out their arms to him if they once find he is dis-
appointed, and all the amusements of his bachelorhood tempt
him with double force, partly by reason of his abstinence from
them for a time, and partly because they are associated in his
memory with that portion of his life when he had not learned
what unhappiness meant.
Fortunate will it be for the neglectful or careless wife if no
other competitors than these arise to win her husband’s affec-
tions from her. But it almost always happens, when a woman
will not devote herself to her husband’s happiness, that he,
with all his perceptions quickened by his daily discomforts,
sees in some other the qualities his wife lacks, and although no
sin nor scandal may follow this awakening upon his part, his
wife’s chance of happiness is seriously imperilled, if not for
ever lost. It is an evil day for a woman when inevitable com-
parisons compel her husband to come to the conclusion that
he would have been a happier man had he married some other
with whose good points he has become fully acquainted. He
may remain a faithful, kind husband ; he may, in remembrance
of his solemn vows and his sacred duty, be generous, true, and
forbearing ; but his respect is gone for ever, his faith is shaken,
and his affection is mingled with pity for his own sorrows, and
contempt for the partner who is insensible to her obligations.
The one way for a wife to ensure her own happiness is by
devoting herself entirely to secure that of her husband. No


man is insensible to devotion, providing it be unaccompanied
with display, and pure devotion is necessarily devoid of that
very objectionable element. The wife who proves her devotion
to her husband by quietly studying his tastes, deferring to his
wishes, providing for his comfort, and making herself and his
home attractive, will inevitably reap the reward of his utter and
entire confidence, respect, affection, and esteem.
The secret of success is self-denial, and self-denial for the
sake of those we love is the sweetest of all exercises—the one
that brings the readiest and fullest reward. How often have
you not, before your marriage, felt that you could willingly
make any sacrifice, endure any deprivation, submit even to
personal pain, if you could but add to his happiness. Yet, after
marriage, there is too often a languid feeling of security, a lazy
idea that nothing more need be done, a foolish conclusion
that no further trouble is necessary, and that a husband who
really loves his wife will not mind what he puts up with.
Under these mistaken ideas married women neglect their
personal appearance, forget their accomplishments, and are
careless of their homes. “ What is the use of dressing to see
nobody but him?” “ What is the use of singing or playing
to one’s husband ?” “ Why should I make such a fuss to have
the table attractive when there is no one here but ourselves ?”
These are the questions foolish women ask themselves, only to
be defeated by all competitors as the practical reply.
“ I am always pleased when you come in," says Mrs. Blank
to your husband when she meets him. “ You and Mr. Blank
are such old friends that I know it is a pleasure to him for
you to call. Pray come round to-night and bring Mrs. Dash
with you, if she will come ?” And she goes off, determined
to provide her best for her husband’s friends. But when your
husband comes home to you, and finds that you are disin-
clined to go out, that you would not do him any credit if you
did go with him, and that you have made no particular
provision for his comfort at home, he feels dispirited and
disappointed. He accepts your suggestion that he should go
alone lest his old friends be annoyed by his broken promise.
He goes, is kindly treated and cheerfully entertained; comes
home, finds you a little more sulky and duller than you were
before, and draws a comparison to your disadvantage.
Suppose, when he returned home with the invitation, he
had come into a neat, clean, brightly lighted room, with
attractive preparations for an immediate dinner, with you
neatly dressed, well rested after your morning’s work, your


hair and eyes bright, your cheeks smiling, and hands smooth,
your collar and cuffs white and snowy, and his own slippers
and house garments laid out ready for him—what do you
think he would say with regard to going out ? “ Well, my
dear, I half promised we would go to the Blanks’ this even-
ing, if you could come ; but, upon my word, it seems a shame
to go out when we are so comfortable here!” His praises
draw a look of gratification from you, and you would dearly
like to have him throw the Blanks over. But you suppress
that impulse, and say, “ Well, I think we may as well go round
after dinner, if you are not too tired. It was very kind of
them to remember us, and you are old friends!” After dinner
you remove your dinner things, so as to leave your parlour
quite neat, you bank your fire together firmly, so that you can
stir it into a blaze when you come home. You turn down
your gas to a mere spark, so that you can make your room
brilliant the instant you open your door on your return, and
you slip on a bonnet and mantle and declare yourself ready to
accompany him. He is proud of your readiness to please him,
proud of your prompt acquiescence in his wishes, proud of
your appearance, and happy to see his friend and his wife
together. A little music, or a game of cards and a friendly
chat pass a couple of hours very agreeably, and, when you rise
to come away, you feel that you have not only gratified your
husband, but have turned his friends into your own. You
return to your own neat home ; a touch of your finger on
the gas, a touch of the poker on the fire, and your room is
brilliant. Your husband pitches himself on the sofa with a
gratified sigh, and watches you as you quickly put the supper,
already prepared, upon the table, and probably says—“ How
kind the Blanks are, my dear. What a good creature she is,
to be sure ; but what a comfort it is to be at home again ! It
was very nice of you to ask them back ; I know you can show
them how to be comfortable,” and so on. Is it not a rich
reward to you to be told in effect, in those simple sentences,
that you have justified his choice before his own world, that
your home is fairer in his eyes than anybody else’s, and that
he is fully confident that you can make it charming to his
friends P
It is in small matters like these, in daily dealings with the
circumstances of the moment, in the trifling denials of self,
in the ready yielding to all reasonable wishes, and in common-
place expressions of appreciation, that the happiness of married
life is secured. The time for protestations and heroics


expired when the honeymoon ended. You show your love
no longer in words, hut in deeds, and prove your truth not
by passionate vows of affection and fidelity, but by the
unceasing devotion of your time and thought to the happi-
ness of your husband.
It is no light thing to win the undivided affection with
which a man returns his wife’s devotion. The love of his
maturity is as superior to the love of his boyhood as his
trained intelligence and strength is superior to that of a child.
While you are thinking and planning for him at home, he is
striving and working for you abroad. The evening nap, which
I advise you to watch in quiet, and peace, and thankfulness, is.
not a sign that he is weary of you, but that he is physically
exhausted. He will waken refreshed, rejuvenated, and com-
forted, and you will have a new charm and a fresh attraction
as the author and giver of his comfort.
Can you have any purer, truer pleasure in the world than
the pride and happiness that will fill your heart as you sit
calmly and quietly working, or knitting, while the lover of
your youth takes that short after-dinner nap with which men
are apt to preface the occupation of the evening ? It is a
proof of the success of your efforts for his happiness. The
unhappy, the unfortunate, the uncomfortable do not sleep.
He sleeps as securely as a child, simply because you have
nourished him, soothed him, and driven away every trace of
care and discomfort. He wakes grateful and happy, and sees
in your matronly face every charm that won his attention
when he first loved you, first dreamed of you as his wife, and
many more into the bargain.
It is only by quiet devotion that you will win his confidence
and become the partaker of his inmost thoughts. He will
become so fully possessed with the certainty that his
happiness is your chief desire, that his reliance on you will
know no bounds. He will learn to think aloud in your
society, and his heart will lay open before you like an open
book. Ho persuasion, no solicitation, will draw from him
one-fiftieth part of the voluntary confidence that will spring
from the utter reliance on your affection that will arise from
your daily devotion of yourself to his comfort. It is by little
matters that men judge, by little doses often repeated that
doctors cure, by little sins constantly persevered in that
characters are lost, by little kindnesses that love is won and
retained.


CHAPTER XVII.
REST AND RECREATION.
Your own good health, good spirits, and good looks are at
least as important to your husband as your good housekeeping
can possibly be. The man who has a sick wife can never be
happy, nor can a sick wife ever be useful to her husband.
Good spirits and good temper are almost entirely dependent
upon good health, for the cheerfulness of the martyr is but a
melancholy spectacle to the beholder after all. Mark Tapley
is credited by Mr. Dickens with having been “jolly ” when he
was seasick, and also when he was “ floored ” by marsh fever.
But I cannot help suspecting that the inherent propensity to
be jocular which undoubtedly distinguishes some men under
circumstances of a serious or painful nature would sit but
badly on a decent housewife. Her cheerfulness, if it is to be
an attraction and a comfort to her husband, must proceed from
a sound mind in a sound body, from the happiness that comes
of promoting the happiness of others.
There is nothing so productive of serenity and cheerfulness
as the knowledge that our work is conducive to the enjoyment
of those we love. But this delight can never be felt in its
fullest perfection by those who are conscious that weak health
is to some extent the accompaniment of their labours. Nor,
indeed, can their work be welcome to those who receive its
fruits, for they will always suspect that the ill-health is directly
caused by the work, and this suspicion poisons all pleasure. It
is your duty, therefore, to guard your good health carefully,
and to take pride in your personal appearance. The know-
ledge that you look nice will generally put you in good spirits
of itself, unless you happen to be ill, and consequently good
•health, good spirits, and good looks go naturally together.
Regular work, regular rest, regular exercise, good food, airy
lodging, and perfect cleanliness are the sure guides to good
health. Now we have just seen that by rising at half-past six
every morning and working until noon, with the intermission
of one hour for breakfast, a young wife may do the entire work
of her little home. Her real labour will thus be confined to
four and a half hours daily, except upon a washing day, when she


will find it advisable to work an hour and a half more. This
extra strain will, however, be atoned for by the perfect rest of
Sunday morning, for, as there are no duties left for Saturday
but the preparation for Sunday, there need be nothing done on
that day but the necessary cooking, which, for two people, is
indeed a light matter.
After your four and a half hours of household work is done,
the best thing you can do is to get a light luncheon and a nap.
There is no beautifier like sleep, no restorer like sleep, nothing
like it for smoothing away all cares and vexations. You can
sleep with a clear conscience. Your house is as clean as a new
pin. Your husband has had a good luncheon and gone back
to his employment, and by your early rising you have not only
earned the right to repose, but have given nature a positive
claim to it. The nations of Southern Europe, living in a
climate closely resembling that of Australia, are unanimous in
their allegiance to the noonday siesta. It is a healthy custom
and a wise one, and it is one that nature herself implants in
the lower animals. Look for the birds at sunrise, and where
are they ? Out on the wing seeking food, up in the trees
building nests, singing, fighting, squabbling, busy. Look for
them at noon, and where will you find them ? Sheltered from
the sunshine, secure among leaves and branches, silent, and
asleep. They will be busy again by-and-bye, when the heat of
the day is past and the rage of the sunshine is declining,
but they do not expose themselves to the blaze of noon if they
know it. Surely a woman may be as wise as a robin or
a swallow and do no harm.
Supposing that you have not been able to get your bath in
the morning on rising, twelve o’clock will be a capital time for
it. You can then take your luncheon directly afterwards, and
your nap will follow naturally. I think an hour or an hour
and a half, as a general rule, will be found enough to give you
perfect restoration. If the nap be taken, as it should be,
directly after luncheon, say about one o’clock or half-past, it
will not interfere with your sleep at night in the least. You
can easily arrange for waking at a proper time by setting the
alarm of a clock before you go to sleep, but after a few days
you will wake naturally in the course of an hour or two. After
your nap you can either make your afternoon toilet and go for
a walk —quite the best thing you can do, especially if you call
on a friend or two while you are out—or you can make yourself
neat for the reception of any callers you expect, or you can
read or play if you have a piano. But, whatever you do should


■be real rest, nob real work. Reading is rest after housework,
so is the piano, so is a walk, so, in short, is any change.
About half-past four, or earlier if you have anything very
ielaborate to cook, you will do well to prepare for your six o’clock
■dinner. You need not disarrange your toilet much for that if
you take care. You need only remove your cuffs, turn back
your sleeves an inch or so, and put on a large apron. Bridget,
the professed cook, may make herself in a mess over turning
-out a dish or two, but no intelligent woman, who respects
herself and is possessed of the least tact, will do anything of
the kind.
I saw a gentleman once give a striking proof of the ease
with which dirt may be avoided in culinary operations. He
was dressed to go to a ball, when some of his family began to
rally him upon his supposed skill in cookery. He laughingly
offered to prove it by making a large pie, then and there,
dressed as he was, guaranteeing not to soil his clothes, pro-
vided he were not required to go to the kitchen and pantry to
fetch the materials. These were brought to him, together
with a basin of water and a towel. He turned back his
wristbands and coat-sleeves and set to work, not even putting
on an apron. In half an hour he had made a large mutton
pie containing four pounds of meat, with herbs and flavour-
ings, and covered with a light puff paste weighing a pound
and a quarter. The pie finished, he merely washed his
hands, turned down his cuffs, and was ready to go to the
dance without asking for a clothes-brush. There was not a
■speck of flour on his clothes, not a smell of pepper or meat
about him, not a trace of the occupation in which he had
been engaged. All persons who have but to cook for a small
number of people may, if they will, be just as successful if
they will take as much pains.
Although your dinner may take an hour and a half or two
hours to prepare, it will nob engross your undivided attention
during the time, and you can still rest and take things easily,
to a certain extent, in the intervals of attending to it. But
these intervals are useful for the purpose of laying the dinner
table, selecting dry, warm clothes for your husband if it be
■cold and rainy, or light, dry ones if it be hot, in order that
he may change his attire the moment he comes into the
house.
The one rule I wish you to observe is this, that you should
not do anything but rest between luncheon and dinner, except
■cook the latter meal. You will thus be quite fresh and on


the alert when your husband comes home, ready, not to
bother him or fuss about him, but to attend upon him quietly
and make him comfortable.
If you dine at six or half-past your dinner will be oyer,
and probably your husband’s little nap into the bargain, by
half-past seven or eight o’clock. If you are going to spend
the evening at home you will be, by that time, comfortably
■established in your own easy chair with your needlework,
which must, of course, be done at some time, although not
much is required, as a rule, in the first year or two of married
life, excepting when a little stranger may have to be prepared
for.
The great secret of comfort at this part of the day is
to let your husband alone. Imitate in this matter the
exceedingly wise tactics of the hotel landlady. When the guest,
wet and weary, or hot and dusty, comes to her door, she
confines herself to smiling pleasantly, speaking cordially,
providing for his wants and repose, and holding her tongue.
The result is that poets innumerable have sung about inns and
their comforts, and landladies can count their admirers by
hundreds. It is no use to reply that you have rights, and
landladies have not. You have no right to worry your hus-
band just because you are his wife; and, if you refrain from
doing so, your reward is bound to come. Of this be quite
sure, that if you want to pin him contentedly to your side for
ever and ever you must humour him, and that perseveringly.
There are very few men who will sit and chatter without
they have something else to do at the same time. Conse-
quently, unless your husband is given to spend his leisure in
some light handiwork, he is almost certain to be a smoker. If
he likes his pipe of an evening your dominion is certain. You
have only to place his pipe and tobacco near him, together
with a cool drink, ready against his awakening ; and by the
time he is in full blast his tongue will begin to go. If you sit
cheerfully quiet with your work, only throwing in a look of
appreciation, or a word or smile now and then, you will hear
everything there is in his mind. But you will do well to keep
your opinions to yourself as a general rule, excepting when
they are asked for, and then give them only sparingly. I take
it that, if you are a true wife and a good woman, you will
much prefer to have his confidence rather than to rule his
actions. Now, confidence is a plant of slow growth, and the
habit of confiding in anyone is not easily acquired, especially
by young men, whose lives, from the days when they leave


school to those of their marriage, are usually very self-con-
tained. If you give your opinions freely on all subjects, are
argumentative; talkative, and litigious, your husband may
acquire a high opinion of your talent, and at the same time be
careful not to call it into exercise. If, on the other hand, he sees
that you are quietly appreciative, and interested only lovingly
because he is, he will pour out all his heart to you, and will
get so firmly into the habit of doing it that he will not he easy
until he has talked over all his affairs with you.
Any small mechanical employment he may fancy will pro-
bably he quite as conducive to conversation as smoking itself.
Indeed, if you busy a man’s fingers, without putting too great
a strain upon his mind, you immediately unloose his tongue. I
once had a shy young fellow to deal with, a relation, in whose
welfare I was most dearly interested. I knew he was ready to
tell me everything I wanted to know. I knew that it was
vitally necessary that I should know many things he was
apparently too diffident to mention, and for a day or two
after his arrival in town I was in despair. But not for long.
Oh dear no. Men are made to be managed, and those who
know how to manage them are their very best friends. So I
contrived one day that he should accidentally upset a large
writing-desk, filled 'with different kinds and sizes of paper,
envelopes, pens, pencils, and other wares. It very oddly
happened that all the drawers and boxes of that stupid desk
were unfastened, and, when it had spilt its contents, the floor
was littered with a multifarious array of miscellaneous
stationery. Common politeness necessitated his offering to
sort, arrange, and replace its contents, a task which occupied
him a considerable time. Before his fingers had been busy
five minutes his tongue began to waggle, and in a quarter of
hour he was chattering as freely as if he had known me for
a hundred years. Long before those papers had been sorted
I knew all I wanted to know, and the ice once broken never
formed again. There’s nothing like a light employment to
loosen the tongue. See what politicians tailors are.
But man is a creature whom change suits, and albeit that
he is prone to get lethargic when he is too comfortable, yet a
fillip now and then does him good. I think I should make
a habit of asking a friend or two in on the average about
once a week, either to share your evening meal, or, if that
entail too much trouble, to spend an hour or two afterwards.
I should also accept an invitation of a similar kind occasionally,
taking care not to attempt to exchange visits with people of


very much larger means than my own. If you go out to see
friends once a week, have friends to see you once a week, and
about as often on the average go out to some place of entertain-
ment, whether it be theatre, opera, lecture, or whatever you
may fancy, you will then have four evenings left for your own
company only, and that will be probably quite enough for the
first year or two. By-and-bye, when a family arrives and affairs
are more engrossing in their demands, you will find it pos-
sible to spend seven evenings in a week in conversation, and
never miss the friends. It is not always convenient either to
visit or to invite. But even between man and wife that perfect
contentment and communion is a plant of gradual growth, to
be cultivated with care, and allowed to increase without forcing.
Do not get into the habit of playing games of pure skill,
such as draughts or chess, with your husband. At the former
game manv women become extremely clever. At the latter
very few are even moderately proficient. But in any case the
contest is not wise. If you beat your husband you will some
day irritate him. If he beat you he will gradually get a poor
opinion of your abilities. Card games of all kinds are
unobjectionable, as they contain those elements of chance that
equalise the difference between bad and good players. These
will afford you so much scope that you may easily feign, if you
do not feel, an indifference for the games of pure skill.
Sufficient sleep is highly important to your health and
comfort, and also to that of your husband. The reputation
of early retirement is also highly conducive to your popularity
in friendly and neighbourly society, Nothing is so incon-
venient in a small household as visitors who do not know
when to go away, or a hostess who does not know when to
permit her guests to depart. You will find it advisable, when
you merely go out in a quiet way to make an evening call, or
to take a friendly dinner, not to stay after ten, or half-past ten
at the very latest, so that your friends have a chance of going
to bed at a reasonable time. When you receive guests in a,
similarly informal fashion, do not prevent them from taking
leave by any great solicitation, unless you know that they would
have to wait a long while for any train or other conveyance. In
the latter case, of course, common hospitality demands that you
should only let them go in fair and ample time. In this matter
renjember the Scotch proverb—
Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.
Eleven o’clock is a reasonable time for you to go to bed as a.
general rule. You will then be ready to get up at six in th§


summer, and half-past six in the winter, and even an hour
earlier now and then, and you will have divided a day of
sixteen and a half or seventeen hours into two nearly equal
portions by a short nap at one o’clock or half-past.
If you preserve regular habits as a rule, an occasional
infraction of your practice when a party, a dance, or a merry-
making of any kind keeps you up late, it will do you no harm
at all. Don’t get up any later in the morning because you
have been up late the night before. It is useless to cover one
irregularity with another, and the result of “ sleeping it out”
would be that an unusually short day would end by leaving
you very wakeful at bed-time the second night. It is much
better to put up with the slight feeling of weariness caused by
the late hours of the previous evening, and compensate yourself
for it by going to bed earlier the next night.
I am writing, remember, for working people—for the man no
less than the wife, albeit that it is the wife whom I address.
I am calculating that you are two young folk, with nothing to
depend upon but the skill of the husband abroad, and the skill
of the wife at home ; that you are anxiously desirous for each
other’s happiness, heartily in love with each other, and
honestly determined to struggle together hand-in-hand until
you achieve better fortunes, taking, meanwhile, such pleasures
as may lie near your pathway in life. I only venture to
suppose that you are comparatively inexperienced, and there-
fore I make suggestions which, while they contain no informa-
tion that is not already familiar to old married people, may
yet hint to the inexperienced how best to conserve their time,
money, health, and comfort.


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN.
Evert mother should nurse her own child, unless she is
prevented by constitutional weakness, by temporary illness, or
by local incapacity. Every consideration of humanity urges
her to this course. The child that is brought up by hand has
a smaller chance of life than the one which receives the food
nature has provided for it, and has also a far smaller chance
of growing up healthy and strong. The mother’s health is
also greatly improved by nursing her child, which is not more
■dependent upon her for support than she is upon it for peace
of mind and comfort of body. The woman who, from mere
caprice or from a fear of injuring her appearance, denies her
child the food nature intended for its support, risks its life,
impairs its vitality, injures her own health, and loses one of
the greatest and purest happinesses of which humanity is
susceptible. In addition, she risks the life of the child of the
wet-nurse, who is bribed through her poverty to sacrifice her
own offspring for gain.
If, however, by reason of the causes set forth above, or by
reason of a highly nervous temperament, a mother is so
unfortunate as to be unable to nurse her offspring without
injury to it or to herself, nothing remains to be done but to
provide Che best possible substitute. The choice of a wet-nurse
is a subject which is too extensive and important to be treated
of here. In that matter, as in all the circumstances attendant
upon childbirth, the doctor is the only safe guide.
If a child has to be brought up by hand, great care must he
taken to give it nothing but milk, for its stomach is nob
calculated to digest anything else, and, although for a day or
two the stimulus of food may appear to be beneficial to it, yet
it is sure to suffer from the improper loading its digestive
organs receive. Eits, convulsions, and even death are the
usual results of any attempt to interfere with nature in this
respect. Cow’s milk is the only safe substitute for the
mother’s milk. For an infant only a day or two old it should
be diluted with nearly half its bulk of warm water, and


slightly sweetened. When administered it should be what ia
called “ blood warm,” a temperature marked on every
thermometer. As the child grows older the proportion of
milk may be gradually increased and less water used, until, at
about the fifth month, the milk may be given undiluted.
Not until the teeth begin to show, which will generally he
at about six months old, should any other food than milk be
given. Then the various farinaceous foods intended for
infants may be gradually administered. One of the very best
of these is a farina called Tons les mois, which may be pro-
cured at all chemists of respectability. I have known strong
and healthy children reared on this farina, when others of the
same family, the mother of which was unfortunately unable
to nurse any of her children, had died. The “tops and
bottoms” bought at the baker’s are very good, but should nob
be the only food used. They only want soaking for a short
time in boiling water, beating very fine, and mixing with
sweetened milk. Semolina, sago boiled in beaf tea, with a
little milk added to it, and various other infant’s foods of
reputation may be sparingly used.
The bottles used for feeding children should be most
delicately and carefully cleaned, and the artificial nipples,
teats, or tubes should be perfectly free from sour milk or any
other impurity. The delicate stomach of a child is easily
injured, and the presence of sour food in its bottle, or in the
tubes, is poison to it. The spoon should not be used for the
first few months. The best way of keeping artificial teats
clean is to change them every twelve hours, keeping the one
which is not in use in proof spirit until a little while before
it is wanted, when it must be well soaked in tepid water.
The instructions regarding the time at which solid food
should first be administered apply to children which have
been suckled by the mother as well as to those which have
been brought up upon artificial food. Children should be
weaned when four teeth have been cut, unless they are very
delicate, and when the canine teeth appear they may be
allowed to have a little minced meat in addition, The
presence of teeth is the sign that the child is beginning to
need more solid food, but the transition shoiild fee very slo >>
and gradual.
The child’s waking and crying is the only guide to the
proper time for feeding it for the first few days, but it will
very soon be possible, by feeding it about eleven o’clock at
night, after a fast of three or four hours, to secure its sleeping


until a reasonable hour, probably six o’clock in the morning.
It should be fed every three or four hours throughout the
day, and regularity in this matter will soon render it con-
tented, and make it give little trouble.
Unless the infant is very delicate it should be accustomed
from its birth to sleep apart from its mother. If the child
be feeble, and have a weak circulation, it will undoubtedly be
well for the mother to cherish it in her arms for the first week
or two ; but, if the infant be moderately healthy, its rest, and
hers, will be better secured by its sleeping alone. It will get
into more regular habits of feeding, will be stronger and
better in every way. After two or three weeks it will be
possible, by exercising it in the nurse’s arms at intervals during
the day, to keep it awake a little, so that its rest at night may
be longer and fuller.
The proper feeding of children, from the very day of their
birth, is of extreme importance. Children that have been
regularly and carefully fed are far less liable to painful and
dangerous attacks during the process of teething, which will
itself be much easier for them. The teething time is always
one of anxiety and trouble. The local inflammation in the
gums, produced by the growth of the teeth, is occasionally
attended by fits, convulsions, and feverish disorders. The
lancing, not scarifying, of the gums, by a thoroughly competent
person, is usually a wonderfully ready and effective cure for
all disorders connected with teething. The operation is too
■quickly completed to be painful, and, if it be completely per-
formed, generally restores the child to health in a surprisingly
short time.
Should convulsions set in during the period of teething,
they may be relieved by immersing the child up to the chest
in a warm bath at a temperature of about 94 degrees. The
head, if very hot, may be dashed with cold water, and, if it bo
necessary, a lavement or an aperient may be administered
before the warm bath.
The clothing of the child should be light, loose, soft, and
warm. Uo bandages, pins, rollers, or supports of any kind
should be used. The child would grgw a§ straight and
strong without plothing of any kind if it could be kept gufih
ciently warm. The clothing and linen mugt be constantly
changed when soiled in any way, and the body of the infant
carefully protected from cold and damp. But, at the same
time, it will thrive a great deal better if ft be permitted t 9
kick abSUI perfegtly naked now and then §yery day, Thogg


times should be before its baths, which should be given twic®
daily. A blanket should be spread on the floor, and the room
being warm and free from draughts, the child should bo
undressed and laid gently down in the centre of it. With &
little encouragement from its mother or nurse, it will soon
move its limbs, and kick about and enjoy itself immensely.
Its bath for the first year should never be under 90 degrees
of heat, but after that advantage should be taken of the first
spell of warm weather to bring the temperature of the water
gradually down, until cold water that has stood in the nursery
all night will answer. But the temperature of the room in
which the bath is given should never be under 60 degrees*
and I think myself 68 degrees better. With this temperature,,
if draughts be avoided, there can be no chance of the child
taking cold. The bath should be given very tenderly, and the-
child should on no account be startled with the water. On
the contrary, if it exhibit the least nervousness, it should only
be gently washed, and by degrees encouraged to play with,
and dabble in, the water, until it enjoys it as it would if nature
had her own way. Use the mildest soap you can get, and a
soft, fine Turkey sponge, with the finest and softest towels
you can afford to buy. A very delicate and beautiful soap
called “ Baby’s Soap” was introduced some years ago, and may
be had of many respectable chemists. Pears’ transparent
soap, the unscented kind, is also very grateful and refreshing
to the skin, and any good nursery soap will answer well. Bo
not use the perfumed toilet soaps from your own toilet table,
as the perfumes, however diluted, are too strong for th&
infant’s downy skin.
If the child be very delicate it may be necessary to wash it
only a part at a time, carefully drying the washed place, and
immediately covering it. But Australian children are happily
seldom so delicate as to render these precautions necessary.
It is, however, better to take the precautions than to slight
the washing, upon which the healthy action of the skin is
absolutely dependent. Violet powder is often necessary, but
it should be of the purest and finest kind. In this case the
best is decidedly the cheapest. Do not forget that a few years
ago a number of unlucky children at Hackney, near London,
were killed by the use of a violet powder, in which an
ingenious chemist had mixed a quantity of arsenic, which
happened to be much cheaper than the genuine article, and do
not grudge a trifle more per packet for the powder in order ta
secure the trade mark of a well-known and responsible firm.


The long clothing of the infant serves the admirable purpose
of keeping its feet and legs warm in the first period of its life.
It would, however, if too long continued, cramp, distort, and
enfeeble those extremities, and if the child be fairly healthy,
you will do well to short-coat it as soon as it shows by its
restlessness that its long skirts are burdensome. But be sure,
when you do short-coat it, to protect its feet and legs with
soft, warm stockings and shoes, giving its feet sufficient room.
Congestion, chills, cramps, and all sorts of ailments come from
leaving the feet and legs of children exposed to cold. The
head, on the contrary, should be covered as little as possible.
Heat is very hurtful and objectionable in this quarter. In
earliest infancy, for appearance sake, a cap made of the very
thinnest and softest muslin may be allowed, but tbe sooner
this is discarded the better.
As soon as a child attains any movement of its limbs you
will do well to let it take all the exercise it can manage. Place
a blanket in the middle of the floor, put the child in the
middle, with its toys round it, and let it kick, roll, and sprawl
to its heart’s content. If it cry, you will do well to look
quietly and silently to see what is the matter before you speak
to it or go to it. A child will speedily learn to cry when
nothing is the matter, as a means of attracting attention, but
if you do not let it see that its cries are heeded, it will drop a
habit which does not produce any result. You will soon learn
to distinguish the cries of pain, fright, and hunger from those
of rage, wilfulness, and fretfulness. If you are wise you will
take no direct notice of those that belong to the last three
classes, but will strive to indirectly change the current of the
child’s thoughts, such as they are, without attracting its
attention to yourself. Unless its rage is so violent as to
threaten a fit, it is as well to take no notice at all, because
children learn so quickly to associate some gratification given
them with their crying that they cry unceasingly. If the
child cries from pain, or fear, or hunger, it is your fault; you
should have been watchful and careful.
In fine weather the blanket on which the child is laid to
sprawl and kick may be advantageously placed on the grass
plot, if you have one, or on the verandah, or on the ground,
anywhere in the open air, providing that the spot chosen is
in the shade of the house or a tree, so that the sun does not
shine directly on the child. You cannot, of course, be too
watchful that no harm happens to it, but you will be wise to


place it so that it cannot see that you are watching it. The
sooner it is accustomed to be out of your arms, in short, the
better for its welfare and your peace.
By-and-bye, when it is six or eight months old, and can
crawl about pretty quickly, it will begin to pull itself up on
its feet by the aid of anything that is near enough for it to
catch hold of. This is the natural manner of learning to walk,
and the quickest by far. As soon as it can pull itself upright
it will begin to try and walk from one chair to another.
Take no visible notice of it or of its frequent tumbles. It will
persevere and teach itself to walk in a tenth of the time it
would take for you to teach it by lugging it about. The only
thing you have to do is to take care that the chairs or other
furniture it can clutch at are too heavy to be pulled over. Of
course you can encourage and help it after it shows this
tendency, by inducing it to try and reach your arms from a
chair, or from the arms of its father; but you will do wisely
not to allow it to depend upon your hands to sustain it in an
upright position by the aid of its own uplifted arms. Your
child no more requires your teaching to walk than to breathe,
or suck, or see, or hear.
The bedroom where your child sleeps should be airy, well
ventilated, and perfectly free from bad smells. You should
never allow any ordure, or refuse, or dirty clothing to remain
in it for any time. The air cannot be too pure nor the room
too fresh. The temperature should not fall below sixty degrees
at first, at least before the child is a year old.
After the first year, a child who has been well managed will
give you very little trouble. It cannot' be too much in the
fresh air, and, provided that its feet are kept warm, and its
clothing is sufficient, it will not take any harm from changes
of temperature, providing that they are not too violent. You
will notice that it is scarcely ever still, Even when sitting
down, intent on the movements of a toy, or an insect, or a
cloud, or a leaf, or any of the thousand and one things that
attract its attention, it will be in motion. Its arms and legs
go in all directions, ISTo muscle of its body is in repose ; all is
healthy activity and growth, It cannot grow, it cannot move,
it cannot breathe if you keep it closely clasped to your bosom,
and though the exquisite affection and unspeakable pleasure
of maternity make you hungry to hold it in your arms, you
must in this, as in all other matters, practice that great virtue
of self-denial that underlies every feminine good quality, and
gives the tone to every good woman’s life,


As soon as a child can digest oatmeal porridge, you will be
wise to let that homely food form a great portion of its diet.
Oatmeal is rich in heat-forming elements, and a child fed upon
it will resist all changes of temperature. It is rich in phos-
phates, and children fed upon it have strong bones, fine teeth,
rich, red blood, clear skins, and bright eyes. Well boiled, and
served with sweet milk, with now and then a little jam or
preserved fruit for a treat, it is the best of all food, and the
one of which the children never tire. Well does the poet
Burns write :
Brawny lads and bnirdly Mzzies
A me bred upon sic fare as this
There is nothing like it, believe me, and nothing so fit for the
Australian climate. Get the best oatmeal money can buy, mix
it smoothly with water, boil it steadily for half an hour at
least, pour it into a plate or basin, add the milk, and give it to
your children morning and night. The mid-day meal should
consist of meat carefully minced, vegetables in moderation, and
light, plain puddings. Fruit, if ripe, sound, and in full season,
should always be supplied. There is a great point in the last
words, “in full season.” Unseasonable fruits are never so
wholesome as those that come “ so that in due season we may
enjoy them.”
Do not deny your children a moderate allowance of sweet
things of all kinds. Remember that all children crave for them,
and that nature, when she implanted the appetite, knew what
she was about. Sugar supplies the heat-forming elements,
which the restless movements of childhood are always dis-
sipating. Your little one is a furnace continually in want of
feeding. It is fresh from the hands of heaven, and shows its
wants by its desires, proves that its wants have been properly
supplied by thriving, and rewards your pains in every minute
of its life. Is there any music to your ears like its voice, any
sunshine like its smile of affection, any touch so entrancing as
its soft hand upon your neck ? It is your very own —a some-
thing of which age, time, distance, death itself can never rob
you, a being in whom your own life is perpetuated, extended,
and improved.
Your child should have nothing to drink but pure water, or
toast water, excepting on rare occasions, when a little home-
made fruit syrup may be given with cold water for a treat.
Never let it sip beer or wine, because the taste for those
beverages is never so unconquerable as when it has been
insensibly acquired in childhood, and also because stimulant*


of any kind are hurtful to its delicate, sensitive, highly strung
irganisation. Neither fall into the mistaken idea that you can
quench its thirst properly with milk, which is a food, and not
n beverage. You might almost as well try to quench it with a
beef steak.
A child of a year old and upwards should sleep comfortably
from six in the evening until six or even a little later in the-
morning, requiring nothing, if it wake in the night, but a
little water. It ought to be bathed before breakfast, and to
have half an hour or an hour’s exercise in the open air, weather
permitting. It will do it no harm to have a crust of bread
while it has its run, but its breakfast should be given it within
from an hour to an hour and a half of its rising. It should
be encouraged to eat, but not pressed to do so, and it will not
eat too much unless it is pressed. Never deny it food as long
as it is eating heartily and naturally without apparent resolu-
tion or greed. If its appetite fall off, try a change of diet.
Breakfast being given to a child by half-past seven or eight
at the very latest, its dinner should follow at twelve. Its tea
will then come at four o’clock, and by six o’clock it should be
put to bed, having had its second bath just before, which will
send it heartily to sleep. Many people are so strict and severe
that, no matter how hungry a child may he, it is not allowed
to have anything between meals. Yet those very people will
themselves, if they feel “ a sinking,” or “ a swimming,” or “ a
void,” treat themselves to sherry and biscuits, or beer and
bread and cheese, or oysters and stout, or any one of a
thousand things. Now be sure that the child knows best. If
it grows languid in its play, and runs to you to beg for a piece
of bread and butter, do not refuse it. Do not even try and
persuade it to go without. Only take care that anything you
give it between meals is less tempting than the meal will be
when it comes, so that you do not foster the accidental want
into a daily habit. Who is to say that a child shall be like a
clock or a steam engine, warranted to go a certain time under-
certain pressure. It is better even that it should get a morsel
of plain food out of time than that it should suffer hunger, that
keenest of tortures to the young.
I meant to leave off here, and I know that I have come to
the farthest end of my tether, but I cannot lay down my pen
until I have adjured you, by everything you hold dear, never
to scold, beat, frighten, or otherwise annoy your child. The
days have gone by, thank heaven, when people believed in
that bad proverb of Solomon’s, about “sparing the rod and


spoiling the child.” What were his children like ? What was
the success of his system? Let your child’s feeling toward
you be the perfect love that castethout fear ; let it never hear
one angry tone in your voice, never see one frown on your
brow, never feel one impatient, unkindly touch with your
finger. Don’t solace yourself with the idea that you were
whipped and scolded, that you are a good woman in spite of
it, and that your child would do well treated in the same way.
Think rather how often your baby heart swelled with the-
feeling that you had been unjustly treated, how often you
carried revengeful plans, futile, hut none the less sincere, in.
your mind, and resolve that no provocation shall make you.
anything but your child’s loving friend, protector, and earthly
providence.
Think what you would feel if it died, if you stood beside.'
the tiny coffin and said to yourself—“ Here lies the child I have-
beaten ; here lies the babe I have scolded, shaken, and
frightened. How can I tell that I may not have loosened some-
of the delicate ties that bound it to life ?” Suppose it breaks
a window or a vase, tears a dress or a picture, loses a coin or
a toy, or shows some infirmity of temper or disposition. All
these things you would have forgiven to a friend or an.
acquaintance, ami that without an effort; but to your own
you forgive nothing. Turn from Solomon in his glory to that
greater, purer, more glorious being who warned us against
offending “ these little ones,” who “ took a child and set it i®
the midst of them.”
You may die yourself, and only your name, your picture,
your books, or work remain to keep your memory green in
your children’s minds. Shall that memory be clouded by the
recollection of your harshness, of your occasional violence, of"
your scolding, and your sneers ? Would you not prefer that
your children should remember you as always turning the same
smiling face to them whether they were right or wrong ? Do
you not love them as much when they vex you as when they
please you, and will you let your face tell a different story to.
your heart ?
I write from a long, a happy, a most blessed experience. I
know that it is possible to rear children to happy and<
prosperous manhood and womanhood without one single angry
word or look, without one attempt at coercion, without a threat,
or an expostulation more urgent than that which I should,
have used in a drawing-room to an ordinary acquaintance..
The example of gentle manners and kindly ways will calm any


natural tendency to roughness in children, and a very mild
•exhortation will do all that is necessary. “My dear, you will
frighten the bird, and that would be unkind.” “My dear,
you will hurt your poor little kitten, and no one likes cruel
people,” was always enough for my little ones. As for
broken windows, torn clothes, noises, and what is known as
unruliness, I made no sins of such things, and you will do
wisely to try my plan. Two of my dear ones are in the better
land, and my happiest reflection concerning them is that their
lives here were uncheckered by one single cloud of human
creation.
Draw from nature.your great example. See how the earth
brings forth her increase with equal liberality to the j ast and
the unjust; how for the bad as well as the good the rain falls,
the trees heave, and the sun shines. Look into your own
heart and ask yourself where your earthly happiness would be
if every nice offence did bear its comment, and the great
mother nature took upon herself to visit the faults of her
-children with instantaneous punishment.
Once more you willhave to exercise the noblest of virtues —the
virtue of self-restraint. But how rich, how beautiful, how
■exquisite will be your reward! Your fearless children will turn
from all earthly friends to give you their confidence, secure
that you will never frown whatever the world may do. Their
hearts will lie open before you, their affection only deepen with
years, their love grow more intense as time unfolds to them the
■difference between the harsh judgments of the outer life and
the unfailing welcome of the home. Your authority will lie,
not in your commands, but in your wishes, not in your
children’s duty, but in their love, and your happiness will but
increase as the years fly, and the progress of time makes them
more and more appreciative of the motives that have guided
your actions.


AUSTRALIAN ECONOMIC BANK,
LIMITED,
3Q COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
CAPITAL:
£500,000.
.pircctors:
M. H. DAVIES, Esq., M.L.A
JOHN DANES, Esq., J.P.
SUBSCRIBED:
£133,665.
WM. ANDEESON, Esq,.
JOHN HOODIE, Esq.
C. W. ELLIS, Esq.
T. B. MUNTZ, Esq., C.E.
| C. J. EICHAEDSON, Esq.
FIXED DEPOSITS Received at Full Current Rates.
SHARES Issued Daily, Payable by Quarterly Instalments.
CURRENT ACCOUNTS—
Interest allowed on Monthly Minimum Credit Balances, at
4 per cent.
ADVANCES ON PROPERTY, repayable by Instalments, as in
Building Societies, or in other ways, to suit borrowers.
HENRY CORNELL, Manager.


A. H. MASSIM & CO.’S LIST OF PUBLICATIONS.
AH. MASSINA & CO.’S WEATHER ALMANAC, and
• General Guide and Handbook to the Farmer, Selector, and Agri-
culturist. Price 6d. j postage, 2d. additional.
T'\R. L. L. SMITH’S MEDICAL ALMANAC, containing
useful family medical and other information. Price 6d.; postage,
2d. additional.
A USTRALIAN JOURNAL, Vol. XX. The Best and
Cheapest Monthly Journal published in Australia. Annual Sub-
scription, 6s. in advance, posted to any address in Victoria; 6s. 6d. per
annum to the adjoining Colonies or Great Britain; single copy, 6d. Sold
•everywhere. Bound in neat red cloth, price 9s. per volume.
AUSTRALIAN MERINO; A Treatise, by J. E. Graham. The
most able work published on Australian Wools. Price 55.; postage,
’6d. additional.
A USTRALIAN MELODIST. Nos. Ito 15 now ready.
■AA. a Collection of all the Newest and Most Popular Songs of the Day,
Price 6d.; postage. Id. additional. Sold everywhere.
/”N ORDON’S POEMS, New and Revised Edition. Complete in one
’J volume. Stiff cloth, neatly bound, 7s. 6d., postage 6d. additional ;
limp cloth, 55., postage 6d. additional; Pocket Edition, 2s. 6d., postage
- 6d. additional.
"DIRIENDLY SOCIETIES’ ACT. (January, 1878.) Price, paper
-A covers, Is.; cloth, Is. 6d.; postage Id. extra.
rpHE REGULATIONS UNDER THE FRIENDLY
-L SOCIETIES’ ACT 1878, Price, paper covers. Is.; cloth,
js. 6d. ■ postage Id. extra.
nENERAL ANATOMY OF THE HORSE, With Key.
'--V Ready for framing. The most wonderful production of the day.
Price £1 Is.; by post anywhere, 235.
SHILLING SERIES OF STANDARD WORKS.
TV/TASSINA’S GUIDE TO MELBOURNE, containing all
A-VI. Information to Visitors—where to go and what to do. Fcap.
Svo. Price Is.; postage included. Is. 3d. Revised to date.
rpHE FARM AND SELECTION. Third Edition. The
A- most useful Handybook to the Farmer and Selector. By Abraham
Lincolhe. Price Is.; postage, Is. 3d.
fW* 1 DOCTOR; or, THE COLONIAL MEDICAL AND
'A SURGICAL HANDYBOOK. Full Instructions for Families
and those Resident in the Bush how to act in Emergencies, Accidents, and
Common Sickness. Price Is.; postage included. Is. 3d,
rpHE FRUIT GARDEN—Parts I. and 11. A Practical Guide
-A to the Planting and Management of the chief fruit-yielding plants of
temperate and tropical zones. By William Claesox, F.L.S.,for many
years Honorary Director of the Experimental Gardens of the Horticultural
Society of Victoria, Price Is. each; including postage. Is. 3d.
Australian plain cookery (Third Edition),
specially compiled and adapted for the Australian Housekeeper,
containing the Plainest and Most Reliable Recipes for use in the Bush
Hut as well as the Most Fashionable Kitchen. Price Is.; by post, Is. 3d.
MAY BE MAE OF ALL BOOESELLEBS.


Advertisements.
NEW AND REVISED EDITION.
COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME
■Stiff Cloth, Neatly Bound, *7/6, Postage 6d. additional.
Limp Cloth, 55., Postage 6d. additional.
POCKET EDITION, 2/6, Postage 6d. additional.
A. H. MASSINA & CO.,
(Djenscx-al 'ffixthix&Vf&x&i
26 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.
WILLIAM RADFORD,
GALVANISER AND JAPANNER,
19 LITTLE BOURSE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE*
Awarded Silver Medal, Exhibitions 1872-3 and 1881.
Baths, Tanhs, Cheese Tube, Washing Coppers, Vats, and all hinds of
Domestic and Dairy Utensils on hand and made to order.
All hinds of Passengers’ Tinware always on hand. Eej airs executed.


"With Books of Directions for Family Use,
viz.:—
y\r F
AisLt o
f I3SS4
ROBIN SON’S FAMILY HERBAL, to which is added
the Botanic Family Physician ; Valuable Medical Receipts;
and Important Directions regarding Diet, Clothing, Bathing,
Air, Exercise, &c., with numerous Illustrations, 3s. 6d.;
coloured, 4s. 6d.
Coffin’s Botanic Guide to Health, 6s.
Skelton’s Family Medical Adviser, 3s.
The Working Man’s Model Family Botanic Guide,
by W. Fox, M.D., 4s.
Books on Physiology, Phrenology, Dietetics,
Mesmerism, Hydropathy, &c.
SEND POE EIGHTT-PAGE CATALOGUE. FREE.
Medicines & Books sent to any Part of the Country by Post or Railway.
W. H. TERRY’S
BOTANIC MEDICINE
Progressive Literature Depot,
84 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE.


GALLIERS & KLAERR
VIGT(ORIAN
GAS COOKING STOVES
n
o
»>
o
-p
m
** 2
Ft O
3 2
■fj F*
bo
rt
w w
I I
w rf
* *
u
o
d
►4 g
■d h
a a
d °
O
.H
o
a
M
M
O
«rf-
fcj
£ £
H P
fcj “
o O
H- O
o o
4
P £'
oq
HI w
£. £
o <1
4 O
in w
PLUMBERS AND GASFITTERS,
£ w
P« {3
n
H cf-
-1 I
p p
P*
s
2 I
3 s
s w
■ O
P
cf
CD
4
(a
ELECTRICAL & MECHANICAL BELLHANGERB & BRASS FINISHERS
Factory: INKERMAN STREET, ST. KILDA.
Ta Be had from the Metropolitan GFas Co. on the Monthly Rental System.


WILLIAMS’
AUSTRALIAN
YEAST POWDER.
5-1
(D
rcS
£
o
Ph
WILL BE FOUND
3
&
P
B
co_
Pi
rJ
■ H
r t 3
f-c
-p>
to
5
&
CO
C-t-
-u
’co
i
i
•<5
CD
P
hd
o
si
WILLIAMS’ AUSTRALIAN YEAST POWDER
THE MOST ECONOMICAL
AND THE BEST MEANS OF
RAISING LIGHT AND WHOLESOME BREAD
Sold by all Grocers and Storekeepers throughout the
Australian Colonies and New Zealand.
