





Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


THE ART OF THOUGHT


THIS BOOK IS PRODUCED IN COMPLETE
CONFORMITY WITH THE
AUTHORIZED ECONOMY STANDARDS


THE ART OF
THOUGHT
By
GRAHAM WALLAS


First printed in this form 1945
Second impression 1946
Printed and Published in Great Britain by C. A. Watts & Co. Limited,
5 & 6 Johnson’s Court Fleet Street, London E.C.4, England.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO THE PRESENT
ABRIDGED EDITION
This shortened version of Graham Wallas’s Art of Thought ,
now issued by the Rationalist Press Association, con-
sists of eight of the twelve chapters of the book as published
in 1926. A number of footnotes have been omitted, of
which a complete list is given in the Appendix at the end
of this edition. No other changes have been made in the
original text. The chapters omitted are Chapters VIII,
IX, XI and XII of the complete edition, in which the
general conception of an “ art of thought ” is considered
in its particular application to the “ mental habits ” of
“ nations or professions or other groups ” (Chap. VIII)
to the problem of “ dissociation of consciousness ” in
religious experience (Chap. IX) and to certain problems
of public education (Chaps. XI and XII). The author’s
summary of these chapters is given in the Appendix.
MAY WALLAS


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST
EDITION (1926)
During the last twenty years I have from time to time
attempted to explore the problem how far the know-
ledge accumulated by modem psychology can be made
useful for the improvement of the thought-processes of
a working thinker. I have published chapters dealing
with various sections of that problem in my Human
Nature in Politics (1908), Chapters II to V; The Great
Society (1914), Chapters 111, X and XI; and Our Social
Heritage (1921), Chapters 11, 111 and IV.
This book is intended to be, not a summing up of my
earlier attempts, but an extension of my inquiry, par-
ticularly as regards the less conscious factors in thought.
In particular, I have not here dealt with the problem of
organized co-operation in thought, which I discussed in
Chapter XI of The Great Society. My footnotes and
quotations will indicate the psychological books which
have helped me. But my main material has been derived
from my experience, during more than forty years, as a
teacher and administrator, and from the accounts of their
thought-processes given by poets and others who were not
professed psychologists, by some of my students, and by
friends in England and America.
If my book helps a few young thinkers in the practice
of their art, or induces some other psychological inquirer
to explore the problem with greater success than my own,
I shall be more than content.
GRAHAM WALLAS
London University ,
London , 5.w.7


SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS
CHAP. PAGE
I. Psychology and Thought 1
Men have recently increased their power over Nature,
without increasing the control of that power by thought.
We can make war more efficiently, but cannot prevent war;
we can explore the world, but cannot contrive an interracial
world-policy; and the same want of intellectual control
exists, within each nation, in politics, philosophy, and art.
We require, therefore, both more effective thinking on par-
ticular problems, and an improved art of thought, in which
scientific explanation may overtake and guide empirical
rules. But in thought, as in cookery, science lags behind
empiricism, and the study of modem psychological text-
books may even hinder effective thinking. This fact is
largely due to the use by psychologists of the “ mechanist ”
conception of instinct as “power,” and of reason as
“ machine.” Some of the best modem physiologists and
psychologists are, however, opposed to that conception,
and substitute for it the “ hormist ” conception of the human
organism as an imperfectly integrated combination of living
elements, each of which retains some initiative of its own,
while co-operating with the rest in securing the good of the
whole organism. The aim of the art of thought is an im-
proved co-ordination of these elements in the process of
thought.
n. Consciousness and Will . . . .18
The thinker must also fight against his own “ common-
sense ” conception of consciousness and will as simple and
absolute unities. Consciousness varies from “ full ” con-
sciousness to unconsciousness, and from comparatively
unified consciousness to “ co-consciousness ”; and the
thinker must train himself to observe his less conscious as
well as his more conscious psychological experiences. Will,
also, varies, from full volition to non-volition, and from com-
paratively unified volition to “ co-volition.” The distribu-
tion of volitional control over the various factors in our
organism is, indeed, curiously incomplete and arbitrary;
so that Plato and others have found difficulty in relating
conscious purpose to creative thought. The similarity of
the characteristics and limitations of consciousness, will, and
organic life has led many thinkers to believe that they may
be three different aspects of the same fact.


CHAP. PAGE
111. Thought Before Art 26
The art of thought is a modification by conscious effort of
a “ natural ” form of human behaviour. In a civilized adult
it is very difficult to observe mental behaviour apart from
acquired habit; but if we make a necessarily rough distinc-
tion between nature and acquirement, we find that the main
“ natural ” process which the art of thought attempts to
modify is the “ association of ideas,” which Aristotle and
Hobbes observed by examining the memory of past associa-
tion-trains, and Varendonck and others by the more difficult
but more fruitful method of examining association-trains
during their occurrence. Varendonck emphasizes the risings
and fallings of consciousness which accompany the “ natural ”
association-trains, and describes the “ dialogue form ”
which results from automatic mental attempts to solve
psychological situations. He correlates rising and falling
consciousness with rising and falling rationality; and, less
successfully, with the use of verbal and visual imagery.
Varendonck’s evidence is influenced by the fact that all his
observations took place while he was falling asleep, and also,
like that of H, Poincare, by an over-simplified “ mechanist ”
theory of the relation between thought and instinctive
emotion. But the thinker, from the record of such observa-
tions, and from his own introspection, can make for himself
a working conception of that natural association-process
which his art is to modify.
IV. Stages of Control 40
At what stages in the association-process should the
thinker bring the conscious effort of his art to bear? If we
examine a single achievement of thought we can distinguish
four stages—Preparation, Incubation, Illumination (and
its accompaniments), and Verification. At the Preparation
stage we can consciously accumulate knowledge, divide up
by logical rules the field of inquiry, and adopt a definite
“ problem attitude.” In Verification we can consciously fol-
low out rules like those used in Preparation. At the Incuba-
tion stage we can consciously arrange, either to think on
other subjects than the proposed problem, or to rest from
any form of conscious thought. This second form of In-
cubation is often necessary for the severer types of intellectual
production, which would be hindered either by interruption
or by continuous passive reading. If we are consciously
to control the Illumination stage we must include in it the
“ fringe-conscious ” psychological events which precede and
accompany the “ flash ” of Illumination, and which may be
called Intimation. We can to some degree control Illumina-
tion by making ourselves conscious (as many poets are con-
scious) of Intimation; and by both encouraging the psycho-
logical processes which Intimation shows to be occurring,
and protecting them from interruption.


CHAP, PAGE
V. Thought and Emotion . . . .61
A difficulty in the voluntary control of thought arises
from the elusive character of “emotion ” or “ affect.”
Sensation and imagery are less elusive than emotion; and
poets and artists have attempted to retain their emotions by
associating them with images of sensation. On the other
hand, emotions can call up ideas, and nations have some-
times to choose between a vernacular language whose emo-
tional associations may provide intellectual stimulus, and a
more exact literary language with fewer emotional associa-
tions. The intellectual influence of certain emotions, such
as humour and sympathy, can best be appreciated by con-
sidering them separately. In poetic creation one of the
strongest intellectual influences comes from the emotion
of “ significance.” A century ago the problem of the rela-
tion between thought and emotional association was dis-
cussed by using the terms “ reason ” and “ imagination ”;
Shelley described his personal intellectual development from
“ reason,” which attempted to inhibit emotion, to “ imagina-
tion,” which used the whole content of consciousness as a
guide both to truth and to human values.
VI. Thought and Habit 79
All mental activities, besides their immediate effects in the
production of thought, have later effects in the production
of mental habits; and it is sometimes convenient to consider
the activity as means, and the habit as end. A regular time-
stimulus is useful as producing the habit of “ warming up,”
and may be combined with the stimulus of place or circum-
stance, or of the muscular movements of fingers or lips. But
we should not become the slaves of habit; the best adminis-
trators often attempt to get a fresh point of intellectual
departure by breaking their own mental habits; and those
who have to work to a time-table should systematically
watch and record their unhabitual “ fringe-thoughts.”
Such thoughts will often come at moments outside the work-
ing day, and it is specially important for the social thinker
to observe and select them during newspaper reading.
Mental habits should vary with the natural powers, the age,
and the subjects of study, of the thinker; and the manage-
ment of habit is specially important for thinkers who are
teachers or journalists. The daily conflict between the
stimulus of habit-keeping and that of habit-breaking is
only part of the larger problem of regularity and adventure
in the life of a creative thinker.
VII. Effort and Energy 91
Further analysis is required of the facts behind our use'in
psychology of such words as “ effort,” “ energy,” and
“ ease.” Creative artists often describe their moments of
greatest intellectual energy as being without effort, but the


CHAP. PAGE
artist himself cannot always tell whether the absence of effort
means an increase or a decline of energy, especially in those
cases where a mental activity which originally required severe
effort has become habitual. Spencer describes a habit of
relaxed mental energy, and Mill a habit by which he con-
stantly renewed his mental energy. But efforts vary not only
in intensity, but also in the character of their “ stroke,” and
many men have wasted their efforts because they never dis-
covered the right stroke for their work. Sometimes the
effective stimulation of mental energy depends on the rela-
tion between thought and “emotion”; extreme emotion
may, however, weaken thought; or the emotional factors in
our organism may fail to respond to an intellectual call for
energy. Some thinkers have advocated the production of
organic harmony by the general organic relaxation of
“ power through repose ”; but the purpose of thought is not
organic harmony but truth, and the seeker for truth must
always be prepared to sacrifice harmony. The harmony re-
sulting from action is more effective for the production of
energy than the harmony of repose; but action, if it is to
heighten intellectual energy, must be relevant to our purpose,
and to those conditions outside ourselves on which the fulfil-
ment of our purpose depends. The “ energy ” of which
the psychologist speaks is an empirical fact of introspec-
tion ; it may some day be related to the measurable “ energy ”
of the physicist and the physiologist.
VIII. The Thinker at School . . . .106
The discipline of the art of thought should begin at an
age when the choice of intellectual methods must be mainly
made, not by the student, but by teachers and administrators.
If Plato were born in London or New York, how could we
help him to become a thinker? He would be a self-active
organism, living and growing in an environment far less
stimulating than that of ancient Athens, and unable to dis-
cover for himself the best ways of using his mind. His
education should involve a compromise between his powers
as a child and his needs as a future adult; he should acquire
steadily increasing experience of mental effort and fatigue,
and of the energy which results from the right kind of
effort; he will need periodical leisure, with its opportunities
and dangers. The present experimental schools in which
students are left to acquire thought-methods by their own
“ trial and error ” have not always been successful, and the
individual hints of a clever teacher as to mental method often
fail. It may, therefore, be hoped that a knowledge of the
outlines of the psychology of thought may become a recog-
nized part of the school and college curriculum; experi-
mental evidence already exists as to the effect of such know-
ledge in improving the mental technique of a student.
Appendix 127


CHAPTER I
PSYCHOLOGY AND THOUGHT
It is a commonplace that, during the last two centuries,
men have enormously increased their power over nature
without increasing the control of that power by thought.
In the sphere of international and interracial relations
our chemists and engineers are now contriving, by techni-
cal methods whose subtlety would have been inconceivable
to our grandfathers, plans for the destruction of London
and Paris; but when French and British statesmen meet
to prevent those plans from being put into operation they
find it no easier than would the leaders of two Stone Age
tribes to form a common purpose, and they generally
part with nothing better than a vague hope that war
may be avoided by accident and inertia. The nations of
Europe seem unable, even after the Locarno Pact, either
to amend the Peace of Versailles, or, if it is not amended,
to provide against the danger of a new world-struggle
which may be succeeded by such a Dark Age as succeeded
the break-up of the Roman Empire. 1 And it is not only
in dealing with the master-problem of war that we show
this inability to control, by taking thought, our new
powers. We are, for instance, rapidly learning so to con-
quer insect-borne disease as to make possible the residence
of a largely increased number of white men in the tropics;
but throughout the greater part of Africa neither the
white invaders nor the European governments to which
they are nominally subordinate have thought out any
better policy than the reduction of the black population
to a condition of statutory servitude, leading some day
to pitiless massacres of masters by slaves and of slaves
by masters. In the Pacific no one has produced a scheme
for the settlement of thinly-populated territory which is
based on any wider conception than the separate advan-
tage of competing races and states.
1 Written in 1926.


In the sphere of internal policy there is, within the
closely guarded frontiers of every state, a turmoil of new
ideas; but those ideas have been so far more successful
in weakening the traditions on which our existing civiliza-
tion is based than in showing the way towards anything
better. The majority of the inhabitants of Europe now
live under constitutions invented by Lenin, Mussolini,
Rivera, or by the founders of the German Republic and
of the Austrian and Russian succession states; but no
one except a few partisans believes that stable forms of
relation between the citizen and the state, or between the
state and other political and social organizations, have
yet been invented. In economic life criticism has far
outrun construction; the individualist, collectivist, and
syndicalist conceptions of industrial organization have all
been discredited, but no new conception has established
itself. In jurisprudence everyone laughs at Austin’s
Utilitarianism and Hegel’s Idealism, but no one proposes
any substitute for them. In literature, painting, and
music, sesthetic tradition has been so broken that the
young painter or poet cannot settle to his work until he
has found his way through a wilderness of half-formulated
psychological theories. In personal conduct, young men
and women find that new knowledge has shaken traditional
sexual and family morality, but that there is as yet no
sign that a period of ethical reconstruction is at hand.
The United States of America are more fortunate than
the states of Europe, in that they are comparatively safe
from external attack; but in American politics, economics,
literature, religion, and ethics the difficulties arising from
the failure of human thought to contrive an adaptation of
human society to its new environment are equally obvious.
Thought, therefore, whether as the concentrated mental
activity of the professed thinker, or as penetrating and
guiding other activities, is now required more urgently
than ever before in the history of mankind. Thought, if
we are to escape disaster, is needed in many specialized
fields; we must construct a more accurate and better-
proportioned conception of the past; separate groups of
students must explore biology and physics, politics and


sociology, and must try to see the relation of their studies
to each other, to the ancient problems of philosophy,
and to that beauty of words and form and colour by
which our thoughts are made more permanent and more
significant; thousands of political and social expedients
must be invented. But in this book I shall argue that
we must also consider how far it is possible for us to im-
prove those processes of thought itself which are used in
all the specialized studies, how far, that is to say, we can
produce a more effective art of thought.
For the purposes of that inquiry it will be convenient
to make a rough division between the more empirical and
the more scientific elements in any art —between the
methods learnt by each practitioner from his own ex-
perience or from imitation of other practitioners, and the
wider principles by which those methods can be ex-
plained or corrected. Sometimes empiricism lags behind
science, and sometimes science lags behind empiricism.
Seventy years ago, for instance, Baron Justus von Liebig
was the acknowledged leader of the chemical science
which then claimed to cover the field of the empirical
processes of selecting and cooking food; while the chef
of the Reform Club might be taken as being a leader of
the empirical “ mystery ” of food-preparation, handed on
by one chef to another, and indicated in the “ cookery
books ” which were so strikingly unlike the text-books
of chemistry. We now know that if in 1855 the Reform
Club chef had been asked to prepare the best dinner he
could, and if Baron Liebig had been asked to order another
dinner, to be prepared in the same kitchen and by the
same body of cooks, the chef’s dinner would have been
much the better, from the point of view of health as well
as of enjoyment. Empiricism was then well ahead of
science in the art of cooking, and it was only in 1915
that, owing to the unrewarded discomforts endured by
scores of small mammals fed alternately on margarine
and butter in the little Wesleyan chapel at Cambridge,
the chemists demonstrated the importance of the vita-
mins. Now, perhaps, a professor of bio-chemistry, if
he had the necessary modesty and humour, might give a


few useful hints to the chef of the Reform Club as to the
cooking of fats and vegetables; and might even learn
from him, as Darwin learnt from the empirical pigeon-
breeders, suggestions leading to new scientific principles.
The study of atomic structure by the science of physics
has been more successful in catching up the empirical
processes of tempering and alloying metals, and a trained
metallurgical physicist is now an ordinary and useful
member of the staff of any large steel-works. Metal-
lurgy is, indeed, a good instance of a sphere of action
in which science and practice are now keeping step,
and are producing a rapidly progressive “ scientific
art.”
How, in this respect, do things stand with the expedi-
ents by which men are helped in the process of thought ?
How near are we to the creation of a “ scientific art ”
of thought? Both in our own time and in the past,
thought has, of course, been helped by advances in the
sciences of logic and mathematics. Roman law, for in-
stance, could not have arisen from the practice of the
courts if Aristotle and others had not first made the
science of formal logic; and those methods of contriving
and interpreting experiments which have produced our
modern control over physical nature have had to wait
throughout on progress in the science of mathematics.
Even in the sphere of social thought, progress has, in
our own time, largely depended upon those quasi-mathe-
matical methods of presenting and comparing the statis-
tical results of the relation between independently varying
causes which date from the work of Descartes and
Leibnitz, And modern thought in all regions has de-
pended for most of its subject-matter on knowledge
accumulated and arranged by “ scientific ” methods.
But behind the use by thinkers of rules and materials
drawn from the sciences there has always been, since
the dawn of civilization, an unformulated “ mystery ” of
thought which has been “ explained ” by no science, and
has been independently discovered, lost, and rediscovered,
by successive creative thinkers. Plato learnt from
Socrates, Sophocles from Aeschylus, Masaccio from


Ghiberti, Marlowe, Jonson and Shakespeare, or Hamilton
and Madison learnt from each other something which
was neither logic nor accumulated knowledge ; and Fara-
day, when he became assistant to Sir Humphry Davy,
learnt from his master something which thenceforth
changed his use of his mind, and which helped to give
efficiency to his thought about those observed chemical
and physical facts and mathematical methods which he
also learnt.
That “something” lies in the field now claimed by
the science of psychology; but a very strong case could
be made out for the proposition that a young thinker
who should to-day submissively study the current text-
books of psychology would be as little likely to improve
his work as would have been a young apprentice cook at
the Reform Club in 1855 if he had absorbed all Baron
Liebig’s Organic Chemistry. A thinker can learn from
the present text-books of psychology useful hints as to
the results of fatigue, as to detailed methods of memoriz-
ing, and as to means of correcting some of the defects
of his sense impressions. But it is difficult for the most
patient reader to get much practical help from the existing
records of laboratory experiments on the simpler forms
of thought; and whoever reads those short chapters on
“ Reasoning ” or “ Thought ” which in the general
psychological treatises cover the whole subject of intel-
lectual activity often feels as a member of the audience
might feel at an organ recital if the wind-pressure in the
organ suddenly dropped. Some, indeed, of the best
psychologists warn us that their science can, in that
region, offer us no practical help whatever. Professor
Pillsbury, for instance, is only a little more explicit than
some others when he says: “No rules can be given for
making the unfertile brain fertile, nor for the better use
of the fertile brain.” 1
And, unfortunately, that section of current psychology
which deals with thought may be not only useless but
much worse than useless to the would-be thinker. Psycho-
1 W. B. Pillsbury, The Fundamentals of Psychology (1923), p.
429.


logy has been deeply and necessarily influenced by recent
growths in our knowledge of nerve-physiology, and
physiologists and psychologists alike have tended to base
on that knowledge a series of summary generalizations,
often expressed in clumsy mechanical metaphors, on just
that point—the relation of thought to other physiological
and psychological processes—where a practitioner of the
art of thought requires most exact and guarded state-
ment. Men, for thousands of years, have vaguely con-
nected the psychological events of which they were con-
scious in themselves with different parts of their bodies.
To the Greek poets and philosophers pity seemed related
to the abdomen, courage to the beating heart, and intense
thought to the diaphragm which controls our breathing.
The modern physiologists, by dissection under the micro-
scope of the nerves of men and other animals, combined
with observation of the behaviour of various parts of the
organism under experimental conditions, have concen-
trated attention on the nervous system. In the primitive
behaviour-cycle which begins with the impact of some
external stimulus upon a sense-organ, and ends with a
movement of the limb-muscles, the physiologists have
been able to follow the passage of the stimulation along
the “ afferent ” nerves from the sense-organ to points
where they come into relation with the “ efferent ” nerves,
down which the counter-stimulations pass to the muscles.
They tell us that when the original stimulation reaches
the spinal cord, it may cause immediate and automatic
muscular “ reflexes ” (such as scratching an irritated
place on the skin, or adjusting the limbs to prevent
falling) even in an animal the whole of whose brain has
been removed. But the stimulation may also reach those
more recently evolved nervous outgrowths of the spinal
cord which are roughly distinguished as the “ lower ”
and the “ upper ” brain. When it reaches the carpet of
interlacing nerves which forms the “ cortex ” or “ grey
matter ” of the mammalian upper brain it sets a sort of
telephone exchange into operation, and nervous events
take place which appear in consciousness as memories
and associations and suggestions. The original sense


stimulus is recognized as part of a “ situation,” 1 and a
new message representing a solution of that situation,
may travel back through the lower brain to the nerves
attached to the muscles. This cortical message may
then give rise to an “ intelligent ” muscular movement,
added to, or modifying, or inhibiting the “ reflex ” move-
ments which originate in the spinal cord, and the more
“ instinctive ” movements which are related to the lower
brain and are normally accompanied by conscious
“ emotions.”
A scientist born in the second half of the nineteenth
century could hardly prevent himself, when describing
this series of events, from using terms taken from the
behaviour of power-driven machinery. He was almost
certain to ask himself what was the “ power ” in the
process, and what was the “ machine.” There seemed
to be “ power ” acting within the spinal cord and its
related “ sympathetic ” nerve centres, and revealing itself
in the reflex movements; but that power had no apparent
connection with the intelligent element in behaviour.
On the other hand, the process of “ association of ideas ”
in the upper brain did not seem to reveal much inde-
pendent “ power ” of its own. There remained the
intermediate stage of the lower brain with its instincts
and their appropriate emotions. These instincts had ob-
vious driving power, and it was undeniable that instinctive
impulses often initiated the process of “ association ” in
the upper brain as a means of attaining their satisfaction.
He was apt, therefore, to conclude that “ instinct,” or
“ emotion,” or “ instinctive emotion,” was the “ power ”
required, and that “ intelligence ” or “ reason ” was the
“ machine.” Professor J. T, MacCurdy, for instance,
says that “the static, intellectual functions of the mind
are like the mechanisms of the automobile; the emotional
or instinctive functions are like its thermodynamics ”; 2
1 See K. Koffka, The Growth of the Mind (1924), and Koehler, The
Mentality of Apes (1925), for evidence indicating that intelligent
mammalian action is stimulated not by a sensation as such, but by
a sensation as indicating a “ situation ” calling for action.
2 Problems in Dynamic Psychology (1923), p. x.
b (A.0.T.)


and Professor MacDougall, in his Outline of Psychology
(1923, p. 440 n.), says that “ it is the paradox of Intel-
ligence that it directs forces or energies without being
itself a force or energy.” Even the great physiologist,
Sir Charles Sherrington, in his Presidential Address to
the British Association in 1923, spoke of the human
mind as “ actuated by instinct but instrumented by
reason.” David Hume, writing in 1739, when Hartley
had already started physiological psychology, but before
the rise of machine-industry, expressed the same con-
clusion in terms of the ancient industrial system based
on slavery, “ Reason,” he said, “ has no original in-
fluence,” it “ is, and ought only to be, the slave of the
passions, and can never pretend to any other office than
to serve and obey them.” 1
This “ mechanist ” conception of the relation between
instinct and thought is based on ascertained facts, is ex-
tremely clear, and is sufficient both for the professor of
physiology who is superintending an experiment, and for
the professor of psychology who is standing before his
black-board, or sitting at his desk and marking examina-
tion answers. It is only when it is used as an actual
guide to thinking that it breaks down. The generaliza-
tions of Baron Liebig as to the chemistry of nutrition also
served excellently well for the introductory black-board
explanations given by the cookery instructresses when I
was a member of the London School Board; and, since
neither the instructresses nor their pupils troubled about
them when it was a question of cooking anything, no
difficulties arose. In the same way it is probable that
the majority even of the most “ mechanist ” psychologists,
when they are thinking whether a new theory is sound or
not, do not often relate their methods of speculation to
their belief that their instincts are, and their intelligence
is not, “ a force or energy.” But there is one group of
thinkers who have in our own time taken the “ mechanist ”
conception of the relation of instinct to reason as a guide
for their own intellectual methods. These are the
Marxian Communists in Russia and elsewhere; I have,
1 Collected Works, Vol. 11, pp. 194-5.


for instance, before me an admirably written Outline of
Psychology published in 1921 (perhaps with the aid of
the Third International) by the Plebs League, who were
British representatives of what the book calls “ the Fight-
ing Culture of the Proletariat.” Its purpose is stated to
be “to introduce the student to the science of human
behaviour, and to the study of the mechanism on which
behaviour depends ” (p. 1), and it contains many quota-
tions from MacDougall’s works. On almost every page
the word “ mechanism ” occurs once or more, and the
writers constantly insist that thought is a machine, inert
in itself, but driven by the force of instinct. Readers are
told that they “ must realize clearly ” that “ our political
convictions, our moral and ethical codes ... the class-
consciousness of the workers and that of the capitalists;
all these are ultimately founded on non-rational com-
plexes, which urge us on to the actions we perform ”
(p. 4). “ Our wants and conations, the strivings of our
instincts, emotions, and habits . . . furnish the standard
by which the reason judges. . . . Reasoning is an accom-
paniment, but not a cause of action ” (p. 82); and the
whole argument leads to the conclusion that “ in all
crises ” the “ dictatorship of a small minority ” (p. 98)
who have realized these facts is essential. The men who
now rule Russia combine this “ mechanist ” conception
of the relation between instinct and reason with a rigid
metaphysical dogma of predeterminism, and are able by
that combination to convince themselves that such a
“ bourgeois ” intellectual process as unbiased reflection
before one acts in obedience to one’s simplest animal
instincts is at the same time biologically impossible, and
also biologically possible but politically and economically
inadmissible. And they seem determined to stamp out
among their fellow-citizens, with the thoroughness of the
Spanish Inquisition, all those methods of inventive thought
which originally enabled Marx to think and write Das
Kapital.
The present position, indeed, of the conception of in-
stinct as force and intelligence as machine compels anyone
who desires, as I do, to get help for the practical art of


thought from the science of psychology, to form a
judgment of his own, on the best evidence he can find,
as to physiologico-psychological questions which he
would normally prefer to leave to the specialized expert.
If, therefore, I were told, as a teacher of political science,
by a young Communist student whose mind had not
yet been completely closed by dogma, that this mechanist
conception is (whether we like or dislike its political
effects) forced on us by the full authority of modern
psychology and physiology, I should begin by pointing
out that during the last three or four years some of the
best psychologists and physiologists seem to have rejected
both “ mechanist ” language on this point and the grossly
over-simplified conception of intelligent behaviour to
which its use is apt to lead. At the Oxford International
Psychological Congress, for instance, of 1923, Dr. C. S.
Myers, as President, protested against the prevailing tend-
ency “ to suppose that all percepts, ideas and volitions,
all forms of cognition and conation, derive their motor
effects from the energy which they obtain from related
affects. According to some, indeed, this energy is ulti-
mately to be derived from a single affect —the sexual
emotion. But the past neglect of instinctive and emotional
feelings should not,” he warned the Congress, “ cause us
to overlook the activity involved in perceiving or thinking,
or to regard percepts or thoughts {e.g. ends) as merely
inert ‘ mental matter ’ whose ‘ movement ’ (nay, whose
very ‘ existence ’ in consciousness) is dependent solely on
the force of propulsion or repression derived from feeling.
Cognitive and affective experiences are not thus to be
isolated in their beginnings.” 1
I should then ask my young Communist to forget that
he ever saw a machine, and to conceive of the human
organism as a combination of living elements, all of which
tend to co-operate in securing the good of the organism
(or of the species of which the organism is a temporary
representative), but each of which retains some measure
of initiative—so that the co-operation is never mechani-
1 Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Psychology ,
p. 188.


cally perfect. I should quote Dr. Henry Head’s statement
at the same Congress that “ the aim of the evolutionary
development of the central nervous system is to integrate
its diverse and contradictory reactions, so as to produce
a coherent result adapted to the welfare of the organism
as a whole,” 1 and should emphasize his assumption that
human integration is not complete, and that “ diverse
and contradictory reactions ”do occur. This conception
might be easier to employ if all young people had learnt
a little physiology at school. It could then be pointed
out to them that the phagocytes (or “ white corpuscles ”)
which wander about in our blood co-operate with the
rest of the organism by surrounding and digesting in-
truding bacteria; but that in doing so the phagocytes act
as living and behaving things, and not as the purely
mechanical instruments of a force external to themselves.
Each phagocyte, indeed, hunts and digests nearly as in-
dependently as if it were an isolated inhabitant of a warm
tropical sea. A man’s hair co-operates with the rest of
his organism by protecting his brain from blows and
from sudden changes of temperature; but it may go on
growing though the man has ceased to live. His epi-
thelial cells may begin at any moment to proliferate
independently, and so cause death by cancer. Red
blood-corpuscles, or patches of skin, transferred from
one man to another may both continue their own activities
and also co-operate in the wider functions of the new
organism of which they are now parts.
And the same combination of co-operating elements,
each of which subserves the good of the whole while
itself retaining some measure of initiative, is found in the
functions of the nervous system. When Woodworth says
of the psychological factors in man that “ any mechanism,
except, perhaps, some of the most rudimentary that give
the simple reflexes [I should myself reject this exception],
once it is aroused, is capable of furnishing its own drive
and also of lending drive to other connected mechanisms,” 2
1 Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Psychology ,
p. 180.
2 R. S. Woodworth, Dynamic Psychology (1918), p. 67.


he is using language drawn from the “ mechanist ”
conception to express the very different conception (for
which I am here arguing) of the co-operating parts of an
organism as each possessing its own drive. The Greek
word for “ drive ” is “ horme,” and therefore Professor
T. P. Nunn (in his Education , its Data and First Principles,
1920, p. 21) called this the “ hormic conception ” or
“ hormism.” Hormism does not deny that all the parts
of an organism tend towards integrated action. But it
substitutes the conception of a living and imperfect tend-
ency towards integration for the conception of a mechani-
cal and perfect integration. The behaviour of a steam
engine is completely integrated; because the parts of the
engine have no force of their own, and only obey the
force of the steam from the boiler. The behaviour of the
human organism tends towards integration, for otherwise
the organism could not, as an organism, exist; but its
integration is not complete, because its parts possess in
varying degrees a force of their own. 1
If the curriculum of our municipal schools also included
some instruction in the past history of the evolution of
living organisms, the difference between the “ hormic ”
and the “ mechanist” conceptions of intelligent action
could be made clearer by using, as Dr. Head does in
the passage quoted above, evolutionary language. The
human body is built up of cells, and every human being
comes into existence by the repeated splitting of a single-
celled fertilized ovum, thereby repeating in outline the
evolutionary history of his species. The world contains
both single-celled and many-celled animals; and we can,
by arranging them in order of complexity and success
in cell-co-ordination, trace an unbroken series from the
loosely co-operating single-celled protozoa to the highly
unified many-celled human organism.
1 Though MacDougall is the most influential authority for what I
here call the “ mechanist ” view of the relation between instinct and
reason, he himself, in his Outline of Psychology (1923), pp. 72 and
218, and in an article in Psyche (July, 1924, p. 27), adopts, while
arguing against Loeb, Watson, and others, what he calls Nunn’s
“ hormic theory of action.”


In such a series the simplest form of co-operation be-
tween cells might be represented by a group of single-
celled marine protozoa, retaining their individuality except
that they are embedded in a common jelly-mass which is
propelled through the water by the simultaneous action
of their whip-like “ flagella.” Next in succession might
come such “ colonies ” as those of the coral-protozoa,
where the tissues of the members of the “ colony ” are
continuously connected with each other, but where each
“ individual ” (if one may still use the word) is similar
in structure to the rest, and follows with independent but
roughly co-ordinated variations, a similar behaviour-
pattern. Later in the series would come the innumerable
species of true metazoa (from the flat-worms to man), in
which the structure of the cells of skin and viscera and
nerves and bone is so specialized as to fit each of them
for the performance of different functions in the life of
the organism; and in which the behaviour of each part
of the organism, though still retaining traces of its ancient
independence, is subordinated with an enormously greater
degree of success to the behaviour of the organism as a
whole. 1
The history, however, of the Russian attempt to found
a complete scientific art of thought upon the “ mechanist ”
conception should be a warning to us not, in the present
state of physiological knowledge, to make an equally con-
fident use of the “ hormic ” conception. The Russians
and their followers reject on a priori grounds some of the
plainest facts of history, and deny the existence of some
of the most important elements in their own mental ex-
perience. Those who prefer the “ hormic ” conception
should for the present be content if it helps them to see
more clearly certain observable facts of human intel-
lectual behaviour which the use of mechanist language
tends to obscure. One of these facts is that, although
what I have called (p. 6) the primitive cycle of psycho-
logical events in rational behaviour is carried through
with greater vigour and ease than any less primitive
1 See E. P. Mumford on “The Conception of Individuality in
Biology ” (Science Progress, July, 1925).


course—although when sensation leads at once to impulse,
impulse to thought, and thought back again to impulse
and muscular action, we are often more intensely alive
than when associative thought begins without sensation,
or without an impulse from the lower nerve-centres, or
when thought ends without action or the impulse to act —
yet that cycle is not the only possible, nor always, for the
purposes of the thinker, the most effective cycle. The
cortex of the upper brain may, for instance, of its own
initiative, to satisfy its own need of activity, and to carry
out its own function in the organism as a whole, start
the process of thought without waiting for the primitive
stimulus of a sensation. When Lord Shaftesbury, in his
diary for 1854, wrote one day, “Very busy; little time
for thought; none for reading. Oftentimes do I look at
a book and long for it as a donkey for a carrot; and I,
like him, am disappointed,” 1 he was describing an im-
pulse to think which was started by the visual sensation
of a book, and which owed part of its vigour to that fact.
But if Lord Shaftesbury had been compelled to live in a
house where he never saw a book, his brain would still,
without any appropriate preliminary sensation, have
asserted its need to think.
Thought, again, may start, not only without the primi-
tive stimulus of a sensation, but also without the inter-
mediate stimulus of an “ instinctive ” impulse from the
lower brain. Though a train of mental association may
be vigorously driven from link to link by envy of a rival,
or pity for a sufferer, it may also start without the aid of
an instinctive impulse, and may gain vigour as it proceeds.
And just as the upper brain may start its activity without
the stimulus of a sensation or an “ instinctive ” impulse,
so it may conclude its activity without having produced
that muscular movement which concludes the “ primi-
tive ” cycle of psychological events. 2 A train of thought
1 Hammond, J. L. and 8., Lord Shaftesbury (1923), p. 128.
2 See MacDougall, Outline of Psychology (1923), p. 289. “In
animals, and primitively in man, every cycle of mental activity
expresses itself in the bodily behaviour which is the natural outcome
of all conation,”


may die away without any recognizable external result of
any kind. When Archimedes invented his test of specific
gravity he ran into the street and shouted; but in the
preceding twelve months he must have done a good deal
of thinking that left his muscles passive. Dr. J. B. Watson,
it is true, and his followers say that any thought of a
chess-player which does not cause his hand to move
towards the pieces does cause his internal or external
speech-organs to move—or rather actually consists of
such movements, though they may be both invisible and
inaudible. 1 But Dr. Watson’s only proof that his belief
is true is apparently the circular argument that if it were
not true the extreme behaviourist dogma would be
unsound.
And the various factors whose co-operation makes up
the primitive cycle of intelligent action can not only
“ short circuit ” that cycle by sometimes providing their
own drive, but can to some extent overlap each other’s
functions, and like the actors in a stock company, play
each other’s parts. K. S. Lashley has proved that a rat
normally acquires the visual habit of finding its way
about a maze by using the occipital part of its cortex;
but that, when the occipital part is removed, it can relearn
the habit (in about the same number of minutes) by using
another part of its cortex. 2 In the same way, human
beings can, apparently, use different proportions of the
cortical and non-cortical elements in their central nervous
system while performing what seem to be identical
operations. I was, myself, a rather precocious and ex-
tremely unmusical small boy. At the age of five I learnt
to play The Blue Bells of Scotland on the piano, by a
process which I can remember well and believe to have
been entirely “ cortical.” Some of my sisters, by making
more use of the more ancient parts of their nervous
1 “ We do not admit [reasoning] as a genuine type of human
behavior except as a special form of language habit.” Watson,
Behavior (1914), p. 319.
2 Psychobiology (1920), 2, p. 55, and Journal of Comparative
Psychology (1921), 1, p. 453, and American Journal of Physiology
(1922), 59, p. 44.


systems, learnt to play with infinitely less cortical activity
and with very different effects upon their hearers.
I am often reminded by these facts of the British Con-
stitution, which it has been part of my professional duty
to study. That Constitution has been evolved owing to
the need of unifying the social actions of the forty-three
million inhabitants of Great Britain. It, like the human
nervous system, consists of newer structures superposed
upon older, in such a way as to produce both the defect
of overlapping and the compensating advantage of
elasticity. The oldest part of our Constitution provides
that we shall be governed by our king, whom God has
caused to be born from his father, and who has been
anointed in Westminster Abbey by our chief priest. The
king still chooses his ministers, as he did when he was the
only source of authority. Before the king, on the advice
of his ministers, directs his sheriff to hang or imprison a
man, he makes use of an almost equally old system, trial
by jury. Twelve peers of the prisoner, chosen by the
supernatural indication of the lot, are sworn to tell the
truth about him by oaths which bring them into danger
of supernatural penalties. On these older parts has been
superposed a newer system, which provides that we shall
be governed by a Parliament, elected by the men and
women on the register, and acting through ministers
responsible to it. On Parliament itself has been super-
posed a still more recent system, in which the main work
of government is done by civil servants and military
officers chosen by competitive examination, and by pro-
fessional judges and magistrates chosen by the ministers
but exercising independent authority.
Many constitutional text-books have been written in
which all these facts are represented as a neatly clove-
tailed mechanical arrangement, in which each decision
is taken by an undisputed appropriate authority and no
question is left undecided. But a British politician who
determined to act on that conception would certainly be
a political failure. He could succeed only by remem-
bering that the relation between the parts of our Consti-
tution is never simple, and is constantly changing. A


certain degree of responsibility of the ministers to the
monarch persists, and influences the working of their
responsibility to Parliament. In time of war the control
of Parliament over the civil executive and the army may
be almost completely suspended, and the Commander-
in-Chief may refuse to tell his plans to the Secretary for
War. No one knows whether the next English bishop
will really be chosen by the Prime Minister, or by the King,
or by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or by a subtle balance
between authorities each of which is, in its origin and on
its own principles, supreme. And if one authority, from
ill-health or incompetence or some external crisis, ceases
to function, another silently takes its place.
In Britain, therefore, the art of government is not that
mechanical process of driving an inert machine by the
force of a single sovereign will, of which rulers like Lenin
and Mussolini constantly dream, but the delicate task of
co-ordinating the actions of partially independent living
organisms. And all the psychological and physiological
arts by which unity of action is to some degree secured
within the individual human organism are of this type.
Mr. Harry Vardon, for instance, in his book How to Play
Golf (1912), says (p. 62) that after a year of constant
experimentation he discovered a grip which “ seems to
create just the right fusion between the hands, and in-
voluntarily induces each to do its proper work.” Mr.
Vardon’s language would not perhaps satisfy exact
psychological analysis, but he has the root of the matter
in him. By his use of the words “ fusion ” and “ in-
voluntarily ” he means that he has at last acquired an
art which enables him, when he grips his brassy, to unify
the behaviour of certain partially independent elements
in his organism; and the thinker who is about to grip
his problem has to acquire a similar art.


CHAPTER II
CONSCIOUSNESS AND WILL
But the thinker who desires to get help in the practice
of his art from the science of psychology should not be
content to avoid the hindrances which arise from the
hasty generalizations of some modern psychologists. He
should also, I believe, try to rid himself of that “ common-
sense ” notion of his conscious self as a completely inte-
grated unity which he will have formed before he ever
heard that a science of psychology exists. Mr. Harry
Vardon, when he is practising a new grip, does not, unless
he has been reading MacDougall’s Social Psychology or
the Plebs text-book, believe that his instincts and his
intelligence have to each other the simple relation of
power and machine. He finds that he is not successful
unless he recognizes more or less clearly that his hands,
wrists, eyes, nerves, feelings, and ideas all have “ power ”
of their own; and that, if he is to achieve that measure
of harmonious organic co-operation on which excellence
in golf depends, he must act on the assumption that in
that respect he can only hope to improve an imperfect
tendency towards unification. But he will nevertheless
assume that he himself, the essential Harry, the person
who wills to improve his grip, and is conscious that he
wills it, the person who looks out every morning through
the eyes in his shaving mirror, is a simple unity.
That assumption will not hurt Mr. Vardon’s golf; but
the professed thinker, if he is to control some of the most
important elements in his intellectual processes, must so
far get behind his own commonsense as to substitute an
explicit conception of his conscious self as an imperfect
and improvable tendency towards unity for the tacit as-
sumption that his conscious self is an already completed
unity. In order to do so he should begin by forcing
himself to realize the existence of an unbroken series of
grades from unconsciousness up to the highest level of


consciousness which man has yet reached. We can, for
instance, watch the growth and decay in our own lives
of our own personal consciousness. Memory seems to
us to be an essential element in consciousness, and if the
consciousness of any one moment is not joined to the
consciousness of the following and preceding moments,
we can hardly conceive of it as consciousness at all. Yet
our memory of consciousness goes back, perhaps, only to
the end of our third year; and if we watch a laughing
child of one year old, we cannot help believing that vivid
consciousness must there exist without continuous
memory. Nor can we draw a line at any point between
consciousness at the age of one, and consciousness or
quasi-consciousness immediately after, or even immedi-
ately before birth, or fix a point in the growth of the
human embryo where potential quasi-consciousness turns
into actual quasi-consciousness. Nor, in the non-human
world, can we draw a line between the apparently intense
consciousness of a fox terrier or a lark, and the quasi-
consciousness of a newly-born puppy or of a fish or
worm. At the end of life we can draw no line between
the second childhood of extreme old age, the quasi-con-
sciousness of delirium, the unconsciousness of coma or
of functional death, and the non-consciousness of irre-
vocable death. At least once every twenty-four hours
we pass through all the grades from consciousness through
foreconsciousness to unconsciousness while going to
sleep, and back again while waking up. We are further
becoming aware that consciousness not only may be
graded on a single series from complete unconsciousness
to the highest grade of consciousness yet reached, but also
may exist in forms parallel to that series. Hypnotists
and psychiatrists have, for instance, proved that in the
same person there may be, either successively or simul-
taneously, two or more “ dissociated consciousnesses,”
or “ co-consciousnesses.”
Consciousness, indeed, shows all the signs of having
reached, as yet, only an early, imperfect, and confused
stage in its evolution. The distribution, for instance, of
consciousness over the physiological and psychological


events which make up our daily life is strangely arbitrary.
Every conscious event can have analogues beneath the
level of consciousness. We can unconsciously, or fore-
consciously, or co-consciously, experience events which,
if they were fully conscious, we should call sensations, or
perceptions, or impulses, or thoughts; and in every grade
of consciousness we can move our limbs, or compose
poems, or discover mathematical solutions. We are, as
a rule, unaware of this fact, because we either do not
observe or soon forget all mental events outside the
limits of full consciousness. In the case of mental events
which are so far removed from full consciousness as to be
called “ unconscious,” we can observe them only by
hypnotism, “ free association,” or some other method of
tapping the unconscious memory after the mental event
has occurred. In the case of less complete defect of
consciousness, we can sometimes observe a foreconscious
event while it is going on. In explaining how we can do
this, psychologists find it convenient to use terms drawn
from the facts of eyesight. The “ field of vision ” of
our eyes consists of a small circle of full or “ focal ”
vision, surrounded by an irregular area of “ peripheral ”
vision, which is increasingly vague and imperfect as the
limit of vision is neared. We are usually unaware of the
existence of our peripheral vision, because as soon as
anything interesting presents itself there we have a strong
natural tendency to turn the foCns of vision in its direction.
We can, however, by a rather severe effort, inhibit that
tendency and so observe objects in our peripheral field
of vision. Using these terms, we can say that one reason
why we tend to ignore the mental events in our “ peri-
pheral ” consciousness is that we have a strong tendency
to bring them into “focal” consciousness as soon as
they are interesting to us, but that we can sometimes by
a severe effort keep them in the periphery of consciousness,
and there observe them.
Closely allied to the problem of our working conception
of consciousness is the problem of our working concep-
tion of will. Just as consciousness shades imperceptibly
from full consciousness through foreconsciousness to the


apparent non-consciousness of the simplest animal be-
haviour, and from unified consciousness to completely
or partially dissociated “ co-consciousness,” so full voli-
tion shades imperceptibly, through what I may call “ fore-
volition,” to the apparent non-volition or automatism of
the simplest animal behaviour; and, on another line of
gradation, from unified volition to that dissociated volition
which I may call “ co-volition.” It is, indeed, a delicate
question of verbal definition both at what point we shall
cease to give the name “ will ” to the less continuous and
less unified forms of conscious conation (whether we shall,
for instance, say that an excited dog wills to dig at a
rabbit-hole, or a hungry infant wills to scream), and at
what point in an equally imperceptible gradation we shall
distinguish between conscious conation itself and the
mere “ urge ” of the simplest forms of protozoal and
cellular life. Even the trained, comparatively unified,
and continuous will of an educated civilized man shares
that quality of incompleteness and arbitrariness which
appears in the analysis both of consciousness, and of the
co-ordination (which I discussed in Chapter I) of all the
factors of organic life. An unconscious desire may, for
instance, mask itself as a conscious will whose character
gives us little or no hint of the underlying process. And
an equal arbitrariness characterizes the limits of the con-
trol of our will over our external and internal behaviour.
If we decide to perform such a bodily act as taking up a
book, or walking in this or that direction, we do so, if we
are in good health, with such easy and complete control
that the will to act and the act itself almost seem to be
the same event. We can with equally complete control
direct and focus our sight, or move our tongue. Few
people can, however, by the most intense effort of will,
influence appreciably the rate of their pulse, or the process
of digestion, or the functions of their thyroid, or sup-
rarenal, or even lacrymal glands; and in some cases the
effort of will is a positive hindrance to the production of
the desired events. 1
1 See e.g. Baudouin, Autosuggestion (2nd English edition, 1924),
p. 37: “In a word, the more we wish, the less are we able.”


The same is.true of those of our activities which, with-
dut dogmatizing as to the ultimate relation between body
and mind, we may call “ mental.” The mental process
of attention is, for instance, like the related bodily act
of eye-focusing, very completely controllable by our
will; and, indeed, the development of the will itself may,
on its physiological side, have been closely related to the
development of attention. On the other hand, our feel-
ings are very little under the control of our will. We
cannot by a direct effort of will make sure of feeling
happy, or sorry, or angry, or grateful, at any given
moment, or in any particular situation. It is easy for
us, again, to learn voluntarily “ by heart,” while making
repeated acts of attention combined with the formation
of silent speech-images; and we can often by a single
effort of will remember a name which we have forgotten,
or find the answer to a simple problem. But the mental
processes which constitute the higher forms of thought,
and which lead to the formation of new and useful ideas
or decisions by distant and unaccustomed links of associa-
tion, are very imperfectly controllable by any direct effort
of will. The most perfectly trained scientist or poet can
no more be sure that he will be able to make his mind
produce the solution of a complex problem, or a new
poetical image or cadence, or a really original sonnet on
the death of a monarch or a president, than can the most
perfectly trained clergyman be sure that he will feel really
sad at Tuesday’s funeral or really joyful at Thursday’s
wedding. It is this fact which leads to such pessimistic
statements about the impossibility of improving thought
by conscious art as that which I have already quoted from
Pillsbury. 1 If our will is unable to control the more
important processes of thought, an art of thought cannot
exist.
This was the problem which constantly tormented
Plato. The whole universe was to Plato only intelligible
if it was seen as an imperfect expression of a divine moral
idea; and Plato’s favourite illustration of moral conduct
was the voluntary subordination of the craftsman’s skill
1 See above, p. 5.


to the craftsman’s conscious purpose. But conscious
purpose seemed to Plato to have surprisingly little con-
nection with the production of poetry, or with the other
highest achievements of the human mind. Plato himself
was a great poet, with ample personal experience of
poetic inspiration; and he lived in Athens at the close of
the greatest poetic outburst that the world has ever seen.
He was also, as far as his love for truth would allow him,
a religious Conservative, who hoped to see a moral
direction for the distracted city-states of Greece develop
out of the trance-utterances of the Delphic oracle. But
neither the Athenian poets nor the Delphic priestess
(who, when awakened from' her trance, might be a very
uninteresting person) could, he found, give any account,
in terms of conscious volition, of the processes by which
their ideas came to them. In the Republic Plato tried to
solve the resulting practical problem by forbidding,
throughout his ideal State, all poetry except “ hymns to
the gods and panegyrics on good men.” 1 In the Phcedrus
he put forward a half-serious, half-ironical theory that
creative thought was a kind of madness, sent upon men
by the gods in accordance with some purpose of which
the gods and not men were conscious. The Greek words
for insanity and inspiration {manike and mantike) were,
he suggested, derived from the same root. “We Greeks,”
he said, “ owe our greatest blessings to heaven-sent
madness. For the prophetess at Delphi and the
priestesses at Dodona have in their moments of madness
done great and glorious service to the men and cities of
Greece, but little or none in their sober mood.” 2 There
is a deeper irony in his description of the “ madness
inspired by the Muses,” “ which seizes upon the tender
and virgin soul ” of the poet and distinguishes him from
that industrious apprentice to the art of letters whom
Plato the poet, in spite of the theories of Plato the moralist,
cannot help despising. “He who having no touch of
the Muses’ madness in his soul comes to the door, and
1 Republic, p. 607.
2 Phcedrus, 244. See also F. C. Prescott, The Poetic Mind (1922),
p. 294.
c (A.0.T.)


thinks that he will get into the temple by the help of art,
he, I say, and his poetry are not admitted; the sane man
is nowhere at all when he enters into rivalry with the
madman.” 1
Indeed, throughout the whole phenomena of conscious-
ness, will, and life, we see the same puzzling tendency
towards unity, limited by the same kinds of imperfection.
This fact is apt to make not only a non-physiologist like
myself, but some of the best modern physiologists wonder
whether physiology may not ultimately give us a working
conception of consciousness, will, and life, as being the
same thing. Professor Julian Huxley, for instance, ex-
presses his belief “ that something of the same general
nature as mind in ourselves is inherent in all life, some-
thing standing in the same relation to living matter in
general as our minds do to the particular living matter
of our brains ” {Essays of a Biologist (1923), p. 242). An
unbridged gulf still, it is true, exists between our con-
ceptions of life and non-life, of the behaviour of the
atoms that are building up the most complex crystal, and
of those which are building up, from its original germ,
the simplest living cell. But there seems to be a tendency
(strengthened by recent work on atomic structure and
movement) to pass over that gap, not by extending, as
Loeb and Watson have done, our conceptions of non-life
to life, but by extending our conceptions of life to non-
life. Professor J. S. Haldane, for instance, writing as a
physiologist, says “ it is at least evident that the extension
of biological conceptions to the whole of nature may be
much nearer than seemed conceivable a few years ago ”
( Mechanism , Life and Personality (1921), p. 101); “We
cannot resolve life into mechanism, but behind what we
at present interpret as physical and chemical mechanism
life may be hidden for all we yet know ” {ibid., p. 143);
and “ That a meeting-point between biology and physical
science may at some time be found there is no reason for
doubting. But we may confidently predict that if that
meeting-point is found, and one of the two sciences is
swallowed up, that one will not be biology ” {The New
1 Phcedrus, 245.


Physiology (1919), p. 19). Professor A. S. Eddington,
again, wrote as a mathematical physicist, in 1920, that “ all
through the physical world runs that unknown content,
which must surely be the stuff of our consciousness ”
(i Space , Time and Gravitation, p. 200). And, in the same
way, it is becoming increasingly difficult for a psychologist
to maintain the distinction between his conceptions of
“ body ” and of “ mind.” If we are compelled by
thousands of years of tradition still to use the old words,
we must at least say with Dr. Henry Head that “ mind and
body habitually respond together to external or internal
events,” 1 and with Watson, “ a whole man thinks with
his whole body in each and every part.” 2 But I myself
find that the nearer I get to the statement that body and
mind are two aspects of one life, the greater is my sense
of reality. And Donne comes very near that statement
in the magnificent lines in which he describes a blushing
girl:
“ Her pure and eloquent blood
Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought
That one might almost say her body thought.” 3
1 Oxford Psychological Congress, 1923, p. 180.
2 British Journal of Psychology, Oct., 1920, p. 88.
3 An Anatomy of the World, line 244—Donne’s Poems (Bullen,
Vol. 11, p. 135). 1


CHAPTER III
THOUGHT BEFORE ART
The art of thought, like the art of running, or the actor’s
art of significant gesture, is an attempt to improve by
conscious effort an already existing form of human
behaviour. Men ran for countless generations before
they invented or handed down the few expedients which
constitute the art of running as taught by professional
athletic trainers; they revealed their feelings by gestures
long before there were any schools of dramatic art; and
they thought for thousands of years before they had a
name for thinking. In all these cases, therefore, the
rules of art must be based on the most exact knowledge
which we can obtain of the behaviour which the art is
to modify. Sometimes that behaviour is completely
“ natural the teacher, for instance, of funning, or of
breathing-exercises, starts from behaviour which is mainly
directed by the sympathetic nervous system, and which
contains hardly any “ acquired ” elements. But when
the co-operation of the higher nervous system is involved,
it is, under the conditions of modern civilization, almost
impossible to observe any instance of human behaviour
which is entirely free, and extremely difficult to observe
any instance which is even approximately free from ac-
quired elements. Many, indeed, of the innate tendencies
of the higher nervous system, such as the tendency to
speak, represent rather a power and an inclination to
learn to behave in a certain way than a direct instinct
to behave in that way. Such learning may proceed rather
by half-conscious imitation than by conscious effort; and
the result even of repeated conscious effort may be a
habit which it is not easy for an observer either of his
own or of other people’s behaviour to distinguish from a
natural tendency.
An actor, for instance, can only with the greatest
difficulty form any estimate as to how far his movements


while he acts are “ natural,” and how far they are due to
acquired modifications of nature. Sometimes he can be
helped by observing the gestures of less sophisticated
persons than himself; he can watch the behaviour of
children; and he could, before the cinema had soaked
whole populations in third-rate theatrical conventions, go
down to the East End of London on a Saturday night,
and watch the comparatively natural behaviour of un-
educated people who were under the influence of rage or
jealousy, and some of whose acquired social habits had
been temporarily weakened by alcohol. Or he may try
to recall his own behaviour on some occasion when he
was “ off his guard ”; or, if he has unusual powers of
imagination, introspection and inhibition, he may stand
before a looking-glass trying to believe that he is Othello
or Lear, and to inhibit all acquired elements in the ges-
tures which follow from that belief.
The thinker, when he is trying to observe thought in
its most natural form, is faced with even greater diffi-
culties than the actor who is trying to observe natural
gesture. Some of the most important steps in the pro-
cess of thought are normally unconscious or half-con-
scious; and our unconscious or half-conscious thought,
even if we succeed in observing it, is not necessarily
“ natural.” The subject-matter, again, even of our least
conscious thought is mainly derived from past experience,
and is deeply influenced by intellectual and emotional
habits; and thought at all grades of consciousness makes
large use of language with its innumerable acquired as-
sociations. The student, therefore, of the art of thought
has to choose a more or less arbitrary point from which
he shall assume the conscious effort of the art to begin.
I myself shall, in this and the following six chapters of
my book, assume that I am addressing young adults who
have already learnt, at home or at school, to speak, read,
attend, and memorize, but who, though they do in fact
constantly reach new ideas by using their brains, have
never yet attempted to acquire or to apply a conscious
art of thought. I shall postpone till the last three chapters
of the book the problem of that preliminary training in


the art of thought which may be given by teachers and
others to children and adolescents.
The young adults whom I imagine myself to be address-
ing will, in spite of differences in their acquired experience,
be alike in that the essential element in their inventive
thought is the process by which, as I have already stated,
one psychological event calls up another in the “ telephone
exchange ” of the upper brain. It is this process of
“ association ” which their art will attempt to improve,
and which they must first try to observe and understand.
The process of association has been observed introspec-
tively by two methods—the observer has either remem-
bered a train of association after it has occurred, or he
has watched it while it is occurring. The first method is
by far the easier, and up till our own time has been
almost exclusively used. Aristotle, indeed, in the earliest
recorded discussion of the association-process, treats
association as a section of the problem of memory. He
asks himself why the memory of one experience calls
up the memory of another. “ For,” he says, “ experiences
habitually follow one another, this succeeding that, and
so, when a person wishes to recollect, he will endeavour
to find some initial experience to which the one in question
succeeded.” 1 He concludes that experiences call each
other up, sometimes because they succeeded each other
in time, sometimes because the experiences were similar,
or contiguous in place, or were connected logically as
are the steps in a mathematical proof.
The best-known description of a train of association
as seen in memory is that given by Hobbes in a classical
passage of his Leviathan (Chapter 111, written about
1650). The passage forms part of a discussion of the
type of thinking which Hobbes calls a “ train of thoughts,
or mental discourse . . . ‘ unguided,’ ‘ without design ’
and inconstant.” “ And yet,” he says, “in this wild
ranging of the mind, a man may oft-times perceive the
way of it, and the dependence of one thought upon
another. For in a discourse of our present civil war,
what could seem more impertinent, than to ask, as one
1 Aristotle, De Memoria, IT, 12.


did, what was the value of a Roman penny? Yet the
coherence to me was manifest enough. For the thought
of the war introduced the thought of delivering up the
king to his enemies; the thought of that brought in the
thought of the delivering up of Christ; and that again
the thought of the thirty pence, which was the price of
that treason; and thence easily followed that malicious
question; and all this in a moment of time; for thought
is quick.” In his explanation of the connection between
link and link in such a train Hobbes is here less full than
Aristotle, and confines himself to succession in time —
“ in the imagining of anything,” he says, “ there is no
certainty what we shall imagine next; only this is certain,
it shall be something that succeeded the same before, at
one time or another.”
In these passages neither’ Aristotle nor Hobbes dis-
tinguishes between the relation to each other of psycho-
logical events, and the relation to each other of the
external facts which give rise to the psychological events.
The likeness between the treachery of Judas and the
treachery of the Scottish leaders seemed a sufficient ex-
planation of the calling up of one by the other, without
asking why the mind of the speaker was interested, even
during “ unguided ” thought, in that kind of likeness.
This over-simplification of the problem was made easier
by the fact that neither Aristotle nor Hobbes recognized
the existence of psychological causes which were not
conscious. And the over-simplification was increased
when, after the publication of Locke’s Essay Concerning
Human Understanding in 1690, psychologists came to use
the term “ The Association of Ideas ” for the whole
association process, and to define “ ideas ” as copies, in
conscious memory, of events.
Hobbes himself, however, realized that the path of
association might in some cases be directed, not merely
by the external connection between remembered facts,
but also by the drive of passion in the thinker himself.
These cases he classed as “ regulated ” thought. “ For
the impression,” he says in the same chapter, “ made by
such things as we desire, or fear, is strong, and permanent,


or, if it cease for a time, of quick return; so strong it is
sometimes, as to hinder and break our sleep. From
desire, ariseth the thought of some means we have seen
produce the like of that which we aim at; and from the
thought of that, the thought of means to that mean; and
so continually, till we come to some beginning within our
own power. And because the end, by the greatness of
the impression, comes often to mind, in case our thoughts
begin to wander, they are quickly again reduced into the
way.” And, as I pointed out in Chapter I, many modern
psychologists have tended to simplify the problem in
another way, by treating Hobbes’s special class as uni-
versal, and by declaring that the mechanical drive of some
one of a list of instincts is invariably requisite before con-
nection can be made between one link of association
and another.
The second method of observation, in which the ob-
server watches the association-process while it is going
on, instead of remembering and explaining it when it is
past, is much the more difficult; but it is much less likely
(if the observer can prevent himself from distorting his
observations by theories as to their causes) to lead to an
over-simplified conception of the association-process itself.
Fifty years hence students will have an ample supply of
this kind of observation before them; but for the moment
the supply which I have been able to discover is curiously
small. The experimental association-trains which are
deliberately started and observed in psychological labora-
tories are limited in range, and are often distorted by the
“ unnatural ” conditions of their formation; and the
clinical observations recorded by the professional psycho-
analysts seem to me to lose most of their evidential value
owing to the influence of the suggestion of the psycho-
analyst upon his patients, and to his own conscious or
sub-conscious determination to defend, against outside
critics, the dogmas of his profession. The most useful
(from the point of view of the would-be thinker) of modern
introspective evidence on the “ natural ” association-
process which I have met with is that contained in Dr. J.
Varendonck’s Psychology of Day Dreams , written by him


self in English, and published in 1921. Dr. Varendonck,
who was attached as an interpreter to the British army in
Belgium, was, before the war, a lecturer on pedagogic
psychology. During the war he trained himself to ob-
serve, night after night, the “ foreconscious ” events in
his mind which immediately preceded sleep, and which
were not initiated or controlled by any conscious effort
of will. He was able both to watch these trains of thought,
which he calls day-dreams, without allowing them to be
influenced by the fact that they were being watched, and
also at the right moment to wake himself, by a strong
effort, into complete consciousness, and record his ob-
servations. His day-dreams deal mainly with the hopes
and fears and annoyances of camp life; and they are set
down with a courage and candour which compel the
admiration of anyone who has tried, as I have, to do the
same thing, and who, partly from want of equal courage,
has failed. Varendonck’s first observation was that
“ there occur in most of our day-dreams risings and
fallings ” (p. 176), or “ successive risings to the surface
and sinkings into the unconscious ” (p. 155). A day-
dream, he says, may last for a considerable time, and
during that time, several such “ risings and fallings ” of
consciousness may take place, before the process is inter-
rupted either by sleep or by a return to complete con-
sciousness. He gives (pp. 170-2) a description, written
down immediately after its conclusion, of a day-dream
which lasted fifty-five minutes, and in which “ on six
different occasions the association had risen close to
consciousness.”
Varendonck carefully analyses a few of his longer day-
dreams, or, as he sometimes calls them, in Freudian
language, “ phantasies.” The most interesting for our
purpose belonged to the type which is often called “ mental
trial and error ”; that is to say they were part of an
automatic mental attempt to solve a difficulty by imagin-
ing successive solutions. And just as the muscular “ trial
and error ” process comes to its conclusion when some
one among a series of movements is successful, so the
“ mental trial and error ” process found, in Varendonck’s


case, its normal conclusion in the mental recognition that
the solution thought of would be successful if tried. In
thinking of this recognition I find that I tend to use the
word “ click,” in the slang sense common among English
school-boys and soldiers. This term spread during the
war, when every young soldier was being trained to use,
by a process containing a large element of muscular
“ trial and error,” a number of machines from rifle-locks
upwards. The “ click ” was the sound made by the
machine when the successful movement was made, and
the verb “ to click ” meant, for instance, to succeed in
such matters as obtaining by verbal ingenuity an irregular
week’s leave. In its origin the click feeling must have
been due to the fact that a foreconscious or unconscious
train of association had led to a point which revealed the
need of action, and therefore the need of full conscious-
ness. It is the same thing as the extremely painful shock
which occurs when a casual train of association suddenly
reveals to us that we are on the point of missing an
important engagement. The feeling itself varies from
joy or horror to a mild recognition that the search is
over.
But the process of association may lead not only to a
recognition that an imagined solution of the situation
will result in successful action, but also to a preceding
series of recognitions that other imagined solutions will
not succeed. Varendonck, therefore, speaks of the “ dia-
logue form ” of sections of his day-dreams, in which
successive proposed solutions presented themselves, and
were met by successive objections, until some solution
appeared against which no valid objection suggested
itself. “ A foreconscious chain of thought,” he says (his
argument shows that he means a foreconscious chain of
thought comparatively near full consciousness), “ is a suc-
cession of hypotheses and rejoinders, of questions and
answers, occasionally interrupted by memory hallucina-
tions ” (p. 179).
He gives a long and amusing analysis of a day-dream
in which his foreconscious mind attempted to deal with
the situation created by the fact that he desired to get an


impertinent orderly punished. The orderly was attached
to a Belgian Field Hospital, of which a certain formidable
Lady V. was matron, and where “ the chief medical
officer was practically at her mercy ” (pp. 64-76).
Varendonck had already reported the orderly to his own
superior officer, Major H. But the orderly had threatened
him with Lady V.’s vengeance. Varendonck imagines in
succession such expedients as writing to Lady V. before
she can hear the orderly’s story, lending weight to his
letter (which he begins to compose) by accompanying it
with his visiting card (with his civilian professional status
indicated on it), or getting a friendly Belgian captain to
send the letter to Lady V. by his corporal. Some of
these expedients were mentally accepted, and some re-
jected; until Varendonck remembered, in consequence
of a detailed visual picture of the comfortable room
where Lady V. used to sit, that she had a telephone,
and finally decided to call upon Major H. himself,
before Lady V. telephoned her version of the story to
him.
Throughout his book Varendonck indicates certain
correlations between the rising and falling of conscious-
ness and the rising and falling of other elements in the
association-process. One such correlation will remind
English readers of the description of falling from day
dreaming into sleep-dreaming at the beginning of Lewis
Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland. As the level of conscious-
ness sank, he found that the critical power which the
civilized human being acquires from education and ex-
perience sank with it; the steps from one link to another
in association often became such as in his fully waking
state he would have at once recognized as absurd, and
his objections to them might be equally absurd. He
describes, for instance, a “bombardment” phantasy, in
which his mind assumed that after losing both legs he
would be compelled to continue his military service (p.
114), and a “ flea phantasy,” in which he hit upon the
expedient of using a garden roller for killing a flea in the
cracks of his bedroom floor. Freud, also, has shown,
though with a serious amount of exaggeration, that as


consciousness sinks towards sleep the links in the train
of association may become more instinctive and animal;
and the vague and generalized tendencies which the
writers of his school call “ sex ” or “ libido ” may appear
in symbolic forms. A similar correlation, therefore,
takes place, according to Varendonck, between increasing
consciousness and increasing rationality: “ The upward
movements have for consequence the introduction into
the concatenations of elements proper to conscious
thought, namely elements of critical thought-activity ”
(p. 176).
Varendonck is, I think, less successful in indicating
some further correlations between sinking and rising con-
sciousness and the other elements of the association-
process. He argues, for instance, that decreasing and
increasing consciousness is accompanied by a decrease
or increase in the use of words, and by a, corresponding
increase or decrease in the use of visual images. “At
one end of the series my foreconsciousness thinks in
words with a few [visual] illustrations distributed at
random; at the other end this ideation seems to proceed
by means of pictorial images with occasional verbal ex-
pressions ” (p. 61). In a passage in which he speaks of
his mind in its less-conscious state as his “ second self,”
he says that this “ second self ” “ operates distinctly by
means of optical images, and I have reason to think that
most persons share this peculiarity with me ” (p. 57).
The facts, however, as to the interrelation of verbal and
visual imagery with rising and falling consciousness seem
to me, even on Yarendonck’s own evidence, much more
complicated. In actual sleep-dreams, and in the deeper
forms of foreconsciousness, we often use words which,
if we happen afterwards to remember them, are found to
belong to the type which psychologists call “ glossolaly,”
and which may be less rational than the most absurd
dream-images. 1 At a stage of consciousness well below
rationality, a coherent but almost meaningless jingle of
words may form itself in our minds, and appear to be
perfectly satisfactory. Mr. Robert Graves, for instance,
1 See Varendonck {Day Dreams), p. 331.


describes his delight with a dream-poem consisting of
the words:
“ It’s Henry VIII, it’s Henry VIII,
He is leading his armies over to France.” 1
And a relative of mine woke one morning with the con-
viction that she had achieved immortality by the lines:
“ Leave there thy steed,
And let it feed
On more than meets the eye.”
And, though it may be true that the use of visual and
other “ images ” plays on the average a larger part (when
compared with the use of words) in less conscious than
in more conscious thought, some of the most completely
conscious and most rational thought may be carried on
entirely by the use of wordless images. A very able and
rapid financial thinker, who was trained as a mathemati-
cian, told me that even when his thought is most con-
scious and rational he thinks, like a chess-player, in terms
of seen or felt wordless “ situations.” The wordless
images of such a “ situation ” may be purely “ kinetic,”
with little or no visual element. The chess correspondent
of the Observer (Feb. 8, 1925) writes that the great chess-
player Alekhin said that “ he does not see the pieces in
his mind, as pictures, but as force-symbols ; that is as
near as one can put it in words.”
Again, when reading Varendonck, one has always to
remember that almost the whole of his first-hand evidence
is derived from introspection during the process of sinking
towards, or rising away from sleep, and that that fact limits
the validity of his conclusions about thought carried on
under other conditions. He says, for instance, that
“ the chains of thought which occupy our minds during
our distractions in waking life are wholly similar to the
phantasies that arise in the somnolent state ” (p. 34).
He illustrates this by a description of the process in which
thoughts and counter-thoughts arise in our mind and are
accepted and rejected when we are in a state of “ full
1 On English Poetry (1922), p. 16.


awareness.” If, for instance, one has to compose and
send‘a painful letter: “One thinks about the letter;
and in one’s mind it has already been composed over and
over again before one writes it down; every argument
that one can think of has been put forward and criticized,
dropped or retained, until in the end the letter is present
in the mind before it is confided to paper ” (p. 139). In
a later book, Yarendonck points out that “ the orator
prepares his speech in the same way, while his mind is
absent during a purely physical occupation; the business-
man unintentionally ponders over his alfairs in the train, or
as he walks to the office; the journalist has his article
in his mind before reaching his office.” 1 I myself, how-
ever, believe that though less-conscious thought during
our hours of full wakefulness has many analogies with
the less-conscious thought which occurs while the main
nervous system is sinking ijito natural sleep or the hyp-
notic trance, there is a difference between the two pro-
cesses, which is of great importance in the higher and
more difficult forms of intellectual creation. And the
process of “ distraction ” in waking life, when a fully-
conscious train of association is broken in upon by a call
for our attention to another subject, is different from the
process in which Alice in Wonderland ceased to think
about cats and bats, and sank into a region where it
seemed quite natural that a white rabbit should carry a
watch in his waistcoat pocket.
Finally, the student who desires to use Varendonck’s
evidence as a working description of “ natural ” thought,
must remember that Yarendonck was originally attracted
to the whole question by reading Freud’s Interpretation of
Dreams ; and that although he is obviously a man of high
intellectual integrity, and much less liable to the involun-
tary distortion of his introspective observations by loyalty
to his master than are most of the followers of Freud, yet
even he seems to feel bound to ascribe every train of
association to the driving force of some “ wish ” or
“ instinct ” or “ affect.” He uses, indeed, the term
“ affective thinking ” as synonymous with “ forecon-
1 Varendonck, Evolution of the Conscious Faculties (1923), p. 108.


scious thinking ” (e.g. p. 19). He can do so with less
violence to the facts because the “ day-dreams ” which
he describes are almost all the result of intense anxiety
either as to his position in the army, or his professional
future, or his intended re-marriage. But nevertheless
in conscientiously analysing his thought-trains he has to
use the word “ affect ” in many different senses, and
sometimes, apparently, in hardly any sense at all. He
says, indeed, frankly, that “ I am quite aware that this
same word affect has been used in my various arguments
to denote very different notions, such as wishes, emotions,
etc.” (p. 245).
One has to be similarly on one’s guard in using the
description of his thought-processes given by H. Poin-
care in the celebrated chapter on “ Mathematical Inven-
tion ” in his Science and Method (translated 1914).
Poincare is also dealing with the complicated and still
insufficiently analysed problem of “ emotion ” as a fre-
quent directing force in the association-process, and as
a still more frequent accompaniment of that process.
And he, too, under the influence of the general tendency
in psychological theory which I have called the
“ mechanist ” view, simplifies that relation by ascribing
the direction of all association-trains to the drive of some
instinctive emotion. He asks what is the selective force,
the “ sieve,” which chooses the apparently right solution
of a mathematical problem and brings it into full con-
sciousness, while rejecting the apparently wrong solution.
He answers that the cause is “ sensibilite ” —an extremely
ambiguous French, term which may either be translated
“ feeling ”or merely anglicized as “ sensibility.” “ More
commonly,” he says, “ the privileged unconscious phe-
nomena, those that are capable of becoming conscious, are
those which, directly, or indirectly, most deeply affect our
sensibility ” (p. 58). He adds that, in the case of his own
mathematical discoveries, the sensibility concerned is that
which arises from the aesthetic instinct. “It may appear
surprising that sensibility should be introduced in con-
nection with mathematical demonstrations, which, it
would seem, can only interest the intellect. But not if


we bear in mind the feeling of mathematical beauty, of
the harmony of numbers and forms, and of geometric
elegance. It is a real aesthetic feeling, that all true
mathematicians recognize. . . . The useful combinations
are precisely the most beautiful ” (p. 58).
Poincare’s authority is sufficient to assure us that in
his case the instinctive appreciation of elegance did play
a real part in stimulating and guiding many of his sub-
conscious trains of thought, and in deciding which of
many subconsciously imagined solutions should produce
the “ click ”of conscious success. He may even be right
in saying that without a rather high degree of this aesthetic
instinct no man will ever be a great mathematical dis-
coverer (p. 60). But it is extremely unlikely that the
aesthetic instinct alone was the “ power ” driving the
“ machine ” of his thought. He must have possessed
some of that “ public spirit ” which is an almost indis-
pensable condition of a lifetime spent in intellectual toil.
He must have had many ambitions and loyalties and
habits of thinking and feeling. Above all he had a brain
which without scope for its self-activity would have been
as restless as a wild hawk in a cage. And each of these
factors must have played its part in the thought-processes
that went on in the varying levels of his consciousness.
One almost fears that if Poincare had been a friend of
Freud, instead of being a friend of Boutroux, who was a
friend of William James, he might have become certain
that libido was the sole and sufficient “ sieve ” of his
thoughts.
But, while the introspective evidence both of Varen-
donck and of Poincare is, I believe, presented in a setting
of over-simplified theory, it is nevertheless possible for
the student, after reading their books, to form, with the
help of his own introspection, a fair working conception
of those “ natural ” thought-processes, which, however
much influenced by experience arid habit, are not, at the
time of thinking, voluntarily controlled by any rules of
the thinking art. He will observe in his own mind auto-
matic trains of associated ideas, some ending with a
remembered positive or negative decision, some broken


and at once forgotten. Some of these trains may belong
to that primitive type which has given rise to the
“ mechanist ” conception of the relation between “ in-
stinct ” and “ reason.” That is to say, behind the train
may be the urge of a strong and simple instinct, love, or
hatred, or fear, driving the train onward, judging its
results, and bringing it back again and again to the same
starting-point. Or the connecting cause may be some
habit of thought; or, again, the upper brain may be
acting on its own initiative, or in obedience to a “ curi-
osity ” which may be only another name for more or less
independent brain-activity. And, at any moment, a
passionless association may lead him to a conclusion that
wakens a vehement passion, or a train of thought driven
by passion may fade into a passionless reverie. Flicker-
ing over. all these processes, as the searchlights flicker
along a line of cliff’s, there may be a hundred different
conscious or less-conscious “ feelings,” alternating with
and fading into each other. He may be dimly aware of
some brooding “ sentiment.” The hormones discharged
by the obscure processes of the endocrine glands may
pervade him with vague “ euphoria ” or “ dysphoria ”
elation or discomfort, energy or inertia. Actual sensa-
tions, and the more or less vivid memories of sensations,
may play their part. Or, he may be able afterwards to
remember sudden flashes of emotional experience almost
too momentary for description, feelings of queerness, or
surprise, or recognition, or amusement, or the craftsman’s
delight in his own skill and success.
d (a.0.t.)


CHAPTER IV
STAGES OF CONTROL
So far, in this book, I have discussed two problems which
are preliminary to any formulation of an art of thought:
first, what conception of the human organism and human
consciousness best indicates the general facts with which
such an art must deal; and, secondly, what is the
“ natural ” thought-process which such an art must
attempt to modify. In this chapter I shall ask at what
stages in that thought-process the thinker should bring
the conscious and voluntary effort of his art to bear.
Here we at once meet the difficulty that unless we can
recognize a psychological event, and distinguish it from
other events, we cannot bring conscious effort to bear
directly upon it; and that our mental life is a stream of
intermingled psychological events, all of which affect each
other, any of which, at any given moment, may be begin-
ning or continuing or ending, and which, therefore, are
extremely hard to distinguish from each other.
We can, to some degree, avoid this difficulty if we take
a single achievement of thought—the making of a new
generalization or invention, or the poetical expression of
a new idea —and ask how it was brought about. We can
then roughly dissect out a continuous process, with a
beginning and a middle and an end of its own. Helm-
holtz, for instance, the great German physicist, speaking
in 1891 at a banquet on his seventieth birthday, described
the way in which his most important new thoughts had
come to him. He said that after previous investigation
of the problem “ in all directions . . . happy ideas come
unexpectedly without effort, like an inspiration. .So far
as I am concerned, they have never come to me when my
mind was fatigued, or when I was at my working table....
They came particularly readily during the slow ascent of
wooded hills on a sunny day.” 1 Helmholtz here gives us
1 See Rignano, Psychology of Reasoning (1923), pp. 267-8. See
also Plato, Symposium (210): “He who has been instructed thus


three stages in the formation of a new thought. The
first in time I shall call Preparation, the stage during
which the problem was “ investigated ... in all direc-
tions ”; the second is the stage during which he was not
consciously thinking about the problem, which I shall call
Incubation; the third, consisting of the appearance of the
“ happy idea ” together with the psychological events
which immediately preceded and accompanied that
appearance, I shall call Illumination.
And I shall add a fourth stage, of Verification,* which
Helmholtz does not here mention, Henri Poincare, for
instance, in the book Science and Method , which I have
already quoted (p. 37), describes in vivid detail the succes-
sive stages of two of his great mathematical discoveries.
Both of them came to him after a period of Incubation
(due in one case to his military service as a reservist, and
in the other case to a journey), during which no conscious
mathematical thinking was done, but, as Poincare believed,
much unconscious mental exploration took place. In
both cases Incubation was preceded by a Preparation stage
of hard, conscious, systematic, and fruitless analysis of the
problem. In both cases the final idea came to him “ with
the same characteristics of conciseness, suddenness, and
immediate certainty ” (p. 54). Each was followed by a
period of Verification, in which both the validity of the
idea was tested, and the idea itself was reduced to exact
form. “It never happens,” says Poincare, in his descrip-
tion of the Verification stage, “ that unconscious work
supplies ready-made the result of a lengthy calculation in
which we have only to apply fixed rules. . . . All that we
can hope from these inspirations, which are the fruit of
unconscious work, is to obtain points of departure for
such calculations. As for the calculations themselves.
far in the things of love, and- has learned to see beautiful things in
due order and succession, when he comes to the end, will suddenly
perceive a beauty wonderful in its nature ”; and Remy de Goncourt:
“ My conceptions rise into the field of consciousness like a flash of
lightning or the flight of a bird ” (quoted by H. A. Bruce, Psychology
and Parenthood (1919), p. 89).


they must be made in the second period of conscious work
which follows the inspiration, and in which the results of
the inspiration are verified and the consequences deduced.
The rules of these calculations are strict and complicated;
they demand discipline, attention, will, and consequently,
consciousness ” (pp. 62, 63). In the daily stream of
thought these four different stages constantly overlap each
other as we explore different problems. An economist
reading a Blue Book, a physiologist watching an experi-
ment, or a business man going through his morning’s
letters, may at the same time be “ incubating ” on a
problem which he proposed to himself a few days ago, be
accumulating knowledge in “ preparation ” for a second
problem, and be “ verifying ” his conclusions on a third
problem. Even in exploring the same problem, the mind
may be unconsciously incubating on one aspect of it,
while it is consciously employed in preparing for or verify-
ing another aspect. And it must always be remembered
that much very important thinking, done for instance by a
poet exploring his own memories, or by a man trying to
see clearly his emotional relation to his country or his
party, resembles musical composition in that the stages
leading to success are not very easily fitted into a “ problem
and solution ” scheme. Yet, even when success in thought
means the creation of something felt to be beautiful and
true rather than the solution of a prescribed problem, the
four stages of Preparation, Incubation, Illumination, and
the Verification of the final result can generally be dis-
tinguished from each other.
If we accept this analysis we are in a position to ask
to what degree, and by what means, we can bring conscious
effort, and the habits which arise from conscious effort,
to bear upon each of the four stages. I shall not, in this
chapter, deal at any length with the stage of Preparation.
It includes the whole process of intellectual education.
Men have known for thousands of years that conscious
effort and its resulting habits can be used to improve the
thought-processes of young persons, and have formulated
for that purpose an elaborate art of education. The
“ educated ” man can, in consequence, “ put his mind


on ” to a chosen subject, and “ turn his mind off ” 1 in a
way which is impossible to an uneducated man. The
educated man has also acquired, by the effort of observa-
tion and memorizing, a body of remembered facts and
words which gives him a wider range in the final moment
of association, as well as a number of those habitual
tracks of association which constitute “ thought-systems ”
like “ French policy ” or “ scholastic philosophy ” or
“ biological evolution,” and which present themselves as
units in the process of thought.
The educated man has, again, learnt, and can, in the
Preparation stage, voluntarily or habitually follow out,
rules as to the order in which he shall direct his attention
to the successive elements in a problem. Hobbes referred
to this fact when in th q Leviathan he described “ regulated
thought,” and contrasted it with that “ wild ranging of the
mind ” which occurs when the thought process is un-
directed. Regulated thought is, he says, a “ seeking.”
“Sometimes,” for instance, “ a man seeks what he has
lost. . . . Sometimes a man knows a place determinate,
within the compass whereof he is to seek; and then his
thoughts run over all the parts thereof, in the same manner
as one would sweep a room to find a jewel; or as a spaniel
ranges the field, till he find a scent; or as a man should
run over the alphabet, to start a rhyme.” A spaniel with
the brain of an educated human being could not, by a
direct effort of will, scent a partridge in a distant part of
the field. But he could so “ quarter ” the field by a
preliminary voluntary arrangement that the less-voluntary
process of smelling would be given every chance of success-
fully taking place.
Included in these rules for the preliminary “ regula-
tion ” of our thought are the whole traditional art of
logic, the mathematical forms which are the logic of the
modem experimental sciences, and the methods of
systematic and continuous examination of present or
recorded phenomena which are the basis of astronomy,
sociology and the other “ observational ” sciences.
Closely connected with this voluntary use of logical
1 See Sir H. Taylor in my Our Social Heritage, Chap. 11.


methods is the voluntary choice of a “ problem-attitude ”
(Aufgabe). Our mind is not likely to give us a clear
answer to any particular problem unless we set it a clear
question, and we are more likely to notice the significance
of any new piece of evidence, or new association of ideas,
if we have formed a definite conception of a case to be
proved or disproved. A very successful thinker in natural
science told me that he owed much of his success to his
practice of following up, when he felt his mind confused,
the implications of tv/o propositions, both of which he
had hitherto accepted as true, until he had discovered that
one of them must be untrue. Huxley on that point once
quoted Bacon, “ Truth comes out of error much more
rapidly than it comes out of confusion,” and went on: “If
you go buzzing about between right and wrong, vibrating
and fluctuating, you come out nowhere; but if you are
absolutely and thoroughly and persistently wrong you
must some of these days have the extreme good fortune
of knocking your head against a fact, and that sets you all
right again.” 1 This is, of course, a production, by
conscious effort, of that “ dialogue form ” of alternate
suggestion and criticism which Varendonck describes as
occurring in the process of uncontrolled thought. 2 It is,
indeed, sometimes possible to observe such an automatic
“ dialogue ” at a point where a single effort of will would
turn it into a process of preparatory logical statement.
On July 18, 1917,1 passed on an omnibus the fashionable
church of St. Margaret’s, Westminster. Miss Ashley, the
richest heiress of the season, was being gorgeously married,
and the omnibus conductor said to a friend, “ Shocking
waste of money! But, there, it does create a lot of labour,
I admit that.” Perhaps I neglected my duty as a citizen in
that I did not say to him: “Now make one effort to realize
that inconsistency, and you will have prepared yourself to
become an economist.”
And though I have assumed, for the sake of clearness,
that the thinker is preparing himself for the solution of a
1 “ Science and Art and Education,” Huxley, Collected Essays,
Vol. 111, p. 174.
2 See above, p. 32.


single problem, he will often (particularly if he is working
on the very complex material of the social sciences) have
several kindred problems in his mind, on all of which the
voluntary work of preparation has been or is being done,
and for any of which, at the Illumination stage, a solution
may present itself.
The fourth stage, of Verification, closely resembles
the first stage, of Preparation. It is normally, as Poincare
points out, fully conscious, and men have worked out
much the same series of mathematical and logical rules for
controlling Verification by conscious effort as those which
are used in the control of Preparation.
There remain the second and third stages, Incubation
and Illumination. The Incubation stage covers two
different things, of which the first is the negative fact that
during Incubation we do not voluntarily or consciously
think on a particular problem, and the second is the
positive fact that a series of unconscious and involuntary
(or foreconscious and forevoluntary) mental events may
take place during that period. It is the first fact about
Incubation which I shall now discuss, leaving the second
fact —of subconscious thought during Incubation, and the
relation of such thought to Illumination —to be more fully
discussed in connection with the Illumination stage.
Voluntary abstention from conscious thought on any
particular problem may, itself, take two forms: the period
of abstention may be spent either in conscious mental
work on other problems, or in a relaxation from all
conscious mental work. The first kind of Incubation
economizes time, and is therefore often the better. We
can often get more result in the same time by beginning
several problems in succession, and voluntarily leaving
them unfinished while we turn to others, than by finishing
our work on each problem at one sitting. A well-known
academic psychologist, for instance, who was also a
preacher, told me that he found by experience that his
Sunday sermon was much better if he posed the problem
on Monday, than if he did so later in the week, although
he might give the same number of hours of conscious
work to it in each case. It seems to be a tradition among


practising barristers to put off any consideration of each
brief to the latest possible moment before they have to
deal with it, and to forget the whole matter as rapidly as
possible after dealing with it. This fact may help to
explain a certain want of depth which has often been
noticed in the typical lawyer-statesman, and which may
be due to his conscious thought not being sufficiently
extended and enriched by subconscious thought.
But, in the case of the more difficult forms of creative
thought, the making, for instance, of a scientific discovery,
or the writing of a poem or play or the formulation of an
important political decision, it is desirable not only that
there should be an interval free from conscious thought on
the particular problem concerned, but also that that
interval should be so spent that nothing should interfere
with the free working of the unconscious or partially
conscious processes of the mind. In those cases the
stage of Incubation should include a large amount of
actual mental relaxation. It would, indeed, be interesting
to examine, from that point of view, the biographies of a
couple of hundred original thinkers and writers. A. R.
Wallace, for instance, hit upon the theory of evolution by
natural selection in his berth during an attack of malarial
fever at sea; and Darwin was compelled by ill-health to
spend the greater part of his waking hours in physical
and mental relaxation. Sometimes a thinker has been
able to get a sufficiency of relaxation owing to a disposition
to idleness, against which he has vainly struggled. More
often, perhaps, what he has thought to be idleness is
really that urgent craving for intense and uninterrupted
day-dreaming which Anthony Trollope describes in his
account of his boyhood.
One effect of such a comparative biographical study
might be the formulation of a few rules as to. the relation
between original intellectual work and the virtue of in-
dustry. There are thousands of idle “ geniuses ” who
require to learn that, without a degree of industry in
Preparation and Verification, of which many of them have
no conception, no great intellectual work can be done,
and that the habit of procrastination may be even more


disastrous to a professional thinker than it is to a man of
business. And yet a thinker of good health and naturally
fertile mind may have to be told that mere industry is for
him, as it was for Trollope in his later years, the worst
temptation of the devil. Cardinal Manning was a man of
furious industry, and the suspension of his industry as an
Anglican archdeacon during his illness in 1847 was, for
good or evil, an important event in the history of English
religion. Some of those who, like myself, live in the
diocese of London, believe that we have reason to regret
an insufficiency of intellectual leadership from our present
bishop. The bishop himself indicated one of the causes
of our discontent in a letter addressed, in September, 1922,
to his clergy. “ I come back to an autumn of what, from
a human point of view, is unrelieved toil. October Ist to
Christmas Day is filled every day, except for the one day
off every week, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.” Then comes a
long list of administrative and pastoral engagements,
including “ three days interviewing 110 Harrow boys to be
confirmed,” “ a critical Bill to see through the House of
Lords,” and “ some sixty sermons and addresses already
arranged in the diocese, besides the daily letters and inter-
views.” “ All this,” he says, “ might justify the comment
of a kindly man of the world, * Why, Bishop, you live the
life of a dog! ’ But this is precisely, though on a larger
scale, the life of every one of you.” 1 It is clear that the
bishop considers that he and his clergy ought to be admired
for so spending their time; and that he conceives the life
of a turnspit dog to be the most likely to enable them to
be successful in the exercise of their office. One sometimes,
however, wonders what would be the result if our bishop
were kept for ten weeks in bed and in silence, by an illness
neither painful nor dangerous, nor inconsistent with full
mental efficiency.
Mental relaxation during the Incubation stage may of
course include, and sometimes requires, a certain amount
of physical exercise. I have already quoted Helmholtz’s
reference to “ the ascent of wooded hills on a sunny day.”
A. Carrel, the great New York physiologist, is said to
1 Church Times , Sept. 22, 1922.


receive all his really important thoughts while quietly
walking during the summer vacation in his native Brittany.
Jastrow says that “ thinkers have at all times resorted to
the restful inspiration of a walk in the woods or a stroll
over hill and dale.” 1 When I once discussed this fact
with an athletic Cambridge friend, he expressed -his
gratitude for any evidence which would prove that it was
the duty of all intellectual workers to spend their vacations
in Alpine climbing. Alpine climbing has undoubtedly
much to give both to health and to imagination, but it
would be an interesting quantitative problem whether
Goethe, while riding a mule over the Gemmi Pass, and
Wordsworth, while walking over the Simplon, were in a
more or in a less fruitful condition of Incubation than are a
modern Alpine Club party ascending, with hands and feet
and rope and ice-axe, the Finster-Aarhorn. In this,
however, as in many other respects, it may be that the
human organism gains more from the alternation of vari-
ous forms of activity than from a consistent devotion to
one form. In England the administrative methods of the
older universities during term-time may, I sometimes fear,
by destroying the possibility of Incubation, go far to
balance any intellectual advantages over the newer
universities which they may derive from their much longer
vacations. At Oxford and Cambridge, men on whose
powers of invention and stimulus the intellectual future
of the country may largely depend are made personally
responsible for innumerable worrying details of filling up
forms and sending in applications. Their subconscious
minds are set on the duty of striking like a clock at the
instant when Mr. Jones’s fee must be paid to the Registrar.
In the newer English universities the same duties are
rapidly and efficiently performed by a corps of young
ladies, with card-catalogues, typewriters, and diaries.
But perhaps the most dangerous substitute for bodily
and mental relaxation during the stage of Incubation is
neither violent exercise nor routine administration, but
the habit of industrious passive reading. Schopenhauer
wrote that “ to put away one’s own original thoughts in
1 J. Jastrow, The Subconscious (1906), p. 94.


order to take up a book is the sin against the Holy Ghost.” 1
During the century from 1760 to 1860, many of the best
brains in England were prevented from acting with full
efficiency by the way in which the Greek and Latin classics
were then read. It is true that Shelley’s imagination was
stung into activity by Plato and and that Keats
won a new vision of life from Chapman’s translation of
Homer; but even the ablest of those who then accepted
the educational ideals of Harrow and Eton and Oxford
and Cambridge did not approach the classical writers with
Shelley’s or Keats’s hunger in their souls. They plodded
through Horace and Sophocles and Virgil and Demos-
thenes with a mild conscious aesthetic feeling, and with a
stronger and less conscious feeling of social, intellectual
and moral superiority; anyone who was in the habit of
reading the classics with his feet on the fender must
certainly, they felt, be not only a gentleman and a scholar
but also a good man.
Carlyle once told Anthony Trollope that a man, when
travelling, “ should not read, but sit still and label his
thoughts.” 2 On the other hand, Macaulay, before he
went out to India in 1834 to be Legislative Member of
the Supreme Council, wrote to his sister: “ The provision
which I design for the voyage is Richardson, Voltaire’s
works, Gibbon, Sismondi’s History of the French , Davila,
Orlando in Italian, Don Quixote in Spanish, Homer in
Greek, Horace in Latin. I must also have some books
of jurisprudence, and some to initiate me in Persian and
Hindustanee ”; and, at the end of the four months’
voyage, he wrote: “ Except at meals, I hardly exchanged a
word with any human being. . . . During the whole
voyage I read with keen and increasing enjoyment. I
devoured Greek, Latin, Spanish, Italian, French, and
English; folios, quartos, octavos, and duodecimos.” 3
If he had followed Carlyle’s advice, he would have had a
1 Schopenhauer, “ Selbstdenken,” § 260, Parerga und Perali-
pomena (1851), Vol. 11, p. 412.
2 Trollope’s Autobiography (edition of 1921), p. 94.
3 G. O. Trevelyan, Life of Macaulay (edition of 1881), pp. 256 and
262.


better chance of thinking out a juristic and educational
policy for India which would not have been a mere copy
of an English model. One understands why Gladstone’s
magnificent enthusiasm and driving force were never guided
by sufficient elasticity or originality of mind, when one
reads, in Mrs. Gladstone’s Life , how she and her sister
married the two most splendid Etonians of their time—
Gladstone and his friend Lord Lyttelton—and spent a
honeymoon of four in Scotland. “ Any little waiting
time as at the railway station,” says her daughter, Mrs.
Drew, “ was now spent in reading—both husbands carry-
ing the inevitable little classics in their pockets.” During
the days when new knowledge, new forms of thought, new
methods in industry and war and politics, and the rise of
new nations were transforming Western civilization, “ Lord
Lyttelton was to be seen at cricket-matches in the playing
field at Eton, lying on his front, reading between the overs,
but never missing a ball.” 1
So far in this chapter I have inquired how far we can
voluntarily improve our methods of thought at those
stages—Preparation, Incubation (in its negative sense of
abstention from voluntary thought on a particular
problem), and Verification —over which our conscious
will has comparatively full control. I shall now discuss
the much more difficult question of the degree to which
our will can influence the less controllable stage which
I have called Illumination. Helmholtz and Poincare, in
the passages which I quoted above, both speak of the
appearance of a new idea as instantaneous and unexpected.
If we so define the Illumination stage as to restrict it to
this instantaneous “ flash,” it is obvious that we cannot
influence it by a direct effort of will; because we can bring
our will to bear only upon psychological events which
last for an appreciable time. On the other hand, the final
“ flash,” or “ click,” as I pointed out in Chapter 111, is the
culmination of a successful train of association, which may
have lasted for an appreciable time, and which has prob-
ably been preceded by a series of tentative and unsuccessful
trains. The series of unsuccessful trains of association
1 Catherine Gladstone, by Mary Drew, p. 32.


may last for periods varying from a few seconds to several
hours. H. Poincare, who describes the tentative and
unsuccessful trains as being, in his case, almost entirely
unconscious, believed that they occupied a considerable
proportion of the Incubation stage. “We might,” he
wrote, “ say that the conscious work [i.e., what I have
called the Preparation stage] proved more fruitful because
it was interrupted [by the Incubation stage], and that the
rest restored freshness to the mind. But it is more prob-
able* that the rest was occupied with unconscious work,
and that the result of this work was afterwards revealed.” 1
Different thinkers, and the same thinkers at different
times, must, of course, vary greatly as to the time occupied
by their unsuccessful trains of association; and the same
variation must exist in the duration of the final and
successful train of association. Sometimes the successful
train seems to consist of a single leap of association, or of
successive leaps which are so rapid as to be almost in-
stantaneous. Hobbes’s “ Roman penny ” train of associa-
tion occurred between two remarks in an ordinary con-
versation, and Hobbes, as I have said, ends his description
of it with the words, “ and all this in a moment of time,
for thought is quick ” {Leviathan, Chap. III). Hobbes
himself was probably an exceptionally rapid thinker, and
Aubrey may have been quoting Hobbes’s own phrase
when he says that Hobbes used to take out his note-book
“ as soon as a thought darted.” 2
But if our will is to control a psychological process it
is necessary that that process should not only last for an
appreciable time, but should also be, during that time,
sufficiently conscious for the thinker to be at least aware
that something is happening to him. On this point, the
1 H. Poincare, Science and Method (trans., pp. 54 and 55). On
the other hand, one of the ablest of modern mathematical thinkers
told me that he believed that his Incubation period was, as a rule,
spent in a state of actual mental repose for all or part of his brain,
which made the later explosion of intense and successful thought
possible. His belief may have been partly due to the fact that his
brain started fewer unsuccessful and more successful association-
trains than the brains of other men.
2 See my The Great Society (1914), p. 201.


evidence seems to show that both the successful trains of
association, which might have led to the “ flash ”of
success, and the final and successful train are normally
either unconscious, or take place (with “ risings ” and
“ fallings ” of consciousness as success seems to approach
or retire), in that periphery or “ fringe ” of consciousness
which surrounds our “ focal ” consciousness as the sun’s
“corona” surrounds the disk of full luminosity. 1 This
“ fringe-consciousness ” may last up to the “ flash ”
instant, may accompany it, and in some cases may con-
tinue beyond it. But, just as it is very difficult to see the
sun’s corona unless the disk is hidden by a total eclipse,
so it is very difficult to observe our “ fringe-consciousness ”
at the instant of full Illumination, or to remember the
preceding “ fringe ” after full Illumination has taken
place. As William James says, “ When the conclusion is
there, we have always forgotten most of the steps preceding
its attainment ” {Principles, Vol. I, p. 260).
It is obvious that both Helmholtz and Poincare had
either not noticed, or had forgotten any “ fringe-con-
scious ” psychological events which may have preceded
and have been connected with the “ sudden ” and “ un-
expected ” appearance of their new ideas. But other
thinkers have observed and afterwards remembered their
“ fringe-conscious ” experiences both before and even at
the moment of full Illumination. William James himself,
in that beautiful and touching, though sometimes confused,
introspective account of his own thinking which forms
Chapter IX of his Principles, says: “ Every definite image
in the mind is steeped and dyed in the free water that
flows round it. With it goes the sense of its relations,
near and remote, the dying echo of whence it came to
us, the dawning sense of whither it is to lead. The
significance, the value, of the image is all in this halo
or penumbra that surrounds and escorts it ” {Principles,
Vol. I, p. 255).
I find it convenient to use the term “ Intimation ” for
that moment in the Illumination stage when our fringe-
1 I take the word “ fringe ” from William James, Principles, Vol. I,
p. 258.


consciousness of an association-train is in the state of
rising consciousness which indicates that the fully con-
scious flash of success is coming. A high English civil
servant described his experience of Intimation to me by
saying that when he is working at a difficult problem, “ I
often know that the solution is coming, though I don’t
know what the solution will be,” and a very able university
student gave me a description of the same fact in his case
almost in the same words. Many thinkers, indeed, would
recognize the experience which Varendonck describes when
he says that on one occasion: “ When I became aware
that my mind was simmering over something, I had a dim
feeling which it is very difficult to describe; it was like a
vague impression of mental activity. But when the associ-
ation had risen to the surface, it expanded into an im-
pression of joy.” 1 His phrase “ expanded into an impres-
sion of joy ” clearly describes the rising of consciousness
as the flash approaches.
Most introspective observers speak, as I have done,
of Intimation as a “ feeling,” and the ambiguity of that
word creates its usual crop of difficulties. It is often hard
to discover in descriptions of Intimation whether the
observer is describing a bare awareness of mental activity
with no emotional colouring, or an awareness of mental
activity coloured by an emotion which may either have
originally helped to stimulate the train of thought, or may
have been stimulated by the train of thought during its
course. Mr. F. M. McMurry seems to refer to little more
than awareness when he says, in his useful text-book,
How to Study (p. 278), “ Many of the best thoughts,
probably most of them, do not come, like a flash, fully
into being but find their beginnings in dim feelings, faint
intuitions that need to be encouraged and coaxed before
they can be surely felt and defined.” Dewey, on the
other hand, is obviously describing awareness coloured
by emotion when he says that a problem may present itself
“ as a more or less vague feeling of the unexpected, of
something queer, strange, funny, or disconcerting.” 2
1 The Psychology of Day Dreams, p. 282.
2 How We Think (1910), p. 74.


Wundt was more ambiguous when he said (in perhaps the
earliest description of Intimation) that feeling is the
pioneer of knowledge, and that a novel thought may
come to consciousness first of all in the form of a feeling. 1
My own students have described the Intimation preceding
a new thought as being sometimes coloured by a slight
feeling of discomfort arising from a sense of separation
from one’s accustomed self. A student, for instance, told
me that his first recognition that he was reaching a new
political outlook came from a feeling, when, in answer to
a question, he was stating his habitual political opinions,
that he “ was listening to himself.” I can just remember
that a good many years ago, in a period preceding an
important change of my own political position, I had a
vague, almost physical, recurrent feeling as if my clothes
did not quite fit me. If this feeling of Intimation lasts for
an appreciable time, and is either sufficiently conscious,
or can by an effort of attention be made sufficiently con-
scious, it is obvious that our will can be brought directly
to bear on it. We can at least attempt to inhibit, or pro-
long, or divert, the brain-activity which Intimation shows
to be going on. And, if Intimation accompanies a rising
train of association which the brain accepts, so to speak,
as plausible, but would not, without the effort of attention,
automatically push to the flash of conscious success, we
can attempt to hold on to such a train on the chance that
it may succeed.
It is a more difficult and more important question
whether such an exercise of will is likely to improve our
thinking. Many people would argue that any attempt to
control the thought-process at this point will always do
more harm than good. A schoolboy sitting down to do
an algebra sum, a civil servant composing a minute,
Shakespeare re-writing a speech in an old play, will, they
would say, gain no more by interfering with the ideas
whose coming is vaguely indicated to them, before they
1 Wundt (quoted by E. B. Titchener, Experimental Psychology of
the Thought-Processes, p. 103). Wundt’s words are “In diesem
Sinn ist das Gefuhl der Pionier der Erkenntniss” ( Grmdziige der
Physiologischen Psychologic (1893), Vol. 11, p. 521).


come, than would a child by digging up a sprouting bean,
or a hungry man, in front of a good meal, by bringing his
will to bear on the intimations of activity in his stomach
or his salivary glands. A born runner, they would say,
achieves a much more successful co-ordination of those
physiological and psychological factors in his organism
which are concerned in running, by concentrating his will
on his purpose of catching the man in front of him, than
by troubling about the factors themselves. And a born
orator will use better gestures if, as he speaks, he is con-
scious of his audience than if he is conscious of his hands.
This objection might be fatal to the whole conception of
an art of thought if it did not neglect two facts: first, that
we are not all “ born ” runners or orators or thinkers, and
that a good deal of the necessary work of the world has to
be done by men who in such respects have to achieve skill
instead of receiving it at birth; and, secondly, that the
process of learning an art should, even in the case of those
who have the finest natural endowment for it, be more
conscious than its practice. Mr. Harry Vardon, when he
is acquiring a new grip, is wise to make himself more
conscious of the relation between his will and his wrists
than when he is addressing himself to his approach-shot
at the decisive hole of a championship. The violinist
with the most magnificent natural temperament has to
think of his fingers when he is acquiring a new way of
bowing; though on the concert-platform that acquire-
ment may sink beneath the level of full consciousness.
And, since the use of our upper brain for the discovery of
new truth depends on more recent and less perfect evolu-
tionary factors than does the use of our wrists for hitting
small objects with a stick, or for causing catgut to vibrate
in emotional patterns, conscious art may prove to be even
more important, as compared to spontaneous gift, in
thought than in golf or violin-playing. Here, again,
individual thinkers, and the same thinker at different times
and when engaged on different tasks, must differ greatly.
But my general conclusion is that there are few or none
among those whose work in life is thought who will not
gain by directing their attention from time to time to the
e (a.0.t.)


feeling of Intimation, and by bringing their will to bear
upon the cerebral processes which it indicates.
On this point the most valuable evidence that I know
of is given by the poets. Poets have, more constantly
than other intellectual workers, to “ make use ” (as
Varendonck says) “ of foreconscious processes for con-
scious ends.” 1 The production of a poem is a psycho-
logical experiment, tried and tested under severer con-
ditions than those of a laboratory, and the poet is generally
able to describe his “ fringe-consciousness ” during the
experiment with a more accurate and sensitive use of
language than is at the command of most laboratory
psychologists. Several of the younger living English
poets have given admirable descriptions of Intimation,
often using metaphors derived from our experience in
daily life of a feeling that there is something which we have
mislaid, and which we cannot find because we have for-
gotten what it is. Mr. John Drinkwater, for instance,
says:—
“ Haunting the lucidities of life
That are my daily beauty, moves a theme
Beating along my undiscovered mind.” 2
And Mr. James Stephens says:—
“ I would think until I found
Something I can never find,
Something lying on the ground
In the bottom of my mind.” 3
Mr. J. Middleton Murry, in his Problem of Style (1922,
p. 93), points out the psychological truth of Shakespeare’s
well-known description of the poet’s work: —
. . . “ as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothings
A local habitation and a name.”
“ Forms of things unknown ” and “ airy nothings ” are
vivid descriptions of the first appearance of Intimation;
1 The Psychology of Day Dreams, p. 152.
2 J. Drinkwater, Loyalties, p. 50 (“ The Wood ”)•
3 Georgian Poetry (1913-15), “ The Goat Path,” p. 189.


and “ local habitation and a name ” indicates the increasing
verbal clearness of thought as Intimation approaches the
final moment of Illumination; and may also indicate
that Shakespeare was a much more conscious artist than
many of his admirers believe.
Some English poets and students of poetry have given
descriptions not only of the feeling of Intimation, but also
of the elfort of will by which a poet may attempt to
influence the mental events indicated by Intimation, and
the dangers to the thought itself involved in such an
effort. In these descriptions they often use metaphors
drawn from a boy’s attempts to catch in his hand an
elusive fish, or a bird which will dart off if the effort is
made a fraction of a second too soon or too late. Mr.
Robert Graves allows me to quote in full a charming little
poem, called “ A Pinch of Salt,” in which he expands and
plays with his metaphor:—
“ When a dream is bom in you
With a sudden clamorous pain.
When you know the dream is tme
And lovely, with no flaw nor stain,
Oh then, be careful, or with sudden clutch
You’ll hurt the delicate thing you prize so much.
Dreams are like a bird that mocks,
Flirting the feathers of his tail
When you seize at the salt-box
Over the hedge you’ll see him sail.
Old birds are neither caught with salt nor chaff;
They watch you from the apple bough and laugh.
Poet, never chase the dream.
Laugh yourself and turn away.
Mask your hunger, let it seem
Small matter if he come or stay;
But when he nestles in your hand at last.
Close up your fingers tight and hold him fast.”
In this respect the most obvious danger against which
the thinker has to guard is that the association-train which
the feeling of Intimation shows to be going on may either
drift away of itself, as most of our dreams and day-dreams
1 Georgian Poetry (1916-17), p. 107.


do, into mere irrelevance and forgetfulness, or may be
interrupted by the intrusion of other trains of association.
All thinkers know the effect of the ringing of the telephone
bell, or the entrance of someone with a practical question
which must be answered, during a promising Intimation.
Aristophanes, when in the Clouds he makes Socrates
complain that his disciple by asking him a question had
caused a valuable thought to “ miscarry,” was probably
quoting some saying of Socrates himself, whose mother
was a midwife, and who was fond of that metaphor. If,
therefore, the feeling of Intimation presents itself while
one is reading, it is best to look up from one’s book and
so avoid the danger that the next printed sentence may
“ start a new hare.” Varendonck describes how, in one
of his day-dreams, “ The idea that manifested itself ran
thus: ‘ There is something going on in my foreconscious-
ness which must be in direct relation to my subject. I ought
to stop reading for a little while, and let it come to the
surface .’ ” 1 And, besides such negative precautions
against the interruption of an association-train, it is often
necessary to make a conscious positive effort of attention
to secure success. Vincent dTndy, speaking of musical
creation, said that he “ often has on waking, a fugitive
glimpse of a musical effect which —like the memory of a
dream —needs a strong immediate concentration of mind
to keep it from vanishing.” 2 But even the effort of atten-
tion to a train of association may have the effect of inter-
rupting or hindering it. Schiller is reported by Vischer
to have said that when he was fully conscious of creation
his imagination did not function “ with the same freedom
as it had done when nobody was looking over my
shoulder.” 3
To a modern thinker, however, the main danger of
spoiling a train of association occurs in the process of
attempting—perhaps before the train is complete—to
1 Day Dreams, p. 190. (The italics are Varendonck’s.)
2 See Paul Chabanei, Le Subconscient chez les Artistes, etc.
(quoted by H. A. Bruce, Psychology and parenthood, p. 90).
3 Quoted by H. A. Bruce, Psychology and Parenthood (1915),
p. 88.


put its conclusion into words. Mr. Henry Hazlitt, in
his Thinking as a Science (1916), p. 82, says: “ Thoughts
of certain kinds are so elusive that to attempt to articulate
them is to scare them away, as a fish is scared by the slight-
est ripple. When these thoughts are in embryo, even the
infinitesimal attention required for talking cannot be
spared.” And a writer on Montaigne in The Times
Literary Supplement for January 31, 1924, says: “ We all
indulge in the strange pleasant process called thinking,
but when it comes to saying, even to someone opposite,
what we think, then how little we are able to convey!
The phantom is through the mind and out of the window
before we can lay salt on its tail, or slowly sinking and
returning to the profound darkness which it has lit up
momentarily with a wandering light.” In the case of a
poet this danger is increased by the fact that for the poet
the finding of expressive words is an integral part of the
more or less automatic thought-process indicated by
Intimation. The little girl had the making of a poet in
her who, being told to be sure of her meaning before she
spoke, said: “ How can I know what I think till I see what
I say? ” A modern professed thinker must, however,
sooner or later in the process of thought, make the con-
scious effort of expression, with all its risks. A distant
ancestor of ours, some Aurignacian Shelley, living in the
warm spell between two ice ages, may have been content
to lie on the hillside, and allow the songs of the birds and
the loveliness of the clouds to mingle with his wonder as
to the nature of the universe in a delightful uninterrupted
stream of rising and falling reverie, enjoyed and forgotten
as it passed. But the modern thinker has generally
accepted, willingly or unwillingly, the task of making
permanent his thought for the use of others, as the only
justification of his position in a society few of whose
members have time or opportunity for anything but a life
of manual labour.
The interference of our will should, finally, vary—with
the variations of the subject-matter of our thought— not
only in respect of the point in time at which it should take
place, but also in respect to the element in a complex


thought-process with which we should interfere. A
novelist who had just finished a long novel, and who must
constantly have employed his conscious will while writing
it, to make sure of a good idea or phrase, or to improve a
sentence, or rearrange an incident, told me that he had
spoilt his book by interfering with the automatic develop-
ment of his main story and of its chief characters, in order
to follow out a preconceived plot. Dramatists and poets
constantly speak of the need of allowing their characters
to “ speak for themselves and a creative artist often
reaches maturity only when he has learnt so to use his
conscious craftsmanship in the expression of his thought
as not to silence the promptings of that imperfectly co-
ordinated whole which is called his personality. It is
indeed at the stage of Illumination, with its fringe of
Intimation, that the thinker should most constantly realize
that the rules of his art will be of little effect unless they are
applied with artistic delicacy of apprehension.


CHAPTER V
THOUGHT AND EMOTION
“ I thought . . . that an artist's instinct may sometimes
be worth the brains of a scientist, that both have the same
purpose, the same nature, and that perhaps in time, as their
methods become perfect, they are destined to become one
vast prodigious force which now it is difficult even to imagine."
{Tchehov to Grigorovitch, 1887, Tchehov’s Letters, trans-
lated by Constance Garnett, 1920, p. 76.)
I have already pointed out (p. 53) that the Intimation
of a coming thought may be “ coloured ” by an “ emo-
tion ” or “ feeling,” or, to use a more technical and more
inclusive term, an “ affect.” One of the most difficult
problems in the voluntary control of the thought-process
arises from this fact. A poet who desires to retain an
emotionally-coloured Intimation for a period long enough
to enable it to turn into a fully developed and verbally
expressed thought, will find that it is extraordinarily hard
to do so. If he makes a direct effort to retain his emotion
the emotion may flit away. As Blake says:—
“ He who bends to himself a Joy
Doth the winged life destroy.”
On this point the laboratory psychologists have carried
out certain introspective experiments whose results may
help us. They have compared the influence of voluntary
attention upon a sensation with its influence upon an
affect; and they have found that under laboratory condi-
tions it is easier to retain an affect indirectly by con-
centrating attention on the sensation which may have
stimulated it than by attending directly to the affect itself.
E. B. Titchener {Feeling and Attention (1908), p. 69) says
that “ affections lack what all sensations possess, the
attribute of clearness. Attention to a sensation means
always that the sensation becomes clear; attention to an


affection is impossible. If it is attempted, the pleasantness
or unpleasantness eludes us and disappears,” and quotes
Kiilpe’s statements: “Itis a familiar fact that contempla-
tion of the feelings, the devotion of special attention to
them, lessens their intensity, and prevents their natural
expression,” and “ While pleasure and pain are brought
far more vividly to consciousness by the concentration
of attention upon their concomitant sensations, they
disappear entirely when we succeed (and we can succeed
only for a moment) in making the feeling as such the
object of attentive observation ” {ibid., pp. 70 and 71).
Kiilpe and Titchener are both thinking mainly of the
particular kinds of “ affect ” which are called pleasure and
pain, or pleasantness and unpleasantness; but what they
say is to a large extent true of all those other affective
types of consciousness, which are so easy to distinguish
from each other in a text-book, and so difficult to dis-
tinguish while watching one’s own mind.
A new thought may not only be preceded or accom-
panied by an affect, but may also be accompanied by, or
may consist of, a visual or audile “ image.” Instances
may then occur where the affect is clearer and more lasting
than the “ image ” associated with it. This may happen
when the association between the two has taken place in
actual sleep—as when we awake from a dream with a
feeling of terror, but having forgotten what frightened us.
Or the image may be a picture that has only incompletely
and with difficulty been made visible to the mind by a
severe effort of concentration, but which is accompanied
by an unusually intense and vivid emotion. The emotional
effect of Dante’s poetry upon his readers is largely due to
the amazing clearness of his power of sensory imagination ;
but even Dante found it easier to retain the passion of the
final Beatific Vision in Paradise than the Vision itself. In
the last canto of the Commedia he writes: “Asis he who
dreaming sees, and when the dream is gone the passion
stamped remains, and nought else comes to the mind
again; even such am I, for almost wholly fails me my
vision, yet does the sweetness that was born of it still
drip within my heart. So does the snow unstamp itself


to the sun, so to the wind on the light leaves was lost the
Sybil’s wisdom.” 1 The general testimony, 'however, of
poets and imaginative thinkers is that the retention by the
thinker of his emotion and its effective communication to
others is most likely to take place when it is associated
with a vivid and easily retained image—when, that is to
say, the psychological events follow the primitive cycle of
sensation, emotion, thought. 2 Milton, in his famous
description of poetry as “ simple, sensuous and passion-
ate,” puts the simple clearness of the associated sensory
image before the passion. Tchehov wrote to Gorky:
“You are an artist . . . you feel superbly. You are
plastic; that is, when you describe a thing you see and
touch it with your hands. That is real writing.” 3
For ten years, from the age of nine to nineteen, I spent
a quite considerable number of hours in each week in the
composition of Latin and Greek verses. For four of
those years I was in the Sixth Form of Shrewsbury School,
which then had something like a monopoly of the Cam-
bridge University prizes in classical versification. We
were told that if we were to succeed in gaining these prizes,
or the college classical scholarships, we must use in our
verses particular instead of general terms. We must say
“ Tuscan ” or “ Adriatic ” Sea instead of “ sea,” “ ilex ”
instead of “ tree,” and “ nightingale ” or “ dove ” instead
of “ bird.” We did so, choosing sometimes, when our
memory failed us, some word in the “ Gradus ” containing
the right number of short and long syllables. Why we
were to do so, neither we nor our Headmaster (who had
won more verse-prizes with, it seemed to me, less poetic
sensibility than anyone else in the long history of Cam-
bridge scholarship) had the least idea. Because Catullus
in the Troad could shut his eyes and feel his heart stir as
he saw again the view from his villa at Sirmio, because
Horace was best inspired with the snows of Soracte before
him, and Virgil when he remembered the kindly smoke-
pillars of the Mantuan farms, therefore we were to write
1 Paradiso, Canto XXXIII, 55-67.
2 See above, pp. 6 and 13.
3 Quoted by J. Middleton Murry, The Problem of Style, p. 14.


down syllables indicating places on the map which we
have never seen, and the names of trees and flowers which
we would not have recognized at Kew Gardens.
It is this emotional factor which constitutes a large
part of the difficulty in choosing, when choice is possible,
the language we should use in thought. One language, or
nuance of language, may enable our problems to be more
exactly stated, and our Verification to be more successful;
but another may possess for us emotional associations
which are more likely to lead to new and vivid thoughts.
When I was giving, some months ago, a short course in
London University based on the material of this book, a
very intelligent American graduate student reproached
me for attempting to state psychological problems in
“ vernacular ” language. I could only answer that the
enormous technical vocabulary used in many American
psychological laboratories may (providing one recognizes
that the vocabulary of one laboratory often differs from
that of another) lead to greater exactness of thought; but
that in this particular case, where my purpose was the
exploring of a rather new problem, I believed that for me
that advantage was less than the advantage of the more
vernacular language, with its greater range of emotional,
and therefore of intellectual, associations. For in the
“ telephone-exchange ” of our brain, just as an idea may
call up an emotion, so an emotion may call up an idea.
Besides the problem of the relation between “ vernacu-
lar ” and technical vocabularies, thinkers and writers
have sometimes to choose between a “ literary ” language
which has acquired exact meaning and wide intellectual
associations, but which is tending to lose its emotional
associations, and a less exact unliterary language with
vivid emotional associations. Those countries are, indeed,
extraordinarily fortunate where, as in Russia and Norway,
literary and popular speech keep close together. Some-
times the two forms of speech end by becoming two
languages. Dante had to choose between the scholastic
thought of his Latin De Monarchia and the richer thought
of his Italian Commedia. Petrarch never realized that his
Latin epic Africa , on which, rather than his Canzoniere , he


rested his own claim to immortality, illustrated every
possible bad effect of language upon thought.
A more difficult case is presented when a people with
a larger literature has conquered but not absorbed a
people with a smaller literature in its own vernacular,
especially if that vernacular has two forms, an older literary
and a newer popular form. At this moment, in Ireland,
Czecho-Slovakia, and other parts of Europe, peoples
whose technical and even literary language has for long
been that of their conquerors, are deciding whether they
should continue to use that language, with its advantages
for exact thought and wide intercommunication, or
should develop a more or less submerged vernacular. 1
Each case must be decided on its merits, and the only point
on which I myself feel sure is that when an old language
is no longer in any true sense a vernacular, but has become
a mere field for school-culture and literary study, like
Sanscrit in India, and Gaelic in Brittany and in most parts
of Ireland, the balance of advantage is against its revival
for the general purposes of thought and communication.
Not only do such revivals add new obstacles to intellectual
intercourse between nations and races and offer new
temptations to the oppression of minorities, but the
obvious defects of such a revived language in fullness and
exactness are not compensated for by its sometimes forced
emotional associations. Perhaps, if ever the hatreds of
Versailles die away, the League of Nations may find itself
discussing seriously whether a deliberately invented inter-
national language, with its obvious advantages in exact-
ness and universal intelligibility, and its obvious dis-
advantages in emotional associations, may be worth the
trouble involved in inducing the schools of the civilized
world to teach it, in addition to the local vernaculars, to
students likely to be engaged in commerce, scientific study,
and the interpretation of legal and diplomatic documents.
If it were decided to adopt such a language, new poems
might after a generation be written in it, and after a century
or two it might acquire such a wide emotional association
as to be suitable for general use.
1 Written in 1926.


In considering the emotional-intellectual influence of
language, it has been convenient to think of all kinds of
emotion as constituting together a single species. But
there are certain emotions whose influence on thought
can be understood only if we examine them separately.
Take, for instance, that curious psychological fact (existing,
apparently, only in mankind) called the sense of Humour,
or of the Ridiculous. It begins with the uproarious
laughter of a little child who has just discovered that he
can do a new trick or can recognize a new likeness between
words and things. At this point it is exactly described
by Hobbes’s definition of laughter as “ sudden glory ”
{Leviathan, Chap. VI). It always retains this quality
of representing a sudden burst into a new train of associa-
tion ; but in later life the feeling of release which accom-
panies the sense of Humour is closely connected with the
fact that our thought has burst through some “ censor-
ship,” some barrier, often unknown to ourselves, of
custom, or morals, or self-esteem. Galileo found that his
sense of Humour was invaluable in clearing away for
himself and his readers the mental and emotional obstacles
which mediaeval tradition had built up across that path of
logical inference which led to the Copernican astronomy.
Now that the Inquisition has passed, the need of a
trained and courageous sense of Humour in the students
of natural science is not so obvious as it was in the seven-
teenth century; but Humour is still a powerful instrument
for clearing out what Carlyle called “ the dead pedantries,
unveracities, indolent somnolent impotences, and accumu-
lated dung-mountains ” 1 of scientific as well as social,
political, and religious thought. A watchful awareness,
indeed, of all Intimation that is coloured by Humour is
an invaluable acquirement for any thinker who, whether
as writer or organizer or teacher, has to deal with mankind,
and with all the instincts and habits which arise from the
fact that mankind are a semi-gregarious species prone to
follow loyalties and solemnities even when the loyalties '
and solemnities have lost their original usefulness. I
1 Latter-day Pamphlets (edition of 1885), Downing Street,
p. 113.


have before me a volume of caricatures from the Munich
journal Simplidssimus during the years 1903 to 1914; and
it is astonishing to see with what precise accuracy the
young humorists were able to observe and communicate
facts about the personalities and policies of the Kaiser
and his son which every German would now recognize,
but which were then hidden from almost every responsible
German statesman. Mr. William Nicholson, in the New
Review of June, 1897, guided by a delicate and kindly
sense of Humour, published that charming woodcut of
Queen Victoria walking with her Scotch terrier, which
began the process, since carried on by Mr. Lytton Strachey,
of freeing us from the enormous unrealities of the Jubilees
of 1887 and 1897. One sometimes feels that if mankind
were deprived of the sense of Humour (which is not the
same thing as the habit of repeating funny stories) and
were reduced in that respect to the condition of the late
Mr. W. J. Bryan, all progress in social, political, or religious
thought might become impossible in America.
We generally assume that Humour requires only an
inborn faculty combined with the encouragement of a
free-speaking and free-thinking group of friends. But
every humorist, if he is to develop, and still more if he is
to retain after middle life his sense of Humour, requires a
long succession of little acts of personal daring. He has
not only to recognize in himself what W. K. Clifford called
“ the still small voice that whispers fiddlesticks,” but also
to insist on letting it speak out in spite of the forces within
him that would silence it. He has to acquire the habit
of treating every Intimation which comes to him with,
the colour of Humour as a challenge to his courage.
Think, for instance, of the quiet heroism which enabled
Mr. Logan Pearsall Smith to bring into full consciousness
the following little mental experience, which most of us
would have instantly huddled away from the fringe of
subconsciousness into complete forgetfulness. He calls
it “ The Goat,” and says: “In the midst of my anecdote a
sudden misgiving chilled me —had I told them about this
Goat before ? And then, as I talked, there gaped on me—
abyss opening beneath abyss—a darker speculation:


when goats are mentioned do I automatically and always
tell this story about the Goat at Portsmouth ? ” 1
Mr. Winston Churchill, in his World Crisis —1915
(1923) p. 21, has a sentence which admirably indicates
the importance in war of the courageous following of
Humour: “ Nearly all the battles which are regarded as
masterpieces of the military art, from which have been
derived the foundation of states and the fame of com-
manders, have been battles of manoeuvre, in which very
often the enemy has found himself defeated by some
novel expedient or device, some queer, swift, unexpected
thrust or strategem.” The whole peace-training of the
typical British officer is apt to prevent him from attempting
to overcome in time of war his subconscious shrinking
from any of those “ queer ” things (like the tanks) which
are felt as somehow part of the “ bad form ” that may in
the end destroy all the decent solemnities of military life.
But the sense of Humour, like every other element in
thought, requires for its effective use not the following of
a mechanically uniform rule but the delicate manipulation
of a varied art. Perhaps no English writer has so fine a
natural gift of Humour as Mr. G. K. Chesterton, and his
readers are often thankful to him for breaking his way by
that gift towards new truth. 2 Yet his books sometimes
force one to realize that Humour without the patient
effort of systematic exploration may be as misleading as
patient effort without Humour.
And Humour is not the only emotion which we should
learn to recognize habitually as a hint of truth, to be used
skilfully rather than followed blindly. I have already
(p. 37) referred to the part played in Henri Poincare’s
mathematical thinking by the aesthetic emotion of beauty.
When one reads A Passage to India by Mr. E. M. Forster
(1924) who has developed his natural sensitiveness by
habitually watching all the emotionally coloured fringes
of his consciousness, one realizes that the history of British
administration in India might have been different if a
larger proportion of our Anglo-Indjan officials and soldiers
had submitted themselves to the same form of self-training.
1 Trivia (1918), p. 90. 2 Written in 1926.


In the tense atmosphere which is so finely indicated by his
description of the garden-party given by the English Club
at Chandrapore to their native fellow-subjects, one seems
to detect the terrific effort of habitual suppression, by
which alone the hosts in that uncomfortable ceremony
are enabled to drive beneath the level of their full con-
sciousness a score of “ still small voices,” that would
whisper, if they were allowed to do so, of the shortness of
human life, the evanescence of empires, and the intellectual
possibilities of unbuttoned sympathy.
Indeed, now that psychologists are abandoning the
simplified conceptions of reason as “ the slave of passion,”
or instinct as a force which mechanically drives the other-
wise inert thinking brain, it is becoming more and more
necessary that we should reconsider in detail the relation,
in the processes of intellectual inference and practical
decision, of emotion and associative thought. An
emotionally coloured Intimation may be the first indica-
tion, not merely that we attach this or that “ value ” to
an intellectual conclusion formed without the help of
emotion, but that our intellectual and emotional being
has, by a process of which we are only partially conscious,
come as a whole to that conclusion, and that the final
stage of conscious Verification may now begin. When I
once asked the best administrator whom I knew how he
formed his decisions, he laughed, and, with the air of
letting out for the first time a guilty secret, said: “ Oh, I
always decide by feeling. So-and-so always decides by
calculation, and that is no good.” When, again, I asked
an American judge, who is widely admired both for his
skill and for his impartiality, how he and his fellows
formed their conclusions, he also laughed, and said that
he should be stoned in the street if it were known that,
after listening with full consciousness to all the evidence,
and following as carefully as he could all the arguments,
he waited until he “ felt ” one way or the other. Such a
“ feeling ” will not, however, give rise to an effective new
thought unless it is something deeper than an intellectual
opinion that one ought to feel. I remember that a small
nephew of mine said of the rather ill-tempered family


dog: “Of course I love Pilot, but I don’t like him.” If
my nephew had become a poet, or a naturalist, or an
Under-Secretary of State, that feeling which he called
“ liking ” might have helped to form his style or drive
his thoughts to their conclusion; while the “ love ” which
he merely knew that he ought to feel might have been a
functionless ornament of his mind.
There is one emotionally-coloured Intimation which
is so important in poetry that sensitiveness to it almost
constitutes the special poetic gift. It is a feeling of the
universal significance of some clearly-realized sensory
image. Professor F. C. Presscott, the author of The
Poetic Mind (1922), describes this feeling in the case of a
poetically-minded man who is not a poet. He says that
we “ suddenly find the scene before us, fields, trees, and
sky, clothed in a strange appearance, coloured by a strange
light, taking us back to childhood or forward to another
world, we hardly know which ” (p. 13). Baudelaire says:
“ In certain states of the soul the profound significance of
life is revealed completely in the spectacle, however
commonplace, that is before one’s eyes; it becomes the
symbol of this significance.” 1 The force and depth of
this Intimation may be due to its close relation to one of
the most fundamental processes of life. A living organism
—from the simplest protozoon to the most complex
mammal—can exist in the world only on condition that it
recognizes likenesses in its environment, the likeness of
one scrap of food to another, or of one enemy to another
of the same or a similar species. 2 That recognition must
have preceded by long ages the dominance and even the
first appearance either of the upper brain or of that con-
tinuous consciousness which the upper brain made possible.
The Intimation, therefore, that we are about to make a
new vast recognition of likeness—that we are about, as
Plato would say, to behold the eternal pattern of which
the confused likenesses between individual phenomena
are clumsy copies—moves our whole being. Aristotle
1 Quoted by J. Middleton Murry, The Problem of Style, pp. 27
and 28.
2 See my Human Nature in Politics, Chap. 11.


goes far to explain the special emotion which much of the
finest poetry excites, when he says that “ Metaphor is the
special mark of genius, for the power of making a good
metaphor is the power of recognizing likeness.” 1
This Intimation of significance may either appear as
a feeling of the relation of some material object before us
to the whole universe, Blake’s power
“To see a world in a grain of sand.
And a heaven in a wild flower;
Hold infinity in the palm of your hand
And eternity in an hour.”
Or it may be a sudden sense that some commonplace fact
or saying has a new and intenser individual meaning, as
when Hamlet cries:
“ My tables—meet it is I set it down.
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least Fm sure it may be so in Denmark.”
But strong and deep as this feeling is, our consciousness
of it is often curiously evanescent. Hamlet may find
himself staring at the scribbled words on his tables, while
the emotion which accompanied the writing of them a
moment ago has already sunk beneath consciousness.
William James (who might have been a great poet), in that
chapter of his Principles which I have already quoted,
speaks of our awareness of “ a passage, a relation, a
transition ”in our thought. “ If,” he says, “ our purpose
is nimble enough, and we do arrest it, it ceases forthwith
to be itself. As a snowflake crystal caught in the warm
hand is no longer a crystal but a drop, so, instead of
catching the feeling of relation moving to its term, we find
that we have caught some substantive thing, usually the
last word we were pronouncing, statically taken, and with
its function, tendency and particular meaning in the
sentence quite evaporated.” 2
Sometimes a poet strives to retain this special Intima-
tion of significance long enough to allow it to develop
1 Aristotle, Poetics (Butcher’s translation, p. 87).
2 W. James, Principles of Psychology, Vol. I, p. 244.
F (A.0.T.)


into the formation and expression of a new thought, and
does so by concentrating his attention upon the “ sensuous”
image that evokes it. Mr. Drinkwater, for instance, in
his “ Petition ” prays:
. . that I may see the spurge upon the wall
And hear the nesting birds give call for call
Keeping my wonder new.” 1
Poets, indeed, spend their lives in capturing for them-
selves and making permanent for their readers emotionally
coloured Intimations which most of us no more notice
than we notice the shifting clouds in the strip of sky
above our street. Sometimes the poet so describes the
Intimation itself as to communicate the emotional colour
of it to his hearers or readers, and leaves the emerging
thought to develop in their minds. Shakespeare, in the
great tragedies of his later period, showed an amazing
power of doing this. If we read or hear Macbeth’s
speech, “ To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow — ”
on being told of his wife’s death, or Hamlet’s “ How
weary, stale, flat and unprofitable seem to me all the uses
of this world,” an emotion stimulating a new thought is
started in ourselves, and is deepened and maintained both
by the music of Shakespeare’s words, and by the intense
reality of his images—the “ poor player,” the “ brief
candle,” the “ tale told by an idiot.”
If, however, we substitute a conscious and mechanical
theory of symbolism for this spontaneous experience of
Intimation, the true feeling of significance, and its power
to stimulate creative thought, at once depart. I remember
a conversation with Dr. Tsai, the head of the Government
University in Pekin, and a leading authority on Chinese
aesthetics. An English friend and I had been asking him
whether a new great period of Chinese art might be
approaching, and in particular whether a revival of the
Buddhist faith might not lend a new significance to
Chinese pictures of mountains and pilgrims. “ No,” he
answered, if I may interpret his interpreter, “ the whole
tradition of Chinese art depends on the fact that the
1 J. Drinkwater, 01 ton Pools (1912), p. 42.


significance of the thing seen arises from the intensity of
its individual reality. If the artist consciously draws his
mountain as a Buddhist heaven, it will lose its essential
mountaineity; and the old man who is painted as a
Buddhist saint will lose the intensity, and therefore the
significance, of his ‘ old-mannedness.’ ”
In the history of literary criticism all forms of Intimation
and Illumination are usually indicated by the single vague
word Imagination; and during the hundred years from
the publication of Edward Young’s Conjectures on
Original Composition in 1759, to that of Darwin’s Origin
of Species in 1859, Imagination was sharply contrasted
with Reasoning or Reason. If a modern psychologist
compares Imagination with Reason, he will do so in
order to indicate different stages and purposes in associa-
tive thought, emphasizing, by the word Imagination, the
stage of Illumination, and that awareness of the less-
conscious fringe of thought which I have called Intimation,
combines with the purpose of artistic creation; and by the
word Reason emphasizing the stages which I have called
Preparation and Verification, and the purpose of arriving
at conclusions on which'it is safe to act. But in the con-
fused controversy, a century ago, in Germany, England,
and France, between the “ classicists ” and the Romanti-
cists, 1 the words Imagination and Reason were used to
mean an opposition between two mutually exclusive pro-
cesses. Imagination was, to the writers of that time, an
outburst of the uncontrollable forces which in some
mysterious way produced beauty and significance in
poetry. Reason was a fully conscious and fully voluntary
process either of discovering the logical implications of
accepted truth, or of so arranging the results of observation
as to lead directly and inevitably to new truth. This
opposition is admirably illustrated by a comparison of
Shelley’s letters in 1811 with his essay on The Defence
of Poetry , written in 1821. We should now say that
Shelley in those ten years made an enormous advance in
1 See the admirable Tract XVII (by Mr. Logan Pearsall Smith) of
the Society for Pure English (Clarendon Press, 1924) on the history
of the four words, Romantic, Originality, Creative, Genius.


his practice of the art of thought by recognizing and
emphasizing Intimation and Illumination as a necessary
stage in the process of thought; Shelley himself described
the change as the abandonment of Reason and the
adoption of Imagination.
Shelley was expelled from Oxford on March 25, 1811,
on the delation of Edward Coplestone (then Oxford Pro-
fessor of Poetry, 1 and later Bishop of Llandalf), for
publishing anonymously certain objections, which no one
at Oxford had answered for him, to the current apologetics
of orthodox Christianity. It had, therefore, fallen to him
as a boy of eighteen to be a standard-bearer and martyr
of Reason. He had studied during his few months at
Oxford the grim syllogisms of Godwin’s Political Justice.
On June 11, 1811, he wrote to Elizabeth Kitchener, the
first new friend he had made since his expulsion: “I am
now an undivided votary of reason.” 2 He believed,
however, that in following reason he was giving up for
ever both imagination and joy. Towards the end of his
letter to Miss Kitchener he wrote: “ I recommend reason.
Why? Is it because, since I have devoted myself un-
reservedly to its influencing I have never felt happiness ?
I have rejected all fancy, all imagination; I find that all
pleasure resulting to self is thereby annihilated ” (Camp-
bell, p. 94).
Part of his mental suffering during that spring was
due to the fact that when he looked into his mind the
clear-cut distinctions of Godwin’s logic were constantly
obscured by vague emotional Intimations. He wrote to
Miss Kitchener (June 20, 1811): “We find ourselves
reasoning upon the mystery which involves our being
... we see virtue and vice, we see light and darkness,
each is separate, distinct; the line which divides them is
glaringly perceptible; yet how racking it is to the soul,
when inquiring into its own operations, to find that
perfect virtue is very far from being attainable, to find
1 See Shelley’s letter to Godwin, Jan. 10,1812. (Ingpen, Letters
ofP. B. Shelley, 1915, Vol. I, p. 220).
2 See Mrs. Olwen Campbell’s admirable psychological study
Shelley and the Unromantics (1924), p. 122.


reason tainted by feeling, to see the mind when analysed
exhibit a picture of irreconcilable inconsistencies, even
when perhaps a moment before, it imagined that it had
grasped the fleeting Phantom of virtue.” 1 In July he
went for a holiday to Rhayader in South Wales, and wrote
to Miss Hitchener: “ Nature is here marked with the
most impressive character of loveliness and grandeur;
once I was tremendously alive to tones and scenes . . . the
habit of analysing feelings I fear does not agree with this.
It [i.e. feeling] is spontaneous, and, when it becomes
subject to consideration, ceases to exist. . . . But you
do right to indulge feeling where it does not militate with
reason. I wish I could too.” 2
In Shelley’s letters we can also see some of the steps
that led to the change from what he called Reason to
what he called Imagination. In the winter of 1814-15 he
began to produce real poetry. On December 11, 1817, he
wrote to Godwin: “lam formed, if for anything not in
common with the herd of mankind, to apprehend minute
and remote distinctions of feeling, whether relative to
external nature or the living beings which surround us, and
to communicate the conceptions which result from con-
sidering either the moral or the material universe as a
whole.” 3 In 1812 he went to Italy, where, in addition
to writing poetry of rapidly increasing power and beauty,
he translated the Symposium of Plato and studied the
Phcedrus. In August, 1818, he wrote to Peacock, under
the influence of Plato’s theory of poetry as the supreme
form of intellectual creation, and quotes Tasso: “ There
is no one in the world who deserves the name of Creator
but God and the Poet.” (Ingpen, Vol. 11, p. 615.)
In 1821 he wrote his Defence of Poetry , which ought to
be read and re-read by every student of the psychology
of thought. He still thinks of Imagination (or Poetry),
with its quality of involuntary inspiration, as something
to be distinguished from the completely voluntary but
1 Ingpen, Letters of P. B. Shelley (1915), Vol. I, p. 88, and Camp-
bell, loc. cit., p. 95.
2 Ingpen, be. cit., Vol. I, p. 122.
3 Ingpen, loc. cit., Vol. 11, p. 574.


mechanical process of Reasoning. “ Poetry is not like
reasoning, a power to be exerted according to the deter-
mination of the will. A man cannot say ‘ I will compose
poetry.’ The greatest poet even cannot say it; for the
mind in creation is as a fading coal, which some invisible
influence, like an inconstant wind, awakens to transitory
brightness; this power arises from within, like the colour
of a flower which fades and changes as it is developed, and
the conscious portions of our natures are unprophetic
either of its approach or its departure.” ( Shelley's Works ,
H. B. Forman, 1880, Vol. 111, p. 137.) Reason is now to
him a mechanical process of calculation, which if it co-
operates with Imagination must do so as a subordinate
instrument. “ Reason,” he writes in the opening of his
essay, ? is the enumeration of quantities already known;
imagination is the perception of the value of those quanti-
ties, both separately and as a whole. Reason respects the
differences, and imagination the similitudes of things.
Reason is to imagination as the instrument to the agent,
as the body to the spirit, as the shadow to the substance ”
C lbid ., p. 100).
As the essay proceeds, he comes constantly nearer to
Plato’s claim that Poetry includes in itself all the necessary
elements of thought, that Poetry, in the large sense in
which he uses the word, is a harmony of those elements,
and that if rightly used it offers to mankind guidance
both for individual and for social life. 1 “ Poetry,” he
says, “ compels us to feel that which we perceive, and to
imagine that which we know. It creates anew the universe,
after it has been annihilated in our minds by the recurrence
1 In Hellas, written a few months later than the Defence of
Poetry, he definitely speaks of imagination and reason as well as
will ,and passion as elements in the whole process of thought:
“ Thought
Alone, and its quick elements, Will, Passion,
Reason, Imagination, cannot die;
They are, what that which they regard appears.
The stuff whence mutability can weave
All that it has dominion o’er, worlds, worms,
Empires and superstitions.”
{Hellas, 11. 795-801.)


of impressions blasted by reiteration ” (p. 140). “It is
at once the centre and circumference of knowledge ; it is
that which comprehends all science, and that to which all
science must be referred ” (p. 136).
Shelley wrote his Defence of Poetry at a moment in the
history of the world curiously like the present. The
great Napoleonic War had been concluded, five years
before, by a victorious Peace. There had been during
the preceding generation an immense increase of human
knowledge and particularly of the sciences applicable to
the production of wealth. But victory in war and the
possession of new power over nature had been accom-
panied by an actual diminution of the happiness and worth
of human life. The cause of this is, says Shelley, that
statesmen and manufacturers have not learnt from the
poets the art of recognizing and retaining the significance
of that which they see: “The cultivation of poetry is
never more to be desired than at periods when, from an
excess of the selfish and calculating principle, the accumu-
lation of the materials of external life exceed the quantity
of the power of assimilating them to the internal law of
human nature ” (p. 136). “ Whilst the mechanist abridges,
and the political economist combines labour, let them
beware that their speculations, for want of correspondence
with those first principles which belong to the imagination,
do not tend, as they have in modern England, to exasperate
at once the extremes of luxury and want. They have
exemplified the saying, ‘ To him that hath, more shall be
given, and from him that hath not, the little that he hath
shall be taken away.’ The rich have become richer, and
the poor have become poorer; and the vessel of the State
is driven between the Scylla and Charybdis of anarchy and
despotism ” (p, 132). “We want the creative faculty to
imagine that which we know; we want the generous
impulse to act that which we imagine; we want the poetry
of life ” (p. 135)., “We have more moral, political, and
historical wisdom than we know how to reduce into
practice; we have more scientific and economical know-
ledge than can be accommodated to the just distribution
of the product which it multiplies ” (p. 134).


As one reads the last pages of the Defence of Poetry one
begins to see light on that dark saying of Aristotle,
“ Poetry, therefore, is more philosophic and a higher thing
than history, for poetry tends to express the universal and
history the particular.” 1 Shelley himself ends his essay
with the words: “ Poets are the unacknowledged legislators
of the world ” (p. 144) 2 ; and the historians who know
most of the struggle which saved England from the worst
consequences of the Industrial Revolution know that that
struggle represented a victory of those who could imagine
its results in terms of human life over those who could
only calculate percentages of commercial profit and loss.
And, in our time, if Europe escapes the worst consequences
of the Congress of Versailles, that fact will be ascribed by
future historians not so much to the innumerable pro-
fessional calculators who accompanied each national
delegation, as to Mr. J. M. Keynes, who could “ imagine
what he knew,” and who in his Economic Consequences
of the Peace dared to quote Shelley.
1 Butcher’s translation of the Poetics, p. 35.
2 It is an indication of the sense in which Shelley uses the word
Poetry in his Defence of Poetry that this sentence forms part of a
passage taken almost verbatim from his Philosophical View of
Reform (written in 1820, but left unfinished, and not published till
1920), and that he had originally written; “ Poets and philosophers
are the unacknowledged legislators of the world ” (A Philosophical
View of Reform, edited by T. W. Rolleston, 1920, p. 30).


CHAPTER VI
THOUGHT AND HABIT
All the activities of a living organism produce, besides
their immediate effects on the organism and its environ-
ment, later and more permanent effects on the future
behaviour-pattern of the organism. Every one, for
instance, of our mental activities in the stages of Prepara-
tion, Incubation, Illumination, and Verification, not only
helps to produce an immediate output of successful
thought, but leaves our organism more able and more
inclined to repeat that activity in the future.
These later effects are called habits, and in discussing
possible improvements of the art of thought, while it is
sometimes more convenient to concentrate our attention
on the original psychological activity and its immediate
results, it is also sometimes convenient -to concentrate our
attention (as I shall do in this chapter), on the future
habit as the end to be attained, and on the activity itself
as a means of creating that habit.
I will begin with the simplest case —the formation, by
voluntarily arranging the hours of intellectual work, of a
habit of responding in the process of associative thought
to a time-stimulus. If, for instance, a man is starting to
write his first novel, it may seem very unimportant whether
he sits down to write at 9 a.m., or 6 a.m., or 8 p.m. But
if, day by day, he chooses 9 a.m., he will find that the
gradual stimulation of his thinking into full activity which
some writers call “ warming up ” will occur rather more
easily and more quickly at that hour than at any other
hour of the day; and in a few weeks he will find that
“ warming up ” will tend to occur almost automatically.
“ Warming up ” may fhen be preceded by an automatic
Intimation of its coming; and, if he breakfasts at 8 a.m.,
he may at 8.45 a.m. begin to wander about the house with
that vague and slightly idiotic expression on his face which
is so irritating to those members of his household on whom


the daily worries of housekeeping are just descending. In
this respect it is a real advantage to a professional brain-
worker to know, and to make part of his working con-
sciousness, something of what I may call the physiology,
as distinguished from the psychology, of thought. No one,
for instance, who is habitually aware of the process by
which the activity of the brain is “ warmed up ” will be
“ fussed,” or angry, or despairing, if on any particular
day that process is slower than usual. He will begin work
on such a day patiently and quietly, and may find that the
sense of vigour and reality in his thinking comes to him,
as sleep comes to a healthy and tranquil boy, unobserved.
In the same way, he will not be frightened at the first
appearance of mental fatigue, but will plod on till his
‘ second wind ’ appears, and will abandon his work only
when it has lasted for what experience tells him is the
right number of hours, or when he is sure that fatigue on
this particular day will not pass off.
Sometimes the time-habit is combined with a habit of
responding to a particular sensory stimulus. Charles
Dickens found that he started work best if he had certain
ornaments, arranged ill a certain order, before him on his
table. 1 Some men work better in the British Museum
Library than elsewhere. I myself find that my newest,
and therefore most easily forgotten, thoughts tend to
present themselves under the stimulus of the first spongeful
of water in my bath; but I have never had the courage to
search in the stationers’ shops for a waterproof writing-
tablet and pencil. A more complex habit results when
some daily repeated muscular action stimulates the
memory of the thought-train on which we were engaged
when we broke off work the day before. A friend of
mine, who is an exceptionally fertile thinker and writer,
tells me that he gets started most easily if he begins by
copying out the last few sentences of yesterday’s work.
Many intellectual workers regularly begin work by re-
reading the whole of what they wrote the day before.
Varendonck, for instance, says: “My first work in the
morning is to re-read what I wrote almost spontaneously
1 John Forster, Life of Dickens (edition of 1911), Vol. 11, p. 236.


the day before; I complete, correct, re-arrange, reserve
points for later consideration, etc., till the whole produces
a logical impression” {Day Dreams , p. 138). Re-reading
often reveals the fact that the brain has been subcon-
sciously exploring the material during the interval of
Incubation and sleep; and that that .fact has made the
processes of arrangement, combination, and expression
much easier than they were when the words were first
written down. Re-reading also often brings on an Intima-
tion indicating an uncompleted brain-activity and the
approach of a new thought; and we should form the habit
of making, when this Intimation appears, a short voluntary
extension of the interruption of mental effort which I
called Incubation. “ If,” says Yarendonck, “ the order
in which I want to present the different parts of my
argumentation does not come forward at once fore-
consciously, while I am reading them over, I leave my desk
for a moment to look after the fire, or to play a tune on the
piano or something of the sort. And provided I have
been all this time in a half-dreamy state, the order of
presentation is usually ready in my mind’s eye, without
any apparent effort ” {Day Dreams , p. 138).
In all this, however, we must be careful not to become
the slaves of our habits. In writing a long book it may be
best on five days out of six to begin work by picking up
and developing the thoughts of the day before. But on
the sixth day it may be better to begin by using our time-
habit to surprise, at the moment of “ warming up,” our
mental activity at a new and deeper level, and so to capture
some idea which mere industry and regularity might never
have brought to the surface. In administrative work a
daily break of this kind is very often desirable. The
administrative thinker has to deal in succession with
many problems widely separated from each other. A re-
reading of the last memorandum which he wrote yesterday
may actually prevent him from hitting on the problem
which most needs to be thought out to-day. And the
administrator is peculiarly liable to form slight emotional
complexes which may half-consciously “ head him off ”
from any path of thought diverging from office routine.


I have been told by a colleague of Sir Warren Fisher how
that great administrator used to begin his day’s work
during the most critical months of the War. He used, I
was told, to come into his room, and stand with his back
to the fireplace, without looking at the pile of official
“ jackets ” which lay, with green “ urgency ” slips sticking
out of them, on his desk. Before him he would have a
couple of the highest officials in his department. Then,
rousing himself and them to the full vitality of imagination,
he would say, “ Now, you fellows, what is the most
essential thing for us to get done to-day? ” and only when
that was settled and arranged for would he go to his desk.
It might be extremely valuable if, before the evidence is
lost, some of those who know would make a careful
comparison between Sir Warren Fisher’s methods and
those by which Lord Kitchener at the War office earned
the name of “ Lord K. of Chaos,”
The President of Harvard once described to me a
mental expedient not unlike Sir Warren Fisher’s. He
said that he had tried to train himself to begin the day by
doing what could be put off and leaving till later what
could not be put off. That which “ can be put off ” means
not only that which will not be mechanically brought
forward by an interview already fixed or an urgent letter
on the desk; it also often means some question which,
without a special effort of volition, we should be inclined
to put off, a problem with slightly uncomfortable associa-
tions, or an inchoate train of still vague and only partially
conscious thought which will drift into forgetfulness
unless the “ salt-box ” is used. Mr. Walter Lippmann
found, after interviewing, as a journalist, many American
statesmen, that he could extract from them, when they
were off their guard and slightly excited, thoughts infinitely
more fruitful than the ordinary commonplaces of politics.
He asks (Yale Review , July 1922, p. 675), “ What if it
were possible, taking men as they are, to liberate the
possibilities that in moments of candour are revealed! ”
He is referring not merely to the chance fact of such a
liberation at any particular moment, but to the possibility
of creating among American statesmen that subtle habit


of overcoming obstructive mental complexes which we
call “ candour.”
There are writers and teachers the nature of whose work
makes it necessary for them to regulate their intellectual
life by strict routine, who must start, for instance, daily
at 9 a.m., to write three thousand words of criticism or
analysis of other men’s books, or to continue a long
series of calculations, or to correct a daily stint of students’
essays. Each one, however, even of these men and
women, is not a machine, but a living and imperfectly
unified organism, whose thinking can be only partially
controlled by order and forethought. As they work,
their whole nervous system may be half-consciously
quivering with old memories and new associations and
vague emotional Intimations. They can, and, if they are
to contribute to the thought of their time, they should
acquire the habit of watching the unfocused fringe of
their consciousness for any significant mental events
which may appear there, without diverting their'main
attention from their immediate task; just as the fencer
watches in the periphery of his field of vision his opponent’s
wrist for significant movements without withdrawing the
central focus of his field of vision from his opponent’s
eyes. They will often be wise to jot down these fringe-
thoughts in their first rough form, and to leave them for
future examination and elaboration.
And those, also, whose daily work requires a con-
tinuous effort of inventive thought, should form the same
habit of watching and recording their fringe-thoughts.
Mr. H. Hazlitt in his Thinking as a Science (1916) gives a
description of this difficult process, ending with the state-
ment : “ Having written the idea you will have it off your
mind ” (p. 77) — i.e. you will be spared the effort of pre-
venting yourself from forgetting it. The professed thinker
should also be habitually on the look-out for the possibility
that a fringe-thought may sometimes be recognized as
more important than the main thought-train during
whose course it arises, and that a temporary interruption
of work may be desirable, during which the fringe-
thought may be developed as a focal thought. I have


done my best of late years to form the habit of writing
down significant fringe-thoughts between “ square
brackets ” on my writing-pad while “ reading up ” a
subject in a library. They produce least interruption to
the main course of attention when they are put down in
the actual words, almost unintelligible to anyone else,
with which they come into my mind, and when even thole
words are economized by the use of a sort of shorthand of
logical symbols. The fringe-thoughts will have no obvious
connection with the chapter which one is writing; and,
therefore, one should, perhaps once a week, run one’s eye
over the notes of the week’s work, and collect and re-
arrange the bracketed entries. Sometimes the mere fact
of writing the fringe-thought down seems to set the sub-
conscious mind to work on it; and the thought reappears
at the end of the week further developed, and accompanied
by an indication of its place in the main problem on which
one is engaged. Varendonck, describing such fringe-
thoughts, says: “These ideas coming to the surface, I
scribble them down as quickly as possible, trying to write
automatically. . . . When I have come to the end of a
section, I cast a glance over my list of foreconscious ideas,
and I find that nearly all of them have automatically
found their natural place in the text. . . .” {Day Dreams ,
pp. 137-8). Fringe-thoughts, though they will generally
find their place in some chapter before or after that on
which the thinker is working, sometimes will not; and
anyone who is living a life of intellectual production will
do well to keep, as Darwin did, a rather considerable
number of “ folders ” or envelopes, labelled with the
names of subjects to which he finds his mind recurring,
even although he may not immediately contemplate
writing, or lecturing, or acting, on them. He will find,
again, that thoughts which first appeared to be scattered
and unconnected will often tend to grow out towards
each other and to form new and unexpected connections.
For this reason he should keep one large folder marked
“ Redistribute,” into which he puts all thoughts that are
felt to be significant, but which do not seem to belong to
any of the sections already labelled, and from time to time


go carefully through it. It is just in such a collection
that new ideas are most likely to be found, and the recorded
thoughts will at least be connected with each other by the
fact that they have all appeared significant to that partially
unified organism which is the thinker’s self.
The thinker should not, as Helmholtz found, confine
the process of recording his fringe-thoughts to the moments
in the day when he is accustomed to respond to a time-
stimulus, or when he is sitting at his desk or laboratory
bench. Hobbes’s custom of keeping a little note-book
where at any hour of the day one can unobtrusively enter
the thoughts that “ dart ” is extremely useful for this
purpose. In modem life, the range of observation and
memory which may start a new thought-train is so vast
that it is almost incredibly easy to forget some thought
and never again pick up the trail which led to it. The
story may be true which tells of a man who had so brilliant
an idea that he went into his garden to thank God for it,
found on rising from his knees that he had forgotten it,
and never recalled it. And if a thinker is fortunate
enough to be visited by some larger conception—a con-
structive theory, or a story, or poem —which carries
with it from the first an Intimation of its complete form,
he must break through all habits and duties till the impulse
to develop and record it is exhausted.
A group of able teachers of philosophy in Columbia
University, headed by Prof. J. J. Coss, published a year or
two ago a volume of essays on Reflective Thinking, for the
guidance of their students. It is a significant indication
of the present conditions of intellectual work in New York
that the writers assume that “ real thought ” never takes
place except during the fixed “ working ” hours. “ The
occasion,” they say, “ of reflective thought becomes clear
when the activities of a day are reviewed. We rise, dress,
breakfast, read headlines, go to business, but only when
the morning’s mail brings up a question requiring a
decision does real thought make its appearance. Thought
comes when decisions or conclusions are necessary, when
the usual succession of acts is interrupted, and considera-
tion has to be given to the next step. A doctor thinks


when he has to diagnose a new case—a student thinks
when he applies his knowledge to the solution of an original
problem in geometry —a city official thinks when he con-
siders the best method of making a tax levy.” This
passage helps to explain why Professor Carrel has to
escape from the Rockefeller Institute to Brittany if he
wishes to arrive at new physiological ideas. It is true that
a Columbia student who strolled daily down Broadway
in a “ brown study ” would not live long, but no worse
service can be done to him than to encourage him to sub-
mit to his environment, and to ignore the weak Intimations
of new ideas which now knock unavailingly at the door of
his consciousness while, after a hurried breakfast, he
“ reads headlines,” or enters the roaring mellay of the
rush-hour trains, or watches at night a high-speed comic
opera or a flickering film.
To a modern thinker on man and society, the problem
of recording fringe-thoughts is particularly important
during those hours in each week which he spends in
newspaper-reading. Newspaper-reading is for most of
us a lifelong training in the bad habit of mildly enjoying
and completely forgetting an infinite series of disconnected
ideas, of which the only useful result is the possibility
that the worn path of our subconscious thought may in
some future crisis make the way to the formation of a
conscious conclusion rather more easy. 1 If we mark all
the articles in one or two daily papers which set us thinking,
and at the end of a week or month cut out and file them,
we may accumulate a mass of intractable material which
it is a labour of Hercules, or of a sub-editor, or at least of a
man with a highly skilled professional secretary, to use at
all. It is, perhaps, a not wholly impossible counsel of
perfection that we should train our minds to be equally
strict in rejecting the second-rate ideas which come during
newspaper-reading, and in retaining the few that seem
really helpful; that we should so mark each cutting as to
indicate at a glance the exact point which made it seem
significant at the time of reading; that every cutting
should as soon as possible be separated from its fellow-
1 See above, p. 36.


cuttings, and take its place in a bundle of less repellent
written notes and extracts; and that we should ruthlessly
destroy all cuttings which, if glanced at later, seem no
longer significant. A man whose literary output is not
too large may find it useful once every three or four years
to run quickly through his own already published books
and occasional writings, to see if these do not suggest some
inchoate thoughts which he may have left undeveloped at
the time, but with which he can now proceed.
The special habits which each thinker should attempt to
acquire in dealing with his accumulated material of notes
of reading, recorded fringe-thoughts, and past writings,
will vary, of course, with the nature of his material, the
character of his work, and his own natural powers. Sir
Walter Scott would browse for an hour over some of the
old notes of his seventeenth-century reading, or some new
anecdotes and descriptions sent him by Erskine or Ballan-
tyne, and would then write a chapter of a novel without
that preliminary outline which Henry James called a
“ scenario.” A man without Scott’s superb natural gifts,
who is engaged in exploring some problem in the social
sciences, will have again and again to re-think and re-
arrange his scattered records. If he is to induce many
hundreds of ideas which originally occurred independently
to connect themselves as a single and consistent argument,
he may require to make a dozen scenarios in the writing of
a single chapter. The question as to what habits it is
best to acquire in this respect will, again, vary with a
thinker’s age. A man of fifty or sixty will have as a rule
a larger accumulated stock of ideas than a man of twenty-
five, but he will also have a less rapid and elastic memory.
He will not be able to sit back in his chair and sweep,
without the help of notes, over the whole plan of the book
that he is writing, and over all the ideas automatically
suggested by every part of it. Charles Dickens, for
instance, did not begin to keep a note-book of ideas and
facts until he was forty-three years of age, and he made
increasing use of it during the next ten years. 1
1 John Forster, Life of Dickens (edition of 1911), Vol. 11, pp. 332-
47.
G (A.0.T.)


To some thinkers who are also teachers, the process of
helping ideas to grow into relation with each other may
be greatly eased by the habit of oral lecturing and seminar-
teaching ; if only they are fortunate enough to find a post
in which lecturing and teaching are sufficiently limited to
be a means towards thought and not a substitute for
thought. The presence and emotional stimulus of an
audience, and the fact that one necessarily approaches the
subject from an angle somewhat different from that of a
writer may in such cases be valuable. But to secure this
result a lecturer should be careful never to read from a
manuscript; to watch for new and significant ideas
occurring during his lecture; to write down an indication
of those ideas immediately after, or, if he can do it quickly
and without being observed, during the lecture, and, if
possible, to discuss the whole lecture afterwards with a
body of students few enough and keen enough for real
dialectic. On the other hand, many teacher-thinkers seem
to feel that the effort of using two different methods, and
of putting, in the broad style of the platform or the class-
room, thoughts which they must afterwards try to express
with scientific exactness, is for them rather worse than a
waste of time.
It might appear that daily journalism would be a better
means than daily teaching of increasing the fertility of
thought. Experience, however, seems to contradict this;
very few men who have, for any considerable part of their
lives, been writers, as distinguished from occasional
reviewers or contributors, on a daily newspaper, have
produced important original work, and those few have
generally been men who were fully aware of the intellectual
dangers of their profession, and who took careful pre-
cautions, e.g. by giving certain hours of each day to more
continuous work, against those dangers. I thought that
I understood the reason for this when I heard a small
group of English daily journalists discuss their intellectual
methods. The daily journalist gets his subject two or
three hours before his “ copy ” must go to press. He so
trains his brain to answer to the stimulus of the daily need
that several of my journalist friends have told me that they


find it almost impossible to write vigorously without that
stimulus. But of necessity their thoughts are “ first ” and
not “ second ”or “ third ” thoughts. A man who has to
write the last sentences of an article in the intervals of
correcting a proof of the opening sentences cannot train
himself patiently to expect the shy feeling of Intimation
and develop it into a new thought; and he would be a hero
among daily journalists who should re-read every morning
the article which he wrote the night before, and strive to
make it the starting-point of a train of thought which it
will now be too late to publish. Dean Wace, of Canter-
bury, was for twenty years a leader-writer on The Times ,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury, when preaching his
funeral sermon, said that that experience “ taught him to
say with cogent terseness what he had to say.” 1 But the
readers of Dean Wace’s controversies with Huxley will
regret that his experience did not in that field of thought
teach him to say anything but what he had “ had to say ”
since childhood. Weekly journalism, where a man has
two or three or even four or five days between the choice
of his subject and the completion of his article, is far less
dangerous to thought, and monthly and quarterly journal-
ism has often been one of the ways in which the most
patient thinkers have discovered or published their results.
But I end by repeating that every thinker must re-
member always that if he is to get any advantage from the
fact that he is a living organism and not a machine, he
must be the master and not the slave of his habits. He
should watch for the least sign that his careful arrange-
ments of time and method and material are making him
“ stuffy ”; and if so, he should get as soon and as com-
pletely as possible into the physical and moral “ open
air.” For that purpose he may find it best to sacrifice
some of the advantages of habit in order to strengthen the
factor of stimulus; he may, for instance, temporarily
begin working at dawn instead of 9 a.m. and go for a
walk at 11 a.m., in order to work longer in the afternoon.
He may cut down his newspaper-reading to five minutes a
day, or read, for a day or two, nothing, or contemporary
1 The Times , Jan. 14, 1924.


novels only. He may go for a voyage, leaving his files
and card catalogues at home, and try to follow up, while
thinking hard all the time, with humility and sympathy the
ideas which his neighbours in the steamer smoking-room
will confidentially expound to him. If he is a writer, he
may give a course of lectures, or if he is a lecturer, he may
spend a Sabbatical term in writing an unacademic book.
Descartes, who lived in a time when war was, for a gentle-
man, a comparatively safe occupation, got the most
fruitful stimulus of his life by going on a short campaign.
This antinomy between the stimulus of habit in time and
place and circumstance, and the stimulus of breaking
habit, is constantly reflected in the lives of those who are
capable of serving mankind as creative thinkers. I have
already discussed (p. 47) the fact that, though without
industry great intellectual work cannot be done, yet mere
industry may prevent creation. But that fact constitutes
the simplest of the problems of conduct which torment and
perplex those who believe themselves to feel the urge of
genius. There have been Shakespeares who were useless
to mankind because they stayed in Stratford with Anne
Hathaway, Shelleys because they obeyed their father, or
were faithful to Harriet Westbrook, and Mary Wollstone-
crafts who died as respected and pensioned school-
mistresses. But there may have been many more Wagners
who were destroyed by gambling, Byrons by sex, and
Marlowes by drink, before they had created anything,
and Descartes who stayed too long in camp.


CHAPTER VII
EFFORT AND ENERGY
An important hindrance to further development in the
art of thought arises from a want of clearness in our
conception of the facts behind our use of such words as
“ energy,” “ effort,” or “ ease,” in speaking either of con-
scious or of subconscious mental activity. Creative
thinkers have noticed, not only that their best single ideas
seemed to come to them by automatic Illumination, but
that their more continuous work was often most success-
ful when it was done without the strain of effort, and even
without any conscious feeling of volition. Milton speaks
of the “ celestial patroness ” who
“ deigns
Her nightly visitation unimplored
And dictates to me slumbering; or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated verse.”
C Paradise Lost, Bk. IX, 11, 21-4.)
But it is difficult, with our existing psychological
vocabulary, to indicate the fact that work done without
conscious effort may vary greatly in respect to the
“ energy,” or “ force,” or “ vitality,” with which it is
done. The effortless thought-process which Milton des-
cribes must in his case have involved intense mental
energy. His words, however, would equally describe a
process involving little or no energy; and he was probably
not himself aware of any difference between his con-
sciousness of more energetic and of less energetic effortless
thought. There is a hint of awareness of such a difference
in a letter of Mozart’s in which, describing his conscious
experiences during the production of one of his great
musical creations, he says: “ All the inventing and making
goes on in me, as in a beautiful strong dream.” 1 Mozart
apparently recognized a difference in the form taken in
1 Quoted by William James, Principles , Vol. I, p. 255.


consciousness by a “ strong ” and a less strong “ dream ”;
but most thinkers, even if they may have a theoretical
knowledge that effortless thought can be more and less
energetic, seem unable to be sure whether at any given
moment their effortless ease of production is accompanied
by a rise or by a fall of mental energy. Mr. J. Middleton
Murry, who is not only a professional critic but also a
map with personal experience of original literary creation,
has written (in his Problem of Style , 1922) some interest-
ing sentences on this point. When discussing “ the kind
of hallucination from which Swinburne sometimes suf-
fered,” he says: “ Anyone who has tried to write has
experienced moments when, in the flagging of his own
creative effort, his writing seemed to be endowed with a
sudden vitality. Word follows word, sentence follows
sentence in swift succession; but so far from being the
work of inspiration, on the morrow it appears flabby and
lifeless ” (p. 22).
The whole problem is complicated by the well-known
phenomena of habit. Mental activities which were
originally carried through with severe voluntary effort,
inevitably become on repetition less effortful and less
conscious; how, therefore, can a thinker, as his work
becomes more habitual, prevent the resulting decline in
effort from being accompanied by a decline in energy?
Wordsworth, when, after Coleridge’s return from Ger-
many, he began to think about his own mental processes,
made the mistake of ignoring this difficulty; he assumed
that the ease of production resulting from habituation
was the same thing as the ease of production which
accompanied, in Milton’s case and in his own best work,
the greatest energy of thought. In the celebrated preface
to the second edition of the Lyrical Ballads , he says that
“ poems to which any value can be attached, were never
produced on any variety of subjects but by a man who,
being possessed of more than usual sensibility, had also
thought long and deeply. For our continued influxes of
feeling are modified and directed by our thoughts .. .
so by the repetition and continuance of this act, our
feelings will be connected with important subjects, till at


length, if we be originally possessed of much organic
sensibility, such habits of mind will be produced, that by
obeying blindly and mechanically the impulses of those
habits, we shall describe objects, and utter sentiments
of such a nature and in such connection with each other,
that the understanding of the being to whom we address
ourselves, if he be in a healthful state of association,
must necessarily be in some degree enlightened, his taste
exalted, and his affections ameliorated.’’ 1 Wordsworth
here, by using the words “ blindly and mechanically,”
describes exactly the mental attitude which was most
likely to lead to loss of energy, and which did, in fact,
help to destroy in him the power of producing great
poetry. His Ecclesiastical Sonnets were the natural result
of a “ blind and mechanical ” following of habit in pro-
duction. Mr. John Drinkwater, on the other hand,
seems to imply that the ease resulting from habit is
necessarily accompanied by a loss of energy. In his
Carver in Stone he speaks of
“ Figures of habit driven on the stone
By chisels governed by no heat of the brain
But drudges of. hands that moved by easy rule.” 2
The problem, however, of the relation between habit and
energy is not so simple; and I have already used the
same metaphor as Mr. Drinkwater in pointing out
(p. 79), that time-habit can be so managed as to aid
that “ warming up ” of the mind which indicates an
increase of energy.
A more fundamental method of establishing a mental
habit (if one can still use the term) by which mental
energy, instead of being diminished, is constantly re-
newed, can be inferred from the contrast which Mr.
Henry Hazlitt draws, in his Thinking as a Science, between
the accounts given by Herbert Spencer and John Stuart
Mill of their respective intellectual methods. Spencer
1 Lyrical Ballads (1800), Preface, p. xiv. Part of this passage is
also quoted by Mr. Murry, but for a purpose somewhat different
from my own.
2 Georgian Poetry (1913-15), p. 94.


describes in his Autobiography a mental habit which was
almost certain to lead to a progressive decline of energy.
When George Eliot told him that she was surprised to
see no lines on his forehead, he explained, he says, that
“ My mode of thinking did not involve that concentrated
effort which is commonly accompanied by wrinkling of
the brows. It has never been my way to set before myself
a problem and puzzle out an answer. The conclusions
at which I have from time to time arrived, have not been
arrived at as solutions of questions raised; but have been
arrived at unawares —each as the ultimate outcome of a
body of thoughts which slowly grew from a germ. Some
direct observation or some fact met with in reading, would
dwell with me: apparently because I had a sense of its
significance. . . . And thus, little by little, in unobtrusive
ways, without conscious intention or appreciable effort,
there would grow up a coherent and organized theory.
Habitually the process was one of slow unforced develop-
ment, often extending over years; ... it may be that
while an effort to arrive forthwith at some answer to a
problem, acts as a distorting factor in consciousness and
causes error, a quiet contemplation of the problem from
time to time, allows those proclivities of thought which
have probably been caused unawares by experiences, to
make themselves felt, and to guide the mind to the right
conclusion.” 1
Mill, on the other hand, uses the term habit, as Aris-
totle 2 does in the Ethics , to describe a mental attitude in
which a high degree of energy is so maintained by re-
peated voluntary effort as to become at least partially
automatic. He speaks of “ a mental habit to which I
attribute all that I have ever done, or ever shall do, in
speculation; that of never accepting half-solutions of
difficulties as complete; never abandoning a puzzle, but
again and again returning to it until it was cleared up;
never allowing obscure corners of a subject to remain
1 H. Spencer, Autobiography, Vol. I, pp. 399-401.
2 See e.g. Aristotle’s definition {Ethics, I, vii, 15, and 11, vi, 15) of
happiness as “ an energy of the mind in accordance with virtue ” and
of virtue as “ an established habit of voluntary decision.”


unexplored because they did not appear important;
never thinking that I perfectly understood any part of
a subject until I understood the whole.” 1 We can detect
in the two statements the chief cause which made Mill’s
thought, though done by a tired man after or before
office hours, more valuable to mankind than Spencer’s
thought, though he gave his whole time to it.
But in the art of thought, as in other arts, the efficient
stimulation of energy does not depend merely, or even
mainly, on either the intensity or the repetition of the
original effort. The thinker must also learn how to make
that particular kind of effort, that particular “ stroke,”
which will bring the energy of his organism most easily
and most completely to bear on his task. “ Natural ”
thinkers, like “ natural ” cricketers, or boxers, or oarsmen,
may learn that “ stroke ” for themselves. Some thinkers
never learn it at all; I have listened, on the public bodies
of which I have been a member, for hours together to
slack rambling speeches delivered with tremendous effort
by good and earnest men and women who have never
caught the trick of stimulating in themselves the mental
energy which would have given point to their thought.
Sometimes a thinker will miss the necessary “ stroke ”
because he directs his conscious effort to some form of
activity which is not that essentially needed by the task
in hand. I remember that when William Morris was
fatiguing his great brain and wearing out his powerful
body by delivering innumerable confused Marxist speeches
at street corners, Bernard Shaw said to me: “ Morris has
come into this movement with all his energy, but not with
all his intellect.” Shaw was here using the word
“ energy ” in the sense in which I am using the word
“ effort.” Morris, in the arts of designing and printing,
and sometimes in his poetry, had learnt the stroke by
which the “ energy ” (in the sense in which I am using
the word) of his intellect could be most effectively brought
to bear. In the kind of thought which is the first duty
of a social critic and inventor he had not learnt that
1 J. S. Mill, Autobiography (1873), p. 123 (see Hazlitt, loc. cit.,
p. 87).


stroke, and had hardly recognized that he needed to
learn it.
Most thinkers, however, are neither natural artists in
thought, nor unable or unwilling to learn their art. But,
in the absence of an accepted “ scientific art,” they learn
by a puzzled and often unsuccessful imitation of the
thought-processes and mental attitudes of others, until a
sense of the craftsman’s mastery comes to them. And
to learn by such a method the right kind of stroke in
thought is much more difficult than to learn it in cricket
or rowing or designing; success in the self-stimulation of
mental energy requires the co-ordination of innumerable
psychological factors of whose nature and working we
are largely ignorant, and often the overcoming of uncon-
scious inhibitions. And sometimes the thinker will be
tormented by the fear, well or ill founded, that he is con-
tending, not against a temporary inhibition, but against
innate and permanent inability. Much of the best exist-
ing material for those who seek in this respect to improve
their mental methods is the negative evidence contained
in accounts given by thinkers of their own sense of failure.
In the Memoir of Henry Sidgwick, for instance, with its
noble record of a lifelong intellectual service which never
quite attained its end, there are two letters—written in
1864, within a few days of each other, at the age of
twenty-six after a stay in Germany—which make one feel
that Sidgwick then had a glimpse both of a form of mental
effort which his splendid ability, his industry and courage,
the advice of his friends, and the psychological treatises of
his time never made clear to him, and of the degree of
mental energy to which that effort might lead. “I
believe,” he says, in one letter, “ I am cursed with some
original ideas, and I have a talent for rapid perception.
But I am destitute of Gibbonian gifts which I most want.
I cannot swallow and digest, combine, build. Then
people believe in me somewhat. I wish they would not.”
If he had been a physicist or a biologist he might a little
later have learnt the secret which he sought at Cambridge,
when Clerk Maxwell returned there in 1871, or when
Francis Balfour began his embryological Aork in 1875.


In his own sphere of work, one feels that the atmosphere
of “ thoroughness ” in the academic Germany of 1864
might then have helped him, and that it may have been a
wise impulse which led him to write in the other letter,
with a possible return to Germany in his mind; “I always
feel it only requires an effort, a stretching of the muscles,
and the tasteless luxury, the dusty culture, the noisy and
inane polemics of Cambridge and Oxford are left behind
for ever.” 1
Sometimes the effective stimulation of mental energy
depends on the establishment of a right relation between
the thought-process and those “ emotions ” or “ instincts ”
or “ passions ” whose part in rational thought has been
so much discussed by modern psychologists. Mr. J.
Middleton Murry, for instance, after quoting a good many
introspective accounts of literary creation, says {The
Problem of Style, p. 14) that “ the lesson of the masters is
really unanimous ” and that “ the source of style [he is here
using the word “ style ” as almost equivalent to thought]
is to be found in a strong and decisive original emotion ”
{ibid., p. 15). The word “emotion” is, however, here,
as often elsewhere, ambiguous. It may mean little more
than the form taken in consciousness by any kind of
intense mental energy—the “ continuous excitement,” for
instance, under which Mr, A. E. Housman says that in
the early months of 1895 he wrote the greater part of his
Shropshire Lad . 2 If we use the word in this sense,
Mr. Murry’s statement amounts to little more than the
proposition that mental energy is not to be acquired
without mental energy. But “ emotion,” in its more exact
sense, means the form taken in consciousness by any one
of those impulses which apparently arise in the lower
brain, and which in the primitive psychological cycle
mediate between sensation and associative thought; the
“ passion ” to which Milton referred when he said that
poetry should be “ sensuous and passionate,” or the
“love” to which Wordsworth referred when he wrote:
“In a life without love there can be no thought; for we
1 Henry Sidgwick, A Memoir , p. 118.
2 Preface to Last Poems (1922).


have no thought (save thoughts of pain) but as far as we
have love and admiration,” 1 and which Dante meant
when he said: “I am one who when Love inspires take
note, and as he dictates within me I express myself.” 2
Sometimes the white heat of such a passion will stimulate
the brain into abnormal achievements of thought in
solving the problems of the moment, as in the instances
given by William James in his essay on “ The Energies
of Men,” and in the description of war-passion which
he there quotes from Colonel Baird-Smith, who, when
barely alive from fatigue and disease and wounds at the
siege of Delhi, found that “ the excitement of my work
was so great that no lesser one seemed to have any chance
against it, and I certainly never found my intellect clearer
or my nerves stronger in my life.” 3 More often emotion
becomes an effective factor in thought only when the
original nervous excitement has died down (Wordsworth’s
“ emotion remembered in tranquillity ”) or when the
emotions have been organized into what Mr. Shand calls
“ sentiments.” When the war broke out in 1914, I ex-
pected that the emotions stimulated by it would at once
create memorable poetry or prose, and prepared to collect
a small anthology of war-philosophy and war-poetry. I
soon found, however, that the terrific emotions of a
modern war are apt to benumb rather than to stimulate
all the higher processes of the mind which are not applied
to the work of fighting. Before the fighting began, Mr.
John Masefield wrote his lovely August, 1914, and when
the fighting was over, Mr. Housman produced an epi-
gram on An Army of Mercenaries, which was worthy of
Simonides; and that was all, except a tiny German lyric
in a newspaper, which I found myself desiring to keep.
The physiological events, indeed, which underlie our
consciousness of passion may often, even in ordinary life,
prevent that harmonious energy of the whole organism
on which efficiency in thought depends. The psychiatrists
1 Mrs. O. Campbell, Shelley and the Unromantics (1924), p. 268.
2 Purgatorio, Canto XXIV.
3 William James, Selected Papers on Philosophy (Everyman’s
Library, 1917), p. 49.


have shown us that when our upper brain needs the
passive expectance of a new thought our teeth may be
clenched, our fingers taut, the “ sympathetic ” nervous
system may be in a condition of/Strain, and our ductless
glands in full activity; and then when our upper brain
calls for activity all or part of the rest of our organism
may refuse to respond. Therefore, during the last half-
century, ever since, indeed, the psychology of the subcon-
scious has been studiejj, recurrent advice has been given
to thinkers that they Should secure organic unity by a
conscious attempt to extend the condition of relaxation
throughout their whole organism. William James, in
one of the best known of his “ Talks to Teachers ” ( The
Gospel of Relaxation ) 1 insists on the special importance
of this advice for America. Some Americans, he says,
on returning from Europe, observe the “ desperate eager-
ness and anxiety ” in their compatriots’ faces, and say :
“ What intelligence it shows! How different from the
stolid cheeks, the codfish eyes, the slow, inanimate be-
haviour we have been seeing in the British Isles ” (p. 28).
“ But,” says James, “ that eagerness, breathlessness, and
anxiety are not signs of strength: they are signs of weak-
ness and of bad co-ordination. The even forehead, the
slab-like cheek, the codfish eye, may be less interesting
for the moment, but they are more promising signs than
intense expression is of what we may expect of their
possessor in the long run ” (p. 31), and he goes on to
advocate “ the gospel of relaxation . . . preached by
Miss Annie Payson Call in her admirable little volume
called Power Through Repose ” (p. 33). James’s warning
must, in thousands of cases, have saved teachers and
others all over the world from wearing themselves out
by the mere friction of opposing nervous tensions. But
Miss Call’s gospel of relaxation must have led many of
those who followed it faithfully into that state of mild
intellectual passivity which was attained by Herbert
Spencer at his worst moments. The thinker should judge
his work, not by the degree of his internal harmony as he
does it, but by his success in the creation of new thought
1 William James, Ibid., pp. 22-39.


in a world the most important of whose conditions are
external to himself. No thinker, therefore, can do all
his work in a state of organic harmony. Between the
moments of harmony there must come times of painful
strain and discord, when, as Maudsley says, “ the face of
a person eagerly pursuing a thought is that of one trying
eagerly to see something which is difficult to be seen,
pursuing it, as it were, with his eye,” 1 the face that one
can watch in the British Museum Library when a writer
is striving to capture some elusive Intimation, or to hold
his unwilling attention to some distasteful problem.
Shelley, in those months when the true conditions of
creative thought were being revealed to him, wrote to
Godwin of the “ alternate tranquillity . . , which is the
attribute and accompaniment of power; and the agony
and bloody sweat of intellectual travail.” 2
The relation between “ tranquillity ” and “ agony,” and
between all the intermediate grades of harmony and
conflict in the thinking organism, must, of course, and
should, vary constantly with variations in the individual
thinker and his task. The genius will differ from the
intelligent man of industry, the dramatist from the
archaeologist, the young man from the old, the man
beginning his task from the man ending it. But every
thinker, even at his moments of most harmonious energy,
must be prepared for the sudden necessity of straining
effort, and in his moments of greatest effort may hope
for the sudden sense of harmony.
The young thinker, if he requires a general formula
for the increase of mental energy, will find the phrase
“ Power through Action ” more helpful than “ Power
through Repose.” Action* in subtle ways that are the
result of millions of years of organic evolution, brings
all the factors of the organism into relation to each other,
and in that region of full consciousness which is indicated
by the word “ self ” action, more than any other expedi-
ent, brings unity without loss of energy. Whoever has
1 H. Maudsley, The Physiology of Mind (1876), p. 381, quoted by
Rignano, The Psychology of Reasoning (1923), p. 81.
2 E. Dowden, Life of Shelley (1886), Vol. 11, pp. 171-3.


been called upon to act publicly on what have hitherto
been his private speculative opinions can remember that
the various “ selves of his thoughts and words, and of the
thoughts and words of other men in relation to him, came
wonderfully nearer to each other —that, to use the
language of the Autocrat of the Breakfast Table , “ The
real John, John’s ideal John, and Thomas’s ideal John ”
were more nearly one than they had ever been before.
He seemed to drop a hundred intellectual disharmonies
as Christian in The Pilgrim’s Progress dropped his burden.
John Dewey says: “ All people at the outset, and the
majority of people probably all their lives, attain ordering
of thought through ordering of action.” 1 But even when
the thinker has acted on his thoughts, and has thereby
attained a new measure of moral and intellectual unity,
he should beware of deceiving himself by the belief that
he can now substitute a single formula for the whole
complex art of thought. That on which the efficiency of
his work will ultimately depend may be no part of his
new confident unified self, but some vaguely disturbing
Intimation, whose significance arises from its relation to
causes and effects in the world outside his self, and which
can be brought to the surface of consciousness only by a
difficult effort of will. Bernard Shaw’s whole life has
been a protest against contentment with premature
emotional and intellectual unity, and on one occasion,
when in debate a critic had said, “ Mr. Shaw, you seem
to talk like two people,” Shaw answered, “ Why only
two ? ” And, on the other hand, Mr. Shaw’s selves may
be offering him contradictory interpretations of a single
universe; and contradictory interpretations of the uni-
verse, though they may all be helpful in providing a
choice of decisions and a wider range of association,
cannot all be right. Verification with her lame foot and
painful step must follow Illumination.
Action, again, not only produces psychological unity,
with all its advantages and all its dangers, but may also
directly increase—in the course of that physiological pro-
cess one of whose manifestations we call habit —the energy
1 How We Think (1910), p. 41.


which it stimulates. William James’s great chapter on
“ Habit ” in his Principles of Psychology can indeed be
read, almost line for line and word for word, as a direction
for strengthening, not only habituation, but also energy.
“ Seize the very first possible opportunity to act on every
resolution you make, and on any emotional prompting
you may experience in the direction of the habits you
aspire to gain. . . . When a resolve or a fine glow of
feeling is allowed to evaporate without bearing practical
fruit it is worse than a chance lost; it works so as posi-
tively to hinder future resolutions and emotions from
taking the normal path of discharge.” And his advice
to “ speak genially to one’s grandmother ... if nothing
more heroic offers,” 1 indicates a means of strengthening
not only the habit of genial speech but also the energy of
our geniality.
But if we are to use action as a means of stimulating
the energy of our thought, we shall require a more de-
tailed analysis of the term “ action ” than that offered in
James’s chapter. “It is not,” he there says, “in the
moment of their forming, but in the moment of their
producing motor effects, that resolves and aspirations
communicate the new * set ’ to the brain ” (ibid., p. 62).
In its influence on the organism mere motor movement
may sometimes be almost negligible; Prof. Lloyd Morgan
and others have pointed out that if we put the limbs of
a passive or resistant animal or child through any move-
ment we do not thereby create a habit. The movement
must be voluntary, and the whole organism must take
part in it. It is not the muscular movement of speaking
genially to one’s grandmother that increases one’s love
for her; an actor may, in the run of a successful play,
speak genially a thousand times to an actress whom he
detests, and may thereby increase his loathing for her;
he will increase affection only if his whole organism takes
part —if he “ means what he says.” Even completely
voluntary acts will also differ, as to their effect in in-
creasing energy of thought and emotion, according to
our knowledge of the range of persons and things which
1 Selected Papers on Philosophy (1917), pp. 62-4.


will be influenced by them, and our purpose in exercising
that influence. Two men, for instance, of about the same
age, were once walking on an American winter’s day, and
recalling the political discussions which had gone on in
the groups to which as young men they had belonged.
“ I remember,” said one of then, “ that I and my friends
used to discuss such questions in order that we ourselves
might know the truth and vote wisely. You and your
friends seem to have discussed them in much the same
words, but you all seem to have felt (as a naturalist feels
about his science) that if you could discover the truth
about democracy, or socialism, or federalism, you had
the responsibility of doing so on behalf of the human
race.” Bentham sat for nearly seventy years scribbling
speculative paragraphs on morals and legislation, and
looking like any one of many scores of insignificant little
scribbling men. But the energy which vitalized his
thought, and which grew stronger decade by decade,
would have died down, had he not always retained his
belief that the movements of his pen and the efforts and
discoveries of his brain were acts as important to mankind
as the battle-orders of a general in the crisis of a war.
The psychological effect of an act may even be greatly
changed by knowledge received only after the act is con-
cluded. A man may sit at his microscope dissecting the
mouth of a fly, or a freshwater mollusc. He may note
the presence of certain foreign bodies, may sketch them,
and may publish his sketch. That sketch may afterwards
become the starting-point for a beneficent world-wide
campaign against sleeping sickness or malaria or bil-
harzia. And while, at the moment of observation or the
moment of publication, the energy of the observer may
have been in no way heightened, the whole force of his
thought may be changed when a year hence he sits reading
his newspaper and suddenly realizes what he has done.
When iEschylus fought at Marathon, and Socrates de-
fied the Thirty Tyrants, each of them strengthened the
energy of his thought because, in Aristotle’s phrase, he
“ knew what he was doing.” 1 And that fact is the
1 Ethics, Bk. 11, Chap. IV. (See also my Great Society, Chap. V.)
h (a.0.T.)


answer to those who would plunge, or advise others to
plunge, into mere physical action as both a guide to truth
and a relief from the effort of thought. The student
who has toiled in vain to think out a solution of the prob-
lem of the distribution of wealth, or of the relation of
man to the universe, determines to “ stop thinking and
act.” He joins a propagandist Socialist body, or becomes
a Trappist monk. He finds, for the moment, an escape
from his troubles, and begins, perhaps, a period of
“ Incubation,” during which new thoughts may form
themselves and lead to a new Intimation. But that In-
timation, when it comes, may find that his mental energy
has meanwhile been lowered, and that he can no longer
develop or act on his thought. To shout speeches, to
tell beads, to dig in a monastery garden, are ways in which
some of our physiological and psychological needs may
be satisfied. They are not for the thinker —as the acts
of finishing his book, or formulating his opinions, or
even resigning his office might be —means of carrying
into effect and thereby strengthening his mental energy.
Throughout this chapter, while discussing suggestions
for the preservation or increase of mental energy, I have
kept on the plane of empirical observation. I have not
inquired what is the relation between “ energy,” as the
writer or psychologist uses the word, and the “ energy ”
of the physicist or physiologist. But a day may come
when, as I argued in Chapter I, the physicists and physiolo-
gists will learn enough about the nature of life to get in
touch with the psychologists, and to help them to invent
means of increasing mental through atomic “ energy.”
At present, even if we accept the view that thought is
driven by a “ horme ” which is life itself, we can seldom
relate our belief to the facts of physical energy further
than the broad statement that a man in good health is
likely to be a more effective thinker than the same man in
bad health. At the Oxford International Psychological
Congress of 1923, Dr. E. D. Adrian, the Cambridge
physiologist, said (in a paper on “ The Conception of
Nervous and Mental Energy ”): “I am quite ready to
believe that the conception of mental energy, properly


defined, may be as necessary to psychology as that of
physical energy is to physiology ”; but that “at present
I do not think that the physiology of nervous conduction
has advanced far enough in its results to be of any real
significance for the psychologist (except so far as he
studies the physiology of the sense organs); speaking
from a purely physiological point of view, it seems to me
that the less we say about nervous and mental energy the
better ” {Proceedings, pp. 162 and 158). As against Dr.
Adrian, Professor C. S. Myers at the same congress could
claim only “ that no harm can result from applying the
term ‘ energy,’ even though we are ignorant of its
nature, and are unable directly to measure it in terms of
mass and velocity ” {ibid., p. 186). There may, however,
be students now living who will succeed in relating our
inexact and empirical observations of the effects of emotion
and habit and action on the success of our thinking, to
those measurable facts as to the energy of the nerve-cell
with which Dr. Adrian’s researches deal. If that happens,
the art of thought may be helped and extended by know-
ledge of such things as the conditions of cell-nutrition,
and the influence on living tissues of stimulation by sun-
light or glandular secretions. We may then learn how,
by means unknown to Miss Annie Payson Call, to in-
crease the “ energy ” of our thought by increasing the
“ energy ” of our whole organism.


CHAPTER VIII
THE THINKER AT SCHOOL¹
So far in this book I have conceived myself to be address-
ing readers who desire to improve their own intellectual
methods and thereby help to diminish the dangers which
threaten our civilization. But the discipline of the art of
thought, if it is to be effective, should begin at an age when
the choice of intellectual methods will be made, for the
most part, not by the student himself, but by his teachers,
and by the politicians and administrators who appoint,
pay, and to some extent control his teachers. In this
chapter, therefore, I shall discuss the art of education as a
section of the art of thought; that is to say, I shall ask how
far a teacher can hope to increase the future output of
creative thought by those thinkers who as students pass
through his hands. For that purpose it will be best to
start with a mental picture, not of an educational system
or a series of statistical curves, but of some supernormal
human being who has actually added to the intellectual
heritage of mankind —Goethe, Plato, Descartes, Kelvin, or
William James. We can then consider what, if such a
man were born under our present conditions, his elders
could do for him or to him, at the successive periods of
his mental growth, which would increase his efficiency as
a thinker.
If Plato were bom now, he would be, as his name-
sake in Athens was, a living organism which had grown
by the repeated subdivision of a single fertilized cell. If
he had grown into a plant, or a marine invertebrate, or
a member of all but a few of the species of fish, and had
had the luck to be a survivor of ten thousand contem-
poraries, his “ behaviour-pattern ” —his “ home ” or
“ urge ” —which grew with the growth of his body, and
perhaps in the last analysis was his body, would, after
1 Chapter Xin the complete edition. For the author’s synopsis
of Chapters VIII, IX, XI, XII of the complete edition see Appendix,
p. 127 (Ed.).


modifications due to experience, have enabled him, without
help from his elders, to feed himself, and ultimately repro-
duce his species. If he had grown into an ant or a bee,
his horme would have been helped out by the behaviour
of his elders in putting food and shelter within his reach.
If he had been one of the higher non-human animals, his
elders would have had impulses to offer him, not only
food and shelter, but opportunities of acquiring skill in a
number of elaborate processes, jumping, or hiding, or
hunting, or obeying summoning or warning calls; and he
would himself have felt rather fitful impulses both to make
use of those opportunities, and also to think out with
some degree of independence his own solution of the
difficult “ situations ” which roused his interest. Being a
human baby, our modern Plato would be born with a
behaviour-pattern much of which he shared with plants
and with other animals. He would seek his mother’s
breast as a seedling plant seeks moist earth, or a young
limpet seeks a rock. As the months went on, he would
crawl and chatter, and pick things to pieces, like a young
ape. But as he grew towards childhood his chatter would
turn into vivid talk, his curiosity into conscious wonder and
delight, and the tendency to recognize a situation and
imagine a solution of it which he had shared with Kohler’s
chimpanzees, 1 would turn into prolonged dreamy explora-
tions of the mathematical and metaphysical problems
which attract a clever little boy.
How then, two thousand years ago, did the elders of
Plato of Athens help him to develop from a clever little
boy into a great philosopher ? The Greek word “ school ”
indicates that their first service was to secure him the
“ leisure ”of a young Athenian freeman. He was not, as
soon as he could walk, set to pick up stones in the fields
or card wool like a slave boy. Nor was he subjected to
that professional Spartan military training which Plato
himself admired when he had become a conservative
statesman. He played naked for part of every day in the
sunlight of the house-court with his brothers and cousins,
till he was old enough to be taken to the gymnasium for
1 See Kohler, W., The Mentality of Apes (trans.), 1925.


exercise under the eye of a skilled instructor. By that
time he was also attending a school, learning to read and
write and draw geometrical figures, and to accompany on
a little harp his own singing. In summer, when war
allowed, he went to Mount Hymettus, and picked flo.wers,
and listened to the bees, and watched where the yEgean
showed itself beyond Phalerum. On great occasions he
climbed the steps of the Acropolis, and saw the sacred
processions, and heard solemn speeches from priests and
statesmen. And one day, after his public admission as a
citizen, he was free to sit with shining eyes at the feet of
Socrates in a comer of the Agora, to argue with friends
during walks up the Ilyssus Valley as to the nature of man
and God and the State, or to stay up for half the night
writing the stilted love-poems and discourses at which in
later years he would laugh; and so, after many travels, and
with no clear division between his life as student, and
teacher, and statesman, he became the most influential
thinker in all history.
If Plato were born to-day, in America or England or
Germany, he would neither be the son of a slave-master
nor the son of a slave. He would be a member of a com-
munity whose educational policy was guided by at least
a half-hearted desire that every citizen should have the
opportunity of developing all his powers; but he would
also be a unit in that type of social organization which has
resulted from the development of mechanical industry,
and which I have called the Great Society. Unless he
belonged to the tiny section of his nation whose members
own sufficient accumulated wealth to be “ independent,”
he would probably live in one of the meanly uniform
houses of a city street, and be the child of parents with few
traditions of culture. Nothing in his daily surroundings
would stimulate in him the passion for truth and beauty
which the Athenian temples and porticoes, and the eager
talkers and traders and poets and orators, and the valleys
and hills and coast of Attica stimulated in the earlier Plato.
It would be only occasionally, as the result of preliminary
arrangement, and perhaps at moments that did not suit
his mood, that he would see the fields in spring time, or


be taken to an intellectually or aesthetically stimulating
cinema or picture-gallery, or hear a few words on the
wireless from an interesting man. He might never,
throughout his boyhood, be able to spend three con-
secutive hours away from the noisy living-room and the
noisier street, with a boy of his own age and tastes. Most
of that which Plato of Athens learnt at first hand from
nature and mankind, Plato of London or New York must
learn, if at all, at second hand, from books and machines.
The great industrial nations may perhaps in the next
hundred years rebuild their cities, and scatter electrically-
driven industries over the countryside. But, for good or
evil, we shall never return to the “ natural ” short-range
environment of Plato’s Athens. Alexander of Macedon,
the pupil of Plato’s pupil, destroyed the short-range fife
of the Greek city-state, because he had learnt from his
master to think in terms of maps and unseen continents.
The modern thinker, if he is to help to control the forces
which now bring human society to order or confusion,
must read during his life a library of books and a pyramid
of newspapers, and must learn from science to live at a
point of time that is continuous with a million years of the
past, and at a point in space which is continuous with
astronomical distances. He must co-operate intellectually
with scores of foreign specialists in handling a body of
accumulated knowledge a thousand times too great for
the memory even of Aristotle to retain, and must profit
by artificial means of observation a thousand times more
accurate than anything which Aristotle could have
imagined.
How can we, his elders, help him? Even the Prince
Consort could not invent a machine capable of forcing
his eldest son through all the intellectual processes of a
Prussian “ state-scientist.” If we are to help our new
Plato to think, we must have on our side his own horme,
with all its imperceptible gradations from spontaneous
“ urge ”to conscious will. And among every generation
of modern educationalists, from Rousseau and Froebel
to the present day, there have always been men and women
passionately convinced that the free “ urge ” of a child is


enough to secure his full development, that a child sent to
wander in a Thuringian pine-wood will become a biologist,
and a child left with a balance and a few test-tubes in the
laboratory of a “ heuristic school ” will repeat the dis-
coveries of Archimedes and Kepler. Their experiments
have failed, partly because human beings do not live for
ever, and therefore must practise economy of time, partly
because, in the-art of thought, as in other arts, that which
experience shows to be the best way of doing things is not
the way which is most likely to occur to one unaided mind.
And yet, especially in America, the heuristic idea is still
continually rediscovered and continually welcomed. An
article, for instance, in the New York New Republic of
April 9, 1924, contains a description of an experimental
school carried on by the New York Department of Educa-
tion in connection with the Public Education Association,
and including a section for “ specially gifted children.”
The Head Mistress is described as believing that “ There
is no need of hurrying along the teaching of symbols—
any normal child will leam to read before he is ten, if he
is exposed to books by those who value them. There is
no use in torturing an imaginative child of six or seven
with a dull reading routine.” Among the “ gifted
children ” in this school may be a potential Alexander
Hamilton, or Louis Agassiz, or Baruch Spinoza, whom the
Public Education Association desire to assist in his pre-
paration for a life of creative thought. I would seriously
ask that Association whether it is wise to postpone his
learning to read till the age of ten, or to leave to mere
accident the question whether he reads for the rest of his
life easily or clumsily, whether his “ ideograms ” are letters
or phrases, and whether his brain interprets slight actual
movements of his mouth-muscles, or audile or visual
images, or the meaning of more directly apprehended
ideas and situations. 1 If the school contains a potential
1 But while the extreme Froebelian conception of the educational
sufficiency of self-activity is now more common in America than else-
where, there is also to be found in American educational literature a
more conscious and definite reaction against it. See e.g. an abstract,
in the Psychological Bulletin (New York), Feb., 1922, p. 78, of a paper


Kreisler, would it be wise to arrange that he should first
learn to play the violin by being “ exposed to violins by
those who value them ” ? One has, indeed, a recurrent
feeling that some American educational reformers have
not sufficient respect for the future work of the human
beings whom they are training in the most difficult of
all arts. One would like to say, in Napoleon’s words, to
those who would keep great talents as long as possible in
that atmosphere of childishness which looks so charming
to an enthusiastic adult, “ Respect the burden.”
If, however, we accept responsibility for showing the
child what we believe to be the best way to develop his
powers of thought, we must try ourselves to be clear as
to what we mean by “ best.” A way of using nerves and
sense-organs and muscles may be best for a young man of
twenty, but not best for a child of six. And a way of
practising thought which would be best for the child of
six, if all human beings died at ten years old, may not be
best for a child of six who will live and work as a thinker
till he is seventy. In that respect, the teacher of any art
must make a delicate compromise between the powers and
needs of the child and those of the future adult. On the
one hand we do harm if we try to teach a baby of six
months old to walk, instead of waiting until, a few months
later, he has developed both the power and the inclination
to walk, or to teach algebra to a child of three, or if we
expect a child of eight to feel as an adult feels in the pres-
ence of certain kinds of great literature. But, on the other
hand, the future violinist should learn as a child to handle
his bow, not simply in the way which is then easiest to
him, but in the way which, while allowing for his muscular
and nervous immaturity, will also allow for the needs of
the adult executant; the future historian should learn to
read at an age and in a way which will not unduly strain his
immature eyes, but also at an age and in a way which
will enable him to read both accurately and rapidly in
by Grace E. Bird, on “ The Devious Path of Slow Work,” in which
she pleads for “ the direct route of the rapid reader,” as against the
“ reproduction of the bye-paths of eye and throat tensions, inner
speech, and imagery of the slow reader.”


after life; and the future mathematician should be taught
to use, in reasoning, methods based on the recognition
not only that a child can play an easy game with Froebel’s
geometrical “ gifts,” but also that the habit of expressing
all quantitative conceptions in terms of solid geometry
may be inconvenient in the performance of the important
duties of an adult mathematician.
One of the most difficult elements in this compromise
is the question how far and at what age the teacher should
aim at teaching the pupil to stimulate his mental energy
by conscious and voluntary effort; and how far mental
energy should be left to grow out of the pupil’s own
spontaneous “ urge.” Perhaps the best result of modern
educational psychology is the present rapid advance in
methods of recognizing and using spontaneous impulse.
But I myself believe that the teacher should also attempt to
find ways of bringing the conscious will of a clever child
to bear upon his thought at least as soon as school attend-
ance begins. The modem urban environment has so
little that is automatically stimulating to the higher
intellectual impulses that I am sure that many great
talents both in England and in America have been pre-
vented from fruition because the experience of full mental
energy has either never come to them at all, or has only
come, too late, in the process of adult money-making.
This loss is partly due to the mistake of most education-
alists after, say, 1780, in exaggerating, by reaction from
the educational methods invented in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, the physiological difference between
the adult and the child. We have hardly yet realized that
after infancy is over intellectual growth is in many respects
quantitative rather than qualitative, and shows itself not
by the sudden appearance of the power to carry out a
particular intellectual function, but by a gradual extension
of the time during which that function can be carried out
continuously. This is particularly the case with intellec-
tual growth after thirteen; a healthy clever man of thirty
differs (if we ignore his greater accumulation of knowledge
and habits) from an equally healthy and clever boy of
fourteen, rather in his power to go on solving new intel


lectual problems for eight hours a day, than in his power
to solve a single new problem in a few minutes. The
Binet and other “ tests ” have, indeed, failed to detect any
increase in momentary “ general ability ” after sixteen.
Because the boy will tire sooner than the man, he should
rest from work sooner and longer; but for the healthy
boy, as for the healthy man, the feeling of fatigue, though
it is valuable evidence as to the desirability of continuing
intellectual effort, is not conclusive evidence that the effort
should be at once discontinued. Every one who has
played games knows the difference between the primary
fatigue, which a healthy youth acquires the habit of endur-
ing until it is succeeded by the stage of “ second wind,”
and the “ staleness ” which, if it is ignored, leads to the
pathological condition of overstrain. And anyone who is
to do efficient intellectual work, either as boy or man,
should be helped to make the same distinction.
After taking my degree I was for two or three years
employed in preparing boys for the “ scholarship ” com-
petitions of the great English “ public schools.” My
conclusion, based mainly on that experience, is that a
healthy and intelligent child should, before the age of
ten, be familiar with the experience of concentrated
attention in the “ problem-attitude ” of continuous
thought, started, and, if necessary, maintained by volun-
tary effort, for a spell of perhaps twenty minutes. A
healthy and intelligent boy of thirteen is, I believe, all the
better for the occasional experience of mental endurance
carried to the point of primary fatigue, in perhaps a four-
hours’ spell, and a boy of sixteen should know, once in a
while, the glorious “ second wind ” which may come when
mental energy is maintained far beyond the point of
primary fatigue. The examination system, as practised
in England, has many obvious dangers; examination-
passing is apt to become an end in itself, both for teacher
and for student; and the nervous strain which follows
from the realization that the opportunities of one’s whole
future life may depend on the effort of a few days is often
harmful. But a student may, during his preparation for
an important examination, learn for the first time what


work which is fully up to his powers feels like, and may
see for the first time, as an intellectual and emotional
whole, a book or subject which he has hitherto seen only
in his daily “ assignments.” Among the most vivid ex-
periences of my boyhood was a spell of seven or eight hours
which I once went through at about the age of sixteen.
I was revising some neglected work for an examination
next day, and I sat through most of one night reading,
by the light of an illegal dark-lantern and with a tear
occasionally sliding down my nose, Sophocles’ tragedy of
Ajax, This question of prolonged effort is, I believe, of
special importance for secondary and college education
in America. Mr. H. D. Kitson in his How to Use Your
Mind (1916), p. 171, says of the American high schools
and colleges: “We indulgently succumb to the first
symptoms of fatigue, before we have more than scratched
the surface of our real potentialities.” During a discus-
sion, a couple of years ago, with some of the staff of an
exceptionally good American college, I raised the question
of “ second wind.” One of the group said, with perhaps
some degree of exaggeration, “ I don’t believe that there is
a boy here with any experience even of primary mental
fatigue.”
But as soon as a student knows what it is to maintain
intellectual energy by an effort of will, he should be
taught to realize that mental effort, and the mental energy
which may be stimulated by it, vary in intensity as well as
in duration. This point is also, I believe, specially
important for the future of American secondary *and
college education. When Mr. McLoughlin came ffom
California to the Eastern States of America, he set a new
standard of intensity in the service-stroke at lawn-tennis;
the eastern players were made to feel that they had hitherto
played “ pat-ball,” and they themselves afterwards crossed
the Atlantic to produce the same effect upon our British
players. Since lawn-tennis is a pastime, of which the
purpose is recreation, Mr. McLoughlin may have conferred
a somewhat doubtful benefit on the world. Thought,
however, is not a pastime, but an art, the successful
performance of which is of enormous importance to


mankind; and I am convinced that hardly any good
fortune could come to American education as great as the
appearance of an educational McLoughlin, who should
abolish “ pat-ball ” among all adolescent practitioners of
that art. A distinguished young American writer, -who
had been educated at the best of those “ preparatory ”
schools which correspond to the English “ public ” schools,
told me; “At we worked hard, but we didn’t really
know what hard work was.” Mr. H. D. Kitson seems
almost to assume that intensity of mental energy cannot
be expected from a clever boy at the age of seventeen.
Speaking of the difference between college work and high
school work, he says: “No longer will you have time to
dawdle sleepily through the pages of easy texts ” (loc. cit.,
p. 15). A student who has carried the habit of “ dawdling
sleepily ” through his work till, at seventeen or eighteen,
he leaves the high school, is only too likely to continue
that habit after eighteen. Another American writer
{New Republic, April 2,1924) says: “ The essential problem
of education, ‘ how to get from every pupil hard work but
willing,’ is still unsolved.” Some American observers
believe, indeed, that in that respect their country is moving
backwards rather than forward. The great American,
Dr. Charles W. Eliot, ex-President of Harvard, had
published at the age of ninety, in his book A Late Harvest
(1924), the statement that, “ I began as a boy to use my
mind intently several hours a day ”; and the New Republic
writer commented: “ Probably the mental inertness of the
average American, college-bred or not, is outside the range
of his comprehension.” The “ intent use of the mind ”
to which Dr. Eliot refers may be aroused by an external
stimulus, but should not be dependent on it; I shall
always remember an American graduate student, who
said to me: “Professor Wallas, I came to the London
School of Economics to be stimulated, and I have not
been stimulated.” And the apprentice thinker should
learn to distinguish between the effort which may be pain-
ful because it is “ against the grain,” and the fortunate
energy into which his effort may imperceptibly transform
itself, and which, though it involves a full concentration of


will, is felt as an unhindered harmony of the whole organ-
ism, In the changes and chances of a thinker’s life he,
like Shelley, will have experience of both.
Intense intellectual energy, however, carried to the
point of fatigue, requires that the Incubation period before
a new thought appears shall be one of real rest, varying,
perhaps, from an hour or two to a month. For this
problem neither the “ public school ” nor the municipal
school traditions of secondary education in England seem
to me to have found a solution. The discipline, indeed,
since the days of Thomas Arnold, of the English Public
Schools may almost be said to have taken the prevention
of leisure as its chief object. The Times reviewer of a
history of Marlborough School, obviously writing with
inside knowledge, contrasts the first years of the school
(when in the 1850’s William Morris used to wander in the
woods round Marlborough) with the present days “ when
few moments are left unallotted.” On December 20,
1923, The Times announced that Mr. J. H. M. Hare had
retired, after thirty-nine years’ service as assistant master
at Eton. A list follows of his distinctions in football,
cricket, and fives, and a poem by the Head Master of
Eton, beginning:
“ Note how each famous man
Hastes to declare
How life for him began
With Mr. Hare!
Why does he rule the land?
How rise to high command?
Because he learnt it from
Wise Mr. Hare.”
Mr. Hare himself said in an interview with The Times ’
representative: “ I have always taught the younger boys—
the last thirty boys or so to enter the school. ... I find
that boys are more ready to learn than they used to be,
and much more ready to do what is expected of them.
Three things I have always tried to impress on boys. I
have asked them never to be doing nothing, but either to
work, play, or sleep.” In some English “ public schools ”


Mr. Hare’s function in the prevention of leisure is assigned
to a professional “ games-master,” into whose power the
boys are given as soon as lessons are over, and who is
likely to think that the school hours are chiefly valuable as
providing an opportunity for his boys to rest, and so
recover the energy necessary for victory in their next
contest. The dangers of sexual perversion, against
which the system of leaving “ few moments unallotted ”
is mainly aimed, are real, so real that they may ultimately
lead to the abandonment of the whole experiment of
keeping boys in unisexual “ preparatory ” or “ public ”
(in the English sense) schools for an unbroken boarding-
school life from ten to nineteen. But I believe that a
careful inquiry would show that the prevention of leisure,
the attempt to secure that for all his waking hours except
meal-times a boy should either be sitting in class-room or
chapel, or engaged in severely professionalized games, or
working at some allotted task, is not an effective method
of guarding against sexual dangers. And even if it were
more effective than it is, the general application of the
system involves an injury to the intellectual culture of the
nation too serious to allow one to accept it as the wisest
way of dealing with the sexual problem.
In the new municipal secondary schools of Great
Britain or the Dominions the danger from absence of
leisure is apt to arise in a somewhat different form. The
whole future of a clever boy or girl depends on the results
of a series of Junior, Intermediate, and Senior “ Scholar-
ships.” My university students have sometimes com-
plained to me that in the preparation for each successive
examination they become “ stale ” and over-strained,
and that they have no opportunity for such a comparatively
prolonged rest as will enable them to recover nervous
elasticity, or to recognize, collect, and systematize any
new thoughts which may be waiting for the moment of
Illumination. The danger in this respect is greater
because the period of severest strain is apt in both sexes
to coincide with the coming of puberty.
The effort and energy, again, of a student thinker vary
not only quantitatively in duration and intensity, but also


qualitatively in respect of the kind of mental process which
is consciously attempted. This is a point which educa-
tional tradition has in the main left to the pupil’s own
“ trial and error.” He “ does lessons ” on certain
“ subjects.” Most of these subjects are chosen mainly in
order that his memory may be stored with a body of know-
ledge—history, science, language, etc. —that will be useful
to him in his own future thinking and in his intercourse
with others. Some are mainly chosen in order that he
may acquire skill in certain simple mental processes,
mathematical, grammatical, etc. Some are chosen—
literature, religion, music, etc. —in the hope that he will
experience certain emotions, and desire certain forms of
conduct. The teacher’s time is spent, partly in oral
instruction followed or accompanied by questioning, partly
in the reading, correcting, and marking of written work,
and to a much less extent, when teaching drawing, music,
experimental science, and gymnastics, in the watching and
correction of the pupil’s muscular movements. The
teacher, that is to say, observes and marks the more
obvious results of thought-processes and not the processes
themselves. It is therefore almost inevitable that his
methods should tend to encourage the simpler mental
processes, and especially that of memorizing. Professor
F. M. McMurray, of Columbia University, says, indeed,
in his How to Study (1909), p. 9, that he obtained “ from
students in college, as well as from teachers, brief state-
ments of their idea of study. Fully nine out of every
ten have given memorizing as its nearest synonym.” Even
if we add to the process of memorizing the processes of
understanding, and applying to particular instances the
arguments and principles of the teacher and the text-book,
it still remains, I am told, that the thought-processes used
by students in nearly all American secondary schools, and
during the collegiate years of nearly all American univer-
sities, as well as in many of the English publicly-supported
secondary schools, belong mainly to the stages of thought
which I have called Preparation and Verification, and that
in these institutions a clever boy may go without reproach
through his whole course, with little or no fully conscious


experience of the more vitally important processes of
Illumination and Intimation.
There have been recently introduced, both in America
and in England, certain forms of school organization
which are intended to offer the thoughtful pupil opportuni-
ties and motives for discovering and practising the more
difficult methods of thought. Of these the best known are
Daltonism, Garyism, the Project Method, the science
method of Professor H. Armstrong, and the methods used
at Oundle by Sanderson, and interpreted by Mr. H. G.
Wells. The common factor of them all is an arrangement
by which the students, as individuals or in small groups,
undertake, with occasional suggestions from their teachers,
pieces of intellectual work prolonged over weeks or even
months; the analysis, for example, of the causes of some
historical event, the solution of a small engineering
problem, the writing and staging of a play, etc. I believe
that these experiments—which can, of course, be looked
on as extensions and modifications of the traditional plan
in some of the older English secondary schools of setting
long literary compositions and long pieces of mathe-
matical “ book-work ” —may lead ultimately to important
educational progress. But in these experiments the dis-
covery and choice of intellectual methods are still left,
in the main, to the students, who do not often succeed in
finding for themselves the best “ mental attitudes ” and
methods. Mr. Abraham Flexner’s Report, in 1918, on
the “ Gary Schools ” seems to prove that, in the schools,
which he visited, the pupils had not made the elementary
discovery of the difference between work carried out with a
full concentration of will and the mental attitude which
Mr. Kitson calls “ dawdling sleepily,” or the “ low-flash ”
interest of a not very exciting game. Still less had they
discovered the difference between a passive waiting for
thought and that intense expectant energy which enables
the creative thinker at the moment of Intimation to give
“ a local habitation and a name ” to the elusive phantom
of a hovering idea. The founders of those experimental
schools sometimes suggest to their students by their own
infectious enthusiasm the necessary form of intellectual
i (a.0.t.)


effort. In such cases the experiment may work excellently
as long as the school is controlled by an inventor who is
also an omnipotent head teacher. But the same school-
methods applied by average teachers to three or four
hundred average irreverent boys or girls, quick to detect
pretence, and ingenious in escaping the effort of thought,
may produce unexpected results.
In schools of a more traditional type a clever teacher,
interested in the mental development of his pupils, is
occasionally able to infer some of the subtler points in
their thought-processes from the character of their written
work, and even from their muscular attitude and facial
expression in class, and to invent words and phrases which
will convey to his pupils the conception of better thought-
processes. Sometimes his phrases are handed down to
his less inventive successors; I can remember, during my
school days at Shrewsbury, the useful effect of the phrase
“ fatal facility ” as indicating a bad intellectual habit
revealed in the Latin and Greek compositions of certain
boys who had hitherto been unaware of it. At Shrews-
bury, also, a traditional saying of Dr, Kennedy’s: “ Boy!
There is a great deal of Horace in this copy of verses, and
a great deal of Vergil, but nothing horatian and nothing
vergilian,” produced among us in the Sixth Form an
occasional mild desire to discover how one should set
about thinking vergilianly. When, in 1885, I was for a
short time a public school form-master, Mr. G. T. Atkin-
son, the ablest and most stimulating of my colleagues,
once invented another useful phrase. A small, very
intelligent, and very industrious boy had come rapidly up
the school and had reached the Fifth Form, which Atkin-
son then took. His Latin compositions in the lower
forms had consisted of the blameless application of known
rules. He now had to do for Atkinson a “ prose,” in
which a passage of idiomatic English was to be turned into
idiomatic Latin. He sat, I was told, pink, with pleasure,
while my colleague praised his composition, and then
received a shock which may have changed in some degree
his habits of thought, when the little panegyric ended with
the words: “ Yes, a really excellent piece of Fourth Form


prose.” It would be interesting if some old Wykehamist
would collect the phrases and stories of this kind which
make up part of the trade secret of Winchester College.
Innumerable stories of the same kind have gathered
round the names of the best-known Oxford “ Greats ”
tutors. The late Mr. Richard Lewis Nettleship is said,
for instance, in a story which may be apocryphal, to have
listened with every appearance of admiration and gratitude
to an essay in which a Balliol exhibitioner who had been
the glory of a North Country grammar school, and the
hope of a Nonconformist congregation, demonstrated by
somewhat “ pat-ball ” arguments that virtuous conduct
necessarily leads to happiness. “ You really do think
so?” said Nettleship ecstatically, “I am so glad. You
know that the question has been discussed for some time.”
And “ The Nettler ” remained smiling sweetly, until the
student experienced a sudden spasm of the abdomen, and
a sudden conversion to the possibility of a new type of
energy in thought.
But the efficacy of such hints is local and individual;
they are not easy to transfer from the “ atmosphere ” of
one school or college, or even of one teacher, to that of
another. Their application always arises from the indi-
vidual failures of a single student, and they are most
helpful when given by a tutor to a student who is sitting
alone with him. When given in a class they sound so
sarcastic as to produce on a sensitive boy or girl little
effect except humiliation and resentment —and they may
also, like other uses of sarcasm, be bad for the teacher
himself. I hope, therefore, that, in the course of the next
generation, awareness of the less obvious stages in the
thought-processes may come to be produced, not by
individual hints, but by a more general study, throughout
the educational course and in the impersonal mental
attitude of science, of the psychology of thought. 1
I am well aware of the difficulties involved in such a
proposal. There is still a lamentable want of agreement
among professed psychologists as to some of their most
fundamental problems; and the preaching, for instance.
1 See my Our Social Heritage (1921), Chap. 11.
1 2 (A.0.T.)


by an extreme “ behaviourist ” of the doctrine that con-
sciousness and will and thought are “ epiphenomena,”
which, though they unfortunately occur, have no relation
of cause and effect with human conduct, or by an extreme
Freudian of the doctrine that every non-sexual idea is a
symbol of a sexual “ wish,” would not be helpful. But
a few simple lessons on the physiology of the central
nervous system in man and other animals might be given
to children of nine or ten years of age, and those lessons
might be illustrated day by day in the ordinary work of the
class. A short talk drawn from a lecture which I once
heard by Sir John Adams on the psychological causes of
mistakes in spelling 1 might make a dictation exercise less
dull and much more useful than such lessons are at present.
There is much American statistical evidence as to the
measurable effect on the simpler processes of thought of
securing the early interest of pupils in their own psychology.
A number, for instance, of American text-books have
been recently published on “ How to Study,” with the
intention of making young students aware of their intel-
lectual processes, and Mr, C. W. Stone says that by a
series of quantitative school experiments, he found that
interest in “ How to Study ” increased the rate of reading
and the degree of comprehension 180 per cent., as shown
by comparison with a control group of high school
students. 2
1 See also Teacher's Encyclopedia, Vol. I, pp. 1-34—John Adams
on “ Child Psychology.”
2 C. W. Stone, quoted in the Psychological Bulletin, Jan., 1922,
p. 43. It is interesting to notice that even the best of these books,
and even when they are dealing with students who have entered a
university course, seem to assume that their readers will use the
easier rather than the more effective intellectual methods. Prof.
Kitson, for instance, in his book How to Use Your Mind, which I
have already quoted, and which is intended for students during their
first college years, says, when dealing with the method of language
learning: “As you look up the words of a foreign language in the
lexicon, trying to memorize their English equivalents, take plenty of
time ” (p. 72). But rapidity and pleasure in learning a foreign
language, and its usefulness in increasing fertility of association, is
enormously increased if the student from the beginning memorizes
the foreign word itself, with its direct intellectual and emotional


At a somewhat later educational stage the teacher,
in explaining how one should approach a geometrical
problem, might add to the mathematical rules of Verifica-
tion a few illustrations, drawn from the psychology lesson,
of the psychological conditions of invention. A literature
lesson to able students of fifteen would cease to be a
mere catalogue of biographical facts, or a mere series of
exhortations to admire or despise, if it sometimes followed
the psychological lines of such a book as Mr. J. Middleton
Murry’s Problem of Style (1922). A science class might
be made to realize, by facts from the mental history of
Descartes or Darwin, that they themselves are experi-
menting in the use not only of microscopes, micrometers
and balances, but also of their own brains. And a clever
student could learn before he is sixteen to see the processes
of his own mind as part of the larger and infinitely more
stimulating problem of mind in general. Sir Henry
Cockburn (Lord Cockburn) attended, about 1800, as a
young student, the lectures of James Finlayson, Professor
of Logic in Edinburgh University, on what we should now
call psychology, and says that “ until we heard him, few
of us knew that we had minds; and still fewer were aware
that our intellectual operations had been analysed, and
formed the subject of a science the facts of which our own
consciousness delighted to verify. Neither he nor his
class were logical, in any proper sense of the word. But
no exposition of the mere rules of reasoning could have
been half so useful as the course which he adopted, which
was first to classify and explain the nature of the different
faculties, and then to point out the proper modes of using
and improving them. This, though not logic, was the
first thing that wakened our dormant powers.” 1
On the question of the effect of psychological aware-
ness in education I have myself gathered some amount of
experimental evidence. For the last ten years of my life
meaning, instead of compelling himself afterwards to wait for that
meaning until he has first recalled some inadequate English
equivalent. . . _
1 Henry Cockbum, Memorials (edition of 1909), pp. 19, 20.


as a London professor of political science I deliberately
used what I was able to learn about the psychology of the
thought-processes as a means of helping my university
students to capture and record thoughts which would
otherwise never have come into full consciousness. I
gave my students class-lectures in psychology outside their
political science course, and in personal work with my
graduate students tried to help them to acquire that power
of observing the emotional and intellectual “ fringe ”of
their thoughts with which I have dealt in this book. I
have before me letters from four such graduate students.
They were all cases of men who had taken university
degrees, after courses (in a Colonial university, an English
training college, one of the newer English universities, and
an Indian university), consisting predominantly of memor-
izing and reproducing other men’s thoughts. I had
explained to them my conception of the process of associa-
tive thought, and of its relation in the primitive thought-
cycle to emotion, and had constantly urged them to look
out for “ thoughts of their own,” and for the appearance
of “an emotional stimulus.” In one case I found that a
student whose written work was at first singularly wooden,
could talk about his subject with humour and freshness,
and urged him to listen to himself as he talked. In another
case I found that freshness of thought was closely con-
nected with literary expression, and urged the student to
grip any telling phrase that came to him. In both these
cases the students and myself were amused and interested
by a kind of discussion which, if we had not been psycho-
logizing, would have sounded sarcastic. One of them
refers to the fact that his early work was “ shown to be a
collection of snippets from various authorities,” and to my
urgence that he should “ bring what personality he had
into the work of research.” Another, the student whom
I told to strive for originality by developing his naturally
considerable sense of literary form, writes of “ the coining
of phrases and the shaping of sentences which would not
be woolly lambs for your sharp knife.” The third wrote:
“ I feel that ... I have acquired a ‘ something ’—served
an apprenticeship as it were.” But the most interesting


of the four letters came from the Indian student. He had
passed through an extremely successful course at his
Indian university, and had obtained high honours in a
professional examination during his stay in England.
His education, carried on as it had been entirely in English
—a language which had for him very slight emotional
associations —would not have been different if it had been
intended as a training in intellectual sterility. All his
thoughts, or rather all the phrases and words which he
selected from the books of the recognized authorities,
apparently came to him as visual images of paragraphs in
an examination answer. For months I despaired of pro-
ducing any result with him; but he was a young man of
very unusual morale, and he submitted himself to a course
so severe that, unless he had been supported by a genuine
scientific interest in his own mental processes, he could
not, I think, have endured it. I first made him take up a
social-political problem on which very few books had been
written. I then forbade him to read anything in literary
form, and told him to get his material from newspapers,
official reports, and conversation with persons to whom I
gave him introductions. I told him to look at the people
in the London streets from the top of an omnibus, and to
imagine their lives and thoughts; and always to watch for
the appearance of thoughts and feelings of his own. All
this time, he says in his letter, “ I was studying hard, but
I felt no emotional stimulus in my work.” I then told
him to read psychology, and with magnificent industry
he read during several months a series of books on
psychology, ethnology, and anthropology. I also advised
him to write long letters in his own vernacular to a favourite
brother in India. 44 At last,” he says, 44 1 began to feel
my way a bit. My teacher had been all this time dinning
in my ears 4 1 want to know what you have got to say of
your own.’ I told him this time that I could not express
what I had to say, but I felt that I might say something in
time. . . . The difficulty of experiencing what my teacher
calls 4 sharp doubts ’ is that they make a havoc in one’s
own mental world. . . . My equipment is not adequate
. . . and I experience mental agony as I feel the hammer of


these rough shocks. ... I was reading my Thesis only
yesterday, and I doubt many statements of my own, and I
feel that if I were to write again I should begin de novo.
I do not know what will be the result. . . . But now I feel
one thing which I never experienced before—an emotional
stimulus.” If my Indian student had, from the age of
twelve, been familiar with the elements of thought psy-
chology, he need neither have waited so long for thoughts
of his own, nor suffered so severely during their birth.


APPENDIX
I.— Author's Synopsis of Chapters Omitted in this Edition.
Chapter VIII. Types of Thought.
Certain ways of using the mind are characteristic of nations,
professions and other human groups. Some of these are the un-
conscious results of environment; others have been consciously
invented; and others are due to a combination of invention and
environment. The French and English nations have acquired
different mental habits and ideals which they indicate respectively
by the word “ logic ” and the phrase “ muddling through.” Each
habit has advantages and dangers, and it may be hoped that a new
habit will some day be developed which will combine both advantages
and avoid both dangers. It is less easy to detect an American type
of thought. There are indications that a more elastic and effective
mental habit may be developing in America than is found elsewhere,
but that habit cannot yet be called the national type. The ‘ ‘ pioneer ’ ’
habit of mind is perhaps more prevalent in America than any other
single type ; but it seems to be rapidly dissolving under the influence
of industrial development, religious change, and the spread of
popular interest in psychology. A new standard of intellectual
energy may ultimately come to be accepted in America, accompanied
by a new moral standard in the conduct of the mind, and a new
popular appreciation of the more difficult forms of intellectual effort.
Chapter IX. Dissociation of Consciousness.
The history of the art of thought has been greatly influenced by
the invention of methods of producing the phenomena of “ dis-
sociated consciousness.” The simplest and most ancient of these are
the methods of producing a hypnotic trance by the monotonous
repetition of nervous stimuli. Such methods have important and
sometimes beneficial effects on the functions of the lower nervous
system; and a slight degree of dissociation may assist some of the
higher thought-processes; but the evidence seems to indicate that
the best intellectual and artistic work is not done in a condition of
serious dissociation. Dissociation, however, often produces intense
intellectual conviction; and the future of religion and philosophy,
in both the West and the East, depends largely on the conditions
under which that conviction is accepted as valid. In Western
Christianity, methods of “ meditation ” have been invented, especi-
ally by Saint Ignatius, which are intended to avoid the dangers of mere
dissociation; but the process of direction of the association-trains of
ideas and emotions by an effort of will is so difficult that it constantly


results in the production of the same state of dissociation as that
produced by the earlier and more direct expedient of self-hypnotism.
And, since dissociation remains the most effective means of produc-
ing intellectual conviction by an act of will, those who now desire to
practise the “ will to believe ” are still thrown back on the old problem
of the validity of conviction produced by dissociative methods.
Chapter XI. Public Education.
In the case of four-fifths of the inhabitants of a modem industrial
community, inventions of educational method will only increase the
output of thought, in so far as they are actually brought to bear on
the potential thinker by the administrative machinery of public
education. That machinery is everywhere new, and was originally
based on an over-simple conception of the problem. In England,
we are slowly realizing the necessity, (a) of making more complex
provision for the “ average ” student, and ( b ) of providing special
treatment for the subnormal or supernormal student. Differential
public education for the supernormal working-class child had to
wait for the invention of a technique of mental diagnosis, and only
began in England at the end of the nineteenth century; the system
is still insufficiently developed, and there is a serious danger that an
extension of the age of compulsion in its present form may lessen
the productivity of the most supernormal minds. If this danger is
to be avoided, we must reconsider our present compulsory system,
with a presumption in favour of liberty and variety; American
experience shows the intellectual disadvantages involved in the
compulsory enforcement of anything like a uniform system of
secondary education.
Chapter XII. Teaching and Doing.
The proposal to raise the age of educational compulsion is often
combined, in England, with a scheme to make teaching, like law
and medicine, a close “ self-governing ” profession, with a monopoly
of public service. That scheme involves serious dangers to the
intellectual life of the community, and especially to the training of
potential thinkers; it ignores not only the possible opposition of
interest between the consumers and the producers of education, but
also the “ demarcation ” problem between the producers of education
and the producers of thought. This over-simplification of the
problem is partly due to the fact that those engaged in the more
general forms of intellectual production are not organized, and do
not claim, as other professions claim, a part in the training for their
profession. Experience shows that the teaching of any function is
sterilized if it is separated from “doing”; but are the English-
speaking democracies prepared to offer special and expensive
educational opportunities to a small minority of future professional


thinkers? Perhaps some local authority might be induced (if
legislation closing the teaching profession did not, meanwhile,
make it impossible) to start an experimental school for students
from all social classes who belong to the highest one per cent, in
respect of intellectual supemormality, and who ask to be prepared
for a career of professed thought. The staff of such a school would
be so chosen as to keep in touch with intellectual work outside the
school; the students would be encouraged both to develop their
own individual talents, and to realize the social significance of their
work; and the success of the school might influence the develop-
ment of a new intellectual standard in other schools. But such an
expenditure of public funds would run counter both to professional
interests and to many of the traditions of democratic equality, and it
may have to wait for a widespread change in popular world-outlook.
2. —Footnotes Wholly or Partly Omitted in this Edition.
P. 12 n. Part of note omitted.
P. 15 n. Part of second note and whole of a third note omitted.
P. 19. Two notes omitted.
P. 28 n. Part of note omitted.
P. 29. Note omitted.
P. 32. Two notes omitted.
P. 37. Note omitted.
P. 52 n. Part of note omitted.
P. 74 n. Part of first note omitted.
P. 75 n. Part of second note omitted.
P. 82. Note omitted.
P. 94 n. Part of first note omitted.
P. 97 n. Part of first note omitted.




