

THE LABOUR QUESTION.
CONTENTS.
Fn 272
LAY SERMON— By Colonel R. G. Ingersoll ... ... 3-16
LAgOUR DISPUTES—By C. Bradlahgh, M.P. ... ... 17-19
DUTY OF LABOUR TO ITSELF— By The Rev. D. O’Donnell 19-21
WELFARE OF THE MILLIONS—By The Rev. F. Minton, M.A. 22-24
HO£IOR AND WEALTH— By John Ruskin ... ... ... 24-27
MASTERSHIP—By John Ruskin ... ... ... 28-29'
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF WEALTH—By G. P.
Macdonkll, M.A. ... ... ' ... ... ... 29-31
PROGRESS OF PUBLIC OPINION—By H. H. Champion ... 32
DUTIES OF THE RICH—By Mrs. Carter ... ... ... 32-33
CO-OPERATION—By R. Cowderoy ... ... ... 33
SOCIAL AFFAIRS— By Henry Georg* ... ... ... 34
TRADES UNIONISM—By G. Howell, M.P. ... ... 35-36
IDEAL UNIONISM—By Mann and Tillett ... ... ... 36-38
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER— By H. H. Champion ... 38
TEMPERANCE REFORM AND THE LABOUR QUESTION—By
Professor Ely ... ... ... ... ... 39-42;
A FINAL WORD— By Professor Ely ... ... ... 42-44
WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE F—By Sir W. Jones ... 4*
PREFACE.
THE opinions brought together in this little book are culled from many
sources. The writers, whose names are appended to each article,
are men in many walks of life, and their views on the labor question
or problem are in many respects as diverse as their various vocations.
They have one thing in common however, I believe. Each one gives his
honest thoughts, and they should be accepted as such, even though dis-
tasteful to the listener or reader. The great want of our age is honest
thought fearlessly and respectfully uttered, and earnest truthseeking
unbiassed by class feeling or the accidental surroundings of every day life.
As a seeker for more light on subjects of human welfare, I have thus,
compiled this small contribution to the problem of the labor question. I
hope it will help a little to promote discussion —full, free, and independent
inquiry and criticism from every point of examination. It has been very
hastily put together, amid other pressing business, but I hope in a little
while to return to the subject, and to give the results of my reading in a
larger volume. I shall be thankful and happy to receive from any of the
readers of this present book, their helpful thoughts with a view to in-
corporation in the larger book.
“Advance Australia” is the motto of our country, and the motto ought
to inspire us to step forward manfully in the path of progress to a better and
a higher life. We are blessed with opportunities possessed by no other
nation in this world, and we do a wrong to the whole of mankind if we
perform not our duty as thinking and acting men. We certainly are in
advance of Old World standards in many respects, but there is yet much to
be done. Too many of us, the large majority I may say, are indifferentists
or worse, taking no thought for the morrow, and living but an animal
existence. Every man of us ought to be a thinker, a worker for the good
of himself, his family, his country, and mankind. We ought to enquire
into the whys and wherefores of things. Many of our habits and customs
are mere slavish copies of Old World habits and ought to be shaken off,
or we should at least look closely into our reasons for following them.
For instance the drinking habit, which costs the little colony of Victoria


€1 millions of pounds sterling per annum. This demands inquiry; can a
nation which spends the large sum of -tt! lus. a year per head on intoxicating
liquors for every man, woman and child hoast of its civilization and
progress. This evidently requires reformation ; our resources are very much
wasted here. It certainly is a question in which the worker should take an
intelligent interest.
Our land laws, too, require thoughtful and careful consideration. The
power of the hind owner over both capital and labour is enormous. They
both pay tribute to him, and are very much in his power. They pay most
of the taxes ; he pays very little. His land is increased in value by their
industry. The rent or tribute they are obliged to pay him is increased,
but he returns none of the unearned increment to the State.
'The labour question, the land question, and the drink question, are
all c osely connected; they are largely one question. The labour question
and the drink question can be adjusted or settled by the workers and their
employers without the aid of legislative enactment. The land question is
a political question, and must be settled by the whole community through
their representatives in parliament when we can get honest politicians con-
trolled by intelligent and watchful electors. At present, politicians are
mostly humbugs.
It only remains for me to add the names of the books from which the
present excerpts have been taken. The extracts by John Euskin are taken
from two books, entitled Mimera Palveris and Unto this Last. Of the latter,
which consists of four essays, John Euskin says in his preface “that they
were reprobated in a violent manner by most of the readers of Comb ill
Magazine," where they originally appeared, and he adds “ Not a whit the
less, I believe them to be the best, that is to say the truest, Tightest worded,
and most serviceable things, I have ever written; and the last of them. Ad
Valorem, having had special pains spent on it, is probably the best I shall
ever write." Every sentence of these valuable humanitarian essays is worthy
the consideration of all true men and women. Labour Disputes, by Mr.
Bradlaugh, is taken from an excellent compilation entitled “Socialism,
Labour, and Capital.” issued by Messrs. Eoutledge, London. The articles
signed Rev. D. O’Donnell, and 11. Cowderoy, are from two pamphlets issued by
the Capital and Labour Federation League, to whose publications on co-
operation and profit sharing I would refer the reader. “ The Welfare of the
Millions, by llev. F. Minton, is from an excellent little book of the same name.
“Social Affairs” is from Henry George’s “Social Problems." Howell’s
“ Trades Unionism " is from the preface to the “ Conflicts between Capital and
Labour,” a book which should be in every working man’s library, as also
should be Professor Ely s “Labour Movement is America.” from which is
selected “The Relation of Temperance Reform to the Labour Movement.”
H. H. Champion’s articles are selected from contributions to the “Age”
newspaper and a paper in the “New Review” entitled “The Federation of
Labour.” An excellent little monthly paper entitled The Australian Herald ,
edited by the Rev. Charles Strong, contains in each issue some well considered
and helpful articles on the labour question and other questions of social import,
which certainly deserve a much wider circulation than they attain at present.
Believing with Burns that —
To make a happy household clime
For weans and wife
Is the true pathos and sublime
O’ human life.
I dedicate these pages to the employers and workers of Australasia, trusting
that the majority of them have at heart a genuine desire to advance Australia
to the foremost rank among the nations of the world, intellectually, morally,
physically, and sooia.ly.
Mri.bourne, October 6th, it go, W. T. PYKE.
“CONDUCT AND DUTY.”
A TREASURE boot of intellectual, physical, social, and moral
advice, selected from the teachings of thinkers and writers of
all times and countries; by W. T. Pyke. Padded morocco, 8/6;
half-calf, 7/6; library-calf, 5/-; cloth, extra gilt, 3/6; and cheap
edition at 2/6 cloth.


THE LABOUR QUESTION
Ladies and Gentlemen: In the greatest tragedy that
ihas ever been written by man —in the fourth scene of the
third act—is the best prayer I have ever read ; and when
I say “ the greatest tragedy,” everybody familiar with
Shakespeare will know that [ refer to “ King Lear.”
After he had been on the heath, touched with insanity,
■ coming suddenly to the place of shelter, he says:
I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep,
And this prayer is my text:
Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your unhoused heads, your unfed sides,
Your looped and windowed raggednese, defend you
From seasons such as these ? Oh, I have ta’en
Too little care of this. Take physic, pomp ;
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may'st shake the superflui to them,
And show the heavens more just.
That is one of the noblest prayers that ever fell from
'human lips. If nobody has too much, everybody, will
'have enough !
I propose to say a few words upon subjects that are
near to us all, and in which every human being ought to
'be interested —and if he is not, it may be that his wife
will be, it may be that his orphans will be ; and I would
like to see this world, at last, so that a man could die
tand not feel that he left his wife and children a prey to
The greed, the avaxice or the cxmelties of mankind. There
is something wrong in a government whei’e they who do
the most have the least. There is somethingv wi*ong,
• when honesty wears a rag, and rascality a robe; when the
Joving, the tender, eat a crust, while the infamous sit at
'banquets. I cannot do much, but I can at least sym-
pathize with those who suffer. Thei’e is one thing that
we should remember at the start, and if I can only teach
you that, to-night —unless you know it already—l shall


consider the few words I may have to say a wonderful
success. , i • r.
I want you to remember that everybody is as he must
be I want you to get out of your minds the old nonsense
of “free moral agency;” and then you will have chanty
for the whole human race. When you know that they
are not responsible for their dispositions, any more than
for their height; not responsible for their acts, any more
than for their dreams ; when you finally understand the
philosophy that everything exists as the result ot an
efficient cause, and that the lightest fancy that ever flut-
tered its painted wings in the horizon of hope was as
necessarily produced as the planet that in its orbit wheels-
about the sun—when you understand this, I believe you-
will have charity for all mankind including even youi-
self.
Wealth is not a crimes poverty is not a virtue —
although the virtuous have generally been poor. There
'is only one good and that is human happiness; and he
only is a wise man who makes himself and others happy.
I have heard all my life about self-denial. There never
was anything more idiotic than that. No man who does
right practises self-denial. To do right is the bud and
blossom the fruit of wisdom. To do right should always
be dictated by the highest possible selfishness and the
most perfect generosity. No man practises self-denial
unless he does wrong. To inflict an injury upon yourself
is an act of self denial. He who denies justice to another
denies it to himself. To plant seed that will forever bear
the fruit of joy, is not an act of self-denial. So tins idea
of doing good to others only for their sake is absurd.
You want to do it, not simply for their sake, but for your
own; because a perfectly civilized man can never be
perfectly happy while there is one unhappy being in this
universe
Let us take another step. The barbaric world was to
be rewarded in some other world for acting sensibly in
this. They were promised rewards in another world, it
they would only have self-denial enough to be virtuous in
in this. If they would forego the pleasures Ox larceny
and murder; if they would forego the thrill and bliss of
meanness here, they would be rewarded hereafter tor
their self-denial. I have exactly the opposite idea. Ho


right, not to deny yourself, but because you love yourself
and because you love others. Be generous, because it is
better for you. Be just because any other course is the
suicide of the soul. Whoever does wrong plagues him-
self, and when he reaps that harvest, he will find that he
was not practising self-denial when he did right.
If you want to be happy youi’self, if you are truly
civilized, you want others to be happy. Every man
ought, to the extent of his ability, to increase the happi-
ness of mankind, for the reason that that will increase his
.own. No one can be really prosperous unless those with
whom he lives share the sunshine and the joy.
The first thing a man wants to know and be sure of is
when he has got enough. Most people imagine that the
rich are in heaven, but, as a rule, it is only a gilded hell.
There is not a man in the city of New York with genius
■ enough, with brains enough, to own five millions of dollars.
Why P The money will own him. He becomes the key
to a safe. That money will get him up at daylight; that
money will separate him from his friends; that monSy
will fill his heart with fear; that money will rob his days
of sunshine and his nights of pleasant dreams. He cannot
own it. He becomes the property of that money. And
he goes right on making more. What for ? He does not
know. It becomes a kind of insanity. No one is happier
in a palace than in a cabin. I love to see a log house.
It is associated in my mind always with pure, unalloyed
happiness. It is the only house in the world that looks
as though it had no mortgage on it. It looks as if you
could spend there long tranquil autumn days ; the air
filled with serenity; no trouble, no thoughts about notes,
about interest—nothing of the kind ; just breathing free
•air, watching the hollyhocks, listening to the birds and
to the music of the spring that comes like a poem from
the earth. \
It is an insanity to get more than you want. Imagine
a man in this city, an intelligent man, say with two or
three millions of coats, eight or ten millions of hats, vast
warehouses full of shoes, billions of neckties, and imagine
that man'getting up at four o’clock in the morning, in the
rain, and snow, and sleet, working like a dog all day to
get another necktie ! Is not that exactly what the man


of twenty or thirty millions, or of five millions does
to-day P Wearing his life out that somebody may say,
“ How rich he is! ” What can he do with the surplus?
Nothing. Can he eat it F No. Make friends ? No.
Purchase flattery and lies? Yes. Make all his poor
relations hate him ? Yes. And then, what worry!
Annoyed, nervous, tormented, until his poor little brain
becomes inflamed, and you see in the morning paper.
“ Died of apoplexy.” This man finally began to worry
for fear he would not have enough neckties to last him
through.
So we ought to teach our children that great wealth
is a curse. Great wealth is the mother of crime. On
the other hand are the abject poor. And let me ask,
to-night, is the world forever to remain as it was when
Lear made his prayer ? Is it ever to remain as it is now ?
I hope not. Are "there, always to be millions whose lips
are white with famine? Is the withered palm to be
always extended, imploring from the stony heart of
respectable charity, alms ? Must every man who sits
down to a decent dinner always think of the starvmg ?
Must everyone sitting by the fireside think of some poor
mother, with a. child strained to her breast, shivering in
the storm ? I hope not. Are the rich always to be
divided from the poor,—not only in fact, but in feeling ?
And that division is growing more and more every day.
The gulf between Lazarus and Dives widens year by year,
only their positions are changed —Lazarus is in hell, and
he thinks Dives is in the bosom of Abraham.
And there is one thing that helps to widen this gulf.
In nearly every city of the United fetates you will find the
fashionable part, and the poor part. Ihe poor know
nothing of the fashionable part, except the outside
splendour; and as they go by the palaces, that poison
plant called envy springs and grows in their poor hearts..
The rich know nothing of the poor, except the squalor,
and rags, and wretchedness, and what they read in the
police records, and they say* “ Thank God, we are not like
those people ! ” Their hearts are filled with scoin and
contempt, and fhe hearts of the others with envy and
hatred. There must be some way devised for the rich and
poor to get acquainted. The poor do not know how
many well-dressed people sympathise with them, and the


Tich do not know how many noble hearts beat beneath
the rags. If we can ever get the Joying poor acquainted
with tlie sympathising rich, this question will be nearly
solved.
In a hundred other ways they are divided. If anything
should bring mankind together it ought to be a common
belief. In Catholic countries that does have a softening in-
fluence upon the rich and upon the poor. They believe the
same. So in Mohammedan countries, they can kneel in the
same mosque, and pray to the same Cod. But how is it with
us P The church'is not free. There is no welcome in the
velvet for the velveteen. Poverty does not feel at home
;there, and the consequence is, the rich and poor are kept
;apart, even by their religion. I am not saying anything
against religion. lam not on that question ; but I would
'think more of any religion, provided that even for one
•day in the week, or for one hour in the year, it allowed
'wealth to clasp the hand of poverty and to have, for one
'moment even, the thrill of genuine friendship.
In the olden times, in barbaric life, it was a simple
flung to get a living. A little hunting, a little fishing,
pulling a little fruit, and digging for roots —all simple ;
and they were nearly all on an equality, and comparatively
there were fewer failures. Living has at last become
■ complex. All the avenues are filled with men struggling
for the accomplishment of the same thing:
For emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue : if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
Like to an entered tide, they all rush by,
And leave you hindmost:
Or, like a gallant horse, fallen in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear.
The struggle is so hard. And just exactly as we have
risen in the scale of being, the per cent, of failures has
increased. It is so that all men are not capable of getting
a living. They have not cunning enough—intellebt enough,
muscle enough —they are not strong enough. They are too
generous, or they are too negligent; and then some people
seem to have what is called “bad luck ” —that is to say, when
anything falls they are under it; when anything bad
happens, it happens to them.
And now there is another trouble. Just as life becomes


complex and as everyone is trying to accomplish certain
objects, all the ingenuity of the brain is at work to get
there by a shorter way, and, in consequence, this has
become an age of invention. Myriads of machines have
been invented —every one of them to save labour. If these
machines helped the labourer, what a blessing they would
be! But the labourer does not own the machine ; the
machine owns him. That is the tx*ouble. In the olden
time, when I was a boy, even, you know how it was in the
little towns. There was a shoemaker —two of them —a
tailor or two, a blacksmith, a wheelwright. I remember
just how the shops used to look. I used to go to the
blacksmith shop at night, get up on the forge, and hear
them talking about turning horse-shoes. Many a night
have I seen the sparks fly and heard the stories that were
told. There was a great deal of human nature in those-
days! Everybody was'known. If times got hard, the-
poor little shoemakers made a living mending, half-soling,,
straightening up the heels. The same with the black
smith; the same with the tailor. They could get credit
they did not have to pay till the next January, and if
they could not pay then, they took another year, and they
were happy enough. Now, one man is not a shoemaker,.
There is a great building —several hundred thousand
dollars’ worth of machinery, three or four thousand people
not a single mechanic in the whole building. One sews
on straps, another greases the machines, cuts out soles,
waxes threads. And Avhat is the result ? M hen the
machines stop, three thousand men are out of employment..
Credit goes. Then come want and famine, and if they
happen to have a little child die, it would take them years
to save enough of their earnings to pay the expense of
putting away that little sacred piece of flesh. And yet,
by this machinery we can produce enough to flood the
world. By the inventions in agricultural machinery the
United States can feed all the mouths upon the earth.
There is not a thing that man uses that can not instantly
be over-produced to such an extent as to become almost
worthless; and yet, with all this production, with all this
power to create, there are millions and millions in abject
want. Granaries bursting, and famine looking into the
doors of the poor! Millions of everything, and yet


millions wanting everything and having substantially
nothing !
Now, there is something wrong there. We have got
into that contest between machines and men, and if
•extravagance does not keep pace with ingenuity, it is
•going to be the most terrible question that man has ever
settled. I tell you, to-night, that these things are worth
thinking about. Nothing that touches the futuie of our
race, nothing that touches the happiness of ourselves or
-our children, should be beneath our notice. We should
think of these things —must think of them —and we should
endeavour to see that justice is finally done between man
:and man. ~ .
Mv sympathies are with the poor. My sympathies are
with the workingmen of the Lnited States. Undeistand
>me distinctly. lam not an Anarchist. Anarchy is the
reaction from tyrannv. I am not a Socialist. lam not
;a Communist. lam an Individualist. Ido not believe in
tyranny of government, but I do believe in justice as
'between man and man.
What is the remedy ? Or, what can we think of—tor
•do not imagine that I think I know. It is an immense,
an almost infinite, question, and all we can do is to guess.
You have heard a great deal lately upon the land subject.
Let me say a word or two upon that. In the first place 1
•do not want to take, and I would not take, an inch of land
from any human being that belonged to him. If we ever
take it, we must pay for it—condemn it and take it—do
not rob anybody. Whenever any man advocates justice,
and robberv as the means, I suspect him.
No man should be allowed, to own any land that be does
not use. Everybody knows that —I do not care whether
he has thousands or millions. I have owned a great deal
of land, but I know just as well as I know 1 am living
that 1 should not be allowed to have it unless 1 use it.
And why ? Don’t you know jthat if people could bottle
the air, they would? Don’t you know that 'there would
be an American Air-bottling Association ? And don t
you know they would allow thousands and millions to die
for want of breath, if they could not pay for air ?I am
not blaming anybody. lam just telling how it is. Now,
,the land belongs to the children of Nature. Nature mvi.es
.into this world every babe that is born. And what would


you think of me, for instance, to-night, if I had invited'
you here—nobody had charged you anything, but you had l
been invited —and when you got here you had found one-
man pretending to occupy a hundred seats, another fifty,,
and another seventy-five, and thereupon you were com-
pelled to stand up —what would you think of the invita-
tion? It seems to me that every child of Nature is
entitled to his share of the land, and that he should not
be compelled to beg the privilege to work the soil, of a
babe that happened to be born before him. And why do
I sav this ? Because it is not to our interest to have a
•few landlords and millions of tenants.
The tenement house is the enemy of modesty, the enemy
of vii-tue, the enemy of patriotism. Home is where the
virtues grow. I would like to see the law so that every
home, to a small amount, should be free not only from
sale for debts, but should be absolutely free from taxation,,
so that every man could have a home. Then we will have-
a natioxx of patriots.
Now suppose that every man were to have all the land
he is able to buy. The Vanderbilts could buy to-day all
the land that is in farms in the state of Ohio —every foot
of it. Would it be for the best interest of that state to
have a few landlords and four or five millions of serfs r
So, I am in favor of a law finally to be carried out—not
by robberv, but by compensation, under the right, as the-
lawyers call it, of eminent domain so that no prison
would be allowed to own more land than he uses. lam
not blaming these rich men for being rich. I pity the-
most of them. I had rather be poor, with a little sym-
pathy in my heart, than to be rich as all the mines of earth
and iiot have that little flower of pity mmy breast. I do-
not see how a man can have hundreds of millions and pass
every day people that have not enough to eat. Ido not
understand it. I might be just the same way my self..
There is something in money that dries up the sources of
affection, and the probability is, it is this: the moment a
man gets money, so many men are trying to get it away
from him that in a little while he regards the whole human
race as his enemy, and he generally thinks that they could
be rich, too, if they would only attend to business as he
has. Understand, lam not blaming these people. There
is a good deal of human nature in us all. You remembei


the story of the man who made a speech at a Socialist
meeting 1 , and closed it by saying, “ Thank God, lam
no monopolist,” but as he sank to his seat said, But I
wish to the Lord I was ! ” We must remember that these
rich men are naturally produced. Do not blame them.
Blame the system !
Certain privileges have been granted to the few by the
government, ostensibly for the benefit of the many ; and
whenever that grant is not for the good of the many, it
should be taken from the few—not by force, not by robbery,
but by estimating fairly the value of that property, and
paying to them its value; because everything should be
done according to law and in order.
What remedy, then, is there F First the great weapon
in this country is the ballot. Each voter is a sovereign.
There the poorest is the equal of the richest. His vote
will count just as many as though the hand that cast it
controlled millions. The poor are in the majority in this
country. If there is any law that oppresses them, it is
their fault They have followed the life and drum of some
partv. They have been misled by others. No man should
go an inch with a party —no matter if that party is half
the world and has in it the greatest intellects of the earth
—unless that party is going his way. No honest man
should ever turn round to join anything. If it overtakes
him, good. If he has to hurry up a little to get to it,
good. But do not go with anything that is not going
your way ; no matter whether they call it Republican, or
Democrat, or Progressive Democracy—do not go with it
unless it goes your way.
The ballot is the power. The law should settle many
of these questions between capital and labor. But I
expect the greatest good to come from civilization, from
the growth of a sense of justice; for I tell you, to-night,
a civilized man will never want anything for less than it is
worth —a civilized man, when he sells a thing, will never
want more than it is worth —a really and truly civilized man
would rather be cheated than to cheat. And yet, in the
United States, good as we are, nearly everybody wants to
get everything for a little less than it is worth, and the
man that sells it to him wants to get a little more than it
is worth, and this breeds rascality on both sides. That
ought to be done away with. There is one step toward it


that we will take : we will finally say that human flesh,
human labor, shall not depend entirely on “ supply and
demand.” That is infinitely cruel. Every man should
give to another according to his ability to give—and
enough that he may make his living and lay something by
for the winter of old age.
Gio to England. Civilized country they call it. It is
not. It never was. lam afraid it never will be. Go to
London, the greatest city of this world, where there is the
most wealth —the greatest glittering piles of gold. And
yet,one out of every six in thatcity diesin a hospital, a work-
house, or a prison. Is that the best we are ever’ to know ? Is
that the last word civilization has to say ? Look at the
women in this town sewing for a living, making cloaks
that sell for $45, for less than forty.five cents ! Right
here—here, amid all the palaces, amid the thousands and
millions of property —here. Is that all civilization can
do ? Must a poor woman support herself, or her child, or
her children, by that kind of labor and with such pay —
and do we call ourselves civilized ?
Did you ever x’ead that wonderful poem about the sew-
ing woman ? Let me tell you the last verse:
Winds that hare sainted her, tell ye the story
Of the young life by the needle that bled,
Making a bridge over death’s soundless waters
Out of a swaying, and soul-cutting thread —
Over it going, all the world knowing
That thousands have trod it, foot-bleeding, before :
God protect all of us ! God pity all of us,
Should she look back from the opposite shore !
I cannot call this civilization. There must be some-
thing nearer a fairer division in this world.
You can never get it by strikes. Never. The first
strike that is a great success will be the last, because the
people who believe in law and order wdll put the strikers
down. The strike is no remedy. Boycotting is no remedy.
Brute force is no remedy. These questions have to be
settled by reason, by candor, by intelligence, by kindness;
and nothing is permanently settled in this world that has
not for its corner stone justice, and is not protected by
the profound conviction of the human mind.
This is no country for Anarchy, no country for Com-
munism, no country for the Socialist. Why ? Because


the political power is equally divided. What other
reason ? Speech is free. What other ? The press is un-
trammeled. And that is all that the right should ever
ask—a free press, free speech, and the protection
of person. That is enough. That is all I ask.
In a country like Russia, where every mouth is a
hastile and every tongue a convict, there may be some
excuse. Where the noblest and the best are driven to
Siberia, there may be a reason for the Nihilist. In a
country where no man is allowed to petition for redress,
there is a reason, but not here. This —say what you will
against it —this is the best government ever founded by
the human race ! Say what yon will of parties, say what
you will of dishonesty, the holiest flag that ever kissed
the air is our !
Only a few years ago morally we were a low people —
before we abolished slavery—but now, when there was no
claim except that of custom, when every man had an
opportunity, this is the grandest government of the earth.
There is hardly a man in the United States to-day, of any
importance, whose voice anybody cares to hear, who was
not nursed at the loving breast of poverty. Look at th*e
children of the rich. My God, what a punishment for
being rich ! So, whatever happens, let every man say
that this government, and this form of government, shall
stand.
“ But,” says some, “ these workingmen are dangerous.”
I deny it. We are all in their power. They run all the
cars. Our lives are in their hands almost every day.
They are working in all our homes. They do the labor
of this world. We are all at their mercy, and yet they do
not commit more crimes according to their number, than
the rich. Remember that. lam not afraid of them.
Neither am I afraid of the monopolists, because, under
our institutions, when they become hurtful to the general
good, the people will stand it just to a certain point, and
then comes the end—not in anger, not in hate, but from a
love of liberty and justice.
Now, we have in this country another class. We call
them “ criminals.” Let me take another step ;
’Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after.


Recollect what I said in the fh’st place—that every man
is as he must he. Every crime is a necessary product.
The seeds were all sown, the land thoroughly ploughed, the
crop well attended to, and carefully harvested. Every
crime is born of necessity. If you want less crime, you
must change the conditions. Poverty makes crime Want,
rags, crusts, failure, misfortune—all these awake the wild
beast in man, and finally he takes, and takes contrary to
law, and becomes a criminal. And what do you do with
him ? You punish him. Why not punish a man for
having the consumption ? The time will come when you
will see that that is just as logical. Wliat do you do with
the criminal ? You send him to the penitentiary. Is he
made better. Worse. The first thing you do is to try to
trample out his manhood, by putting an indignity upon
him. You mark him. You put him in stripes. At night
you put him iri darkness. His feeling for revenge grows.
You make a wild beast of him, and he comes out of that
place branded in body and soul, and then you won’t let him
reform if he wants to. You put on airs above him, because
he has been in the penitentiary. The next time you look
with scorn upon a convict, let me beg of you to do one
thing. Maybe you are not as bad as 1 am, but do one thing :
think of all the crimes you have wanted to commit; think
of all the crimes you would have committed if you had
had the opportunity ; think of all the temptations to
which you would have yielded had nobody been looking;
and then put your hand on your heart and say whether
you can justly look with contempt even upon a convict.
None but the noblest should inflict punishment, even on
the basest.
Society has no right to punish any man in revenge —no
right to punish any man except for two objects —one, the
prevention of crime; the other, the reformation of the
criminal. How can you reform him ? Kindness is the
sunshine in which virtue grows. Let it be understood by
these men that there is no revenge; let it be understood,
too, that they can reform. Only a little while ago I read
of a case of a young man who had been in a penitentiary
and came out. He kept it a secret, and went to work for
a farmer. He got in love with the daughter, and wanted
to marrv her. He had nobility enough tell the truth he
told the father that he had been in the penitentiary, fbe


father said, « You cannot have my daughter, because it
would stain her life.” The young man said, “Yes, it
would stain her life, therefore I will not marry her.” He
went out. In a few momenta afterward they heard the
report of a pistol, and he was dead. He left just a little
■note saying; “I am through. There is no need of my
diving longer, when I stain with my life, the one I love
And°yet we call our society civilised. There is a mistake.
I want that question thought of. I want all my fellow-
, citizens to think of it. I want you to do what you can to
do away with all cruelty. There are, of course, some
-cases that have to be treated with what might be called
, almost cruelty: but if there is the smallest seed of good
in any human heart, let kindness fall upon it until it grow’S,
and in that way I know, and so do you, that the world
will get better and better day by day.
Let us, above all things, get acquainted with each
other. Let every man teach his son, teach his daughter,
that labor is honorable. Let us say to our children ; It is
your business to see that you never become a burden on
others. Your first duty is to take care of yourselves, and
if there is a surplus, with that surplus help your fellow-
man. You owe it to yourself above all things not to be a
burden upon others. Teach your son that it is not only
his duty, but his highest joy, to become a home-builder, a
home-owner. Teach your children that the fireside is the
happiest place in this world. Teach them that whoever is
an idler, whoever lives upon the labor of others, whether
he is a pirate or a king, is a dishonorable person. Teach
them that no civilized man wants anything for nothing,
or for less than it is worth ; that he wants to go throug i
this world paying his way as he goes, and it he gets a
little ahead, an extra joy, it should be divided wrth another
,if that other is doing something for himself. Help othe s
to help themselves. ~. , ,
And let us teach that great wealth is not gre
happiness ; that money will not purchase love ; it. never
■ did and never can purchase respect; it never did and
never can purchase the highest happiness. I believe with
JJobert Burns :


If happiness have not her seat
And centre in the breast,
We may be wise, or rich, or great,
But never can be blest.
We must teach this, and let our fellow-citizens know
that we give them every right that we claim for ourselves.
We must discuss these questions and have charity—and
we will have it whenever we have the philosophy that
all men are as they must be, and that and
kindness are the only levers capable of raising mankind.
Then there is another thing. Let each one be true to
himself. No matter what his class, no matter what his
circumstances, let him tell his thought. Don t let his
class bribe him. Don't let him talk like a banker because
he is a banker. Don’t let him talk like the rest of the
merchants because he is a merchant. Let him be true to
the human race instead of to his little business —be true
to the ideal in his Heart and brain, instead of to his little
present and apparent selfishness —let him have a larger
and more intelligent selfishness —a generous philosophy,
that includes not only others but himself.
So far as I am concerned, I have made up my mind
that no organization, secular or religious, shall be my
master. I have made up my mind that no necessity of
bread, or roof, or raiment shall ever put a padlock on my
lips I hare made up my mind that no hope of prefer-
ment, no honor, no wealth, shall ever make me for one
moment swerve from what I really believe, no matter
whether it is to my immediate interest, as one would
think, or not. And while I live, lam going to do what
little I can to help my fellow-men who have not been as
fortunate as I have been. I shall talk on their side, I'
shall vote on their side, and do what little I can to con-
vince men that happiness does not lie in the direction of
great wealth, but in the direction of achievement for the
good of themselves and for the good of their fellow-men.
I shall do what little I can to hasten the day when this
earth shall be covered with homes, and when by countless
firesides shall sit the happy and the loving families of the
world.
R. Gr. iNGtfiRSOLL.


LABOUR DISPUTES.
In the wise opening speech, delivered at Jolimont, by
Mr. Thomas Burt, M.P., as President of the International
Miners’ Congress, the same keynote was most temperately
struck. “ Let the workmen everywhere demand and
insist upon free speech and the right of combination. Let
them trust to the reasonableness of their cause ; let them
regard as their greatest enemies, in whatever guise of
friendship they come, those who counselled intimidation,,
violence, and outrage. Such advice was not only im-
prudent and suicidal, but in a free country it was wicked
and criminal in the extreme.”
I am not one of those who believe that contentment
under wrong, or under unwholesome and vicious life-
conditions, is a desirable state for any one, whether
worker or employer.
Whilst the right, alike of employer and employed, to
determine any contract of employment in the manner
provided by the original contract, cannot be reasonably
denied, even though that may involve sudden cessation
of work, the consequences are possibly so disastrous to the
worker, that neither strike nor lock-out should be resorted
to until every possibility of conciliation has been
exhausted.
Speaking generally, strikes are suicidal and locks-out
are murderous, inasmuch as the labour for sale is a
perishable commodity, and its purchase-money is the only
reliable provision for the labourer and his family. Once
the hour or day has passed away, so much of a saleable
commodity is entirely lost, and from any increase of
future wage, this lost labour value is a certain deduction.
The unemployed labourer can only exist, during the strike
or lock-cut, by consuming previous individual savings, by
exhausting his personal credit with the local tradesmen,
or by living on the strike allowance provided by the Union,
that fund being made up out of the previous earnings of
himself and fellows. Sometimes he is aided by donations
from other Unions, and by donations from the general
public, or by being subsisted by voluntary charity, perhaps
by himself or members of his family becoming chargeable
to the parish, or by a mixture of all these sources. When
the strike is successful, there is a long list of goods in pawn;


debt at the grocery and baker’s shop; money drawn out
from the savings bank, co-operative store, or building
society ; children’s clothing in sore condition, to set off
against the success achieved. During the enforced idle-
ness, with home comforts diminished, the public-house
affords an assembling place and momentary relief, but
the remedy sometimes becomes a chronic disease. Wife
and children suffer permanently from every prolonged
strike. One of the most successful strikes of modern times
is the great Dock strike, and yet any one closely examining
the condition of the population specially affected, will
find many distinct evidences of continuing misery, and
will not always be so clear as to the permanent good
results. This is a successful strike, but what will be said
■of the recent unsuccessful Dock strike at Liverpool, where
tens of thousands were reduced to starvation, in order
that a victory might be claimed by Union officials, and
a barren victory it'would have been had it been achieved.
My conclusion is therefore distinctly against strikes, as
exhibitions of force often most disastrous to the workers,
and at best as of doubtful benefit. The only form of
strike against employers which, if not immediately bene-
ficial to the men, must at any rate be usefully educational,
is where the men unite together to exploit for themselves
the special industries with which they are familiar. As
Henry Crompton states it in his work on Industrial
Conciliation, “ the only industrial scheme which really
threatens the existence of the employer class is that of
co-operative production.” In co-operative production
experiments, the men would learn at their own cost, and
for their own profit, how far wage might be augmented
do what point the hours of labour might be lessened, and
what capital it was necessary to provide, consistently with
the maintenance of each industry. The regulations for
the preservation of health, and for the avoidance ot
possibilities of accident in working, would, in co-operative
production, all be within the control of the men themselves.
It must be conceded that up to the present, pure co-
operative production, has made comparatively small
headway in this country, nor does there appear any great
•disposition to advocate it amongst those who most strongly
denounce the too greedy appropriation by capitalists of
Ihe results of labour.


There is a very wide and growing difference in the
views of trades unionists as to efficient action in cases of
labour disputes. The older trade unionism sought, and
those who adhere to it still seek, to effect its objects by
conciliation, by arbitrament, by give and take. This
trades unionism has my heartfelt support. Each trade
is found dealing with its own grievances, and asserting its
own claims, though receiving help from, and in turn
giving assistance ,to, the other trades as emergencies
arise. From the newer trades unionism there is a
declaration that the old organisations and their conductors
have failed, and the aid of the law is said to be required
to compel submission from the employers where concession
cannot be voluntarily obtained. General declarations in
favour of “ less work and more money ” in all employ-
ments, are substituted for specific grievences of overwork
and underpay in particular industries. With the newer
trades unionism there is more unrest, less fore-thought,
more dash, and less steady work.
C. Bradlaugh.
THE DUTY OF LABOUR TO ITSELF.
If labour is to he loyal to itself it must encourage and
support those industries which do at least as much for labour
as for capital , and it must discountenance and withold its
support from those which do the most for capital anil the
least for labour. If we can place before you an industry
which is in the lowest degree beneficial to the working
man, if it be beneficial at all, an industry which returns
to the capitalist an enormous interest on his investment,
and that at the same time yields to the labourer the
smallest measure of support, we claim that working
man, to be loyal to labour, is bound to do all he can to
prevent the growth of all such industries. Without fear
of successful contradiction, I affirm that the Liquor Trade,
as such, stands foremost among the foes of labour. To
made this clear, let us appeal to the inexorable logic of
facts. Will you listen to the following figures taken from
the statistical record of Canada ? ~


TABLE.
Showing the ratio of Wages to Capital and to Produce
in some of the principal industries as compared with the
two industries of brewing and distilling.
Rate of Wages
Thadbs.
Rate of Wages
TO VALUE OF
Produce.
Capital.
Agricultural Implement Makers
Blacksmiths...
31 per cent.
m ~
67
43f „
274 per cent.
32 „
Boot and Shoe Makers
Furniture Makers
31* „
Fitters and Founders...
Printers
45 „
30 „
36 „
Saddle and Harness Makers
Tailors and Clothiers ...
58 „
23* „
56 „
32 ,
DISTILLERIES
BREWERIES
U „
11 »
10 „
Hi „
But we shall be asked how these figures stand in
relation to own industries. Well, here they are as far as
I have been able to obtain them. One of the Woollen
Factories near this city gives regular employment to 86
persons, whose wages last year amounted to £4781. The
wholesale value of the goods produced was £14,830.
A large biscuit factory in this city gives employment to
445 persons, to whom it paid in wages last year £30,000.
From the most reliable sources at my command I gather
the following figures in relation to the manufacture of
liquor. There are in Victoria eight distilleries which give
employment to 56 hands. The output in one year
amounted to 239,444 gallons of spirits. This quantity at
ten shillings a gallon would mean an annual wholesale
value of products of £119,722. There are 72 breweries
in this Colony which give employment to 1037 hands, an
average of about 14 each, who produced in one year
16,018,462 gallons of beer, valued wholesale at upwards
of £1,000,000. Placed in contrast these figures stand
thus ; -Seventy-two breweries give employment to 1037
hands. One food factory employs 445 persons, nearly one
half as many as all the breweries. This food factory
distributed amongst its 445 employees £30,000 a year as


wages. Allowing an average of fourteen workers to each
brewery and allowing £2 per week to each man, then each
of the 72 breweries will distribute amongst the labourers
the sum of £1456 per year. One woollen factory turns
-out £14,800 worth of goods per year. To do this they
employ eighty-six bands to whom they pay £4781 as
wages. Eight distilleries produced £119,722 worth of
liquor in one year, in the manufacture of which they
employed 56 hands, or 30 less than are employed in one
manufactory of woollen material. When we further
consider the almost entire absence of costly and delicate
machinery, the making of which gives employment of
labour in the brewing and distilling trades, in comparison
with that required in the two classes of industry just
referred to, we can understand how the Liquor Trade,
regarded as an industry, is no friend to labour. We would
say here and now that before the wage earner can make
any appreciable advance in the solution of this great
industrial problem, he must learn that in the reproductive
power of wages lies the secret of the matter. Our ideal
labourer will not he content to ask how he shall earn, but
rather how he shall spend, his wages. Not how he shall
secure the largest wage for the least of service, hut how he
shall spend what he earns so that the great brotherhood of
toil shall reap the greatest gain from the spending of it.
Whatsoever portion of his ivages he spends in support of that
to which is not a beneficial industry, to that extent he is disloyal
labour. Should he in spending his wages, in support of that
which does the least for labour and the most for capital,
deprive himself and family of the common necessaries of
life, such as food, clothing and house-shelter, which are
the fruits of beneficial industries, he is guilty of high
treason if he be judged according to the standards of
economic science. If we believe in the doctrine of the
greatest good for the greatest number, then we are bound
every man of us, to consume all we can of fruits of
beneficial industry. Only let the multitudinous host of
bread-winners abstain from supporting the non-beneficial
forms of industry, and they will soon compel the capital
invested in such concerns to find a sphere in those
branches of trade which do at least as much for labour as
for capital.
Rev. D. O'Donnell.


THE WELFARE OF THE MILLIONS.
The social benefactor is the one who makes the wisest
use of the capital that falls to his distribution : first, as a
means of bringing him by exchange possessions for
perfecting the "functions of his own life; and then of
giving him the widest possible helpful influence, both
personal and by means of his possessions, over the lives
of others.
The time has come when a gradual change will have to
be made in our industrial system, and, in fact, in the
industrial system of the world, for glutted markets are
becoming more and more common everywhere through
the unequal distributions of capital, while the angry
murmurs of the millions are becoming plainly audible..
The cure seems to lie in the abolition of monopolies, which
in their practical effect hinder the workmen from obtaining
anything like the real value of their labour, the monopo-
lists appropriating no small share, while there is no'
guarantee that they afford society any real benefit in
return. If the masses obtained wages proportional to
their real share in creative production, their purchasing
power would be enlarged. The higher classes should also
receive their just wages, which, whether in the form of
rents, interest, profits, or otherwise, would be of the nature-
of wages, if a real service were afforded to society, ihus
capital would be more evenly distributed among its pro-
ducers, and, if properly balanced, would quickly clear off
the congestions of capital, which in turn would give an
immense impetus to the further production of capital by
opening out employment for all.
That affairs are going to adjust themselves at once is
of course impossible. The change must be a process of
growth. Ten years may make a perceptible improvement
for the better, which will be more apparent in half a
century ; and probably a century or two may elapse before
there is sufficient to satisy the primary wants of all, for
such necessities as wholesome food, ample clothing, and
healthy habitations with their appliances, together with a
secure provision, probably by a system of insurance in
youth, for sustenance in something like comfort in old
age, or in case of accident. The removal of the dread of
abject poverty may be expected to have a wonderful


influence in curbing the present selfishness and greed,
which, like a panic in a theatre on fire, defeats the aims
of its victims, by causing them to neglect all other claims
except the central one of self-preservation.
Paradoxical though it may seem, one of the great means
of increasing the production of capital in the future will
probably be a considerable reduction in the hours of
labour, Man’s direct muscular power is an insignificant
factor in production. It has already been superseded to a
large extent by natural forces —steam, electricity, etc. Un-
limited force seems at man’s call. It is upon his
intellectual and moral capacities that his progress will in
future depend. The reduction of labour to eight hours a
day, and eventually perhaps to six, might be expected to
vastly increase the productive power of the masses, if the
muscular force set at liberty was directed to their in-
tellectual culture, instead of being exhausted, as now, in
mere physical exertion, in a direction where the forces of
nature would be infinitely more efficient. Of course the
reduction of the hours of labour would have to be
gradually introduced, according to the capacity of tKe
workmen to wisely use their leisure.
What ! reduce the hours of labour in the face of modern
competition ? it will be asked with not a little scorn,
Precisely for that reason, among others, I reply. Is
slavery economically possible in modern civilization, where
the master would have unlimited control over the victim
of his tyranny? ISTo; for free labour is more efficient,
and would drive it hopelessly from the market. And it
looks as if glutted markets are to teach us that the
industrial slavery of the masses under existing arrange-
ments must give place to juster distribution. As we look
back upon the past, we gain hope from the history of
labour. For the reduction of the hours of labour is no
untried experiment. Both economical and social advantages
have been proved to result from such reduction. What has
been the result of our factory legislation; the English work-
man works fewer hours per diem than the workman either of
the Continent or America, and English labour is pre-
eminent in efficiency. In the words of an American
economist, In England the hours of laboui are shoitei
and the wages higher than in any country in Europe ; and
the increase in the use of capital and the production of


wealth per capita is greater than any country in the world.
Instead of English products being undersold by those of
the long-hour and low-paid continental labourers, it is to
protect themselves against the competition of the products
of the nine-and-a-half-hour labourers of England that the
high tariffs are imposed in every country on the Continent,
and in this country as well. We are not afraid to compete
with the products of the thirteen or sixteen-hour labour of
Russia, Austria, and Italy, but it is the products of
England, where the hours of labour are the least of those
of any country in the world, that we are most anxious to
exclude.” “ With wages 84 per cent, higher in England
than the average for the whole of the Continent, the
general cost of production in this country is at least 30
per cent. Jess. . . . The explanation of this is, that
the use of steam machinery in this country is 117 per
■cent, greater than on the Continent. If we are to continue
this prosperity it must be by raising the amount of the
labour of quality, which can only be done by giving to
workers a trained intelligence in regard to their work.”
Rev. Francis Minton, M.A.
HONOUR AND WEALTH.
For the old and destitute, comfort and home should be
provided ; which provision, when misfortune has been by
the working of such a system sifted from guilt, would be
honourable instead of disgraceful to the receiver. For a
labourer serves his country with his spade, just as a man
in the middle ranks of life serves it with sword, pen or
lancet. If the service be less, and, therefore, the wages
during health less, then the reward when health is broken
may be less, but not less honourable; and it ought to be
quite as natural and straightforward a matter for a
labourer to take his pension from his parish, because he
has deserved well of his parish, as for a man in higher
rank to take his pension from his country, because he has
deserved well of his country.
It can never be shown generally either that the interests
•of master and labourer are alike, or that they are opposed ;
for, according to circumstances, they may be either. It is,


indeed, always the interest of both the work should be
rightly done, and a just price obtained for it; but, in the
division of profits, the gain of the one may or may not be
the loss of the other. It is not the master’s interest to
pay wages so low as to leave the men sickly and depressed,
nor the workman’s interest to be paid high wages if the
smallness of the master’s profit hinders him from enlarging
his business, or conducting it in a safe and liberal way.
A stoker ought not to desire high pay if the company is
too poor to keep the-engine-wheels in repair.
And the varieties of circumstance which influence these
reciprocal interests are so endless, that all endeavour to
deduce rules of action from balance of expediency is in
vain. And it is meant to be in vain. For no human
actions ever were intended by the Maker of men to be
guided by balances of expediency, but by balances of
justice. He has therefore rendered all endeavours to
determine expediency futile for evermore. No man ever
knew, or can know-, what will be the ultimate result to
himself, or to others, of any given line of conduct.
every man may know, and most of us do know, what is a
just and unjust act. And all of us may know also, that
the consequences of justice will be ultimately the best
possible, both to others and ourselves, though we can
neither say what is best, or how it is likely to come to
pass.
I have said balances of justice, meaning, in the term
justice, to include affection, —such affection as one man
owes to another. All right relations between master and
operative, and all their best interests, ultimately depend
on these.
The only means which the master has of doing justice
to the men employed by him is to ask himself sternly
whether he is dealing with such subordinate as he would
with his own son, if compelled by circumstances to take
such a position.
Supposing the captain of a frigate saw it right, or were
by any chance obliged, to place his own son in the position
of a common sailor : as he would then treat his son, he is
bound always to treat every one of the men under him.
So, also, supposing the master of a manufactory saw it
right, or were by any chance obliged, to place his own son
in the position of an ordinary workman ; as he would then


treat his son, he is hound always to treat every one of his
men. This is the only effective, true, or practical Role
which can be given on this point of political economy.
The whole question, respecting not only the advantage,
but even the quantity, of national wealth, resolves itself
finally into one of abstract justice. It is impossible to
conclude, of any given mass of acquired wealth, merely by
the fact of its existence, whether it signifies good or evil
to the nation in the midst of which it exists. Its real
value depends on the moral sign attached to it, just as-
sternly as that of a mathematical quantity depends on the
algebraical sign attached to it. Any given accumulation
of commercial wealth may be indicative, on the one hand,,
of faithful industries, progressive energies, and productive
ingenuities: or, on the other, it may be indicative of
mortal luxury, merciless tyranny, ruinous chicane, some
treasures are heavy with human tears, as an ill-stored
harvest with untimely rain ; and some gold is brighter in
sunshine than it is in substance.
And these are not, observe, merely moral or pathetic
attributes of riches, which the seeker of riches may, if he
chooses, despise ; they are, literally and sternly, material
attributes of riches, depreciating or exalting, incalculably,
the monetary signification of the sum in question. One
mass of money is the outcome of action which has created,.
—another, of action which has annihilated,—ten times as
much in the gathering of it ; such and such strong hands
have been paralyzed, as if they had been numbed by
nightshade: so many strong men’s courage broken so
many productive operations hindered ; this and the other
false direction given to labour, and lying image ot pros-
perity set up, on Dura plains dug into seven-times-heated
furnaces. That which seems to be wealth may in verity
be only the gilded index of far-reaching ruin ; a wrecker s
handful of coin gleaned from the beach to which he has
beguiled an argosy; a camp-follower’s bundle of rags un-
wrapped from the breasts of goodly soldiers dead ; the
purchase-pieces of potter’s fields, wherein shall be buried
together the citizen and the stranger. #
And therefore, the idea that directions can be given tor
the gaining of wealth, irrespectively of the consideration
of its moral sources, or that any general and technical law


of purchase and gain can be set down for national practice,
•is perhaps the most insolently futile of all that ever
beguiled men through their vices. So far as I know,
•there is not in history record of anything so disgraceful
to the human intellect as the modern idea that the com-
mercial text, “ Buy in the cheapest market and sell in the
dearest,” represents, or under any circumstances could
represent, an available principle of national economy.
Buy in the cheapest market ? —yes ; but what made your
market cheap ? Charcoal may be cheap among your
roof timbers after a fire, and bricks may be cheap in your
streets after an earthquake; but fire and earthquake may
may not therefore be national benefits. Sell in the
dearest P—yes, truly; but what made your market dear ?
You sold your bread well to-day: was it to a dying man
who gave his last coin for it, and will never need bread
more; or to a rich man who to-morrow will buy your
farm over your head ; or to a soldier on his way to pillage
the bank in which you have put your fortune ?
None of these things you can know. One thing only
you can know ; namely, whether this dealing of yours is
a ]just and faithful one, which is all you need concern
yourself about respecting it; sure thus to have done your
own part in bringing about ultimately in the world a state of
things which will not issue in pillage or in death. And
thus every question concerning these things merges itself
ultimately in the great question of justice.
There is no Wealth but Life. Life, including all its
powers of love, of joy, and of admiration. That country is
the richest which nourishes the greatest number of noble and
happy human beings; that man is richest who, having
perfected the functions of his own life to the utmost, has also
the widest helpful influence, both personal, and by means of
his possessions, over the lives of others.
John Ruskin.
From “ Unto this Last.” v
To make a happy fireside clime
For weans and wife;
Tliat’s the true pathos and sublime
O’ human life.— Burns.


MASTERSHIP.
There are, therefore, —let me finally enforce, and leave-
with the reader, this broad conclusion, —three things to be
considered in employing any poor person. It is not
enough to give him employment. You must employ him.
first to produce useful things ; secondly, of the several
(suppose equally useful) things he can equally well
produce, you must set him to make that which will cause
him to lead the healthiest life; lastly, of the things
produced, it remains a question of wisdom and conscience
how much you are to take yourself, and how much to
leave to others. A large quantity, remember, unless you
destroy it, must always be so left at one time or another;
the only questions you have to decide are, not what you
will give, but when, and how, and to whom, you will give.
The natural law of human life is, of course, that in youth
a man shall labour and lay by store for his ©ld age, and
when age comes, shall use what he has laid by, gradually
slackening his toil, and allowing himself more frank use
of his store ; taking care always to leave himself as much
as will surely suffice for him beyond any possible length
of life. What he has gained, or by tranquil and unarudous
toil continues to gain, more than is enough for his own
need, he ought so to administer, while he yet lives, as to
see the good of it again beginning, in other hands; for
thus he has himself the greatest sum of pleasure from it,,
and faithfully uses his sagacity in its control. Whereas
most men, it appears, dislike the sight of their fortunes
going out into service again, and say to themselves, “ I
can indeed nowise prevent this money from falling at last
into the hands of others, nor kinder the good of it from
becoming theirs, not mine; but at least let a merciful
death save me from being a witness of their satisfaction ;
and may God so far be gracious to me as to let no good
come of any of this money of mine before my eyes.”
As things stand, a man holds it his duty to be temperate
in his food, and of his body, but for no duty to be temper-
ate in his riches, and of his mind. He sees that he ought
not to waste his youth and his flesh for luxury ; but he
will waste his age, and his soul, for and think he
does no wrong, nor know the delirium tremens of the
intellect for disease. But the law of life is, that a man
should fix the sum he desires to make annually, as the food


he desires to eat daily; and stay when he has reached
the limit, refusing increase of business, and leaving it to
others, so obtaining due freedom of time for better
thoughts. How the glut tony of business is punished, a bill
of health for the principals of the richest city houses, issued
annually, would show in a sufficiently impressive manner.
Let inventive men cease to spend their existence
incessantly contriving how cotton can be made cheaper ;
and try to invent a little how cotton at its present
cheapness could be somewhat justlier divided among us.
“ Let inventive men consider whether the secret of
this universe does after all consist in making money.
With a hell which means —‘ failing to make money,’ Ido
not think there is any heaven possible that would suit one
well. In brief, all this mammon gospel of supply and
demand, competition, lassez fatre, and devil take the
hindmost ” (foremost, is it not, rather, *Mr. Carlyle ?),
“begins to be one of the shabbiest gospels ever preached.’’
—From “ Munera Pulveris.” John Ruskin.
THE DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
OF WEALTH.
A. true conception has not yet been formed of what are
the duties and responsibilities of wealth.
The saying that a man may do what he likes with his
own begs a great many questions. It is at best a very
inexact legal maxim, and it is a very dangerous social
maxim; its careless use exemplifies the mischievous habit
of treating our legal and our moral obligations as identical.
The legal and the moral ideas which we attach to
property, to a man’s own, are not identical; they are
often in absolute conflict. There are many modes of
acquiring property and of using it which infringe no law,
but which are forbidden by plain principles of honour and
morality. The basis of the right of property is some-
times said to be this : that a man should be entitled to
hold that which by his own industry and skill he has
made or acquired, or which some other person has by gift
transferred to him. Think whither a rigorous application
of this principle would lead us. Let a man of wealth
apply it to himself, and by its light trace the gradual ac-
cumulation of his store. Let him frankly and candidly


compare himself with other men ; let him consider how
far he stands above the average point of capacity, of in-
dustry, of prudence; and then let him put side by side
his own wealth and the average wealth of his fellow-
citizens. To what extent will he find that, so far as he
is concerned, his fortune is unearned, is represented by
no supeiior skill or industry, and is due to the fact that
he is a member of a great society, whose countless, per-
sistent, urgent wants bring prosperity to those who have
the good fortune to supply them ? Exact calculation is
impossible; but surely he will confess that the proportion
of unearned wealth is considerable. He will be ready to
see how solid a basis of truth there is in socialism, when
considered as a moral, not an economical, doctrine. Com-
paring himself with the artisan who makes a living in his
factory, or with the beggar who painfully submits to his
charity, he will hardly say : the difference of our circum-
stances is a fair return for my superior worth—l am a
a hundred times, a thousand times more deserving than
these men. For he will know that such a plea is pre-
posterous, and that success in life, though it may be a
rough test, is not a measure of superiority Not in envy,
but with truth, are gx-eat accumulations named after the
blind-folded goddess of fortune. Thei’efoi’e, when we say
that a man may do what he likes with his own because he
has earned it, we speak with serious qualification. We
differ fx’om the socialists in holding that distributive
justice cannot be secured by the action of the State; but
do not let us on that account shut our eyes to the fact on
which their theories are founded —the fact that wealth is
not strictly apportioned according to labour and merit.
The notioxx of practically absolute ownership, which is a
legal necessity, is inadmissable in point of morality. If
there be any such thing as social duty, the rich hold their
riches in trust. They are called upon by the most solemn
of obligations to acquire them not otherwise than justly,
and to use them for the permanent benefit of society. It
is a counsel of pex-fection, no doubt; yet we should have
advanced far if the existence of the obligation were widely
recognised. For it has many plain applications which
demand no impossible perfection in him who has acquii'ed
or is bent on acquiring wealth. If he be an employer of
labox’, he will never plead the growing keenness of com-


petition as an excuse of exerting rigorously, still less of
overstepping, the powers which the law confers upon him;
and if this duty stand, as it well may stand, in the way of
his making a fortune, then he will moderate his own
ambitions rather than make heavier the burdens of others.
It does not need the just man made perfect to rise above
the standard of the Factory Acts in dealing with his work-
men. Yet even that standard is too high for many,
whose names each year form a long and dreary catalogue
in the Factory Inspector’s Report; and many more who
in this vast city are guilty of overdriving men and women
by practices that no Act of Parliament can touch, and
■which nothing save the growing strength of opinion can
sweep away. To rise from this low level is no ira-
rpossihility. Fortunately, there are amongst us not a few
who guide their business lives by a far higher standard
than that of the law, who do not consider that they are
free from responsibility when they have pa.d the wages
agreed upon ; but who strive to enable their workmen to
live in conditions that tend to virtue and dignity. 1 heir
example reaches far, and will gradually raise the general,
level. And thus steadily we shall feel the action of one
of the greatest causes, and a sure accompaniment of social
progress. But it is not an idea that will spread rapidly.
Gross forms of an anti-social conduct still abound among
the rich as well as among the poor. When one hears of
men and women, honourable by repute, descending to the
unspeakable meanness of using their social position to re-
strict the political freedom of their dependents ; when
every day one witness the degrading worship of wasteful,
self-indulgent, and unbeautiful luxury, and of lives spent in
-ostentatious and ignoble idleness, the morabsation of
wealth seems to recede to an impossible distance. But
we may hope on ; we may believe that
“ The world is growing still,
As once it grew from chaos and from night; ”
for we have the undoubted fact that within living memory
—to go much further back to the days before steam and
factories, would prove little—there has been a steady
movement in advance. Whosoever has not that hope is
without any real belief in social progress. For him the
.■social problem is insoluble.
G. P. Macdonell, M.A»


PROGRESS OF PUBLIC OPINION.
Men no longer believe that the purchase of labour in
the cheapest market is the whole duty of man, or it they
believe it have become ashamed to say so; and that in
itself is a proof of the change in public opinion it is
unfortunately true that a good deal of the sympathy for
the poorly paid is like the charity that prompts indis-
criminate almsgiving. High living develops a sort of
<*out in the conscience, and the twinges during an attack
induce the victim to practise a certain amount of abstinence.
The attacks are fitful and not of long duration. But they
show that the conscience exists. The bad employer or
the rack-renting landlord may be unable as yet to see the
iniquity of his own practices, but he has at any rate
reached a state of grace in which he is prepared to
condemn similar practices on the part of other peop e.
So rapidlv is this process of conversion going on that it
is possible to believe that even in our generation a man
who is known to have grown rich by taking advantage ot
the necessites of the poor may find himself subjected to
social ostracism just as though he appeared in thet arJc
in a pot-hat, ate peas with a knife, or committed any
other outrage on the feelings of the community.
H. H. Champion.
DUTIES OF THE RICH.
The rich ought to look upon it, not only as their
bounden duty, but as their greatest privilege, to be ablo
to devote themselves to the general good and happiness of
mankind. Instead of looking upon fortune as a special
rio-ht, belonging solely to themselves and to be used only
for their own gratification, they should hold it as a
solemn charge for the common weal—a great gift m
serious trust for others. Of what use is the concentra-
tion of wealth if it is not to be employed for good pur-
poses; if property be universally expended only for selfish
ends, it becomes a question whether the State may not be
justified in restricting the amassing of riches, or in en-
deavouring to direct as far as posssible their re-distnbu-
tion In advancement towards virtue, nobleness, sim-
plicity of life and unselfishness, let the happy possessors-


of wealth, position, and influence, lead the van, and the
poorer classes will not then envy them nor seek to rob
them of a responsibility held for the benefit of all.—
Mrs. F. J. Carter, in Victorian Review for Sept., 1880.
CO-OPERATION—AN IDEA FOR UNIONISTS.
The wide-spread evils of strikes and lock-outs are, alas !
too familiar to every intelligent observer amongst us. No
one will contend that in some instances there is not a
genuine grievance at the bottom of the quarrel; but the
trades’ union strike is a barbarous and stupid remedy.
This is what a recognised friend of the cause of labonr
says about them : —“ A trades’ union strike is a contest
of starvation. It is a siege of capital with a view to its
reduction by famine, in which the besiegers are more
likely to suffer than the enemy. It is a waste of wealth
in order to increase it. It is the maddest device known
in war in which the belligerents who have little strength
render themselves helpless in order to fight.” We scarcely
need to quote examples in proof of the unwisdom of
strikes, but here is one. In a great strike that took place
in Lancashire some years ago the weavers kept 4000 looms
idle for a whole year. One of the strikers put the case
from a trades’ union point of view, thus: —“ In Colne there
are 4000 looms, in East Lancashire there are 90,000 looms.
If the Colne strike had not taken place the prices all over
East Lancashire would have been reduced to the Colne
standard. Therefore East Lancashire saved money by
contributing £20,000 to the Colne strike.” The answer of
an advocate of co-operation was that the reduction of
wages mentioned was not a probable contingency; but
apart from that, if the Colne people, instead of going on
strike for a year, had kept at work, but lived on half
wages, as they had to do during the strike, and saved the
other half, and if the East Lancashire people had still
subscribed the £20,000 the result would have been £54,000
in hand. That money would have set to work in perpetuity
for the hands themselves 360 out of the 4000 looms in
Colne! The self-same effort which threw then into
•comparative beggary would have raised them into com-
parative independence.”
From a Lecture by Mr. B. Cowderoy,


SOCIAL AFFAIRS.
A civilization is possible in which the poorest could
have all the comforts and conveniences now enjoyed bj
the rich, in which prisons and almhouses would be need-
less and charitable societies unthought of. Such a
civilization only waits for the social intelligence that will
adopt means to ends. Powers that might give plenty to
all are already in our hands.
The application of intelligence to social affairs has not
kept pace with the application of intelligence to in-
dividual needs and material ends. Natural science strides
forward, but political science lags. Knowledge has vastly
increased; industry and commerce have been revolu-
tionized; but whether free-trade or protection is best for
a nation we are not yet agreed. The progress of civiliza-
tion requires that more and more intelligence be devoted
to social affairs, and this not the intelligence of the few,
but that of the many. We cannot safely leave politics to
politicians, or political economy to college professors-
The people themselves must think, because the people
alone can act.
The salvation of society, the hope for the free, full de-
velopment, of humanity, is in the gospel of brotherhood,,
—the gospel of Christ. Social progress makes the well-
being of all more and more the business of each ;it binds
all closer and closer together in bonds from which none
can escape. He who observes the law and the proprieties,-
and cares for his family, yet takes no interest in the
general weal, and gives no thought to those who are
trodden underfoot, save now and then to bestow alms, is.
not a true Christian. Nor is he a good citizen. The duty
of the citizen is more and harder than this.
The intelligence required for the solving of social
problems is not a rare thing of the intellect. It must be
animated with the religious sentiment and warm with
sympathy for human suffering. It must stretch out
beyond self-interest, whether it be the self-interest of the
few or the many. It must seek justice. For at the
bottom of every social problem we shall find a social
wrong.
Henry George.


TRADES UNIONISM.
I have been forcibly struck with the enormous changes;
which have taken place as regards industrial questions.
Trades unions were denounced in the press, on the plat-
form, in the pulpit, and in parliament ; not occasionally,
but constantly, persistently, and virulently. Now trade-
unions are bepraised and commended by all sorts and
conditions of men. Their influence is sought socially and
politically, and combination is preached as the one great
panacea for all kinds of-social evils, even by the Lord’s-
Committee on “ Sweating.”
The one valuable lesson which trade unions have taught
and enforced is ; That labour has its rights as well as its
duties; and that capital has its duties as well as its
rights. Formerly we heard nothing except the rights of
labour on the one hand, and the rights of capital on the
other. Rights and duties cannot be divorced; the one is
involved in the other. The recognition of this fact has
led to the establishment of Boards of Conciliation for
dealing with labour disputes. Those Boards may not
have been as successful as could be desired ; but they
have done, and are doing most excellent work in several
industries. Newer developments and a wider field are
opening to them ; moderation, prudence, and a determin-
ation, on both sides, to do what is right, will ensure-
industrial peace and progress. The old motto of trade
unionists is : “ A fair day’s work for a fair day’s wage. ’
Older still it was : “The labourer is worthy of his hire.”
The equitable proportion of work to Avages must be
settled by workman and employers. This phase constitutes
labour and capital in debate. If properly conducted,
antagonism will be minimised, and the more acute phases
will be largely diminished, if not entirely prevented.
Wrongful claims will be abandoned, and rightful dues;
will be conceded, Avhen fair-minded men on both sides sit
at the same table, on an equal footing, to discuss the
terms and conditions of employment, with the view of
s jttling them upon an equitable basis.
Labour and capital in alliance is less easy of realisation,
although some progress has been made in this direction
also. The simpler form of industrial partnership has
has been tried, and has succeeded in many cases ; but it


has had its failures. Industrial co-operation has largely
extended, in the more difficult field of production, as well
as in distribution. When workmen are engaged mutually
in production, they begin to realise some of the difficulties
of so employing capital as to ensure a return for the
money invested, as well as good wages during the period
■of production. Only the more thoughtful and thrifty of
the workmen have as yet voluntarily undertaken the
responsibilities of self-employment, by associative effort
and capital. Some of the “new trade unionists ’’talk
widely on these subjects. They think that they have
discovered how to get rid of capitalists, abolish profits, and
■do away with wages, and yet promote the welfare of the
masses and the prosperity of the country. Something of
this might be accomplised by the co-operation of labour
and capital, for the mutual good of each, and for the
.common good of all. But these men are not co-operators.
'They denounce'trade unions and co-operation alike, when it
suits their purpose. They look to the state for aid. But
history shows, especially industrial history, that self-
reliance, self-help, by individual effort, and mutual help,
by associative effort, are the only practicable means
whereby the condition of the people can be permanently
improved.
George Howell, M.P.
—From “ Conflicts of Capital and Labour .”
IDEAL UN lON ISM. —By Messrs. Mann and Tillet.
An attack had been made by some trades unionists of
the old school upon the new trades unionism, in which it
is broadly hinted that lam its motive power. In reply
Mann and Tillet have issued a phamplet from which I
quote the following extracts :
We have thrown ourselves into this work, and whatever
genuine enthusiasm in a noble and righteous cause can do,
tempered, we trust, with all necessary discretion, shall
be done. Poverty can be abolished, in our opinion, and
it is the work of the trades unionists to do this. We
want to see the necessary economic knowledge imparted
in our labour organisations, so that labour in the future


shall not be made the shuttlecock of political parties.
Our trades unions shall he the centres of enlightenment,
and not merely the meeting place for paying subscriptions
and receiving donations. The organisation of those who
are classed as unskilled is of the most vital importance, and
must receive adequate attention; no longer can the’
skilled assume with a sort of superior air that they are
the salt of the earth. The man or the woman who
honestly toils, no matter in what capacity, is of the most
vital concern to the community.
A new enthusiasm is required, a fervent zeal that will
result in the sending forth of trade union organisers as
missionaries through the length and breadth of the
country. Clannishness in trade matters must be super-
seded by a cosmopolitan spirit; brotherhood must not
only be talked of hut practised.
Nevertheless, what we desire to see is a unification of
all, a dropping of all bickerings, and an earnest devotion
to duties taking the place of the old indifference. The
cause we have at heart is too sacred to admit of time
being spent quarreling amongst ourselves, and, whilst we
make no pretence to the possession of special virtues, we
are prepared to work unceasingly for the economic
emancipation of the workers.
We trust that areal religious fervor will be thrown
into the grand work of organising the workers of the
metropolis, which will, of course, find its counterpart
throughout the country, resulting in such action being
taken, socially and politically, as shall make it possible
for all men to be steadily and continuously employed
under such conditions that they and their families shall
be able at all times to procure, not merely the necessaries-
of life as ordinary understood, but everything that induces
to the elevation of humanity, to the development of our
better faculties, and to the crushing out of all that is-
mean and base. We will above all things endeavor to he
true to ourselves, and we call upon all who will to respond
to the call of duty as a religious work.
Further, I find in the Monthly Record of the Dockers’
Union an editorial note (written by Tom Mann) appended
to a letter which appears to belittle the objects of trades-
unionism. Mr. Mann says :
Others in their speeches habitually refer to the


•capitalists as being the real hinderers of progress, and
argue as though the workmen were practically unanimous
,in tbeir desire for a great change, but could not bring it
.about, the real fact being that the majority of the workers
are either so ignorant or apathetic that they will not
take the first steps to prove that they have any real
concern in the matter, and therefore it is, in our opinion,
.foolish to spend time in denunciation of capitalists.
We are far from being pessimists, but is it not still
true, as Mazzini put it a generation ago, that “ the peoples
'.lack that social faith which is the parent of victory ; the
.faith that arouses the multitudes; faith in their own
destiny, in their own mission, and in the mission of the
epoch ; the faith that combats and prays ; the faith that
.enlightens and bids men advance fearlessly in the ways
of God and humanity, with the sword of the people in
their hand, the religion of the people in their heart, and
the future of the people in their soul.”
—(Quoted by Mr. Champion in the “ Aye ” Newspaper.)
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER.
For the bottom truth in all this is that there is no salvation
for society or for labour in any of the mechanical panaceas
that are preached, such as Trades Unionism, Go-operation or
Socialism. I have had some experience, and it teaches me
that all depends on the spirit that may or may not he behind
'these penaceas. When the spirit in ivhich these things are
practiced is a pure and noble one, they contain the possibility
■of the redemption of the world. When the spirit dies out of
them they may he as fair on the outside as Dead Sea apples,
■hut they are nothing in reality but dust and ashes. If you
Australian workmen are set upon establishing a Holy Alliance
of the English speaking peoples of the earth —and you may
•do it if you ivill —its two fundamental principles must he
that it truly relies for its power on moral, not physical, force,
■and refuses to treat even its opponents as anything hut
■brothers.
H. H. Champion.


THE RELATION OF TEMPERANCE REFORM!
TO THE LABOUR MOVEMENT.
Labour organizations and their leaders have evidently
been more and more impressed with the fact that in-
temperance is one of the deadliest foes of the workingmen,
of this country, and their sentiment in favor of temperance;
reform has been becoming more intense. Evidences ot
this abound, and may be found in labour platforms, in-
reports of meetings of workingmen, and in the labour press.-
It is scarcely too much to'say that the labour organization*
of the country are, at least, temperance organizations, and
many of their members and leaders are out-spoken total 1
abstainers and prohibitionists. Every one knows that
this is the ease with that much misunderstood and more
maligned organization, the Knights of Labor.
The sum of money which a workingman who is-
moderate drinker, or only an occasional drinker, can
save in a few years by the practice of total abstinence,
may not seem large, and let us confess frankly that it is
small, and as the rate of interest falls, becomes smaller
but it is a mistake to undervalue the utility of a small,
sum of ready money, for at a critical period it will often
prove to be the difference between a life ot comfort, usetu -•
ness, health, contentment, and a life of discouragemen
and poverty. Even so small a sum as fifty dollars may be
the turning-point, and a deposit of ten dollars m a-
savings bank will spare one many a humiliation
These are homely old-fashioned arguments but they
cannot be repeated too often. They are unfortunately
apt to arouse irritation and ill-will on the part of working-
men, because they are frequently put forward as the only
thing which needs to be said on the subject ot poverty.
They are too often made a pretext on the part of the
well-to-do, for their failure to concern themselves with t e
labour problem. It is very comfortable to the self-
complacency of a plutocrat, as he sips his c ampagne, o
say “If the workingmen would stop drinking and save
their money, they would never lack in this land of plenty..
Intemperance is the cause of poverty and the only an i-
poverty society needed is a society of one—each man for
himself.” Because this is so unjust and because its
injustice is so keenly felt, the large gram of truth m it is


apt to be overlooked. It is this sort of talk more than
anything else which has closed the ears of too many
thinking workingmen to valid temperance argument. The
time lost on account of intemperance, and the strength of
body wasted, have frequently been mentioned. Professor
Huxley, the naturalist, has told us what kind of a body-
broad shoulders and deep chest —he would wish for his
son. He lays stress on physical strength, because in this
age of sharp competition the turning-point of a life may
be included in a few months, weeks, or days, and during
this time final success may depend on power to sustain
continuous exertion of the most intense kind. It is
frequently necessary, to enable one to take the tide of
fortune at its flood, to undergo arduous toil for a period
of even years. Doubtless life is too intense and com-
petition is too sharp, but the struggle for life must always
be severe, and there is no prospect of improvement in a
near future. lie who burdens himself with hcibits which
waste even a little time and dissipate even a little physical
energy , enters the race handicapped ; a loss of energy of
which the loser may not even be conscious, has un-
doubtedly turned the scale of fortune against many a man.
The loss of mental energy is far more serious . on the
whole, than the loss of physical strength, and this greater
loss is experienced by many who never become intoxicated
and who regard themselves as moderate drinkers.
The wage-earning classes need every bit of mental
capacity which they possess or can acquire, to enable
them to attain well-being in the struggle of modem
industrial life. The wage-earning classes, as classes,
must act solidly together. The solidarity of their interest
can be disputed by no fair-minded and competent observer.
Now, if this is so, every ivage-earner who wastes any of
■his resources of body or mind by the use of alcoholic
drinks, is an enemy of his class. At what disadvantage
in dealing with employers are sullen and incompetent
men, with no reserve of accumulated earnings, as
compared with bright, open, and determined men ! The
talk about the equality of labour and capital in labour
contracts is a farce, but why make the inequality need-
lessly great ? Strikes occur too frequently, but that they
are sometimes necessary is genei-ally conceded. Upright
and intelligent men will be very careful about entering on


a strike, but when once undertaken, they will make a
,r o od fight. What is the effect of intempeiance and
at tendant lawlessness on strikes Y It is to answer
the question. Disorder is so manifestly injurious to
strikers, that unscrupulous employers have been accused
of sending emissaries among them to stir it up. W orking-
meu should remember Cromwell's praying soldiers, and
the terror they were to their finally vanquished enemies.
I think that absolutely temperate strikers, fleeing all
association with saloons*.would inspire an unscrupulous-
individual or corporate employer with a new terror.
A good point was made in the testimony given by Mr.
Alphonso Crosby before the United States Senate Com-
mittee, to which attention has already been called, lie
grt : I that the wages of mechanics were ; set by drinking
men, because drinking men were improvident, and,,
having no economic reserve, are obliged to take what
they could get ; they had nothing to fall hack on. this
is in keeping with what has been said about the soliditary
of the interests of labour. Nothing is more disastrous to
a man who has something to sell than to be obliged to
force it on the market. A commodity under those
circumstances will frequently not bring half-price. Now
he who is obliged to force labour on the labour market
does a thing equally disastrous, and his conduct is
injurious to every workingman. .
Intemperance weakens the working people in another
way. It is made a reproach to them, and the innocent
suffer with the guilty. It serves their opponents as a
very efficient weapon. With the ordinary non-partisan
—the man neither employer nor employed, in the usual
sense —what is the most telling argument against the
present agitation for the eight-hour day ? Undoubtedly
this : “ More leisure means more time and more money
for the saloon.” Doubtless this is untrue, but in a good
cause we ought not to give our enemies any handle to use
against us.
A continual subject for discussion among workingmen
is political action. It requires all the unirnpared power
of the keenest intellects at their command, to decide
what political course it is best to take, and when any
course is taken, it demands the utmost of their patience
and self-control.


We heai* in political economy of “ the seen and the
unseen,” the unseen meaning simply that which is not
readily seen. Now I think it is manifest that the worst
effects of intemperance, considered from the standpoint of
the labour movement, belong to the unseen. Is it not
evident that temperance workers are among the best
friends of the wage-earners of the country , and that any
labour leader who has not sufficient mental power to grasp
this , is unfit for his position? and , finally , that any
intemperate labourer is an enemy to his class ?
By Richard T. Ely.
—From “ The Labour Movement in America .”
A FINAL WORD TO WORKINGMEN.
Let every workingman try to make himself more indis-
pensable in his place, a.better workman and a better man.
If every member of society is ever to receive a sufficient
quantity of economic goods to satisfy all rational wants,
products must be increased in quantity and improved in
quality. If we ever expect to use our opportunities to the
best advantage , we must improve our characters. Landing
together will be of little avail to worthless men or a worthless
■ cause.
There is no atom of help to you or to any in drink,—-
the poor man’s curse so often, and so often the rich man s
shame. Every effort making to promote temperance
among you should receive the warmest encouragement.
Beware of demagogery , especially political party ism,
which will give illusory triumphs , but leave to you only
wretched failure. Be not stepping-stones for others to vault
into place. Cast off the slavery of party politics, and with
faith in the triumph oj righteousness, ally yourselees to every
endeavour to elevate and purify public life. You have far
more than others at stake in this. While the majority of
you reject socialism, I am certain that most of you agree
with me that along certain lines the functions of the State
should be increased. Government cannot do everything,
but it can do much. Yet when this is suggested, corruption
in the sphere of public life is urged as an obstruction to
the performance by the •onstituted authorities of the land


, c f their legitimate duties. Help all those who are trying
to remedy this unfortunate state of affaiis. ,
All the wars have been at the expense of your blood.
Imitate no violence. Destruction of the property or lives
■of others cannot help you or enrich you. Your triumph,
■can come only by peace. . .
There is much that is had in existing social arrange-
ments, hut there is also much that is good ; and this goo
has been procured by the struggles of centuries. With
a full appreciation of all that is sad and disheartening in
the condition of the masses, I believe that, on the who e,
the lot of mankind was never a happier one than to-day.
Rio-hts which the humblest of us take as so muc i a
matter of course that we do not reflect upon the possession
-of them as a source of pleasure, although to be deprived
-of them would inflict the keenest pain, were in a past age
scarcely within the dreamland region of the masses. I Ins
is not said to suggest to you that you fold your ban s,
and lazily take things as they are,but to encourage the use
of conservative means for the attainment of your ends.
There are vast treasures in our civilization which it is in
the interest of all to preserve. Resist wrong more
strenuously than heretofore; strive for all that is good more
earnestly than you have ever done; hut let all your endeavors
be within (he law. The rich and powerful will always find
protection; and if the dreams of the Anarchists weie
realized, there would be no check to the despotism of the
.strong and cunning. The law is often not what it should
be - but the law itself points out peaceful methods by
which it may be changed. Law is often perverted, am
fails to fulfil its function; but even when it is worst
administered, it affords some protection.
Cast aside envy, one of your most treacherous foes.
Reject every thought of levelling down. Cultivate an
admiration for all genuine superiority. While all the
monstrous inequalities of our times can by no means be
upheld by good men, while many of those inequalities,
the fruit of evil, can beget only evil, remember that
nothin"- more disastrous to you could happen than to five
in a society in which all should be equals. It is a grand
thino- for us that there are men with higher natures than
■oursf and with evexy advantage for the development o
.their faculties, that they may lead in the world s progress.


foi&UO
THE LABOUR QUESTION.
and serve us as examples of what we should strive to
f become. It will not take you long, if you'think earnestly
„ _ _ ah.nit it, to become convinced of this. It is well for the
small farmer to have a rich neighbour to lead in the use
of expensive machinery, the introduction of blooded stock,
and in other experiments, which, if disastrous, would
ruin a poor man ; it is well for common schools to be
under the influence of the best universities, without which
their work is likely to be indifferent. Why, it is often
held to be a misfortune for a boy to belong to a class in
school or college which he can lead. It is, as a rule, much
better that there should be those associated with him
who are abler than he, that they may serve as a constant
stimulus to him.
If your demands are right, if they are reasonable, then
you will win and hold your gain. The world will listen
even to socialism, if properly presented. If you keep to
the right , the world will come to you. The right is bound to
win. Educate, organize , wait.
Richakd T. Ely.
Wbat constitutes a state ?
Not high-raised battlements, or labour’d mound,
Thick wall or moated gate ;
Not cities proud with spires and turrets crown’d j
Not bays and broad-arm’d ports,
Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride;
Not starr’d and spangled courts,
Where low-brow’d baseness wafts perfume to pride.
No : —MEN, high-minded men,
With powers so far above dull brutes endued,
In forest, brake, or den,
As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude;
Men, who their duties know,
But know their rights, and knowing, dare maintain,
Prevent the long-aim’d blow,
And crush the tyrant, while they rend the chain ;
These constitute a state. —Sir W. Jones.
TT. HJX w«T.nw
f - w m
*
ony,
d.


“ Do as you please, Bob! ” the mob yelled.
“ Leave this room, Forest,” commanded Robert Fest. “I"
have no grudge against you ; but if you stand in my way you ,
will have to suffer the consequences.”
“So long as I live you shall not commit murder in this-
house,” Mr. Forest replied. . “You ought to be ashamed, Fest,.
of a conduct so unworthy of a gentleman.”
“ Shut up you fool,” Fest screamed with rage. That hypo-
critical scoundrel, Leete, has bull-dozed the people long enough.
He must die, and if you don’t get out of our way, you will die
with him.”
A rage I had never felt before carried me away. “ What'
has this old gentleman done to challenge your thirst for his. •
blood, you mean, cruel coward ? ” I cried and jumped at Fest,..
trying to put my knife into his heart. But a dozen fists disarmed
me, while Fest commanded : “ Put that old Bostonian in a bag
and dump him in the harbor. Although not a gentleman in the •
eyes of the professor I am a man of my word, and I have promised*
that resurrected spectre, I would drown him like a puppy when
ever again he crossed my path.”
He lifted his axe and advanced towards Dr. Leete who
remained silent, with his grey eyes fixed upon his brutal enemy.
Once more Forest tried to save the life of the leader of the
administration, but in vain. A dirty-looking ruffian buried a
knife in Forest’s true and fearless breast, and with The wavdsi '
“We are even, Leete,” he saiiJsAioM^-ffbbrT - Edith struggled
with two menwho flad”seized her arms and were trying to lead
her'away when Fest’s axe descended on Dr. Leete’s grey head.
Without a murmur he fell to the ground, while Edith with a
loud cry fainted. Fest seized her around her waist.
“ She refused to be my wife,” he said with a Satanic grin,
“ now she will be mine without the ridiculous ceremony of
marriage,” and while stepping to the door with Edith’s lifeless
body clasped by his left arm he said : “ Kill every friend of the
administration, boys, I will meet you at the city hall in an
hour or so.”
I made a tremendous desperate effort to shake off the men'
who kept me back: I uttered a despairing cry and—awoke in.
my bed, May 31, 1887. At my bedside a physician, and my
servant Sawyer had been busy for some time awakening me from
my deep mesmeric slumber. They had labored very hard until
they succeeded, but more than an hour passed before I had gained
my ability of reasoning, and then I felt greatly relieved.
With the swiftness of lightning all the details of my>
interesting but terrible dream passed through my mind. I
weighed all the arguments of Dr. Leete and Mr. Forest
carefully again, and felt delighted that I was living in the nine-
teenth century instead of in the communistic state that appeared i


to me now like a large penitentiary on the eve of a rebellion of
the convicts.
“ I would rather work harder at liberty than remain idle for
a number of hours every day in a prison-lfke life,” I said reflect-
ively, “ for work is not an evil. And I would rather work a few
years longer and miss some commodities of life than submit to
■ communistic slavery. Most of the luxuries for which we are
struggling appear most desirable so long as we do not possess
them, and we do not care much for them when they are ours.”
I resolved to use hereafter my best ability for the advance-
ment of all desirable reforms for the benefit of mankind, and to
preach contentment, the only solid basis of happiness. Felicity
is so independent of wealth, in fact glory and opulence are
almost stumbling blocks in the way of happiness. Happiness
depends largely on our acceptance of our lot. 4n Victor You
Scheffel’s famous poem “ The Trumpeter of Sackingen ” young
Werner when he parts from his beloved Margaret, as he supposes
forever, sings .
To life belongs the. most unpleasant feature,
That not a rose without sharp thorns does grow.
Though love eternal stirs our human nature
Through pangs of parting we at last must go.
But Margaret is at last re-united to young Werner, she
becomes his wife, and it would have been much more in conson-
the final result, if young Werner, when departing from
Margaret, had sung thus :
To life belongs this very pleasant feature, ' -
That next to thorns the blooming roses bend,
And love eternal conquers human nature
In joy uniting lovers in the end.
Federation of the World Prize Essays. —The first series,
comprising 53 Essays written in response to Mr. Cole's invitation, is now
ready. The book contains the Fifty-thkeb Essays (including the Ten
Prize Essays) selected from 650, 53 Portraits of types of nations, and an
Introduction by E. W. Cole. Among the essayists are journalists, school
teachers, legislators, clergymen, lawyers, students, etc. It is thus a represen-
tative book, written by men of many shades of opinion and of every walk in
life. Price 2j- in limp cloth cover.
A Knapton, Printers, 290£ Little Collins Street, Melbourne.
