

SONG STORY OF THE GREAT WAR.
INTRODUCTORY.
The rough copy of “The Story of the Great War,” or
as a friend said seriously, or in fun, “The Great War Song,”
was writen by me, all except a few verses added later, on the
morning of sth Feb., 1915, before breakfast. My wife and
another having approved of it, I called on my friend, the
Revd. A. Thain Anderson, M.A., of Hamilton, N.S.W., and
he has been my Fidus Achates all through in the matter.
I know he dreaded my addition of the extra verses, but
that was because of his interest in *he song, even more
than In me. Yet he gave way, and so you have them. Half
an hour after leaving Hamilton Manse my M.S. was in the
hands of the printer.
I have had assistance from all sorts and conditions of
men in perfecting these proofs; and, I have literally allowed
the man in the street to decide which of two words should
be used, and so you will say there is slang used, but
not objectionable slang. I have written not for literary
folk, but from patriotic motives, and so have crowded my
review. From the Superintendent of the Caledonian Coal
Coy. to the Engineer and Driver—men who have read
muc ii—j Rave had assistance, and thank them and the
advertisers. May I hope that my War Song may be read
or sung on board War Boats; by the Battlefield Campfire,
and in the bush humpy, and that it may become:—
“A sound to set the blood on fire
And warm the shivering soul.”
Music.
The original intention was that “Auld Lang Syne”
should be the tune; but the rhyme can be sung to
Mr. P. D. McCormick’s fine piece, “Advance Australia, w
and one friend who has learned more music than I
have forgotten, says he can sing it to “The Minstrel
Boy”; but that’s more than I can do. I was after something
rousing, simple, sweet and catching, in a word, something
that those “who cannot sing,” “can sing,” or that they can
easily learn. There came to my mind an old air, in danger
of being forgotten or being run away with by The Dairy
Maid. With these words I trust it may go forth anew, on
a much larger and as loyal and loving a mission. That air is,
“There’s nae Luck about the House,” sung as a Double Com-
mon Metre, with repeat formed of lines 8 and 7 of each verse,
and I think those eighth lines of “The Call” will bear three-
fold repetition to this 1771 melody. Soldiers, sailors, and
those who wish, are at liberty to add a step of the Highland
Fling at the chorus without infringing my copyright; but I
would request that instead of the dance at the end they
substitute “The National Anthem,” as indicated.
Copyright.
The song Is being copyrighted, but permission to print
(in a single issue) can be had on easy terms, the easiest
being arranged for Parish Papers and the Country Press.
There is no compulsion to sing all the piece through. The
first part may be read, recited, or sung, but the choruses,
where indicated, should be sung by the company. Do, do put
spirit and go into the singing of “The Call,” and not do it
as if half of your blood were that of a well-known Australian
reptile, but are possessed of full British blood and governed
by a British soul!
Several have volunteered their services to set new music,
and it remains to be seen whether this is belter or more
suitable than “Auld Lang Syne” and “There’s nae Luck
about the House.” Finally, we arc not out for money, but
to help in its dire hour of need as best we can the Empire
and her sons, that we trust soon to see victors and their
land blessed with “Peace.” —Psalm xxlx., 11, 12.
J. B. FULTON.
15th Fch., 1915.
West WaHseneF, N.S.W.


2nd EDITION OF 3000. COPYRIGHT APPLIED FOR.
The Story of the Great WAR —
A Call to Duty.
Suggested tune till we get another, “ Auld Lang Syne."
Suggested Chorus:
“Now’s the day and now’s the hour,
See the front of battle lower;
See approach the Kaiser’s power,
Chains and slavery,”
Or “ Cheese f and Sourcrout !”
Adaptation of Burnt,
PART I. —HISTORICAL RECITATION.
Introductory Movements.
The Northern Sea was sown with mines,
The smoke of battle hung,
O’er Belgium’s golden fields of grain
The marshalled millions swung.
Lieg’s long defended fortresses,
And Antwerp’s chain of forts;
With well trained gun and mortar piece
Are giving no reports.*
The cruel German legions all
The Vosges valleys past;
And aged men are learning now
Of war the deadly blast.
Theory and Practice.
’Tis bad to crop your vistlms’ ears
Or cause the infant screams;
But gouging eyes and chopping hands
Are worse than wrecking Rheims!
“Oh! Treitschke, war-mad Treitschke!
You cause the mothers’ tears;
At Jesus pure Beautitudes
The crackbrained Nietzsche sneers.”
t Cheese, but it must be Limburger to be stronger than
chains.
• I mean that the forts were silenced or taken.


Hundreds of happy homes are razed
While women stand aghast,
To screen the German firing line,
How long is this to last?
Chorus —“Now’s the Day.”
Mixed Ideals.
“Till France and England conquered are,
So said the German lord,
“And gay Paris is entered, aye,
And all obey my word.”
But John the British Bulldog true,
His teeth set like a vice;
In front of Paris’ fortress bold
Was standing in a trice.
Before the brunt of battle, dread
The Allies now made one,
Throw back the German armies might,
O’er ground that they had won.
“Hold now that we have Antwerp’s wharfs,
My eldest well loved son,
You lead the way to Calais coast
Where we will have our filn.
We’ll send up Krupps and Zeppelin ships
Bombarding England’s shores,
And when I fly to London town,
The Dukes will do our chores.’’
Chorus —“Now's the Day.’’
The Reply.
“Wait, cousin, not so fast, says George,
(By Grey his guiding man),
With Joffre’s men, I’m anxious still
To save the Belgian land.
Ulster, well drilled, is ready now
With Erin to combine;
Brave Scotia’s sons, with Welshmen true,
Are standing in my line.
My puppies will be with me, yes,
In half a jiff of time;
Canadian’s here already, Bill,
And India’s Sepoys mine.
King Edward won the Boer’s love,
From Afric’s sunny strand;
Now, Botha can be trusted with
The loyal of our land.


Then Austral’s sons are coming strong,
New Zealand hears the “call,”
They’ll camp beside the ancient Sphinx
To guard Lessep’s Canal.*
The “Sydney” war boat quickly “cleared”!
To give the “Emden” chase,
The pirate flew on Cocos rocks
Disabled in the race.t
Your “baby raiding” Blucher boat
Finds her ignoble home;
Her comrades flee and leave the men
To sink beneath sea foam.* J% tt rf. /y,
Chorus —‘ 1 N o
International Review.
‘ ‘ The ancient Austrians ’ tired a bit
And Spain’s no longer Spain;
Italia sits too long the fence,
You cannot trust the Dane.”
The Yankee wants the dollars might,
No matter how its got;
And Wilson’s wishing birthdays, more,
To William off his dot.**
Well taught by Gorgon Graham of old,
He sneaks his contraband;
The slippery Turk is ready, aye,
To play the losing hand.
Time fails to tell of Soissons fights
Or Winter in the trench;
The Eastern war by Russian Bear,
Our Prince, with General French!
Chorus —“Now’s the Day.”
Defence of Our Navy.
Trust we the touch of Jellicoe,!
Lithe and alert is he,
Like Galahad his armour’s bright,
As Falklands’ brave Sturdee."
Judge patiently their work so big,
And for them bend the knee;
Six hundred smacks are fishing out
Mines from the Great North Sea.
' w " Chords —‘ ‘ Now ’b the Day?’ ’
* The Suez Ca/al was built by de Lefseps last century,
but originally a canal was here built by Seti I. of Egypt.
t “The Sydney” accounted for “The Emden’ on 9th
November, 1914.
* For account of the sinking of the Blucher see the
very vivid cablegrams on Saturday, 6th February, 1915.
**What I mean is that the Kaiser is suffering from
“swelled head,” but to suit the rhyme use the slang.
t The alertness and tou-h of Jellicoe are remarkable
at 55 years.
n Sturdee left London, and before anyone knew was at
Falkland Islands waiting for four German cruisers, which
he sunk on 9th December, 1914.


PART II.—THE CALL.
SONG AND CHORUS.
Tune •* There’s nae luck about the house."
The German fleet is bottled up,
And Britain rules the seas;
Join all ye sons of Britain Great,
The proper moment seize.
And help to smash the braggart brute,
Though strong —a coward he;
We’ll teach him know that Britain’s Great
In air, by land and sea!
In air, by land and sea ! In air, by land and sea !
We’ll teach him know that Britain’s Great
In air, by land and sea 1
Rise then! Britannia’s sons, arise!!
Like Nelson sweep the seas;
And like the Iron Duke or “Bobs,'’
No longer live at ease
Give ye! Oh sons of Britain give!!
Kitchener five! million men!
To chase the ruthless raiders back
To Germany again.
11 To Germ., Ac., To Germ., Ac, To chase, Ac., To Germany’
This Austral land for Britain Great
We hold by Heaven’s decree,
And ’neath the old flag flourish all,
The freest of the free!
Training our lads, defend tkelr land
With Lithgow’s Enfield-Lee;
Aye, step with Britain’s Legions brave,
And sail with her the sea.
“And sail, etc., And sail, etc., Aye, step, etc., And sail, etc.”
Britannia’s pure, unsullied shield,
Must ever win the fight,
Passed on by sires to noble sons,
Who mean to keep it bright.*
While proud usurpers treaties break,
And think that “Might is Right.”
The God of battles is our trust,
And constant guiding Light!
“ And constant, etc. The God of, etc., And, etc., Light!”
To be sung by all—civilians standing—hats off.
Military—Officers salute 1 Soldiers, stand to attention !
“GOD SAVE THE KING!”
J. B. Fulton
West Wallsend, Military Chaplain.
f Vi K 1 01 *; /"P DAVIES A CANNINBTON. LTO.tN.
° Ull J-CU.j PRINTERS NEWCASTLE. MS.W.rX
+ The cables of 6th February speak of three million
only, but I calculate we will want five million to end the
war in reasonable time. We ought to get that number,
and no able bodied man say “ Let the other fellow go.”
*As young Captain Pockley, M. 8., M.Ch., did at
New Guinea in September last.


James Dill & Son,
DRAPERS AND STOREKEEPERS,
KURRI KURRI and MIAMI, A.S.W
McILRATH’S LIMITED,
Importer« & Manufacturers. Grocery, Tea & Provision Merchants
Head Office. Bulk Stores and Country order Departments:
PITT AND QOULBURN STREETS, SYDNEY.
BRANCHES ALSO AT
Newtown, 243-8 Kin? Street-
City, 15, 17 George St West
Darllnghurst, 152 Oxford-Bt.
Paddington, 344 Oxford St.
Waverley, Bondi Junction.
North Sydney, Walker St.
Enmore, 187 Enmore Road
Petersham, 480 Parra- Road.
Burwood, Burwood Road.
Parramatta, Churoh Street.
GEORGE WHITE BROWN.
Grocer, General Storekeeper & Newsagent,
West Wallsend.
Only the Best Quality of Goods stocked, and you can
rely upon being courteously and promptly served.
RAILWAf HOTEL, MORISSET, N.S.W.,
CLWYDD WILSON, Proprietor.
Best Brands Wine, Spirits and Ale always kept.
First-Class Accommodation.
F. H. NICMOLLS,
GENERAL STORE WIORISSET, N.S.W.,
For Produce, Groceries, Drapery, Boots & Shoss, Iron-
mongery and every Household Requisite at City Prices.
“Caledonia Mouse.”
Departments Manchester, Clothing, Mercery, Furnish-
ings, Fancy and Laces, Men’s Boots, Millinery,
Hats and Caps, Dresses.
ARTHUR BOWIE,
CARRINGTON STREET - - WEST WALLSEND.
R. MATCH ETT,
GENERAL STOREKEEPER - - - MINMI, N.S.W
Wall Papor a Speciality— Latest Designs. Drapery, Boots
and Shoes at City Prioas. Best Brands of Groceries Stocked.
Prompt Attention.
James Kerr & Sons,
WEST MAITLAND, N.S.W.
Maitland’s leading drapers.
One of the Oldest and Best Houses in the District.
A Country Customer writes : . >f
"Kerr's Kloea wear like a sovereign.


r J/ju jJxlxj : OO
■ .
'~Qr 0^
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
CANBERRA
R 247
