

The Growth
of a
Great Public Utility


The service of a gas company does
not represent merely the exchange of
a commodity for so much money. It
has an intrinsic value to the nation, in
the maintenance of health, the elim-
ination of drudgery in home and
factory, the conservation of 'valuable
constituents of coal, the abatement of
the smoke nuisance, the promotion
of general economy and efficiency and
the raising of the standard of living.




THE AUSTRALIAN GAS LIGHT COMPANY
Deed of Covenant, dated November 27, 1d37,




THE GROWTH OF A GREAT PUBLIC UTILITY
The Australian Gas Light Company’s Work
and Progress.
* I ’HE history of the gas industry in New South
Wales extends over five reigns of the monarchs
of England, for, as far back as the days of King
George IV., the pioneers of Sydney considered
lightening the gloom of their straggling streets by
the then newly discovered illuminant Gas. Their
consideration took definite form in the reign of the
next Sovereign, William IV., at a time when the
people of the Old World were but opening their
amazed eyes to the new Torch of Progress, lit in 1797
by the first gas engineer, William Murdoch. In 1837,
just prior to Queen Victoria’s accession to the Throne,
a quaintly worded Royal Charter gave power for the
formation of The Australian Gas Light Company,
for the purpose of "effectually lighting the said town
of Sydney.” At that time the entire white population
of the infant colony of Australia numbered only
150.000, but what the pioneers of Sydney lacked in
numerical strength they more than made up in
courage and enterprise. They launched the first gas
company in Australia only twenty-five years after the
incorporation of the first in the world—The London
and Westminster Gas Light and Coke Company, The
gas undertakings of Paris and Berlin came into being
3 few years earlier than that of Sydney.


To celebrate the birthday of Queen Victoria,
May 24, 1841, the streets of Sydney were first lighted
with what the Press of the day, in its enthusiasm,
described as "this exquisite production of science . . .
this pure, brilliant and inoffensive illumination of gas.”
Literally, The Australian Gas Light Company
was founded upon a rock, the sites for the first works,
gas holder tanks and offices being actually hewn out
of the solid sandstone at Darling Harbor. Each of
the first two gas holders had a capacity of 45,000
cubic feet, which the Directors of those days referred
to as "being sufficient to store up a superabundant
stock of purified gas to meet any emergency, the
90,000 feet of storage being considered mere than
adequate for all the wants of Sydney for many years
to come.” How far along the road of progress the
Company has advanced since then is shown by the
fact that it now has five holders with a total capacity
of nearly 20,000,000 cubic feet, one of which is the
third largest in in the world, while during the last
fiscal year no less than 406,000,000 additional cubic
feet of gas had to be made, an amount greater than
the annual production of an average gasworks in
Great Britain. The make of gas now reaches an
annual total of just on 7,000,000,000 cubic feet.
From the small concern of the early forties the
Company has grown to be the seventh largest gas


Aeroplane View of Mortlake Works.


undertaking in the British Empire, whilst it is
rapidly overhauling the gas companies of the great
cities of Manchester and Liverpool for the honor of
fifth position.
In the century great strides
Conservation of , , in i
r, . have been made all over the
ruei Resources.
world in the production of gas
and in the saving and utilisation of the by-products
of coal, and the Company has kept pace with the
progress and development of the gas industry.
In order to preserve for the use of future gener-
ations our great natural resources, it is necessary that
we make the most economical use of them, lest we
waste in a few years the product of countless aeons in
the history of the earth. New South Wales is
blessed with a wealth of coal, but that wealth must
be conserved. The Australian Gas Light Company
is in line with the gas industry generally in the
economical utilisation of the world’s coal resources.
Recognising the national need lor
Industrial , , r , c
extended use ot gas as a substitute tor
Gas. 5
the wasteful burning of coal, the Com-
pany is encouraging its utilisation by the introduction
of concessions in price and the provision of a special
demonstration hall. This is equipped with up-to-date
furnaces and appliances for the convenience of manu-
facturers desirous of making practical experiments,


COAL GAS
■"THIS is made from bituminous
coal which is placed in air-tight
fire clay vertical retorts, heated ex-
ternally. The system of vertical
retorts installed at Mortlake is that
known as the Glover-West, in which
the gasmaking is continuous.
In this system the coal enters at
the top, gravitates through the re-
tort—being subjected to heat in its
passage—and issues from the bot-
tom in the form of coke, all
volatile matter having been dis-
pelled in the process.
A Worm or helix, with its axis
vertical, is placed in the bottom of
the retort and supports the whole
of the coke and coal. The speed
of rotation of this helix determines
the rate of passage of the coal
through the retort.
The gas, together with tar and
ammoniacal liquors in the form of
vapours, pass into a collecting main
and thence through a condenser or
cooler, wherein they are cooled by
water caused to flow over the sur-
face of the condenser pipes which
convey the gas. The tar and am-
moniacal liquors which are thus re-
covered flow out at the bottom of
the condenser through water-sealed
pipes into an underground tar stor-
age tank, not shown in the accom-
panying illustration.
It is desirable that the gas as
produced in the retorts should have
an unimpeded progress through the
necessary purification plant to the
gasholder or gas store. To this end
exhausters or pumps are installed
between the condenser and subse-
quent plant to remove the gas from
the retorts as fast as it is produced,
and propel it onward with sufficient
force to enable it to pass through
the various purifying processes to
the holder.
Gas as produced in the retorts
contains, in addition to tar, am-
monia and sulphur compounds,
which if allowed to remain would
create a nuisance when burned
and would be injurious to health.
Ammonia and its compounds are
removed by literally scrubbing the
gas wdth water, which, having an
affinity for ammonia, readily ab-
sorbs it.
The principle of the washers em-
ployed consists in passing the gas
between the bristles of revolving
brushes which are continually
being immersed in and withdrawn
from water, and thus carry innum-
erable globules of water between
the bristles.
The sulphur-compound impurities
in the gas are not capable of
removal by mechanical means. Re-
sort is therefore had to chemical
means, and purifiers are employed.
These consist of a series of boxes,
approximately sft. deep, all fitted
with removable lids suitably sealed
to prevent the escape of gas, and
filled with natural oxide of iron.
Through this material, in a suc-
cession of boxes, the gas is forced
by the exhausters, or pumps, and
by chemical action the sulphur im-
purities are absorbed, leaving the
gas clean and fit for use.
The gas now goes through the
Station Meter which measures
volume, and thence to the holder.
How Gas is made and distributed by The Australian Gas Light Company, Sydney, New South Wales.
CARBURETTED WATER GAS
In addition to the gas made by
the direct carbonisation of coal in
retorts, gas is also made by pas-
sing steam through a deep body
of incandescent coke, whereby the
steam is split into its component
elements, hydrogen and oxygen.
The latter element combines with
some of the carbon of the coke and
forms carbon monoxide, the result-
ant gas being a mixture of hydro-
gen and carbon monoxide, botn
burnable but non-luminous gases.
In order to increase the heating
value of this gas —technically
known as blue water gas —oil un-
der pressure is sprayed over hot
brick work incorporated in the
plant, and is thereby perman-
ently gasified. Such addition of oil
is known as carburetting. The gas
is then passed through a condenser
for the dual purpose of cooling the
gas and removing the tar and
aqueous vapours. The gas then
passes into the relief holder from
which it is drawn and mixed with
the coal gas.
The relief holder is provided for
the purpose of regulating the flow
of gas, such gas being intermit-
tently produced during the process
of manufacture.
The relief holder consists of a cir-
cular tank filled with water in which
a wrought-iron bell or inverted cup is
floating. This bell rises and falls as
the gas volume is increased or de-
creased.
STORAGE
Gas is made at practically a uni-
form rate during each hour of the 24,
but the rate of demand varies largely,
the demand during the hour of maxi-
mum consumption being as much as
ten times the demand during the
hour of minimum consumption. A
holder, therefore,- is necessary to
meet such fluctuation and act as
a store, the excess gas being held
in reserve and liberated during the
hours in which the demand exceeds
the quantity produced.
The stoiage holder works on the
same principle as the relief holder;
however, to increase the capacity,
several sections or “lifts” are
used over one tank of water, tele-
scoping as they rise or descend.
The several lifts have water sealed
connections to prevent escape of
gas at the telescoping joints.
DISTRIBUTION OF GAS
The Mortlake Works supplies the
gas consumed over an area of ap-
proximately 240 square miles, and
as the gas has to travel as
much as 15 miles, considerable
power is required to force the gas
such a distance. Steam turbines,
driving enclosed fans, are employed
to exert the necessary driving
force, and the initial pressure at
which the gas leaves the works at
times amounts to eight pounds per
square inch. Such high pressure is,
however, confined to a system of
mains separate from the ordinary
reticulation or supply system. The
latter system is kept supplied with
gas at a regular pressure by auto-
matic governors, connecting the
two systems of mains at many
points throughout the district.


under actual working conditions, in the use of gas as
an industrial fuel. Manufacturers find in the cheap
rates for industrial gas a solution of one of their
greatest economic problems, and they welcome the
opportunity given by the Company to test its poss-
ibilities. Apart from its low cost, they appreciate the
superiority of gas as a fuel, because of its smokeless-
ness, the absence of the transport, storage and
stoking problems associated with other fuels, the ease
with which it can be adjusted to meet all requirements
and the increased efficiency of the workers consequent
upon the saving of labor and the improvement in
working conditions.
Apart from the very careful re-
By ro ucts. searc b w hich has been conducted into
the methods of the production and use of gas,
successful experiments have been made in the Mort-
lake works in the recovery of the by-products of coal.
The most important of these are the high-grade
road-making material known as "Duratar” (an efficient
and economical alternative for imported bitumen)
fuel oil and coke for industrial purposes, sulphate of
ammonia for the fertilisation of crops, benzol for
motive power, creosote wood preserving oil, pyridine
and solvent naphtha.
p. By the original Royal Charter of
1837 the capital of the Company was
limited to £lOO,OOO, but this restriction was removed


by subsequent legislation. To-day capital stands at
nearly four and a half million pounds sterling, which
has been contributed by over six thousand share- and
debenture-holders, most of whom are actual customers
of the Company. A big percentage of the employees
are also shareholders, a fact which gives them a
personal interest in the organisation which they serve.
With the shares of the Company spread over so great
a number of stockholders, and with the customers
and staff taking part in the financing of the concern,
The Australian Gas Light Company is a co-operative
organisation in the true sense of the word. The
progressive policy of the Company and the success
with which its business has been conducted have
induced in the public mind a great confidence in and
respect for the organisation. The fact that on three
occasions within the past few years the Company has
voluntarily reduced the price of gas to the consumer
is a practical example of the manner in which its
success redounds to the advantage of the community.
This is also reflected in the high estimation in which
the stock of the Company is held in commercial
circles.


Plant and
Property
Every year the demand on the
,
Company s service increases, on account
of the spread of suburban settlement
and the extension of the use of gas as an industrial
fuel, and this has necessitated extensive alterations
and additions to property and plant, also the intro-
duction of new and improved methods of manufacture
and distribution. The Company’s works and offices
now cover an area of approximately too acres, and its
4,000 miles of mains and service pipes serve an area
of 240 square miles of territory.
The average quantity of coal used daily at
Mortlake totals over 1,100 tons and is handled by an
up-to-date coal and coke conveying plant, known as
the Telpher or mono rail system, which has been im-
proved and developed by the company as occasion
arose. This system reduces to a minimum the necess-
ity for manual labor, as the coal is dealt with and
conveyed by machinery all the way from the colliers
to the retorts, whence the coke is conveyed by mech-
anical means to the delivery points. At Mortlake is
also installed the largest coal carbonising plant of its
kind in the world.
This continuous development has involved a big
outlay and called for considerable enterprise and careful
technical planning, involving the installation at the works
of highly efficient boosting plants and gas holders to-


gether with apparatus for controlling the pressure over
the whole area to be served by the Company. Pro-
vision is also being made for the erection of district gas
holders and boosting plants which will bring about
the decentralisation of the distribution of gas.
Australian
Material.
In accordance with its policy to
use Australian material wherever poss-
ible, the Company has purchased the
greater part of its plant and material locally. Besides
the use of Australian material, the extension work
has given employment to a large number of Aus-
tralians. To carry almost half a million tons of coal
every year from Newcastle to Mortlake three of the
largest colliers in the Australian coastal trade are
constantly in commission.
The Company ) in its works,
The Company as . , , , .
, r ' out-stations, branches and head
an Employer.
office, employs 3,000 people, the
wages and salary bill amounting to well over £BOO,OOO
per annum. The relations between the Company
and its employees are exceptionally harmonious, which
is due in great measure to the smooth working of
the conciliation systems in operation. This happy
condition of affairs has been more marked since 1920
when an agreement was completed between the
Company and the Gas Employees’ Union which
represents the main body of the workers. This


agreement was the basis for a system of conciliation
unique in the industrial history of the Commonwealth,
all disputes and labor difficulties now being settled in
an atmosphere of reason around the table of the Con-
ciliation Committees. The success achieved by these
committees has been remarkable, and has been brought
about by the spirit of co-operation and mutual trust
existing between the Company and the Union officers.
This has meant that the output of gas and by-products
has gone on uninterrupted!/, resulting in the smooth
working and development of the Company’s business
and the establishment and maintenance of permanent-
ly good relations with the consumers and the general
public.
Welfare
Work.
A keen interest is taken by the
Company in the educational efforts of its
staff, and fees are advanced for tuition in
approved commercial subjects. An extensive welfare
scheme has been inaugurated and enthusiastically sup-
ported by the staff. Comfortable rest and luncheon
rooms, medicine chests, nursing attention and facilities
for social functions are provided, under the care of a
committee elected by the staff from amongst its
members.


g .
, TT . c
the Housewife.
The health and happiness of
a nation depend upon the efficiency
r . r 1
or its housewives. A service that
helps the housewives to be good cooks is a national
service, and the Company is proud of the work that
it is doing in this connection. A special feature
of its public service is the advice freely given
to the women of Sydney on matters relating
to the preparation of food and the care of the
appliances by which it is cooked. Well equipped
showrooms, showing the latest and most up-to-date appli-
ances for use in the home, link up with lectures on cook-
ery delivered daily at Head Office and tri-weekly at the
branches. In addition, lady demonstrators frequently
visit consumers’ own homes to aid the housewives in
the management of their stoves. The attendance at
the lectures and the calls for the demonstrators show
the appreciation ot this service by the women of Sydney
and the need existing for it.
Built on solid foundations, The Australian Gas
Light Company, after nearly a century of progressive
work and loyal service to the community, has set its
ideals high. Standing firmly to its slogan : “Service
First,” and with high hopes of the future, it continues
to keep alight the Torch of Progress lit by the stout-
hearted pioneers of the days of King William IV.


A GREAT KEY INDUSTRY.
T I "'HE Australian Gas Light Company stands forth as
■*" one of the great key industries of the State. As a direct
employer it controls the destinies of thousands of
Australians. Indirectly, through supplying fuel and
light for the conduct of the industries in which they
earn their livelihood, it provides avenues of employ-
ment for many thousands more, not to speak ot the
vast numbers e igaged in producing and transporting
its raw material.
The value to the nation of an organisation pro-
ducing so vital a utility as gas, with its by-products,
cannot be assessed in mere figures. It goes beyond
statistics; it gets down to the very roots of the
nation’s life, progress and happiness.


€TAeAGL,CO.
SYDNEY
Deaton and Spencer, Printers.
