

THE WORKER,
AS
A Factor in Social Evolution.
By ALFRED J. TAYLOR.




THE WORKER.
By Alfred J. Taylor.


THE WORKER.
A FACTOR IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION.
The following address was recently
delivered to the No. 1 Denison
Branch of the Workers’ Political
League by Mr. Alfred J. Taylor. Mr.
R. Kennedy was in the chair, and
there was a large attendance.
It is a well-worn adage, said the
lecturer, that God made the country
and man made the town. One thing
is certain, that God utilised the power
stored in the brawn and bone of the
worker to so shape the country for
the purposes of civilisation that the
town became a possibility.
When I was in London a few years
ago I saw at the Royal Academy a
picture bearing this title “The great-
est hero of them all.” It represent-
ed the Christ surrounded by the great-
est heroes the world has known. lam
quite sure, in spite of all that has been
said against the Labor party with re-
gard to its attitude towards religion,
that the workers would be .the first to
acclaim the award of the "artist who
painted the picture referred to.
If I were asked to select the heroes
of to-day I would point to the men who
have faced the hardships of the Aus-
tralian hush; who have levelled the
giants of the forest, and carved out
for themselves the smiling homesteads
that make the country as we know It
By ALFRED J. TAYLOR.
now. And I would place these heroes
in my Pantheon of the Great far above
those who have won fame at the can-
non’s mouth; or who have remained
unmoved upon the battlefield while
bullets ‘were beating upon the hone a
of men as hailstones patter upon the
window pane.
If we go down to the bedrock of
human effort and enterprise we find It
in the work of those who start out
to conquer and subdue nature, and to
render her subservient to purposes of
civilisation and the uplifting of hu-
manity. In such a struggle the work-
er must stand first. Let us consider
during the time at our disposal what
part the worker has been playing as a
factor in the evolution of our social
life —and I wish to deal with this
question in its bearing upon the posi-
tion of the Labor party to-day and the
possibilities of its influence in the
future.
NECESSITY FOR COMBINATION.
In the first place I would remind
my hearers, that as one of the neces-
sary factors in the development of
a higher civilisation a time was
reached in the history of the human
race when it became necessary for
those having special regard for parti-
cular interests to combine for the pro


motion and protection of those inte-
rests.
'Combination became necessary, for
example, to counteract influences that
were likely to become dominant to
the injury of the common good; and
thus we find that in the middle ages
combinations known as Craft Guilds
were formed in which masters and
workmen united to protect the inte-
rests of certain trades.
These Graft Guilds, after long and
obstinate struggles, succeeded in win-
ning certain privileges and political
powers that paved the way for the suc-
ceeding victories that have been won
by the modern combinations known as
Trade Unions.
The Craft Guilds, however, differed
from the Trade Union in so far that,
while under the former, masters and
men combined for the common object
of protecting their particular trades
the Union was designed to regulate the
interests of Trade “exclusively from
the workman’s point of view. Instead
of the Guild in which masters and
men were as one, we have on the
one hand the associations of the em-
ployers, and on the other the union's
of the workmen.” (“Subjects of the
Day, p. 106.”)
At the time of the ancient Guild
comparative equality prevailed. The
master trained, personally, his own
apprentices, who were in most cases
inmates of his dwelling. The rela-
tionship between master and man was
almost that of the family, “and their
trade was a mystery not to be commu-
nicated to outsiders.” But as the
conditions of society changed, the
masters, being the strongest, used
their power “rather to advance their
own individual interests than to serve
the good of the whole trade,” and this
was the disintegrating factor that ul-
timately led to the breaking up of the
Craft Guilds, and left labor without
organisation of any kind whatever.
CLASS LEGISLATION.
Taking advantage of their helpless
condition, the dominant class, for the
time being, influenced the Legislature
to pass laws for the special govern-
ment of the workers, to which we can
only now look back with wonder and
amazement.
Under the laws referred to, labor
was enforced as a duty, and refusal to
work was punished as a crime. “The
rates of wages for which men should
work were fixed by act of Parliament
and it was equally an offence for the
workman to demand, or the employer
to pay, more than the law specified.
Combination of every kind was strict-
ly prohibited, and any found uniting
for the purpose of dealing with the
conditions .of labor were subjected to
extremely severe penalties.” (Ibid,
page 107.)
Under Act 2 and 3, Edward VI, c 15
(which is regarded as the starting
point of legislation against combina-
tions), it was enacted “that if any ar-
tificers, laborers, etc., should conspire,
covenant, or promise that they should
not make nor do their work but at a
certain rate, or should not work but at
certain hours, they should forfeit, for
the first offence, £lO, or suffer twenty
days’ imprisonment; for the second
offence. £2O, or the pillory; for the
third offence £4O or the pillory, and
the loss of one ear,” etc.
This law, we are told by the writer
I have already quoted, “was in spirit
but a type of all the legislation affect-
ing labor which prevailed right down
to the end of the first quarter of the
present century.” “Indeed,” he ob-
serves, “It is not too much to say, as
Professor Rogers has done in his book
on wages, that from the times of the
Wars of the Roses up to the repeal of
the combination laws, all legislation
was ‘a conspiracy concocted and car-
ried out by parties interested in its
success, entered into to cheat the Eng-
lish workman of his wages, to tie him
to the soil, to. deprive him of freedom,
and to degrade him to irreparable po-
verty.’ ”
After the passing of the prohibitory
laws 1 have referred to only the most
zealous workers combined openly,
“but,” says Howell, “under the cloak
of friendly societies many associations
were formed .... Secrecy was the


child of suppression; the Legislature
forged at once the chains of the work-
men and the weapons for their deliver-
ance,’'
When the law prohibited combina-
tion on the part of the workers, the
journeymen tried to fix a list of prices.
This the employers opposed on the
ground that they alone had the right
to fix the price of labor. The idea of
arbitration an such matters was also
opposed.
That the efforts of the workmen to
combine were to some extent success-
ful is sufficiently shown an the fact
that at the commencement of the nine-
teenth century strikes were found to
be common in almost every trade.
Class interest and influence was con-
sequently once more brought to bear,
and in the year 1800 a statute was
passed directed against all associa-
tions of workmen established for any
of the proposes for which such socie-
ties were then in existence.
By the statute referred to (40 Geo.
111, c 106) all agreements between
journeymen and workmen for obtain-
ing an advance of wages for them-
selves or others, or for reducing the
hours of work, or preventing the em-
ployment of hands, or in any way af-
fecting any person carrying on any
manufacture, was declared to be il-
legal. Power was given to one Jus-
tice of the Peace to convict summarily
and impose imprisonment for two
months upon any workmen making
such agreements, or interfering in
the other ways mentioned.
Under this law those who were bold
enough to defy its provisions were
made to suffer heavily; for the laws
were put in force without mercy, and
oftentimes in defiance of justice. As
an instance, it may be mentioned in
ISOS three linen-weavers were sent to
Wakefield gaol for three months —one
for the offence of carrying a letter to
York requesting assistance from other
workmen. The men were invariably
punished very severely, but they in-
variably failed whenever they attempt-
ed in turn to prosecute the masters
for combination, although some of
their cases were fully proved. I
might cover 'pages in quoting instan-
ces in support of these statements,
but that would only unnecessarily
trespass upon the time I have at my
tLisppsal. Those who are curious in
the matter I must refer to Howell's
excellent account of the “Conflicts of
Capital and Labor,” pp. 105-7.
THE STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM.
“The history of these persecutions
and contentions,” says that writer,
“and the consequent privations en-
dured by the workmen, for the pur-
pose of securing their independence, is
a real record of heroism. In spite of
oppression the most crushing; of legal
enactments the most stringent; of
punishments the most cruel for any
infraction of these acts, the men con-
tinued to combine; they contested
every inch of the ground, until, after
a struggle of centuries, they were on
the threshold of victory; partial, it is
true, but still most important, viewed
by the light of later facts A
few men in Parliament, with Joseph
Hume at their .head, had observed
their struggles for industrial freedom,
and in the year 18'24 they moved for
and obtained the appointment of a
select committee of the House of Com-
mons to consider the laws relating to
workmen and artisans.” The condi-
tions under which the workers were
struggling at this time may be judged
from the statement of the same his-
torian that “there are men still living
who can recollect the time when they
had to bury the books and records of
their Society on the Town Moor of
Bolton, in Lancashire, when oaths had
to be resorted to, and were adminis-
tered to for the purpose of securing
mutual protection; when to ask for a
rise of wages, or even to receive an
advance, if offered, was a violation of
the law,” and when the exportation of
machinery and the emigration of art!
sans was alike forbidden.
In due time Mr. Hume’s committee
brought up its report. The committee
expressed the opinion of its members,
that masters and workmen should be


freed from the existing restrictions re-
gard’ng rates of wages and hours of
working, and be left at perfect liberty
to make such arrangements as they
might naturally think proper; also,
that the statute laws interfering in
these particulars should be repealed,
as well aa the common law under
which a peaceable meeting of masters
and workmen could be prosecuted as
a conspiracy.
While suggesting these concessions,
ti e committee recommended “That ic
is absolutely necessary, when repeal-
ing the Combination Laws, to enact;
such a lavr as may efficiently and hy
summary process punish either mast-
ers or workmen who by threat, intimi-
dation, or acts of violence, should in-
terfere with the perfect freedom
which ought to be allowed to each
party of employing his labor or eapr-
tal in the manner he may deem most
advantageous.” (Howell.)
The result of the select committee’s
report was the Act of 1824 (5 Geo. TV,
c. 95). This Act relieved workmen
from all liability to punishment for
engaging in peaceful combinations or
strikes.
Strikes on a large scale immediately
occurred in various parts of the coun-
try, and the Legislature was seized
with a panic, which the manufacturers
did their best to promote. Towards
the end of the session the panic sun-
sided, and “all parties,” we are told,
were contented with a reproduction
of the Act last quoted “with some
alteration in its shape, and in the lan-
guage of some of its provisions.”
Statute 6 Geo. IV, c. 129, therefore
took the place of Statute 5 Geo. IV. c
93.
Under Statute 6 Geo. IV, e 129,
while exempting from punishment
persons meeting together to determine
wages and hours of labor (which the
persons actually present at the meet-
ing might require or agree to give),
the law defined all combinations or
agreements affecting the wages or
hours of work of persons not present
at the meetings as conspiracies. Under
the definition of conspiracies were
also included attempts to control a
master in the management of his busi-
ness, and agreements not to work in
company of any given person, or to
persuade others to leave their employ-
ment.
INFLUENCE OF UNIONISM.
The history of Unionism from this
stage for some years afterwards is a
record of strikes, prosecutions, and
protests, not against the law, hut
against the way in which it was being
administered.
The prosecutions and convictions
resulted in the unions increasing in
number; and, on March 26, 1845, a
society was established, under the
title of the National Association of
United Trades, which became the cen-
tre of a great movement, and gave
birth to a newspaper called the “Labor
League.” It proposed to raise a
sum of £50.000 to provide a fond
for the support of workers thrown out
of work by labor disputes. It bore
fruit in the consolidation of trade as-
sociations, and the better understand-
ing of the aims and objects of the
unions.
The feeling of the workmen had not
been so much against the law as
against its administration, but the
builders’ strike and lock-out in Lon-
don in the year 1859—the excitement
attending which created universal in-
terest for many months —brought
about a crisis that led to. an organ-
ised effort and demand for the amend-
ment of the law itself. The press
took the side of the employers, and
denouncing the unions as secret socie-
ties, “whose power was sustained only
by terrorism,” demanded that they
should be stamped out as an incurable
and detestable evil. The Unionists
replied by challenging investigation.
In the year 186>6 it was shown as the
result .of inquiry by a select commit-
tee, that the average number of con-
victions, under the existing laws in
England and Scotland alone exceeded
11,000 cases annually. The inquiry
led to the passing of the Master and
Servants’ Act, 1867.






