



,irt wwjjjrr




I
I
♦


c Uhe TRIO from RIO
CA c ßook which the Author cannot make up his mind
whether to describe as a Grown-up’s Book
for Children or a Children’s
‘Book for Grown-ups.


Other Books
by Alan D. Mickle
The Pilgrimage of Peer
The Great City: Poems
Appartement in Brussels
Of Many Things




rahr
“Remarkable coves are us three.”


Trio
from
Rio
c Uhe
CAn d Other Quaint Folk..
ALAN D. MICKLE
ILLUSTRATED BY
ROBERTSON <3? MULLENS LIMITED, MELBOURNE


Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission
through the post as a book
FIRST EDITION. 1942
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
The National Press Pty. Ltd.,
34 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, C.l


C 15305
27 NO' mk
DEDICATION
c To Suzanne, who agrees with Willy
that the Dinkeys are two “ nasty,
disagreeable old gentlemen.”




CONTENTS
i. Humpty Dumpty And Andrew Ant 13
ii. Sailorman Jim 27
in. The Sensitive Sole 39
iv. Mo Mice And The Nibberley Nobberleys .... 51
v. The Trio From Rio 63
vi. Policeman Jones 78
viii Crikey The Kangaroo And
Woggo The Wombat 92
viii. The Dinkey-Dies And The Dinkey-Doos .... 103




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Stupid fellow, don't you see that I'm trying to frighten
you”
Put some muscle into it, boy, said Humpty; Pull
hard”
•began to whirl himself round first in one direction
and then in the other
‘‘Used to eat glass and nails to make him tough
‘‘Now you’ve gone and done it,’ said the thing
I took out my watch of lead
You cannot buy a rabbit in my black shoe shop
The only one left in the house
“We are the Nibberley Nobberley ones;
we are not quite as big as whales
‘‘Remarkable coves are us three”
A chieftain quite swanky, waved his best hankie
The bell made a terrific jangling noise
‘‘l believe he was trying to break into gaol,” said the big
man
Just one little move and you’re cat’s meat
“Realy too sleepy to say any more”
-—and then make another low bow
He’s not going to argue away half my spare time
‘‘We simply can’t walk because —our feet are all over


-


CHAPTER I.
Humpty Dumpty And Andrew Ant.
M ITTLE WILLY FITZBIFFKIN had not been
JU long asleep in his large, soft, comfortable bed
when he woke up. He did not really wake up. Had
he done so he would have seen the brass knobs on the
posts at the foot of his bed, and the curtains drawn
over the windows, and his clothes on the chair, and
all the other usual things in the light his mother had
turned low after tucking him in and hearing him say
his prayers and kissing him good night. Also he would
have heard the big clock in the hall ticking, and pro-
bably old Grandpa Fitzbiffkin snoring, which he
usually did whilst he dropped off for what he called
a few winks in his big chair after he had had his supper.
Willy neither saw nor heard any of these things, which
proves that he did not wake up when he thought he
did. He only dreamed that he woke up, which is quite
a different matter.
He was walking along a road in a sort of country
place with a lot of wild bush and big mountains all
about him, wondering where he was and how he had
got there, for he could not remember coming from any-
where to get where he was, when he heard somebody
call out in a shrill voice, “Hi —you!” He looked round
to see where the sound came from, and saw two most
extraordinary-looking objects. One of these was lean-
ing against a wall with his legs crossed, and the other
was sitting perched up on the top of the wall. This
latter object had a tiny body and tiny arms and legs
and an enormous head that was shaped like an egg.
It had a tiny mouth, too, from which, when it spoke,
issued a funny squeaky little voice. This object wore
black boots that dangled at the end of thin little legs.
Page Thirteen.


and seemed much too big for the feet in them. Its
stockings were bright yellow; so was its waistcoat,
whilst its funny little coat with immense red buttons
on it was bright green, and its trousers bright blue.
Perched jauntily on one side of its huge bald head like
a gaily-coloured pimple was a schoolboy’s cap made
in coloured sections.
The other object was even more extraordinary in
appearance. It wore a schoolboy s cap of the same
colours as that worn by the object sitting on the wall,
but its long coat was of a dark brown colour. This
coat was drawn in tightly at the waist, and had two
long tails that nearly reached the ground at the back.
Its trousers that went down gradually thinning to its
feet were bright yellow, and its feet were in highly-
polished brown shoes. Willy noticed that this remark-
able creature had four arms. One hand of the lower
pair held a thin cane, on which it either leaned with its
legs crossed or twirled round at a rapid rate. The other
hand of this pair of arms rested on one of the object’s
remarkably wide hips. The two hands of its upper
pair of arms were in white gloves, and kept curling up
two most ferocious whiskers. But its most remark-
able feature was its face. Willy had never seen such
a face. It had two very long jaws with sharp teeth on
them that it opened out sideways, and above these were
two enormous eyes that looked like bull’s-eye lanterns.
As Willy approached, this object kept looking up
sideways at him with these eyes and snapping its jaws
in and out. When Willy drew near it put its two
lower hands on its two knees and looked closely at him.
“Dear me, dear me! What have we here?” it
said in a funny grating kind of voice, “a most remark-
able phenomenon. Humpty. Just look at it.”
The object addressed as Humpty took a round
glass attached to a cord out of its upper left waistcoat
Page Fourteen.


Humpty Dumpty and Andrew Ant
pocket and adjusted it to one eye that it screwed up. It
carefully examined Willy too, and then said, Extra-
ordinary Andrew, most extraordinary. I wonder
whatever it wants.”
“Why did you call me?” asked Willy.
“Why did we call it? Why did we call it? I
like that,” said the object on the wall. “Why did we
call it, Andrew?”
“Did we call it, Humpty?” asked the object ad-
dressed as Andrew. “I certainly, in the course of my
daily voice exercising, called out, ‘Hi —you!’ but I
have no recollection of addressing anyone or anything
in particular. And I am not aware of any legal reason
why one should not call out ‘Hi—you, provided, of
course, that one feels like calling out. You know of
no reason, Humpty?”
“None whatever,” said the object addressed as
Humpty, “none whatever.”
“Who are you people?” asked Willy.
The tall object instantly stopped curling its
whiskers and raised its cap with its two upper hands.
“I always use two hands to lift my cap,” it ex-
plained, “It makes one feel superior to be able to do
what other people cannot do. Most people cannot
afford to use two hands in raising their caps, but I can
and I have still one left to twirl my stick in the clever
way I do, and another for emergencies. But allow us
to introduce us ...
“Ourselves, Andrew,” corrected the other object,
“ourselves.”
“Who’s ourselves?” demanded the first object.
“Us,” said the second.
“Well, if ourselves is us, wbv isn’t us ourselves?
That’s what I would like to know.”
“A mere grammatical quibble,” said the second
object. “But we must not forget our manners
Page Fifteen


Andrew. Allow me. This gentleman on my right is
Andrew Ant, more popularly known as Andy, and I,
as I daresay you will be aware from acquaintance with
all the numerous hoardings on which my photograph
is displayed by unauthorised persons, and the gossip
that is current regarding me and my reputed fall, am
Humpty Dumpty, at your service.”
“How do you do,” said Willy politely. “My
name is Willy Fitzbiffkin.”
“Fitzbiffkin,” said Humpty, rubbing his chin
reflectively. “Fitzbiffkin? lam sure we were ac-
quainted with some Fitzbiffkins once, Andrew.”
“We were not,” said Andrew Ant. “We were
not. Most certainly we were not. I for one have a
positive recollection that I have never heard the name
before. What is more I don’t like the name. Its
acoustics make no appeal to me whatever, and I never
want to hear it again.”
He twirled his cane rapidly, snapped his jaws to-
gether, and made his long whiskers stand straight up.
“Whatever are you doing all that for?” asked
Stupid fellow, don’t you see that I'm trying to frighten you.”
Pare Sixteen


Humpty Dumpty and Andrew Ant
“Stupid fellow, don’t you see that I’m trying to
frighten you,” said Andrew. “If you are not
frightened there must be something wrong with you.
And I don’t want to have anything to do with any-
body who has something wrong with him or her.’’
“I certainly do seem to be seeing queer things,’’
said Willy. “I really feel that there is something
wrong with me.’’
“There you are,’’ said Andrew. “What did I
tell you? He admits that he seems to be seeing queer
things. Obviously there is something wrong with him,
and here we are consorting with him in a public place.
Whatever will our admirers think of us?”
“That is one of our main troubles,” Humpty ex-
plained to Willy. “You see we are celebrities, and we
have to consider extensive publics. It is a dreadful
nuisance. Still, one must take the bad with the good.”
“I don’t agree with that at all, Humpty,” said
Andrew; “I don’t agree with it at all. I don’t know
why I don’t agree with it, but I just don’t, and that
ends the matter.”
“The weather,” said Humpty tapping his head
with his finger and winking at Willy whilst he indi-
cated Andrew. “You will have noticed how the
weather affects some people?”
“I daresay I have,” said Willy, “but I don’t re-
member noticing that I noticed noticing it.”
“Very neatly put indeed,” said Humpty; “ex-
tremely neatly put if I may say so. You don’t re-
member noticing that you noticed noticing it. Very
neat indeed. You will agree with me, Andrew?”
“I will not,” said Andrew decisively. “I most
certainly will not. I don’t know what it means; I
don’t believe he knows what it means; I don’t believe
you know what it means: I don’t believe anybody
Page Seventeen.


knows what it means; I don’t believe it means any-
thing. Therefore I don’t agree that it is neat at all.”
“That’s his anty nature coming out,” whispered
Humpty to Willy. He’s anti everything. He’s anti-
peace and anti-war. That’s where the term anti comes
from. That’s why he’s celebrated. But he cannot
carry his celebrity as I do.”
“I know you are whispering about me,” said
Andrew, “but go on. Don’t mind me. I can afford
to be whispered about, which is more than can be said
of some persons whose names I wouldn’t mention.”
“I don’t want to quarrel, Andrew,” said
Humpty, “especially before a stranger, but if you are
insinuating things about me, that is one thing I simply
will not stand for.”
“You won’t stand for; you won’t stand for.
He, he, he, he, he, he, ha, ha, ha, ho, ho, ho.” Andrew
doubled himself up laughing. “Did you hear him?”
he said wiping his eyes, from which tears were falling,
with his gloves; “did you hear him? That’s good, that
is. He won’t stand for it. He can’t stand for any-
thing. He’s stuck on the wall. He got so stuck up that
he had to stick himself down. So he can’t stand for
anything really. Perfectly priceless. lam glad I have
such an advanced sense of humour.”
“There’s nothing humorous about it,” said
Humpty to Willy. “A poet once wrote a poem,
founded on a baseless report that I had fallen off a wall
and been broken up, and could not be put together
again. Unfortunately the poem became world-
famous. The result was that everybody who saw me
tried to push me off walls to see if I would break, and
how if I did I got put together again when it expressly
says in the poem that it couldn’t be done. However, I
have now circumvented them. I’ll show you. Just
catch hold of those feet.”
Page Eighteen.


'
Humpty Dumpty and Andrew Ant
“Put some muscle into it, boy,’’ said Humpty; “Pull hard.”
Page Nineteen.


He held his two little legs out to Willy, and Willy
caught hold of the two feet with the large boots on
them.
“Now pull, said Humpty. Willy pulled.
“Put some muscle into it, boy,” said Humpty.
“Pull hard. I could have pulled four times as hard
as that when I was your age.”
“I could have pulled ten times as hard,” said
Andrew Ant. “A very poor effort if I may be per-
mitted to say so. You want to eat more porridge,
b °y-''
Willy set his teeth and put his feet against the
wall and pulled and pulled till the wall rocked and he
could pull no more.
“Well,” said Humpty; “well, what happened?”
“Nothing happened,” said Willy.
“Precisely,” said Humpty; “nothing happened.”
He crossed his knees and clasped his hands to-
gether over one of them. “Nothing happened,” he
said. “As you say, nothing happened. Now, why
did nothing happen? That is the question. Why—
did—nothing happen? Now, I’ll tell you.”
Andrew Ant groaned deeply.
“I wonder how many times I have had to go
through all this before,” he said. “He is going to say
his poem now. I know the procedure off by heart. I
am going to sit down if you don’t mind.”
He sat down with his back against the foot of
the wall.
“There is no need for you to listen Andrew,” said
Humpty, “if you do not wish to do so, but Mr, Fitz-
biffkin has asked me to explain why nothing happened
when he tried to pull me off the wall. Just as a matter
of common politeness I feel that it is my duty to en-
lighten him. That is, of course, Andrew, if you have
no insurmountable objection.”
Page Twenty.


Humpty Dumpty and Andrew Ant
“None whatever,” said Andrew Ant, waving his
upper set of hands. “None whatever. Don't mind
me. I'll be bored, but lam used to being bored. Go
on, go on. Explain away. I doubt if Mr. Fitzbiffkin
will be much the richer for the explanation, but go
ahead, go ahead. I may be able to snatch a few winks
of sleep.”
“Very well,” said Humpty. He turned to Willy.
“I’ll tell you why nothing happened. Now just keep
your eye on this finger. I will recite to you a poem,
and I am going to point my finger at you and keep
time with it to the words of the poem, because that
makes the words sink in, and no poem is worth hearing
unless the words sink in.”
Then he crossed his little legs and drew them up
under him, and all the time keeping his finger pointed
at Willy he recited the following poem—
Humpty Dumpty sits on a wall,
But Humpty Dumpty doesn’t fall
Any more as he used to do,
Because he’s learnt a trick or two.
For instance, he saw a lady stick
A stamp with just some gum and a lick,
And he watched a carpenter who was able
With glue to stick a leg on a table.
And, seeing these things, he thought a lot
Until an idea in his head he got,
Then he covered himself all over with glue,
Shirt and socks and trousers, too.
And climbed up on the wall and sat
Till he was dry, and said, “That's that!’’
“And now,” said he, “the king's men all.
And all his horses can pull and haul,
But they won't get me down off this wall.”
“There now,” he said when he had finished the
poem, “that will serve to give some slight indication
of how clever I am, and how I have circumvented my
Page Twenty-one.


over-curious admirers. But it really must be getting
near my lunch time.”
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket and took out
a large silver watch. He held it up to his ear and shook
it. “Stopped,” he said; “when this watch stops it al-
ways does so for ten hours, so I have merely to add ten
hours on to the time when it stopped and I know the
correct time at once. It is really a most convenient
watch when you get used to it. It is now” —he put
the watch face upwards on the wall beside him and
counted on his fingers—“precisely half-past one. My
luncheon hour is twelve.”
“Then you have missed your lunch?” said Willy.
“I always miss my lunch,” said Humpty, “also
my breakfast and afternoon tea and dinner and supper.
Merely as a matter of curiosity, may I ask what is the
longest period of time that you have gone without
food?”
“I don’t really remember,” said Willy. “Once I
had a bilious attack and I went nearly all day without
food, and sometimes I go for three or four hours —
that is, of course, not counting chocolates and things.”
“Three or four hours,” said Humpty; “three or
four hours not counting chocolates and things. Well,
well, well! Would you believe me if I told you that
I had not eaten anything for three weeks?”
“Three weeks,” said Willy; “oh, how dreadful!
Why haven’t you eaten anything for three weeks?
Why don’t you eat something now?”
“Not such a simple matter as you appear to
think,” said Humpty; “nothing like so simple a mat-
ter. When you are as old and possibly as wise as I am,
though that is hardly likely, you will know that it is
a most difficult matter to do two things together that
cannot be done at the same time. I glued myself to
this wall so that nobody could remove me from it.
Page Twenty-two


Hwnpty Damply and Andrew Ant
which I consider an exceedingly clever move on my
part, but the trouble now is that I cannot get off the
wall to go home for my meals, so I have to go without
them, which is very annoying really. There is nothing
that would give me greater pleasure at the present
moment than to eat a big black pudding. Before my
reputed fall, that made me so famous, I used to con-
sume at least one black pudding per diem —you speak
Latin, I presume?”
“I have not learnt as far as per diem yet,” said
Willy. “I know mensa means a table, and a few other
words like that.”
“I was much more advanced when I was your
age,” said Humpty, “but then if we were all clever
there would be nobody left for us to whom to show
our cleverness. I used to eat at least one black pud-
ding daily. I used to sing about black puddings,
too. The song went like this.”
Humpty began to sing in a squeaky voice
“Black puddings hot, black puddings cold,
Black puddings in a pot worth their weight in gold.
There’s one for the office boy and one for the chief,
But none for the Welshman who stole the leg of beef.”
He coughed and said, “My voice is not what it
used to be; still, it is a good song. I suppose you
know it.”
“I have heard one something like it,” Willy said,
“but I don't think it went just like that.”
“It didn't,” said Andrew Ant, waking up sud-
denly; “it certainly didn’t.”
“Dear me, dear me.” He went on giving a great
yawn and stretching up all his four arms. “Quite a
pleasant little nap spoiled. Your voice is really dread-
ful, Humpty. Nothing makes me sleep so much as
your reciting, and nothing keeps me awake so much
Page Twenty-three.


as your singing. Well, I’ll have to be going off for my
lunch. Perhaps you would like to join me,” he said
to Willy; “if there is anything left over you are quite
welcome to it.”
“Thank you very much,” said Willy, “but what
about poor Mr. Humpty?”
“Oh, don’t bother about him,” said Andrew.
“After I’ve had my lunch I’ll come back and tell him
how much I enjoyed it. I always come and tell him
what I have had to eat, especially if I have had some-
thing extra specially good. It cheers him up. That
is my job. I’m his Job’s comforter. Goodness
gracious, that was a clever one, but I must not start to
laugh, though it is extremely funny—Job’s com-
forter. Very neat indeed. Unfortunately I never can
be as funny as I would like to be for fear of killing
myself laughing. I have to curtail my merriment.”
“But couldn’t you bring Mr. Humpty some-
thing?” asked Willy.
“Sainted Sam,” said Andrew, “I never thought
of that. It never once entered my head. It is an idea,
too. We must put it into effect at once. I’ll go and
have my lunch and you run along to the butcher's and
buy a black pudding, and then if you bring it to me
I will bring it to Humpty—that is, of course, after I
have had my nap.”
“I don’t think that is a good idea at all,” said
Humpty. “As a matter of fact, I don’t even know if
I want a black pudding today. But perhaps if Mr.
Fitzbiffkin were to run along to the butcher’s and ask
him to send his boy to me so that I can give him an
order to give the butcher to send him back with a black
pudding, in the meantime I can be considering
whether I will or will not eat the black pudding when
it arrives.”
“But,” said Willy, “would it not be better for
Page Twenty-four.


Humpty Dumpty and Andrew Ant
me to ask the butcher to send his boy back with the
black pudding to you rather than asking him to send
his boy to you to get an order for the butcher to send
the boy back with the black pudding? That would
save time, and time counts when you are hungry.”
“With the uncelebrated, probably it does,” said
Humpty; “but you forget that we are now dealing
with the celebrated. It is appearances that count with
f f
us.
“He’s right there,” said Andrew Ant, standing up
and swinging his cane. “He is not often right, but he
is this time. You run off, like a good chap, and I'll
go and have my lunch.”
“Where is the butcher’s?” asked Willy. “I am a
stranger here. I don’t know where I am.”
“Goodness gracious,” said Andrew Ant, “he
doesn’t know where he is.
I might be here; I might be there;
I might be dark: I might be fair;
I might be thin: I might be fat:
I might be a mouse: I might be a rat;
I might be mutton or raspberry jam,
But I don’t know where on earth I am.
“How is that for a bit of extempore versifying?”
“Not bad at all Andrew,” said Humpty; “not
bad at all. You are improving. I could have done
better; but did you observe that Mr. Fitzbiffkin asked
us where the butcher’s was—US? CELEBRITIES?
Fancy asking a celebrity where a butcher's is. Boy,
don’t ever ask a celebrity such a question again. Ask
anybody else. But a celebrity, no. It simply is not
done. Is it Andrew?”
“Certainly not,” said Andrew. “I agree with
you Humpty for once. I won’t again, but Ido for
once. Well. I must be moving. Lunch waits for no
Page Twenty-five.


man as the proverb says. Good-bye, Mr. Fitzbiffkin.
I don’t like you very much, naturally, but I don’t bear
you any real antipathy—ant-ipathy. You get the
joke, I hope. What a wag I am! See you later
Humpty.” “Bye-bye,” he said to Willy. He again
lifted his cap with two hands. Then he squeezed him-
self sideways through a crack in the wall.
“Goodbye,” said Willy, politely lifting his cap
too. “I’ll go and see if I can find a butcher,” he said
to Humpty, “and get him to send his boy back.”
“Do,” said Humpty, “I am really extremely
hungry.”
“All right,” said Willy, starting off down the
road and feeling very puzzled about everything.
“I suppose there must be some fun in being cele-
brated,” he said to himself, “for most people seem to
want to be celebrated, but if being celebrated means
doing uncomfortable things like glueing yourself to a
wall and dressing up like Andrew Ant, I don’t think
I want to be celebrated.”
But he was really very sorry for Humpty, as he
would have been for anybody whom he knew was
hungry, so he hurried off down the road as fast as his
legs woud carry him to see if he could find a butcher
who would send his boy back to Humpty so that
Humpty could send the boy back to the butcher with
an order for the butcher to send the boy back to
Humpty with a black pudding that Humpty wanted
for himself.
Page T u>enty-six


CHAPTER 11.
Sailorman Jim.
WHEN Willy had travelled some distance down
the road in quest of the butcher for Humpty
Dumpty he saw advancing towards him at a fast pace a
cloud of dust with a white speck in the middle of it.
When this drew near, Willy saw that the white speck
was a sailor in a white suit, who was dancing a horn-
pipe along the road. Seeing that he was coming straight
at him and did not appear to be looking, Willy called
out in his loudest voice, “Hi, there, look out!” And the
sailor roared “Avast there! What ship is that? Full
speed astern! Pipe all hands on deck! Stand by to
lower boats! Women and children first!” And when
he had stopped almost on top of Willy he said, “Shiver
my timbers, shipmate, that was a close thing. If I had
not answered my helm in the way I did and carried out
my orders smartly we would both of us probably be
in Davy Jones’ locker by now. Why didn’t you show
your navigating lights or give a blast on your foghorn
or something? Little coasters like you are a danger
to all respectable shipping—that’s what you are.
Wouldn’t be allowed out of port if I had my way.”
“I’m awfully sorry,” said Willy, though he did
think it rather funny that the sailor should put all the
blame on him, as he had certainly shouted first.
“Well, I don’t suppose it’s any use crying over
unspilt milk or lowering your boats before you're
wrecked,” said the sailor, “so we’ll agree to let bygones
be bygones. What’s your moniker?”
“My what?” said Willy.
Page Twenty-seven


“Your name/' said the sailor.
“Willy Fitzbiffkin," said Willy, “but I never
heard it called that before.’’
“Oh, that’s American,’’ the sailor said. “That’s
the worst of us sailors travelling about so much. We
get to know so many foreign languages that we some-
times forget which is our own. Willy Fitzbiffkin —
that’s your name is it? Mine’s Jim Jinks, alias Jovial
Jinks, alias Bashful Jim, alias Sailorman Jim. Most
of my shipmates call me Sailorman Jim. Well, we
know each other now. Would you rather I told you
some sea yarns or sang a sea chanty or did some sea
tricks?"
“I think I would prefer to sec some sea tricks,’’
said Willy politely. “I’ve heard sea stories and sea
songs, but I have never seen any real sea tricks done by
a real sailor. Of course I have heard of tricks at the
wheel, but I have never seen them done."
“Oh, those are old tricks. Everybody knows
them. Now let me see," the sailor went on thought-
fully; “let me see. What had I better show him first?
You know the Nautical Spin, I suppose?"
“No," said Willy, “I have never even heard of it.
I have heard of sailors spinning yarns."
“Not the same thing at all,” said the sailor; “now
watch this. Ido this trick rather well. Just hold my
cap and give me a little sea-room." He threw his cap
to Willy. He then spread his arms out sideways and
stood on one toe and stooped down. Then he began
to whirl himself round first in one direction and then
in the other. When he whirled one way he got thinner
and thinner and taller and taller, and when he whirled
the other way he got fatter and fatter and shorter and
shorter. Willy had seen something like this before in
two mirrors that stood on the opposite sides of an
arcade in his home town, but he had never seen it in
Page Twenty-eight


Sailorman Jim
—began to whirl himself round first in one direction, and
then in the other.
Page Twenty-nine.


real life. He thought it very clever, and decided to
try it when he was by himself.
“Pshew,” said the sailor, when he had stopped:
“hot work that, but it’s a trick I do real well. Quite
a useful trick it is, too. If I want to see ships or land
or things over the horizon, I spin one way until I am
as high as the tops of the masts, and if dirty weather
is brewing, I spin the other way until I am almost flat,
and gales and hurricanes and things pass right over me.
Of course most sailors do this trick, but my shipmates
all tell me I am especially good at it.
“I should think you were,” said Willy. “I sup-
pose you have been everywhere and seen everything?”
“Most everywhere, and seen most things,” said
the sailor. “Let us lay up alongside the mole for a
spell whilst I have a pipe of baccy.” He walked over
to the side of the road and sat down on a bank. He
took a pipe and a tobacco pouch out of a rear pocket
in his tight trousers, and putting the pipe in his mouth
took some tobacco from the pouch and began to roll it
in his hands. Willy sat down beside him.”
“You haven’t seen coral islands and coconut
palms and cannibals, have you?” he asked.
“I lived on a coral island once,” said the sailor,
“and the cannibals used to climb the palms and get me
coconuts to drink from.”
“But didn’t the cannibals want to eat you?”
asked Willy.
“They wanted to all right,” said the sailor, “but
I was handy with a capstan bar in those days, and I
always carried one about with me. Besides the chief
was a pal of mine. He was going bald, and no cannibal
chief likes to go bald. I shared some hair-restorer I
had with him, and he never forgot it. He cried when
I came away, and I did not like leaving him either.”
“I suppose you have seen sharks and whales and
Page Thirty.


Sailorman Jim
icebergs, too? You haven’t seen a real iceberg, have
3 9 9
you?
“Haven’t seen a real iceberg?’’ said the sailor.
“Sailorman Jim hasn’t seen a real iceberg? I like that.
And me living on one for well nigh two years. That
was down in the roaring forties. Way back in ninety-
one it was. We were bowling along at a steady nine
knots on a dark night when we ran smack into a big
iceberg. We just had time to get aboard the iceberg
when the ship sank. Tidy little craft she was, too.
“But what did you live on?’’ Willy asked.
“What did you have to eat?’’
“We had plenty to eat,’’ said the sailor. “That
wasn’t our trouble. Our main trouble was the sea
lions that used to roar so much at night time that we
could not sleep. We got fair worn out.’’
The sailor struck a match on his trousers and
began to puff at his pipe.
“We trained some seals to bring us fresh fish first
thing every morning,’’ he went on, “and we had an
arrangement with some albatrosses to lay us fresh eggs
whenever we wanted them. And there was always
plenty of ice cream. It was really an ice cream island.
You just had to pick up a handful whenever you felt
like it. Great ice cream it was, too. We used to give
the seals and albatrosses what was left over after we
had our meals. If it had not been for those sea lions
I would have been quite sorry to leave that berg.’’
“You haven’t met any real pirates, have you?’’
said Willy.
“Haven’t met any real pirates?’’
The sailor held his pipe with the stem pointing
at Willy. “One of my best pals was a pirate. I never
took to pirating myself, though I believe it was quite
a paying trade. Pirates aren’t half bad sorts of chaps
really. Of course when they get annoyed they make
Page Thirty-one.


you walk the plank, or heave you to the sharks, or
hang you at the yardarm, but apart from that
they are really quite jolly. It all depends on
how you treat them. I mind the time when I was on
a real fancy little brig trading out of Jamaica in sugar
and molasses and rum. We were taken by a pirate. He
was a fine big strapping chap with a black beard and
yellow teeth and gold rings in his ears. He used to eat
“Used to eat glass and nails to make him tough.’’
glass and nails to make him tough. And boy, was he
tough! Some of our chaps didn’t take to him at all,
but I found him quite a good shipmate. He liked
poetry and could see a joke. He was watching some
prisoners walk the plank one day, and one little fat
cove got so nervous that he fell off into the sea before
he reached the end of the plank, and did that pirate
laugh! I’ll say he did. Of course he would slit your
throat as soon as look at you, but taking him all round
he was quite a decent sort —that is as pirates go.”
“He wasn’t a well-known pirate was he?” asked
Page Thirty-two.


Sailorman Jim
Willy. “I mean he wasn’t like Captain Kidd, or Mor-
gan, or Long John Silver?”
“I never heard of them,” said the sailor, “but
Pemmican Pete was well enough known on the Main
as we used to call the West Indies in those days, to
make all the blacks turn pale whenever they heard his
name mentioned. I wrote a poem about him at the
time. Now how did it go?” The sailor took a few
puffs at his pipe. Then he began to recite—
A terrible tar was Pemmican Pete:
From his toes to his crown he was seven feet;
And he drank with his meals half a barrel of rum.
And his brigantine was the Kingdom Come,
And his face was as wicked as ever was seen.
And he always carried a cutlass keen
With which unerring blows he dealt,
And he wore four pistols at his belt.
And his flag was a skull and two crossed bones:
And he issued his orders in terrible tones:
And the crews of all the ships he sank,
He merrily made to walk the plank.
I don’t believe since this world began
There ever was a more terrible man,
Nor one who could be more fierce and irate
Than Pemmican Pete the Peerless Pirate.
"What do you think of that for a poem?” the
sailor asked when he had finished. “Good stuff in it,
don’t you think?”
“I do,” said Willy. “I’ve tried to write poems
about pirates, but they were not as good as that. You
must be a great poet.”
“I suppose lamin a way,” the sailor said. “We
sea-faring folk can do most things well . We are not
like ordinary human beings. If I were not so modest
I could tell you some wonderful stories of the won-
derful things I have done.”
Page Thirty-three


“I suppose you have picked up castaways and
rescued people in distress?” Willy asked.
“Frequently,” said the sailor, “quite frequently,
but we don’t count that sort of thing. I mind one
time over in the China seas when I dived in and rescued
at great risk a lovely girl from a school of hungry
sharks. A typhoon was blowing at the time, and a
mountainous sea was running. It turned out that the
girl was a princess and she wanted me to marry her,
and her father offered me a palace to live in and an
army for my personal requirements. I was too bashful
though. lam an extremely bashful sort of chap.”
“I suppose you have had homes all over the
world, too?” said Willy.
“Yes, I have,” said the sailor. “I have lived in
China and Africa and Australia and other out-of-the-
way places. I had a lovely little home in the moun-
tains of Peru once. Just liked the look of the place
and decided to cast anchor there for a spell. It was a
great place that for bandits and revolutions.”
“It must have been exciting,” said Willy. “Just
fancy, bandits and revolutions. Didn’t the bandits
try to rob you?”
“They tried to,” said the sailor, “but I was a bit
too spry for them. You could not trust any servants,
so I bought a whole lot of those big fierce macaws like
those you see in the Zoo, and I trained them to look
after the place when I was out. I wrote a poem about
them, too. Would you like to hear it?”
“Would I what?” said Willy. “Please do say it.
You recite beautifully. I would just love to hear it,”
“All right,” said the sailor. He struck an atti-
tude and began—
Page Thirty-four.


Sailorman Jim
When I had a home in Peru,
Do you know what I used to do?
To guard all the doors
I had big macaws,
Like those ones at the Zoo.
With their coats of yellow and blue,
They would say to you, “How do you do?
And they’d great big claws
Had those big macaws,
And great big hooked beaks, too.
And what would a bandit do
When he saw them all on view.
With their old-man shrieks
And their big bent beaks,
He would run, and wouldn't you?
So that’s what I used to do
When I had that home in Peru—
I had big macaws
To guard all the doors,
And all the windows, too.
“What do you think of that one? Rather good,
don’t you think?”
“I think it’s just wonderful,” Willy said. “I'd
rather be a sailor than anything else, and after that I
would rather be a poet. To be a great sailor must be
fine, or to be a great poet —but to be both a great sailor
and a great poet —it must feel marvellous.”
“Oh, I don't know so much about that,” said the
sailor. “At first when I found out what I was and
people made a fuss over me I used to get all hot and
bothered —embarrassed you know —I used to blush
horribly and all that sort of thing, but you get
hardened to it after a while.”
“I suppose you make heaps of money out of your
voyages and writings?” Willy said.
“I’m not complaining,” said the sailor; “I
Page Thirty-five.


manage to keep the wolf from the door, as the saying
is. But it is not an easy life.”
“I just shouldn’t think it was,” Willy said. “But
it must be beautifully thrilling and exciting. I sup-
pose you have had stories and poems written about
your
“Well, yes,” said the sailor. “We do get written
up. I’ve often got into the papers. Some good poems
have been written about me too. The best poem that
anybody ever wrote about me was one I wrote my-
self. I made myself see myself as other people saw
me. Then I wrote down what I had made myself
see. I would repeat the poem to you if I were not so
bashful.”
“You needn’t be bashful with me,” Willy said.
“I’d love to hear the poem ,and I promise I won’t re-
peat a word of it to a soul.”
“It’s not that,” said the sailor. “I would not
mind so much if you repeated it, but the trouble is it
says nice things about me, and it makes one feel so
awkward hearing oneself saying nice things about one-
self. Still if you press me hard enough I may be in-
duced to repeat the poem.”
“Please do,” said Willy.
“Well, then, but I might say to begin with that
I don't live on a barge as is stated in the first line of
the poem, but I had to make myself live on a barge
because I had to have a rhyme for large. Being a real
sailor I could not live on a barge, but being a real poet
I had to put myself on a barge to rhyme with large.
Poets do that sort of thing, you know.”
“It must be just awfully difficult,” Willy said.
“It is that,” said the sailor, “but there would not
be much fun in climbing up a mast if it were easy to
climb. If sailoring were easy all people would be
sailors, and if writing poems were easy all people
Page Thirty-six.


Sailor man Jim
would be poets. However, as you insist, here is the
poem—
Sailorman Jim lives on a barge;
He’s been all over the world so large,
To every sea and land;
And of places he’s been
And of wonders he’s seen.
His yarns are simply grand.
When we can slip away from school,
He sits before us on a stool,
And spins and spins his tales
Of voyages done,
'Neath the tropic sun,
And through the winter gales.
He tells of isles where coconuts grow.
And sparkling seas where sperm whales blow;
Of treasures and pirates grim,
And of shipwrecks, too,
And cannibals who
Were sometimes after him.
There isn’t a place he hasn’t been:
There isn’t a sea he hasn’t seen;
There’s never a time he fails.
When, with eyes aglisten
We sit and listen,
To thrill us with his tales.
When we grow up we’re going to be
Sailormen too, to sail the sea
In ships all tall and trim;
And when we’re old we’ll live on a barge,
And spin kids tales of the world so large,
Just like Sailorman Jim.
"I really should not have said that poem/' the
sailor said, “not that it is not a good poem. It’s al-
most as good as the one I am entering for the poetry
competition, but I do feel shy about saying it myself.
I m tanned by salt sea spray and biting winds and
Page Thirty-seven.


tropical suns or you would see for yourself that I am
even now blushing violently.
“I wouldn’t blush if I could write a poem like
that,” Willy said. "I’d be just awfully proud.”
“Yes, I suppose you would be,” the sailor said.
“If I were not so modest I would be myself. lam not
really ashamed of it, but just a bit bashful.”
He shook the ashes out of his pipe on his boot
and put it back in his rear pocket. Then he took out
his watch from another pocket and looked at the time.
“Shiver my timbers,” he said, jumping up, “gone four
bells and I must make port before nightfall to hand in
that poem of mine for the competition. You won’t
mind if I leave you?”
“I’m awfully sorry you are going,” said Willy.
“I’ve enjoyed our meeting just terribly much. And I
hope your poem will win the prize.”
“Hope so,” said the sailor. “So long, then."
He folded his arms and advanced one foot ready
to dance off. Then he roared out, “Below there!
Stand by! Make ready to cast off! Let go! Full
speed ahead!”
Then he began to dance a hornpipe again and
was soon getting smaller and smaller in the distance.
Willy, watching him go, was sitting there thinking
how wonderful it would be to be a great sailor and a
great poet like Sailorman Jim was when suddenly he
remembered Humpty Dumpty.
“Shiver my timbers,” he said to himself. “Gone
four bells and I haven’t even found a butcher for
Humpty yet. I must be getting under way. Cast off.
there,” he called out: “Full speed ahead!” And he
jumped up and began to dance a hornpipe like he had
seen Sailorman Jim do, as hard as he could go down
the road towards a town that he could just see ahead
of him in the distance.
Page Thirty-eight ,


CHAPTER 111.
The Sensitive Sole.
WHEN Willy had hornpiped some distance down
the road he slowed down to a walk as he came to
a bridge. He was just about to cross this when he heard
a funny little squeaky voice saying, “Just a minute
traveller; just a minute,” and he looked down to
where the voice had come from and he saw a most
curious thing. At first it looked like a very stout little
gentleman leaning against the foot of one of the posts
of the bridge, but when Willy looked closer he saw
that it was only stout sideways and not frontways or
backways. And it had a funny little twisted mouth
to one side of its face and two queer little eyes with
white eyelids that kept closing and opening over them.
And its two little feet were the prongs of a tail and
not at all like ordinary feet. Neither were its hands,
which were merely the ends of flippers, like ordinary
hands. It wore a brown coat with black and red spots
on it and a silvery blue waistcoat with yellow but-
tons, and one wide trouser that narrowed rapidly as
it went down.
“Whoever or whatever are you?” Willy asked.
“Now, you have gone and done it,” said the
thing. “I had a sort of feeling that you would. I
was not going to speak to you at first because of my
suspicion, but my better nature suggested that I should
give you the benefit of the doubt, and this is what
comes of it.” It took a large red handkerchief out of
the tail pocket of its coat. “I am probably going to
Page Thirty-nine.


burst into tears now, and when I burst into tears it is
exceedingly difficult to stop me.”
‘‘But why,” said Willy. ‘‘What have I done to
make you cry?”
“Now you’ve gone and done it,’’ said the Thing.
‘‘What have you done to make me cry? That is
not the question at all,” said the thing. “The ques-
tion is, ‘Have you done anything that provides me
with a reason why I should not cry?’ You did not
know who I was.” He put his head down and held
out his handkerchief, and began to weep tears into it.
After a while he rung it out. ‘‘There now,” he said,
‘‘that's my very last handkerchief.” He hung it on
the rail of the bridge beside him to dry, and Willy saw
that four other handkerchief were already drying
there. ‘T m Sam the Sole,” he went on, ‘‘and my
friends and admirers, of whom there are a great num-
ber, call me Sensitive Sam. I am so sensitive that the
slightest insult makes me burst into tears. That is
why I knew I was going to burst into tears when you
Pane Forty.


The Sensitive Sole
showed that you did not know me by asking who I
was.”
“I am really very sorry,” said Willy. “I—l
“Now, now—stop that,” said Sam; “don’t say
any more, don't say any more or you will make me
cry again, and I have not another dry handkerchief.
If I cry any more now I shall have to use my sleeve,
and I always catch a cold when my sleeve gets wet
through in that way. I wasn’t going to do you any
harm either. I merely wanted to ask you if you could
lend me a rhyme for arch. I was going to return it
when I had finished with it. I always do return
things that I borrow, but of course if you won’t lend
it to me that ends the matter.”
“I didn’t say that I wouldn’t lend it to you.”
said Willy.
“True,” said Sam, “but I inferred that you in-
ferred as much which comes to the same thing. I don’t
know lam sure why everybody is so unkind to me. I
go out of my way to do nice things and to be polite
to people, and it always ends like this. I suppose I
shall have to do without my rhyme for arch, that’s all.”
“Arch?” Willy said. “There’s larch—that’s
some sort of a tree, and parch—”
“Tried both of them,” said Sam, “and they won’t
do: won’t do at all. If you can’t do better than that
I would much prefer that you did not waste my time
in the way you are doing.”
“What about starch?” Willy said. “You know,
the stuff you stiffen collars and things with.”
“That might do,” said Sam. “Now don’t in-
terrupt me whilst I try it.” He took out a little book
and began to write furiously in it with a pencil that he
held in his flipper. “That might do,” he started off
again. “In fact, it will do. But for the life of me I
Page Forty-one


cannot see why you did not come along before and tell
me. It would have saved me all these handkerchiefs
and no end of trouble. Are you always so thought-
less?”
‘‘l don’t think I'm thoughtless at all,” said Willy.
“That proves that you are,” said Sam. "If you
don’t think you are thoughtless, the mere fact that you
don’t think proves that you are without thought,
wherefore you are thoughtless.”
“Well, at least I gave you a rhyme,” said Willy,
“and you have not even thanked me for it.”
“There you go again,” said Sam. He took the
driest handkerchief off the rail and began to weep bit-
terly into it again. “You have charged me with in-
gratitude,” he sobbed. “Me, of all people, and utterly
regardless of my sensitiveness. You must have known
too, that the competition closes and that my poem
must be in by this afternoon.”
“How ever was I was to know that?” asked
Willy.
“Well, it was in all the papers. It also had my
photograph in most of them, and interviews in which
it was suggested that I was the most likely winner.”
“Do you often win competitions like that?”
Willy asked.
“I should like to know what I would live on if
I didn’t,” said Sam. “I am a fish out of water, and
life is hard for a fish out of water. But then it is hard-
ships and suffering that make us poets what we are.
And where, I ask you, would the world be if we poets
were not what we are? Where would it be?”
“I don’t know,” said Willy: “where would
it be?”
“If you don’t know,” said Sam, “it is not my
business to enlighten you. lam almost bound to win
Page Forty-two.


The Sensitive Sole
the competition, though I must say that the subject
set was a most difficult one.”
‘‘What was the subject?” Willy asked.
‘‘The Marble Arch of all things—an Ode to the
Marble Arch—an extremely difficult subject—ex-
tremely difficult. Still I feel that I have done well. It
was only the rhyme for arch that was holding me up.
Perhaps you would like to hear my poem?”
‘‘l would,” said Willy. “I have just been talking
to a sailor who is a great poet, and he recited some of
his poems. He told me he was going in for the com-
petition, too.”
‘‘He was,” said Sam,” but I have seen to it that
he won’t. I don't consider him a great poet. A mere
rhymster, I would call him. A nice fellow and all
that, but when it comes to poetry, a mere pot-boiler.
Had I considered him a real poet I would not have
eliminated him from the competition.”
‘‘But how did you eliminate him from the com-
petition?” Willy asked.
“Quite easily,” said Sam: “quite easily. A mere
matter of a little shrewd brain work and quick think-
ing on my part. Just a little while ago he came past
here and asked me where the town was where he had to
hand in his poem for the competition. I told him the
town was in the opposite direction to what it was.
By the time he finds out where the town isn’t it will
be too late for him to enter for the competition, and
he will have successfully debarred himself.”
“But I don't think that is at all fair,” said Willy.
“I would not either, if I were what you are,” said
Sam, “but it happens that lam what you are not. I
am a poet, whereas you are not. I suppose you are too
ignorant to have heard of poetic licence. That allows
a poet to do anything he wants to. I will read you
my poem. As the hero of the poem commits a murder
Page Forty-three.


the poem is on the whole, though it has bright lines in
it, rather sad, and I shall probably cry at the end of it.
If you feel like crying, please refrain from doing so,
because that will only make me worse. Here is the
poem—
I took a bus for the Marble Arch—
A bus that was painted red;
And I had a collar stiffened with starch,
And a watch that was made of lead.
And I passed a policeman singing a song,
Who said to me, “You look very strong,
Can you stand upon your head?’’
And I showed him that I could do it,
And he said he thought he knew it.
1 hen I met a pedlar peddling his ware.
With bright green eyes and bright red hair,
And he showed me a trick that was old and flat.
And he said to me. “Can you do that?”
And I showed him that I could do his trick,
And I took out my watch of lead:
And I asked him if his hair was thick.
And I bashed him over the head.
I took out my watch of lead.
Page Forty-four


The Sensitive Sole
Then I took off my collar stiffened with starch,
And I took a look at my watch of lead:
And I sauntered back to the Marble Arch
To look for a bus that was painted red.
“Strong dramatic appeal, that poem has," Sam
said, when he had finished reading it; "distinctly
strong dramatic appeal. A winner or I’m a Dutch-
man, which you can see for yourself that I am not.
You like the poem, I take it?"
“It sounds all right," Willy said, "but I don’t
quite get the meaning."
It s a modern poem,” Sam said, “and whoever
heard of a modern poem having meaning I’d like to
know. If you understood what I write you would be
as wise as I am. So I conceal my meaning. You must
simply take my word for it that it is there. I don’t
suppose you would care to hear my life story, would
you? It is a very pretty story, but sad, as most pretty
stories are."
“If you would care to tell it to me," said Willy;
“I am sure it must be interesting."
It is, said Sam; “sad but interesting. Once
upon a time there was a nice little sole. His mother
and father had told him not to go too near the shore,
and whatever he did never to go near fishermen’s nets,
but he would not listen to their advice. So he was
caught. But he looked so wistfully into the face of
the fisherman who caught him, and wept so bitterly,
that that hard man s heart softened, and instead of
selling the little sole he gave him to his daughter to
put in her pond in the garden. That pond was of
fresh water, and no saltwater fish can live in fresh
water, but the little sole was so sensitive and wept so
over the kindness of the fisherman and his daughter
that the fresh water in the pond was all made salt by
the salt tears wept into it. And so the sole survived."
Page Forty-five


“That is quite a pretty story,” said Willy.
“That’s just exactly what it is,” said Sam. “A
great poet wrote a poem about it. You probably
know the poem. It begins—
A sensitive sole in a garden grew
In a pond that was fed by the morning dew:
It really was a most beautiful pond,
With a very high bank so it couldn’t abscond;
And there it lived through the live-long day.
Pleasantly dreaming the hours away.
“Do you know the poem?”
“I remember hearing a poem that was something
like it,” Willy said. “It is in the Third Reader. I
have not got so far yet, but our teacher read it out
once.”
“That’s the one,” said Sam. “It really is quite
a famous poem.”
“How did you get out of the pond in the end?”
Willy asked.
“I wrote a poem that immortalised me,” said
Sam; “a pretty, sad little thing that I just dashed off.
I have forgoten it now, but it immortalised me at the
time. Naturally then I ceased to be a fish. I still re-
tain some of my fishy characteristics you will perceive
as you get to know my poems better. Many of them
smack of the sea, which is due to the time I spent on
that fishing smack before I was put in the pond.”
“Do you earn your living by just winning com-
petitions?” Willy asked.
“Not altogether,” said Sam. “I have other
sources of maintenance. lam really a commercial poet.
I write poems for advertisements. Quite recently I had
two commissions—one to do a rhyme advertising a
black shoe shop, and another to advertise a rabbiter’s.
I saved myself and both of my clients time and ex-
pense by combining the two subjects in the one poem.
Page Forty-six.


The Sensitive Sole
The result was extremely satisfactory for all con-
cerned. It was a fine poem, too —a lot of sound
commonsense in it and all that sort of thing.”
“Do you remember it?” Willy asked.
“I have it in my book here,” said Sam. “Listen
to this—
I went into a black shoe shop one day to buy a rabbit,
And the shoe shopman laughed till I thought he would drop.
‘ Since when young sir,” said he, “have you acquired the habit
Of trying to buy a rabbit in a black shoe shop?”
Then I said to him, “My good man,” and I said it most
sedately,
“If you would only for a moment make your silly laughter
stop,
You might give the information that would oblige me greatly,
Why I cannot buy a rabbit in your black shoe shop.”
Then he looked in the window where were stocked the shoes
in season,
And he said, and his funny little eyes kept going pop,
‘That I don’t keep rabbits, sir, is the one and only reason
Why you cannot buy a rabbit in my black shoe shop.”
You cannot buy a rabbit in my black shoe shop
Page Forty-seven.


“That is what I call a really capable piece of
work,” Sam said, when he had finished reading the
poem. “You see how cleverly I have made the one
advertisement do for the two shops? After reading it,
all my thousands of readers will know at once that if
they want rabbits they should go to the rabbiter's, and
if they want shoes they should go to the shoe shop.
You see my point?”
“It sounds all right,” Willy said.
“It is all right,” said Sam. “If ever you want a
bit of first-class advertising done, or if you know of
anybody who wants any done, you could not do bet-
ter than come to me or send them to me. Here is my
card.”
He took a card designed like a mussel shell out
of his waistcoat pocket and handed it to Willy, who
read
Sam the Sensitive Sole;
Advertisements done with despatch,
With rhythm and rhyme in perfect time
And a form that you could not match
“You might just hand that round to all your
friends,” Sam said. “Tell them that I have been most
wonderfully kind to you, and that I am the greatest
poet you know, and that I am the sole of honesty
and an honest sole, and all that sort of thing. It makes
for publicity, and what is a poet without his publi-
city? If you will do this little thing for me I won’t
weep as much as I otherwise will and use up all my
handkerchiefs in the way I do.”
“I’ll do anything I can to help you,” said Willy.
“I knew you would.” said Sam. “I knew you
would. The first moment I clapped eyes on you I
told myself that here was somebody coming whom I
knew would understand me. 'Twin soles with but a
single thought’ I quoted to myself. ‘Not the same
Page Forty-eight.


The Sensitive Sole
kind of sole as I am,’ I said to myself, ‘but a kind soul
for all that.’ And here you are going to prove to the
hilt that my judgment was right. But I want you to
leave me now, like a good fellow. I feel myself get-
ting too fond of you. I know that lam going to be
bowed down with grief when you go, and the longer
you stay the longer I shall be bowed down. You see
it is not your going that grieves me so much as the
knowledge I have of the deep grief that your going
from me will cause you. I always make a point of
feeling more for others than Ido for myself. lam
that sort of sole. So please go now.” He took out all
his five handkerchiefs and started to weep into one of
them.
‘‘Good-bye, friend,” he said in a broken voice.
‘‘Good-bye,” Willy said, and then he suddenly re-
membered that he had forgotten Humpty Dumpty
again, and he asked Sam if he knew where the nearest
butcher’s shop was where you could buy black pud-
dings. ‘‘Turn right, then left, then right, then left,
then left, then right, and the third house on the right
you will see is a theatre. The manager there is a
personal friend of mine and greatly in my debt though
he doesn’t know it,” Sam said through his now
rapidly falling tears. ‘‘lf you tell him that you are
a great friend of mine he will I am sure go out of his
way to explain where the nearest butcher’s shop,
where you can buy black puddings, isn’t.”
But,” Willy said, ‘‘l want to know where the
nearest butcher’s shop is, not where it isn't.”
Sam groaned.
Silly, he said sadly, “don’t you see that my
friend will not only tell you where the nearest
butcher s shop isn t, he will pass you on to some other
friend who will tell you somewhere else where the
nearest butcher s shop isn’t. Then when you have
Page Forty-nine


found out all the places it isn’t —don’t you see you
will know where it is. But please go now like a good
fellow. I cannot bear much more of this.”
And Willy went off down the road, repeating
“Turn right, then left, then right, then left, then
left, then right, and the third house on the right.”
“I suppose Sam’s directions are all right,” he said
to himself, “but it seems a jolly funny way of finding
out where somebody is by looking for where he isn’t.”
Page Fifty.


CHAPTER IV.
Mo Mice And The Nibberley Nobberleys.
TURN right, then left, then right, then left, then
left, then right, and the third house on the right
should be a theatre. This should be it,” Willy said to
himself; “and, I say, what a funny looking place it is!”
The front of the house was like a huge closed-m arch
with a large square door in the middle of it. Over the
arch was painted in large red, white and blue letters
TOjeatre of tfje ilftberlcp J^ofalierleps
and over the main door, which was closed, was painted
in letters of the same colours
ALL WELCOME EXCEPT CATS.
Beside this door leaned a large placard with printed on
it—
Roll Up! Tumble Up! Tumble Up! Roll Up!
POSITIVELY LAST PERFORMANCES.
COME IN AND SEE THIS LAST WORD IN
UNIQUE SHOWS.
ACTS PUT ON WHILE YOU WAIT.
ONLY THE BEST ACTORS USED.
POPULAR PRICES! POPULAR PRICES!
POPULAR PRICES!
Page Fifty-one.


Above this placard beside the door was a round ring
in the middle of a white circle. Under this was printed
in gold letters—
The ring above this rings a bell;
If you should pull it once or twice.
And tell us who you are as well,
You’ll see our show if you are nice.
Willy pulled the bell hard twice after reading
this poem, and he could hear it jangling loudly in-
side, There was at once a tremendous scampering
and knocking over of all sorts of things and a great
deal of squeaking. Then a little trapdoor with a grid
over it opened beside the bell, and a very long, sharp
nose with tremendously long whiskers and a mouth
with sharp teeth on the end of it came through the
grid, and a voice said, “We don’t want any fruit,
vegetables, knick-knacks, hams, jams or jellies, sweets,
bootlaces, camphor, toothpaste, soap, writing mate-
rials—nothing this morning, thank you. We are very
busy, so please go away.”
“But,” Willy said, “I’m not selling things. I
only came to ask a question.”
The nose pointed down a bit, and Willy saw
two eyes under very bushy eyebrows looking at him
over the tops of large round spectacles.
“You only came to ask a question?” said the
owner of the eyes, “you only came to ask a question?
Then if you only came to ask a question why don’t
you ask it instead of just standing there and doing
and saying nothing in that stupid way?”
I wanted to ask you if you could tell me where
the nearest butcher’s shop is,” Willy said. “You see,
Mr. Humpty Dumpty is very hungry, and he wants a
butcher to send his boy so that he can send the butcher
back an order for a black pudding.”
Page Fifty-two.


“I don’t know any such person as Mr. Humpty
Dumpty,” said the being behind the nose and glasses
and whiskers. "And I don't like black puddings, and
I don’t like people who like black puddings. And
what is more the nearest butcher is out."
‘Does he live here?" asked Willy.
‘No, he doesn't live here."
‘Does he stay here?"
‘No, he doesn’t stay here."
‘Does he work here?"
‘No, he doesn't work here.
‘ls he ever here?"
‘No, he is never here."
Then, said Willy, "why did you say he was
out."
"Well, if he isn’t here he must be out somewhere,
mustn’t he?"
"I suppose he must." said Willy. "Mr. Sam the
Sole said the manager here would give me some in-
formation, that is why I asked."
Mr. Sam the Sole said the manager here would
give you some information? Then why on earth
didn’t you say that Mr. Sam the Sole said the man-
ager here would give you some information? Now
I 11 have to go to all the trouble of opening the door.
I hate opening doors and letting draughts in and all
that sort of thing."
He slammed the trapdoor violently and there was
a great deal of noise as if heavy bars were being taken
down. Then a key grated in a large lock, and the
door was pulled open. Willy saw then that the owner
of the long nose with the whiskers and teeth on the
end wore blue trousers with red stripes up the sides
and a red coat with gold buttons and a peaked cap
with Nibberley Nobberley Theatre in gold letters on
it. He said to Willy, "Come in, come in, boy. Don’t
Page Firty-three.


stand there gaping. lam not the show. I would not
let you in if you were not Mr. Sam s friend. You don
deserve to get in anyway —butting into rehearsals an
things in this way. It is disgraceful. How do you
expect us to put on a good show when Y? u wdl not
allow us to rehearse properly. My name is Mo Mice
the Mouse: what’s yours?”
“Mine’s Willy Fitzbiffkm, said Willy. But
why do they call you Mo Mice the Mouse? You can t
be mice if you’re a mouse.” „ ~ <. T
“That’s merely what you think, said Mo. i
was christened Moses, but my friends dropped the ses
to save time, and I’m called Mice because I am more
mouses than one. Perhaps if you are as clever at
answering questions as you apparently believe that
you are at asking them, you might provide the answer
to this poem that I ran off yesterday. It s going to be
put on as a special number on Saturday night. A
prize of a pound of toasted cheese will be given to any
body supplying the correct solution.
If the plural of house is houses,
And the plural of mouse is mice,
Then why shouldn’t mice be mouses?
And why shouldn’t houses be hice?
Can you give the answer to that one?”
“I’m afraid I can't really,” said Willy.
“I wasn’t greatly afraid that you could,” said
Mo. “Well, what about this one?
If P-L-O-U-G-H spells plow,
And C-O-U-G-H spells koff,
Then why shouldn’t koff be cow?
And why shouldn’t plow be ploff?
What about that one?”
“I can't answer that one either,” said Willy.
“I would not have asked you if I had thought
Page Fifty-four.


Mo Mice and the Nibberley Nobberleys
you could/' said Mo. “But I suppose I had better
take you along to our manager. He will be pleased,
I don’t think. He’s probably having a sleep. Of
course he will pretend that he is pleased. He has what
is called a polished manner. He isn’t rough and ready
like me, but I don’t put too much trust in polished
manners myself. I call spades spades I do. But come
along, come along. We’ll never get anything done if
you are going to stand there talking all day/'
He led Willy down a passage to a glass door with
MANAGER printed on it. and NO ADMISSION
EXCEPT ON BUSINESS. Mo knocked on this
door, and said in a loud voice, “Come in.” He
opened the door and said, “There’s a Mr. Fitzbiffkin
to see you, sir. He says he’s a friend of Mr. Sam the
Sole.” Then he put on quite a different voice, which
Willy could see him screwing up his mouth to do, and
said, “Ask Mr. Fitzbiffkin to be good enough to step
this way.” Mo then turned to Willy, and said in his
own voice, “Go right in. Our manager will see you
now.” He pushed Willy into the room, and Willy
saw that there was nobody there, but he heard a wild
scampering outside, and another door opened, and Mo
came in buttoning up a tail coat. “Pleased to see you,
Mr. Fitzbiffkin,” he said in quite another voice, com-
ing forward and holding out his hand. “Sorry if I
kept you waiting. Won't you sit down?” Willy went
to do so but could not see any chair. “Any friend of
Sam’s is a friend of mine,” Mo went on. “Like me,
like my dog is one of my mottos. Though, between
you and me I do not give Sam such a warm welcome
here as I used to. He used to come here quite fre-
quently at one time, but we never invite him to shows
now. He sobs so much that the audience cannot tell
whether the play is a comedy or a tragedy. Then he
used to hang his handkerchiefs to dry on the backs of
Page Fifty-five.


the seats. When we put up a notice NO WEEPING
ALLOWED, he said we were referring to him, and
that only made him weep worse than ever. Quite
spoiled a number of our most expensive reserved stall
seats. A real nice sort of fellow Sam, but he has his
weaknesses, but then which of us hasn’t? Throwing
stones in glass houses, you know what I mean. I sup-
pose you would like to see some of our new numbers.
Come along with me. and I’ll get our producer to put
on an act.”
“Oh, but I don’t want you to go to all that
trouble for me,” Willy said.
“No trouble at all,"said Mo. “We always put
on an act or two for friends. First of all I'll see if I
can find a spare seat.” He went into a little office and
came out with a ticket, which he handed to Willy.
“Yes, here we are —the only one left in the house, but
it is quite a good one. I'll get the usher to take you to
your place. Just wait here a moment.”
The only one left in the house.
He went round a corner, and came back almost
at once with his front hair plastered down and a very
Page Fifty-six.


Mo Mice and the Nibberley Nobberleys
tight coat with a tremendous number of brass buttons
buttoned up to the neck. “Your ticket, please, sir,”
he said to Willy. “Just follow me.” He led Willy
into the theatre, which was all lit up with candles.
“Here we are, I think,” he said. “Seat 26, Row D.
This will be your seat, sir. I think you will see quite
well from here.”
Mo then went out, and came in again with his
coat off, and went round blowing out all the candles,
except those in the footlights of the stage. When he
had done this Willy saw him creep down between
the seats and sit down in the part reserved for the
orchestra. He took up a tin whistle, and played a
tune, which Willy recognised as “Rats and mice
come out to play, all the cats have gone away.”
Then he called out, “Curtain,” and ran over
and began to wind a handle, and Willy saw
the curtain go up. The scene on the stage
was a town, but all the houses and shops and castles
were shaped like buns and cheeses and Christmas cakes.
Then Mo called out, “First number, please.” And a
great many mice ran out on to the stage. There were
an equal number of girl and boy mice. They were
all nicely dressed, with frills round their necks, and
as they came in they held on to each other’s tails.
Then the boy mice went to one side of the stage and
the girl mice to the other. Then Mo, who was now
in evening dress, with a white tie, stood up in the
conductor’s box, and bowed to all the different parts
of the house. Then he turned to the stage and shook
down his cuffs and tapped with his baton on the front
of the box. Then he waved his baton very gently
here and there, and then suddenly pointed it at the
boy mice, and they chanted in deep bass voices the
first line of a song. Then Mo pointed just as suddenly
Page Fifty-seven.


at the girl mice, and they chanted in squeaky sopranos
the second line, and so on. The song went —
We are the nibberlcy nobberley ones:
We are not quite as big as whales:
But we’re not as little as some things are,
And we have got beautiful tails.
Some of us are quiet little mites.
And some are gay little friskers,
And we’ve all got eyes that can see at nights.
And we’ve all got loverley whiskers.
And we’ve all got warm little coats of fur,
And we don’t have to change our clotheses.
And we’ve all got ears that can hear cat’s purr.
And beautiful sharp little noses.
We are the nibberley nobberley ones:
We can’t sing like nightingales.
But our squeaks aren’t as ugly as some squeaks are,
And we have got beautiful tails.
We are the nibberley nobberley ones:
At night time we dance our dance.
And we eat crumbs and cheeses and buns.
Whenever we get a chance.
We nibble and squeak and squeak and gnaw,
Then one gnaw a little bit harder;
Then a loverley smell that we’ve smelt before;
And we’re in somebody’s larder!
We are the nibberley nobberley ones:
We’re not quite as slow as snails;
And we mightn’t be fast as some things are.
But we’ve all got BEAUT-TFUL TAILS!
The moment this song was finished Willy heard
a great clapping from one side of the stalls, and a voice
called out, “Encore, encore,” and looking round he
saw that it was Mo sitting in one of the seats.
Then he disappeared, and Willy heard a patter
of running feet, and there was Mo in a seat
Page Fifty-eight.


11 !il /0| Ilf ij
II m III r \ V I p| II
“We are the Nibberley Nobberley ones: we are not quite as
big as whales.
Page Fifty-nine.


on the other side of the stalls clapping and call-
ing out, “Encore, encore!" Then he appeared in the
Dress Circle. Then he was in the gallery, with his
hat on his head and his two hands to his mouth, call-
ing out, “Hencore, hencore! How's it for another
round, folks?" And then he was in a box sitting back
and clapping very aristocratically, and calling out,
“Brava, brava!" And the girls and boy mice, who
had gone off the stage, came back and stood in a row
smiling and bowing, and then, as Mo clapped and
clapped, and kept on calling out, “Encore, encore!" in
different places, they sang together—
We are the Nibberley Nobberley ones;
We’re not quite as slow as snails:
And we mightn’t be fast as some things are,
But we’ve all got BEAUT-I-FUL TAILS!
Then they all turned their backs on the audience, and
suddenly stood on their hands and walked off wav-
ing their tails. And Mo ran to the handle and began
to wind down the curtain. Then he ran round light-
ing all the candles. When he came back to Willy in
his manager’s coat he was puffing and blowing so
much that fc he could hardly speak, and with a large
red handkerchief he was mopping his brow.
“Well, Mr. Fitzbiffkin," he said at last, “what do
you think of that for a show? Pretty good, don’t you
think?”
“Very good indeed," said Willy, who had really
enjoyed it all very much. “I like the way the boy
and girl mice did the alternate lines."
“One of my lesser ideas, that," said Mo. “Not
at all a bad one either. It always gets well received like
that."
“I think the poem was fine too," Willy said.
Mine, too, said Mo. I write all our plays
Page Sixty.


and lyrics, and do all the music for them. Now if you
will give me sixpence I’ll give you your ticket, so that
you will be able to get out.”
“But,” said Willy in a surprised voice, “you did
not charge me to come in,”
“We never charge anybody to come in,” said
Mo, ; “we only charge them to go out.”
Willy felt in his pocket, and found a threepenny
bit and three pennies, which he gave to Mo. Mo then
ran to the door, and when Willy handed him his ticket
he gave Willy a sixpence.
“What is this for?” Willy asked.
“For coming to the show,” said Mo. “We
always pay people for coming to our shows. We don’t
charge them for coming in, but we do for going out,
and we pay them for being here. That’s how we make
our profit.”
Willy was not very good at arithmetic, and he
could not for the life of him see how much profit could
be made that way, but he supposed it must be all
tight.
•a “ru nUSt k 0 Setting back to my office now,” Mo
said, I have several important business appointments
Drop in some other time, there’s a good fellow. And
you might let anybody you meet know that ours is
the best show you’ve ever seen and all that sort of
thing. It all helps, and one needs help to keep going
these hard times.” 5
he called out. Commissionaire, show this
gentleman out.” Then he ran away, and in a moment
reappeared in the coat he had worn when Willy first
saw him. Willy noticed that there were coats hang-
ing on hooks all over the theatre.
C°me wa T please sir; I hope you enjoyed
the show, he said.
“I did, very much,” Willy said.
Page Sixty-one.


“More than I did,’' said Mo. “Fm going on
strike for higher wages and shorter hours, that’s what
Fm going to do. lam getting fair worn to a shadow
I am —no more than skin and bone my old missus
says I am, and what’s more she’s right. What our
manager wants to put on acts for, for every Tom, Dick
and Harry who comes into the place fair beats me. If
you see Mr. Sam the Sole, you might tell him, with
my compliments, exactly what I think of him for
sending along people and making us work in the way
we do.”
“I will,” said Willy going out into the street
through the big door that Mo slammed hard after him.
“I do believe,” he said to himself, “that that really
must be about the funniest theatre there is in the world.
And Mr. Mo Mice didn’t even tell me where the
butcher wasn’t, as Sam said he would. I suppose I’ll
have to go and find somebody else to ask.
Page Sixty-two.


CHAPTER V.
Trio From Rio.
WHEN Willy was outside the Theatre of the Nib-
berley Nobberleys he stood for a moment won-
dering which way he would go next when he heard
loud voices coming from inside a building across the
street. This building had a large glass window,
through which you could not see what was going on
inside, and over the doorway hung a huge sign, on
which was painted a ship in a stormy sea with jagged
lightning in the dark sky above it. And printed like a
rainbow in the dark sky were the words THE
SAUCY JANE INN, SAM JENKS, PROPRIETOR.
Willy went over and looked in through the door, and
saw a counter with a high wall of shelves of bottles of
all shapes and sizes behind it. At one end of this
counter, between it and the wall, sat a little old man
with a fringe of white whiskers round his chin. On
the top of the apron he wore were printed the words
SAMUEL JENKS, PROPRIETOR. He was adding
up figures on his fingers and writing them down with
a large pen in an enormous book. Every now and then
he would pause to listen to the conversation of the
three queerest looking men Willy had ever seen, who
were sitting at a round table. These men had big
mugs in their hands, which they kept emptying and
filling again out of huge bottles that stood on the table
in front of them and which had Ginger Beer printed
on them. Willy would not have gone in if he had
not seen that one of them was wearing a blue and
white banded butcher’s apron, and had a cleaver and
Page Sixty-three


a steel hanging from a belt at his waist. He was a
big man with a large round head with very short hair,
and Willy noticed that his bare feet had bells attached
to each of his ten toes. Next to him was a funny
looking man with a long thin nose, whom Willy
judged, from the white cap he wore and the white
apron and the white powder on his arms, must be a
baker. He wore a large round ring through his nose.
The third man was short and fat, and wore the fun-
niest little waistcoat Willy had ever seen. Willy
judged from some utensils he had tied round his waist
that he must be a candlestick-maker. As Willy went
in the three men, keeping time by banging their mugs
on the table, began to sing a song. It was a funny
sort of a song that went like this—
Remarkable coves are us three;
We’ve just returned from the sea,
Where we’ve been on a trip in a saucy ship.
And now we’re famous, and we
Are going to appear in the music halls,
For we’ve been eaten by canney-balls,
Eaten, eaten, eaten —eaten by canney-balls!
And all the best papers feature our capers,
And our story’s been over the air,
Of the canney-ball isle and the chief with a smile
And his daughter who was so fair;
And how that cunning old canney-ball met us,
And housed us and fed us and in the end eat us.
And in the end, in the end, in the end, eat us.
Remarkable coves are us three:
We’ve just returned from the sea,
Where we’ve been on a trip in a saucy ship,
And we’re famous as we can be.
And we’re to appear in the music halls,
For we’ve been eaten by canney-balls,
Eaten, eaten, eaten, eaten —EATEN
By canney, canney, canney—CANNEY-BALLS!
Page Sixty-four.


*k
|M
“Remarkable coves are us three.”
Page Sixty-five.


The three then touched their mugs together and
quaffed long drinks. As Willy entered, the elderly
gentleman looked up and said, “Well, Sonny, what do
you want?”
Willy did not like being called Sonny, but he
thought he had better be polite, so he said, “I just
wanted to talk to one of those gentlemen.”
“Well, we don’t charge for talking,” said Sam
Jenks, “but if you want a drink you pay for it, and
if you create a disturbance, out you go.”
Willy went up to the table where the the three
men were, and said to the big man with the apron,
“Please, Mr. Butcher, would you send your boy to
Mr. Humpty Dumpty so that he can send him back to
you with an order for a black pudding. He has not
had anything to eat for three weeks, and is really
dreadfully hungry.”
“What me,” said the butcher. “ME SEND MY
BOY to Mr. Humpty Dumpty. Did you hear that,
you fellows. He’s asking me to send my boy—Not
much. No more butchering for me. I’m famous I
am, and no famous man ever works.”
“I should just think not,” said the baker. “I’m
famous too, and I’ve given up bakering too.”
“Me, too.” said the candlestick-maker. “No
more candlestick-makering for me either. Didn’t you
know we had been eaten by cannibals?”
“Nonsense,” said Willy. “You couldn’t be here
if you’d been eaten by cannibals.”
‘‘WE—COULDN’T BE HERE if we’d been
eaten by cannibals?” they all sat up and said together.
“You mean to say,” said the butcher, “that you
haven’t read the poem that was written about us?”
“No,” said Willy, “I never read it.
“Bustin’ beeswax,” said the butcher, “he’s never
read it.”
Page Sixty-six.


“Jumpin' jimini,” said the baker, “it was in all
the papers.”
“Gapin’ gimlets,” said the candlestick-maker,
“doesn’t he ever listen in to broadcasts?”
“Perhaps we had better show it to him,” said
the butcher.
“Who’s got it?” asked the baker.
“You had it last,” said the candlestick-maker.
“I did no such thing,” said the baker.
“Then the butcher had it,” said the candlestick-
maker.
“I didn’t,” said the butcher. “You had it your-
self. I saw you stick it in your waistcoat pocket with
my own eyes.”
The candlestick-maker felt in his waistcoat
pocket and pulled out a cutting from a paper which
he smoothed out on the table.
“You read it to him,” said the butcher.
“I don’t want to read it,” said the candlestick-
maker. “I’ve got the toothache.”
“Toothache nothing,” said the butcher, “you’ve
always got something wrong. It would not be you
if you did not have something wrong with you. Why
can’t you be like me. You never hear me complain-
ing. And Goodness knows I’ve got enough to com-
plain about.”
“I don’t want to be like you,” said the candle-
stick-maker. “And I have got a toothache, see. It's
bad, too. You wouldn’t be so funny if you had it.
You made a fuss enough when I accidentally stood
on your toe this morning.”
“Here, give me the poem,” said the baker, “I’ll
read it. And you two stop quarrelling. Quarrelling
in company, too. Where’s your manners?”
“The poem is all about us,” said the butcher.
Page Sixty-seven


“It tells the story of how we were eaten by the
cannibals,” said the candlestick-maker.
“I’d awfully much like to hear it,” Willy said.
“Go on, read it to him,” said the candlestick-
maker to the baker. “If you don’t know how to read,
I’ll show you, in spite of my toothache.”
“You’ll —show—me?” said the baker. “I’d just
like to see you show me anything. You may be able
to make cheap candles that won’t light, but you can’t
read poetry. Can he?” he asked the butcher.
“Reads it something dreadful,” said the butcher.
“You read it.”
“You’re both unfair to me,” said the candlestick-
maker. “You’re always setting on to me. But who
cares? You’ll both of you be sorry some day when
lam dead. I won’t be able to stand this toothache
much longer. It’s driven me almost to skin and bone
now. And when I am no longer here perhaps you
will remember that if the cannibal chief had not looked
closely at me in the pot to see if I were done neither
of you would be alive here now.”
“Looked closely at you to see if you were done?
I like that,’’ said the butcher. “Wasn’t it me calling
him a good-for-nothing, loafing, crooked-eyed blacka-
moor that made the chief come close enough for me to
grab him and pull him into the pot?”
“You didn’t grab him at all,” said the baker, “I
did.”
“Nonsense,” said the candlestick-maker. “It was
9 9
me.
“What!” roared the butcher, “I didn’t grab him?
Here, hold this mug,” he said to Willy, “I’ll show
them whether I grabbed the cannibal chief or not.”
‘Now, now, gentlemen,” called out Sam Jenks
from the counter. “I'll have to respectfully call your
attention to that notice there.”
Page Sixty-eight.


Willy looked up to where Sam pointed and saw
a large card pinned on to the wall with drawing pins.
On it was printed—
NO FIGHTING I FIVE HUNDRED
POUNDS REWARD!
The above reward will be paid to anybody giving
information that will lead to the arrest and conviction
of anybody found fighting on these premises.
Order,
SAM JENKS, Proprietor.
"Well, ask these twerps not to insult me,” said
the butcher. “I'm only sticking up for my rights. A
man’s got a right to stick up for his rights, I suppose.”
“Just listen to him,” said the baker. “His lan-
guage is getting worse and worse. He called us
twerps!”
“I’d twerp him,” said the candlestick-maker, “if
I didn’t have my sore tooth.”
“Like to see you do it,” said the butcher. “I’d
take oti the two of you, one hand tied behind my
back, kneeling. Bah—give me some more ginger
beer.” He filled his mug and emptied it at one quaff.
“He called me a twerp,” said the baker, “but who
cares for names? My mother taught me that sticks
and stones might break my bones but that names
would never hurt me.”
“I wish you gentlemen would not quarrel about
me,” Willy said. “Perhaps if I read the poem myself
it would do.”
“That sounds good common sense,” said the
baker. “I vote we let him read it.”
That goes for me,” said the butcher.
It’s okay by me,” said the candlestick-maker.
Page Sixty-nine


“What about us fellows singing our song over again
while he’s reading it?’’
“Good idea,” said the butcher. “Let’s.
They all filled their mugs and began to sing
again—
Remarkable coves are us three—
whilst Willy read the following strange poem—
A butcher, a baker, a candlestick-maker
Were a most remarkable trio.
They lived on a hill
In a place called Brazil,
Whose principal city is Rio.
The butcher wore bells on his toes;
The baker a ring through his nose.
And a quaint little vest
Stood out from the rest
Of the candlestick-maker’s clothes.
And this remarkable trio
Who lived in the city of Rio,
Got a lovely idea,
One day on the pier—
They would go for a sail on the sea-o.
So they borrowed their grandmother’s tub,
And rolled it down hill through the scrub,
And the fisherfolk laughed
As they christened their craft
The Rubadub-Rubadub-Dub.
Then they sailed away for a while
Till they came to a cannibal isle,
Where a chieftain quite swanky
Waved his best hankie.
And asked them to land, with a smile.
And then when shore they had rowed.
He asked them to share his abode,
And he called to his daughter
To bring soap and water.
Whilst each to his bedroom he showed.
Page Seventy.


iE
Then his table he set in a trice
And laid out the pickles and spice,
And he said, smiling brightly,
“If I judge them rightly,
I guess they will taste very nice.”
And then when the water was hot,
He tumbled them into his pot,
And he stirred them like fun
Till he thought they were done,
And then started to eat up the lot.
A chieftain quite swanky, waved his best hankie.
First he bit out some bones from the butcher
Then he bolted some bits of the baker:
Then he gnawed a shinbone.
Quite the nicest he’d known.
That came from the candlestick-maker.
And now, if a-sailing you be,
And you come, on a tropical sea,
To a cannibal isle.
And a chief with a smile,
You will certainly know it is he.
Page Seventy-one.


For his toes wear the bells of the butcher,
And his nose wears the ring of the baker,
And the quaint little vest
He wears for his best.
Once circled the candlestick-maker.
And his best war canoe is a tub,
That he sails on a pond in the scrub,
And its name you will see
If you look carefully.
Is the Rubadub-Rubadub-Dub.
Willy had just finished reading the poem when
the trio finished their song.
“I think it is a very interesting story,” he said,
“but I still can’t see how if you were eaten by canni-
bals, as the poem says, you can still be here. You can’t
be alive and dead at the same time.”
“I suppose we shall have to explain it to him.”
said the butcher.
“It is extremely tiresome,” said the baker. ‘‘But
I suppose in justice to ourselves, we shall have to do
it.”
‘‘l have heard the story so often,” said the candle-
stick-maker, “that frankly, it bores me. My tooth
kept me awake all last night, so I think I’ll just lean
back in my chair and snatch a few much-needed winks
while you fellows tell him the story.”
“All right,” said the butcher, “I’ll tell the gentle-
man the story.”
“But if he snores,” he said to the baker, ‘‘you hit
him over the head.”
“Good-oh,” said the baker. “I’d like to hit him
over the head. Can Ido it now? He’s bound to snore.
He always does. He kept me awake all last night.”
‘‘You great big story teller,” said the candlestick-
maker, ‘‘how could I have kept him awake by snor-
ing, seeing how my tooth kept me from sleeping all
Page Seventy-two.


night? Anyway, I would just like to see him hit me.
Just let him try —that’s all.”
“It was like this,” began the butcher. “When
we had been out for three weeks or so and were running
short of vittles we were heading for the Horn—”
“We were doing no such thing,” said the candle-
stick-maker, "we were cutting across for the Cape of
Good Hope, which is in Africa, and isn’t in America
at all. He knows about as much about geography as
my big toe does. He couldn’t get beyond the second
class when he was at school.”
“Let him get on with the story,” said the baker.
“If I looked like you I’d be seen and not heard. You
ought to be ashamed of yourself.”
“Please,” said Willy, “do let Mr. Butcher tell the
story.”
“Well,” said the butcher, “we were in the dol-
drums, that s where we were, and all our fresh water
had run out for some days, and we had only one bottle
of ginger beer between the three of us—”
And we had to eat toast and butter without
marmalade for breakfast,” said the baker. “It was
dreadful. I was quite weak.”
The butter had all melted in the tropics,” said
the candlestick-maker, and the rats had eaten all our
cake and sucked the treacle out of all the tins.”
“Are you gentlemen telling this story or am I?”
said the butcher. “Because if you are—”
“Oh, please go on,” said Willy. “What hap-
pened?”
“Well, we were just at our last gasp.” said the
butcher. “We’d chewed up all our boots, and licked
the moisture off the railings, when one evening I spied
land on the starboard bow. I leapt up with what
little strength I had left, and shaded my eyes with
Page Seventy-three.


my hand, and roared out, “Land, Ho!” which is what
you do when you spy land at sea.”
“If you aren’t just the biggest story-teller ever,”
said the baker. “It was me who saw the land, and it
was not on the starboard bow. It was dead ahead.
And it was not in the evening: it was in the morning.
I remember that quite distinctly. I had just cleaned
my teeth, when I looked up, and I don’t clean my
teeth in the evening.”
“And it was me who roared out, ‘Land. Ho!’
said the candlestick-maker. “I did it just like this.”
He stood up and put his two hands round his mouth
and called out at the top of his voice, “La-and. Ho-
t f *
O-O-O!
“But I want to know how you were eaten by the
cannibals, and are still alive,” said Willy.
“Well, to cut a long story short,” said the
butcher, “the land was a cannibal isle, and all hap-
pened just as is told in the poem. The only thing was
that the man who wrote the poem was so eager to
get his news into the paper that he did not wait to
see the finish. He just guessed what would happen.
People who write for papers often do that sort of
thing.”
“He means,” explained the baker, “that he left
before the denouement.”
“He didn’t wait until we were properly cooked.”
added the candlestick-maker.
“You see,” said the butcher, “just when we were
nearly done and were feeling very uncomfortable, the
cannibal chief leaned over to sniff if he had put in
enough pepper and spices and things to make us tasty,
and we grabbed him and pulled him in with us. As
he was a big man it made the soup we were in flow
over the sides of the pot, and that put out the fire.
When we were cooled off sufficiently we got out. Then
Page Seventy-four.


we piled big stones on the chief to keep him in the
pot and lit the fire again. Then we sneaked away,
and when the cannibal tribe came in to dinner and
found the pot full of soup and bones they thought it
was us. So they really ate up the cannibal chief. And
while they slept after their meal we stole our canoe
and—well—here we are."
"That’s about it," said the baker. "The details
are all wrong, but it is as near as one could expect con-
sidering who told the story."
"He didn’t do me justice," said the candlestick-
maker, "but then, who ever does?"
"It’s a jolly exciting story," said Willy. "I
wonder if I might ask you gentlemen a few ques-
tions?"
"Certainly,” said the butcher. "Anything to
oblige."
"Ask away," said the baker.
"You’re welcome," said the candlestick-maker.
"Probably we won’t answer, but you’re welcome to
ask."
"I just wanted to ask," Willy said, "why Mr.
Butcher wears those bells on his toes, and Mr. Baker
that ring in his nose, and you, Mr. Candlestick-maker,
that funny little waistcoat."
"It isn't a funny little waistcoat," said the
candlestick-maker. "It belonged to my great-great-
great grandfather, and was handed down to me. It’s
a heirloom, that’s what it is. If you don’t like it you
needn’t."
"I don’t dislike it," Willy said. "I only thought
it looked funny."
"I wear bells on my toes," said the butcher, "be-
cause my feet have a habit of going to sleep if I don’t
wear bells on my toes to keep them awake. I’m not
ashamed of them, either.”
Page Seventy-five.


“And I wear a ring in my nose,” said the baker,
“so that instead of having to hang up my clothes
separately when I go to bed at night I just hang up
myself with my clothes on. It saves time when I have
to get up for early baking in the morning. My father
suggested it to me. Quite a clever idea, don't you
think?”
“Very,” said Willy.
“Very,” said the butcher.
“Very,” said the candlestick-maker.
“We don’t think,” they both roared together.
“They think they’re being funny,” said the
baker.
“No we don’t,” said the butcher. “We think
you are being funny. You are, too, only you don’t
know it.”
“He mightn’t be, if he did,” said the candlestick-
maker.
“I’ll have to be getting along now,” Willy said.
“I don’t suppose you could tell me where I could find
some unfamous butcher who sells black puddings?”
“You might ask Policeman Jones,” said the
butcher. “He lives at the gaol down at the end of
the street.”
“You could do that,” said the baker. “Police-
man Jones does not know much, but he just might
know that.”
“Don’t mention our names to him though,” said
the candlestick-maker. “He doesn’t like us. He has to
control the crowds that gather when we go out, and
he hates controlling crowds.”
“I’ll run along and see if I can find him,” said
Willy, ‘Thank you all very much.”
“Don’t mention it,” said the butcher.
“Our pleasure,” said the baker.
“You’re welcome.” said the candlestick-maker.
Page Seventy-six.


Willy went out, and as he started off down the
street to look for Policeman Jones he heard the strange
trio begin to sing again—
Remarkable coves are us three:
We’ve just returned from the sea,
Where we’ve been on trip in a saucy ship.
And now we’re famous, and we
Are going to appear in the music halls.
For we’ve been eaten by canney-balls;
For we’ve been eaten by canney-balls:
By canney, canney, canney, CANNEY-BALLS!
"Bustin’ beeswax," said Willy to himself, "I
have been meeting some queer sorts of beings lately. I
wonder what Policeman Jones will be like?"
Page Seventy-seven.


CHAPTER VI.
Policeman Jones.
WHEN Willy left the Saucy Jane Inn he walked
down the street until he came to a large white
building with a high wall around it, and over the only
gate he could see in the wall was painted in large bright
gold letters the word GAOL. Suspended from a beam
high up beside the gate was a large bell with a cord
attached to it. A card was tacked on to the wall be-
side the gate, and Willy went up and read on it—
TRADESMEN’S ENTRANCE AT REAR.
THIS GATE RESERVED FOR PRISONERS AND
VISITORS ONLY.
WHEN INSIDE DON’T SPIT, DON’T WRITE NAMES
ON WALLS. AND BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS.
PLEASE RING BELL QUIETLY.
By Order— POLICEMAN JONES, P.C. 198234.
Willy was too short to reach the cord, but he saw
a box near the wall, and he carried it over and climbed
up on it. He had just taken hold of the cord when
the box gave way under him and he fell. Of course
the bell made a terrific clanging and jangling, and
Willy, who had let the cord go, could not stop it. He
received a great fright, for he always had been afraid
of policemen, and the notice said to ring the bell
quietly by order. He was even more afraid when the
gate opened, and a huge big man with arrow heads
Page Seventy-eight.


painted all over his clothes and his hair cut very short
came out. He was muttering and grumbling, and he
looked very fierce. He reached up one big hand and
stopped the bell. Then he looked one way down the
street and then the other way. “Drat it," he said,
“there’s nobody here. As if I haven’t got something
The bell made a terrific jangling noise.
better to do than answering bells that nobody rings.
I’ll ring them if I catch them.” He was so big that
he looked right over Willy, who was a long way down
below him, and so did not see him. He was going in-
side again, still muttering and grumbling, when Willy
said, Please, sir, I did it, but I didn’t mean to ring
the bell so loudly. The box broke under me, and I
did not have time to let go the cord."
Oh, so you did it,” said the big man leaning
over and looking down at Willy, “and what’s more
you’ve been damaging government property. If you
don t get it hot from old Jonesey for this my name
isn t Spike Harris. He’s in one of his very worst
Page Seventy- Nine


tempers this morning, too. I’m his favourite pri-
soner, and he spoke to even me most dreadful this
morning. And just because I coughed and made him
drop a stitch in his knitting. Real coarse he was —
fair flew at me. So just what you won’t get from
him for all this I don’t know.”
“Perhaps it would be better if I called some other
time,” said Willy.
“Perhaps it would, but you won’t —not if I
knows it,” said the big man. “And me get me good
conduct cut for letting you go. Not much. You
come along with me. You’re under arrest, you are.”
He stooped down and took hold of Willy’s coat col-
lar with one hand and closed the gate with the other.
“Come along now,” he went on, “and we’ll hear
what old Jonesey has to say. I don’t like the looks
of you at all myself—breaking government property
and loitering round the gate and all that sort of thing.
You should be inside here doing a stretch, you
should.”
He dragged Willy along a passage until he came
to a door marked OFFICE. NO ADMISSION EX-
CEPT ON BUSINESS. By Order, Policeman Jones,
P.C. 198234. Willy could hear a queer sort of mut-
tering coming from inside, and when the big man
opened the door he heard a voice saying over and over
again, “Purl two, plain two, drop one, slip one, purl
two, plain two, drop one, slip one,” and when he was
in the room he saw just the queerest-looking police-
man he had ever seen. He was a very little man, and
had on his head a helmet that came down over his
ears, and all of his face that Willy could see was
two big eyebrows and a big sandy-coloured moustache
and a very red nose, on the tip of which was balanced
a pair of spectacles. The policeman’s sleeves were
rolled up at the ends, for his coat was miles too big
Page Eighty.


I believe he was trying to break into gaol,” said the big man.
Page Eighty-one


for him. He wore a short green apron, and his little
feet were dangling down on the end of his short little
legs in front of the rocking chair on which he sat rock-
ing himself. With four very long needles he was knit-
ting a bright red sock.
“Please, Chief,” said the big man, pushing Willy
forward, “I caught this young man ringing the bell
at the gate and breaking up government property. He
was creating a disturbance as well, and obviously
loitering with intent to commit a felony. On my
proceeding to arrest him he resisted violently, called
me words I would not care to repeat, and I had to re-
sort to all my courage and great strength to get him
in. I think he’s a desperate criminal. Perhaps there
is a reward for him.”
“Purl two, plain two, drop one, slip one, purl
two. plain two, slip one drop one—there now, I’ve
gone and done it again. I’ve slipped where I should
have dropped. I always do when I am interupted.
Now I’ll have to take the whole row out.” The
policeman pushed his spectacles back on his forehead.
“You criminals,” he went on, “never seem to have a
thought for anybody but yourselves. Why can’t you
live and let live? Goodness knows I go out of my way
to be good and kind to you all. After all, lam only
a human being.” He looked at Willy over the top of
his spectacles, which he had put back on his nose.
“Nasty looking prisoner you’re brought in,
Spike,” he went on. “What’s the charge?”
“I believe he was trying to break into the gaol,”
said the big man. “Anyway, we can charge him with
ringing the bell loudly, destroying government pro-
perty, resisting arrest —also there’s using bad lan-
guage, loitering, no visible means of support, vag-
rancy. I’ll probably think out some other charges
Page Eightg-two.


later, but those will give you an idea of what sort of
young man the prisoner is.”
"One of those desperate customers,” said the
policeman. “Just leave him with me, and I’ll try him.
Run along now and change your clothes. I have a
report that Convict Purley is down at Old Mother
Brown’s lolly shop. You go down there and talk to
him nicely so he won’t go away, and I will come and
arrest him when I have time. Here’s thrippence. Buy
some lollies and give them to him to keep him quiet,
and don’t eat them all yourself as you did last time.
And see that he doesn’t get hold of any matches. You
might enter the prisoner’s name and the charge against
him in the charge book before you go.”
“Okay, Chief,” said the big man, going over to
a desk and opening a huge book there. He took a pen
from an ink bottle and shook it over the floor.
“What’s your name?” he asked Willy.
“Willy Fitzbiffkin,” Willy told him.
“W-i-l-l-y S-m-i-t-h,” the big man spelt out,
writing.
“Willy Fitzbiffkin,” said Willy, “not Willy
Smith. My name isn’t Smith.”
“I can’t spell Fitzbiff, whatever it is,” said the
big man, “so it will have to be Smith here. Fitzbiff—
whatever it is, is probably an alias anyway. What’s
your occupation?”
“I haven’t any occupation,” said Willy. “You
see I have only just started school.”
“Occupation—invisible means of support,” said
the big man writing. “Address?”
“I can’t really remember,” said Willy. “I was
trying to remember it just a little while ago.”
“Address—can’t remember,” said the big man
writing. “Now for the charges. I suggest the usual
charges. Chief.”
Page Eighty-three


“Okay, Spike,’’ said the policeman. “Now you
run along, there’s a good fellow, and do what you can
about Convict Purley, and I’ll try the prisoner.”
“ ’Pon my word, I don’t know what things are
coming to,” he went on after Spike had left the room.
“I’m sure I don’t know when I will get this sock done.
I started it when the last war was on, and I have a
dreadful feeling that this war will be over before I
get it finished. I never get a chance to do much patrio-
tic work. What with getting the prisoner’s meals and
washing up after them, and you criminals dropping
in at all hours of the day, I never get a moment to my-
self for a bit of quiet knitting. You haven’t the least
idea what a policeman has to put up with. There's
Convict Purley now. As nice as chap as you could
wish to meet, but you can’t trust him, his memory is
so shocking. I allowed him out three hours ago to
go and spend his pocket money down at Old Mother
Brown’s, and he’s gone and forgot to come back. He
always does. He gets gossiping and forgets the time.
And I can’t go and arrest him till after five, when I
have given the prisoners their teas and let them out for
the night.”
“But you surely don’t let the prisoners out for
the night,” said Willy.
“I usen’t to,” said the policeman , “but they
would talk so much and have pillow fights in their
cells after I had gone round and blown out the candles
that I could not get a wink of sleep. I warned them,
but they would not listen to me, so now I make them
go off to their homes for the night. They don’t like
it, but they brought it on themselves. But it all
means more work for me. I have to get up early to
let them in in the mornings and get them their break-
fasts.”
Page Eighty-four.


“Then why are you worrying about Convict
Purley being out?” Willy asked.
“He's different,” said the policeman. “He burns
down houses and things. Of course, there's not much
in that, but you see, in the poem it says that he only
sees the sky through barred windows. If I let him
stay out it spoils the meaning of the poem.”
“What poem?” Willy asked.
You 11 find it in the record book, if you want to
see it,” said the policeman. “It's up on the shelf.
Take down that number marked O-R. I think it is
page one thousand two hundred and six.
“There’s a poem here called PETER PURLEY, ’'
said Willy, "is that the one?”
“That’s it,” said the policeman. “It is quite a
good poem. I rather like it, though I did not write it
myself. You recite it whilst I'll get on with my sol-
dier s sock. He took up his knitting and began to re-
ag^*E~P ur l two, plain two, drop one, slip one—
whilst Willy read out the following poem—
Peter Peppercorn Pop-off Purley
One day was seeing red,
So he rose up very bright and early,
And stoic with stealthy tread,
And, quiet as a mouse,
Burnt down a house
Over its owner's head.
Peter Peppercorn Pop-off Purlev
Began to feel quite blue.
When a policeman big and burly
Quickly hove in view,
And telling him to put his hat on,
Urged him with a thick black baton
Before a judge he knew.
Peter Peppercorn Pop-off Purley
Now has gone quite white,
For that judge, in voice most surly,
Page Eighty-five


Though in manner quite polite,
Said, “Lighting houses must be fun,
But we mustn’t have it done;^
It gives folks such a fright.”
Peter Peppercorn Pop-off Purley
Is finding life quite hard.
He has to rise up bright and early,
And walk in a prison yard.
And he heaves a sigh
As he looks at the sky
Through a window always barred.
“Quite a fine poem that, said the policeman,
“but it is a pity the poet put that last line in. It means
I can't let Purley stay out without spoiling the poem.
“Couldn’t you change the last lines?” said Willy.
“You could put —
And he heaves a sigh
As he looks at the sky
That at night is brightly starred,
or something like that.”
The policeman put down his knitting and looked
at Willy over the tops of his spectacles.
“That sounds to me/' he said, “as if you are in-
citing me to commit a forgery. Not only that, but it
looks to me like a clear case of bribery and corrup-
tion. ~ - t 1 11
“I didn’t mean to do anything like that, Willy
said. “Really I didn’t.”
“I’ll have to take your word for it,” said the
policeman, “but it is a nuisance.”
“What are all those things in the big glass case?”
asked Willy, looking towards one wall of the room
with shelves on it that were covered with an assort-
ment of all sorts of queer things.
“That is my private museum,” said the police-
man, “quite an interesting collection.”
Page Eighty-six


“What are those things in the saucer?” Willy
asked.
“Bullets,” said the policeman. “Those were the
ones Spike Harris, who's just gone out, missed me
with when I arrested him. He’s one of our worst
murderers, but quite a good sort when you get to
know him. You will like him when you've been in
for a month or two. He’s a bit rough, but he means
well, and that after all. is the main thing.”
“What’s the ladder for?” asked Willy, looking
at a ladder inside the case.
‘That,” said the policeman, “that recalls a very
sad affair. It's in the record. Take down Vol. - F-J
and look up Gunday, Eliza. Spinster, deceased.
There’s a poem there that tells the story. I was the
policeman mentioned in the story. I was promoted
for my heroic behaviour on that occasion, but all my
cleverness and courage proved futile. Read out the
poem. It always upsets me. but I like it.”
Willy took down the volume, and whilst the
policeman went on with his knitting he read out the
poem that was entitled “The Sad Case and the Very
Tragic Ending of Eliza Gunday.”
There was a young lady named Eliza Gunday,
Who against her mother’s wishes went skating on a Sunday.
When the sun was quite hot and the ice quite thin.
And Eliza very early skated right in.
And then she grew frightened and began to shout,
And call aloud for somebody to help her out:
And people came hurriedly from all directions,
And gathered on the banks in excited sections:
And a policeman came with a rope and a ladder.
But the hearts of the watchers grew sadder and sadder
When they saw this lovely but disobedient daughter,
Slowly, slowly sinking in the ice-cold water.
And all of them who had not gone at one o'clock
Were quickly very troubled by a dreadful shock.
Page Eighty-seven.


For just when the policeman had shouted he had her,
Eliza gave a shriek and let go the ladder.
And that was the end of poor lovely Eliza.
Who, if she hadn’t got drownded would have been much wiser.
When Willy had finished reading he looked up
and saw that the policeman had taken off his spec-
tacles and was wiping his eyes with his knitting Willy
felt sad too.
“You must be a fine policeman,” he said. “It is
splendid of you to do noble things like that.
“I suppose it is really,” said the policemam “My
public do respect me. If you turn to Page 887 in that
volume you will get some idea of the respect in which
lam held from a poem that is there. I wrote the poem
myself.”
Willy turned to the page mentioned and read
out —
I'm Policeman Jones, and I’ve great sized feet:
When they hear me walking down my beat.
Then every criminal about commences
To look for holes in hedges and fences.
I mightn’t be after them —that’s true.
But they think of gardens where apples grew:
And they think of the times when they bathed with their
crowd.
Where the notice says. NO BATHING ALLOWED:
And the Chinaman’s cart they threw stones at,
They think that I might have heard of that.
I mightn’t be after them —that’s right—
No use working up into a fright.
But something tells them down in their bones,
To keep well away from Policeman Jones.
“A good poem that, and you recite it quite well,”
said the policeman, “considering the very little school-
ing you have obviously had. But I must be getting
on with the trial. I don’t like having to sentence you.
Page Eighty-eight


but business before pleasure is my motto. You sit
there.” He pointed to a chair at one side of a large
desk, and then went round to the opposite side of it
himself. He piled some big books on a chair and
climbed up on them and sat down at the desk. He
took off his helmet and put it on one side of the desk
beside him. He next put down his knitting on the
other side. Then he took out from a drawer in the
desk a large white woollen wig and put it on.
"Now,” he said, ‘the court is opened. Let me
see” —he turned over the pages of the book in which
Spike Harris had written. ‘‘Ah —here we are. ’Pon
my word, Spike’s writing is getting worse and worse.
I shall really have to speak to him about it. Occupa-
tion —Invisible means of support —address, forgot-
ten —charges—ah, here we are —ringing bell loudly,
destruction of government property, gaol-breaking,
bad language, vagrancy, larceny from the person, sedi-
tion, contempt of court and resisting arrest with great
violence. All very grave charges. Do you plead
Guilty or Not Guilty?”
‘‘Not Guilty, of course.” said Willy. ‘‘l didn’t
mean to ring the bell loudly, and I didn't mean to
break the box, and I didn’t use bad language, and I
didn’t fight with Spike Harris as he said I did, I only
rang the bell so that I could see you and ask a ques-
tion.”
‘‘And what was the question in question?” said
the policeman. ‘‘By the by, you might refer to me as
Your Honour. A mere formality, but rather pleas-
ant, and it lends dignity to the proceedings. It might
even predispose me to take a rather more lenient view
of the case than I might otherwise feel disposed to do.”
‘‘Your Honour,” said Willy, ‘‘l have a friend
named Mr. Humpty Dumpty, and he’s starving, and
I thought I might be able to find out from you where
Page Eighty-nine


I might find a butcher where I could get a black pud-
ding sent from for Mr. Dumpty.”
"I'm afraid I can’t help you there,” said the
policeman. "Since I took on this job I have not had
time to go into the village yet. But before I came
here, though that of course is some years ago now,
there used to be a butcher named Hop in the next vil-
lage. My mother used to get all our mince and tripe
and sausages from him. He might keep black pud-
t * f f it jr
dings.
"How do I get to the next village?” asked Willy.
"Well the best way,” said the policeman, "is to
walk down the road till you come to a wood on the
right with a high fence around it and a notice that
says trespassers will be prosecuted by order of me. If
you climb over the fence and follow a track that starts
there you will get to the village.”
"Thank you very much,” said Willy. "May I
go now?”
"I’m very much afraid so,” said the policeman.
"You see your evidence puts an entirely different com-
plexion on the case. I would like to keep you with
us for a while, but in the face of that evidence I don’t
quite see how I can do that. I’m really afraid I shall
have to discharge you without a blemish on your
character.”
"Thank you very much Your Honour,” said
Willy.
"Not at all,” said the policeman, "not at all. As
I told you, my motto is duty before pleasure. You
can go now, and I'll get on with my knitting. I’m
hoping to turn the heel in a week or two. You can
let yourself out by the front gate, but please pull it to
after you. We’ve lost a number of prisoners that wav
recently.”
He climbed down off his chair and put his wig
Page Ninety.


away in the drawer and put on his helmet and went
back to his rocking chair. He began, “purl two, plain
two, slip one, drop one” —as Willy went out into the
passage and then through the gate in the wall, which
he pulled to carefully after him. Then he set off down
the road to follow Policeman Jones’ instructions.
Page Ninety-one


CHAPTER VII.
Crikey The Kangaroo And Woggo The Wombat.
y#LL the time thinking how hungry Humpty
Dumpty must be getting. Willy, when he left
the gaol, hurried off down the road until he came to the
wood. Policeman Jones had mentioned, and the notice
board on the fence. When Willy came to this notice
he saw that it read—
KEEP OUT OF THIS WOOD.
ANYODY CAUGHT DEPOSITING RUBBISH OR
PICKING WILDFLOWERS OR TRESPASSING OR
DOING ANYTHING ELSE HE OR SHE SHOULDN’T DO
WILL BE PROSECUTED WITH THE UTMOST
RIGOUR OF THE LAW.
Order, POLICEMAN JONES. P.C., 198,234.
Willy, who did not like doing things he
shouldn t do, was a bit worried over this notice, but he
said to himself, “I suppose it must be all right for me
to climb over the fence, for Policeman Jones himself
told me to use the path through the wood.” So he
climbed over the fence and started off down the track
that began there. He had just gone a little way when
he saw a peculiarly coloured bush with bright red
flowers on it. He stooped over this bush to have a
closer look at the flowers on it when a most amazing
thing happened. The bush began to move, and it
stood up, and Willy saw that it was a very fat little
Page Ninety-two


Just one little move and you’re cat’s-meat.
Page Ninety-three.


wombat dressed in a coat and trousers of every con-
ceivable shade of colour in dots and splashes and lines
and bands. On its head was a green cap with bright
red flowers stuck all over it.
“Ha, ha!” said this strange being, peering into
Willy’s face with very sleepy-looking eyes. “Got you
this time, me lad.’’
Willy received a great fright, but an even greater
one was in store for him when a very gruff voice be-
hind him said, “Stick ’em up, pal. You’re covered.
Just one little move and you’re cat’s-meat.’’
Willy put his two hands up above his head and
looked round to see a kangaroo dressed in the same
way as the wombat, but instead of red flowers it had
white ones stuck all over its cap.
“Frisk him, Woggo,’’ said this creature. “No
hanky-panky now, sonny, or this goes off.’’
He held a huge catapult aimed at Willy in his
paws.
Woggo put his hands in all Willy’s pockets, and
took out his top and notebook, and some string and
three marbles and a knife and a crushed-up paper bag
of dates. Woggo, who was very short-sighted, looked
carefully over all these articles. He said, “He’s got a
nasty-looking scalping knife here, Sarge, and some
horrid mushy brown things in a bag. Looks like some
sort of high explosive to me. Might easily be dyna-
mite or gelignite or something like that.’’
“It isn’t a nasty-looking knife,” said Willy.
“One blade is broken off, and I only use it to sharpen
pencils and things. And, of course, it isn’t a scalping
knife. Whatever would I scalp with :t? And the
things in the bag are dates. He doesn’t even know
dates when he sees them.”
“They’re probably poisoned,” said the kangaroo.
Page Ninety-four.


“Anyway, you are trespassing, and you were just go-
ing to pick wildflowers when I bailed you up. Old
Jonesey won’t half go off when we run you in. It will
mean a couple of years at least.”
“Four; I would put it at that,” said Woggo,
“four at the very least. I’d make it ten if I were a
judge, waking me out of the first sound sleep I’ve had
since I came on duty this morning.”
Woggo put his knuckles into his eyes and
yawned. “I simply can’t stand this being awake all
day. I’m not used to it. It isn’t fair.”
“Lay off it, Woggo,” said the kangaroo.
“We’ve got business to attend to. What’s your
name?” he asked Willy.
“Willy Fitzbiffkin,” Willy told him.
“Old Jonesey will fitzbiffkin you, when he gets
his clutches on to you. Not half he won’t, will he,
Woggo?”
“He sure will that,” said Woggo. “He’s a fair
terror on trespassers and wildflower-pickers, especially
wildflower-pickers. I wouldn’t like to be you, that I
just wouldn’t.”
“May I put my hands down now?” asked Willy.
“If you want to feel what it’s like to have day-
light drilled through you, you can,” said the kan-
garoo.
“I don't want to feel any such thing.” said Willy.
“I’m a friend of Policeman Jones. He told me to
come through the wood.”
“Well, why didn’t you say so,” said the kan-
garoo. “If you are a friend of his, you should have
heard of us. We’re his forest rangers. This is Woggo
the Wombat, and I am Sergeant Crikey, the Kan-
garoo.”
“How do you do?” said Willy politely.
“Howdy,” said Woggo.
Page Ninety-five


“Can I put my hands down now,” said Willy.
“My arms are getting tired.”
“Okay,” said Crikey, “put ’em down, but no
hanky-panky, mind. I’m dangerous when I’m roused,
aren’t I, Woggo?”
“You’ve said it,” said Woggo. “He scares me
stiff when he gets roused, and it takes something to
scare me, I can tell you. What’s more, it’s very easy
to rouse him, isn’t it, Sarge?”
“Sure thing,’ said Crikey. “It’s all I can do to
control myself sometimes, and when I begin to shoot
somebody usually gets hurt. I'm not called Two-
catapult Crikey for nothing, am I, Woggo?”
“Slickest thing on the draw I ever come up
against,” said Woggo, “and I’ve come across some
pretty slick ones I can tell you. Will I light the fire
now, Sarge, so that we can get hot splinters to put
under his nails to worm a confession out of him?”
“Not just yet,” said Crikey. “I think he will
come clean without our torturing him. Seems a sen-
sible sort of young cove. So you’re a friend of old
Jonesey?”
“Policeman Jones is a very kind policeman,” said
Willy. “I like him, but I don’t like his friend, Mr.
Spike Harris.”
“What, old Spike? Is he still going strong?
You remember Spike, Woggo?” Crikey said.
“Sure thing,” said Woggo. “He’s a lifer, Spike is,
and a real tough guy.”
“He’s a murderer,” Willy said, “Policeman
Jones told me he was.”
“You’ve said it, brother,” said Crikey, “Spike’s
a murderer all right. Murdering is in his blood. ‘You
know, Crikey,’ he said to me almost wistful like one
day when we were doing a stretch together somewhere.
‘You know, Crikey, I don’t know why I like mur-
Page Ninety-six.


derin’ people. I suppose it’s something just natural
in me. I don’t like givin’ people pain really. It’s just
some sort of pleasure I get out of murderin’. I sup-
pose its my form of expression of a natural gift. It’s
my form of art.’ Spike meant it too. At heart he’s
as gentle as a kitten Spike is, one of Nature’s gentle-
men you might say. It’s just that he’s got that weak-
ness. He’ll be sitting next to you talking real nice like
about the flowers in the garden or the sunset or what
he is going to get you for
and then before you know
round and murdered you.
he, Woggo?”
“Just,” said Woggo.
a present next Christmas,
where you are he’s turned
He’s just like that, isn’t
“He’s got a soul. He’s a
poet, like I am. I'm a poet, aren’t I, Sarge?”
“Sure thing Woggo,” said Crikey. “Spout him
your piece and then I’ll do mine.”
“Okay, Sarge,” said Woggo, “but let us sit
down. I get so tired standing up on two legs.”
They sat down, and Willy sat down too. Woggo
began—
"Really too sleepy to say any more.’’
Page Ninety-seven
.


I'm Woggo the wombat:
When I reach for my guns, folks scram.
I’m a real tough guy in a combat:
That’s what you’ll find I am.
Then he rubbed his eyes with his knuckles and
yawned again, and said, “I’m really too sleepy to say
any more. You tell him your autobiography, Sarge.
That always makes me go to sleep, and I could do
with a few good winks right now. I’m getting thin
for want of sleep.”
“All right,” said Crikey. He began then to re-
cite—
I’m Crikey the kangaroo.
I could get nothing to do
Here in Australiar
They called me a failiar.
So I hopped overseas to Peru.
There I set myself on view,
And earned a pound or two,
By charging a shilling
To folk who were willing
To learn some tricks that I knew.
But my heart beat hard within,
When the President’s next-of-kin
Let it be known
That he wanted to own
A coat of kangaroo skin.
I hopped as hard as I could
Out of that neighbourhood.
And I boarded a liner
Bound for China,
Where living I’d heard was good.
There I bought some silken socks,
Which gave some folks some shocks.
And I earned some money
being funny,
And teaching the kids to box.
Page Ninety-eight.


But I felt my face go pale
When I heard Chinks liked to regale
Themselves very nice,
On ginger and spice
And soup of kangaroo tail!
I quite suddenly got a notion
To put myself in motion,
And I hopped and I hopped,
And I never stopped
Till again I’d crossed the ocean.
Whilst Sergeant Crikey was reciting Woggo had
gone to sleep sitting against a tree with his head on
one side and his mouth open and his two hands clasped
over his round paunch.
“There, he’s off,’’ said Crikey. “He always does
that when I say poetry. Kick him, will you. He
was dragged up, you know. No manners at all. “Here
you,’’ he called out loudly. “Here’s a trespasser.’’
“What? Where? Who? Stick ’em up pronto or
I shoot,’’ Woggo said jumping up. “Where’s the tres-
passer, Sarge?’’
“In your dreams,” said Crikey. “Why don’t
you keep awake —snoring like that when you’ve com-
pany too, and I’m reciting. You ought to be ashamed
of yourself, you ought.”
“I couldn’t help it,” Woggo said. “I just
dropped off, and I wasn’t snoring. I was just breath-
ing a bit hard. Ido at times. It’s my asthma or some-
thing.”
“What are you two dressed like that for?” Willy
asked.
“Can’t you see,” said Crikey. “Don’t you get
the idea? People come along and see us sitting quiet
like. They think I'm a marguerite bush and that
Woggo here is a geranium. They think, here’s a chance
to do some wildflower-picking whilst nobody’s
Page Ninety-nine.


around. Then they try to pick flowers off us, and we
have them. There’s no flies on us, is there, Woggo?”
“You’re telling me,” said Woggo. “I wouldn’t
like to be the fly that landed on you, big boy.”
“Me either,” said Crikey.
“What are you called Crikey for?” asked Willy.
“I never heard that word used as a name before.”
“Well,” said Crikey, “when I was young I was
an orphan. I never had any father or mother, and I
didn’t know what my name was until one day I passed
two men, and I heard one sav. ‘Crikey, there he goes,’
and the other one said, ‘Crikey, yes, that’s him all
right.’ I didn’t stop to ask them how they knew
my name. That was the first time I knew it was
Crikey myself. I like it too, it’s uncommon.”
“I’ve never heard it before,” said Willy, “that
is, used as a name. You speak the same kind of
American language as Sailorman Jim,” he went on.
“I was in Hollywood for a year not long ago,
and I’m real good at picking up languages,” Crikey
said. “Me and Woggo here were teaming together in
a gangster set. Woggo got sacked because he went to
sleep and snored just as Greta Garbo was saying ‘I
luff you’ to Clark Gable or somebody. Just the sort
of thing he would do. I got tired of signing auto-
graph books and I came away to find a real man’s job.
You know Sailorman Jim, do you?”
“Yes,” said Willy. “I know him. He’s a great
poet. Why is it that everybody in this country writes
poetry?”
“It's the air,” said Crikey. “It’s so balmy that
everybody breathing it goes balmy. Then they start
writing poetry.”
“Is that it?” Willy said. “I was wondering what
it was. Humpty Dumpty, Sam the Sole, Sailorman
Jim, Mo Mice, Policeman Jones, and now you.”
Page One Hundred.


“And me,’’ said Woggo. “What about me?”
“They don't all write poetry,” said Crikey. “As
poets I would not put any of them in my own class,
for instance, I suppose you know my ‘One Night’
poem. It’s not my best, but it’s my best known.”
“I don’t know it,” Willy said. “Will you say
it?”
“I thought everyone knew my ‘One Night',” said
Crikey. “Now how does it go? Here you,” he said,
giving Woggo, who had gone off to sleep again, a
kick, “pipe down on that snoring. Can’t you see I'm
talking literature with a gentleman?”
“I'm so tired,” said Woggo, “I haven’t slept a
wink all day.”
“Well, if you want to sleep,” said Crikey, “do it
quietly. How can I recite poetry with you snoring
like a great grampus?”
“I do not snore like a great grampus,” said
Woggo. “I don’t know how a great grampus snores,
but I know I don’t snore like one.”
“Well, shut up now, I want to recite to Mr. Fitz-
biffkin.”
“Recite away then,” said Woggo. “Don't mind
me. It really does not matter if I don’t get any sleep.
I am getting thinner and thinner and thinner for want
of sleep every day. But who cares?”
“Getting sorry for himself.” said Crikey. “If he
had to put up with himself like I do with him he
would have something to get sorry about. But I’ll
say my poem.”
He started to recite
One night when I was feeling good,
I wandered about in our neighbourhood,
Seeking some funny old sight about
A rhythmy rhyme to write about.
Page One Hundred and One.


But none came into view
Till I met a fiddler who
Said, for a penny
He’d play just any
Tune that I wanted him to.
So I asked him to play a dance;
And he started a hi-diddle-diddling;
You never heard such a tune;
I looked up and saw the moon
Begin to giggle and then to wriggle.
And then to hum and croon:
And then it shot me a curious glance
And began to balance and sway and prance
In time to the fiddler’s fiddling.
And as the fiddler’s fiddling grew,
There wasn’t a single thing in view,
Dog or cat or rat or mouse.
Private hotel or church or house,
That wasn’t doing some sort of a dance,
Good or bad or middling.
Romp or wriggle, or sway or prance,
To the fiddler’s furious fiddling.
First of all the chimney-pots began.
As nothing else but chimney-pots can.
To balance and sway and roll and croon
In perfect time to the wriggling moon.
And I saw a bus start a minuet
With another bus just across the way.
And all the lamp-posts in the streets.
And the trees inside their palings,
Started a rhythmic rhyme to beat
On all the area railings.
And the house-bells and the church-bells,
Started all the tunes they knew.
They rang ho. ho; they rang he. he;
Till the fiddler came fiddling up to me
To ask me for his penny,
And I thought it time for me to go.
For. as I suppose you know,
I really hadn’t any.
Page One Hundred and Two.


So, still in my rhythmy rhymey mood,
I wandered out of that neighbourhood,
Still seeking some funny old sight about
My rhythmy rhyme to write about.
“I consider that a real pretty thing,” said Crikey
when he had finished. “It’s got a sort of oomph about
it.”
“I don’t think it is nearly as good as my poem,
said Woggo. “You know the one that goes—
I'm Woggo the wombat;
When I reach for my gun, folks scram;
A real tough guy in a combat,
That’s what you’ll find I am.
“That’s the only poem he has ever written,” said
Crikey. “He always goes to sleep when he gets to the
end of the first verse. He is no more than a rhymster
like Sailorman Jim and Sam the Sole and all the rest
of them. There's no oomph in any of their work like
there is in mine. As for Woggo—sleeping and eating
and snoring and digging holes under respectable
peoples’ fences are more in his line than writing
poetry.”
“I can see in the dark.” said Woggo, “and that’s
more than you can do. You think because you can
hop a bit that you’re everybody in one. You’re only
a magnified grasshopper when all is said and done.”
“That’s his idea of gratitude,” said Crikey. “I
bring him all the way back from Hollywood, sacri-
ficing my own career to do so. I get him this job,
the best he’s ever had in his life, and I’m as kind as
anything can be to anything else, and this is the result.
A bit of real rough stuff is what he wants.”
“I don’t,” said Woggo. ‘‘l don’t want any real
rough stuff at all, not from you or anybody else. I
just want to go to sleep.”
Page One Hundred and Three.


“Gratitude,” said Crikey. “Oh, gratitude, where
is thy sting? as the poet says. Here am I working my
fingers off patching his trousers to keep him at least
looking respectable. After every meal he gets so fat
that he bursts all the buttons off his waistcoat, and
who sews them on? Me. But he can sew on his own
buttons after this. And do his own patching. I'm
through with him. He's gone just a bit too far this
time. Showing me up before strangers.”
“I don’t think he really meant to do that,” said
Willy. “I say, you two, won’t you make it up? Just
shake paws. That’s what we humans do. It works
sometimes, too, you try it.”
“I’m willing if he is,” said Crikey.
“It’s okay by me, Sarge,” said Woggo. “Shake.”
They shook.
“I’ll get on now,” said Willy. “I'm glad I met
you two gentlemen.”
“We’re glad we met you, too,” said Crikey,
“aren’t we, Woggo?”
“You’ve said a mouthful, Sarge.” said Woggo.
“A real nice little guy. Sorry he's got to scram. I
think I’ll have a little nap now. So long.”
“Good-bye, gentlemen,” said Willy.
“Toodleoo,” said Crikey.
Page One Hundred and Four.


CHAPTER VIII.
The Dinkey-Dies And The Dinkey-Doos.
M FTER Willy had left Sergeant Crikey and Woggo
and had walked some distance down the path
through the wood and was feeling a little tired, he de-
cided to sit down and rest under a tree for a while. He
had barely done this when, coming down the path to-
wards him, he beheld two strange little figures. He
wondered where he had seen figures like them before,
and then he remembered that it was on his mother's
sewing-machine in the workroom. They both wore
very tight grey tights up to their waists and had little
coats, and hats that drew out to points then wilted
over. One of these hats was pale blue, and the other
one pink. Both the figures had little tufts of grey
whisker on their chins and very funny stumpy round
red noses. They were almost exactly alike, Willy
saw, when they had drawn nearer to him, and
were dressed alike, except that the one with the
pale blue hat had a huge bow tie of the same
colour, and the other had a tie of the same size
and shape but of a colour to match his hat too.
As they came along the road they were going
through most extraordinary antics. Willy had
started to learn the minuet in the dancing class at
school, and this dance the two little figures were danc-
ing, he saw was something like the minuet. First of all
the dancers would stop and bow very low to one
another. Then they would take two long, gliding
sidesteps in opposite directions, first to the right then
to the left. Then they would hold each other's hands
Page One Hundred and Five.


high up and walk round each other, taking very high
slow steps forward and back and then make another
low bow. Then they clasped hands and tripped for a
and then make another low bow.
few steps lightly along the road. They were all the
time singing a song, and as they came up to Willy he
heard the last verse, that went —
We are the Dinkey-dies:
They are the Dinkey-doos.
We end our name with lES:
They end theirs with OOS;
But it doesn’t really matter
Which of us you choose.
They did not see Willy, but as they were pass-
ing he called out to them. “Good afternoon, gentle-
men. It’s a nice day."
The two little figures, still holding hands and
pushing out their little fronts, looked at Willy in a
puzzled sort of way that made him feel uncomfort-
able.
“Did either of us happen to remark,’’ said the
one with the blue hat and tie to the other one; “Did
Page One Hundred and Six.


either of us happen to remark that it was a bad after-
noon, or a nasty day?”
“I never heard us do so,” said the one with the
pink hat and pink bow. “In fact, Joe, I am perfectly
sure that neither of us did.”
“What would you take it to be, George?” asked
the first one.
“Blest if I know,” said George. “Just can't make
it out at all. I can’t recall ever having seen anything
just like it before.”
“I’ve seen something like it before somewhere,”
Joe said. “If I were called upon to do so. I would
classify it as a specimen of that branch of the human
race known as boy. I am sure it is a boy.”
“Probably you’re right, Joe,” said George. “You
generally are in these matters. But it is not a pre-
possessing specimen of whatever it is. Just look at
those finger nails—there’s dirt for you —haven’t been
cleaned for weeks I should say. I am sure he does not
clean his teeth or wash behind his ears.”
“I do that,” said Willy. “I clean my nails and
brush my teeth and wash behind my ears every day.
Your nails would be dirty if you’d been in all the
places I’ve been in. I’ve been in a theatre and a
prison.”
“Goodness gracious,” said Joe, “he’s been in
prison. Did you hear that, George? He’s been in
prison.”
“Fancy,” said George, “ —in prison. I thought
when I first saw him that he looked like an escaped
burglar or something.”
“That’s exactly what struck me,” said Joe. “I
was almost going to say to you, George, ‘if that isn’t
an escaped burglar I’ll eat my hat?’ And then you took
the words out of my mouth. Doesn't he look cruel
and wicked?”
Page One Hundred and Seven


“I am not cruel and I am not wicked,” said
Willy. "I think you are both very stupid old gentle-
men. I don’t like you.”
“Very stupid old gentlemen. Did you hear that,
George?” Joe said. “We’re very stupid old gentle-
men —us? And he doesn’t like us.”
“That’s the worst of being truthful and oolite,”
said George. “Nobody likes you. But that is no
reason for calling us stupid old gentlemen. We
mightn't be young as we used to be, but stupid—No.
I call it impudent.”
“And argumentative,” said Joe.
“They always are,” George said. “It’s charac-
teristic of the race. They’ll argue till they're blue in the
face.”
He's not going to argue away half my spare time.
“And then keep on after that. I know they will.”
said Joe. “I’ve seen them do it. They’ll argue away
half your spare time if you let them.”
“He’s not going to argue away half my spare
time,” said George. “I’ve got something better to do
Page One Hundred and Eight.


with my spare time than just having it argued away
like that.”
‘‘Me, too,” said Joe.
Tm not argumentative at all,” said Willy. ‘‘l
only said—”
‘‘He’s not argumentative at all,” said Joe, ‘‘and
he only said—listen to him. He wants to argue about
whether he’s argumentative or not, and yet he’s not
argumentative. Did you ever hear the like?”
“Never in all my born days,” George said. “I
think his brain must be turned. They get that way
sometimes, Joe. A bit too much praise or something,
and it goes just like that. I’ve known of some ex-
tremely sad cases in my time.”
“So have I,” said Joe, “extremely sad. Bright
young buds nipped off and all that sort of thing. It
really is sad. I suppose he was all right once.”
“Who are you, or what are you, anyway?” said
Willy, who was getting a little bit angry.
“Who are we and what are we, anyway? Hear
that, George?” said Joe.
“I heard it, Joe,” said George. “I wish I hadn’t,
but I did. It is no use my denying it. It looks as if
he is adding curiosity to his other vices. I wonder if
he knows what curiosity did?”
“I know what it is supposed to have done,” said
Willy, “but I don’t believe it ever did.”
; ‘‘He doesn’t believe that curiosity killed a mon-
key,” said Joe. “Did you ever hear the like?”
“I never did,” said George, “positively never. No
wonder they put him in gaol.”
"I wasn’t in gaol,” said Willy, “At least, I
wasn’t in in the way you mean.”
“He was in gaol, but he wasn’t in gaol. Doesn’t
he make his point clear,” said Joe. “I wish I could
make myself understood like that,”
°age One Hundred and Nine.


“No doubt about his cleverness,” George said.
“He could talk his way through a keyhole if he got
half a chance. But his cleverness will get him into
trouble one day, you mark my words, Joe; cleverness
always does.”
“I’m glad I’m not clever in that way,” Joe said.
“It must be dreadful to have that sort of thing hang-
ing over you all the time. I wonder if it would im-
prove matters, George, if we told him what we are.”
“We couldn’t dis-improve them,” George said.
“I’m sure of that.”
“All right,” Joe said, “we’ll do our piece. We’ll
do the first and last verse together and alternate verses
in between. It went well that way last time.”
“Right-oh!” said George. “Let her go.”
They then recited for Willy’s benefit a long poem
that went like this—
We are the Dinkey-dies;
They are the Dinkey-doos;
We end our name with lES:
They end theirs with OOS:
But it doesn’t really matter
Which of us you choose.
We like to play with fire;
They like the water better:
As we get drier and drier,
They get wetter and wetter.
If you want to speak to either of us
You simply write a letter.
You post it to Dinkey-di-land,
Or else to Dinkey-do land:
Dinkey-di is an island:
Dinkey-do is a new land:
Dinkey-di is a red
And Dinkey-do a blue land.
We like to bath in a raindrop;
They like to warm at a star:
rage One Hundred and Ten


If you saw us in a pie-shop,
Or in a motor car,
Not for a moment could you tell
Which we really are.
Yet it is exceedingly simple,
If you will only try;
Each Dinkey-di has a dimple
On the left side of each eye:
So see a dimpled Dinkey
And it must be a Dinkey-di.
And the Dinkey-do has just as plain
A mark for you to view;
One of his eyes has a green stain,
Whilst the other one is blue.
So you see a Dinkey with blue-green eyes.
And it must be a Dinkey-do,
We are the Dinkey-dies:
They are the Dinkey-doos:
We end our name with lES:
They end theirs with OOS:
But it doesn’t really matter
Which of us you choose.
All the time they were reciting this poem George
and Joe were doing funny little steps like tap-danc-
ing, and when they had finished they took off their
hats and made a sweeping bow to Willy,
“Perhaps he knows now who he was so rude
to,” said George. “That piece should give him a
pretty good idea of what we are and what is our social
standing."
It should." said Joe. “It certainly should, but
it is not what goes into an ear that counts so much as
it is what the ear holds of what goes into it. You
can t make silk purses out of sows’ ears. You follow
me, George?"
I do, Joe," George said. “Others wouldn’t, but
I do. I like that bit about the silk purses and the
Page One Hundred and Eleven


sows’ ears. You are always coming out with quaint
original sayings like that.” <
“It is not an original saying,” Willy said. Ive
heard it dozens and dozens of times before.”
“I can’t help it if my sayings are quoted all oyer
the world,” Joe said. “Isn’t he just the rudest thing
you’ve ever come across- —contradictive and argumen-
tative, and rude?”
“I’m not rude, and I don’t contradict and I don t
argue,” said Willy. “At least I don’t with most
people. I don’t really know what you are talking
about.”
“Really, now, tell me truthfully, Joe,” George
said, “Can you beat it? One of my old grandmothers
was like that. If my father said a thing was black, my
old grandmother would say it wasn’t: it was white.
And if he said it was white she would say it wasn’t; it
was black. So my father always used to say a thing
was grey. He was a wise man my father was.”
“So was my father,” Joe said. “He was an artist,
and he always painted his pictures blacker than they
should have been. He used to say that if you painted
a thing black and it turned out to be white everybody
was pleased, but if you painted it white and it turned
out to be black nobody was pleased.”
“If you two old gentlemen did not talk so
much,” said Willy, “and if you would only listen —”
“There now,” said George, “he’s one of those
‘if people. Perhaps it would teach him a lesson if
we did our ‘if’ piece for him.”
“It might,” said Joe doubtfully. It might,
George. I don’t suppose any harm would come out of
our trying it. It would be like those medicines that
are advertised to do you no harm if they do you no
good.”
“Shall we sing it or recite it,” George said. “It
Page One Hundred and Twelve.


went rather well when we song and danced it, you
may remember.”
“I do,” said Joe. ‘‘We’ll song and dance it.”
They then danced a few steps, took off their hats
and held them in their hands in front of them, and
sang—
If all the sea were pea soup,
And the moon all gruyere cheese,
And the earth a great round onion
That always made you sneeze;
And if every star were a hall-mat,
And every river honey;
If the world were made like all that.
Wouldn’t life be funny?
And if people only wept at jokes,
And laughed at things most serious.
And babies grew up like artichokes
Wouldn’t that be mysterious?
And if all motor-cars were Sunbeams,
And none of them were parkable,
And icebergs were made of ice-creams,
Wouldn’t that be remarkable?
And if one needn’t wash one’s face,
Nor do anything else one should.
Then wouldn’t the world be a nice place,
And wouldn’t life be good?
They finished with a dance in which they kicked
their legs up one after the other in the air, and again
when they had come to a standstill, made a sweeping
bow before Willy.
“Now,” said George, “I doubt if even he could
say that that was badly done.”
‘‘lf he did, it wasn’t,” said Joe. “But he might if
he does. You never know with some people, as my
father used to say.”
‘‘l wasn’t even thinking of saying it was bad.”
Page One Hundred and Thirteen.


Willy said. “Even if it was bad, I would not be rude
enough to say so. But it wasn’t. I like it. I don’t
know why you should be so nasty to me. I only
wanted to ask you if you knew where I could find Mr.
Hop the butcher. Have you ever heard of him?”
“I have,” said Joe.
‘I have, too,” said George.
‘ln fact we both have,” they said together.
‘I suppose we had better let him have it ” George
said
“I suppose so, George,” Joe said. “Come on.”
They then began to sing again—
Mister Hebblethwaite Hilary Hop,
He is our village’s butcher man.
“Who’ll buy a portion of steak or a chop
To put in his frying-pan?”
Will shout aloud from the front of his shop.
Mister Hebblethwaite Hilary Hop.
Then down the street his cart he drives,
Clipperty-clopperty-clipperty-clop.
And at half-past ten every day he arrives
With your steak or sausage or chop:
In his apron blue he will come to you—
Clipperty-clopperty-clippcrty-clop.
Mister Hebblethwaite Hilary Hop,
He is our village’s butcher man.
He has everything in his shop
For pot or oven or pan.
You can buy rabbits or sirloins or chops,
At Mister Hebblethwaite Hilary Hop’s.
“What do you want to find Hilary Hop's for?”
asked Joe when they had finished their song.
“I have a friend —a Mr. Humpty Dumpty, who
is starving,” said Willy, “and I want to get a butcher
to send—”
“Half a minute,” said George. “Half a minute.
So you’re the one that’s been spreading that rumour
Page One Hundred and Fourteen.


Abc at Humpty Dumpty sticking himself to the wall
and all that rigmarole."
"I didn’t spread it," Willy said. "Mr. Humpty
Dumpty told me himself, and it’s true, because I tried
to pull him off the wall when he asked me to."
"But who put him back up on the wall in the
first place?" Joe asked. "Didn't the King and his
horses and men do it?"
"Mr. Humpty Dumpty didn’t say so," Willy
said.
"He wouldn’t," said George. "He would still
be smarting from being pushed off the wall in the first
place. But you evidently haven’t heard the true
story."
"Do you know it?" asked Willy.
"Do we know it?" Joe said. "We should know it.
considering we made it up. I did the words and George
here, did the accompanying music. Will we give it to
him, George?"
"It’s all right by me, Joe," George said.
"I’d like to hear it," Willy said. "Please do it."
"Well, we haven’t got the music here." Joe said,
"so we’ll just have to recite it. We’ll do alternate
verses. It goes well that way. I’ll start off."
He began to recite in a very deep tragic voice
Who killed Humpty Dumpty?
“I did,” said the king, playing with his crown;
“He sat up on the wall
And said he couldn’t possibly fall.
So I pushed him down.”
Who tried to save him?
“I did that,” said Little Cinderella.
“I couldn’t really do much good.
But I hit the king just as hard as I could
With my little umberella.”
Page One Hundred and Fifteen


Who attended to his wounds?
"I did,” said kind old Widow Twankey,
‘‘l carefully kissed and washed the place,
And tied up his nice little face
In my best spotted hankie.”
Who’ll hold the inquiry?
“We will,” said the three pigs, who had been out strolling
“We’ll get some friends together
And talk about the weather,
And start the ball rolling.”
Who’ll be the witness?
“Me,” said the Maid who was hanging out the clothes.
“I know I’m ugly and I mightn’t be all that I should.
But that king won’t come to no good.
If I tells all that I knows.”
Who’ll arrange the funeral?
"I'll attend to that,” said the Dog-in-the-manger.
"It has been remarked that I am mean.
In some places I have been.
But I’m an excellent arranger.”
Who’ll be the solicitors?
"What about us?” asked the Three Blind Mice.
“We can’t find our way about people’s houses
Like some other little mouses,
But we can give good advice.”
Who’ll pull the hearse?
"Leave that to me,” said the doormouse.
“A reasonable amount of sleep I simply must take.
But when I am awake
My strength is just enormouse.”
Who’ll ride in the coaches?
“We must do that,” said the Two Ugly Sisters:
"With shockin’ colds we’re both hoarse,
And we simply can’t walk because
Our feet are all over blisters.”
Page One Hundred and Sixteen.


“We simply can’t walk because —our feet are all over blisters.”
Who’ll defray the expenses?
“I’ll try to do that,” said Old Mother Goose.
“My bird, like me, is getting old,
But I daresay she’ll lay an egg or two of gold.
If that’ll be any use.”
Who’ll provide the flowers?
“I'll see to that,” said the Old-Woman-Who-lived-In-a-
Shoe.
“In my kitchen garden are some hollyhocks,
And wallflowers and chrysanthemums and stocks:
I’ll send along a few.”
And whilst they were all of them talking,
Who along should come walking.
But the king with all his horses and men
To try and put Humpty together again.
And we know that, in spite of what has been told in the
past.
That they did get Humpty back up on that wall at last.
“There now,” said Joe, “that is the true story ”
“It’s very clever,” said Willy, “but I don’t think
Page One Hundred and Seventeen.


it is true. I saw Humpty sticking to the wall with my
own eyes. I think you are two old story-tellers, that
is what I think you are.”
“Well —” said Joe. ‘‘Did you hear that,
George?”
‘‘l did,” said George, “and I would not have be-
lieved it had I not heard it with my own ears. Let
us go, Joe. It’s dreadful.”
‘‘You needn’t go,” said Willy, ‘‘for I am going.
I'll say again that you are two nasty, disagreeable old
gentlemen, and I don’t like either of you.”
‘‘Well, well, well, well,” said Joe and George
together, as Willy stood up and walked away from
them. When he looked back they were both standing
staring after him and shaking their heads. He turned
and hurried on. He had been looking down at his
feet, and something made him look up suddenly, and
there right in front of him was a butcher’s shop with
printed in large letters over it —
HEBBLETHWAITE HILARY HOP. BUTCHER,
SPECIALISER IN BLACK PUDDINGS.
Willy looked in the window, and there spread
out on the white marble were all sorts of Black Pud-
dings. Willy was very pleased, for now he could give
Humpty Dumpty’s message. But when he went to
the door beside the window he found it was closed,
and there was a big padlock on it. But beside the
door was a white circle with a button in the centre of
it. Over the circle was printed, BELL, and on the
button PRESS. Willy pressed hard, and when he
took his finger away the bell still kept on ringing. He
was wondering however he could stop it when sud-
denly all things about him began to change. He saw
the brass knobs on the end of his bed, and the light
coming in through the window, and out in the passage
Page One Hundred and Eighteen.


he could hear the telephone bell ringing, and his
mother was saying, “Is that the butcher? I have been
trying to get on to you for some time.”
Willy sat up and rubbed his eyes hard. And he
wondered and wondered. He had not really seen
Humpty Dumpty at all, nor Sailorman Jim, nor Sam
the Sole, nor Mo Mice, nor the Trio from Rio, nor
Policeman Jones, nor Crikey and Woggo, nor the con-
ceited little Dinkies. It had all been only a dream.
Page One Hundred and Nineteen








3 1508 02112820 7


