

19/369 7. 11. 9 [?]
Printed by courtesy of "The Age."
THE GREAT WITHDRAWAL
STORY OF A DARING PLAN
LAST DAYS AT ANZAC
HOW OUR SOLDIERS LEFT
A VIVID NARRATIVE
BY DR. J. W. SPRINGTHORPE
PRICE SIXPENCE
Proceeds in Aid of the Lady Mayoress'
Patriotic League for Our Fighting Men




THE GREAT WITHDRAWAL
STORY OF A DARING PLAN
LAST DAYS AT ANZAC
HOW OUR SOLDIERS LEFT
A VIVID NARRATIVE
BY DR. J. W. SPRINGTHORPE
MARCH, 1916
BROWN, PRIOR & CO., 165-171 QUEEN STREET
MELBOURNE




THE GREAT WITHDRAWAL.
The record is ended. Anzac has been evacuated, and Aus-
tralia’s Iliad may now be written with the story of wanderings
beyond those of the Argonauts, and deeds superior to those done
on the field of Troy. It awaits only its Homer to immortalise
its first great war epic in verse worthy of the occasion, the doings
and the cost. Picture the price and the situation—beyond all por-
trayal. Anzac! The very name from the men themselves (Australia
and New Zealand Army Corps) links the Commonwealth with the
Dominion in a new and indissoluble bond.
The “Impregnable” Fort.
Anzac —so difficult of access, held to be impregnable —a bit
of ground less than a “cocky” farmer’s selection, y.et carried by
20,000 men with the loss of one-third; held afterwards by a force
reduced at times to one-half, and never more than doubled. Only
a narrow .beach—* narrow beach 300 yards by 40 yards; a congeries
of precipitous hills and gullies; a sickle-shaped cock-pit ending
in a central ridge some 1000 yards away, falling on each flank,
itself dominated and incessantly shelled by an always superior
force of the best trench fighters in Europe —always better armed
and better equipped. Here they take hold and establish them-
selves, often only in one thin line, in some miles of trenches —
everywhere confronted with and in places almost touching a triple
line of Turks with more machine guns, better bombs and high explo-
sive shells without number.
There, from loopholes and slits, behind parapets where exposure
means instant death —many of them mere boys, practically all under
fire for the first time —they take their stand, two hours on and four
hours off duty (mostly hard at other work) in a constant hail
of shrapnel and machine gun bullets. They fight like prize fighters
in a constant clinch to the point of exhaustion. There they stay
from April to December, mostly without a spell and practically
without reserves. Always above them are the Turkish trenches,
always among them the Turkish hail. Push them once, and in
but one place, off their precipitous ledge, and all is over. But
that moment, that place, never came. Courage crystallised, it is
true, into indifference, but determination grows ever grimmer. Never
will they yield, and they never do until commanded at the end.
They can die, and do die, in thousands —partly in defence, far more
in attack, in taking trenches again and again whenever they are
asked, only to retire when ordered, and making forlorn heroic rushes
under the scythe of machine gun fire. For the sake of what never
comes, going to their death with a final “good-bye,” not one
wavering.


The Anzacs’ Heavy Losses.
Ponder some of the figures:—773 reduced to 57, 1100 reduced
to 300, 1000 to 127, 4500 to 2800 in fifteen minutes; 3000 lost in
three days; 15 out of 17 officers and 442 out of 500 men in ten
minutes. Shells every 5 seconds for an hour and a half. So fought
our boys for the blood, for the flag, for the Empire, for Australia. And
behind these death traps they excavated hundreds of miles of tunnels
and communication “saps”—hidden pathways 6 feet to 8 feet deep and
2 feet to 6 feet wide, in a mesh work beyond any miner’s wildest
In the Firing Line.
imagination, and, when viewed from an aeroplane, like the lines
on the palm of the hand. For tents they built “mia-mias” by the
thousands in all sorts of inaccessible places and protected by mil-
lions of sand bags. They planted guns in concealed positions. They
tried to hide, but in vain, their scanty reinforcements, insufficient
supplies, invaluable mules, and even ambulances and hospitals, in
half-hidden gullies on every hill side, in every valley.


Anzac Cove.
The little Anzac cove, a haven of industry, is crammed with
troops coming and going; with bathers in the evening, with sup-
plies and stores worth millions of pounds. But it is the most
exposed place of all, always under observation and shell fire —once
1100 shells fell there in one hour —and the scene of in all some
3000 wounded. Thank heaven August came at last; the North
Anzac beach, out of observational fire, was added, and a new area,
especially to the left, which gave some cover and materially reduced
the congestion.
Food Plentiful —Water Scarce.
Meantime, what of the men themselves? Water was always
scarce —>at times almost absent; always carried by hand, often up
rope ladders. Food was unusually plentiful, but monotonous and
unsuitable. Flies were a plague indescribable. Awful filth every-
where. No pen dare describe it. Men washed at the risk of their
lives, and only if they could stand the awful climb back. There
was, of course, some dead time between the firing line, the sapping
and other fatigue work, but it uncertain, and every moment
was packed with immense possibilities. Every night there was the
chance of attack, the repeated bombing and the torrents of shells,
and lights which would disclose the positions must be done without.
“Slush” lamps were made of jam tins, with bacon fat for oil, and
bomb lights from bombs filled with kerosene —worth its weight in
gold. Wicks were made from cord from the sand bags or web equip-
ment. Only the elite at headquarters had candles.
Is it any wonder that under the ceaseless strain the camp lost
strength, and diarrhoea came, stayed, and abounded? Men lay
crouching in the sand. Others had to halt four times on a short
march, and when coming back from the beach they envied the for-
tunate who were shot. They could scarcely man the trenches, whilst
thousands proclaimed officially “sick” were invalided, with the
loss of over two stone in weight, to Mudros, Malta, and Egypt.
Still the rest fought on, with reinforcements that scarcely main-
tained their numbers. Their only “clothes” were hats of all sorts,
“shorts” and boots. The naked, white army was hardly distinguish-
able from the Gurkhas. Then came the winter, and the four days’
blizzard, such as no Australian had ever conceived, when thousands
become frost bitten, scores died at their posts, and water pipes were
frozen. Only eight days’ rations remained -on the extreme left, and
the water supply had almost failed. Long before now, the chances
had shown themselves to be even against disease, as one to three
against shot, and as one to seven or eight against being killed. Still
they fought on —heroes, if ever there were any —without complaint,
though in distant Australia were the careless, the cunning, the
cowards, who never came to their aid.


The End that was Inevitable.
But the end was bound to come. There was no hope of getting
through without reinforcements and supplies that could never come.
Anzac must go! All feared it, even more than recognised it. It
cost 6000 men to take, and 30,000 to keep, and the authorities antici-
pated it would take at least 20,000 to get out. Which was the worse
—to stay or to get away?
The question was decided by the Servian defeat, the arrival of
Austrian 14-inch howitzers, the blowing up of Lone Pine with all
its garrison, and the emplacement of 14-inch guns on commanding
positions. Anzac was doomed. The Turks could retire to comfort-
able winter quarters, with ease and all supplies. We were exposed
and irregularly and insufficiently supplied. Soon they would blow
us to atoms.
The Evacuation.
With what mingled feelings must Australia have received the
news of the evacuation! In reality there is only room for two —
pride at an unparalleled achievement, sadness at the necessity for it.
Anzac has become Australian’s first Westminster Abbey. To us in
Cairo it was the best news since the memorable landing on 25th
April; it was the best and only real Christmas possible to the men
themselves, and to the tens of thousands of mothers, wives, sweet-
hearts, fathers, brothers, sisters, friends and relatives. It was the
one thing they wanted; all alike in hospitals and homes may now
eat their Christmas dinners in thankful peace, and away from the
trenches the fighters themselves may now enjoy the 34,000 billies,
the 20,000 puddings, and the gifts innumerable borne to them from
distant home. Elsewhere and less exposed our men may now have
a fair chance of showing what they can do in more propitious cir-
cumstances. Best of all, they have now earned the right not simply
to stand anywhere beside the best, but under supreme limitations
to be the masters of their own fate and immediate movements. As
they crowded into Cairo, who that saw them on the steps, on “Shep-
heards,” on the lounge of the Continental, in the hospitals and in
the streets, can ever forget them —smiling, stained with travel, scarce
believing it to be real, happy beyond words to be alive, away and
together—with a buzz of talk that boomed like an organ.
Bluffing the Enemy.
After General Sir Charles Munro had recommended, and Lord
Kitchener had apparently acquiesced, the British Parliament openly
advocated the evacuation. The Germans knew us to be fools, but
did not believe we were such fools as tc declare our intentions where
to know was to annihilate. To them it was bluff, all the more


Beach at Anzac, in July, showing piers and stores.
North Anzac Beach


when two divisions were let slip from Portsmouth for the East.
So among the Turks there was fevered anxiety which continued
up to the last minute —strengthening of defences with barbed wire
entanglements, additional trenches, and gun enfilades.
The first notable thing, probably tentative only, was the main-
tenance of a three days’ absolute silence about the first week of
November, during which no rifle or gun was fired, no bombs were
thrown, and even sniping was not indulged in. The Turks attacked
in two places, and each got a very nasty knock. Normal conditions
then prevailed for a month; then a second and shorter period of
silence, which increased their anxiety and gave another reason for
thinking we were bluffing.
It was apparently only three weeks before the evacuation that,
after very careful consideration, a decision was arrived at by the
very few responsible as to the best plan to combine the chances
in favour of the safe removal of the greatest number with the
minimum loss in case of failure or fighting. The plan was really
a ruse —not a battle, unless compelled. It was a big problem,
involving for the Australians alone some 45,000 men, 3000 mules,
ever so many guns and machine guns, and several millions of pounds’
worth of stores —all to be removed whilst maintaining every appear-
ance of an offensive. The problem was complicated by the prob-
ability of violent storms, and bright moonlight.
Approximately about one-third of the whole garrison was re-
moved,'ostensibly to rest at Mudros, and the intention was openly
expressed of resting the balance in batches monthly.
Evacuation Occupies Five Nights.
The evacuation proper occupied five successive nights. Even
then the plan was quite unknown to even generals in Egypt and
other distinguished officers, medical and. otherwise. On the first
three nights were sent away the less important stores, such as all
winter reserves of wood and clothing, all reserves of ammunition,
20,000 sick, convalescent, and light duty men, some guns and
several hospitals, surplus horses, etc. It was then very rough, and
there were grave fears that the whole operation would have to
be postponed.
Rehearsing the Parts.
By the third night all non-essentials had been got rid of. It
was only on the morning of the 19th that the rank and file were
taken into confidence, though, of course, the whole plan had been
settled before that, and a final reconsideration had taken place.
Every detail was settled. Partial rehearsals were made, such as
falling in at times arranged, marching away, timing from various
positions to the beach, testing the scheme and making desirable


modifications. Orders had been very carefully prepared, drafted
and typed, and placed in the hands of all responsible. Nothing
was left to chance.
The men now left were the pick of the forces. They were
arranged in three parties—A, B. and C—for each night. Specific
duties were allotted them with a time table giving the exact moment
each unit was to be in a particular place and combination, and
with what paraphernalia. Every man and everything was thus speci-
fically accounted for.
It was only now that the men knew, though for the last
week or so there had been suspicions and assumptions, as everything
of value was being taken out and no fresh stores were brought in.
The men, wonderful to say, could get luxuries and new clothes
for the asking. The men and mules were constantly coming up
openly, but returning secretly, etc., and yet all the trenches down
the hill, on the beach and in the bay seemed as usual—if anything,
suggestive of steady preparation for new attacks.
The eventful morning of the 19th was calm, with a steady baro-
meter, and no wind. The only adverse thing was that it was the
night before full moon, but. as it turned out this helped us, and
did not give us away to the Turks. The move proper started with
the embarkation of men in three echelons.
In Case of Failure.
A complete plan of battle had been super-added in case of
discovery, involving the selection of successive positions for retreat,
the definite sending of troops to them, and the nomination of the
various leaders, with the establishment on the beach of two casualty
clearing station hospitals fully staffed for 1200 patients, and a letter
with each commander calling on the Turks to obey the Geneva
Convention. Meantime, many smart Australasian brains had set to
work to devise all kinds of mechanical contrivances to maintain by
noise, fire, etc., the Turks’ belief that we were still in the trenches.
Success depended on the Turks having no idea of our intentions.
That they were entirely ignorant is proved by the fact that they
made no attack, and that they were attacking the beach some 20
hours after we had gone.
Leaving the Trenches.
As the moon did not set till about 2 a.m. on the first night,
embarkation had to be confined to the four hours of darkness be-
tween 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., with a margin of I>4 hours for the trans-
ports to get behind Imbros. As a preliminary, immediate steps
were taken to remove all official papers, maps, kits, and baggage, and
on withdrawal from the trenches all bayonets were unfixed, rifles
unloaded and magazines uncharged. Each man had 150 rounds and
two days’ rations.


The men marched down to appointed places at a definite speed
—three miles an hour--until the sections reached specific points at
specific moments, with an officer at the head and another at the
rear of each party. They guided themselves by holding on to ropes,
coat tails, etc. Staff officers were detailed to regulate the traffic
and check the strength, casualties, etc., and divisional representatives
were at the junction of the main sap and the gully, to whom all
parties had to report. Specially selected staff officers were told
off to guide them to the special wharf where they had to embark.
The numbers brought along had to correspond with a list previously
given to the embarkation officers, so that a further check was pro-
vided. Each division embarked at its own wharf, so that the em-
barkation officers could tell when all had been withdrawn. Final
checking was made before the final order to cast off was given.
The parties got away in batches —A. B. and C —each night,
only those on the first night carrying blankets. Not a match was
struck, not a word was spoken, and over their boots the men wore
socks or sandbags. No fires or lights, other than the incinerators
and others which were kept normally burning, were lighted.
“My God, it was magnificent!” was one general’s comment.
On the first night all but a specified number were sent away, about
half the “A” parties being carefully got on to the beach without
being seen. “B” parties embarked at 11 p.m., whilst “'C” parties
were timed to leave their trenches at the various points so as to
reach the north beach, at about 3 a.m. 'ldle last boat left at 3.30
a.m. precisely.
No Hitch and no Mistake.
There was absolutely no hitch and nc mistake. The only
animals left behind were some half-dozen donkeys. The thrilling
moments were on the second and last nights. The trenches had
by then been considerably thinned, though in places the Turks were
only 10 yards away, and their trenches were fuller than usual. Each
party, A. B. and C, was gradually withdrawn into formed bodies,
the “C” parties remaining until ordered to withdraw by the O.C.
A final covering position was established, provided with food,
water and ammunition, to be held by a rear party drawn from certain
“C” parties in accordance with orders issued by the commander,
There were many volunteers for this absolutely forlorn hope.
Specific instructions guided all units. The whole of the tentage,
chiefly consisting of hospitals, had been left standing on the north
beach, ancj, two hospitals were left, with a supply of drugs, band-
ages, food, etc., in the event of any casualties among the sea parties,
who had been instructed to that effect. The personnel of first one
hospital and then of the other was sent off, so that no one remained.


A Dug Out.
Resting in the support trenches. Lieut. T. P. Roberts, 22nd Batt. on left.


Generals and Privates in the Boats.
Meantime the queer picket boats known as “beetles” had been
passing unobserved from the beach to the half-dozen transports
lying some two or three miles out. Into them tumbled generals,
staff and soldiers of all ranks and in any sort of order, packed as
tight as sardines, and so mixed that it took two weeks to disen-
tangle them. In the moonlight they had no trouble in finding their
way from the transport to the pier, and vice versa. Just before
the final order to cast off was given a straggler, the only man missing,
rushed down into the sea without hat or coat or anything else but
his shorts. He explained, when he got his breath, that he had
fallen asleep, wakened with a stomach ache, and found himself
alone. Without waiting for the usual Anzac “treatment,” he bolted
for the beach.
Last Act in the Drama.
At 3.30 a.m. the last act in the drama took place. From under
Walker’s Ridge, 40 feet underground, a tunnel had been constructed
right under the key of the Turkish position, the scene of the most
desperate fighting of the war. Two tons of amonol, the most
powerful explosive known to us, was placed in the tunnel, and now
that all -was safe and the evacuation assured, this mine was fired. It
was in a direct line, about 1000 yards from the wharf. The explo-
sion was colossal. Huge sheets of yellow flame lit up Walker’s Ridge
and Russel’s Top, and masses of bodies were hurled hundreds of
feet in the air. The nek and the surrounding trenches which were
always held in strength as vital to the Turkish defence, were abso-
lutely blown away. Nothing could have lived within 100 yards, and
the estimated losses might well have beer 1000. It was Australia’s
farewell.
There was half a minute’s dead .silence. Then rifle fire broke
out all along the line, the Turks believing, no doubt, that the time
for our main attack had come. But ere this the last Australian to
leave the beach, Colonel Antill, brigadier of the Third Light Horse
Brigade, had stepped aboard the last “beetle,” and she was on her
way to the transport, about a mile off shore, whilst our “automatic”
rifles continued regularly popping in reply to the Turkish general
fire. The wireless at Anzat had closed with the message, “All
off.”
The Turks still fired on. About 7 a.m. they made a sudden
wild bombardment, and some 20 minutes later charged the empty
parapets. Then our navy moved in and smashed up everything
that was left. Twenty hours after we had gone the Turks were still
shelling the empty beach.


Australia’s Triumphant Retreat.
Such was Australia’s triumphant retreat. Try to visualise the
scene —the tangle of Anzac hills, with its hundreds of gullies;
everywhere men leaving on the tick of the watch, each with a card
of instructions giving explicit details —such as, “3.32 p.m., tighten
time fuse; 5.30, pick up the leg of the machine gun,” etc. —equipped
in the manner already described, creeping in the full moonlight to
their meeting point at the valley intersection. There they were met,
convoyed and numbered, and finally they converged into marching
columns, emerging on to the separate piers where the “beetles” waited
for them with steam up.
Think of the strain of the last few hours on that second night
—such a six hours’ strain—'General Monash describes it as the worst
he has ever experienced —ready for instant decision if anything went
wrong —practically hopeless had we been attacked. One moment it
was said 100 Turks were coming down the gully from Snipers’ 'Nest.
Had that, been so, all would have been over, and yet we got off
without a single loss —without .even a man wounded. It was the
providential ending of a marvel of perfect organisation and perfect
execution of orders, such as only thoroughly disciplined troops
could have carried into effect.
Incidents of the Withdrawal.
A few sidelights are surely permissible. I have already men-
tioned how only a few really knew. Until the last few days the
rank and file knew nothing of the movement as a whole—only
of partial retirements, One private in A Battalion at Black Hand,
near Lone Pine, only knew of it on getting special orders eight or
nine hours before leaving. He had seen 12 or 15 men on two morn-
ings testing what time it took to do the distance. He had got
special food and extra clothes, and had put up bluff stores of empty
biscuit boxes.
On the previous night “Beachy Bill” put in ten shots rapidly,
and our men set fire to a lot of stuff, so that the Turks thought
they had done it, and kept on firing. They left in the evening at
intervals, marched straight down to the beach, on to the “beetle,”
on to the transport, and were at their destination before daylight.
They brought all their guns away, leaving a small party, with five
officers, for the last night.
A private in the Battalion said his company had been
destroying things for weeks, and they had got plenty of
new clothing. With spells they reached Old Anzac beach in an
hour and a half, leaving 60 behind out of some 600 men, with two
men on every post instead of three. They were at the end of the
journey by 8 a.m. He knew only that three or four men had gone
down to see how long it would take.


A trooper in the Light Horse at Chatham’s Post had an
idea when two or three days before he was told to hold himself
in readiness. There were rumours, but nothing was actually known.
They formed a body in single line, marched through the gullies under
the protection of the hills, through Mule Gully to a wharf opposite
Watson’s Pier, went aboard the “beetle,” and reached about
4 a.m. All was hurry, and he had no note of the time. Like
the rest, he did not like the idea of leaving. He had lost so many
pals there, and they had done practically nothing. They had left
nothing behind.
The doctor of one of the field ambulances (of which there
were only 40 left out of 300) said his men did the mile in 35
minutes, with sand bags and socks over their boots, and holding
Cemetery in Shrapnel Valley, Anzac.
on to coat tails when they had no rope. It was wonderful that
there was no' notice from Snipers’ Nest. He understood that only
mule and three guns were left behind.
The doctor of the hospital ship that was waiting for the wounded
saw the great conflagration of tents and stores at Suvla and the
three explosions on the Turkish position. Just before three men
had come down with the rest of the clearing hospital after burying
some champagne among the other stores. He had three men injured
from Suvla —one shot in the foot, one in the side of the face, and
one suffering from a fall.


Farewell Letter to the Turks.
The different headquarters left their dining tents for a Turkish
“feast.” The full text of a letter from one of our units to the
Turks may be appended as showing the really good feeling that
existed and the recognition of the qualities of the Turk as a fighter:—
Brigade Head Quarters,
Australian Imperial Force,
Anzac, 20th December,- 1915, 2.30 a.m.
To the Commander of the Turkish Forces,
Gallipoli, Turkey,—
The brigadier presents his compliments to our worthy
Turkish opponents, and offers those who first honour his
quarters with their presence such poor hospitality as is in
his power to give, regretting that he is unable personally to
welcome them. After a pleasant sojourn of seven months
in Gallipoli, we propose to take some little relaxation at that
period in which we are instructed hy a higher power to
observe “good will to all men.” In bidding au revoir to
our honourable foes, we Australians desire to express appre-
ciation of the fine soldierly qualities of our Turkish op-
ponents, and the sportsmanlike manner in which they have
participated in a conquest honourable, we trust, to both
sides. We have been with you, yet a little while and you
shall see us not. For us it is a matter of deep regret that
the ancient friendship so long existing between the British
and Turkish empires should have been thus disturbed and
broken by the insidious machinations of the arch enemy of
humanity. We have left this area and trenches, in which we
have taken considerable trouble and pride, clean and in good
order, and we would be grateful if they may be so main-
tained until our return, particular care being asked in regard
to matters of sanitation, so vital to the health and well-
being of an army.
We hope you will find the wine, coffee, tobacco, cigarettes,
and food to your taste, and a supply of fuel has been left
in the cupboard to ameliorate in some measure your discom-
fort during the cold watches of the winter. Our only request
is that no member of the nation who was guilty of the
inhuman murder of that noble woman,' Miss Edith Cavell,
to whose portrait this message is attached, will be per-
mitted to pollute with his presence the quarters of soldiers
who have never yet descended to such barbarous and ruthless
. methods.


Australian Discipline.
Am I tedious? Well, I am near the end. This closed the great,
the ever memorable Anzac episode. It was a magnificent and alto-
gether unexpected ending. The outstanding feature is that of per-
fect discipline. Perish for ever the idea that the Australian cannot
be and is not disciplined. The success of the wonderful evacua-
tion is a sufficient answer. There could be none better. It emphasises
also the fact that the whole Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, from general down to private, were uniformly ready, and
equal to the relegation of the emotional into the background, and
to the concentration of all their physical and mental powers on the
problem in hand, simply to do it, and on it to bend all their ener-
gies without stopping to think what it meant or involved. The
details of the plan were the outcome of many and many anxious
consultations. It was successful, because everybody, without excep-
tion, did his duty at a very high level —each man, each unit, all
concerned; the practical carrying out of the scheme required the
skilful co-operation of many assistants. As a piece of scientific
soldiery it was far before the landing, requiring as it did the
courage not only of high spirits elevated by success, but of know-
ledge of danger and of imminent failure.
But it was favoured by Providence. On the last and most
important night there was again a calm sea. Had the weather
broken the remaining men could not have got away, but would have
been left to die or to surrender. At 10 a.m. next day a furious
gale arose that would have smashed all the flimsy piers, and made
transport by small craft quite out of the question. There were ready
for them 15,000 hospital beds, and, in addition, twelve large ships
equipped as hospitals, whilst for the overflow all available patients
had been ordered out of all the hospitals in Alexandria and Cairo,
where there were some 10,000 more available.
But the final flitting had been without a single loss, without
even a single casualty. On a golden coin the officer supervising the
embarkation has placed this proud and unique inscription: —
“Anzac, 20th December, 1915 —No Casualties.”
The only day for eight long months of which such a statement
would be true. So, thanks to Providence, and to Australian in-
genuity, intelligence and discipline, we have retired with honour from
an untenable position, and earned the right henceforward and for
ever to rely upon ourselves, and to manage our own affairs, subject
only to supreme command. The flitting from Anzac, the most
wonderful incident in a wonderful series, is the high-water mark of
Australian achievement.
