

flliw
|>hß
Kanaka fiaboui 1 traffic
SINCE ISSS,
Evidence and Opinions
OF THE
EVILS AND REUSES OF
THE TRAFFIC
Since the Report of the Royal Commission
in 1885.
BEING A SUPPLEMENT TO •
DR. JOHN G. FAXON’S PROTEST.
COMPILED BY
HIS HON. SECRETARY, A. K. LANGRWGE.
Printed by HAZELL, WATSON, & VINEY, ID,
5 & 6, F.’ by Street, Hatton Garden, London.
I&f 1


May, 1892.
We earnestly trust that the circulation of this pamphlet,
together with Dr. J. G. Paton’s protest, against the Re-opening
of the Kanaka Labour Traffic between Polynesia and Queens-
land, may, by God’s blessing, be the means of securing the
immediate and final suppression of the Traffic —in the interests
of the weak and downtrodden and for the honour of the
British name.
JAMES PATON, B.A. (Si. Paul's ), 2, Park Quadrant, Glasgow,
Editor of the Autobiography of Dr. J. G. Patou.
A. K. LANGRIDGE. Hon . Organising Sec.,J. G. Paton Mission Fund,
To whom all communications should be addressed at
“Grasmere,” Grove Hill, South Woodford, London
Dr. Paton’s address is:—
Moreland Grove, Coburg, Melbourne, Australia.
Other Copies will be sent, if desired, on application to
Mr. Langridge,
George Lane Station


THE
QUEENSLAND KANAKA LABOUR
TRAFFIC SINCE 1885.
EVIDENCE AND OPINIONS
OF THE
EVILS AND ABUSES OF THE TRAFFIC
Since the Report of the Royal Commission
in 1885.
BEING A
SUPPLEMENT TO DR. JOHN G. PATON’S PROTEST.
COMPILED BY
HIS HON. SECRETARY, A. K. LANGRIDGE,
Undoubtedly in the past, and up to the time that the Royal
Commission delivered its Report in 1885, the Kanaka labour
trade was unmitigated slavery. Such is the universal verdict of
both friends and enemies of the traffic.
But since that time the regulations that have been made
have corrected the abuses, and it is no longer a slave trade, but
a genuine labour traffic. Such is the statement of the promoters
and friends of the traffic ; a statement, however, that is delibe-
rately challenged by those who have watched it on the islands
and in Australia, and who still maintain that the system is little
better, and in some respects even worse , than slavery. The
following evidence and expressions of opinion concerning the
evils of the traffic since 1885 have, therefore, been collated, in
order that a judgment may be formed by those who view the
question from a humanitarian and Christian standpoint. It
should be added that they are intended simply as a supplement
to Dr. Paton’s protest, which has already been put before the
public.


The Kanaka Traffic since 1885.
Dr. Paton, writing to the British Weekly of 18th July,
1890, says : —“ lam convinced that if that Royal Commission
“ sat again, or any other Commission which did its duty as
“ honestly, and got at the facts in examining into the conduct
“ of the labour vessels of last year (1889), it would have
“ equally to condemn similar conduct in them all. Commodores
“ Wilson, Goodenough, and many others in H.M. men-of-war,
“ have from time to time, all through the history of this shock-
“ ing traffic, proved it to have been constantly guilty of similar
“ atrocities with those given in the Report of the Commission..
“ Yet, because we have not a Royal Commission to sit_ yearly,
“ and prove the continuance of such crimes by the collectors,
“ is it still to go on ? ”
Witnesses on the Field in 1889.
A resolution regarding the traffic, unanimously passed, on
the 26th of July, 1889, by the thirteen Missionaries composing
the Mission Synod of the New Hebrides, residing on those
islands, and well acquainted with the character and doings of
the traffic there, condemned the traffic “ which has been, and is,
“ the cause of much sorrow, suffering, and bloodshed on the
“ islands and pleaded with the Government “on no conside-
“ ration to continue a traffic so steeped in deception, immorality,
“ bloodshed, and suffering.”
Actual Facts (in 1889).
Dr. Paton writes ( British Weekly, 18th July, 1890) :
“When we were at the meeting of the Synod on Tanna
“(New Hebrides) in July, 1889, on the Sabbath day, a
“ Queensland labour vessel called, and there, before us, the
“ Government agent, an old man, assured us that they were
“ not going to take away any recruits that day, after which the
“ boats left, empty of natives, and disappeared. Thus thrown
“ off their guard, the natives entered the church for a religious
“ service, and after the service great excitement and grief was
“ caused by the discovery that this same agent had brought
“ his boats in near the rocks that hid them from view, and by
“ some inducement got a number of lads away. All engaged
“ in this traffic are so accustomed to deceive and falsify that
“ we doubt if one man in its vitiating work speaks the truth.”
Other Facts (still in 1889).
Dr. Paton writes : “ Four men and a young widow (who
“ left two children unprotected and unprovided for) have


u been got away from Aniwa. They plead with me, if possible,
to get them all sent back; but once in the hands of the
“ collectors there is no rescuing them from any of their sham
u engagements.” —( British Weekly , 18th July, 1890.)
Another Testimony (in 1889).
The Rev. P. Milne, ofNguna (New Hebrides), complained
to the authorities in Queensland of a Brisbane labour vessel, the
Eliza Mary , taking away, on the 28th of September, 1889, from
his station, three lads who were his hired servants from other
islands, and on that day after dark its boats got away a young
man who left his wife and children behind unprovided for and
in great sorrow, and with him they got away other six lads, ten
in all, which roused a spirit of burning for revenge in the hearts
of those so robbed of their children, and as the missionary
was responsible for the safe keeping of the three lads, his
hired servants, the revenge is likely to fall on him.—Sydney
Presbyterian , 2nd August, 1890,
Note. —Obviously the best thing possible from the labour collectors’
point of view.
Testimony of Mr. Hume Nisbet.
(See his book, “A Colonial Tramp,” published by Ward and Downey
(1891, page 61, vol. ii.)
“ Personally, from what I have seen of the black, or South
“ Sea Island trade, I cannot discern much difference between it, as
“ it is, and the negro catching and slave dealing of America long
“ ago. The ways of trapping them are very little different; the
“ transporting them to Queensland is similar; and the retaining
“ of them as nearly alike as it could possibly be in reality,
“ although, to read the laws concerning it, it is altogether a
u different and benevolent system.”
A Horrible Story.
“ In the hotel where I put up at Maryborough the captain,
“ super-cargo, and officers of the Young Dick were staying. The
“ sloop itself was lying at anchor in the river, and I sketched it
“ from the verandah —a clean-built, swift-sailing vessel, the ideal
“ of what in my school-boy days I used to read about as a
“ pirate craft. They were washing it down, and getting it ready
“for another voyage. It had come in a short time before,
“ deluged with blood, and filled with wounded men. There had been
“ a rising of the cargo on board, much blood spilt, and many lives
“ lost (this was in 1886), and they were now filling it up with the
“ consumptive exiles whose time was up.”
“ A Colonial Tramp,” page 64, vol. ii.


Evils —Apart from Abuse of Regulations.
“ I affirm that if depopulation and demoralisation are evils,
“ the labour trade, apart from particular cases of wrong doing,
“ has brought grievous evils upon the Melanesian Islands.”
Rev. R. H. Codrington, in Guardian, 4th May, 1892.
The population of the islands is limited and decreasing.
. . . To take men of marrying age further decreases it. . . .
Husbands have opportunity, and even inducements, through
the traffic, to abandon wives and children; and lads are often
taken without their parents’ consent, and refused when they are
demanded back.
Bishop Selwvn, in Guardian , 4th May, 1892.
An Illustration of this Fact.
The Right Rev. James Lyall, Moderator of the Federal
Assembly of Presbyterian Churches of Australia and Tasmania,
writes of a visit to the islands (New Hebrides) in 1890 as
follows : —“ Landing on the island of Malicula one morning
“ about seven o’clock, we observed a large number of natives
“in a state of considerable excitement. The women were
“ chattering at a great rate, and there was a general movement
“ towards a particular point. A Queensland vessel (the
“ Borough Bell , Captain Williams) was riding at anchor about
“ two miles off, and her boats, painted red, were approaching
“ the shore. One of the boats backed in, while the other re-
“ mained further out to protect it. A lad rushed from the
“ bush into the water, followed by the women with babies on
“ their backs, who beckoned to him, calling him to return.
“ He got into the boat, which was immediately rowed out to
“ the other boat, into which they delivered the recruit. A loud
“ wail was raised by the women all along the shore as the
“ boat went off with its recruit. It backed in again, no doubt
“ to see if any others could be got. . . . One would not have
“ been surprised to have heard the report of firearms, but the
“ natives feared reprisals, as no doubt both the boats were
“ armed. For my part I felt ashamed that such things were
“ done by men of my own race, and ceased to wonder that
“ revenge should burn hotly in the breasts of those poor
“ islanders.” British Weekly, 27th November, 1890.
Abuses in Connection with the Recruiting of Women.
“ This is the great vice of the trade.” Labour vessels
facilitate elopement, abandonment of children by mothers,
leading to bloodshed, hatred, and thirst for revenge.”
Bishop Selwyn (Guardian , 4th May, 1892).


A Case in Point.
The Sydney Presbyterian of the 2nd of August, 1890,
says :—“ The Rev. J. D. Landells, missionary of Malo, com-
“ plains of a French schooner recruiting a woman from Malo,
“ and leaving an infant behind. This, though a hard-hearted
“ case, is hardly equal in cold-bloodedness to a case in which
“ a man and his wife wanted to go to Queensland, but when the
“ Government agent objected to an infant they had, the man
“ took up the child and dashed out its brains against a rock,
“ and turning to the agent, said, ‘ Will you take us now ’ ? ”
Sydney Daily Telegraph.
Foul Atrocities.
“ There is no use going into details of the foul atrocities
“ which sometimes take place on these fair sunny islands; the
“ cold-blooded murders and shooting down, the ravishments
“ and violence. Sufficient to say that the women of many of
“ these tribes are perfect in face and figure and dazzlingly
“ beautiful; that the men who hunt them have been months
“ at sea, lawless most of them by their occupation, and made up
“ from all nationalities. The reader does not require much
“fancy in his composition to imagine the rest.”
“ A Colonial Tramp,” page 64, vol. ii.
The 111-fated Kanaka Women on the Plantations.
Dr. Paton writes (“Autobiography,” popular edition,
p. 445)
“ In the slaving ships, and also on the plantations, the
“ immoralities are unspeakable. In one plantation, where a
“ great deal was said of the excellent hospital, etc., I pled to
“be allowed to visit the sick, but I found nothing but girls
“ and women who had been confined or were about to be confined !
“An overseer, in charge of about 800 Kanakas, said to me :
“‘Many children are born here by the girls and women,
“ white children; it is a mercy they nearly all die in infancy.’
“But here the veil must be drawn. No decent company
“ would stand to read or hear one half of what we have seen.”
Again—
(Page 465, “Autobiography.”)
“On my late visit to Queensland, an agent said to me how
“ sorry he was for several girls just sent to the hospital who
“would never see their own islands again. He especially
“ lamented one beautiful and handsome woman who came,
‘he said, from Port Resolution, Tanna, and would die in a


“short time, like multitudes of others, from abuse on the plan-
stations. On enquiry I found that her name was Mane;
“ and imagine my horror and agony when I remembered her
“as a little child, and her father as a chief whom I had
“ instructed and prayed over ! And this was what the white
“ man, with his so-called civilisation, had brought her to ! ”
In view of the above facts, Bishop Selwyn’s hints for
for better regulations are significant.
“Greater care should be taken of the women on the
“ plantations. They are relatively few in number, the men are
“ many, and the temptations are very great.
“ Far stricter discipline should be maintained in Govern-
“ ment vessels over the crews of the ships when at anchor.
“ Crying evils have resulted from a lack of this.”
Guardian, 4th May, 1892.
The Value of Regulations
(“ These happy and humane regulations” !)
“ I have no doubt that the Queensland Government fully
“ intended to provide, and thought that they had provided
“ adequate safeguards against all cruelties in the labour traffic,
“ and all injustice and oppression on the plantations. But to
“ make good laws is one thing ; to enforce them under all the
“ circumstances is quite another. Certainly the history of the
“ past shows the difference only too clearly.”
Bishop Barry (Guardian, 4th May, 1892).
These Boasted Regulations—Dr. Baton’s Argument.
“ It is said that the kidnapping and murders referred to
“ in my articles on this traffic were committeed about six years
“ago. That is true, for I quoted the incidents from the
“Report of the Royal Commission, knowing that no person
“ would doubt its accuracy and truthfulness. And as all the
“ vessels examined by that Commission were clearly proved to
“ have been constantly guilty of such deeds, when sailing
“ under the same laws , regulations , and bonds, and with a paid
“ Government agent on board each to see that those laws
“ were not broken, and yet they were all constantly violated in
“ collecting the labour; what has there been to prevent all the
“ labour vessels, collecting during the last six years, from com-
“ mitting similar crimes, as they have all been licensed in the
“ same way and sailed under the same laws and bonds ? ”
British Weekly, xBth July, 1890.


Regulations Easily Overcome.
“ Now each trader must carry a supercargo, appointed by
“ Government, who goes with them through the islands to see
“that no force is used, and no bloodshed or violence takes
“ place. Some of these men work conscientiously, yet the
“ temptation to act otherwise is very strong. During a long
“ voyage the captain and mates are apt to become chums of
“ the supercargo. It is a miserable life if they are enemies on
“ board. It is also to their interest to keep him well primed
“ with drink and lay little traps for him, so that if he is not
“ very careful and has not great self-control, long before they
“ begin ‘ black-birding ’ he is completely in their power, and
“ must shut his eyes whether he feels inclined or not.”
“ A Colonial Tramp,” by Mr. Hume Nisbet,
page 63, vol. ii.
Further Testimony.
Bishop Barry, speaking of Government labour agents
(the supercargo) says ; —“ They have one and all told me that
“ the attempt to do their duty has led to great friction, and it
“ needs an exceptional man to stand the strain of an incessant
“ contest for a faithful fulfilment of the law.
“ I look upon you, sir, as my natural enemy,” said a cap-
tain to his agent one day. E vino veritas. Many shut their
eyes to abuses, a few wilfully abet.
Guardian , 4th May, 1892.
And yet the fulfilment of the Regulations depends
entirely upon the vigilance of the Government agent. The
exceptional men only do their duty. Thus it follows, as a rule,
that the regulations are not fulfilled.
These Boasted Regulations —How Vindicated.
In the House of Commons, 29th July, 1890, Mr. Samuel
Smith, M.P., called the attention of the Under Secretary of
State for the Colonies to certain abuses of the Regulations of
the Kanaka traffic. The reply was as follows : —“ It is not
“possible to take action upon (the statement) unless H.M.
“Government can be furnished with the names of the vessels
“and the colony from which they came (if they were British
“ ships), together with the dates of these occurrences. If these
“ particulars can be supplied, the fullest enquiry shall be made,’
etc., etc.


The practical issue, under the circumstances (as it must be
in almost every similar case), was that the Regulations became
a dead letter.
To a further question calling attention to other cases in
which the Regulations had been violated, the reply given to
Mr. Samuel Smith, M.P., wound up as follows: —“ If any
“ Queensland regulation creating and providing penalties for
“ other offences in connection with the labour traffic has been
“infringed, such infringement must be dealt with by the
“ Queensland Government. I may remind the hon. member
“ that the introduction of Polynesian labourers into the colony
“ will cease after the end of this year.”
How Queensland “ deals with ” the Infringement of
the Regulations.
“All the interested parties, especially the planters and
collectors, screen the character of the traffic and the crimes
practised, and when, in some glaring cases, prosecution has
followed, it has been very difficult to get a colonial jury to
convict on the clearest evidence, and generally those found
guilty and imprisoned for the worst of crimes have, by petitions
of sympathisers, supposed flaws in the case, etc., been set at
liberty, to find their way back to the shocking traffic.”
Dr. Paton in British Weekly , 18th July, 1890.
These Boasted Regulations —How Avoided.
“ The laws of Queensland demanded that a native should
“ come —first, freely, of his ozun knowledge and will
“ secondly, that he was only hired for a space of three years,
“ and sent home again when his time was up. Officers were
“ appointed to see these laws enforced.
“ These officers as a rule did not understand the languages
“of the natives ; therefore interpreters had to be chosen. The
“ traders generally acted as interpreters.
“ This is how the ceremony was conducted and the articles
“ signed (on arrival at Queensland): —
“ Officer : 1 Those who have come of their own free will
“ hold up their hands.’
“ Interpreter ; ‘ Hold up all your hands.’ All hands
“ went up promptly. They had endured a voyage with the
“ interpreter, and knew from experience better than to resist.’
“ Down went the report ‘All right.'


“ Officer: ‘You are willing to serve your time of three
* years ? If so, up with your hands.’
“ Interpreter: ‘ Hold up your hands.’
“ Again the report was satisfactory, and the officer went on
his own way, leaving the planters to come forward and pick
out their men, paying their a piece for them to the
trader-interpreter. ”
See “ A Colonial Tramp,” by Mr. Hume Nisbet,
page 62, vol. ii.
Mr. Nisbet writes the above of the way in which the
Regulations used to be avoided “ under a system now happily
“ condemned.”
But the following facts prove that somewhat the same
farce must still take place, and are an
Absolute Proof that the Regulations have not been
Fulfilled.
It is the law that a native should come freely of his own
knowledge and will, and the conditions of his employment
must be fully known and understood before he can be
legally shipped for Queensland.
Now for the facts. There are some thirty or more islands
of the New Hebrides in charge of the Presbyterian Mission
alone, and on those thirty islands no less than twenty-three
distinct languages are spoken by the natives; so distinct indeed
that neither natives nor missionaries residing on one island can
make themselves understood on islands within a few miles of
them. And more, on one island (Tanna), if not on others, three
languages are spoken by the natives living in different sections
of the island.
Here is palpable evidence of the sophistry of the “ Regu-
lations ” argument. No living man understands half these
twenty-three languages. How, then, can the labour vessels,
collecting natives from this group of islands, conform to the
Regulations ? And yet thousands of natives have been so
“collected” since 1885. And if haply there should be a
trader on each island (they would studiously avoid pressing the
missionary into such service) who understood the language
sufficiently to put the questions {very few would be considered
necessary) what is to prevent his lying to the natives as to the
conditions ? deceiving the natives, and the Government agent
also, should he happen to be one of the “ exceptional ” men,
anxious to do his duty, that Bishop Barry speaks of.


Attention is here called to the
Startling Announcement
by Bishop Selwyn, in the Guardian of 4th May, 1892, that
“ too often they (the agents) are picked up when other trades
have failed How often, then, are the Regulations enforced
by such men, we ask?
Doubtless the natives are still practically kidnapped from
these islands, it cannot be otherwise, and the farce described by
Mr. Hume N isbet goes on as before at the Queensland depot.
The truth being, as Commodore Goodenough says in his
“ Journal ” at page 295, that “ The voluntary ‘ recruiting ’ is all
rubbish, and the ‘ engagement ’ is all nonsense.”
The Kanaka on the Queensland Plantation.
Where he works.
“ The Mary River is a splendid sheet of water. . . with at
xi the entrance long sand banks, and further in woody cliffs,
“ and as it narrows, flat banks of sugar plantations, for this is
“ the great plantation district of Australia, where black labour
il is required —a source of deep consideration to humanitarians,
“ and a social problem difficult to solve.
“ A Colonial Tramp,” by Mr. Hume Nisbet,
page 61, vol. ii.
His bearing.
“ I also went among the natives in the fields watching
“ them cutting down the cane, marvellously dexterous they
“ were at it, and afterwards crushing it; I don’t think I saw
“ one contented face amongst them, although South Sea
“ Islanders have always a rather sad expression, but these
“ Kanaka savages seem to have added a lowering air to the
“ usual melancholy, as if they were brooding on real or
“ imaginary wrongs. Therefore I came to the conclusion that
“ they were not enamoured of plantation life.”
“ One cause might have been that very few of them are
u permitted to bring wives with them. The traders and
“ planters would not be bothered with encumbrances in the
“ form of wives or children for the three years’ spell, therefore,
“ unless the natives learn to drink , they have no means of enjoy-
“ ing themselves, but go sullenly to work, and lie fretting for the
“ absent ones at night. I never heard a sound of music or


The Kanaka on the Queensland Plantation —( continued).
“song in any of the huts; silence reigned over the whole of
“ them.”
“A Colonial Tramp/’ by Mr. Hume Nisbet,
page 65, vol. ii.
His treatment.
“ Nor do I doubt that in many cases the labourers were
“ well treated by humane employers, as indeed was often the
“ case in old days with the slaves in the West Indies and in
“ America. But the fact remains that, whatever good regula-
“ tions might be laid down, the labourers in the distant and
“ thinly inhabited districts were almost absolutely in the hands
“of their masters with but little control or limitation of
“ power.”
Bishop Barry ( Guardian , 4th May, 1892).
How he spends his leisure.
“ The laws forbid any one to sell or give them strong
“ drink, and yet they die by it in /mndreds, and by the violence
“ and vice to which it fires them on. At one place in Queens-
land, where I was detained in my tours, Sabbath after
“ Sabbath had been spent by the natives from adjoining
“plantations meeting in arms and indulging in drinking and
“ fighting. Degraded white men looked on and enjoyed the
“ spectacle [‘ Low whites form a large dement in tropical
“ Queensland/ vide Times , 25th April, 1892.]. Some were
“ murdered and many wounded before the police could at last
“ quell and disperse them. Every human feeling in the men
“connected with this trade, or responsible for it, seems to
“ become blunted, and fiendish joy in cruelty and bloodshed
“ becomes rampant in their hearts.”
Dr. Paton (“Autobiography,” page 456.)
His health and how he gets home.
“ The Governnment has benevolently put up a hospital for
“ consumptive natives a little way out of Maryborough. While
“ I was there it was filled up, so they had to use outhouses for
“ their crouching patients ; so much for the healtlmiess of the
“ sugar-growing business.”
“ The Government officials visited the plantations once a
“year in order to see that none of the natives were kept
«longer than their three years. As a rule, few were kept.


The Kanaka on the Queensland Plantation —{continued).
“ Still, if some hardy islander managed to rub through without
“ some damage in his case there was no release.
“ Before the arrival of the officer the comedy was all
“ prepared, and the sickly ones coached up as to what they were
u to do.
“ Officer: ‘ Hold up hands those who have served their
“ timed
“Interpreter (the planter’s overseer this time): ‘You
“ fellows to the left hold up your hands.’ And the row of
diseased skeleton-hands went up, while the cough-racked
shadows prepared to see their native land.”
“ A Colonial Tramp,” by Mr. Hume Nesbit
(pages 63 and 65, vol. ii.).
“ As to those who do return to the islands, though the
returning vessel is under a heavy penalty by the Queensland
law if failing to land them on their own island among their own
people, yet they are often landed on islands other than
their own, or, if on their own, often in districts inhabited
by tribes who are enemies of their own people, whereby
many of them have been murdered , and their three
years’ earnings divided among their murderers. A short
time ago, when in Queensland, I saw a steamer sent by the
Government to return and land a number of Kanakas on their
own islands, and among their own people, and I was told that
she was under a heavy penalty if all were not so landed. Yet,
on my return to the islands I found that the steamer had
landed a large number of them on Aniwa, from sixteen to
twenty miles from their own island and people on Tanna ; and
there they had to remain a burden on my poor Aniwans till
they could all be taken to their homes by the mission vessel.
(If Aniwa had still been a savage island instead of Christian,
these Kanakas would doubtless have been slain and eaten, and
the planters would thus have brought about their murder.)
Of course, in this case , as in the case of all the vessels examined
by the Royal Commission, on returning to Queensland, the ship’s
company solemnly declared that they had fulfilled strictly every
requirement of the law," — Dr. Paton in British Weekly, 18th
July, 1890.
And who could contradict ? This is a specimen of the value
of the “ Regulations.”


His character on his return home.
An Obstacle to Christianity.
A Significant Fact.
The System is worse than Slavery.
The Kanaka on the Queensland Plantation — {continued).
“He is a much abused person, and in many cases justly.
Very often he has learnt all the evil and none of the good of
“ civilization. In many cases he returns a confirmed black-
“ guard, knowing enough English to swear withal, a bully, and
“ the prime mover in mischief and outrage.”
Bishop Selwyn ( Guardian , 4th May, 1892.)
Doubtless every missionary, and indeed every Christian,
will therefore agree with the Rev. R. H. Codrington when he
declares that: —
“ This traffic has been a serious and undoubted obstacle to
“ the introduction of Christianity by missions into these
“islands.” {Guardian, 4th May, 1892.)
“As to British New Guinea I understand that Sir
“ William McGregor, the Commissioner, has forbidden recruit-
“ ing there.” Bishop Selwyn ( Guardian, 4th May, 1892).
We leave this significant information to point to its own
conclusion. British New Guinea is nearer to Queensland than
the Hebrides and most of the other islands from which recruits
are taken, and if the Kanaka traffic is good both for the islands
and natives, and for Queensland, why is a British Commissioner
allowed to forbid recruiting from an island over which he has
jurisdiction ?
The slave is the property of his master, who, from self-
interest, will generally treat him kindly, so as to get all the
years’ labour he can out of him ; but if the Kanaka is wrought
to death on the sugar plantations (isolated as many of them
are) within the so-called three years’ engagement, the employer
has only to make his fellow-islanders bury him like a dog and
get others to occupy his place.
Dr. Paton {British Weekly , July, 1890).
In fact, should he be weakly , and past work , the death oj
the Kanaka is an actual profit to the planter , in saving the cost
of his passage home.


J dFp
&4UO
K w
The Kanaka on the Queensland Plantation— ( continued ).
“ Before the end of their three years of servitude, what
“ with the unaccustomed life, the cane swamps , and the home-
“ sickness, few of the South Sea Islanders were worth anything
“in the shape of work. Rheumatics and consumption had
“ finished them up, so that the planters were glad to get rid o f
“ them and send them home to die. From this lam inclined
“to lean towards the side of the Carolina planters , who, at
“ least, kept their slaves to the last and buried them, but that
“ is a matter of private opinion entirely.”
Mr. Hume Nisbet in “ A Colonial Tramp ”
(page 63, vol. ii.).
Conclusion.
The soul agony of a righteous man.
“ Let us give Great Britain and Queensland the credit for
what has been tried to alleviate the horrors and evils of this
business—to make it a genuine Labour Traffic, and not a slave
trade. Laws and regulations have done much, perhaps all that
is found practicable, to prevent the atrocities and murders and
kidnappings in which the Kanaka traffic is admittedly steeped.
Our contention is that this traffic, owing to special circumstances
that are essentially inherent in the case, cannot he regulated or
controlled , and must therefore be positively suppressed. Laws
that read well on paper, and sound as if perfect, in Queensland
or Britain, are one thing; and it is an altogether different thing
to work out these laws in ‘ collecting ’ {alias kidnapping) and
* engaging ’ {alias selling) poor uncivilised Islanders. It is an
inhuman trade, carried on by desperadoes; its laws are violated,
its contracts shams, and it cannot, despite all regulations, be
distinguished from the most abhorrent slavery. I have looked
on these things, and pondered and groaned over them till my
soul loathes the very words ‘ labour traffic ’; they are to me
symbols of Hell let loose on Earth, and I continue to plead
for its total suppression as the only cure, and the only way ol
clearing a dark and bloody stain from Britain’s honour.”
Dr, John G. Baton (“ Autobiography,” page 457).
