

THE NEW GUINEA
MISSION
BEING THE STORY OF ITS FIELDS
ITS PIONEERS, AND ITS PROGRESS
266.02395 M3SI
Prof. G. CURRIE MARTIN
B.D.


[?]




THE NEW GUINEA MISSION






Sketch Map of
NEW GUINEA


THE NEW GUINEA
MISSION
BEING THE STORY OF ITS FIELDS,
ITS PIONEERS, AND ITS PROGRESS
By
Prof. G. CURRIE MARTIN, M.A., B.D.
Author of “ Foreign Missions ” in Eras of Nonconformity, etc.
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY
16, NEW BRIDGE STREET, E.C
1908


PRINTED BY
HAZEIX, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,
LONDON AND AYLESBURY.


XTO
MY BRETHREN
THE L.M.S. MISSIONARIES
IN
NEW GUINEA
AS A TRIBUTE OF
ADMIRATION AND AFFECTION




PREFATORY NOTE
In the preparation of this little book the writer has been
handicapped by two very serious limitations, namely,
lack of time, and the fact that he has never visited New
Guinea. So far as a study of the literature of the subject
and the kindness of friends who have personal acquaintance
with the country can make up for the deficiency, the writer
has been very fortunately placed. He desires to place on
record his extreme gratitude to many who have aided him
most willingly in the production of this little book, and
who, by their kind assistance, have enabled him to give
it whatever value it possesses. For reading parts of the
MS. he offers his best thanks to his friend, A.-H. Dunning,
Esq., F.R.G.S., F.R.P.S., who has given him many valuable
suggestions, to Dr. A. C. Haddon, Cambridge, who has
given him the loan of much valuable literature, and the
right to reproduce several valuable photographs, has read
all the proofs, and contributed many important items of
information and correction; and to T. Athol Joyce,
Esq., M.A., of the British Museum, who has given many
valuable hints and also permission to reproduce photo-
graphs that are the property of the Royal Anthropological
Institute. In the case of the photographs reproduced from
Lindt’s Picturesque New Guinea, every effort was made
to discover the possessor of the copyright, but without
success. The author trusts he will be pardoned if any
ix


rights have been unwittingly infringed. While conscious
of the many imperfections that the book contains, the
writer has striven to secure its accuracy of impression, and
trusts that the story here told may deepen interest in the
New Guinea Mission, and awake new enthusiasm for an
enterprise which appears to him not the least important
among the many great tasks undertaken by the London
Missionary Society.
BRADFORD,
April, 1908.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
PAGE.
THE COUNTRY I
CHAPTER II
THE PEOPLE-—eTHEIR DRESS AND HOUSES . . -15-
CHAPTER III
THE PEOPLE —THEIR HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS, FOOD, OCCU-
PATIONS, AND AMUSEMENTS 29.
CHAPTER IV
THE PEOPLE —THEIR SOCIAL LIFE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS,
AND PRACTICES ....... 53.
CHAPTER V
MISSIONS—THE DAYS OF THE PIONEER. . . 61
CHAPTER VI
MISSIONS—THEIR LIGHT AND SHADE . . . 7 1
CHAPTER VII
MISSIONS —NEW DEVELOPMENTS —INDUSTRIAL MISSIONS
AND FUTURE POLICY 82-
APPENDIX 94
INDEX 97




THE NEW GUINEA MISSION
CHAPTER I
THE COUNTRY
The object of this little book is to give its readers some
conception of a country occupied by their fellow citizens of
the British Empire who are among the furthest off and
almost the lowest in the scale of human progress of the vast
numbers of people who own our King as sovereign. The
book will describe them in their primitive condition, and
then show what progress has been made in their midst by
commerce, civilisation, and, especially, Christianity. One
or two links knit these far-off fellow subjects of ours with
ourselves. To begin with, they also inhabit an island,
and it is one which, like our own, possesses great variety
of scenery and has magnificent highlands within its area.
There also lie round its coasts a great variety of small
islets, just as is the case with the western and northern
shores of Scotland. The country is known to us by the
name of New Guinea, but its more accurate title is Papua,
though the natives themselves have no general name for the
country, it being usually termed by them, with pardonable
pride, seeing that they do not know of any other, The
Great Land.
The island is the largest in the world, since nowadays
Australia is generally termed a continent, and its total
The island area is about three and a half times the size
Home. of Great Britain. It lies exactly to the north
of Australia, from which it is separated by the Torres


Strait, which at its narrowest is nearly 100 miles wide.
It lies, therefore, just south of the Equator, and is con-
sequently possessed of a perfectly tropical climate. The
island is of a very irregular shape, not unlike a huge
grotesque lizard with its head to the north-west, and its
tail stretching to the south-east, while the great foot or
claw comes down opposite the northernmost point of
Queensland. Under this figure it is perhaps most easy to
remember the general outline of the country, and a glance
at the map will confirm the general impression. The
coast-line is to a large extent marshy, especially at the
deltas of the great rivers. But in some places considerable
cliffs front the sea, and at others are found fine sandy
beaches, upon which the great rollers of the Pacific rush in
with tremendous force, causing a heavy surf.
In British New Guinea the west is dreary in the extreme.
The land is flat, and a good deal of it swampy. For
British long distances no hill higher than a dwelling-
Territory. house can be seen, and huge mangrove
swamps fringe the shore. The sea is very shallow and
treacherous, and the numerous sand-banks render naviga-
tion both difficult and dangerous for anything of deeper
draught than a canoe or a whaleboat. Toward the south-
east the scenery improves. Lofty mountains are visible
not far from the coast, and the water becomes deeper and
less muddy. There are numerous sand beaches, and the
villages situated close to the coast are much more
carefully built. The most mountainous part of the coast
is found on the north-east. There mountains of 2,000
and 3,000 feet in height run right down to the shore, and,
as in similar places in Norway, the water is extremely deep
and wonderfully clear. It often reaches 100 fathoms close
in shore.
The rich tropical vegetation clothes the whole country
right down to the sea shores, and the scenery is on the whole
very magnificent. The tail of the lizard is occupied by a
long and lofty range of mountains, which in various sections
take different names, the most lofty being that called the


Owen Stanley, which rises to about 13,000 feet. In the
widest part of the body of the lizard, where the breadth of
the country is nearly 500 miles, there run almost straight
across from west to east other ranges of mountains, the
highest of all being the Charles Louis range, which begins
just at the lizard’s neck, and has peaks that rise to nearly
20,000 feet in height, and terminate at the lower end of the
lizard’s back in the Finisterre mountains, which run close
to the sea. In the head of the lizard there is also a range
of hills known by the name of the Arfak mountains, which
are not less than 10,000 feet in height. Some of these
in various parts of the country are of volcanic origin, and
several of the volcanoes still show signs of activity.
Gold has been discovered in various places, but scarcely
yet in sufficient quantities to warrant the belief that it
will prove a very rich gold-producing country.
It will be clear that such mountain ranges naturally give
rise to an extensive river system in a tropical country.
Rivers higher mountains have often snow upon
them, though there is conflicting evidence as to
whether any of them keep the snow during the whole year.
The amount of moisture, however, that is caught by their
summits is enormous, and the rivers, in consequence, both
numerous and important. The chief are the Amberno,
which reaches the sea at the top of the lizard’s shoulder
in the extreme north-west, the Kaiserin Augusta, which
flows into the ocean near the end of the lizard’s back
on the north coast, and the Fly, the mouth of which
forms a vast swampy delta, studded with low islands,
between the lizard’s foot and its tail, near the middle of
the south coast. There are a great number of other
shorter rivers, and many, no doubt, of the tributaries are
as yet undiscovered. Some of these fivers are navigable
for considerable distances, even to river steamers of very
light draught, while the Fly has been navigated for 600
miles. The beauty of the scenery is enhanced in some
places by fine waterfalls. One of the most beautiful is
found in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby.


The main groups of islands are those which stud
the Torres Strait, one or two of which formed the first
. ~ , posts of our Mission ; those of the Louisiade
Archipelago. 1 . y
Archipelago, lying off the extreme south-
east end of the island; the D’Entrecasteaux Islands,
which lie close to the shore on the north-east of the southern
end ; and the great group of the Bismarck Archipelago,
which lies north-east of the Finisterre mountains, and
includes the very large islands known respectively by the
names of New Britain or New Pomerania, and New Ireland
or New Mecklenburg, the difference in names arising from
the terminology of English and German geographers.
These numerous islands differ very much in character,
some of them being extremely tiny, and others of
considerable size. Some idea of the great variety of
these islands may be obtained from the fact that the
largest one, New Britain, is about 300 miles in length,
and others such as Duau and Fergusson Island among
the D’Entrecasteaux, and Tagula or Siidest among
the Louisiades, are each about 50 miles in length, while a
large number are the merest specks without inhabitants.
They vary also in geological formation, some being of
volcanic origin, others apparently the summits of sub-
marine mountains, while a large number are the work of
coral insects. A certain number seem to partake of both
characters, the centre of the island consisting of the summit
of the mountain, while the coral insects have built round
the slopes of the mountain, and have so raised a fringing
reef that surrounds the central peak and leaves clear water
between the two. One group of outlying islands to the
north of the D’Entrecasteaux are thus described by Sir
William Macgregor, who regards them as unique. “ Round
each of them,” he says, “ there is a ring of shallow water,
from, say, 5 to 20 fathoms, gradually deepening outward.
Three of them have a narrow outer zone about 100 or 200
yards deep, and about 2 or 3 yards, say, above the sea ....
Then comes a circular wall of coral limestone 300 or 400
feet high, so steep that parts of it have to be ascended on


(FROM “PICTURESQUE NEW GUINEA.")
GROUP AND NATIVE HOUSE, MAIRY PASS.


ladders ; this wall runs round the island, enclosing a slightly
undulating central plateau, i to 3 miles in diameter, ac-
cording to the size of the island, and 50 to 100 feet below
the top of the surrounding walls. In this plateau are, in
each case, from half a score to a score of native villages,
the inhabitants of which cultivate the rich, brown soil of
the central plateau. The outer, lower ring and the high wall
are densely wooded.” This peculiar formation is known
scientifically as an atoll. Many of the islands contain
fairly high mountains, and several of them have magnificent
harbours. The scenery of many is of extreme beauty,
and a most tempting field of exploration and mission
labour lies among them.
As will be clearly seen from what has been already said,
it is not easy to give any general description of the scenery
that will be applicable to the country as a
whole, because, although it is all tropical, the
great height of the mountains causes a very considerable
alteration of vegetation as the higher elevations are reached.
But inasmuch as we shall be mainly concerned in this book
with the coast line, on which as yet almost all our mission
stations are situated, it will suffice to give some general idea
of the main characteristics of the coast scenery. Close
down to the shore comes the luxuriant growth of the tropical
„ , forest. The most prominent trees are, of course,
Coconut , / . , , . , . ’
the coconut palms, with their long, straight
trunks and the fine crown of feathery leaves, from which
depend the coconuts, not as we know them in the shops
in England, but appearing twice or three times as large,
of a light green and yellow colour, since they are enclosed
in their outer husks or rinds, the nut of commerce being
only about one-third of the total bulk, and being, of
course, the real fruit. The outer covering is smooth and
polished, and of a longer and flatter appearance than the
nut that is so familiar to us. This outer husk has to be
torn open in order to get at the nut, and it is this fibre
in which the nut is so embedded that is one of the most
valuable products of the famous palm.


From the coconut is also derived the copra of commerce,
which consists of the kernel dried and broken up into
small pieces. From this is obtained the coconut oil
which is used in several sorts of manufacture, particularly
for the making of marine soap, since it has the quality of
enabling washing to be satisfactorily done in salt water.
Coconut oil is also employed in medicine, as it has
something of the same quality as cod-liver oil, and is less
unpleasant to certain constitutions.
Another very common tree is the pandanus, popularly
known as the screw-pine, so named from its leaf-buds,
which in appearance bear a strong resemblance to the pine-
apple. The shape of the tree is peculiar, as it is not unlike
the banyan, seeing that it sends down long roots from the
branches, which eventually, reaching the ground and
anchoring there, serve as props for the tree. The flowers
of the tree are extremely fragrant, and are often used by
the natives for purposes of personal adornment. The seeds
and other parts of the plant are also used as food, while its
leaves are employed in thatching, and from its fibrous
roots excellent string is manufactured.
There is everywhere a thick undergrowth, and the forests
are filled with blossom of all kinds, but particularly
Flora splendid varieties of orchids. There is no
country more rich in these fantastic flowers than
is New Guinea. Many varieties of water-lilies are found in
the streams, and one of particularly splendid beauty is
found in the upper reaches of the Fly river. The fully ex-
panded flower is nearly a foot in diameter, and delicately
pink in colour. Many of the trees are also flowering trees,
so that the general aspect of the forest is picturesque in the
extreme. Many peculiar grasses grow in the island, some
of them covering vast spaces of the mountain slopes, where
in the past great forest fires have destroyed the timber.
From one of these grasses are obtained the greyish-white
seeds, popularly known in England as “ Job’s tears,” of
which the natives make necklets and other forms of decora-
tion, just as our girls do at home when they are fortunate


enough to obtain them. The brilliant blossoms of various
kinds of hibiscus, some of which are herbs and others trees,
are a familiar sight, and these also are used by the natives on
festive occasions. '
Among the commoner trees are the banana, with its
useful fruit, which forms one of the staple foods, and the
sago, which grows mainly in the western districts of the
island, and is consequently, as we shall see, an important
article of commerce among the natives. Vast forests of
the sago palm exist in certain districts, and it may be
reckoned as the staple article of diet for a large part
of the country. Various forms of grape vine and figs are
found, and everywhere, of course, is the graceful form of the
bamboo,which is so universally present in tropical countries ;
and in New Guinea, as elsewhere, it is put to an almost
infinite variety of uses. The sugar-cane is universally
prevalent, and is much enjoyed by the natives, and may in
the near future be a prominent article of commerce. Very
generally distributed is the foliage of the eucalyptus.
Through these dense forests there are practically no
roads. In one or two places near European Settlements
Forest Paths a beginning of road-making has taken place,
’ but for the native there is nothing but paths,
many of which are scarcely traceable by the untrained
eye and are very quickly overgrown.
The native has no vehicle of any kind, not even a ham-
mock, so that if he ever attempts to carry a sick or infirm
person, this has to be done on his back. There are no beasts
of burden, and most of the natives have never even seen a
wheel. An amusing incident illustrative of this pecu-
liarity once happened to a friend of the present writer.
This gentleman had been spending hours with a company
of natives waiting for the arrival of a boat. To beguile the
time he had told many tales through the medium of his
interpreter, and then finally began to describe certain
things in England. In the course of his description he
attempted to make them understand what a railway train
\yas like. Tb begin with, by dint qf diagrams qn the saqd,


and so forth, he had to give them some conception of a wheel,
and then to speak of houses on wheels tied together, and
a kind of house at one end that could not only go by itself,
but pull the other houses after it. Some time afterwards
he attempted to find from his interpreter what the natives
of the village had made of his description. It was with
great difficulty that he could extract any information, but
at last he was told that the general opinion had crystallised
into the following clear but uncomplimentary judgment :
“ They say they have heard many mighty big liars here
before, but never one like you.”
To turn from the plants to the animals of New Guinea.
Though the latter are numerous, there are none of them
Fauna large or fierce. The most widely distributed
is the wild boar. These appear to have been
domesticated by the natives for many generations. The
native pigs are somewhat hairy, smaller, and coarser than
ours. They are given great freedom in a village, and much
prized. Often the pig is the pet of the family, and a native
woman will not hesitate to suckle either a little pig or a
little puppy with the same breast at which she feeds her
own baby. The pigs are, of course, the favourite article of
flesh food, but seldom or never killed, save for ceremonial
feasts.
Another of the wild animals is the dingo, or wild dog.
From these also are derived the domestic dogs of the
villages. These also are much loved by the people, and
most households have their dog. Not only so, but in many
places a special ladder is kept to enable the dog to get into
the house. As most of the houses are built at some height
from the ground, this requires a certain amount of agility
and practice. The dog’s ladder is generally a long, swaying
plank, up which he has to run about three-quarters of the
way and then make a spring for the opening. Similarly, on
the return journey he has to spring down on to the plank,
and it is generally more than he can manage to run all the
way to the bottom, his advent usually concluding in an
ignominious roll on his back.


In common with Australia, New Guinea is the home
of many kinds of kangaroos; among others, the tree
kangaroo, which is a smaller species, and has not such
long hind-legs as the common kangaroo possesses. To
the same natural order belong the wallabies, various species
of which are found ; the cuscus or phalanger, the latter
being tree-climbing animals, not unlike our squirrel, though
some of them are no larger than dormice ; the bandicoots,
whose habits are akin to those of rabbits, but whose general
appearance is rather more suggestive of a very large rat
or shrew-mouse. Various species of ant-eater and hedge-
hog are also found.
Birds are among the most distinctive and beautiful of
the living creatures of New Guinea, the most famous of all
Birds of being the Birds of Paradise. Their variety is
Paradise. ver y great, and the gorgeousness of their
plumage past all description. As is well known, the habits
of many of these birds are very curious. The male
bower-birds in many cases execute extraordinary dances
in the clear places of the forest, and some of them delight
in forming a sort of tunnel or maze, through which they
pass in regular procession. The brush-turkey is found in
certain parts, but not in all, and is not found in the small
islands. The hornbill is a common bird, and its great
strong beak is used as a special decoration by the warriors,
being worn on the forehead. The black cockatoo is one
of the picturesque birds of the country, and as it has a
curious red spot on either side of its beak, a native legend
has arisen about it to the effect that it stole fire and flew
about from island to island with a burning brand, dropping
it at place after place, until at last it came to the island of
Kiwai, where it had to leave it altogether, because the fire
scorched its beak, and the marks are left to this day.
Everywhere pigeons and doves of many sorts are found,
the largest and most beautiful being the white-crested
goura pigeon.
The largest of all the birds of the country is the cassowary,
which is much like the ostrich in appearance; but its legs


are stronger and thicker than those of that bird, and it is
so formidable an opponent that it is said it can even
_ more than hold its own with a wild boar. The
Cassowary
plumes of the cassowary are greatly valued by
the natives for personal decoration, especially for dancing
headdresses, while from its bones many articles are manu-
factured, the sharpened leg-bones making most formidable
daggers.
The rivers are infested with crocodiles, which often work
great havoc among the natives, both adults and children.
There are also many species of lizards, and snakes are very
numerous. Not all of the latter, of course, are poisonous,
the large and beautiful carpet snakes being the most con-
spicuous of the latter class. Among the venomous ones
are species of adders, brown, black and whip-snakes.
The waters of the rivers and the sea are well stocked with
edible fish, and the turtle is another favourite article of
diet, while tortoises are frequent. Many kinds of shell-fish
inhabit the sea coast, some of which are dangerous from
the poisonous bites or stings which they inflict. One
curious kind of crab is found in the delta of the Fly river,
which seems to perform the same sort of function that
earthworms do in our own country and the white ant in
parts of Africa. These crabs dig tunnels and chambers
in the water-covered mud, and bring up the excavated mud
to the surface, where they build mounds of it to the height
of two or three feet. The river silts up the mud into the
excavated passages, and so the crab becomes an actual
creator and fertiliser of land-surface. His immediate pur-
pose in doing so seems to be to make a dry resting-place
for himself above the surface of the river.
Insect life is, of course, very abundant, and not all its
forms delightful. Most beautiful of all are the numerous
species of brilliant butterflies. Beetles are also
Insects. A
very numerous, and many of extreme beauty,
while bees and ants and wasps are represented by many
different species. For any naturalist who is particularly
interested in the subject of the animals and plants of New


Guinea, a capital account is to be found in an appendix
to Thomson’s British New Guinea, pp. 218-82.
The seasons may be said roughly to be exactly the re-
verse of our own, the New Guinea winter falling in the
„ middle of our summer ; but, of course, the terms
569.80DS ' ' '
are misleading, as the winter is never unduly
cold, only extremely wet. The island lies exposed to two
regular series of winds, the South-east Trades, which pre-
vail from March to October, and the North-west Monsoon
for the rest of the year. Both these winds are heavily laden
with moisture, so that the country is always exposed to a
considerable rainfall. The result of this and of the swampy
character of the coast-line makes the whole country very
subject to fever. The natives suffer from it, but not nearly
so much, of course, as do Europeans. For the latter the
climate is very trying, especially for European ladies.
Healthier positions are to be got inland on the mountains,
and in every case the higher land, or some of the outlying
islands, are the most healthy situations. The natives
themselves suffer terribly from loathsome forms of skin
disease, which do not appear, however, to be infectious
or to incommode them very much, though it renders them
often extremely repulsive in the eyes of foreigners. Of
these skin diseases the most common is a form of ringworm,
known to scientists as Tinea desquamans. Many suffer from
the horrible form of ulcers known as yaws, which is a
common disease of tropical countries. The disease lasts
from two to six months, but chronic cases last for years ;
and as its successful treatment requires great cleanliness
and care, it is obvious that the native has not much chance
of cure, especially when it is remembered that the discharge
from the ulcers is extremely infectious. Ague and influ-
enza and rheumatism are not infrequent complaints.
New Guinea appears to have been first sighted by
voyagers in the early years of the sixteenth century. A
Discovery of Portuguese navigator of that time gave it
New Guinea, the name of Papua, which in Malay signifies
“ fuzzy-head,” from one of the marked features of the native


faces. At a later time it was called by another voyager
the Golden Island, presumably because he considered it
a sort of El Dorado. The name of New Guinea was con-
ferred upon it by a Spanish voyager in the middle of the
sixteenth century, because he thought the natives resembled
those of the Guinea coast in West Africa. During the
next century Dutch navigators touched at it, but on the
opening day of the year 1700 William Dampier, the English
explorer, sighted it, and sailed right round it. His book
is thought by some to have been one of the sources of De
Foe’s Robinson Crusoe, and his description of the natives
is as follows : “ The natives are very black ; their short
hair is dyed of various colours—red, white,- and yellow ;
they have broad, round, yellow faces, with great bottle
noses, yet agreeable enough, except that they disfigure
themselves by painting and wearing great things through
their noses, as big as a man’s thumb, about four inches
long. They have also great holes in their ears, wherein
they stuff such ornaments as in their noses.” In some
ways we shall see the eighteenth-century captain had made
very accurate observations. The island was also visited
by Captain Cook, and from that time forward many other
voyagers visited the country. Some of its place-names
are derived from these travellers, as, for example, the Fly
river, which bears the name of the ship in which Captain
Blackwood sailed, while the Owen Stanley range and
Port Moresby bear respectively the names of English cap-
tains. In 1848 the Dutch took possession of the western
half of the Island, and in 1884 arrangements were made
whereby the eastern half was divided between Great Britain
and Germany, so that the north-eastern section of that
half, that is, from the middle of the lizard’s back to nearly
the middle of its tail, was assigned to Germany, and the
southern half to Great Britain.
In 1883 the district now known as British New Guinea
British was first annexed by the then Premier of Aus-
Protectorate. tralia, but it was not until 1888 that a defi-
nite British protectorate was formed, with Sir William


Macgregor as first Administrator. Under him there exist
two State Councils, the Executive and the Legislative, the
former consisting of the Administrator, a judge, a sec-
retary, and a resident magistrate, the second made up of
such officers and others as the Administrator appoints.
Local courts are held, and native police control the people.
In matters of supreme importance the Administrator
must refer to the Governor of Queensland. This method
of government has worked well during the past twenty
years, the natives taking kindly to British control, and
the police proving themselves very trustworthy. The
Colonial reports show on the whole a wonderful absence
of serious crime, and law and order appear to emerge
much more quickly than might be expected among a
people so recently brought under anything like systematic
control.


CHAPTER II
THE PEOPLE —THEIR DRESS AND HOUSES
The racial origin of the natives of New Guinea is a subject
of very great difficulty. Probably, as has been the case in
„ .. _ other countries, the aborigines have been
N&UV6 Iv3,C6S, , .
driven inland, and are now found mainly among
the hill tribes, of whom as yet comparatively little is
known. It is thought that at some remote period New
Guinea formed part of the continent of Australia, and
some think that the original inhabitants were of the same
race as the so-called Blacks of Australia. The natives of
New Guinea seem, however, to be of a higher order than the
Australian aborigines, at least as we now know them. The
islands of the Torres Strait probably formed a connecting
link, and many of the customs that obtain there are also
found in New Guinea itself. At some time, however, there
may have been an invasion from Oceania, and possibly also
from the Malay Archipelago. Many of the people show
characteristics of the Melanesian races, i.e. the inhabitants
of the Western Pacific islands, and there are some in-
teresting traces of these immigrations. The people
on the eastern part of the island show, on the whole, a
higher state of development, and some authorities have
fixed upon Jokea, or its neighbourhood, a village on the
eastern end of the Gulf of Papua and on the southern coast
of the island, as a dividing line, reckoning westward from
there the population to be Papuan, and eastward Mela-
nesian, especially along the coast.
There are certain marked features about native practices


that serve to support this contention. In the western
districts, for example, the bow and arrow is the ordinary
Differences weapon, while on the east the spear is found,
between East In the west, the decorative form of native
and west. takes the rude shape of animals and
human figures, while in the south-east bird ornaments are
more frequent, and between the two geometrical patterns
are prevalent. Language is not a great guide, as the differ-
ences are enormous between districts that are very close
together, even fifteen miles being sufficient to present a
difference that is not merely one of dialect but of vocabulary
and construction, so that the speech of the natives of one
village is perfectly unintelligible to those of another.
Causes for such isolation are to be found in the mountainous
character of the country, the absence of roads, and the
general distrust in which, in former times at least, they all
lived with reference to any one outside their own imme-
diate circle. The languages spoken by Papuans proper
form one group, while those spoken by the Melanesians
belong to the Oceanic linguistic family. The general mass
of the people are not very dark in colour, rather coppery
than black, though darker races are found in certain dis-
tricts, mainly in the west around the Fly river. They are
not as a rule tall, but muscular and well built, and the faces
not at all unpleasing. The typical Papuan or aboriginal
inhabitant seems now mainly to be found in the Gulf
region and to the West, and in the inland mountainous
districts of the South-east Peninsula, and is characterised
by a darker skin and woolly hair. But there are still many
unsolved problems about the races of New Guinea, and
such statements as follow here must be taken more or less
generally, as the scope and purpose of this book do not
permit of exact definition and limitation at every point.
After all, there are a great many features that are common
to the whole country and may conveniently be treated
in general terms.
The people are as a whole very responsive to kind and
frank treatment. They have shown themselves faithful


and loyal friends when their trust has been won. They
are reliable if suspicions of the foreigner as such have
Character- been allayed. Naturally the savage looks upon
istlcs. a man 0 f different colour and habit at first as
an enemy, for all strange things are inimical to childlike
people. One excellent feature of the native life is the love
of children and the great freedom that is permitted them.
Sir William Macgregor has given the following description
of New Guinea children : “ The children are often very
pretty, with delicate mouths, bright, soft eyes, bronze,
chubby faces, silky features, and velvety skins. To myself
it has always appeared that the eye of the Papuan child is
perhaps unique in beauty. It is very often of the soft,
deep, bloomy tint of the ripe blaeberry of the Scotch woods,
and which has probably never been put on paper or canvas.
Unfortunately this bloom is like all others in being ephe-
meral. It becomes changed by the sixth or eighth year into
a much harder, less liquid, hazel-coloured eye, often,
indeed, of large size, and strikingly expressive.”
The boys and girls of the New Guinea villages seem to
live in a perfect paradise so far as external conditions go.
Like their elders, they soon become quite amphibious,
and do not care much whether they are on land or on the
water. Many of the houses are built, as we shall see, with
water around and beneath them, and tiny little tots run
about fearlessly on the somewhat crazy staging round the
houses, quite indifferent as to whether they may fall in or
not.
As little babies they are carried about by their mothers
either astride upon the hip or in a specially constructed
Baby- string bag, which is suspended from the head
carriers. a nd carried either at the back or in front.
Sometimes the bag is filled with all kinds of garden produce
and the baby set astride on the top. The bag serves
a double purpose, for while the mother is at work in the
field it is hung up on the branch of a tree, and makes a
convenient and more or less comfortable cradle. If there is
no baby, a little pig may be honoured in the same way.
2


There is no unhealthiness from contracting of little
limbs or tight wrappings, as among Red Indians or Chinese,
Dress i° r the male baby never wears any clothes from
his earliest days to his latest; for even the
grown man, in many districts, has nothing in the way of
dress beyond a single cord round his waist, although in most
places a more substantial band or covering is worn. Of
course, as we shall see later, ornaments of various kinds are
worn, and belts for armour or other purposes, but the
general costume, or lack of costume, is as here indicated.
In certain inland districts women also have been found
without any clothing, but as a rule the New Guinea girl
from ten years onward wears a skirt or petticoat (called
nogi, rami, etc.) stretching from the waist to below the knee,
or in some districts not quite down to the knee, made of
fibre, grass, or palm leaves, and in many cases dyed various
colours. This may not seem an elaborate costume, but
the New Guinea lady is as proud of it as her Western sister
of her much more gorgeous attire. It has certain ad-
vantages of simplicity, for obviously a grass skirt would
be seriously spoiled by a shower of rain, but the New
Guinea woman of fashion saves the risk, if caught in a
shower, by taking off her skirt and sitting on it till the
rain is over. In some districts, fashion demands a new
dress as often as once a month, so that New Guinea ladies
may have a fresh, costume even more frequently than many
English ones, and great care is exercised to have the skirt
of proper length and shape. For very special occasions
the New Guinea belle puts on her whole wardrobe at once,
and visitors whom the New Guineans have specially desired
to honour have been a little amazed at the effect of half a
dozen skirts worn on the top of one another.
In many parts of the country, especially round Port
Moresby, the girls are very richly tattooed, the effect of
Tattooing which is not at all unpleasing, and has been de-
scribed as being “ like a tightly fitting covering
of lace.” The tattooing process begins when a girl is quite
young, and is done with a sharp needle made of thorn or


the spine of a palm-leaf, or some similar substance, and
then colouring material made from coconut-shell, char-
coal, and oil is rubbed into the wound. When a girl is
married, certain special marks are added to the tattooing
pattern just about the breast, which indicates her altered
condition of life. In the West, cicatrising takes the place
of tattooing. This is done by cutting with a sharp shell
and putting some irritant substance into the wounds, so
MEN FROM OROKOLO
(BY PERMISSION OF ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE).
that they will leave scars. Many of the patterns made in
this way seem to have a social or religious purpose.
The New Guinea men do not so generally practise tat-
tooing (many cases are, however, to be found among south-
Personai eastern tribes), but are very fond of various
ornaments, styles of ornaments. What may appear the
most objectionable to us is the practice that begins in early
childhood of extending the lower lobe of the ear. A hole
is bored through it, and gradually thicker and thicker pieces
of wood driven through the opening, and heavy objects


attached to it, till, in some cases, the lobe of the ear almost
reaches the shoulder. Huge pieces of bamboo stem, gaudy
feathers and flowers, fragments of shell, and even pigs’
tails are thrust into it, and there are occasions on which
it seems to serve in the place of a pocket. Another curious
custom is the armlet (called gana) which is put on the upper
arm in early boyhood. It is never removed or widened,
and as its wearer reaches manhood, a deep indentation
MEN FROM OROKOLO
(BY PERMISSION OF ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE).
in the flesh of the arm is formed by it. Curiously enough,
nature seems to adapt herself to the process, for there is
no evidence that this weakens the muscular force of the
native’s arm. Necklets of dogs’ teeth, sharks’ teeth,
shells, seeds of plants, and other things are worn. The
most prized of all are elaborate ornaments of boars’ tusks,
that in some cases almost extend to breast plates. These
are valued not for themselves alone, but from the idea that


some of the bravery and power of the wild boar will thus
become the property of the wearer. On special occasions
bracelets and anklets of cassowary feathers and other
similar materials are worn, and it is not uncommon to wear
flowers and feathers in the permanent armletsdor decora-
tive purposes.
A favourite ornament is a piece of shell or bone about
six inches in length thrust through the septum between the
Nose nostrils and stretching out on either side of the
Ornaments, n ose. It is usually turned up at either end,
after the fashion of the German military moustache. As
the hole gets worn by the weight of the ornament, wedges
of all kinds have to be driven in to keep it in the proper
position, which frequently give a very grotesque appear-
ance to the face. In certain cases chains of shell or other
objects are attached to the ear from the outer ends of this
ornament, so that the face is festooned in fantastic fashion.
Bands of decorative bead work, pearl shells, bone orna-
ments of various sorts, and strips of cassowary feathers
are worn bound across the forehead.
But the most elaborate part of the ordinary costume is
the head-dressing. There is ample opportunity in the fine,
Head- fuzzy mop of a Papuan head for the hair-
dressing. dresser’s fancy, and the fashions are certainly
very varied, if not all elegant. The materials that seem
to be mainly employed in producing the desired effects are
mud and coconut oil, frequently rancid. In this way, as
may be imagined, the hair can be transformed into many
fearful and wonderful shapes. Sometimes plaits of string
are introduced into the hair, and these hang down the back
and are finished off with heavy tassels of baked mud. In
some districts on the Fly river elaborate conical hats of
beautifully plaited straw, surmounted by gaudy feathers,
are found. But these hats are firmly fixed to the head with
mud, which has been allowed to dry, and the hats have not
been removed for years. This is the Papuan’s equivalent
for the Western hat pin!
Not many of the men wear much hair on their faces, and


where beards are found at all, they are often scanty. But
. a New Guinea shave is not the luxurious and
Shaving.
comfortable process to which the Westerns
are accustomed. If anything is used in place of a razor,
it must be either a shell or a piece of split bamboo, and a
broken bottle is reckoned an extremely luxurious razor.
But the favourite method of getting rid of superfluous
hair is slower and much more thorough. The man to
be operated upon lies down on the ground, and one of
his lady friends takes each individual hair between two
pieces of fibre, which are attached at the end to a piece
of string, by means of which the fibres are twisted round,
thus entangling the hair and pulling it out by the roots.
Sometimes the same effect is produced by rubbing the skin
hard with pumice-stone.
In some places both men and women bleach their hair
with lime till it becomes a dirty golden colour. This
practice obtains from April till the yam-digging season.
When a New Guinea youth is in search of a wife he is
accustomed to wear a broad belt of bark, decorated with
heaux. fantastic figures of geometric patterns, and
capable, I am sorry to say, of being drawn ex-
tremely tight. The reason for this is said to be that
the young ladies of his village may suppose that such a
young man cannot possibly eat much, and will therefore
be easy to keep. He puts up with his self-imposed tor-
ture until he secures his wife, when it is discovered that
the belt is capable of extension, and he is quite ready
for a good meal. In the districts where bows and arrows
are used, gauntlets of cane and bark and other material
are worn to protect the arm from the bow-string. When
in mourning, the New Guinea natives sometimes wear
string corselets, but these are not so much a form of dress
as a ceremonial sign of sorrow.
When the men have to take part in ceremonial dances
or in war, they often paint themselves with white
qT-n RRS,
and black, yellow and red colours in the attempt
to look more imposing and ferocious. The face and


body are thus decorated, and in addition, the tusks of boars
are sometimes attached to plates which are held in the
mouth, and.at other times a kind of mask is so worn, a piece
of wood or leather being attached to the back of it that it
may be held in the mouth. The magicians wear very
elaborate masks, with huge, grotesque, and hideous faces
that tower far above their heads. The huge bill of the
bird known as the hornbill is worn on the forehead by
warriors.
The women are quite as fond, or even fonder, of decora-
tion than the men. In addition to such ornaments as are
common to both sexes, the women wear a larger number
of armlets, bracelets, and necklets of shells, teeth, bead-
work, and other material. In some places bodices of the
seeds known as “ Job’s tears ” are worn. The women fre-
quently decorate their hair with blossoms of flowering trees
and bushes, such as the hibiscus, frangipani, and other
sweet-smelling plants. Charms of many kinds are worn by
both men and women, some of which are more curious than
elegant, such as the bones of pigs, human bones, and dried
pieces of the human body. Widows are sometimes seen
decorated with the jawbones of their deceased spouses, and
when a woman is in mourning she rubs herself all over
with soot, or other black dye, mixed with moisture taken
from the corpse, and, like the men, frequently wears a net
covering in token of mourning.
The marriage customs are very simple, and some of them
seem to point to' an older practice of marriage by capture.
Marriage There is a pretence of marriage by capture, the
Customs. girl being supposed to be taken away from her
father’s house, while he and his friends come to recapture
her, but are mollified by the presents made to them, and
permit her to remain. There are very few unmarried
women in New Guinea, and polygamy," while a common,
is not a universal practice. The New Guinea husband
and wife are, as a rule, very faithful to one another, and,
judged by comparisons with other peoples, the moral
standard may be reckoned fairly high. Families are not, as


a rule, very large, but children are well cared for, and have
much affection lavished upon them. Genuine sorrow is
manifested on their death, though it sometimes takes
strange, and, to us, horrible, expressions. A few years ago,
for example, a deacon of one of our churches went with his
son on a fishing expedition. The boy was caught and
killed by a crocodile. When the fragments of the body
were recovered, the faithful father rushed upon them in a
frenzy of grief and, to show his devotion, devoured parts of
the flesh. Our missionary was wise enough to recognise the
thought that underlay this hideous practice, and did not
deal with the man in any severe way.
Domestic architecture in New Guinea is both picturesque
and varied. Round the coast in the majority of the
Houses villages most of the houses are built on piles
on the extreme edge of the shore just below
high-water mark, and in some cases quite a considerable
distance from the shore. This was doubtless in its origin
dictated by conditions of safety. Immense ingenuity is
shown in the way in which the first pile is driven, and the
New Guinean shows great mechanical genius by his solution
of the problem. A sharpened stake is floated out to the
spot as the tide begins to ebb. It is dropped into position,
and a rope connected to two canoes is drawn across the top
end. The canoes are filled with men, and the rope is drawn
tight on either side of the post between the two boats.
As the tide falls, the whole weight of the canoes, of course,
drags upon the pile, which is thus gradually sunk into
position. When the first one is thus firm, it is an easy
matter for the agile native to stand upon the top of it
and hammer in the next one, and so on, until enough
have been placed to stretch a plank across, and so form
a basis for further operations. The houses are built with a
broad platform or verandah in front, shaded by a thatched
roof. The interior consists of one, or generally two
chambers, the outer one for meals and general social life,
and the inner one for cooking and sleeping. The hearth
is usually made of clay, let into the floor, and sometimes


protected by a rude stone fender. The walls are usually
made of heavy panels of grass sometimes covered on the
outside with palm leaves or loose grass thatching, which
also forms the material of the roof. The roofs are of
different shapes in various parts of the country, the favourite
forms being pyramids, saddles, or what may best be de-
scribed as modelled from the shell of a turtle. In some
instances they rise to an enormous height in front, but this
is more frequently the case with the larger communal
HOUSE AT IASA (PHOTO BY DR. A. C. HADDON).
houses, though also found in chiefs’ houses. When the
villages are built on the shore, the pile form of foundation
also maintains, probably for safety from enemies and
venomous creatures and floods. In all such cases the
approach is by rough ladders or an inclined pole, with
notched steps on the upper side.
In the inland districts houses of refuge are built on trees
from 20 to 40 feet above ground. These are reached by
Tree houses on £> Adders (which can be pulled up when the
inhabitants are indoors), and many of them
are provided with fighting platforms below the house


and large stocks of ammunition, in the form of heavy
stones and spears, to discharge from these platforms in
case of assault. Some of the inland villages are fenced with
high pallisades, and the tree-houses, one or two of which
may be found outside the stockade, are only used as watch-
towers and sentry-boxes. In the western district, especi-
ally about the mouth of the Fly river, many communal
houses are found. Some of them are of immense size,
Chalmers having measured one 692 feet in length.
The dubus, found also in Melanesia, are built on the
same general plan, that is, on piles, with an open plat-
Dutjus and form in front, as has been already described. In
Communal front, the roof occasionally towers to a height of
Houses. 6 0 or 80 feet above the platform, and the thatch
is supported on high poles, some of which are elaborately
carved with bold designs. It is possible that these houses
have heen modelled on the crocodile with its open mouth,
for their general shape is not unlike that creature, with its
widespread jaws. In certain places these dubus are only
used for the men, and are largely devoted to ceremonial
practices, which will be described in the next chapter.
Sometimes, therefore, writers on New Guinea speak of
these as “ temples,” but the term is misleading. Almost
all the native architecture shows great skill in design and
execution, and the thatching is performed with wonderful
dexterity. Inside, communal houses consist of a long
central corridor, with numerous stalls on either side,
forming small chambers, separated from one another by
low partitions, each chamber being a family residence,
with its own hearth, and containing the family possessions.
They are perfectly destitute of light except for the opening
at either end, and it may be imagined how unpleasant is
their interior when filled with the smoke of countless fires
and the odour of many native families. In cooking, the
women sometimes use bamboo tongs with which to turn
the food, so that it is evenly done and not burned.
In the neighbourhood of the villages are found the
gardens and plantations of the natives. There they grow


TREE-HOUSE (FROM “PICTURESQUE NEW GUINEA”).


their vegetables, and while the original clearing and turning
up of the soil is performed by the men, the general care of
the garden is entrusted to the women. In old days the
men had usually to stand guard over them with their
weapons ready to hand. Many of the crofts display great
care, and reflect much credit upon their cultivators, and in
some places at least really good agricultural drainage has
been carried out. The natives occasionally display con-
siderable taste in planting ornamental shrubs such as
crotons and flowering plants in the neighbourhood of their
houses and villages.


CHAPTER III
THE PEOPLE —THEIR HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS, FOOD, OCCU-
PATIONS, AND AMUSEMENTS
When the visitor enters a New Guinea house he does not
find much in the way of furniture. All that can strictly be
Furniture ca be'd by that name are mats and pillows,' the
former being woven of fibre of various kinds,
and grass, or made of bark cloth beaten out very fine by
stone or wood hammers, and painted with designs in black
and red and yellow by vegetable dyes and certain forms
of earth. In nearly all New Guinea houses there exist
racks on which are stored cooking pots and other utensils.
Often these racks are in the shape of hanging cages, made
of sticks and cord, in which such food as yams' and taro
are kept until wanted. A mat may be spread for the
visitor on the platform outside the house, and at night
he would have to stretch himself on a similar mat and
find the softest position on the rude-shaped boards. In
such circumstances it is customary to discover that these
boards consist mainly of knots and sharp corners. The
pillow offers no idea of comfort to a Western. It con-
sists of a piece of wood, with four low legs, sometimes
rudely carved into the shape of a crocodile, but often
consisting of a square or round block decorated with geo-
metrical or other figures. This pillow is inserted under the
back of the neck, so that the elaborate coiffeur of the
New Guinean may not be spoiled, and the hair that took
so long to do up may not have to be redone in the morning.
There are many accompaniments to a night spent in a New
Guinea house that are not agreeable. First of all, there


are the myriads of mosquitoes, which are only kept away
by smoke, so that the unaccustomed visitor has either to
choke and have his eyes nipped by the acrid smoke from
the fire or suffer untold torture by the bites of the venomous
insects. Other insect pests are also very numerous, and
the household dogs and pigs may easily disturb the sleep of
the traveller, the former by seeking to share his mat, and
the latter by their restlessness underneath the house.
More gruesome accompaniments are not uncommon, for
travellers often find strange substances dropping down
upon them, when investigation discovers a half-dried corpse
of some ancestor resting on the rafters overhead. The
rafters form a favourite storehouse for many things, food
and weapons of war, and other house property being kept
there. There are few adornments, unless, indeed, human
skulls be reckoned such. To the New Guinean these latter
are objects of great interest and importance, and in the old
head-hunting days no house in certain districts was con-
sidered to be properly furnished without a good number of
them, while many of the great communal houses reckon
them by scores and hundreds. These are found in British
New Guinea, mainly in the south-east and notably at
Kwaiawata.
Throughout the central and eastern districts of New
Guinea cooking vessels are made of rude pottery. The
Pottery potter’s wheel has not been discovered by these
people, and the women build them up, and
fashion them by hand in a most skilful manner, while they
are also able by some process to know just how to prepare
sufficient fuel to fire them properly in the open, as they do
not possess kilns or furnaces of any sort. At Maisiua Sir
William Macgregor found pottery with raised designs upon
it, as if a small cord had been half-inserted in the clay and
left there. In districts where pottery is not employed,
food is either cooked in large shells or roasted wrapped up
in leaves of the coconut palm. Pork is a very favourite
article of diet, as is also the flesh of the wallaby, the
crocodile, and many other smaller creatures, and on the


PORT MORESBY GIRL WITH WATER-JAR (FROM “PICTURESQUE NEW
GUINEA”).


sea coast fish is very largely employed. The preparation
of sago in the districts where it grows is a staple industry,
and this is bartered for pottery, as the two industries
belong to different parts of the country. Shoots of the
young palm trees are also cooked as vegetables, and, of
course, fresh fruits are eaten everywhere, notably the
banana.
There are two other plants which play a prominent part
in the staple food-supply of the people. These are known
Taro and respectively as the taro and the yam. The
Yam. former is a species of arum, from which a pleasant
kind of flour is produced, or the roots may also be cooked as
a dish by themselves, while the leaves serve as a vegetable.
The yam takes, in all the countries where it is grown, the
place of our potato. The tubers are very much larger
than those of the potato however, some of them occasion-
ally reaching even as much as thirty pounds in weight.
The plant itself is a climber, and the leaves not unlike
those of a convolvulus. There are many species of yam,
and it is a most important food-stuff in New Guinea.
Bowls and dishes are formed out of wood, most cleverly
and beautifully fashioned. The very hardest wood is
exquisitely worked into very perfect form, decorated
with neat geometric patterns round the rim. Drinking
cups and spoons are prepared from the coconut. The
latter are beautifully fashioned, and very prettily decorated
oftentimes with a sort of fretwork round the edge of the
handles. Forks are also formed from bone, while for
knives either shell or bamboo is employed. It may seem
difficult to imagine bamboo sharp enough for the purpose,
but if it is carefully split a very razor-like edge is produced,
and the knife is easily sharpened by taking off another
thin section. Gourds or coconuts are used as water
bottles, but sometimes more primitive practices are in
vogue, and outside the house a long coconut leaf is
attached to a tree trunk or to the end of the house in such
manner as to form a runnel for the rain water, and all the
native has to do when he is thirsty is to run out and apply


GROUP OF UTENSILS (FROM “PICTURESQUE NEW GUINEA”).
Shield, tobacco-pipe, cassowary feather ornaments, hornbills, war-clubs,
gourd, and necklaces.
3


his mouth to the lower end of it, and so drink his fill.
Lengths of bamboo-stem are frequently used in which to
carry water.
Gourds are also employed to carry lime. Into this gourd
fits a spoon made of bone, and the lime is used to chew
Betel-nut with the areca nut. This is a very common
chewing’. practice over a large part of New Guinea. It
is said to taste something like a mixture of soap and
cayenne pepper, but is greatly relished by the natives. It
has, however, a very disfiguring effect upon the teeth and
mouth, but its effect is so admired by the natives that in
many places a girl’s chances of marriage depend on her
being beautified in this way. It not only colours the lips
and inside of the mouth a very bright red, but enlarges the
lips and loosens the whole surrounding muscles.
The natives are everywhere much addicted to tobacco-
smoking. The tobacco is grown by the natives, and
Tobacco sticks of tobacco imported by traders almost
Pipes. take the place of a currency. The native
tobacco pipe is a curious instrument. It consists of about
two feet of bamboo, open at one end, closed at the other.
An inch or two from the closed end a hole is bored in
the stem about large enough to contain an ordinary
cigarette. Into this hole a leaf is inserted, so twisted as
to contain some tobacco. The tobacco is then lighted, and
the mouth applied to the wide end of the stem, and the
breath drawn in till the whole tube is filled with smoke.
The tobacco is then withdrawn,the flat of the hand applied
to the open end, and the lips to the small hole, through
which the tobacco is inhaled. Each member of the com-
pany is satisfied with one whiff, and the pipe passes from
hand to hand. When all the smoke within it is exhausted,
the process of filling it is repeated. These tobacco pipes
are very beautifully decorated with pyrographic patterns,
as are also the lime-gourds and other objects, for our
modern fancy for poker work is an old invention in New
Guinea, the implement employed being the glowing end
of a sharp palm leaf with which the designs are pricked


LAKATOIS UNDER FULL SAIL (FROM " PICTURESQUE NEW GUINEA”).


out and the connecting lines burned. Baskets are also
made for many purposes, and as the New Guinean is obvi-
ously without pockets, he has to make baskets serve their
place. The ordinary basket carried for purposes of the
Englishman’s pocket consists of a nest of three baskets, one
inserted inside the other, and carried by a string over the
shoulder. The men of certain tribes carry in their baskets
a slab of mica, which they use as a mirror, while some carry
a small sponge for purposes of ablution.
The methods of producing fire are interesting and in-
genious. Ordinarily three processes are employed. The
Manner of the friction of a strip of bamboo
Producing against a bit of bamboo stem. A more ordinary
Fire - process is to lay a piece of softish wood on the
ground, and then hold in the hand a stem of harder wood,
with a sharpened point. This is rubbed vigorously back-
ward and forward upon the soft wood until a groove is cut
in it and the end of the groove filled with glowing wood
dust. This dust is carefully transferred to a piece of tinder
made from the dried husk of a coconut, which is then blown
into flame. Directly this happens the burning husk is
laid on the ground and covered with dry leaves and twigs,
and the blowing is continued until the fire is well alight.
The third method is even more difficult of manipulation.
In this case a hard piece of wood is not rubbed backward
and forward, but rotated rapidly between the palms of the
hand. The difficulty is to move the hands sufficiently
rapidly from the bottom of the stick up to the top again
so as not to lose the rotatory motion. Skilfully managed,
this produces fire quite as quickly as either of the other
methods, and is a prettier process to watch.
Fire has to play a large partin many native operations ;
seeing that his tools are at the best stone, he has to make
fire do as much for him as he can. Suppose he wishes to
fell a tree, he carefully burns it round about the bottom
of the stem and then removes the charred wood with his
stone axe, and repeats the process of burning and hacking
until he gets the tree down. If he wishes to turn the tree


into planks, he drives wooden wedges into it, and so splits
it into boards of the desired width. But if he wishes to
make a canoe of it, he will set several fires alight along the
A NEW GUINEA INTERIOR: THE FIREPLACE.
upper surface of the trunk as it lies on the ground, taking
care that the charring does not proceed too far. He will
then set to work with his axe and hollow out the charred
portion, and so go on with these alternative processes until


he has removed all that is requisite to form the interior
of his canoe.
A very ingenious process is sometimes applied in canoe-
building. In order to increase the carrying capacity of
Canoe- the interior, when sufficient space has been
building. hollowed out, it is filled with water, into which
red-hot stones are placed, and the effect of the boiling
water and the steam is so to swell the wood that it gives
a good form to the canoe, broadening her beam, and im-
proving her outline. These dug-out canoes are made in
many forms, some extremely narrow, so narrow that it is
impossible to sit down in them, and the paddlers have to
stand all the while. Some are open from end to end, and
when they are set afloat the ends have to be stopped up
with clay in order to keep the water out. Others of them
are by an ingenious construction self-baling, so that when
water pours in, it can run out again without any trouble.
Canoes are built with single outriggers and double out-
riggers, to steady them in rough weather. Some of the
paddles are made of a single piece of wood, while others
have the flat blade inserted into the split end of a
stem.
More remarkable than the paddling canoe are the many
forms of sailing canoe to be found on the coast. These are
all rigged with huge sails, generally attached to a single
mast by lanyards of twisted grass rope and rattan. Some
of these sails are in the shape of an elipse, but the most
curious and famous are those of the lakatois, which are
found all along the south-eastern shore. Their sails are
huge mats in the shape of lobster-claws, which look ex-
tremely picturesque when a large fleet is sailing westwards
at the season when the cargoes of pottery are carried to
ports on the shores of the Gulf of Papua and exchanged
for sago, with which the fleet returns. These lakatois are
also remarkable, since each one consists of several canoes
lashed together, and a kind of deckhouse built over them
to hold the stores they have to carry. The natives are
very fearless and expert sailors, and manage with re


markable skill their seemingly unwieldy craft. Many places
are specially famous for their canoe-building, and have a
reputation throughout the whole coast.
On the Vanapa river, somewhat north of Port Moresby,
is a very interesting specimen of native engineering. The
Native river at this point is about seventy yards wide.
Bridge. About twenty feet from the edge of the stream
is a large banyan tree, and the bridge takes its start from
this tree, to which it is attached at an elevation of about
fifty feet from the river level. The bridge dips to about
fifteen feet above the water in mid stream, and rises again
to about twenty feet at the farther side. It is built on the
suspension principle, and constructed entirely of rattan
cane. The floor of the bridge consists of four of these
canes laid alongside one another. As they are not suffici-
ently long, of course, to cross the river, they are fastened
together at the ends, about two and a half feet from the
floor ; and somewhat wider apart than the floor itself stretch
two rattan canes on either side of the bridge, and about
two feet higher others are placed still wider apart.
These cane supports are woven together all the way across
by split cane worked from the floor to the upper support
through the middle one. In this way the bridge is con-
structed in a V-shape, with well protected sides of about four
and a half feet in height. At either end the rattan canes
are stretched over the trees and firmly anchored to the
ground or to trees that stand farther back than those upon
which the ends of the bridge rest. It is approached at
either end by sloping platforms.
The most of the implements used in building and car-
pentry work are, as we have said, made from stone, and
Tools and the most largely employed is green-stone. A
Weapons. jade-like stone has been found used for the
purpose in some districts, which is capable of a fine polish
and gets a good edge upon it when it is ground. Axes and
adzes are made of all sizes, but generally of a hatchet shape.
These stones are ingeniously bound by strips of rattan
to wooden handles, and some are so shaped as to allow the


tool to be used with equal effect in several different posi-
tions as need and the exigencies of the work demand.
Stones were also largely employed for heads of war clubs.
The favourite shapes of the latter were stone discs, with
sharpened edges and a hole in the centre through which the
wooden handle was thrust; and stars with six or eight
points or solid heads roughly carved with bosses in the form
df pineapples. It can easily be understood how terribly
murderous such weapons were in the hands of muscular
and agile savages. Spears and arrows are made either
of sharpened wood or of wood tipped with bone, cassowary
claws, shell-fish claws, or filed shell, and are almost always
barbed. Many of the arrows are so made that the point
comes off and is left in the wound. There is no evidence
that they are purposely poisoned, but the amount of
animal matter which is left upon them frequently causes
septic poisoning, and the wound proves fatal. Bows are
made of bamboo or wood, and the bow-string of native
twine or rattan. Sometimes twine is used at either end,
and a strip of bamboo in the centre. One weapon of war
seems to have been the exclusive invention of certain tribes
in New Guinea, the head-catcher. It consisted of a wooden
spear, surrounded at its upper end by a stiff oblong loop.
The warrior ran after his victim, threw the loop over his
head, and with a sudden jerk plunged the point of the spear
into the base of the brain. The head was then cut off by
a bamboo heading knife, and another little instrument,
specially made for the purpose, consisting of a loop of bam-
boo, to which was attached at right angles a T-shaped piece
of wood, was inserted into the mouth of the head, and the
head carried home in triumph.
New Guinean shields are of many forms, and more or
less fantastically decorated. They are generally made of
wood or bark, and are designed to ward off spears and
arrows. They are not actually strong enough to be im-
pervious to either weapon, but are so skilfully handled
and held at such an angle by the warrior against whom these
weapons gre directed, thgt the latter glance off the shield


harmlessly. They also form a picturesque accompaniment
to the dances and other ceremonials.
Associated with war and peace is the drum. This is the
New Guinean musical instrument par excellence. It is
Drums made of a hollowed-out part of the trunk of a
tree, and varies in length from about two to three
feet. They are all shaped something like an hour-glass,
generally with a handle at the thin part in the middle, so
that they can be carried horizontally, and there is gener-
ally attached to them a festoon of nutshells, which make
a very effective rattle. Over one of the ends is stretched
a piece of lizard skin. No drumsticks are employed, but
the skin is beaten by the points of the fingers. In some
PLAN OF SEDE.
SECTION.
districts, however, the edge of the drum itself is struck with
the palm of the hand, and the fingers are allowed to drop
loosely on to the drumhead, thus causing the rhythmic
sound. In certain dances, and on board the lakatois a drum
is not permitted, but the time is marked by a rude instru-
ment called a sede, formed from a section of bamboo, a
slip of which has been cut in such a way that when struck
by a piece of wood it makes a rattling sound as it springs
back into position. Other favourite instruments are the
pan-pipes, bamboo flutes, some of which have the mouth-
piece at the end, and others at the side, like our own flute.
One form of these flutes is extremely long and very diffi-
cult to sound. The players have to expend an enormous
amount of mpscular energy in the performance, and they


BULL-ROARER (FROM
JOURNAL OF ROYAL
ANTHROPOLOGICAL
INSTITUTE).
dance and twist round one another as
they play, the excitement gradually
waxing more and more furious, till the
player has finally to give in. A rude form
of Jew’s harp is also made from bamboo
and native cord, and a kind of whistle
from the coconut. In war and on other
ceremonial occasions the conchshell is
used as a trumpet.
A very curious instrument is the bull-
roarer, which in one district at least has
Bun roarer ne onoma f°P oe tic (that is,
imitative) name of burumama-
ramu. This consists of a long oblong piece
of wood sometimes elaborately carved,
which is attached at one end to a cord,
which, in turn, is fixed to a wooden
handle, and then swung rapidly round
the head until a prolonged, weird note is
formed. It is only used in special cere-
monial practices, which will be described
later.
As we should expect in the case of a
people inhabiting an island, and so many
. of whom live on the seashore,
Fishing-.
the New Guineans are admir-
able fishermen. They make their own
fishing nets of various forms, many of
which are used in the same way as our
fishing nets at home. In one case the net
is in the form of a basket, shaped like a
candle-extinguisher, about 18 inches in
diameter at the lower end, and from 3
to 5 feet long. Into this the fish are
driven. There is one extremely pretty
and interesting form of fishing, which we
may briefly describe. A net is stretched
through the water on a reef where a kind


of mullet is abundant. The fish are then driven up by
men in canoes to the point where the net is stretched. The
mullet, instead of turning back at the net or entangling
themselves in it, spring up in the air in order to swim
straight on, but men stand at intervals behind the net with
small hand nets something like a butterfly net, and catch
the mullet as they leap. In some places the fish are
trapped in ingenious snares, into which they swim, and from
which there is no exit, as the entrance is barred by cleverly
arranged spines of the sago palm. Sometimes the natives
put into the water a certain poisonous plant that stupefies
the fish, so that they are easily netted. A most ingenious
method of fishing is employed at one place on the southern
coast. To the tail of a kite is attached a ball of spider web
and the kite is flown with this ball touching the water.
As it bounds along, the gar-fish make a spring at it, and
are caught by their teeth becoming entangled in the bait.
In some places fish are shot with bows and arrows, and
very expert are the natives in harpooning the dugong, or
sea-cow, a creature not unlike a porpoise. These creatures
feed upon submarine plants, and their haunts are conse-
quently well known. The harpoon is made of heavy wood,
about 14 feet in length, and into one end is fastened a hard
wood dart with many barbs filed upon it. To the latter the
rope is attached, and the canoe carefully manipulated
until it is close upon the creature. At the proper moment
the harpooner, who has got close up to his prey, springs into
the water, and drives the dart into the animal’s back. The
dugong starts off, followed by the trailing rope. Presently
a number of the fishermen get into the water, swim after
it, and fasten a rope round its tail. When they succeed
in doing this, they manage to prevent it rising for breath,
and so finally kill it. In some places the dugong is har-
pooned from a platform erected on the coral reef. In
fishing for turtle, some of the islanders have discovered a
valuable ally in the sucker-fish, which is in the habit of
attaching itself to the shells of turtles. One of these
fishes is caught, and a string passed through its tail and


then it is let off in the water. When it sights a turtle it
fastens upon it, and if the turtle is sufficiently small, the
fishermen can pull it in by the string attached to the
sucker-fish. If not, a diver springs into the water, follows
the cord, and secures the prize. There are tribes who
carefully cure the fish they catch, and barter them for
other articles of food.
The main object of sport ashore is the wild pig, and
the New Guineans have a rather clever way of capturing
him alive, which demands, however, much courage and
dexterity. An oval frame is formed of about two feet
across the longer diameter. A network of strong cord
is stretched across this frame, and the whole apparatus
is firmly held between the hunter’s knees. When the
boar is driven towards him, he dashes this with all his
force in the creature’s face, and throws it over on its
back, when _it is easily captured by his fellow hunts-
men.
The natives have, of course, no coinage, but when actual
equivalent barter is not the method employed, hatchets,
Native shells, necklets, and feather ornaments are
Money. used as we should use coin. In Stidest Island,
a string about a yard long consisting of red native beads
with shell ornaments attached is reckoned of sufficient
value to purchase a canoe, while the other most valuable
article of currency is the stone from which axes are
made.
The preparation of sago is the occupation of a very
large section of New Guinean natives. The tree is cut
down whole, and from this the fibre is chopped with wooden
axes, and washed in rough troughs, the resulting starchy
matter being dried and finally done up in packages, or
packed in clay pots. It does not keep well, owing to the
imperfect way in which it is prepared, but the natives
do not seem to object to the partial fermentation which
takes place. The sago is cooked in a variety of ways,
sometimes mixed with coconut and roasted in rolls
wrapped in palm-leaf; sometimes boiled, either alone


or mixed with arrowroot or various vegetables. From
the fibre of the pandanus, string of all kinds is manu-
factured, the natives making it very cleverly by holding
the fibres on their great toes, and twisting them against
THREE STRING FIGURES (COPIED FROM JAYNE’S “STRING FIGURES,”)
MADE BY NATIVES OF THE TORRES STRAITS.
1. Head hunters, a moving figure. 2. A three-pronged fish-spear.
3. A sea-snake, also a moving figure.
the thigh. Very good cord of various sorts is produced,
and from the fibre excellent nets are made.


One use to which this native string is put brings us
naturally to the subject of native amusements. Let a
Amusements ew Guinean native have about two yards of
' string, and knot the two ends together, and
he has hours of endless amusement before him. Our boys
NEW GUINEA GIRL, WITH STRING FIGURE ON HER HANDS
(FROM PHOTO BY DR. A. C. HADDON).
and girls are familiar with the “cat’s cradle,” but that
is simplicity itself compared with the multitude of string
figures that a native is able to evolve from this simple ap-
paratus. Some of them, like our own cat’s cradle, require
two people to form them, but most can be perfectly
well made by one pair of hands. By this means very
clever reproductions of natural objects are produced,


such as the setting sun, the dugong, a canoe, a fish
spear, and sometimes the interest of movement is added
to the figures, ' as in the case of a sea-snake which
can be made to wriggle in quite a natural manner, and
two head hunters who can struggle on the string till one
remains victor.
Some of the more intricate figures require the teeth and
feet, even, of two performers to be brought "into play. It
has been said that the games of the New Guinean children
are among the prettiest in the world. There are, of course,
the natural evolutions of children on the beach and on
the water, where very early the children become most
expert swimmers. Some games seem to be universal
all the world over, such as leap-frog, hopping, jumping,
and skipping. Dr. Haddon describes several games that
he has seen in different parts of the country. In one,
two rows of boys face one another, each grasping the
arm of his neighbour with one hand, while with the other
he clasps his own arm. A platform of arms is thus
formed, and a little fellow is placed upon it and set to
run forward along the road thus made. Whenever he
removes his feet from the arms of the first pair of boys,
these rush forward and place themselves in front of the
last pair, and so the continuous platform is kept up until
the runner tumbles off. Many varieties of singing games
are used, more or less like the similar games in our own
villages. The simplest to describe is where a number
of boys stand in a circle, each catching hold of his neigh-
bour’s wrists, while one stands in the centre with folded
arms. The encircling boys sing a verse that serves as
a challenge, and the boy in the centre makes a rush to
break through the ring, and when he succeeds the game
is over, and some one else takes his place. Toys are made
from strips of palm-leaves, one of which when whirled
round makes a noise like a grasshopper. Puzzles and
little whirligigs, such as are sold in our own streets, are
also made from the palm-leaf. Some kinds of shells are
used in the same way in which we spin the teetotum. In


the Murray Islands top-spinning is a very favourite amuse-
ment of the men.
Of all New Guinean amusements, perhaps the dance
stands foremost. In heathen society it has almost always
Dances some religious significance, and is associated
with great festivals or important crises in the
life of the individual or of the society. The dancers are
got up with as much care as are the warriors, and there
are often attached to ankles and wrists rattles of nut-
shells. Some of the so-called dances are very curious,
for they consist simply of rhythmic movement of the
body, the feet never being lifted from the ground. But
in other cases the muscular energy displayed is very
vigorous indeed, and the complexity of the figures so
intricate as to baffle the descriptive power of those who
have witnessed them. Dr. Haddon describes one inter-
esting dance that he saw performed by girls at Babaka
and Hood Bay. “ The girls,” he says, “ walked in a
somewhat stately manner, and gracefully swung a cord
of about three feet in length, to which a small netted
bag was attached ; the other end of the cord was attached
to the waist-belt of the petticoat at the back. They
swung it with the right hand, causing it to make a graceful
sweep behind the back, round to the left side, where it
was caught by the left hand. During this manoeuvre
the whole body made a half turn. The action was then
repeated with the left hand, the tassle being caught with
the right hand. During the dance some women beat
the drums.” It appears that in most cases there is a
master of ceremonies, who controls the dancing and gives
the signals to the drummers to indicate when the various
figures are finished. The drummers sit while they per-
form, though in certain places every male dancer has
a drum which he does not play upon, but flourishes about
during the dance. There are war dances, ceremonial
dances, as the one held on the occasion of the sailing of
the lakatoi fleets, and there appear also to be dances of
pure pleasure and exercise. One curious dance is the


death dance, in which the performers mimic the attitudes
of persons recently deceased, and the women, who are the
onlookers, recognise with tears and sorrow this imitation
of their friends. At the latter dance one person takes
the place of a fool, and plays pranks in the middle of it,
a curious recognition on the part of these savages of the
close connection between laughter and tears. In other
dances the performers imitate the action of certain animals,
such as crabs and lizards, and in still other cases the
occupations of real life are illustrated in the movements
of the figures.
Further amusements are those universally common
to mankind, the telling of tales round the fire, and the
Folk tales sdigiug of popular songs. Many of the New
Guinean tales are of great beauty, and some
of their legends full of quaint humour. One of these
tales given in Mr. Romilly’s book, From my Verandah in
New Guinea, and described by Mr. Andrew Lang, as “ the
most curious, characteristic, and poetical ” of the New
Guinean myths, may be given briefly as a specimen of the
folk-tales, and also because it shows how the savage mind
accounts for natural phenomena.
A man was one day digging in his garden, and was
tempted to go on deeper than the ordinary surface digging
. . until, after many weeks, he came upon a bright
“The Moon” „ , . ° .
silvery object which he lifted up in his hand,
and was surprised to find that as he did so it became rapidly
larger, though no heavier. He took it down to the sea
and washed it thoroughly, and found that with ever-
increasing rapidity it grew in size, and became so light
that he could no longer hold it, and had he not let go,
it would have carried him up into the air. He did lose
hold, and it floated off into the sky and became surrounded
with a brilliant cloud. Out of the cloud came a voice
that upbraided him for disturbing her before the time,
and the voice told him that it was really a female form
he had discovered, only that she should have been allowed
to remain in her hiding-place for a much longer time,
4


since she was the daughter of the earth, and destined
to be a perpetual illumination for the world. Since,
however, she had been dug up too soon, she could never
fulfil her proper destiny. The voice and the appearance
then vanished, and the young man determined to set
out in search of her, and make her his wife. After long
wanderings he found one day on the brink of a river
a woman’s grass skirt, and felt certain it belonged to
her of whom he was in search. He sat down upon it,
and waited till the owner came to claim it. She recognised
him, and told him that she could never marry him, because
she was betrothed to the sun. In any case, since he had
touched her dress, he would only have two days to live.
Eventually he persuaded her to marry him for the day
only. On the next morning he was compelled to return
to his native village, make a great feast, tell his adventures
to the people, and at sunset lay down to die. The sun
and moon were married, but domestic squabbles began
from the first day of their married life, because the moon
always showed her greatest beauty in her husband’s ab-
sence, and he grew very jealous. The greatest cause of
the quarrel was that each month she appeared in her
greatest splendour just when her husband had gone to
bed. They came to an agreement that for the sake of
appearances they would show themselves together for
a few days each month, and for the rest of their lives
each one should go their own way.
As an example of a humorous story may be given the
legend that accounts for the discovery of the coconut.
The coconut A native once went into the forest to hunt
Found. pigs, and died there. Years afterwards an-
other native followed the same track and found a grove
of coconuts, a plant he had never seen before. He picked
up one of the nuts that had fallen to the ground, and,
breaking the husk open, discovered the nut within, upon
one end of which was the clear impression of a human
face. The hunter decided that this must be the head
of his long-lost comrade. He took two of the nuts home


with him, and they were broken open, and the cool milk
and lovely white kernel tempted them to eat. But they
were afraid. A sudden idea occurred to them, however,
that the oldest lady in the village might try the experiment.
It would not matter much if she did die a little sooner,
and, if she didn’t, a great addition would be made to
.the resources of their larder. She took the nut, and re-
tired within her own house. In the morning the young
hunter eagerly went to discover the old lady’s fate. He
found her lying quietly by the hearth, apparently dead.
He came down sorrowfully, and took some of his friends
with him to dig her grave below her house. This roused the
old lady, who had only been sound asleep, and she appeared
on the platform above, with a request for more of the new
food. She had found it more delicious than anything
she had ever tasted, and had anointed herself with the
oil, so that she had needed no fire. Since then the coconut
has been a stock article in the New Guinean larder.
References have been made several times to the diffi-
culties that exist owing to the many different languages
Language s P°ken in New Guinea. Excellent illustrations
of their great divergencies can be found in
the Government Report on British New Guinea for 1890,
pp. 117-67. In the report Dr. Lawes compares a long
list of words in seven dialects, and one or two examples
may show us how many forms a word assumes, and how
in some cases there appears to be no resemblance between
the languages at all. In the case of the coconut, five
dialects agree in naming it niu, but the names in the other
two are kilokilo and da respectively. Mauri represents
life in all the seven, with the very slight difference that
one pronounces it maguri, and another mukuri. In the
case of the men’s girdle, two call it sihi, one sivi, one si,
two seem to drop the first letter altogether, and the words
appear as ibi and ivi, but the seventh has the much longer
form of ihavuri. It is interesting to examine the various
ways in which the numerals are used. Some tribes do
not seem to have any numeral beyond two, except the


equivalent of ten, and all other numbers are clumsily
constructed from the combination of these three. For
example, one is nao, two netawa, nine is, therefore, netawa
netawa netawa netawa nao. In other tribes, separate
words exist for the numbers from one up to five, obviously
arising from the practice of counting on the fingers. After
the hands are exhausted, then the feet are taken, and to
express twenty, the terms employed would mean “one
man dead.” It is no wonder that among such a babel of
languages pidgin English is resorted to with a certain
amount of joy, though its result in the case of preaching
must often be startling, and even seem irreverent to un-
accustomed ears, as in the case of the preacher of whom
Dr. Wardlaw Thompson tells, who began a sermon as
follows: “You know one fellow, Jesus Christ. You
stick to Him. He good chap.”


CHAPTER IV
THE PEOPLE —THEIR SOCIAL LIFE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS,
AND PRACTICES
The New Guineans seem to be very strong individualists.
Property belongs not to the village or tribe, but to the
personal proprietor. Land, trees, houses, canoes, animals,
all pass by regular inheritance from hand to hand. Unused
land only is common property, but when once the native
has worked any part of it, it becomes his own possession.
There may be occasional combinations for a definite piece
of work, but when it is accomplished the men return to
their own regular routine.
In certain districts, however, chiefs do exist, and are
possessed of a very real power. While individual initiative
Chiefs ' s a l wa y s strong, the chief will have the casting
vote in matters of general policy and in the
conduct of tribal affairs. In a few places the chief is so
important a person that no member of the tribe will pass
him in an upright position, but always with the head
inclined, and sometimes turned away from the great man.
As the outcome of these practices, there is scarcely any-
thing approaching to chieftainship in the whole country.
Sometimes a man rises to the position of leader for a
special war, but when it is over he reverts to his position
as a private citizen. Beyond the circle of the family, in
which usually a head is recognised, there are very few
districts in which anything like a ruler is found. This has
seriously increased the difficulty of government by English
officers, but in time, perhaps, a natural order may evolve
that will produce a more stable and organised state of


society. One blessing that attaches to the older practice is
that there is scarcely anything that corresponds to slavery.
The beginning of manhood is marked for the New
Guinean lad in many districts by ceremonies that are
initiation more or less elaborate in character. These
Ceremonies, customs vary, of course, from district to district,
but in general the description that is presently to' be given
is sufficiently accurate to cover the main features of the
ceremonial. These initiation practices are not without
their great effect upon the general morality and efficiency of
the tribe. We learn, for instance, that boys not bom in
recognised wedlock are not permitted to go through the
initiation ceremonies, an injunction which tends to give a
strong sanction to marriage. Again, the lessons that the
boys are taught by the older men of the tribe are in the
main designed to produce a feeling of intense loyalty to
tribal institutions, and to further careful attention to the
highest interests of the community. The most prominent
feature of the initiation is the isolation from all the women
and children of the tribe of those who are to be initiated. A
special house is erected near the village. In this the boys
have for a shorter or longer period to take up their residence.
It is carefully protected by stockades or other arrangements,
so that no prying eyes can see them. Food is brought by
the older women, but it must be left in some place whence
the lads can fetch it without being seen. In some districts
each of the youths has to make a drum, which occupation
will take him four or five weeks to accomplish. The
process is begun at the advent of the new moon. For days
they are not allowed to leave the precincts of the house.
When at last such permission is given them, they can, only
for a time, walk abroad so protected by an elaborate cover-
ing of palm-leaves that no part of their body is visible,
save their feet. Certain articles of diet, frequently fish,
are for the time being forbidden them. They are told that
should they eat it they would be certain to be overtaken
with some dread disease. All the while they are instructed
by the older men of the tribe and some by the magicians or


sorcerers, in certain practices of magic and in the reasons
for all tribal practices. It is impressed upon them with
great earnestness that their first duty at all times is to the
tribe, and it is thought that owing to the training then
received, such a practice as the slaying of twin children is
due. The boys would be impressed with the idea that it
would be likely more difficult for a woman to rear two
A PAPUAN GREETING.
healthy children than one, and that, therefore, the sacrifice
of these lives makes in the end for the efficiency of the
tribe as a whole. When the stricter part of the isolation
is over, the boys are allowed to walk abroad, and even to
enter the village, but only under the strict supervision of
their superiors. During this period they are trained in
the arts of war, and in the proper temper of the warrior.
In many ways their courage is tested, both physically and
morally, for the sorcerers make many efforts to play upon


their superstitious fears, and endeavour to render them
to some extent superior to such womanish and childish
terrors. Amongst other things, they are instructed in
the mystery of the bull-roarer, and are taught that the
instrument must never be described to any woman. There
are a few districts in which this rule is not strictly enforced.
The women must be allowed to believe that the noise made
by it is the voice of a spirit, and is not produced by any
human agency. The close of the initiation ceremony is
generally marked by a feast, and then the boy enters upon
the duties and privileges of manhood. He can marry,
build his own house, or have his chamber in the communal
house, in accordance with the practice of his district, and
set about the cultivation of his own plot of land. For the
future his work lies in hunting and fighting, and various
outdoor amusements, while his wife looks after the cooking,
the fetching of wood and water, the care of the children,
and the general culture of the croft. If he is a very suc-
cessful man, he may marry two or three wives, for the more
women he has about the household, the less he has to do
himself, the more land he can bring under cultivation, and,
therefore, the richer he becomes. Owing to these practices,
daughters are regarded as valuable properties, and even
daughters-in-law are a great aid in the father-in-law’s
household. In some districts the girls also undergo certain
ceremonies when on the threshold of womanhood.
When disease comes there is not much help in native
medicine. Any sickness is attributed to evil spirits, and
while charms and amulets are regarded as preventives of
disease, the mediation of the sorcerer is almost the only
known means of cure. Much noise and futile ceremonies
constitute the supposed methods of cure. But if nature is
not able to effect one, there is little help for the sufferer.
The practices of burial are in all cases primitive, and in
many instances the methods of the disposal of the dead
Burial are l° at hsome. Occasionally they are left to
decay in the full view of the inhabitants of the
village. Sometimes the bodies are laid on high platforms,


specially erected for the purpose; sometimes they are
hung up on the rafters of the house, and allowed to dry
there ; sometimes they are buried underneath the dwelling,
and in certain districts common graves are built, surrounded
by rude walls and covered with a thatch roof, and there the
bodies rest for a time until eventually the bones are disin-
terred, scraped, and carried to a ledge on the cliff by the
sea shore, where they are stored in great -quantities. A
man’s bows and arrows or other weapons are sometimes
stuck at the head of the grave, and occasionally a woman’s
grass skirt is hung in the same position.
For a period of days, which varies with different districts,
food and fire are laid by the grave, the idea being that the
Spirits spirit comes up occasionally, and must find what
he requires ready for him. At the expiry of
the period it is supposed the spirit finally departs, unless
anything subsequently annoys him and brings him back
again. During these days the practices of mourning that
have been already described are carried out. In some
parts, in addition to blackening herself, the widow inflicts
severe cuts on face and body, and is compelled to sleep on
the grave of her husband for several weeks, unless, per-
chance, she has another offer of marriage in the meantime,
when, if she accepts it, one of her female relatives must
take her place. A widow owns nothing that belonged to
her husband, and, consequently, cannot sell any part of it
without the consent of the male relatives, but she has the
use of his property so long as she remains unmarried. It
is no uncommon accompaniment of mourning ceremonies,
as also in some places of the rejoicings at a birth or a
wedding, to cut down coconut trees, and sometimes to
plant new ones. In some districts the memory of the
deceased is honoured by his relatives taking his name and
attaching it to their own by a prefix that denotes the
relationship. This belief in the movement of the spirits
is also the New Guinean’s explanation of dreams. A
dream is caused by the spirit taking a short excursion,
only then he comes back to his dwelling-place, whereas at
death he goes out of the body and cannot return.


There does not appear to be anything in the belief of the
New Guinean corresponding to what is properly termed
idol-worship. Many figures exist, and are found in the
houses, particularly the ceremonial houses, but they seem
rather to partake of the nature of charms, in which, or in
connection with which, good or evil spirits are supposed
to dwell. Forms of imprecation are uttered to them or
in their presence, with the idea that they will be able to
bring misfortune upon the enemies of the man who utters
the formulas, or, on the other hand, to bring good luck to
those who propitiate them. Some of these objects are
rudely carved effigies of the human body, and others of fish
and different animals, and are supposed to have the special
quality of insuring good crops or good fishing as the case
may be. In certain places these figures are painted on
the warriors, perhaps to insure good luck in battle, but
also probably for another reason, namely, that they con-
stitute a man’s totem.
This brings us to the extremely difficult subject of
totemism, which is as yet not thoroughly understood,
„ „ , and remains the subject of much discussion.
Totemism. 1 .
Its general idea, however, is that an individual
or a community is associated with a particular natural
object, say a coconut palm, a cassowary, a crab, or a bam-
boo. In such a case, if it is an edible object, a taboo will
exist upon it for the individual or community, and it will
never be eaten by them. Further, if a man meets another
of the same totem in battle, he will not slay him. A man
may not marry women of the same totem as his own.
The child generally inherits his father’s totem, and the
wife respects that of her husband. Rough drawings of
these totem signs are found on trees and other objects,
and sometimes very much more elaborate constructions
appear to have a similar origin. Mr. Riley describes a
canoe 45 feet in length which was recently discovered
on the Fly river, and the whole of it regarded as a sacred
object. It was elaborately carved, there being a figure-
head of a woman with eyes made from the shell of mother


of-pearl, while the cheeks were painted red. Behind the
figure-head was carved the body of a crocodile. Amid-
ships were figures of pigs and fish, and in the stern a cocka-
too. All these were beautifully executed, and all formed
from one piece of wood. Near by lay the carved figure
of a woman, who was supposed to be the steerswoman.
The canoe took five months to make, and all the while a
taboo was put upon the coconut, nor was any woman
or child allowed to come near. When it was completed,
the whole tribe was gathered together, the taboo solemnly
taken off, a coconut cut, the milk drunk, and the kernel
divided among the people. The women were allowed
to see the finished work of art, and a dance followed.
It is difficult to get at the ideas of the people about any
divine being, but there does seem to be a fairly general
Future Life belief in a great spirit. By some of the natives
he seems to be identified with the sun, for when
darkness comes he is said to go underneath the earth, and
wander along a tunnel, whence he emerges in the morning.
They have a belief that the spirits of men go to some far-
off land, whither the way is difficult and dangerous, ac-
cording to some along the back of the sea-serpent, but once
there, the life is joyous and happy. The sorcerers are
supposed to have intercourse with spirits, both good and
evil. In Mr. Holmes’s notes on the Elema tribe, he tells
us that the spirits are classified in the following way.
First, of those killed in battle; second, of those who die
a natural death; third, of those who die violent deaths not
in battle, and fourth, of those who die by crocodiles or
snakes. The fates of these spirits are to some extent
different. Further, the same people distinguish between
spirits that are gods and spirits that are not gods, and they
have a distinct conception of a supreme spirit called
Harisu, who controls all the spirits that work for the welfare
of men, while an opposing deity controls all malignant
spirits. In other forms of their beliefs, this tribe at
least seems to have a more or less formulated theory, of
divinities.


Amongst the firm beliefs of the New Guinean, as of
many primitive peoples, is that in sympathetic magic.
Sympathetic It reveals itself in many curious forms, and
Magic. accounts for the strangeness of some of the
ornaments worn on the person or used to decorate the
house. There is little doubt that it may lie at the basis
of cannibalism itself, since the desire of possessing the
bravery of the enemy leads to the practice of eating him
in order to secure that gift. Sometimes special parts of
the body were supposed to possess exceptional virtue; for
example, the muscle behind the ear was given to lads to
eat in order to make them strong. When the practice was
not carried so far as actual cannibalism, we see the same
idea present in practices that are not so revolting, though
very unpleasant to us. The young warriors will eat the
scrapings from the finger nails of the older warriors, or
even the exudations from their body for the purpose
of enabling them to be partners in their bravery. What
is termed “ homoeopathic magic ” is another form of the
same thing. Dr. Haddon tells of a rain-maker in the
Torres Straits who advised one of his clients to go and
put additional thatch on his house, as well as on that of
the rain-maker. This was to keep out the rain whose
coming he prophesied. Another practice common in New
Guinea is the placing of stones shaped like yams in the
gardens, in order that the yam crop may be plentiful.
One further point may be noted of a different character,
that is, the fear of pronouncing a personal name. One
example of it is given in Chalmers’s Life, p. 137, when the
native Aruadaera, elsewhere referred to in this book, came
up to Mrs. Chalmers’s house, and the only response she
could get to the question, “ Who are you ? ” was “ I,”
and not until some one recognised the voice and said, “ Is
it you, Aruadaera ? ” did he reply, “It is.” There is no
doubt that the power of the name is felt as much as in the
old Hebrew days, and the fear of uttering it is lest the.owner
should come under the evil spell of the person who is
master of his name, and so presumably of himself.


CHAPTER V
MISSIONS —THE DAYS OF THE PIONEERS
As we have already seen, it is possible that the physical
origin of New Guinea arose from its separation at some
Beginning of remote period from the continent of Australia,
Mission. an( i that the link between the two now consists
of the group of islands lying in the Torres Straits. It is
intensely interesting to find that from these islands also
the news of the Gospel reached New Guinea. The London
Missionary Society had been at work for fully three-fourths
of a century in the islands of the Pacific, and the work had
been crowned with marvellous success, as many of the
islanders proved themselves to be not only excellent Chris-
tians, but remarkably successful missionaries. They had
been the main agents in spreading the Gospel from group to
group, but they knew that there lay certain islands to the
west of them which had not yet received the message, and
most important was the island of New Guinea, of which
terrible tales were told about the extreme barbarity of
the people, their terrible cannibalism, and their excessive
ferocity. Meanwhile, the home authorities had been
considering the question of the extension of their mission
in the South Seas, and in the year 1871 they decided to
establish a mission in New Guinea. When the news of
this advance movement reached the South Sea Islanders
it found them assembled in their annual missionary meet-
ings, and the excitement was tremendous. The people
were all enthusiastic to go as pioneer missionaries, and
the story of the. way in which they received the challenge
reminds us of the old tale of Pizarro and his Spanish troops


in South America, or of Garibaldi and his volunteers in
the struggle for Italian freedom. Both these leaders,
it will be remembered, in addressing their troops on the
eve of the great and perilous undertakings that lay before
them, did not withhold a clear statement and definite
warning as to the risks that were to be run. But in both
cases also there was no shrinking on the part of their
followers from the enterprises to which they were sum-
moned.
The first English missionary selected to lead the enter-
prise was the Rev. S. Macfarlane, of Lifu. Associated
First with him was his older colleague, Mr. Murray,
Leaders. and eight native teachers, with their families.
The point selected as the first landing place by the pioneers
was Darnley Island, which lies south of the Gulf of Papua.
Not far off lay Murray Island, and to this also the thoughts
of the missionaries were directed. It was during these wait-
ing days that the famous colloquy took place between one
of the South Sea teachers and a native of Darnley Island.
“ There are alligators on Murray Island,” said the native,
“ and snakes and centipedes.” “ Hold,” said the teacher,
“ are there nun there ? ” “ Oh, yes,” was the response.
“ There are men, of course, but they are such dreadful
savages that it is no use your thinking of living among
them.” “ That will do,” said his interrogator, “ whom-
ever there are men, missionaries are bound to go.” This
brave-spirited pioneer, by name Tepeso, was one of the
first to lay down his life for the people of New Guinea,
for he and his wife and child soon fell victims to the
dreaded fever. One of the teachers was left in Darnley
Island, and the others proceeded to found stations on
two islands nearer the coast of New Guinea. The dangers
to which they were exposed were very great, but their
Christian heroism triumphed over them, though not the
least of their trials was the home-sickness, which causes
very terrible suffering to these simple-hearted people.
The next contingent of native helpers came from
the Islands of Samoa, Rarotonga, and Niue. Chalmers


has told the story of their departure with character-
istic fervour and enthusiasm. “ Preparations were at
Native once begun,” he wrote, “ to get our first con-
Missionaries. tingent away. At one early morning meeting
the chapel was crowded, and I proposed that we should
pray that God would help us to select the best men for
the very important undertaking. At the meeting several
old men stood up and said ‘Take us all. -If we cannot
learn the language to speak for Jesus, we can live for Him,
and help the younger men in station work.’ The en-
thusiasm was intense. Five men and their wives were
selected, and from all the islands we had numerous offers
of service. The churches and congregations were every-
where thrilled. The John Williams arrived and re-
mained a few days. Then the parting came, a never-to-be-
forgotten day. One of the five, Ruatoka, was sent with
fear and trembling, being apparently in bad health and
very weak, and I was strongly urged not to send him.
He much wished to go, and, thinking he could bear it,
I agreed. At Samoa they were joined by Piri and his
wife, so that they were now six.” Of the mission band,
the man who was so weak that Chalmers hesitated to send
him, outlived his famous leader.
But in after years in New Guinea the two of them made
a magnificent partnership in the work of spreading the
Ruatoka’s Gospel, and when Chalmers fell beneath the
Heroism. clubs of his murderers at Goaribari, and the
news reached Rua, he exclaimed (and, be it remembered,
he was now an old man who had borne the burden and
heat of the day in New Guinea for twenty years) “ Hear
my wish. It is a great wish. The remainder of my
strength I would spend in the place where Tamate and
Mr. Tomkins were killed. In that village I would live.
In that place where they killed men, Jesus Christ’s name
and His word I would teach to the people, that they may
become Jesus’ children. My wish is just this.”
The veteran missionary, Mr. Murray, took up his abode
at Cape York, in the extreme north of Queensland, within


eighty miles of the New Guinea coast, and from that point
he was enabled to make various visits of superintendence
to the new mission, and to settle some of the Samoan
teachers at various points on the mainland, and on an
island in the mouth of the Fly river. This latter island
was the scene of the first martyrdom, which may probably
have been caused by undue and unwise enthusiasm on
the part of the native teachers, who did not allow sufficiently
for the absolute ignorance of the unenlightened savages.
The places first chosen as stations proved extremely un-
healthy, and several of the early teachers succumbed to
the conditions of the climate.
At Port Moresby a more healthy spot was found, and that
became the chief centre of the New Guinea mission. To that
place the Rev. W. G. Lawes (later Dr. Lawes,
Lawes. A
who died in August 1907) was appointed,
and for fully thirty years he carried on magnificent service
in the land of his adoption. The year 1875, when he
settled there, may be taken as a landmark in the history
of the New Guinea mission, since from that time onwards
it has been under direct European control, and the number
of European missionaries has been gradually, but steadily,
increased.
For years at Rarotonga Chalmers had been in the
habit of conducting prayer-meetings at which he and his
_ native Christians interceded earnestly for an
TJI.TTI3IA '
opening of mission work in New Guinea, and,
when that opening was made, for the workers in that
land. And now their prayers were to be answered in a
way they had little dreamed, for Chalmers himself and
several of his native friends were appointed in 1877 to
the mission. From the moment that Chalmers set foot
on the island he began his marvellous career of exploration
and pioneer work. From Port Moresby he and Macfarlane
set out on a great tour eastwards along the coast. It is
difficult to know whether to admire most his own in-
domitable courage or the quiet heroism of his wife, who
accompanied him in all this and many another expedition,


being daily exposed to the erratic moods of the untutored
savages, whose suspicions were so easily aroused, ancl
whose anger or terror might so soon end in murder. From
THE LATE REV. W. G. LAWES, D.D.
the first Tamate seemed to bear a charmed life, his coolness
and resource being marvellous. It was not only Christian
courage that carried him through all the dangers to which
he and his fellow travellers were exposed, but the great
gift of tact and consecrated common sense, which made
5


him a perfect genius in dealing with the natives. He went
everywhere unarmed, and many are the thrilling stories
which can be read in his life of how time and again he
marched quietly through the bush, or down to the sea-
shore, with the natives howling round him and flourishing
their clubs. But something in his general bearing and
easy confidence restrained them from touching him. To
all of these people Chalmers and his friends came as the
first white skins they had ever seen, and he tells us that
many times those cannibals eyed him with a very un-
comfortable feeling of too intense interest, in the evident
idea that he would make an excellent meal. He was often
told how excellent a thing human flesh was to eat, and
one of the conversations held with an old man, even long
after he had become a Christian, Chalmers reports as
follows. He had started the conversation by saying,
“Is man good to eat ? ” And the native replied, “You
savee bulamakau ?” 1 “Yes.” “ Well, no good. You
savee pig ? ” “ Yes.” “ Well, no good. You savee
sheep ? ” “ Yes.” “ Well, no good. Man he too much
good,” and the old fellow smacked his lips. Chalmers
gives us an interesting narrative of the conversion of
the first New Guinean native to be baptized. His name
was Aruadaera, and the agent in his conversion was Rua’s
wife. She had been speaking one Sunday about the work
of the Spirit of God in the heart of men. At night she
was aroused by a sound at the door, and discovered it was
one of her hearers. All were in bed, and she urged him
to come back in the morning, but on his declaring that
he could not wait, she let him in, when he spoke as follows :
“ I do not know what it is, but I am afraid, and I think it
must be this Spirit you spoke of working in my heart.
I am afraid to lie down lest I should die, for I know I am
bad.” Before long he became a genuine Christian, and
later a deacon in the Port Moresby Church.
Chalmers took up his quarters first on the little island
of Suau, and among the natives at that place the influence
i This is pidgin English for “beef,” probably "bull and a cow.’’


of himself and his wife soon made a very great difference.
The trust reposed in them deepened and
SU3iU
strengthened the best elements of their nature.
When he was absent on long expeditions, and left Mrs.
REV. J. CHALMERS (TAMALE).
Chalmers alone with them, they realised that nobody who
meant them anything but good would ever commit to them
such a trust.
In the meantime the little sailing ship Ellengowan,
the gift of Miss Baxter, had proved a great help to the
mission, and in 1878 Chalmers undertook long journeys


in her. In the same year he began the work of translation,
making a commencement with the gospel of Mark. His
explorations were not confined to the coast, but he pushed
inland in various directions, and everywhere was on the
outlook for suitable spots in which to establish missions..
He was the strong supporter all through of the policy of
managing the New Guinea mission from New Guinea
itself, and not from the islands of the Torres Straits, as
some of his colleagues advocated.
A sad event marked the year 1881, when the natives
at Kalo in Hood Bay massacred all the teachers and their
Kaio families, to the number of twelve persons.
Massacre. Chalmers was chosen by the Government
officials to accompany the punitive party, and there is
no doubt that his presence did much to avoid bloodshed,
and to bring about a good feeling between the natives
and the foreigners.
In all Chalmers’s expeditions he never failed to keep
in view the main object of his presence in the country.
Tamateasa While he did most serviceable work as an
pioneer. explorer, and had, indeed, by the end of 1880
visited the whole of the coast line of South-East New
Guinea, and made several inland excursions, he had every-
where gone with the same idea, namely, to find the most
suitable places in which to settle native teachers and
form centres of missionary influence. In all this work,
though he was perfectly fearless, it is not to be thought
that he was unduly rash, for no better counsel could
be given to any pioneer than that which Chalmers himself
gives. “ For the first visit,” he says, “ trade a little,
cause no excitement, and get away after a very short
stay.” He was himself of opinion that on more than
one occasion when teachers were put to death it was
owing to the fact that they had not been provided with
sufficient money wherewith to provide the people with
presents valuable enough to prove to them the good
intentions of their visitors. Witness to his enormous
influence is readily given by Government authorities. One


of those who visited the country in 1885 writes : “If I
went to the natives and said, ‘ Who is the king ? ’ ‘ Ta-
mate,’ was the reply. If I said to them ‘ Who is like
a father to you ? ’ they would say ‘ Tamate.’ If I said
‘ What is Maino ? ’ (that is “ peace ”), they would say
‘ Tamate.’ Was it not Tamate who turned their quarrels
into peace ? Had not Tamate been known, when two
opposing tribes were approaching, to go and take the
two hostile chiefs like two turbulent children, and insist
upon their being friends, and not fighting ? ”
One of the most interesting of his companions during
many of these excursions was the native woman whose
„ own name was Kena, but who was known
to all the mission as “ Granny.” She had
been one of the first to welcome the missionaries on their
landing in 1872, and had persuaded them to go to her
native village of Hannabada, which became known later
as Port Moresby. When she was left a widow she became
servant to Mrs. Lawes, and proved invaluable, not only
to the household of her protectors, but as’ an interpreter
among strange tribes. She was a magnificent traveller,
and not only accompanied the exploring parties every-
where, but willingly carried a heavy load of cooking utensils
and other things besides. On one occasion when the
party was all thrown into the river from a somewhat crazy
craft, “ Granny,” who was an excellent swimmer, seemed
to be making very slow progress. It was found when she
did reach the shore that she had brought with her a
whole paraphernalia of pots and pans, which she would
not for any consideration let go. She was a great supporter
of the mission till her death, and well known to all the
visitors at-the Lawes’ house.
ChalmersJhad meanwhile moved his headquarters from
Suau to Port Moresby, and there, on the opening days of
First 1881, a new church was opened, and the first
Baptisms. New Guinean converts baptized. Of course,
in such a mission as that converts in New Guinea pioneering
can never be given up for many years to come, and in every


district freshly opened to missionary influence the workers
are to some extent pioneers. But when we reach the stage
of a settled mission station, with its native church and
permanent building, we have passed the first stage of a
mission’s activity, and can see how the work progresses—
from the evangelisation of scattered villages, and occasional
visits to groups of people, to the more permanent, if slower
and less exciting, service of building up Christian character,
teaching the little children the elements of knowledge,
and by the daily life of the Christian family setting before
the natives that example of consistent Christian disciple-
ship which has a deeper influence upon them than any
other method of work. We must turn, therefore, in the
next place to a general description of missionary difficulties
and achievements in the quarter of a century that has
followed those early days, and try to realise what kind
of harvest the field most lately sown has produced.


CHAPTER VI
MISSIONS —THEIR LIGHT AND SHADE
The teaching to which we referred at the close of the last
chapter was the work to which Dr. Lawes gave himself
New Guinean with tremendous enthusiasm from the very
Teachers. beginning, but at the time we have now reached
in the history of the mission the training of native evan-
gelists was carried on in Murray Island by Dr. Macfarlane,
and from that institution the first teachers were sent in
1883 to tribes on the Fly river. They were, of course,
not New Guinean natives, but Torres Straits islanders.
Very soon afterwards, however, from Port Moresby itself
evangelists who had been trained there were given the
task of preaching the Gospel to their own people, and
ever since that time the supply of New Guinean native
preachers has never failed, and the secret of final success
in the work of that country, as in all countries, must lie
with the native preacher. Chalmers and his friends saw
the great importance of general education, and he himself
spoke wise words concerning it in his official report of 1884.
“ Only by a thorough system of education,” he writes,
“ will they ever rise above their superstitions, and shake
off for ever the fear of sorcerers and sorceresses. Earnestly
taken in hand, and gradually educated, there is nothing
to prevent the New Guinean natives so rising in the scale
of civilisation as to become an honour to us as a nation,
and to rise to a worthy national life.” When the British
annexation of New Guinea took place, both Chalmers and
Lawes rendered conspicuous service to the Government,
and Chalmers’s knowledge of the peoples rendered his


presence practically indispensable to those who had to
hoist the flag at various points on the coast. In 1888
the concluding act of this annexation took place, with the
appointment of Sir William Macgregor as Administrator.
This appointment was hailed by the missionaries with
great satisfaction, and the Government officers themselves
were most hearty in their appreciation of the missionaries’
services.
In 1888 Chalmers left Port Moresby and took up his
residence at Motumotu (or Toaripi), about 170 miles west-
wards, situated at the north-eastern end of
TSiiirciki
the Gulf of Papua, his great desire being to
establish mission stations along the whole of the northern
shore of that gulf, a desire in seeking the accomplishment
of which he finally laid down his life. He had selected
the spot for the further reason that he had a great admira-
tion for the tribe in whose territory it was —-the Elema
people. The place had been further rendered sacred to
him because it was the site of the murder of one of his
great friends, a native Samoan teacher, called Tauraki.
The attack had been made upon him and his wife and
child while they were travelling in a canoe with certain
natives. The latter were the object of hatred on the
part of the hostile canoes, and if Tauraki would have con-
sented to leave his native friends, he could have escaped,
but he bravely determined to stand by them, and he and
his child were, both killed. This fine heroism touched
the heart of Chalmers very deeply, and he determined to
carry on himself the work that the Samoan teacher had
begun. No sooner were he and his wife settled there
than they began school work, and gathered children round
them as rapidly as they could, but the difficulties of teach-
ing were enormous, for, even among its comparatively
small number of pupils, as many as four native languages
had to be taught, besides English. Another difficulty
arose from the irregular attendance of the children, who,
in common with all such people, imagined they were
conferring some benefit upon the missionaries by attending.




In the same year the mission was strengthened by the
arrival of Messrs. Walker and Dauncey, the latter of whom
New settled at Port Moresby, while the former
Recruits, proceeded to Chalmers’s former station,
Suau. In the succeeding years the work at Motumotu
became gradually consolidated, and the following diary of
a day’s work, when teachers were being gradually trained,
gives in a clear manner some idea of the routine life of a
missionary. On weekdays the time-table is as follows :
6 a.m. morning prayers ; 6.30 to 8 a.m. Bible class ; 9 a.m. to
11 a.m., sometimes till 12, boys’ class ; 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. men
and boys’ classes for arithmetic and writing, and women’s
classes for reading and sewing; 5.30 p.m. evening prayers,
and 7 p.m. evening service in the house. On Fridays and
Saturdays no classes were held, as the students had to
devote themselves to the cultivation of the gardens, and
other necessary work. On other days they studied during
the morning hours. The Sunday programme is as follows :
6 a.m. morning prayer; 6.30 a.m. services in villages ; 11 a.m.
service, and catechism afterwards ; 3.30 p.m. village service ;
5.30 p.m. prayer meetings. On Saturday nights Chalmers
was in the habit of sending his students to the men’s houses
in the villages, with instructions to give their message as
clearly as possible, consisting of a short, simple address,
and a reminder of the Sunday service on the next day,
sing a hymn, and then leave.
In 1892 Chalmers was requested to take charge of the
work on the western side of the Gulf, and for this purpose
Tamate fixed upon Saguane, a village at the extreme
at Kiwai. south of Kiwai Island, at the mouth of the Fly
river delta, and the spirit with which he entered upon
this new enterprise is expressed by himself in the following
words : “ This Fly river work I look upon as my last, and
perhaps greatest, work for Christ, and, being always with
Him, I fear not. God knows there will be many Gcth-
semanes, and it may be Calvaries; but all for Christ, and
it is well.” Meanwhile Dr. Lawes had translated the
New Testament into Motu, which was the language of


Port Moresby and its district, and was understood to a
certain extent along a considerable part of the coast. At
first it was supposed that Motu might eventually become
the general literary language of New Guinea, but the later
opinion both of missionaries and civil officers has rather
altered that belief, and is in favour of translating into
other native languages, and trying eventually to make
English the common medium of communication.
In the extreme east of the mission Messrs. Abel and
Walker had transferred their headquarters to Kwato,
an island to the extreme south-east corner of New Guinea.
At first it was a fearfully unhealthy place, but by dint of
setting the natives to fill up the deadly swamps, and by
building the missionary’s house on the high ground, it
has become one of the healthiest stations in New Guinea.
Mr. Walker was moved later to one of the stations on the
Gulf of Papua, and the present form of his missionary
activity will be specially dealt with in the next chapter.
In 1893 Mr. Holmes was settled first at Jokea, close to
Motumotu, but later he passed westwards to Orokolo, on
the north of the Gulf, and Mr. Pryce-Jones has taken his
place at Jokea.
Other changes that took place were the removal of
Dr. Lawes from Port Moresby to Vatorata, about
Deiena ' thirty m d es farther east, at which place he was
able to found a larger training college, and
Mr. Dauncey’s settlement at Deiena, about two-thirds
of the way between Port Moresby and Jokea. At
the new training college the course extended over four
years, and from it many most promising students were
sent into the mission field, while, in many cases, they
took with them as their wives, girls who had been trained
by Mrs. Lawes in her school. One great difficulty with
the native teacher is to get him to live away from his
own place, but this is partly aided by the four years’
residence at the training college.
All these influences are telling gradually but steadily
upon the New Guinean mind, and missionary reports are


full of simple but striking incidents that show how Chris-
New ideas *-ian ideals are penetrating the native conscious-
ness. In Motu, which, as has been said, is the
most advanced of the New Guinean dialects, there is said to
BIGA AND RUTA. NEW GUINEA NATIVE TEACHERS.
be no word for “ thanks,” and that means that the idea
which the word expresses did not exist. The native never
believed in giving anything for nothing, and if he did
treat his visitor to a meal, it was in the expectation that
when the dish came back to him empty of food, he would
find in it a stick of tobacco, or some other similar article


in payment for his so-called gift. But nowadays the
natives will give liberally to the cause of foreign missions.
In three successive years at Port Moresby the missionary
collections reached the following rapidly increasing totals ;
first year £37, second year £gi, and third year £155, which
figures are not only remarkable in themselves, but show the
very extraordinary rate at which the practice of generosity
REV. J. H. HOLMES.
is growing. At one missionary meeting recently held at
Vatorato, the magnificent sum of £237 was collected, of
which only £2l was the gift of Europeans. In the last
report that has been issued, we are told of the self-sacrificing
efforts of some of the people for the funds of the Society,
when the missionary makes the remark, “It is only the
love of Christ that would get a Western New Guinean to
stay out on the reef for a month, picking up shell, for which


he receives no material advantage.” And yet these men
are willing to give this time and make this effort on
behalf of the spread of the Gospel among their fellow-
countrymen.
Chalmers’s settlement at Saguane did not prove at all
permanent, because the sea encroached so rapidly as
Tamate and speedily to endanger the house. In 1901 he
Tomkins removed westward to the island of Daru. This
martyred, change was made more tolerable to him, because
just before leaving his station his second wife had died, who
had proved herself as competent and courageous a worker
as the first Mrs. Chalmers had been, and he was greatly en-
couraged by the arrival of his colleague, Mr. Tomkins, whose
youthful energy, vigour, and enthusiasm charmed him from
the first moment he met him. Dr. Lawes said of the young
missionary after his death, “ A man of faith and prayer,
mighty in the Scriptures. He was a great help, comfort,
and joy to Tamate." One of the great ambitions of
Chalmers’s life was to settle teachers among the wild
head-hunting tribes of the Aird river, and to visit these
people he sailed on board the “ Niue ” mission vessel in
March 1901. On the 7th of April the vessel anchored off
Goaribari Island in the mouth of the river, and the natives
came off evidently in no very good mood. Tamate decided
to go ashore with them, and attempted to dissuade his young
colleague from accompanying him. This he could not do,
however, and no sooner had they landed than they were
both struck down apparently, and the close of the heroic
life had come. The English Government exacted severe
punishment upon all the villages concerned, taking some
of their natives prisoners, killing others, though no life
was taken that could possibly be avoided; they also burned
down all the dubus (warriors’ houses), and destroyed the war
canoes. The terrible character of the people can be seen
most clearly from Mr. Dauncey’s report. “In one of the
dubus,” he says, “ there were over seven hundred skulls,
and at another four hundred. Some of the other dubus
were cleared before the party reached them, but lam


within the mark in saying that there must have been ten
thousand skulls in the twenty dulms burned. What a
tale that number tells.” The general effect of his death,
both in New Guinea and throughout the world, is well
expressed in the memorial verses written by Mr. John
Oxenham.
" Great Heart is dead, they say.
Great Heart is dead, they say ?
Nor dead, nor sleeping 1 he lives on. His name
Shall kindle many a heart to equal flame.
The fire he kindled shall burn on and on.
Till all the darkness of the lands be gone.
And all the kingdoms of the earth be won.
And one.”
One further tribute may be quoted here, that, namely, of
Vice-Admiral Bridge, who had known him intimately, and
seen much of his work. “ His vigilance, cheeriness, readi-
ness of resource, and extraordinary influence over native
savages made his help quite invaluable.”
Two interesting memorials have been raised to him in
the country that will be always associated with his name.
Memorials of In the cathedral at Thursday Island a font
Martyrs, has teen erected in his memory, while a beauti-
ful memorial window has been put into the church at
Vatorato, the gift of Dr. and Mrs. Lawes, in which Chalmers
and Tomkins are represented as Paul and Timothy. But
his greatest memorial will ever be the work he did and
the inspiration his example has been to many missionaries
and native converts.
Surely all the world has heard of the great friendship
that sprang up during a voyage from Sydney to the Pacific
Tamateand Islands between the great man of letters,
Stevenson. Robert Louis Stevenson and Tamatc. Steven-
son in introducing his friend at a lecture in Samoa in 1890,
spoke as follows : “ There are some men who never need
introducing, and Tamate is one of these. I have the
highest admiration for him, and I am sure that all present
will not only enjoy listening to his narrative, but will also


very heartily wish him God-speed in all his future en-
deavours as a pioneer of civilisation and love. I believe
we shall all be stimulated to greater courage in taking up
the cross that all heroic souls have taken, the cross of light
and progress.” All his letters to Chalmers are full of interest
and of characteristic touches. Let me quote one of them,
because, with his own explanation, we can see how much the
simple words mean. “lam a man now past forty. Scotch
at that, and not used to big expressions in friendship ; and
used, on the other hand, to be very much ashamed of them.
Now when I break my word to you I may say so much ;
I count it a privilege and a benefit to have met you. I
count it loss not to meet with you again.” In a letter to
his mother, he writes about Chalmers as follows : “I shall
meet Tamate once more before he disappears up the' Fly
river, perhaps to be one of the unreturned brave, and I
have a cultus for Tamate ; he is a man nobody can see and
not love. He has plenty of faults, like the rest of us ; but
he is as big as a church.” Men of Chalmers’s type, with
a large humanity and general sympathy with all sides and
interests of life, do much for missions beyond their active
service in the work of the field, seeing that they influence
travellers and educated foreigners who may not at the
outset be much in touch with such efforts. Louis Steven-
son’s experience was a notable case in point, and the more
value, therefore, is to be attached to his final judgment:
“ I had conceived a great prejudice against missions in the
South Seas, and had no sooner come there than that pre-
judice was at first reduced, and then at last annihilated.
Those who deblaterate against missions have only one thing
to do—to come and see them on the spot. They will see a
great deal of good done ; they will see a race being for-
warded in many different directions, and I believe if they
be honest persons they will cease to complain of mission
work and its effects.”
Statistics do not count for everything, but it is surely
a splended result of the fearless work, prayer, and self-
sacrifice of Macfarlane, Lawes, Chalmers, and their numer


ous European colleagues and South Sea native helpers to find
that the latest report of the London Missionary Society
Statistics, gives their present missionary staff in New
1.907. Guinea as 15 English missionaries, 139 ordained
native missionaries, and 15 native preachers. The Church
members total 2,646, while there are 3,742 adherents. The
educational work is represented by 105 schools and 3,370
scholars. The most recent pioneer work is that done by
Mr. Schlencker in the Inland Mission at Kalaigolo, and
he hopes soon to move to another station at Boku, which
seems to afford a better centre of influence. He seems in
spirit and method to be a worthy successor of Tamate.
6


CHAPTER VII
MISSIONS —NEW DEVELOPMENTS —INDUSTRIAL MISSIONS
AND FUTURE POLICY
There comes a time in every mission among primitive
people when the onlooker is apt to think that the latter
Natives in state of the man is worse than the former. The
Development, casual visitor or wandering tourist comes home
with reports of the mission-made native and the spoiling
of the noble savage, and one hears it so often that its mere
iteration impresses a great many people with the idea
that it must after all be true, and that the supporters of
missions are hiding some essential facts that make against
their theory. The idea that where there is much smoke
their must be some fire is not altogether false, and the
wise advocate of missions is bound to admit that there is a
stage in the development of a savage race under Christian
influences which has at least the appearance of degeneration
rather than of progress. This arises from the fact that when
a people who for generations have been engaged in war as
their main occupation, who have had to be continually on
the outlook for their enemies, and who could never move
from their own village unarmed, find themselves suddenly in
conditions of peace, there is not at once an outlet for their
energy. In New Guinea, as we have seen, the women do
most of the house and garden work. In the old days the
men had enough to do to be always ready for the fight and
the chase. An additional difficulty arises from the very
fertility of the country, making it not requisite to engage
in any strenuous effort in order to find enough to eat. The
savage is always improvident, and so, when a sudden


drought comes, or a flood that destroys his crops and
gardens, he has nothing laid up for the time of distress. His
inherent laziness is, therefore, increased by conditions of
outward security; and to the casual observer who sees him
loafing about, and perhaps hanging on in a somewhat
NEW GUINEA SCHOOL GIRLS GATHERED FOR A FEAST.
unsatisfactory way round the mission premises, without
initiative and without much outlook upon life, it is very
natural to come to the decision that the first effect of the
touch of Christianity upon him is to make him less manly
than he was before. But these critics very seldom reflect
that what they see is the merely outward presentation of a


passing phase. Neither have they examined, in all likeli-
hood, the better and more hilly developed type of native
Christian, nor considered how very long a time it has taken
their own country to advance even to its present imperfect
state of Christian progress. Surely lazy people are not
hard to find even in England or America, where there is
not the same excuse of an enervating climate, of few and
simple needs, and of lack of competition that there is in a
country like New Guinea.
There is a suggestive article on the administration of
British New Guinea in the Colonial Office Journal, for
June 1907, in which, discussing the problems here raised
the writers suggest that the settlement of whites should
be encouraged in the country, “ as one of the surest and
most practical methods of arresting the present indolent,
apathetic state into which Government protection is sinking
a race capable of a more useful and worthy destiny.” The
writers further think that there is a great agricultural
future before the country, and that the poor results which
have already been obtained in some instances is owing to
the fact that the planters have known little or nothing
about the work. They consider that there may soon be a
large produce of both coffee and tobacco, neither of which
has yet been cultivated to any extent.
We need not disguise the fact that in the past mis-
sionaries may have thought too little about the need
Need of for providing employment for the native con-
Empioyment. vert. When once the latter has given over,
either through choice or compulsion (for it must be remem-
bered that the British Government in New Guinea in-
sists on good behaviour and peaceful relations between the
tribes), the old life of fighting and head-hunting, and finds
that the missionary cannot employ more than a very small
section of the community, he is tempted to offer his services
to any white man that may be in the neighbourhood.
Trade always follows the mission flag; for when safety is
secured through the efforts of the Christian teacher, many
who have no sympathy with his work are quite prepared


to reap the benefit of his pioneering. In entering the service
of such traders, the native is unfortunately often exposed
to many temptations and to a rude disillusionment. He
has learned to trust the missionary, and naturally sup-
poses that all white men are equally trustworthy. It is a
terrible awakening, therefore, for him to find that he may be
cruelly cheated out of a fair remuneration for his labour,
even when worse things do not happen to him. There have
been too many tragic instances of brutal murder, as well
as absolute disregard of the rights of property, and of all
the claims of moral conduct to men, women, and children
in the black records of the relation between traders and
natives in every part of the South Seas.
The true missionary must, therefore, not rest content
with teaching in his school or preaching in his chapel, but
show the native how there are great and important arts of
peace which, for the Christian, take the place of the
disused arts of war. Foresight is a hard thing to teach
these children of nature. Mr. Pryce Jones tells that on one
occasion, a great fall of rain had swamped all the gardens
and banana groves near his station. He tried to induce
the men who were living in their club houses to go down and
cut through the sand dunes in order to allow the surplus
water to escape, but it was impossible to persuade them. At
last the missionary in despair took with him a few of the
young natives who were more amenable to his direction,
and began the work. The older men came down and looked
at them, sat on the sand, and tendered advice, but would
not lend a hand to help. The gardens were saved, and the
missionary felt that in this way he had given them a great
object-lesson in the practical power of Christianity.
One of the most telling and picturesque stories of the
result of practical help is that, told by Mr. Walker, of an
Mr. walker’s experience of his in one of the islands of the
sermon. Torres Straits. He had found a little island
which had been subject to famine as the result of a long
drought, while a period of heavy winds had prevented the
natives from doing any fishing. On his arrival, Mr.


Walker saw that apparently laziness, or, at least, impro-
vidence was at the root of much of the evil. He was not
able to speak the dialect, and so had to employ the universal
vehicle in those districts of pidgin English. He preached
on the text “ If any provide not for his own, and specially
for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel.” A little specimen of the sermon
may here be reproduced, not only as an example of the
curious pidgin English, but of the practical teaching of a
wise missionary. “You people alonger this place you think
you good fellar. You think God bery glad longer this
island cos you come alonger church all de time, sing and
pray plenty. God not glad alonger you. He very angry.
What for ? Cos wife and piccaninny belong you be hungry.
He cry, cry, cry all de time. You big, strong man here too
much lazy. You no work, and this Book he speak suppose a
fellar no work catch ’im kaikai(food) for wife and piccaninny
belonger him, God angry alonger that fellar. All same
fellar no go church and no beliebe about God. God been
put in de water allround dis island plenty pearl-shell, plenty
tortoise-shell, plenty beche-de-mer. He gib arm, leg
belong you, go swim and get him. Then you go sell him
longer Thursday Island, get plenty money, buy flour, rice,
biscuit, tin-a-meat. Wife, piccanniny belonger you no
more hungry, no more cry, all together fellar come along
church, sing and pray and thank God. That proper
fashion.” On further investigation Mr. Walker found that
these men had been horribly cheated by a white storekeeper,
and as a result he managed to purchase a boat for them,
and in eighteen months they had paid off /120, which it cost,
and were well established in their new enterprise. At the
end of that time they had the good fortune in one of their
diving expeditions to come across a large quantity of
copper, which had probably been thrown overboard by
some Portuguese ship centuries before. This was sold for
them, and realised £6OO. Their first act on receiving such
unheard-of wealth was as a community to vote half of it
for the erection of a church, which now stands on the


island as a proof of their perfect comprehension of the
missionary’s application in his sermon, “ All together fellar
come along church, sing and pray and thank God. That
proper fashion.”
It was this incident which gave Mr. Walker the idea of
the Papuan Industries Company, a scheme that has been
warmly commended and greatly aided by the Government
MR. SAVILLE'S BOYS ON THE CANAL.
authorities in New Guinea, and which has been well
launched in this country. The idea briefly is, that, from
Papuan a base situated in the Torres Straits trading
Industries should go on round the New Guinea coast,
Company. that the natives should be encouraged and
helped to plant and cultivate coconuts, coffee, tobacco,
and to enter upon other profitable enterprises. The
further occupations of pearl-fishing and the export of
tortoise-shell and beche-de-mer are to be encouraged and


developed, while it is hoped that good timber will be found
for commerical purposes, and probably its growth become
rapidly extended. The Papuan Industries Company is
in the hands of competent business men in this country,
and it is to be carried on as all such businesses are conducted,
with this one important limitation, that at no time, and
under no conditions, are its shareholders ever to receive
more than 5 per cent, per annum. All surplus profits are
to be devoted to the benefit of the natives, in order to help
them in their enterprises, and make these more effective,
as well as to encourage improvements in their conditions of
life in such matters as housing, education, and healthful
amusement. The work will be under Mr. Walker’s charge
at headquarters, and though the days of the enterprise
are as yet very new, the prospects are most encouraging.
Much excellent industrial work has been done under
Mr. Abel at Kwato. Here the native boys have been
trained in carpentry work, as blacksmiths, and
as boat-builders, while the girls are taught mat-
making, fancy needlework, embroidery, and laundry work.
Here, too, the experiments are pretty recent, but they
have been successful beyond the highest dreams of their
originator. One very great improvement is already
noticeable in the much better type of native house built in
the island. The lads are also being trained there in good,
healthful exercise, which is most essential for the proper
upkeep of strong bodies and pure minds. In the old
savage days the necessity for being always alert and pre-
pared to meet his enemies kept the New Guinea native in
good form, but Mr. Abel has seen to it that his lads have
become excellent cricketers, and in this way he is doing for
them not the least important part of his mission labour.
Along the lines indicated in these previous paragraphs,
much of the mission work of New Guinea must develop,
Lines of but there are other problems to be faced and
Progress, difficulties to be overcome. The South Sea
Islanders have rendered, as these pages have already
shown, magnificent service in the Christianising of this


country; but they have fallen in terribly large numbers
victims to fever. They are also subject to much depression,
and seem unable to cope with some of the difficulties
of detail in management of a station which a teacher
in such a position is bound to face. Their work as
storekeepers, for example, seems to be beyond their power,
and they find the task of keeping accounts and generally
superintending the business side of things to be an-
noying, and, in some cases, impossible. The future of the
Mission will lie, it appears, with the New Guineans them-
selves, so that the increase of training schools and the
rendering more efficient of those already in existence is the
direction in which European control will be most effectively
exercised. The Government have pressed upon our
Society over and over again the necessity of pressing inland,
and opening up work among the hill tribes. This will
probably never be possible to the European missionary to
any great extent, but it should certainly be a successful
enterprise in the hands of well-trained natives. More and
more must efforts be made to deal with the young men in
their communal houses. It is, as we have seen, during
the period when the lads are being initiated into the duties
and responsibilities of manhood that the thoughts, practices,
and superstitions of native life take firmest hold upon them.
If they can be reached before this age in mission schools,
if they can be personally influenced by native Christian
teachers who are themselves familiar with all the good and
evil that is mingled in these ceremonials, and are not too
narrow in their outlook to lay hold of what good elements
do exist, and turn these to profit for ethical training, the
battle may not only gradually, but speedily be won. A
determined effort should also be made to reach the men of
influence among the people, those, that is, who have the
control of such ceremonials and imbue them with new and
better ideals, so that they in turn may implant them in the
minds of the youths under their care.
There might be an opening for more directly medical
work - than has yet been attempted. If a good hospital


could be started at some central position such as Poit
Moresby or Vatorato, and if one or two medical mission-
Lady aries could be added to the staff, much gain
Missionaries, might attend the new movement. Other mis-
sions (mainly the Roman Catholics) have done a good deal by
the service of unmarried lady missionaries, and an opening
for some might well be found in our own Mission. As the
security of British rule advances, their presence and work
would be more possible, and the effect of their training upon
the native girls is bound to be productive of the very highest
benefit. No clearer testimony to the benefit that accrues
to native society from the presence of Christian women
in the land could be adduced than the following extract
from a letter written by Dr. Loria, an Italian scientist, who
spent some years in New Guinea, and had gone there
strongly prejudiced against mission work. He writes :
“Before closing I wish to say a few more words about Mrs.
Abel. Only those who lived at Kwato nine months can
appreciate her and her work at its real worth. In a commu-
nity where women are despised, she is beloved, esteemed, re-
spected. Her wishes are commands, and even the natives are
influenced by her sweet, good nature. Her influence is not
confined to Papuans, but extends even to the white popula-
tion. I, for my part, have to acknowledge that lam going
home a better man than when I left Europe, and I am
indebted for this entirely and solely to her influence.”
It will be readily understood, even from the necessarily
brief sketch of the New Guinean Mission that has been here
Primitive possible, how real and genuine has been the
Peoples. progress made, and how well worth while all
the heavy sacrifice involved has been. But there
are a certain number of critics who, while enthusiastic about
mission work in such countries as China and India, are very
slightly in sympathy with those among primitive people.
Their position has been forcibly summed up in the phrase,
“ Wrong missions to wrong races in wrong places.” They
contend that until the great and cultured races of the world
have been won to Christianity, the savage people must be


content to wait, or else they think that even if they are killed
out by a civilisation divorced from Christianity it matters
little in comparison with the tremendous loss attached to
the non-Christianising of the older civilisations. We may be
quite ready to admit the importance of the latter work,
and feel as strongly as others how imperative the duty of
England is to carry her faith to the sons and daughters of
India and of the Farther East, but we maintain that obedi-
ence to Christ’s commandment necessitates our guarding
the interests of those childlike races; for of them also is the
kingdom of heaven. Their hearts are very accessible to
the message of the Gospel, and as Chalmers found in the
case of his friend, Kone, they quickly grasp the deepest
essentials of the Christian faith. This man was one whom
Chalmers had only been able to teach the simple prayer,
“ God of Love, give me light; lead me to Christ.” Not
long after he had learned it, he was with some of his savage
friends at a feast when a quarrel arose, and one of them
seized a spear to throw it at an enemy. Kone noticed the
action, and immediately pulled the man behind him, and
the spear entered his own breast. Thus did he carry out
in practice the deepest lessons of the Lord he was striving
to know.
The methods that are most effective in carrying on mission
work among these simple people are the same in essence
as the wisest methods of evangelism at home. Points of
contact are discovered in the ideas of the native with the
thought of the Gospel the missionary has to preach to him,
and the work that is carried on is not primarily one of
destruction, but of rearing a new fabric whose beauty and
strength will soon replace the poor and unsatisfactory shelter
of the old one. We might fairly regard the work that we
have described Mr. Abel as doing at Kwato as a parable of
what the new religion will gradually accomplish in the
whole country. New methods of house-building are intro-
duced, and when the natives see how much better a house
is built on new lines, they soon imitate it, and the village in
time becomes transformed. But the missionary has not


first pulled down all the old dwellings, for, had he done so,
no one would have welcomed his innovations. The point
upon which we are insisting is put in the thoughtful little
volume by Mr. Leonard Alston, entitled The White
Man’s Work in Asia and Africa , when he says: “The
missionary should avoid as far as may be the practice of
treating his work as something absolutely fresh and without
parallel in his congregation’s experience. Rather he should
be glad to dwell upon that aspect of Christianity in which it
appears as the full blossom springing forth on the tree that
was there from the beginning, and should emphasise
the ennobling teaching which tells of the Logos as the light
that lighteth every man coming into the world ; for this,
rather than the crude dwelling on ideas of sin and con-
demnation, human failure and the wrath of God, while
equally of the essence of the Gospel, is more than equally
fitted by its suggestions of sympathy, and of the respect
that builds up self-respect, to win the assent of those who
would reject an ostentatiously alien gospel.” That this
ideal has fired the thought of many of the missionaries in
New Guinea we may be thankful, and that in the future
such conceptions will play a larger part than in the past
we may be sure. The work will continue to be carried on
with courage and efficiency by those in the field, but we
who are at home must by prayer and sympathy support and
sustain their efforts. Ideally the country is already
conquered, for it is God’s heritage. But we have to go in
and make the ideal conquest actual. When Ruatoka, the
veteran South Sea missionary, opened in the year 1900 the
Memorial Church erected at Vatorata to the eighty-two South
Sea martyrs who had fallen at their post in New Guinea we are
told he stood aside a moment when he threw open the door,
and said reverently, “Go in first, my Father, and we will
follow.” It was a beautiful and touching act, and ex-
presses as perfectly as may be done the spirit and attitude in
which missionary triumph can alone be reached.


ADDITIONAL BOOKS ON NEW GUINEA
Savage Life in Hew Guinea, by C. W. Abel. L.M.S. 25. 6d.
James Chalmers, by C. Benham. L.M.S. id.
Lawes, W. G., by V. A. Barradalc, M.A. id.
Tamate, A Book for Boys, by R. Lovett. R.T.S. 6(7.
James Chalmers, by R. Lovett. R.T.S. 3s. 6 d.
James Chalmers, by Cuthbert Lennox. A. Melrose. 6 d.
Work and Adventure in New Guinea, by Jas. Chalmers. R.T.S. 3s. 6 d.
Pioneering in New Guinea, by Jas. Chalmers. R.T.S. 3s. 6d.
British New Guinea : Country and People, by Sir Win. Macgregor.
John Murray.
Head Hunters, Black, White, and Brown, by A. C. Haddon. Methuen
& Co. 15s.
Magic and Fetishism, by A. C. Haddon. A. Constable & Co. is.
White Fire, by John Oxenham, a story suggested by the Life of
Chalmers. Hodder and Stoughton. 6d. net.
For further and more detailed study, the Government Reports
and the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute may be
consulted.
For readers of German a most interesting book is Paul’s Die
Mission auf den Deutschen Sudsee-Inseln. Dresden, 1908. 4s.


APPENDIX
A SHORT SKETCH OF OTHER MISSIONS IN NEW
GUINEA
In British New Guinea the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel is also at work, their stations stretching along its north-east
coast. The majority of them are grouped closely together from
Cape Nelson to East Cape, though one or two lie as far north as
the borders of the German territory. The Mission was undertaken
by the Australian Church, and a start was made in 1889 by the
Rev. A. A. Maclaren, who had been at work in North Queensland,
and was accepted as the first missionary. Mr. Maclaren was joined
by the Rev. C. King, Mr. and Mrs. Tomlinson, and Mr. Kennedy,
who settled at Bartle Bay in August 1891. Within a few months
the pioneer missionary laid down his life for the country, but the
other workers were not discouraged, and rapidly founded several
new stations. In 1896 two young men were baptized as the first
converts from the district, and the Gospel of Luke and other
portions of Scripture were translated. In the following year a
bishopric was founded, and the first bishop consecrated. He
showed himself a very vigorous mission-worker, and had soon
familiarised himself with all the stations, and explored suitable
sites for new ones. The Mission was greatly helped by the South
Sea Island native Christians, one of the brightest of whom was
named Willie Holi. A most encouraging feature of the Mission
has been its strong support of industrial work; one interesting
example of it being the establishment of a lighthouse at Cape
Vogel, which has proved of the utmost value to mariners. In 1900
a station was started on the Mamba river, in the extreme north of
the British territory, where most encouraging work has been done
under Mr. King’s leadership. A hospital has been opened there,
which has not only been of great service to the natives, but also
to the European gold miners in the neighbourhood. In 1903 a
steam launch was presented to the Mission by a gentleman in New
York, and this has been of the greatest help. The Mission also
has undertaken the training of natives as preachers, a work which


was begun in 1904. The Mission has also several ladies at work,
one of whom, a most devoted nurse, died in its service in 1904.
The most recent report gives us a striking example of union in the
mission field. Mr. Newton, an S.P.G. missionary, was visiting
Samarai when one of the Methodist missionaries died there. At
the request of his wife and of Mr. Abel, of the L.M.S., Mr. Newton
conducted the funeral service, and writing about it, he said, “It
seems as though such troubles draw us together. There, in the
cemetery on an L.M.S. station, the body of one who had given his
life for our Lord in the service of the Wesleyan Mission was laid
in its last resting place with the service of the Church of England
taken by a priest of the Church.” The latest available statistics
speak of a total staff of 74, with 17 stations, and 1,350 children in
the schools.
The work of the Rhenish Mission was begun by the Germans in
1887 at Constantin Haven, when two missionaries landed in the
May of that year. The story of its progress has been a very sad
one, as fever has claimed so very many victims. Almost every
year has seen some missionary lay down his or her life in the
cause. Yet, notwithstanding this fact, new volunteers have never
been lacking, and many of them men of great energy and women
of heroic purpose. The first convert was baptized in 1902. The
German missionaries are getting good hold of the people, and
especially encouraging is the work among the children. Churches
have been built at various stations, and at some of them the
Sunday is observed by a fair proportion of the people. The report
of the year 1906 tells of four mission schools, with 234 children.
The stations of the Rhenish Mission have been mainly very unhealthy
ones, but in 1906 a new station was opened which promises to
be free from many of the disadvantages that attended the earlier
ones, and the missionaries have also become possessed of a small
steamer, which will make possible the more frequent and rapid
intercourse between the stations. The latest report gives the
number of native Christians as 46, and of candidates for baptism
as 69. In spite of the small numbers, the missionaries feel
encouraged, and plead earnestly for continued interest and prayer.
Probably the hard pioneer days are over, and they are about to
enter upon a fuller harvest.
Another German Missionary Society in connection with the
Lutheran Church, called the Neuendettelsau Mission, which was
started in 1885, is carrying on work with its headquarters at Finsch
Haven, some considerable distance to the east of Constantin Haven.
Other stations have been opened a little way inland, and one on
the island of Tami, opposite Finsch Haven. In the end of 1906


the Mission had to stations, 20 missionaries, and 2 unmarried lady
missionaries. The number of baptized converts was 750, of whom
590 had been admitted during the year 1906. The spiritual progress
of that year, especially in the coast stations, caused the missionaries
much encouragement.
In the extreme north of New Guinea the Dutch missionaries
have long been at work. Their original station and headquarters
is the little island of Manaswari on Doreh Bay, at the extreme east
of the Arfak mountain range. There is also a station on Mafoor
Island, a little to the eastward of Doreh Bay, and quite recently one
of the missionaries named Geissler wrote a Bible history in the
language of the people. The Mission was started by Messrs. Ottow
and Geissler, who went out under the inspiration of Gossner, a great
missionary enthusiast, who believed in every missionary supporting
himself by his own trade, and who, about the middle of the
nineteenth century, roused much enthusiasm for missions in Holland.
The work is now undertaken by the Utrecht Missionary Union,
and the latest available statistics speak of five stations, with 260
baptized Christians.
The Australian. Methodist Church has been very active in mission-
work. In 1875 it commenced operations in the Bismarck Archi-
pelago, the earliest stations being placed in the north of the island
of New Pomerania. The pioneer was the Rev. George Brown.
He was nobly aided by natives from Fiji and other islands, who
undertook and prosecuted the work in the spirit of the greatest
heroism. A college has been founded in the island of Ulu, with
which is connected practical training in agriculture, and the cultiva-
tion of coconut palms, coffee, and other profitable plants. The
students, to the number of about 40, are thus splendidly trained
for their special form of service. The New Testament has been
translated, and a good deal of other literature prepared. In New
Mecklenburg work was begun by South Sea native teachers, but in
1901 the first European missionary settled in the island. Since
that time most rapid and encouraging progress has been made.
The same Mission has also stations in the Louisade and D’Entre-
casteaux Islands. In German New Guinea, British New Guinea,
and in the Bismarck Archipelago Roman Catholic missionaries are
also at work.


INDEX
Abel, Rev. C. W., 75, 88
Mrs., 90
Aborigines, 15
Adzes, 39
Alston, M. L., quoted, 92
Animals, 9-11
Archipelago, 4
Armlets, 20
Aruadaera, 60
Atolls, 6
Axes, 39
Babies, net for carrying, 17
Baskets, 36
Belts, 22
Betel-nut, 34
Bridge, native, 39
Bridge, Vice-Admiral, quoted, 79
Bull-roarer, 42
Burial, modes of, 56
Canoes, 38
Cassowary, 10
■“ Cat’s cadle,” 46
Ceremonies, initiation, 54
Chalmers, Rev. J., 64-79
Charms, 23, 58
Chiefs, S 3
Children, beauty of, 17
games of, 47
love of, 17, 24
Cicatrising, 19
Climate, 12
Coconut, 6, 87
story of origin of, 50
Communal houses, 26
Copra, 7
Counting, 52
Crabs, 11
Crocodiles, 11
Cuscus, 10
Dampier’s voyage, 13
Dances, 48
Daru, 78
Dauncey, Rev. H. M., 74, 75,
78
Delena, 75
Dingo, 9
Discovery of New Guinea, i?
Diseases, native, 12
Dress, 18
Drums, 41
Dubus, 26
Dugong, 43
Ear-boring, 20
Ellengowan, 67
Exploration, 68
Fever, 12
Fire, story of origin of, 10
manner of obtaining, 36
Fishing, 42
Flowers, 7
Flutes, 41
Folk-tales, 49-51
Forests, 6
Furniture, household, 29
Generosity, 77
Goaribari, 63, 78


Gold, 3
“ Granny,” 69
Hair-dressing, 21
Head-hunting, 40
Holmes, Rev. J. H., 77
Houses, styles of, 24
lasa, 25
Industrial Missions, 85-88, 94,
■ 96
Initiation ceremonies, 54
Jokea, 15, 75
Kalo massacre, 68
Kangaroo, 10
Kiwai, 10, 74
Kone, 91
Kwato, 75, 88, 90
Lakatois, 38, 41, 48
Language, 16, 51
Lawes, Rev. W. G., 64, 71, 74, 79
McFarlane, Rev. S., 62, 71
Macgregor, Sir W., 4, 14, 17, 30,
72
Magic, 60
Marriage customs, 23
Martyrs, 62, 68, 72, 78
Mission, beginning of, 61
Missions, industrial, 85-88, 94,
96
Money, native, 44
Moon, story of origin of, 49
Motumotu, 72, 74
Mountains, 3
Mourning customs, 23, 24, 49, 57
Murray, Rev. J. R., 62, 63
Necklets, 20
New Guinea, British, 2, 13
Dutch, 13, 96
German, 13, 95
Nogi, 18
Nose-ornaments, 13, 21
Ornaments, 19, 22, 23, 28
Orokolo, 19, 20, 75
Oxenham, J.. quoted, 79
Papua, 12
Papuan Industries Co., 87
Paradise, birds of, 10
Pidgin English, 52, 66, 86
Pigs, 9
Pile-driving, 24
Pillows, 29
Port Moresby, 64, 69, 77
Pottery, 30
Progress, 88, 96
Protectorate, British, 13, 72
Pryce-Jones, Rev. E., 75, 85
Rami, 18
Rivers, 3
Ruatoka, 63, 92
Sago, 8, 44
Saguane, 74, 78
Sede, 41
Shaving, native, 22
Shields, 40
Smoking, native manner of, 34
Spirits, belief in, 57-60
Stevenson, R. L., quoted, 79
String figures, 46
Suau, 66
Taboo, 59
Tamate. See Chalmers.
Taro, 32
Tattooing, 18
Tauraki, 72
Tepeso, 62
Thursday Island, 79
Tobacco pipes, 34
Tomkins, Rev. O. F., 78
Torres Straits, islands of, 4, 15,
61
missions in, 62, 68, 71, 87


Totemism, 58
Training colleges, 71, 75, 96
Translation, 74, 94, 96
Tree-houses, 25
Vanapa River, 39
Vatorato, 7;, 77, 79
Walker, Rev. F. \V., 74, 75, 85
War costume, 22
drums, 41
Weapons, 39
Widows, dress of, 23, 57
Yam, 32


PRINTED BY
lIAZELL, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,
LONDON AND AYLESBURY,


