

Hmw 1 |lp® li! H
ipp iii«“ ||


■
,
-■ ,;•■■._■■■ -■_. . , 1 ■ _. .
'[■> ■■-, : ’’-;• ■ .&>$$%?> " If ■' '.‘••.r •■,:■/• ■ ■■'-■•
■ ■■- : £.-... ,:v
’
■ -vj
■
■ • ' _••V'.; ' '
' • •;•;>
■ ■
. ■ " ' ■,
. ■_•;■. ;-;‘v
l®>VlW ■>, ; , , ■; •„•*.■•/.■ • - ‘v-’/' ■ ■* V V. *JM • > '. • ■ •. ■ • ‘V r- • •/ • ■•.*-■ -
■
- ’ • • '
' > ' ' , • •
J J,~-, ‘ - r.*<] • * •> .. ;/*./• ''. j, . * . , . ;
>'r>v: V C *■*■*' f* • ' -f* V • ’ ■• V* v •* ? ••' ‘ t ' f ■ ’ V T »- T ‘ •
: ■


r’FO" A, ATTON BUREAU
630 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW \ OilN N. Y.
LIBRARY


THE BEEHIVE


“There’s mv mother,” she said, pointing to the picture.


THE BEEHIVE
ELIZABETH POWELL
(“Patricia Ann”)
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY LONDON
1941


Set up, printed and hound
in Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney.
1941
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a book


AUSTRALIAN NEWS AND r'FO r- ’AT!'"’ BUREAU
630 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW GEN 20, N. Y.
library
ALL “MUMS”
ONE IN PARTICULAR


CONTENTS
I. THE HOUSE BY THE SEA .... i
11. THE HOUSE BY THE RIVER - - - - 22
111. EASTWARDS 31
IV. BERYL ARRIVES AT THE BEEHIVE - - 39
V. SUNDRY SURPRISES 50
VI. THE FIRST SUNDAY 64
VII. BRENDA - 78
VIII. WARFARE 93
IX. -AND PEACE - 107
X. ARGUMENTS AND OTHER THINGS - - 121
XI. THE BEEHIVE IS TROUBLED 134
XII. AMATEUR HOUSEKEEPERS - 148
XIII. BERYL GOES TO TOWN 161
XIV. A SOCIAL EVENT 178
XV. THE BEND EN FETE 188
XVI. BERYL CATCHES UP 197
XVII. A SHOPPING EXPEDITION - 206
XVIII. THE BIRTHDAY TEA 217
XIX. THE PAYMENT OF A DEBT - 226
XX. MR SMITH COMES TO TEA - 245
XXL A HORSE AND A GIRL 263
XXII. NELLY RETURNS 273


CHAPTER 1
THE HOUSE BY THE SEA
Mrs Campbell read through the letter again, sighing
more than once as she turned the pages of large hand-
writing. Then she glanced from the veranda down
through the lacy tamarisks to the white beach of the
gulf shore, where the blue water was bordered with
emerald shallows.
“Coo-ee-ee,” she called, but there was no answer, and
the bobbing dark heads in the sea did not turn.
“Coo-ee-ee,” she cried again, a little louder, and one
of the heads twisted round, an arm waved, and all three
swimmers paddled furiously shorewards. Mrs Campbell
smiled adoringly as Barbara, Brenda, and Bubbles
dashed up the slippery white sandhills and through the
always-open gate. There was not much garden, for the
sea-winds were strong and relentless, although a few
sad geraniums and nasturtiums were usually to be found
fighting valiantly against the onslaughts of the elements.
The path was almost hidden under drifting sand, but
then, no one cared. They all liked the sand, and the
pink “pig-face” that crawled persistently up from the
hollows, while digging and shovelling was such a bore
on hot days with the water beckoning with cool, twink-
ling fingers and sparkling eyes a few dozen yards away.
Barbara was first at the gate as usual, for her long
legs could scamper faster than her sister’s or those of
her small fat brother; that Barby was the tomboy of


the family every one agreed. When the fact was com-
mented on she would toss her head and take this de-
scription of herself as a compliment, saying quickly:
“Ed rather be a tomboy than a mollycoddle.”
“Is there no stage between a tomboy and a molly-
coddle?” her mother had once asked.
“Not for me,” was the decided response. Then Barby
blurted vehemently: “Mum! If I had to sit still and
knit and do things like that, I’d . . . hurst”
And Mum—dearest and best of Mums—had smiled as
only a Mum can smile, nodding, shaking her head,
looking wise, thoughtful, and loving all at the same
time.
Barby was tall and thin, with long limbs and dark
eyes which were shadowed and made beautiful by thick
and long lashes. Her teeth looked even whiter than
they were by reason of her olive skin, tanned long
ago to an indelible brown, unblemished and clear, a
deep rose shading up to her ears in moments of excite-
ment or temper. Barby had a “paddy”, but repented
just as quickly as she flew into a rage, and always
apologized handsomely when she found herself to be
in the wrong, which, to do her justice, was not often.
She despised sentimentality as a weakness, although hold-
ing in her heart—as did all the Campbell children—a
passionate adoration of her mother. Barby could be
stubborn, and sometimes forgot that hurts administered
smartly are not so easily soothed by hasty regrets. Alto-
gether, the little girl was lovable, and very human, with
the attraction that is always present in any one possess-
ing that odd attribute, “personality”.
Bob, the biggest one, was quite a man in the eyes
of Bubbles, who already was looking forward to the
day when he should wear “long pants”. Bob studied
architecture in the office of a large city firm, whose
senior partner had been a close friend of the children’s


father. He was the eldest of the four Campbells, a quiet
mannered, thoughtful lad, well liked by every one. It
was he who had been responsible for the name of the
house by the sea. He had one day pulled down the
rusty name-plate from over the veranda steps, and tossed
it out on to the sand.
“Who ever heard of a rambling, decrepit old barn
like this being called ‘Windsor Cottage’?” he had de-
manded of the small group of spellbound listeners round
him. “It’s no more like Windsor Cottage than Windsor
Castle. Let’s give the place a decent name ... a name
. . . such as ... as . . .” and then he had seized Barby,
who was a mite of a girl, and had danced with her
round the floor. “The Beehive ,” he had shouted. “That’s
the name for it: the very name. Barby’s aB, and so is
Bren. I am a B too.”
“You’re not a B,” corrected his mother, with laughing
eyes. “You are an R. R for Robert. Robert Mayne
Campbell, and you can’t get away from it, son.”
“Mum,” came a wry protest. “Have a heart. Could
you call me Robert? Am 1 a Robert? Robert . . .” the
boy, teeth gleaming and fine eyes alight with fun and
mischief, had mocked in high falsetto, much to his
parents’ delight and the glee of the two small girls.
“Come heah, pet,” he mimicked, striking an attitude he
fondly imagined to be highly truthful. “Come heah,
Robert. . . .” He had then subsided into noisy and
school boyish laughter, and had departed to the useful
wash-house to paint elaborately in sprawling letters on a
piece of tin, the inscription: The Beehive.
So the house had been suddenly and disrespectfully
dubbed the Beehive, and its inmates: Bees.
A few months after the christening of the house
there had been another christening, for the smallest
member of the Beehive had come into the world.
When Bob, upon his return from school, had tip-


toed into his mother’s room to behold the miracle of
the new baby, he had peeped into the folds of the pink
blanket in the cradle-swing that had held all four Bees
in turn. Inside the woollen hood was a round face
with two dark eyes staring solemnly; two small fists
almost hidden in frills and ribbon, and a mop of straight
dark hair like that of a golliwog. Mum had watched
tenderly the big boy’s silent worship of the littler one,
but suddenly her tranquillity had been disturbed, for the
boy had slapped his leg loudly and broken into a long
chuckle. “Bubbles,” he whispered piercingly. “See, he’s
blowing them by the dozen. That’s the name for the
little fellow. Bubbles! Another Bee for the Beehive.”
Mum had shaken her head.
“Can’t be helped now,” came the consoling reply
to the headshake. “The deed’s done, and he’s Bubbles
for keeps. Give him any high-falutin’ old name to
christen him with, but he’s Bubbles all right.”
When the elder Bee had left the room, his mother
had reflected over the inevitable. The baby’s father had
entered then, and heard the tale. “. . . and I had made
up my mind to call him Stanley,” Mum had said re-
gretfully and slowly. Her husband had smiled.
“You can still do so, Marygirl, but I’m afraid his
nickname will stick.” And it did.
So Stanley John was Bubbles, and did not care what
name he possessed, so long as he was allowed to enter
into the fun of the others. Bubbles was the one solemn
member of the family, being round-eyed and pensive at
all times, and quite unable to distinguish a joke from
an ordinary remark. Pondering deeply upon most mat-
ters, and apparently working out Euclid problems of
terrific proportions even at play, he would ask occasion-
ally some extremely awkward questions.
Brenda, the fourth Bee, should have been mentioned
before, for she came third on the list, being almost twelve,


eleven months younger than Barby and six years older
than the little boy.
Brenda had not Barby’s vivid ways. The younger girl
had much of the sweet thoughtfulness of her mother.
The second girl-Bee liked sitting on the sand, or away
in the shredded shadows of the tamarisks; reading tales
of fairies and elves, pixies and gnomes, knights and faire
ladyes; thrilling and glowing over swashbuckling deeds
aid wild adventures; and smiling gently over wild ro-
mances, her eyes filling and her throat aching with the
pain of dwelling upon the printed pages which so sharply
pictured for her the sadness of renunciation, and the
pain of great losses.
She had a mysterious old exercise book that was some-
how connected with these quiet hours—a discarded, half-
used book of Bob’s, locked away with other treasures
in the left-hand drawer of the dressing-table shared with
her by her sister. No one knew what was in that book,
and no one cared very much, except from reasons of
curiosity. Mum respected the sensitiveness that caused
Brenda to keep jealous guard of her secret. Barby would
mischievously query at times, and pretend to peep while
her sister was scribbling with a red stump of pencil
that was always kept within the limp and tattered pages
of the book, but her teasing was not unpleasant and
not too insistent. Brenda, her eyes dwelling upon some-
thing far beyond the horizon, her mouth twisting into
odd shapes as she wrote an evidently difficult phrase,
could tell no one of the worlds she saw.
Her grey eyes would brim over very easily, and her
heart would ache over things that left Barby, who often
scoffed loudly over this trait in her sister’s character, un-
touched. But Barby, despite her ready compassion for
the unfortunate and the hurt, had not the instinctive
understanding and tolerance (those rare qualities that
help quickly towards the moulding of the character of


the fine man or woman) that Brenda already possessed.
In her heart of hearts, though, Barby called Brenda a
“dear old kid”, from Barby there being no greater praise
to be had.
L his bright summer afternoon was very hot, the sand
scorching the naked feet of the three children (Bob
being yet at the office) as they scampered up from the
water. Mrs Campbell was almost bumped over as Barby,
colliding with her deck-chair, hopped upon one leg like
an animated pelican, then dropped to a heap on the
grey cement. Taking no notice of a grazed shin, she
crossed her wet legs and wound her arms round her
bony knees—in pure Barby style—in such a complicated
knot that one might wonder how she could ever unwind
herself. The others followed suit in more simplified
fashion. From the wet bathing-suits dripped and oozed
shallow puddles that almost immediately dried up on
the sunwarmed floor. Barby inclined her head with a
jerk towards the letter in her mother’s fingers.
“What did you cooee for, Mum?’’ she asked expect-
antly, shaking back sopping strands of short hair from
her eyes. “Got some news?’’
Mum surveyed all three Bees as though trying to dis-
cover something, then turned her attention to the letter,
tapping it absently with a slim forefinger.
“This . . .’’ she said haltingly, “is from Mr Carslake.”
“What’s up?’’ blurted Barby in alarm. A letter from
the solicitor must mean one thing—trouble—even if the
solicitor happened to be an old friend of both Mr and
Mrs Campbell. Brenda rubbed a damp leg and looked
up at her mother with a glance that betrayed both
anxiety and fear.
“Mr Carslake wouldn’t write if ... if it were the
worst,” she said slowly. “He would come.”
Mrs Campbell murmured a soft: “Yes, dear.” They
all knew what Brenda had referred to.


The father of the Bees was a well-known scientist
and naturalist, who had returned from the war with
many honours and the rank of “Major”. Shortly after
peace had been declared he had departed on one of the
trips which claimed so much of his time. On this occasion
it was to the Pacific. The expedition was to be a much
longer one than usual, and was to take him into many
strange ports, and to islands little known by white men.
Both husband and wife had said farewell with aching
hearts and faces that tried to smile—just as they had
said good-bye when the war had taken Mr Campbell
away. “After this trip, Marygirl,” the Major had said,
“I’ll stay at home and write up my notes. No more roving
then,' little lady. I will swell my bank balance a little
more, finish off my studies in the Islands, and then . . .
home for good with the Bees to buzz round me all day
long.” Mrs Campbell had nodded, for, though she feared
for his safety, she knew she must let him go.
And so the big quiet man, who was so like the boy
he left behind to be head of the house, had sailed away
from Sydney in a neat, white yacht, leaving his wife
to travel sadly back from that city to her own, two
States away, to pick up the dropped threads of a house-
hold oddly small. v
The Major had been gone seven months, when sud-
denly had come like a bombshell the news of the foun-
dering of the Quest , in one of the disastrous and tem-
pestuous storms which blow up from behind the blue
horizons of the Pacific Ocean. No one was saved.
After that had come a sorrowful calm that had thinned
the mother’s face and saddened her lips. The children
lowered their voices when they spoke of their father.
Elsa, the maid of all work, had to be sent away; and
the man who came weekly to chop wood and attend to
odd jobs round the house and garden, was also told
regretfully that he could no longer be employed. There


had been little money to spare, for post-war prices were
exorbitant, and the Bees were hungry Bees, who tore
their frocks and stockings, too, like other small folk do.
It was all so tragically different from the care-free and
joyous days when father was at home.
One day in the papers there appeared the story of
a steward picked up by a trading schooner on an island
to the east of New Guinea. He had been steward on
the Quest , and asserted before witnesses and examiners
that he had seen Major Campbell alive and well in the
village where he himself had been nursed back from
death by the islanders. He had been washed on to the
beach in the storm.
While he was recuperating on the island, and before
he could make himself understood by the golden-skinned
natives, the Major vanished, quite ignorant of the sick
man who was so eagerly trying to impress upon the
brown men the need of speaking to that other one who
had been saved. There was talk then of a schooner in
the lagoon on the other side of the island, but the
steward, helpless and ill, could not investigate. There
was talk, too, of much rum swallowed that night, and
of a native dance held in the sandy clearing under a
clump of coco-nuts where the deep and shadowed grove
met the shore where the dark canoes rested.
The survivor knew no more, but asserted again and
again that he knew the Major too well to be mistaken
about his identity. He was alive, but thin, was clad
in a soiled pair of duck trousers and a rumpled, water-
wrinkled shirt, and had walked easily, wandering along
the beach of Keleme, gazing out over the water but never
once back towards the bush where the sick man lay
under a pandanus shelter.
Then for the Campbells had followed a period of
dreadful suspense, during which a ship was despatched
to the island, with the object of discovering the Major.


The island was visited, and many other islands too,
while the Administration of New Guinea lent a yacht
and helped in the search wholeheartedly. Two recruit-
ing boats laden with natives were questioned, but the
rescue ship was forced at last to return and report
failure. Many people said that the tale was a figment
of a sick man’s fevered brain, but others who knew the
islands shook their heads and said: “You never know:
queer things happen in the Pacific.”
The Beehive, too, said: “You never know.” It was
a thought based on hope alone.
The mystery was: “If Major Campbell be alive, where
is he?” Had the schooner which vanished with the clear
dawn taken him away, and what was its name? No one
knew; the islanders, either from stupidity or from stub-
bornness, when questioned, told nothing. A search of
the island had been made by the party on the yacht
from New Guinea, but even their understanding and
keen eyes had discovered no clue to the white man’s pre-
sence. Whether there had been two white men, or one,
upon the Keleme beach, it could not be ascertained.
There were many strange reasons, also, for craft being
in the waters of the Pacific, and many odd persons upon
those craft which dodged in and out of the ports and
lagoons. Law-breaking was common, and dealings with
natives often had to be hidden from authorities. It was
a simple matter to suppose the mysterious schooner to
have had excellent reasons for covering its tracks and
identity so well. And . . . you never know. . . .
One thing the Beehive knew—that being, if the Major
were alive, he must be out of reach of messengers, for
otherwise he would write, radio, or wire news of him-
self. All there was to do for the Beehive, was to wait
. . . to hope, and be brave.
Sometimes the family felt their hopes melting, for
days can be as long as years when hearts are lonely.


Then would come tales of miraculous escapes from
cannibals and sea-creatures, while stories would be read
of adventures and deeds among dark islands and in
silent, steamy forests, and they would say: “Perhaps
after all, he will come back.”
Upon one occasion, for a week Bob had lived in a
dream, with a well-known story of Pacific Island adven-
ture under his pillow. Mum had discovered it there
when she had been bed-making. Dropping one tear on
the cover, she then sternly reproved herself and swept
the floor vigorously. “Carry on” was the Beehive's watch-
word, and although they seldom voiced their hunger
and loneliness, their minds were always active.
Brenda swallowed the lump which always came to
her throat when the subject of the absent one was
touched upon, and blinked hard as she stared ahead of
her into the trees beyond the veranda.
Bubbles frowned ponderously, for he did not remem-
ber this father of his very well, except through the help
of a photograph on the shelf of the room called “Father’s
room”. The room was so filled with specimen cases,
minerals and curios, stuffed fish, mounted insects, but-
terflies of wondrous size and colouring, maps, sketches,
manuscripts, prints and drawings, magazines and books,
reports and prospectuses, that it was a nightmare to
sweep and dust. It was a labour of love with Mrs Camp-
bell, however, although she would shudder at the clay
hair, and fibre death-masks standing in one corner, and
shiver with a nameless dread as she met the inscrutable,
wooden, distorted visages of treasured Boitala images,
carved out of solid blocks, hideous and stolid, with the
hands of the creatures eternally holding up their appar-
ently always-aching jaws. No one but Mrs Campbell
dared touch the place, and she not very often. Memories
were too vivid, and the carven images too grotesque for
her ragged nerves.


The vanished father was evidently a serious matter,
thought Bubbles, for all the faces, of those of the Beehive
were solemn and unsmiling when they spoke of him.
Their voices, too, were strained and funny—as Bubbles
said to himself that day—like the sounds the chooks made
when they got seeds down their necks. He wanted his
father too. Most of the other boys had fathers. If he
(Bubbles said to himself valiantly, watching Brenda’s
eyes with mild speculation) was on any old islan’ or any-
thing, he would run and run til’ no ole cannobles at
all could touch him.
“Yes,” said Mrs Campbell firmly, in answer to
Brenda’s statement. “Mr Carslake is too thoughtful and
kind to break such news to me in a letter. No news
is good news, they say, and perhaps, even at this minute,
he may be starting for . . . home.”
“Yes,” the sensitive Brenda quavered. “But ... he
might be . . . not,” she ended lamely. Barby sniffed
loudly and inelegantly at the sea-water in her head.
“He’d write to us if he were rescued, I imagine,”
she said gruffly, in order to end the discussion that was
bringing the well-known and dreaded expression of
poignant despair to her mother’s face. “What’s the letter
about, anyway?” The atmosphere changed to one of
eager attention, while once more the mother regarded
the written words on the paper on her knees.
“Mr Carslake,” she volunteered with no expression
at all in her voice, “wants me to take a boarder; a girl
a little older than yourselves.”
“A boarder I”
“A girl I” cried two voices simultaneously, while
Bubbles stared. What was a boarder? Had it anything
to do with boards?
“Where from? Why on earth? Who is she?” then
followed in swift bombardment, and Mum held up one
hand for silence, and commenced to read aloud.


There were few secrets at the Beehive, the problems
of house and purse, since the father’s disappearance, be-
ing tackled by a committee of four and dissected thor-
oughly. The girls should know a little of housekeeping
trials and troubles, thought Mrs Campbell. A little re-
sponsibility, maybe, would help the serious light for
education and training in the struggle for existence.
There was but a chance of the Major’s return, and all
wits were needed to manage without him. Five heads,
Bubbles included, were better than one.
Mrs Campbell was reading: “. . . and so, my dear
Mrs Campbell, I immediately thought of you. Mr Gil-
more, who is a client of mine, is leaving at once for
Perth, where he will marry the child’s stepmother. After
the marriage, the new Mrs Gilmore and the girl, with
Mr Gilmore, of course, are coming to Adelaide to see
the home he is purchasing here. He is a very rich man
with pastoral interests in the North, and cattle-stations
in the Territory, and intends to reside in this State
indefinitely, after the honeymoon in the British Isles
and on the Continent.
“The Perth servants of the child’s stepmother will be
brought here and left in charge of the new house until
the return from the trip abroad, and naturally the Gil-
mores will not want a thirteen-year-old girl with them
on their travels. Mr Gilmore does not take kindly to
the thought of a stepdaughter who is but a stepdaughter
of his wife, although he has said little about the matter
to me. However, I am afraid the child is in the unen-
viable position of not being wanted. I am sorry for her,
and from what I can gather, there is a pronounced enmity
between the child and the stepmother. If you will take
the child into your home until their return from Europe,
the Gilmores will pay three guineas weekly for her
board and lodging, as well as leaving with me an ample
sum to provide for her other needs—pocket-money, cloth-
ing, excursions, etc.


“Mr Gilmore asked my advice, feels the responsibility
of Beryl, and is deeply interested also in the unusual
story of the Major. He agrees with me that home in-
fluence would be better for her than boarding-school,
should the right home be found. At once I thought of
you. With your eyes upon her, in the healthy and nor-
mal atmosphere of your house, the girl would indeed be
fortunate. Three guineas a week is . . . three guineas a
week, and I take the privilege of an old friend and
venture to say that the sum would relieve you from
many petty worries. Mr Gilmore leaves for Perth on
the Trans-Australian limited to-morrow, so a telephone
message at my office before nine in the morning, or at
my home to-night, will enable me to tell him of your
decision before he goes. He is calling at nine-thirty.
There will be some one at the office from eight o’clock
to-morrow, so take your time to-night to decide. He is
eager to settle the matter before leaving.”
Mrs Campbell read no more, that being sufficient for
the girls to understand the situation. She waited until
the Bees should begin upon their second volley of ques-
tions.
“What do we want a boarder for?” said Barby ex-
plosively, after a simmering, incredulous calm. “We don’t
want her old three guineas a week.”
Her mother raised her brows and frowned a little
worriedly. “But we do, dear,” she corrected quietly.
“At this moment there are bills that are worrying me
dreadfully. Our income is microscopic now. There are
school uniforms needed for you and Brenda, and white
frocks too, while Bubbles’ clothes are in a shocking
state.” Mum smiled ruefully. “I’m even running out of
patches. Bob is shabby, and does not think I notice it,
but who could help it? We need the money, and when
Bob comes home to-night, we must decide.”
Barby was slightly nonplussed. The thought of need-
ing money was not pleasant; the fact of owing it, even


stranger in the beloved Beehive .
. . so natural . . . and
Mum’s heart sank under this new
burden.
“It will be nice, Mumdarling,
to have some one to
play with and swim with, and . .
. talk to,” came from
less pleasant; the thought of going without shoes and
frocks, and Bob without new suits, was appalling. She
gulped and looked rather startled, gazing at the silent
sea for inspiration and help. It was all very bewildering
and strange.
“I don’t like bringing a strange girl into our home,
dears, you know that, unless you all agree,” said Mum
anxiously. “But
Brenda checked her sister as she was about to answer
sharply and blindly. The furtive tug on her bathing-
suit pulled her up. It was odd that the gentle Brenda
was always in charge of such a situation. Barby glanced
sideways and her cheeks faded to normal as she caught
Brenda’s significant glance at their mother’s white face
and wan mouth.
“I . . . I . . .” came reluctantly, with a gallant attempt
at warmth. “Don’t mind ... if the others don’t.”
Brenda’s effort was almost as great as her sister’s,
although more disguised under genuine concern for Mrs
Campbell. A smile more wide than merry was observed
and understood, however, by the mother, who had missed
none of the little play before Barby’s speech. They tried
not to let her see how they resented the intrusion of a
Brenda with obviously false enthusiasm, and her mother
rose quickly. She could bear no more.
“Wait till Bob comes home,” she replied briskly; if
they could play the game, then she must. “Now I must
run indoors or the meat will burn. Get dressed quickly,
chicks, and set the table for me. Bubbles, you can put
Daisy in the shed and feed the hens.”
The two girls wandered disconsolately away from the
steamy patches where they had been seated on the


cement. Hurriedly dressing by the small dressing-table,
wriggling into cambric frocks very faded and short, and
brushing their hair into hasty order they prepared to go
to the dining-room.
“A boarder I” Barby sniffed, savagely whacking at the
curls about her forehead. “We don’t want any girls
here. S’pose she’ll want to bag the best of everything.”
“She may be nice,” Brenda said. Her imagination
was already at work, supplying her with details that
might and might not be correct. “And did you hear
what Mum read out—about not being wanted? It’s awful
not to be wanted, Barby, isn’t it? Let’s be nice to her
if she comes.
“Softy,” chided the other girl, then shrugged good-
humouredly. “Oh, well,” she said pertly, to hide her
sympathy with what Brenda had said about “not being
wanted”. “She might be a good swimmer, and it might
work all right, if Bob agrees. If she’s decent, it won’t
be bad, but if she isn’t then . . . look . . . out."
With this belligerent warning she thumped the hair-
brush to the table and stumped from the room.
It did not occur to either of the girls that their mother
would have the worst of anything that might arise from
the probable advent of the boarder, for apart from
very likely quarrels and friction, there was the inevit-
able extra work that must fall upon the shoulders of the
housekeeper. Mum never complained of the work she
had to do, although missing the stolid Elsa sadly. None
of the four Bees understood the exact amount of labour
there was to do in the Beehive. The days were a con-
tinual procession of duties, all necessary to keep the
home in the condition demanded by the nature of a fas-
tidious woman.
After dressing themselves that hot afternoon, Barby
and her sister went kitchenwards, at the door meeting
Bubbles, upon the same mission as themselves. All three


made a determined onslaught upon the bread-tin and
the jam-dishes, standing to eat by the window that
looked out over the yard and the distant fringe of tama-
risks by the swamp road. They talked with lips sticky,
and teeth crunching the crusts that Mum made them
eat on these in-between-meal-time feasts after bathing,
speaking mostly of school matters, while they idly
watched the sand outside where some gulls were quar-
relling over crumbs on the ground. The girls chattered
and licked their thumbs, and the small boy ate steadily
and commented solemnly after each carefully masticated
mouthful.
“Three guineas a week,” sang the spoon as Mum
stirred boiling sago in the big, shining, aluminium pot.
“Three guineas a week! New shoes and new frocksl
New linen and towelsl New jerseys and woollies!” But
never once did the spoon beat time to a song sung of
something for herself. Mums are mostly like that, it
seems.
“She’s a Westralian girl, it appears,” said Barby sud-
denly, while Bubbles ceased chasing a blowfly round
the window-pane and regarded his sister intently. “So I
s’pose she’s seen the goldfields and all.”
“The goldfields are a long way from Perth, dear,”
said Mrs Campbell, catching Barby’s remark and know-
ing of whom she spoke.
“Anyhow, she’s an Australian, and that’s a comfort,”
said the younger girl soothingly. “And she’s sure to be
a brick, isn’t she. Barb?”
“Maybe. Some of the girls we know who are Aus-
tralians are not bricks.”
“I expect there are nasty people in every country,”
compromised Brenda bravely. “But less here than any-
where.”
“Really,” laughed Mum. “And how do you know?”
“I just knozu,” was the unwavering response.


‘Til wager,” said Barby as she rinsed her hands in
the sink beneath the window. “That she’ll be a mammy’s
girl and snivel if we look at her.”
Mum looked up with a sweet look of gentle reproof.
“She could hardly be a mammy’s girl—without the mam-
my,” came softly.
Barby flushed to her forehead.
“Hurry, girls,” then followed a swift glance at the
old alarm clock on the kitchen shelf, the clock that
would go only if tilted to the north-west on three legs.
A marvellous clock. “Bob will be here in a few mo-
ments.”
The kitchen was then filled with bustling figures,
and many queries were circulated concerning the where-
abouts of certain spoons or bowls which mysteriously
had strayed. At the Beehive, no doubt because of the
spasmodic and erratic assistance of the juvenile mem-
bers of the household, domestic articles had an uncanny
habit of wandering into the most unlikely spots. For in-
stance, the other day an egg-beater was found in the
bathroom, and last week a pickle-fork was discovered
on the southern veranda beside a dismembered motor-
car of Bubbles’.
At last the big table in the comfortable living-room
was ready for the evening meal which was invariably
called “tea”, and Bob arrived, breezily whistling, as he
came through the yard to the kitchen door where he
called loudly for “Mum”.
It was always for Mum that Bob called, this big lad
almost a man. When she came to-day he lifted her into
his strong young arms, and soundly kissed her. “I say,
Mater,” he remarked thoughtfully, his face clouding.
“You’re not getting any fatter.” He set her down again,
slightly ruffled by his bear-hug.
“Since this morning?” she asked lightly.
He pinched her arm. “You’re thin. Mum. Thin.”


‘‘Nonsense. Em always slightly slimmer in the summer.
All my fat melts in the sun,” she jested, going to the
oven to lift from it a sizzling and spitting leg of lamb.
After tea, when the dish-washing had been done by
Mum and Bob while the girls sketchily attended to their
home-lessons; and when Daisy the cow had been milked
and fed, all tramped out into the glow of late evening,
on to the western veranda where the old lounges and
cane chairs, and the deck-chairs with the faded cretonne
cushions were. The western veranda in the afterglow
of summer days, and the pale and beautiful twilight be-
fore the deep blue darkness and the first shy stars, was
a favourite spot of all the Campbells, and to-night they
settled themselves in sprawling abandonment as usual.
Major Campbell—how long ago it seemed—had loved
the old cane chairs and the feathery trees that were
etched gracefully against the fading sky.
The tall tamarisks waved softly to-night, in a small
caressing breeze that stole out of the heart of the sun-
set, and the smell of the sea was damp and fresh after
the long, hot day of school and work. As far back as Bob
could remember, the evening grouping upon the veranda
had been beloved of them all.
Sometimes they would postpone tea until after dark,
swimming until the light left the brazen sky, and very
often strolling en masse along the grey sands either to
the township for an indulgence in ice-creams and “cool
drinks”, or trudging in the other direction, where wild
sea grasses waved across the horizon on the high sand-
hills, and a wee, lonely cottage stood, untenanted, nest-
ling in a hollow on the point.
Mum had not had such wistful eyes in those days,
nor had she been so pathetically and quietly satisfied
to sit still while the younger ones swam, or romped
on the beach. Once Mum had run as fast as any of
them, with the two tiny girls puffing beside her, or her


hand fast in her husband’s and her voice as merry as
a voice could be. Thirty-seven, Brenda thought, this
evening on the veranda. Mum was thirty-seven, and that
wasn t very old, because in the township a woman who
was at least sixty, drove a speedy little yellow motor-car
—grey hair and all. Mum had chuckled over this remark
when Brenda had come home and told her about the car
and the grey hair. “You surely don’t expect her to leave
it at home, do you?” Mum had asked, “even if it is a
wig.”
Bob was also occupied with the problem of Mum’s
youth and her quietness that evening; there was some-
thing about Mum and her serenity that hurt them more
than usual. It was as if thoughts were hidden from
them, because they were children. The ache of it bore
into Brenda like a pain.
Bob was in his bathing-suit, a shrunken and streaked
garment whose blue had turned to dingy white, and
white to a dingy blue, waiting until the remainder
of the Beehive should talk themselves round to the sub-
ject of the boarder again. It was so like Mum to let them
form their own opinions about it.
“Why don’t you take your swim now, Bob, and we’ll
discuss the matter afterwards,” suggested his mother.
“It’s so creepy in the sea after dark.”
Only when there were glow-worms to stick thrillingiy
to their arms and legs and face, did the girls like the
sea when it was one vast pond of indian ink. But Bob
said: “I don’t mind it dark, Mum; get on with the
washing.
“Look here, Mum,” he said presently, after delibera-
tion. “It’s this way: you need the money, and I feel
I should be earning it for you, instead of studying. The
idea of your taking a boarder seems a bit rotten, with
me still doing lessons , you might say.”
“Your father wished you to continue with your studies,


and you must carry on. His wish is mine,” Mrs Camp-
bell said steadily. “It will be better for you in the end.”
“I know that. But it’s so dashed hard on you, with
Elsa gone and no help with anything—or next to no
help,” he added as Barby stirred and looked savage. “I
don’t like you having to board a strange youngster to
keep us in clothes and grub. Hang it all, you’re like a
skeleton now.”
Loving fingers touched his, and the boy continued
gruffly: “A decent fellow doesn’t like sponging on his
mother. . .
“Laddie! Are you sponging? Is there a dearer boy
anywhere? I am satisfied with you, completely. For you
to give up your work now, after the progress you’ve
made, would be folly. Remember what Mr Du Crane
said about your studies, and his praise is never given
lightly. Your heart is in your drawings, too. A man or
woman always does best with the occupation he or she
loves. One of these days, later, you’ll be taking me to
the Melbourne Cup in your Rolls-Royce, and I shall
have a new gown every week, and I will introduce you
to people as ‘My son, the famous architect, you know—
Oh, yes, Mrs Thingummy, he has just finished designing
the new Sydney Town Hall.’ ”
“Yes,” mumbled Bob amid laughter. “And I can see
you boasting about as well as I can see you swanking
at the Cup. My hat! though, you’ll have the silk dresses
if I have to shove you into ’em.” And Bob laughed
somewhat uneasily and shakily, with such a critical
audience round him. The audience approved heartily
this time, however, of what Bob said, and proclaimed
their agreement in varying tones of enthusiasm. The
shadows slowly deepened, and they still talked, while
the breeze died away and above the grey sea shone a
few faint stars.
Into the silence which fell then, crept like a living


presence the thought of the absent man, and they
became very still as each knew that the others, too, were
wondering about . . . him.
“If father were but here ..." thought the big boy
with a glance of agony at his mother’s slight form out-
lined in the dimness. The responsibility of caring for
her was a task filled with dangers and fears, and he
knew that she and the others were sub-consciously wait-
ing for him to help them decide upon the matter of the
boarder.
He shattered the quiet with a cough and a query:
"What is the kid’s name? I didn’t notice it when I
skipped through the letter.’’
Mrs Campbell withdrew her gaze from the far-off
horizon, and started. “Her name—’’ her thoughts came
back then. "Oh, it is Beryl. Beryl Le Leivre.”
"Beryl,” Bob repeated, thumped a bare knee. "Well,
Destiny has settled it for us. Another Bee. One more
inmate for the Beehive! Mum, her fate’s decided. I’ll
go presently and ring Mr Carslake at his house, and
tell him we’ll have her. And ... by jove l If you girls
don’t help Mum with the extra work I’ll skin the pair
of you.”
And with that cheerful threat hanging in mid-air, the
boy sprang to his feet and raced down to the dark
sea.


CHAPTER II
THE HOUSE BY THE RIVER
Beryl Le Leivre could not remember her mother, who
had died many years before, but she remembered well
the man with the beard and moustache and deep voice
—the man who had taken her for ferry rides when she
was a tiny girl. Mr Le Leivre had brought his family
to the house by the river long ago, and then had left
them to go up on to the goldfields to do some work
for the Government. The work proved interesting and
profitable, the newspapers devoting a column occasion-
ally to what he did and what he saw.
When her mother died, Mr Le Leivre left the small
girl-baby on her tottering legs and went away again,
up past Kalgoorlie with a camel-train to the limestone
plains.
Then he returned to Perth once more, and found Beryl
to be a pretty child of five years, with her mother’s
morning-glory eyes and blue-black curling hair. The little
girl had been shy at first, but the laugh and the deep
voice of the big man with the beard had awakened
memories in the lonely little heart, and she clung to
him, and quickly the man and the child became the
best of pals.
But business called the father away again, and once
more Beryl was left with the servants and with Wilbur,
who was a little more than a servant, and had full
charge of the little girl. At the age of six, she was taken
daily to a small and extremely select school, Mr Le


Leivre knew very little about schools, and this one had
been recommended by the wife of a friend in the city.
He did not know that the school was a place where
snobbery was cultivated, and Beryl soon learned to turn
up her pretty nose at badly cut garments, plain foods,
and simple manners.
Mr Le Leivre, when he was at home, listened to his
small daughter, and watched her mannerisms, frowning
and vaguely discomforted by what he observed. Fie de-
cided at last that what the child needed was a mother.
It took him a long time to discover this. Servants—even
such proper persons as Wilbur and her associates—were
not the same as a loving and understanding woman. It
was influence that mattered most, and the influence that
was governing Beryl was of the wrong kind for her
welfare.
Reluctantly Mr Le Leivre looked around him for
a new wife, just as a woman looks for a new dressmaker.
He did not like putting any one else in the place of
Beryl’s mother, but it was for the child’s good. At last
he thought he had found someone who should suit.
It was Nelly Ayres; she was pretty and dainty, with
light blue eyes and a fluff of golden hair; she had soft
and white hands, and her teeth were like square-cut
pearls.
Mr Le Leivre could not see the greed that was in her
face, nor could he look into her heart and see her small-
ness and cowardice.
Nelly Ayres became Mrs Le Leivre, and the small
Beryl was brought into the drawing-room to meet her.
“This is your new mother, dear,” explained the man
nervously. “So come and kiss her and welcome her
home.’’
Beryl stood still and dumbfounded, her feet planted
wide apart on the carpet, her eyes blazing. Had she
not been taught to cherish the memory of the mother


whose portrait was there on the wall near her? She
turned and pointed to it, unconsciously dramatic in her
swift and soundless action. There was the mother she
remembered as being sweet and dear, and not the woman
in the rich clothes, standing near the man who had
spoken. How could this woman be her mother, thought
Beryl, bewildered. Her mother was dead.
“There’s my mother,” she said at last, in anger and
fright. “I don’t want another one. How can she'— with
a nod at her father’s new wife, “be my mother. One can
only have one mother, and there she is”—and Beryl
again pointed to the picture on the wall.
Mr Le Leivre flushed. The flush came mostly from
disappointment, but mingled with it was a little anger
at Beryl’s refusal to greet the pretty woman standing
before her.
“Come and kiss your mother at once,” he ordered,
with an inward prayer for forgiveness for the mistake
he now saw he was making.
Beryl’s face had hardened.
“I won’t,” she had said imperiously, turning and run-
ning from the room. She reached the garden with her
eyes filmed with tears, and fell in a sobbing heap in
a silent corner beneath a willow. She was dimly aware
of all that the new-comer meant, and was terribly afraid
of the change that must come to the well-ordered house-
hold.
Her father, in the drawing-room, bowed his head, for
his heart was heavy and he, too, was afraid.
His new wife had laughed—a pretty, insincere laugh,
like the tinkling sound of the clashing bangles on her
wrists. “Don’t worry over me, Jim,” she said with a
smile. “The poor child was surprised. She will come
round later. 1 expect she is jealous.” And under her
breath she was saying: “Little fiend: I’ll teach her better
manners.”


But Beryl did not come round later, and a steady
dislike grew between the stepmother and the child.
Beryl was ordered to address the new Mrs Le Leivre
as “Mother”, but refused so stubbornly that, to save
trouble, there was nothing more to be said about the
matter. And in defiance of orders, and because she knew
it annoyed Nelly, Beryl deliberately called her by her
Christian name upon every occasion. The unhappy
father could not summon courage to raise his voice
against it any longer.
His wife proved her hatred of Beryl by surreptitious
slappings and pinches, cruel smacks across the pale skin
of the little girl’s delicately beautiful features, blue and
yellow marks put on slim arms by angry hands. Most
of this occurred when the father was away in the country.
He seemed to be away a lot just about that time.
Beryl at last realized that by ignoring the cruelty
of Nelly she could anger her more than in any other
way, and also learnt the annoying and unpleasant little
habit of shrugging her shoulders defiantly and scornfully,
with eyes half-shut and lips quietly smiling. This ap-
parent indifference to pain so enraged Nelly that she
was led into acts of spite and venom that very often
frightened her—for fear her husband should find out.
So just before each return of Le Leivre to the city,
there were extravagant gifts of jewellery, lace, trinkets,
and clothing, all of which Beryl accepted with the same
calm as she had the slaps and blows . . . but without
L
the smile of scorn, for her mind was busy.
She did not tell tales, but did not let Nelly know
that she could not tell tales. Nelly was afraid of tale-
telling, and continued with the presentation of gifts
to bribe the girl into saying nothing of the cruelty she
endured during her father’s absences. And Beryl’s strange
little mind was busy all the time, while her heart ached
with loneliness and despair.


When Mr Le Leivre did return to the house by the
river, the child would creep into his arms and press
close to him, silently telling of her gladness at having
him back, and sometimes would sob helplessly until ex-
hausted, giving no reason other than she “had missed
him dreadfully”. He would frown and sigh, and his lips
would set in stern and bitter lines, for he guessed a
great deal of the true state of affairs, and blamed him-
self. Then he would carry the over-dressed, tear-stained
little human doll into her room and give her into the
charge of the patient and careful Wilbur. His eyes
would avoid the maid’s when he handed the child to
her, usually asleep, exhausted after her storm of weep-
ing.
He would go into the drawing-room and gaze at the
picture on the wall—the picture that Nelly longed to
remove, but did not dare.
In the mind of the child was an odd mixture of
babyishness and maturity that caused her to argue this
way: “I’ll accept everything Nelly gives me, for she is
spending my father’s money, and the things she gives
me are really his. I will save them all up, and some
day when all of his money is spent, and she goes away,
I will give him the brooches and bangles and pendants,
and we will be rich again.”
This state of affairs went on for years, and it says
much for Beryl’s natural sweetness of mind that she
was not utterly ruined by the woman who sought every
possible way of hurting the girl who was daily growing
more silent and sedate. And Beryl continued to lock
away carefully all the gifts of jewellery and ornaments,
just as another child would treasure patches of cloth
for dolls’ clothing. Her shrug was becoming more pro-
nounced, and the thin layer of snobbery and artificiality
was thickening.
Then Beryl’s father went away once more, for the


last time. He did not return. He was buried out in the
limestone; the camels and their driver came back alone.
After a few months of false and picturesque sorrow
on the part of Nelly, and the heart-broken misery of
the little girl, the house quickly began to fill with noisy
guests, the drawing-room being refurnished elaborately.
The portrait of Beryl’s mother was placed triumphantly
away in the box-room. Beryl rescued it with passionate
tears she did not fully understand, and Wilbur promised
to hide it for her until she should want it.
Then one night during hairbrushing operations at
bedtime, Wilbur told Beryl that Nelly was to marry
again.
So there was a wedding in the house by the river,
and Nelly was very gay. Beryl was dressed in rose-pink
georgette, like gossamer, weighted with rosebuds. Her
shoes were shining and black, and her long silk stock-
ings were the colour of the frock, and a little rosebud-
covered bonnet pressed down upon her dark curls. Beryl
knew she looked very pretty, for every one, as well as
Wilbur, had told her so.
After the ceremony, Beryl had returned to the heaps
of clothes ready for packing, in her bedroom. She idly
picked up little piles of frocks and petticoats and tossed
them on to the bed. “Put those in the cabin-trunk, please
Wilbur, and these in the suit-cases. The rest can go in
the box for the hold. You may go now—l’m going to
bed.”
“Bed? Well, then shan’t I undress you?”
“No, thanks.
Nelly and her husband entered at that moment, smil-
ing at something they had been saying as they passed
through the doorway. Beryl turned languidly, waiting
for them to address her. The guests were still out in
the porches and on the lawns, for the Gilmores were
leaving next day, and that night there was to be a dance


at the river home. They were to leave by interstate
steamer on the morrow, for South Australia.
The sound of music stole in from the lantern-lit lawns,
laughter from the garden.
Nelly tucked an arm in the arm of her husband, and
Beryl winced. She was as pale as alabaster as she turned
away.
“I think it’s time to tell you, Beryl,” she said lightly,
“that we are not taking you to England with us.”
The man stared at his wife. “Didn’t you tell her be-
fore?” he asked in astonishment.
“I forgot,” confessed Nelly, lying prettily. “I was so
busy.”
Beryl glanced at the clothes upon the bed, and at
the partly filled boxes, while the dutiful Wilbur went
on packing.
“Oh,” laughed Nelly in assumed sweetness. “You will
want your clothes. We are leaving this house for good,
you know.” Beryl did not know; she had presumed that
they were to return later. “Your . . . new father” (Beryl’s
eyes filled) “has bought a place in Adelaide, and the
servants are to go there to look after it while we are
away. We have made arrangements for you to live with
some people at one of the beaches near Adelaide, so
you will sail that far with us. We are spending a week
there before catching the other boat.”
“I’m glad I’m not going away with you,” was the
stifled reply in the affected, stilted tones of the girl.
The man looked curiously at her and stroked his small
moustache. “Why?” he asked.
“I prefer to be alone, thank you,” was the response,
made with the aplomb of a grown-up person. Turning
her back upon them, she called to Wilbur to unbutton
her frock, as though there were no other persons pre-
sent. Nelly moved, but paused, for she could hardly
slap the child then, with her husband looking on. She


quivered with rage, then swept from the room, her hus-
band, after a swift glance of interest and pity at the
erect young figure in the soft frock, following her.
The door was closed sharply by Beryl, not many
inches behind Mr Gilmore’s back.
She pointed to the labels on the dressing-table, ready
for sticking on the boxes. “They should gum one of
those on me,” she said bitterly. “Not wanted on the
voyage—or” she added thickly: “Any other time.”
“Come, come, Miss Beryl,” said Wilbur soothingly,
but without meaning.
“Don’t be an idiot. Unhook this frock and let me get
into bed.”
“But the party. . . The woman nodded towards
the window, through which came the tinkling sound of
a ukulele and soft laughter. Beryl walked to the blind
and stood with her hand upon it for a moment, watch-
ing the coloured lanterns on the boats in the tiny bay
of the river, and the long snaky reflections wriggling like
live things across the water. She caught her breath in a
deep sob, then pulled the blind down.
“The party doesn’t want me, and I don’t want it.
And my . . . father is forgotten, like my mother.”
By the time she was in bed she was pondering miser-
ably over the home waiting for her at the South Aus-
tralian beach where she was to live for so long. “I
wonder where they’re sending me?” she asked.
“I’m sure I don’t know, Miss Beryl. We all—cook
and all of us—are to go straight there to the new house,
and put it straight for when Mrs and Mr Gilmore come
back from foreign countries.”
“And . . . this house. . . .?”
“I did hear that it was to be sold—Miss Beryl.”
“Sold! My mother’s and my father’s house to be sold
. . . like a . . . a . . . thimble in a shop.” Beryl was


stunned. “Oh,” she wailed. “If he’s got so much money
they might have had the decency to leave that alone.”
The impulsive cry had been shrill and full of deep
hurt. The prim face of Wilbur softened a little. She
stepped forward and touched the girl’s arm lightly, a
caress in her small action. “Don’t take on so, my dear;
it can’t be helped.”
“Can’t be helped! That makes it worse. Oh! Go
out”
Wilbur turned quickly, offended, with lifted chin and
stiff back, while Beryl pressed a small lace handkerchief
to the hot tears on her cheeks. She looked up suddenly
to regard the woman intently. Then, half ashamed and
embarrassed she moved a finger: “Come here,” she said
in low tones.
The woman, with her hand upon the knob of the
door, paused and looked back at the bewilderingly
lovely little figure in the bed, and obeyed.
“Wilbur, I’m sorry,” was the almost inaudible re-
mark, and Beryl pressed the big hand for a second, then
reached back to the bedside table and switched off the
light.


CHAPTER 111
EASTWARDS
Beryl leaned upon the rail of the interstate steamer
and watched the busy scene round her. Huge cranes
swung, and bells ting-tinged happily; luggage was piled
into swings and hoisted . . . rattle . . . creak . . . then
lowered with a sickening sweep into the hold. It was
almost time to leave, and the people on the wharf were
buying streamers and waving excitedly. Chatter and
laughter rose into the warm air.
The paper streamers shone in the strong sunlight.
It was very hot in Fremantle that day. An officer in
immaculate white linen passed where Beryl stood. She
admired his clean suit and shining buttons. Nelly’s
laughter was heard from the deck, where she stood with
her small gloved hands around the stems of large
bunches of flowers, and with chocolate-boxes under both
arms. Streamers, the other ends of which were grasped
by a crowd of merry folk on the wharf, were caught
among the flower-stems.
Beryl shrugged and looked away from Nelly to the
ant-heap below. Some clean-faced schoolgirls in navy
blue and white were waving to a pretty woman with a
plump baby in her arms, and one of the girls in a shrill
voice cried: “Write, mother . . . every day.” Beryl felt
suddenly very much alone, in spite of the people, and
there is no worse feeling for thirteen to experience, even
if thirteen is dignified and very much grown-up.


In spite of the vague ache of loneliness Beryl was
interested, and thrilled to the core by the novelty of
the happenings round her. The tall masts of sailing
ships pricked up towards the sky; sirens boo-ed mourn-
fully; the funnels of the steamer and of a big liner
near by belched black smoke; midget boats scurried
around the harbour like water-beetles; and stewards
bustled to and fro among mountains of luggage and
people all edging towards the rails.
Beryl had no one to wave to, for Nelly’s friends were
busy with Nelly, and Beryl’s own absent friends were no
more than polite acquaintances. She realized that some-
thing was missing, and found herself longing for some
one to “see her off’’. She gulped many times, in the
flurry of those last moments of shouted good-byes and
bon voyages , as the creaking ropes were loosened and
dropped free of the wharf. Then, looking around to see
that no one was observing her, she waved and waved
again, her eyes fixed upon an imaginary friend, her
handkerchief fluttering until all of the signals from
below seemed directed at her alone. But the little game
was too empty to last long, so she dropped her arm
and stood still.
Slowly the ship turned and moved away from the
last touch of the land, swung into mid-harbour and
nosed steadily out into the open sea. The streamers had
broken, and were fluttering and whispering in broken
ends from railings and ropes. The crowded wharf was
soon a block of faintly smudged colour, drifting away
into the distance and merging into the land. Beryl
turned and walked along the steady deck, to the fore
part of the steamer, where the rigging through which
she looked made her think of tales of pirates and
buccaneers, pieces of eight, and short-nosed cannons.
Rottnest Island, lying in a blaze of golden brown and
green, with spray drenching the rocks in thin veils of


white, next slipped away into the haze of heat that
hung over the clear water, until there was nothing to
look at but sea, sky, and far-off shoreline.
The gentle dipping of the ship became a little
rougher, loud splashes and trickles coming up from
where the prow shattered the blue rollers, while a small
and welcome cool wind whined through the rigging and
the wireless aerial. Fremantle, with its stifling streets
and hot roads, was suddenly far away.
Nelly emerged from the landing door above the saloon
steps, and walked a little unsteadily towards her step-
daughter standing alone. “Seasick yet?” was the query
thrown at Beryl.
“Not yet, thank you . . . Nelly,” came the evenly toned
response.
After all, it was Nelly who was unromantically sea-
sick, and not Beryl. She appeared at the table for each
meal, listening to the conversation, replying when
spoken to, and leaving the saloon always as she entered
it, alone. Mr Gilmore sat at the other side of the table,
with an empty chair beside him. Beryl spoke to none
of the other girls on board, and they did not know what
to make of the quiet, serene-mannered little personage
who dressed so elaborately and travelled “adult”. Beryl
would have found the voyage much more pleasant if
she had joined the jolly youngsters who scampered
around the decks in sand-shoes and jerseys, played deck-
quoits and devoured fruit and sweets at all hours.
After two days at sea, and when the idyllically lovely
Albany had been left behind, Beryl thought suddenly
of her steel-bound box, containing her treasured jewels
and trinkets. She hastened to her cabin, fastened the
door, and dragged out her trunk from beneath the
lounge. Seating herself upon the floor with her back to
the door, she drew the box from among piles of soft
garments.


The contents of the small box she tipped into a
glittering, shining heap on the carpet, catching at a
bangle as it rolled away with the motion of the ship.
Wristlet watches and bracelets, combs and pendants,
small rings and buckles, and even a jewelled garter
were in the tangled pile. Beryl lifted the articles one
by one, nodding as she examined them.
“That was when she pinched my neck. . . .” she mur-
mured. “And that when she slapped my mouth. . . .”
With stiff fingers she clutched the things tightly to her
frock. “Daddy,” she said to herself in passionate under-
tone, her eyes screwed shut: “Why aren’t you here?
They are all yours. I saved them for you. She never
loved you . . . never.”
The little figure rocked disconsolately to and fro for
a time, the hands and the golden things still at her
breast; then came a sound outside, and the jewellery
was hastily bundled away again, and tears pressed from
wet eyes with a small lace handkerchief. She re-locked
the trunk carefully, pushing it under the lounge as she
rose to her feet.
“I wonder,” she thought, “what those people in South
Australia will be like. I wonder if they’ll have a nice
house? I . . . perhaps they’ll be stiff and proper, and
I won’t be able to breathe without first asking per-
mission. Perhaps they’ll be common .”
Before this awful possibility Beryl was aghast.
The same night, as dinner-time approached, she
bathed early and went to the upper deck to gaze out
over the beauty of the dim sea. The notes of the dressing
bugle sounded as she stood there, echoing as sadly as
only the notes of a bugle can, in the softly lapping
noises of the twilit ocean. It satisfied her to look at the
water; to think that for thousands of years it had been
the same. She leaned her elbows on the wooden rail,
pulling her fur-edged cloak tighter about her. A shaft


kind. “Don’t ask me to mix with the others; I can't”
“Why?”
“I didn’t join in at first. I ... I didn’t know how.
They . . . are different from the girls at my school.
I . . . I’m not proud, really, but I can’t help show-
ing. . . . Oh, inside of me I’m like they are, but it
won’t come out. Something stops me from being . . .
what I’d like to be. And . . . there is only another day
of yellow light, touching and running over the dark
waves sliding by, struck out from a port-hole below.
She shivered slightly as the night wind nipped her
ankles, and turned to go down the stairs, but Nelly’s
husband stood beside her, where he had been for some
minutes, watching her.
He caught her arm, and though she wriggled free
with an agile, haughty little action, he stood in her
way against the smoke-room door, and prevented her
escape.
“Look here, Beryl, you’re not such a little snob as
you appear to be. Even if Nelly doesn’t like you, need
I be the same?”
Beryl stared then.
“Of course you know we can’t take a big girl like
you away with us so far. Let’s be friends and forget
differences.”
“I’d rather not, thank you.”
The man was wise enough to understand the sudden
misery that drenched her eyes while the dignified, cold
little utterance tried to give such a different impression.
“Now look here,” he said sensibly. “Be a good girl and
listen to me. Join in with others on board and don’t
be so stand-offish. You’re behaving like a pompous society
hostess rather than a human little girl. You’re injuring
yourself more than us, you know.”
“Please—?” Beryl looked into eyes that after all were
or so and we’ll be in port.”


The man nodded, and spoke gruffly. Beryl’s face was
very lovely then, with wistful eyes startlingly beautiful
with their black lashes and tearful shadows. “All right,
then—come for a stroll with me.’’ Mr Gilmore, who
had slightly resented the fact of possessing a “ready-
made daughter’’, linked arms with that same girl, and
led her round the deck again and again, until he felt
he had made a good overture towards a permanent
friendship. It was a pity, he thought, that Nelly did
not like the child better: a nice youngster, clever and
naturally observant, although appallingly over-cultured
in tone and manner . . . and dressed like a stage infant.
“I . . .” Beryl hesitated. “What shall I call you,
please?’’ came desperately at last.
The man laughed uneasily. He knew what his com-
panion was thinking of. “Well! You can hardly give
me a paternal title, can you? Call me Gil, for all of
my best pals do that.’’
Beryl glowed. “Very well, then . . . and . . . thank
you, Gil,” she said shyly.
After another round of the deck she stopped sud-
denly. “Please, . . . Gil, will you tell me where I am
being sent?”
The little moustache was tugged at then, and a frown
appeared upon Mr Gilmore’s smooth forehead. “Well,”
he confessed, “I haven’t seen the folk with whom you
are to stay, but Carslake, my solicitor, assures me of
their . . . niceness. Is that the right word? Good. He
is a friend of the Campbells. They live in a big old
house on the shore somewhere, about a mile from a
small township, I believe. There’s a jolly fine little
school there—Denning House. You should be very happy
there, you know, Beryl, and when we return from
Europe we’ll have you with us in the big house, with
Wilbur again.”
“Nelly is going to have Wilbur for a maid.”


“Oh ... is that so?”
“I like you,” blurted Beryl, unable to remain silent
on the matter any longer. “But I can’t like her, and
please . . . oh, please don’t let me live with her again.
I . . . she . . .
The little girl paused generously for she could not
“sneak’’.
“She . . . what?’’ asked the man sternly.
“1 . . . we don’t get along well. I . . . am to blame.
for I tease her, and shrug, and smile, and call her
Nelly. 1.. . am insolent. . . She looked at the man,
meeting his gaze squarely. “She is not my mother, and
I will not call her that if forty Kings and Queens come
and beg me to. My mother is dead.’’
“I . . . see,’’ pondered Mr Gilmore. “I . . . under-
stand.” He waited a moment, then: “I’ll try and fix
you up to be happy: perhaps boarding-school when we
come home . . . eh?”
I hate the thought of it,” faltered Beryl. “But, it
would be better than . . .” she gulped and said more
brightly: “Well, anyway, I’ll remember what you’ve
said, and of course you don’t want me with you while
you have Nelly. I am nothing to you, really, and nothing
to her either, am I?”
“There is such a thing as a sacred charge,” muttered
Mr Gilmore. He patted the wrist on his arm. “But
never mind, girlie, you’ll like it at the beach, that much
is certain. Major Campbell is quite a celebrity, too. . . .”
Here followed the outline of the Major’s romantic and
sad story. “Now, there’s the bugle again, and I must
go down and collect Nelly. She’s better to-night, with
the sea behaving so decorously, and is preparing to follow
your example and tackle a big dinner. . . . Eh, with two
serves of ice-cream, and a mound of trifle as big as a
pumpkin. And pineapple after that . . . eh?”
“Oh! But I was hungry .”


Mr Gilmore winked.
Beryl blushed. “Trifle is nice, though, isn’t it, Gil?”
she said.
“Rather. I’m a pig for it myself.”
He left Beryl smiling, as he had intended.
After dinner, upon deck again, Nelly approached and
took the girl’s arm in a fierce grip. Beryl whitened, but
would not wince. “I saw you walking around with my
husband,” the woman almost spat at her. “And I sup-
pose you told him everything you could rake up about
_ 9 9
me.
Beryl was disgusted, but spoke coolly, the old con-
temptuous look replacing the more wholesome expres-
sion summoned to her features by Mr Gilmore’s
friendliness. “Do you think so, Nelly?”
“Of course you did.”
“Of course I did not. You judge me by your own
nasty ways,” the girl retorted sharply, the old hate and
misery returning. “I am not a sneak.”


CHAPTER IV
BERYL ARRIVES AT THE BEEHIVE
There were great preparations at the Beehive, in honour
of the coming guest. The spare room, next to the room
which was shared by Brenda and Bar by, was made
shining and bright by the united efforts of the children
and their mother, not forgetting Bob. A few gaily-
coloured cushions were placed in the big chair by the
window, and linen mats on the dressing-table and wash-
stand.
A white counterpane was spread over the soft blan-
kets, although the weather was much too hot to think
of using them. A rug from Mrs Campbell’s big bedroom
was taken away by her and put beside the single bed
in the spare room. The window was curtained with
new net purchased by the two girls after school the day
before, and placed upon brass rods the same evening
by Bob, who was quite as interested as the others in
the freshly decorated room.
All the windows of the Beehive reached to the floor,
so that all one had to do to go out of doors was to
stoop and step outside.
Petunias from the strip of garden by the woodshed
were placed in bowls and vases upon the morning of
the visitor’s arrival, and fern was picked from Brenda’s
own flower-pot, which lived behind the panes of the
wash-house, sheltered from the winds from the sea.
In the kitchen, on that Saturday morning, pies were


baked, and a joint of lamb roasted; jellies for Sunday
night’s tea were made and placed in the cellar to “jell”;
a custard was carefully concocted by Brenda, solemnly
sprinkled with coco-nut by Bubbles, and put near the
jelly. Bubbles was always happy and replete on cooking
mornings, having a fancy for scraping out the cooking-
pots and bowls, and eating crusts and crumbs from the
table. In this diversion he had an able assistant—
Waggles, the ancient and sleepy tabby-cat, who was
beloved by the whole Beehive, and worshipped by the
small boy. Waggles had a voice like something that
had been suddenly trodden upon, and a look of eternal
misery in his mournful eyes. For such a sorrowful feline,
he possessed a remarkable appetite.
Fruit was stewed; cakes and scones were made, and
then the mother of the hard-working and zealous family
stretched her weary limbs and went to her room to
change her frock before the arrival of the stranger.
They were all curious to see the girl who was to live
with them for so long. Bob had gone to the station
some time back, and was expected back with Beryl at
any moment now.
The Campbells possessed no vehicle, having been
accustomed, when the family was complete, to hiring
a motor-car from a local garage, but now there was no
money for such luxuries. Bob would have to go to the
blacksmith’s and hire a trap and horse instead, drive
to the station, then to the Beehive with the girl and her
boxes, return the vehicle to the blacksmith, and then
walk home.
The train was nearly always on time, unless floods
in winter strayed across the line on their way through
the salty creeks which wound through the swamps to
the sea. The train journey between Mangrove Bend
and the city took a little over half an hour. Bob arrived
at the station with the horse and trap just as the fussy


engine and five carriages curved out of the Bend station
towards the terminus, a mile farther on. He hurriedly
ran up the wooden steps past a few stray passengers
who had alighted to the platform.
He looked around, and discovered a regal-looking
little creature in the open waiting-room, with her big
heap of luggage beside her. Bob was conscious of a
sinking sensation in the region of his heart as he beheld
the array. Surely this little dandy with her long gloves,
silk coat, and impressive hand-bag, was not Beryl Le
Leivre! His sisters did not dress like that! An uneasy
thought struck him. Perhaps this haughty little dame
would sneer at their sensible clothing and simple frocks!
Well, let her sneer. Barby and Brenda could take care
of themselves.
Bob fought back a wave of colour that threatened
to plunge his face and neck into scarlet for the rest of
the day, and walked resolutely forward. Lifting his cap,
he regarded the strange girl with interest, despite his
discomfort, and stammered: “Pardon—but are you Beryl
Le Leivre?”
The girl glanced from the tail of the vanishing train
to the tall boy with the pleasant, honest face, whose
cheeks were red and whose eyes were very brown.
He was quite a nice boy, she noted at once, and
smiled faintly, trying to remember Gibs advice about
making friends. Beryl, however, was not accustomed to
meeting young people in this manner, and did not
smile quite in the manner she would have wished to.
“Yes,” was her answer in the precise tone that sounded
curt and distant. “That is my name. Have you come
from a Mrs Campbell?”
“I have,” said Bob with emphasis. “Are all of these
yours}”
There was reason for the emphasis. He waved a hand
at the three trunks, four suit-cases, and two hatboxes,


with a rug thrown across them and a dressing-case on
top of the pile.
“Of course,” said the girl, wondering why he stared
so at her belongings. “Have you a car for me? These
will follow later, I dare say.” Beryl pointed to the
luggage.
Bob stared again, and thought of the small bedroom
with the draped “corner-wardrobe”. He hid a smile.
This young person with the grand-dame air was due
for some shocks. To his everlasting credit it must be
stated that he met her gaze squarely, with no suspicion
of merriment, and explained carefully the situation.
“I haven’t a car. We don’t grow them at the Beehive,”
he stated to the amazed girl. “But I’ve got a trap outside,
and we’ll take the baggage with us. It’s a mile from
here, you know, to the house, and I don’t want to drag
the horse twice through the heavy sand when once
will do. Besides, it’s two bob an hour for the hire of
the turn-out.”
He leaned over and picked up a suit-case, Beryl walk-
ing ahead with her hands empty of all but the hand-bag.
Not even the rug did she take with her, thought Bob
disgustedly. A new respect for his sisters rose within
him: they would have helped carry the things to the
trap.
The girl stopped suddenly, as though remembering
something. “Oh, the porter stared so when I tipped him:
was five shillings enough?”
“Five bob,” was the smiling reply. “I don’t suppose
the poor chap’s recovered from the shock yet. A bob
would have been ample.”
“A shilling ,” was the echo, with slight stress upon the
word. “But I always like to tip people well—it encour-
ages them, you know.” Had Bob known it, this was
quoted from a remark of Beryl’s stepmother.
Bob grunted as he lifted a trunk, and wondered


whether she would try to tip him. “If she does,” he
said savagely to himself, “I'll tip her— out of the trap,”
he added.
Beryl glanced to the right and left as they went jig-
jogging along the main street of the little beach town,
past the shops with plate-glass windows that reflected
them in wriggling and waving shapes, and past shops
with hardly any windows at all. There was the town hall
where the weekly moving-pictures were held; standing
opposite was a small store that did duty as a restaurant
in summer-time, when custom was heavy and trippers
plentiful. Tables and chairs were placed at intervals
around the interior of the “shop”; the window was
filled with jars of nuts, chocolate boxes, trays of sweets
and a card that said “pies and pasties obtainable here”.
More notices announced the sale of ice-cream, cool
drinks, tea and coffee. Many a riotous night had the
young Campbells spent at the hall, with a shilling each
to divide between the ticket-box and the delights of
the store.
Then the school, a large low building with a row
of sentinel pines, and a tall fence along the front, came
into view. The pines threw pleasant shadows across the
front walls and lawns. Bob pointed with his whip, for
he was explaining as they drove: “There’s your school,”
he said. “And there’s the kindergarten where my young
brother hangs out.”
Beryl watched the school until the next corner was
turned, but did not commit her thoughts to speech.
The short wooden jetty with the T-shaped end came
next into view. “No big boats put in here, the water’s
too shallow. But there are yacht races from the end of
October until the winter, and we often have sports and
swimming competitions. I won a prize once, for diving.”
To Bob’s pained surprise there was no comment.
Leaving the township behind very suddenly, as a


bend in the road shut off all sight of shops and houses,
the trap appeared to be heading straight for the open
sandhills, with nothing in sight but the rolling dunes,
rippled and clean, and low, oily swamp land on the
other side of the road. “What a contrast,” thought
Beryl.
“The water comes down from the hills every time
heavy rain falls,” explained Bob, “swamping the term-
inus town at the end of the line. It gets into a lot of
houses, too, between here and the city, and of course
comes this way trying to escape to the sea. If there’s a
high tide there’s no hope of the floods getting out, and
the whole of Mangrove Bend is marooned, with trams
and trains stopped and the roads impassable.”
“Where are the trams?” asked Beryl, looking back
along the roadway curving around the sandhills.
“At the terminus, a mile past the Bend. They take
a different track from the trains. When there’s a flood,
trollies and drags come down and make small fortunes
carting people through the water. It’s fun, too.”
“Why aren’t the floods stopped?”
“Why?” asked Bob of the air. “Ask the Government,
not me.”
Beryl blinked.
More sandhills appeared, higher than any yet passed.
These apparently brought a recollection to the boy’s
mind, for he smiled, and pointed again with the whip.
“We have ripping times here occasionally,” he said,
“wandering around, and finding things, and sliding
down those slopes. It’s good sport. Gee up, Angel.”
“But your boots must get full of sand,” said the
amazed girl.
“Easily emptied again,” was the nonchalant reply.
“But it’s better fun after a dip in the winter—warms
one. Get along there, Angel.”
“Do you swim in the cold weather?”—Beryl stared.


“Rather.”
“Isn’t the water icy}”
“Sometimes, but who’s afraid of cold water?”
“Oh!”
After a pause that was punctuated by the slow clip-
clopping of Angel’s hoofs, Bob glanced sideways at his
companion, with his brown eyes fixed curiously upon
her pretty features. “Why did you come down here
alone?” he inquired. “I expected some one with you
as far as the Bend station, anyway.”
“I am used to being alone,” explained Beryl, who
was at that moment thinking how comical she must
appear, in the quaint old vehicle drawn by the decrepit
horse. “And Gil, my . . . stepfather, hadn’t time. Nelly
. . . she is my stepmother, couldn’t be bothered. Gil,
when he left the hotel this morning, told Nelly to take
me to the Bend, and then said good-bye to me, but
when the time came for me to leave, Nelly put me into
a taxi with my luggage, and sent me alone.”
“How did you manage at the main station in town?”
“I paid the taxi-man, then he went for a porter for
me, and I tipped the porter well, and, after buying my
ticket, I didn’t have to do anything but get on the train.
Nelly wanted to send me right to your place in the
taxi, but I wouldn’t go, because you would have then
met the train for nothing.”
Bob nodded. “Rather decent of you,” he admitted.
Then he asked quickly: “Is Nelly . . . your stepmother,
1 mean . . . decent to you?” “Decent” was a favourite
word of Bob’s and held many shades of meaning for
him. Beryl understood.
“I detest her,” she said shortly and savagely, and
stared very hard at Angel’s ears.
Bob whistled.
A gate came into view, breaking the line of tall tama-


risks through the branches of which could be seen
glimpses of a blue stretch of water.
“That is pretty,” Beryl said almost with shyness. “It
looks so clean and . . . fresh.”
Bob liked to hear her praise of the Beehive surround-
ings, and stuck the whip into its socket with a loud
and satisfied smack, as he jumped down to open the
gate. Considerable effort was needed to drag it apart
wide enough for the trap to pass through. Angel knew
what to do, for she had walked through many gateways.
She lifted her head and plunged forward with a jerk
that shook Beryl back against the seat. She did not
expect this independent movement on the part of the
unangelic Angel, and laughed spontaneously. The merry
chuckle was shut off as soon as it was begun. Bob
thought with relief: “She’s human, after all,” and added
compassionately: “Poor little beggar.”
“The sand drifts with every wind,” puffed the boy
a moment later, climbing back beside Beryl. “And piles
up in heaps against the fences, toppling them over.”
“What do you do then?” she asked, looking about her.
“Stick ’em up somewhere else,” was the answer.
“How . . . queer.” Beryl thought he was making fun
of her.
“The butcher walks to the house from the gate,”
went on the boy as the dry sand squeaked beneath the
horse’s hoofs. “He won’t drive his nag in here. In winter
though it’s not soft like this. No road in front of the
house, you know, only the beach.”
Brenda, in her white voile dress and white shoes,
stood on the veranda edge, beside the other two Bees.
Barby and Bubbles were not quite as spotless as their
sister, for the arrival of the guest had taken so long to
come about that they had gone to the cowshed to rake
it out until the trap was sighted. The occupation had
proved so engrossing that the new-comer had been


entirely forgotten until the agonized squeaking and
squealing of badly oiled wheels had reminded them of
impending social duties.
Mrs Campbell, in a frock of soft grey, which was
one of those expensively simple ones purchased when
her husband had been home, walked across the veranda
from the dining-room window. There were two win-
dows to that room, one with a seat from which one could
look out over the gulf, and another which was used
solely as a door. Bob smiled with pride at the pretty
picture his mother made, in the cool grey with the white
cuffs and black ribbons.
Mrs Campbell was more than a little surprised at
the rich raiment of the girl who was descending from
the buggy, but smiled and held out her hand.
“Come inside,” she said, “and remove your coat and
hat straightaway. Em sure you are tired and will be
glad to change your frock and shoes too. This is Brenda,
this Barby, and this Bubbles. All B’s, you notice, and
Bob calls this house the Beehive. You are a B also—
so you fit nicely.”
Beryl bowed stiffly and murmured a small politeness
which Mrs Campbell did not catch. Barby growled, but
caught a grave glance from her mother and vanished
suddenly around the corner of the house, followed by
the embarrassed and sympathetic small brother.
Beryl wanted to say “Hello” in the jolly fashion
which she knew the Beehive would appreciate, but could
not manage it, and to hide her awkwardness said quickly:
“My boxes can go to my room, too, and be unpacked.”
Bob sat for a few moments on the step of the trap,
staring after his mother and the strange little young-old
girl, then with a grunt began hauling the heap of
luggage from the vehicle. Groaning elaborately and
bumping the articles heavily to the ground, he said,
under his breath, some things that were not at all polite.


This was one of the occasions when Bob forgot his
dignity as “head of the house”. That girl had somehow
made him feel youthful and raw, and no lad of eighteen,
with responsibilities, likes to feel like that.
Brenda, leaving the post against which she had been
leaning dreamily, proffered assistance now. “Right-o,”
said her brother. “Grab that suit-case.” Then the other
Bees approached cautiously, and all four dragged and
tugged the boxes round the house to the spare-room
window, but no farther. There was much exaggerated
grumbling, and much giggling, but Bob had recovered
his dignity to sternly tell the other three to “Shush”.
He felt that it would not be polite for the new-comer
to overhear their mirth, nor yet would it be kind.
Mrs Campbell opened the door of the comparatively
small, but pretty room, and the girl walked in. The
mother of the Bees smiled as she drew the blind higher
and saw her family outside with the boxes, then turned
back to the girl in the room. She was standing in petri-
fied amazement in the middle of the floor, looking from
one piece of furniture to the next, from floor to window,
cushion to bed. The pleasant little room was flooded
with golden sunlight, pouring through the curtains in
shredded beams.
“This is your room,” said Mum in her quietest man-
ner. “It is not very large, but quite large enough for
one little girl.” The words of protest on Beryl’s lips
were silenced for ever.
She walked to the window and looked out over the
brilliant sea, lying cream and blue and green beyond
a white and footmarked stretch of sand, all framed
between two wedges of feathery tamarisks. In spite of
her chagrin and other unpleasant emotions, Beryl gave
a small exclamation of delight.
“You like it?” asked the sweet-faced woman standing
by the white-covered bed, and the other occupant of


the room that was no longer “spare”, said in a small
voice: “Yes”—drawing off her gloves slowly.
“You wish to be alone?” was Mrs Campbell’s next
remark as she turned to go, and Beryl again said “Yes”
but added “please” to it this time.
Something in Mrs Campbell’s grey eyes made her want
to say “please”. The grey eyes were kind and grave,
and then the little girl realized that they also were sad.
The door closed softly, and she was alone.


CHAPTER V
SUNDRY SURPRISES
While Beryl removed her hat and coat, surveying casu-
ally the limited proportions of the room, she pondered
over what had happened during the last eventful week,
reflecting upon Gil’s remarks that morning as he had
left the hotel where she and Nelly were packing in the
latter’s bedroom. “Now be a sensible kid,” he had
advised, with a light pressure on her soft arm, “and
don’t expect to find gardeners and maids where you are
going. Life is quite possible without them, my dear.”
After a pause he continued: “Mr Carslake has given me
further information regarding the Campbells, and they
are just the people to do you good.”
“Why,” Beryl asked herself now, savagely and resent-
fully objecting to being so “managed”, “did he say that ?
I suppose he knew all the time what this bare old barn
was like.”
She was unfair, and Beryl knew it, but that made her
more cross. From anger she changed to tearful pity of
herself, bringing to mind her luxurious room at “Blue-
lawns”; the wide carpeted spaces of hall and drawing-
room; the sunny, tiled porch; and the large white and
blue kitchen and orderly scullery. Then Gil’s words
came back again, and realizing that she was crying for
the moon, she shrugged and heroically blinked until she
could see clearly to straighten the crisp masses of her
hair. If she cried, then the big boy and the little boy—
and the girls—would see her red eyes. Without being


aware of it, she was more than a little eager for the
good opinion of the household, recalling, with the
pleasure of an artist, the deep grey of Brenda’s eyes and
her oval face; the vivid beauty of her older sister; and
the friendliness that Bob had proffered—mostly, now
she remembered, when she had shown her willingness
to accept it. At the gate, when Angel—it should have
been Angle—had ploughed forward, then Bob had caught
her (Beryl’s) glance, and had laughed. She liked the look
of his face when he laughed, she decided pensively.
“The Beehive” they called the wide-verandaed, un-
evenly gabled old place. That was quite a . . . suitable
name, and now she was a Bee also. The new Bee dwelt
upon the peculiarly engrossing subject, and decided it
was all very queer . . . and somehow nice. She was glad
her first name began with a B. As for Mrs Campbell—
here Beryl’s eyes misted again, but not for herself—there
was something in her face that made her think of the
picture Wilbur was caring for. Mum, they called her.
That was a dear name, and somehow suited the Beehive
and its— what was the feeling that had assailed her upon
entering the wide hall strewn with books and cushions,
with a tennis racquet caught behind a picture and a
series of school snapshots framed and hung in a row?
It was not a feeling of luxury, nor yet of neatness; not
primness nor austerity; not the air that is associated
with hospitals, nor yet the air that is associated with the
houses of poor folk. At last light came through Beryl’s
wandering and probing thoughts. It was the feeling of
home . . . the atmosphere of homeliness, that gave to
the Beehive the charm which was now making itself
felt while the new-comer was criticizing the chairs and
the walls.
Beryl was aroused from her puzzled contemplation
by the pleasant sound of the rattle of plates and cups
from a room not far from hers. There were footsteps and


a laugh or two, and then a shout of “Tea-ea-ea” was
raised. Beryl recognized the plodding of Bubbles’ feet as
he scampered from the bathroom and the heavier stride,
accompanied by whistling, of Bob, as he crossed the
veranda from the shed. The scuffle in the hall outside
meant that one of the girls was at her door to call her.
“Please,” she heard a quick voice say, “will you come
to tea—straight down the passage—the door’s open.”
“Thank you,” the occupant of the spare bedroom
(which was not a spare bedroom any longer) said primly,
and turned the handle of the door.
Crossing the hall as Barby had directed, the Beehive
guest found the living-room (which was also called the
“dining-room” upon occasions) empty of children and
adults alike. Attracted to the window-seat by the view
outside, she seated herself with a careful regard for her
elaborate frock. She inspected the cutlery and tea tray
with a glance. “It isn’t dinner even,” she said to herself.
“They just have tea like common people.”
The long table was set with shining cutlery and
flowers—petunias purple and red—in thin silver vases.
The dishes were blue patterned and extremely dainty;
the table linen, fresh and white. The window-seat in
the full afternoon light was brightly coloured and gay
with printed blue humming-birds and old-gold roses on
a rose coloured ground. The floor was spread with a
large faded carpet (for the sea salt had blown in at the
open window too long for any colour to remain), which
gradually had taken on the tinge of the sand on wet
days. The sea, through the window, was calm and silent,
with now and then a lazy “plash-plash” coming from
the water’s edge, where a baby wave rolled in and broke
languidly. The lowering sun hung above the sharp
horizon like a round scarlet lamp. It would be difficult
to look out upon the uninterrupted loveliness of one of
Nature’s greatest masterpieces, and not be moved. Beryl


forgot such material matters as worn carpets and mis-
named and misplaced meals, and feasted her appreciative
eyes on the scene before her.
Her ruminations were cut short by the entry of Bob,
who, in an old school blazer and cream flannels, his
hair freshly damped and brushed, looked somehow older
than he had at the station. Perhaps it was because he
was at home, Beryl thought astutely. She replied to his
breezy greeting with a frozen little smile, while Bubbles
sidled in with big eyes frankly devouring the “new
girl’s” shining stockings and patent-leather, buckled
shoes. Brenda followed, with Barby on her heels, the
former nodding and smiling shyly and immediately
sliding into her chair at the table, the latter uttering a
gruff “Hullo!” and settling herself on a chair by the
door. She was saying over and over, silently: “Cheek!
Cheek! To rig herself up like that!”
Brenda’s tender little heart was beginning to swell
sympathetically at the stiff replies that the new-comer
gave to the various attempts at conversation, for Brenda
was putting herself in the Westralian girl’s place, and
not liking it. Then Mum entered, bearing in her hands
a large dish of savoury stewed chicken, the enticing
odour of which stole through the room and tickled the
nostrils of the hungry company. Beryl could not avoid
giving one sniff, but did not show her approval again.
She felt the eyes of the Beehive to be boring through
every part of her clothing—burning her with their ques-
tioning persistence. Bob and Bubbles waited until the
rest were seated, then sank with sighs of anticipation
into their chairs.
Beryl did not collect her wits in time to lower her
head while grace was being said by the mother, for the
little girl was watching and criticizing (with the ability
of one who had been in the hands of Nelly and the
Misses Holloway) the mended jersey of the small boy


and the simple and obviously cheap frocks of the girls.
Why! They must be really poorl It was Beryl’s first
encounter with “poor” people, and upon tasting the
chicken and finding it delicious, and even more tender
and delicate than was served at the hotel luncheon the
day before, she was more surprised than ever. She dis-
covered before the end of the meal that “poor” people
had cakes and jellies, cream and beautiful butter in
silver and dull green dishes, soft cakes and scones, thin
slices of brown and white bread, and bowls of fruit.
Beryl ate everything upon her plate, attacking scones,
cake, and fruit with the same hunger and enjoyment
as the others did.
Stewed fruit, and golden, fluffy custard followed, Beryl
eating portion of those edibles also, and deciding that
the sea air of the journey from the West, and the sea
air of the Beehive surroundings were already sharpening
her appetite again. She had been listless and languid at
the hotel, in spite of the exhilarating voyage. Then she
remembered that she had that day missed the elaborate
afternoon-tea that was customary at the hotel, and which
had been considered part of the daily routine at Blue-
lawns. At the Beehive there was no formal afternoon-tea
with rich creamy cakes and spiced sandwiches, but
instead of that there was an onslaught upon the bread-
bin and the safe. Wet bathing-suits made damp spots
on the table and chairs while the Bees draped them-
selves around the room, hungrily devouring all that was
before them.
“Can you swim?” asked Barby explosively after an
uncomfortably silent pause. Barby could not summon
enough courage to add Beryl’s name. Barby had an
uncomfortable and altogether unfounded idea within
her that perhaps she might be wanted to say “Miss Le
Leivre”. The new Bee was a problem to be unravelled
gradually.


“No,” confessed the girl, feeling a very new sense of
shame before the embarrassingly direct glances from the
deep brown eyes of this other Bee. “But I have bathed
in the Swan, you know, from our lawns.”
“Lawns!” echoed Bubbles, with the usual lack of
tact. “How do you bathe from lawns}”
Barby unfortunately choked at this moment and,
panic-stricken, looked at her mother, who corrected this
breach of good manners by gazing steadily at her with
unmoving face and severe eyes. Barby swallowed a lump
and preserved her mental equilibrium by a miracle.
“111-bred little beast,” thought Beryl inelegantly,
flushing painfully as she was forced to combat the titter
with an explanation.
“Our home in Perth has a lot—of lawns, that run right
down to the water. It is shallow, like a beach, and it is
shady ... on the lawns and where the trees hang, and
we have two gardeners . . . and the river runs past
them,” she remarked a little haughtily, but in muddled
fashion. Barby’s tongue slid out and around her pink
lips before she asked with irresistible mischief:
“Past the gardeners?”
Beryl flushed deeper still, but did not reply, and the
members of the Beehive, to whom such sallies and par-
ries were part of their existence, fell into a profound
silence again, to be broken by disjointed and uneasy
conversation until the end of the awful meal.
Beryl was very near tears, but hid them with her
accustomed ability. Barby was annoyed at something—
she did not quite know what. Bob and his mother talked
casually of nothing in particular, in an effort to cloak
the atmosphere of the room.
Beryl, as she rose from the table at last, excused her-
self by saying she would unpack her clothes, and Brenda
timidly offered to help.
f ‘No, thanks," was the reply, curt and final. At this


rebuff Brenda shrank back, her lower lip trembling.
Beryl, noticing this, was half inclined to take back what
she had said, for she had no wish to hurt the girl who
had unselfishly proffered her help. Brenda, however, had
turned away with her head lifted, to leave the room.
Beryl shrugged.
By the time Brenda had reached the kitchen-sink
around which the juvenile Bees had clustered in working
mood, she had convinced herself that it was because
the strange girl was feeling lonely and shy, that she had
spoken so. Brenda generally managed to find an excuse
for any lapse that was at all excusable, and many that
were not.
The Bees, as a rule, were inclined to evade the steamy
sink and dish-towels on a warm night, but to-night the
kitchen seemed a very desirable place to congregate, so
in a chattering group and armed with towels and dish-
mop, they discussed the new member of the household.
"We have two gardeners,” minced Barby in an exag-
gerated mimicry. "And we bathe from the lawns. Oh!
Bubbles! I could kiss you for saying that.”
Bubbles looked transparently alarmed, but relaxed as
he saw that his sister was joking.
"Shut up, Barb,” said Bob angrily, whose manhood
was stirring in defence of the one little stranger among
so many others. "Don’t forget the kid’s a guest here.
You are not such a model yourself, you know, and no
doubt she feels like a duck in a drought, with you about.
All that’s the matter with her is too much cash.”
"Well! She shouldn’t be haughty with Mum. We’re
as good as she is, with all of her maids and lawns . . .
and gardenersV ’
"Bolshie!” retorted the biggest Bee, and there was a
scuffle. The Bees would not forget in a hurry Beryl’s
unfortunate remark at the table.
"Bees! A jolly good name for us, I say,” continued


Bob, to aggravate Barby’s ruffled feelings, “for we can
sti?ig all right."
Mrs Campbell regarded her elder son reflectively as
he stroked his hair with the palm of one hand, then she
turned to Barby, who was wiping a treasured cut-glass
bowl and replacing it on the dresser. “That remark of
yours was quite unnecessary, Barby, and please be gen-
erous, and remember that any one of you would be just
the same as Beryl under the conditions which have
governed her life. Don’t push back her natural sweet-
ness with rude and unfeeling ways. It’s not very nice
for her, dear, and you are very trying at times.’’
“She shouldn’t . . .’’ began Barby, but Bob stamped
lightly on her toes, in brotherly fashion, so she subsided,
plunging with clattering haste into the last of the
washing-up. “There!” she said, throwing down a handful
of spoons with a crash. “That's what I think of stuck-
ups\ ’’
“If this little Miss Midas worries you, Mum," Bob
said softly, slipping a long arm around his mother’s
shoulders, “we’ll tell Mr Carslake to ship her off some-
where else."
The cruelty of the remark struck him, and he twisted
his sensitive mouth. “Poor little beggar," he muttered
compassionately. “Pushed around the country like a lost
parcel. No wonder she’s stuck-up; she doesn’t know how
to be anything else."
Barby was still “on the high horse", and tossed her
head.
“I haven’t any time for snobs, and she’s one."
“And you’re a snob too, of another kind, if you talk
like that," remarked Bob quickly. “Give her a chance,
and wait a month or so before you condemn her so
utterly. Leave Mum to take her in hand, and we can
add the finishing touches."
“Mum will make her nicer," Brenda remarked pen-


sively. “For none of us can stay cross long when you
talk to us, Mumdarling.” Brenda sometimes addressed
her mother as “Mumdarling” in one loving drawl, just
as her husband had called his wife “Marygirl”.
“Mumdarling” smiled at the words, patting the
speaker on the cheek, but denied the flattery with a
shake of her head. Brenda was already away in the midst
of another vision. “If father were here,” she said aloud,
“she would like him.”
“If he were here she wouldn’t be here at all, you can
rest assured about that,” Bob said, blinking and looking
away from his mother’s face, “and—and—” here Bob
vanished through the screen door with a wild plunge,
letting it slam behind him with a hollow thud.
“Mum!” said Brenda, as she tried to look cheerful.
“Don’t look like that. Something’s kept him somewhere.”
She continued vaguely with a determined effort to com-
fort and reassure. “We’d have felt it if he’d been . . .
lost for good.” She could not bring herself to say “dead”.
“Sometimes,” continued Barby hastily and with kindly
intent, “cannibals keep white people with them as kings,
and treat them like gods”—Mrs Campbell whitened—
“and perhaps that has hap . . .”
“Don’t,” cried Mum suddenly, with a break in her
voice. She lifted her hands to her temples with an un-
usual gesture of pain. “Don’t talk to me of him to-night,”
she cried, and to their consternation, Barby and her
sister saw their mother walk swiftly out after Bob, her
face chalk-white, her eyes dark with misery. The trees
outside were like grey ghosts; their shadows scattered in
shredded patterns on the sand.
Beryl, in her bedroom with the problem of her clothes
and the small wardrobe to face, was frowning down at
her trunks and suit-cases. Her frocks would not go near
the ridiculous piece of furniturel Angry tears filmed her
eyes. Then she shrugged and wagged her head. Let the


frocks and things lie in the trunks for ever and spoil.
She couldn’t use them here, and when she moved away
to another place they’d be too old-fashionedl
The perverse mood was not dispelled by a long look
at the darkening sea. The disturbed little girl undressed
slowly before the small light of the candle on the
dressing-table. Entirely ignoring the fact of the possi-
bility of the Beehive expecting her in the living-room,
she slipped into bed. The littered room and the tangled
heaps of garments pleased her, as did the stupidly fragile
nightgown she deliberately chose out of the many in
her boxes. They had not silk crepe night-wear with
georgette sleeves and long ribbons!
Yet, somehow, the nightgown looked very silly in the
plain, sweet little room, and she could not understand
what emotion it was drove her to rise from the bed ten
minutes after getting into it, and change the wispy gar-
ment for one of crisp cambric.
There was a small rap at the door. She pulled the
sheet to her chin, and said reluctantly: “Come in”, but
her heart said: “Keep out—this is my room.”
It was not one of the children, however, for Mrs
Campbell, rather pale and very tired looking, entered
with a glass of milk and some buttered biscuits on a
small round tray. Without looking at the resentful face
on the pillow, she placed the tray on the small table
at the head of the bed, then, drawing the curtains wide
apart, opened the window to its full extent.
“It’s a perfect night,” Mum said, looking at the moon-
lit sea and grey sands. “The others have gone for a
walk along the beach. They go without shoes and stock-
ings, of course. I thought you would rather rest to-night,
although Bob was going to call you to join them.”
“I’m not tired,” was the response, neither graciously
not ungraciously.
“No?”


Surprised blue eyes watched from beneath the dis-
ordered mop of tumbled hair, while the woman with
the gentle manner began picking up the scattered clothes
and belongings. Her deft fingers folded and smoothed
the creases; lifted dress-hangers; and wound tangled
ribbons.
“I will pick out some suitable frocks for you, and
pack the remainder away in the trunks. Bob will help
me move them to the room where we keep portmanteaux
and such paraphernalia . . . and they can stay there
until you need them.” The pleasant and soothing voice
talked on, until Beryl, in listening, forgot the thoughts
which had dominated her a few minutes before.
“I know you will like it here by the sea. There are
a hundred things to interest, when you get used to the
place. You will miss your home for a while, but must
try and look forward—not backward. The time will soon
pass, and then you’ll have your own home again.”
“I don’t want to live with Nelly . . . but I like Gil,”
and Beryl found herself telling a stammering tale, just
as any forlorn little girl would, to the woman who
merely nodded and smiled and uttered small exclama-
tions of sympathy and interest as she folded and
unfolded frocks and petticoats and other surprisingly
useless and pretty articles.
“That has all gone, dear,” was the answering remark,
“so forget it as much as possible and look forward to
your new school and new experiences.”
“You didn’t think,” faltered Beryl, “that I was telling
tales—telling about Nelly?”
“No! Certainly not!” was the decided answer. “We
all feel better at times for expressing a little of what
we feel ... do you not think so?”
“I feel . . . different . . . since you came in,” admitted
Beryl. Mrs Campbell nodded her dark head, and flashed
a glance at the girl in the bed—a glance that was trans-


lated as: “And I feel different, too, since I came in.”
Beryl noticed the dark lines under the grey eyes, and
wondered subconsciously if grown-ups ever wept— really
wept, not just sobbed like Nelly when she was dis-
appointed.
“What a lot of rich things you have, child, but you
will need so few of them here. The school which you
will attend requires its scholars to wear blue linen or
serge tunics and white blouses. So I think I will keep
out these linens and ginghams (what beautiful sewingl)
these two serge skirts and silk blouses, these woolly
jumpers, this coat and skirt and this silk dress, with a
dust coat and heavy coat. You can get the tunics through
the head mistress, or from Carter and Freebody’s, in
town. They supply school outfits. I will order some for
you at once.”
“Yesl Please! Mr Carslake has heaps of money, because
Gil told me he left a lot with him for my use.”
“I have a letter telling me that. The blouses and
navy skirts will be nice until you get the other things.
The dressmaker in the Bend will make you a gym. suit,
if you haven’t one.”
“I haven’t! We didn’t have a gymnasium at the Misses
Holloways’.”
Mrs Campbell sorted the flimsy clothing from the
stronger, placing silk stockings and such unsuitable
articles aside with flowered and ribboned underwear.
“Now, I think we have quite an extensive wardrobe in
spite of my determined weeding,” came with a merry
laugh, “and I am afraid that even these will fill your
little room to bursting point.”
It was easy to join in with that little jest, as Beryl
nibbled a biscuit while the room slowly emerged tidily
from its shroud of silk and lace. “Shall I have to walk
all the way to the Bend to school, alone?” queried the
girl suddenly, with a biscuit held in mid-air.


“It’s only a mile, and the other three walk. We have
no one to take you to school, except, of course, the
children.”
No Wilbur! Beryl sipped the milk and pondered over
this new and independent order of affairs. Perhaps it
would be rather nice, after all, not to be supervised on
the way to and from school each day. Freedom of any
kind is attractive to contemplate.
“You will enjoy the walk along the beach. The child-
ren nearly always take off their shoes and stockings and
paddle to and from the jetty. In the winter when the
rain is heavy they wear mackintoshes (I see you have
one) and walk along the swamp road. They generally
find something to amuse them on the way. You will
get a little colour into your cheeks, too. You are very
pale.”
Beryl tossed the biscuit she was eating down on to
the tray with a clatter. She was pale, certainly, but the
paleness had been called “complexion” by Nelly, care-
fully cultivated as part of the necessary outfit of a
“genteel” child—and intensified by periodical visits to
a masseuse. Beryl said this, aloud.
“Was that necessary? With wonderful skin like you
have! It seems a pity . . .” Mum paused, inwardly mar-
velling at the woman who had been foolish enough to
train this child to expect face massage as an ordinary
incident in her life. Beryl read the inward criticism
behind the pause, and mistook the direction in which
it was sent.
“I like being pale,” the silly girl said in her old,
objectionable manner. “The teacher at my school says,
too, that it is aristocratic to look pale. She says that
distinguished people are never red or coarse. Common
people are seldom pale,” and even as Beryl spoke she
wanted to recall what she had said, which somehow
sounded unconvincing and quite wrong here at the Bee-


hive. A peculiar expression that might have been
amusement, and might have been pity, chased across
her companion’s features and vanished.
“Do you not think—to use your word, Beryl—that it
is ‘common’ to try to hurt another person’s feelings?’’
came quickly, and Beryl’s lips quivered, for she knew
now she had been rude, and was ashamed because she
had not altogether meant it. Mrs Campbell saw that
the unhappy girl was overstrung and nervous with the
strain of fitting herself, with her odd upbringing, into
the sane and healthy atmosphere of the Beehive.
“I ... I didn’t mean . . .’’ she began, then covered
up her head like a scared baby, with the sheet in tightly
shut fists, and was silent.
Mrs Campbell, smiling with compassion and sympa-
thetic understanding, hesitated, then stepped to the bed.
She gently tucked the sheet around the stiffly held little
figure, very slight and long under the covering, then
drew the window blind to its full height, and puffed
out the light.
Beryl did not move, but her heart thumped oddly
and rapidly, for the linen was drawn back from her
face and shoulders in the darkness, and a soft and for-
giving kiss was pressed on her cheek. The door was
closed a second later.
Beryl was bewildered; a few of the bricks of the wall
that Nelly had built were tumbling down.
The moon had moved farther towards the horizon,
and a shadow had travelled from the top of the door
to the ceiling before Beryl fell asleep. When she finally
shut her eyes it was to murmur, “Daddy . . . you would
have loved her . . . and Bob . . . and Bubbles . . . and
. . . a-n-d . . .” but there was no more, for Beryl was
asleep, one hand curved over her cheek, her fingers still
damp from the relieving tears she had shed.


CHAPTER VI
THE FIRST SUNDAY
Sunday was a haphazard day at the Beehive; a day of
lazy bathing and lounging on the dry sand; of reading
in odd corners; of scribbling letters; of rummaging in
boxes and drawers among ribbons and papers; of pot-
tering around the kitchen cutting sandwiches and
making salads; of sitting on the veranda sleepily chat-
ting or dozing; of roaming round the sandhills or down
towards the swamp creek.
In winter it was all different, for instead of bathing,
there were long walks in the cold wind, with the scum
from the sweeping waves flying in yellow bubbles along
the shore and the seaweed piling high in glistening
brown and richly smelling masses. The races ahead of
rain-showers were enjoyed perhaps more than the walks.
Often a laughing crowd of young people descended upon
their mother by the big fire in the cosy living-room,
telling tales of what had been seen and done—trivial
things, but coloured into interesting events by eager
voices and merry jests.
In summer the Beehive meals mainly consisted of
salads and fruits, cake and bread, cold meats and cus-
tards—but in the winter there was toast, and more toast,
with every one at the table demanding still more. Bob
or one of the girls was appointed toast-maker-in-chief,
and dodged in charmingly irregular manner between
table and fireplace, not only toasting bread, but face


as well. Poached eggs and sardines in neat rows on
toasted bread, with butter liberally patted over the
whole, were placed high on the list of winter delicacies
for the Sunday night’s tea. Sometimes there were chops
or sausages, with a deep dish of chipped potatoes, and
sometimes crisp and flaky white fish, caught by Bob
from the jetty-end. There were not many fish caught at
the Bend, cold noses and numbed limbs being usually
all the optimistic and patient fishermen waiting with
their lines swaying in the dull green winter sea, received
for their pains.
At midnight, upon very rare occasions in summer.
Bob and the girls, armed with tins of extremely unpleas-
ant “gents”, rods, and groundbait, in addition to much
enthusiasm, would go fishing. The sense of adventure
that accompanied the midnight expeditions sufficed—
even if there were no fish which felt the call of the
hook. Mum allowed these adventures occasionally. Each
time Bob recalled other days when he had been accom-
panied by his father, who understood all there was to
know of fish and their ways, and the queer things in
the sea. The tales he told on these trips were more than
compensation for any lack of active sport.
The Sunday night teas had been hilarious in those
days, with always a guest or two to join in with the
noise. But nowadays, the Beehive seemed to be dropping
down into a calm and uneventful routine, tinted by
school affairs of momentary importance and punctuated
by storms or gales, or high seas when the gulf is like
the open ocean and ships pass veiled in grey rain-drift.
Bob did not visit the friends he wished to, because of
the empty state of his purse, and the consequent inability
to return the hospitality shown him. Besides—his mother
needed him. The last reason was enough for the boy
who put his mother before himself, but often there
came wistful longings for days on the yachts of his


friends, with refreshments galore, and the fun of scud-
ding ahead of a brisk gale, wet through and frozen with
the wind. Scarred and sore fingers and aching back were
part of the glory of it all. Gradually the invitations to
dances and tennis-teas, swimming parties, and moving-
picture excursions ceased. Mum noted this and regretted
it. Bob, warding off all talk of himself and his desires,
pretended not to see that she sympathized.
“Just when you should be having a good time, Son,”
she once said, “you are prevented from it. If ever your
father returns we will make up for it all . . . with
compound interest. Em sorry I have not more to give
you, laddie.”
“Mum! I tell you I don’t mind,” asserted Bob. “And
it is my place to give to you—not you to me. Funny
sort of a son I’d be, to expect my Mother to give her
cash to me. Stow it, Mum—and let’s talk of something
sensible.”
“You are stepping from school straight into manhood,
with no youth in between,” Mum protested.
“Fuss and fiddlesticks!” had been the fervent reply.
“How many fellows leave school to work like niggers?
I’m all right.”
The first Sunday at the Beehive was a day of dis-
turbances both for Beryl and for the Campbells. Bubbles
said the “new girl didn’t like doing anything, and
couldn’t swim even, and was stuckened up, an’ all”.
Beryl had expressed a wish to remain at home rather
than roam with the other Bees on a tour of exploration
through the swamps around the ever fascinating creek.
She did not wish her shoes to be covered with black
greasy mud.
“Wouldn’t hurt you,” said Barby, in her usual blunt
manner. “You’ve got plenty. Besides, there are all sorts
of nice things by the creek. We fish sometimes. There’re
cranes, too, flying up from the stumps and grasses in


the water, and little diver-ducks. They’re so funny. They
dive under the surface, and you stare ever so hard to
see them come up again, and think they’re drowned,
when all of a sudden there is a tiny sound away along
the creek, and there they are, swimming away as hard
as they can go. Sometimes there are snakes in the man-
groves. fn the high grass out towards the golf-links—
that’s about two miles away, where the pine grove ends
in a yellow sand patch—Bob killed a snake feet long.
It was a black one with a blue belly, and it stood up
on the end of itself, and struck at him—Uhhhhl Just
like a cobra. It was awfully exciting.”
Beryl, shuddering deliciously at the mention of the
snake, was inclined to be interested by the enticing pic-
tures. She would like to see one—one not in the Zoo.
“It’s such fun, too,” continued Barby, animated at
the tale of their exploits. “We step across the mud when
there’s much water about, and use tufts of grass like
stepping-stones. We walk over the golf-links and watch
them playing golf. Once, we met there a nice man, with
baggy trousers tucked in his socks, and a funny little
moustache as big as two beetles. He gave us a ball each
and two old clubs. Bob plays sometimes out on the rise
at the back of the swamp. It’s really good fun out by
the creek, Beryl.”
“No, thanks,” and the new-comer shook her head.
To accept would be perhaps to show her ignorance of
something besides swimming, and perhaps to be dis-
graced by her lack of the knowledge of how to deal
with possible snakes or oily pools.
Barby swung around. “Stop where you are then,” she
retorted with emphasis, and scurried away. It was very
difficult for Barby to be polite.
Bob put his hands deep into his blazer pockets and
grinned down at the girl with the black hair and
morning-glory eyes. She was shy of something, thought


the boy, and that was the reason for unsociability. No
wonder—with all of the Beehive zumming round her.
“Now, look here, Beryl,” he lectured pleasantly. “You
must be pleasant if you want to have a good time here.
Barby is eager to make you feel at home, as we all are,
and although her manner is rather queer, she means
well. How about a swim now? We’ll dispense with the
walk. You can’t be a Bee unless you can swim, and
to-day for a wonder the sea’s ripping for surfing. Run
and put on your togs and we’ll scoot down before lunch
and have a dip. Hurry up! No shirking, or I’ll come
to your room and haul you down, gay frock and all.
We’ll get ready too ... so scoot.”
Although the words were spoken in such a droll man-
ner, with a twinkle in the dark eyes, Beryl knew that
Bob meant what he said, and with a gasp she turned
to go indoors, the rest scattering. Presently they emerged
in their faded suits, to sit in the shade of a tamarisk
to wait for Beryl.
She was realizing at that moment, with dismay, that
she had no bathing-suit with her. The old one she had
used in Perth, on the very rare plunges into the shallow
river-edge, she had left behind with a number of other
garments which she had outgrown. The day before
leaving Bluelawns, Wilbur had taken a large box of
things to a woman who was a friend of hers, and who
kept a little shop where such garments could be altered
and sold profitably. The new bathing-suit had been
entirely forgotten during the stay at the hotel in Ade-
laide! Even the suit she had left behind had been a
queenly garment compared with the dingy blue cotton
things on the girls and boys within sight, through the
window.
She bobbed her head down, and slipped out on to
the veranda, standing in expectant silence on the cement,
waiting for one of them to approach her—but they


yelled in chorus for her to approach them, and she did
so, falteringly.
“I . . . haven’t a bathing-suit,” she confessed, and
Bubbles stared.
“You can’t go in without,” he averred solemnly, and
Bob told him to shut up, while he eyed the tall slim
girl before the little group wallowing like hens in the
warm sand.
“You’re pretty lanky,” he stated as he rose from the
ground with a slow unfolding of his long limbs, “and
I’ve got some old ones in the wash-house that might
do you. Come along and I’ll dig them out for you, and
dust the spiders out of ’em.”
“You can bring them to me. I’ll-wait here by the
window,” said Beryl, walking back to her room, and
Bob raised his eyebrows in a way that made Barby giggle
in a simmering splutter, then he followed the new Bee.
He passed her in silence, on his way to the back of the
house.
“Thank you,” said Beryl demurely, as the stiff and
dull-coloured garments were handed to her. She shud-
deringly inspected them when inside her room, for signs
of spiders or webs. There were none, so she decided that
Bob had been teasing. They more than fitted her; and
when she overcame her distaste at the touch of the rather
scratchy and thin covering, she could not help but
laugh at her appearance. The baggy top part hung down
to her knees in quaint ups and downs of hem-line, the
lower part being completely hidden. She pinned her
hair on top with two combs which she sometimes used
to press back the thick masses from her face.
Down on the sand, she watched the others run and
leap into the waves, being quite hidden for a moment
in smothers of foam, but bobbing up safely a few yards
farther out. She could never do that.
For a while the swimmers forgot her, until Beryl


was turning to go back to the house, when Bob called
out: “Come on in. It’s as warm as toast.”
“She misses the gardeners,” whispered Barby, and the
two girls trod water and giggled until they nearly
choked.
Slowly and gingerly Beryl stepped towards the small
waves at the edge of the boiling and hissing sea, the
water creeping to her knees in bubbling and spark-
ling rushes, like soda-water, she thought. The large
waves farther out were mounting in green and white
peaks, to rush forward in tumbling haste, and were
falling with sharp crashes and roars to race shorewards
in a creaming mass that mixed with more masses, only
to die reluctantly in the shallows where the girl was
hesitating.
The water was unusually rough for that part of the
gulf, and it was Beryl’s first surf. The sight of the slowly
stepping girl was too much for Barby. She looked
horizon-wards between the falling and rising of the big
waves, and saw that Bob was swimming a long way
out, with strong overarm strokes. Bubbles was not swim-
ming, for the water was too rough for him. He was
digging holes in the wet sand farther along the beach,
grunting philosophically as each hole was filled in imme-
diately with the rushing water.
The strength and backwash of the breakers was a
thing to be revelled in by the Beehive members, who
one and all gloried in a battering in the rough surf that
was so rare. Calm seas and lazy waves characterized
that beach. But Beryl was different. She set her lips
tightly, to resist as much as possible the strong arms of
the other two. She pressed with the soles of her feet
against the sand, but the water was neck-high almost
before she was aware of it. The coldness of her first
immersion stifled her and left her gasping.
Barby laughed and released her as a big wave tossed


towards them, but Brenda, who saw the expression on
the girl’s pale face, held her arm and said: “Jump . . .
now,” and with friendly assistance steadied her. She felt
herself rocked up off her feet and down again, with the
alarming mountain of water far past her and smashing
on the sand.
The sea felt warmer now, too. A tinge of thrilling
enjoyment and ecstasy in the turmoil around her sent
a faint pink to her cheeks, as she waited in almost glad
expectancy for the next roller.
“Good fun, isn’t it?” asked Brenda, delighted to see
the new Bee becoming human.
Beryl nodded. Brenda was not so horrid as Barby,
and as she came to that conclusion, another wave ap-
proached, and there was no time for retrospection. A
jump again—a wavering of her legs as she kept vertical
by a seeming miracle—a sensation of floating for a
second—then the sand beneath her again; eyes wet and
stinging and lips tasting of salt. She licked her lips,
smiling at her companion.
There was a call from a little way out, where Barby
was now swimming swiftly onwards into smoother and
deeper water, Brenda waving an arm in reply as she
shot off after her, with a clear: “Back directly—keep on
jumping” to the girl left swaying in the waves. Brenda
flashed after her sister in the exhilaration of trying to
catch up to her, but had no real hopes of succeeding,
for Barl3y could almost outpace Bob. She had not yet
done so, but was using all of her spare time and energy
towards the wonderful moment when she would beat
her brother.
Beryl was slightly alarmed now at the swirling around
her feet, feeling helpless in the swift and heavy on-
slaughts of the waves, but she would not allow the other
Bees to see her as a coward, so she set her teeth and
waited for the next time to “jump”.


“If I were drowned, they would be sorry for leaving
.. . burr .. . glug .. . ugh!”—for Beryl had forgotten
to propel herself skywards during her doleful visualiza-
tion, her feet being immediately tipped to where her
head should be, and her mouth and nose filled with
choking water.
She fought desperately to regain her balance, green
masses of glassy sea passing before her eyes, until she
shut them and clutched wildly, feeling her fingers scrape
along the sand as the backwash whirled her outwards.
Her lungs were bursting and her eyes paining, as she
struggled helplessly and more feebly, with vivid and
strangely unreal pictures of a sorrowful Beehive flitting
through her brain.
She was shot to the surface, to gasp painfully for a
mouthful of air and strain every muscle to keep her
feet beneath her, but shrieked aloud with genuine terror
as another wave, bigger and greener, descended upon
her and smashed against her shoulders and head—and
the shore was much farther away, as she saw in that
brief glimpse.
“Bob!” was what she had shrieked, but she did not
know that.
Her head sang with prickling sensations and sounds,
as she threw out a feeble arm to claw at something
anything ... to lift her from the crashing, smashing
suffocation of the water and scraping sand. . . . Her
fingers closed on a hard arm.
It was Bob who had heard the call, and at a pace
which Barby could never hope to beat, had covered the
distance between deep water and where the black head
had appeared. He looked with horror at the livid and
tortured face of the girl, and gripping her cleverly, swam
towards the shore. The air coming back to her lungs
made her sick and dizzy, but some one had hold of her,
and was taking her out of the battering depths.


The iwo oilier girls followed guiltily, with eyes that
avoided one another’s, while Bubbles left his sand dug-
outs to see “what was up’’.
Bob carried the slim young figure out of the shal-
lows and placed her tenderly on the wet sand.
She was sitting up and coughing when Barby and
Brenda arrived beside her. The former, shocked and
ashamed at what she knew had been her fault, stood
back cowed and apprehensive beside her sister, who was
watching with parted lips.
Bob saw that Beryl was not seriously harmed, but
was merely shaken and unpleasantly sick; and when
she was recovering from the nausea and giddiness, and
pushing back her sopping hair from her burning eyes,
he scolded her.
“See here, Beryl. Don’t you know better than to
go out into that deep water when you can’t swim.
Where’s your sense?’’—Bob was more blunt than he in-
tended to be—“ You might have been drowned.”
Beryl gulped, for to be spoken to like this by the
big boy who was so strong and splendid, hurt her. She
felt the gaze of the two sisters boring her, and hung
her head, tracing a pattern on the sand with a shrivelled
and soaked forefinger.
“Silly little beggar 1” corrected Bob sternly and a little
hoarsely. “We don’t want any funerals here. See that
you don’t go out again like that on a rough day until
you can swim. I’ll teach you as soon as you like. You’ll
soon learn.”
Beryl raised her dripping and lank head and thanked
him with a look, and Bob rose from his knees and
walked away, whistling as usual, but out of tunc.
He returned again almost immediately, before either
of his sisters, or the other girl, could stir, and lingered,
ignoring his family completely. “I’m not cross, kiddie,
but you gave me a shock . . . hear me?”


to blame,” was confessed freely, “because I . . . we . . .
dragged her out there . . . and left her. . .
“Yes!” flashed Beryl, to hide her threatened com-
posure. “Em not deaf.” As she tried to rise, swaying
and almost falling, Barby and her sister stepped for-
ward without hesitation. A short glance was exchanged
between the two who understood every fraction of a
signal of each other’s. They were ashamed of their
part in what had almost been a fatality, yet were un-
willingly filled with admiration of the guest at the
house by the sea. Barby sniffed, then lifted her head
defiantly as she held Beryl’s arm. “Bob! She wasn’t
“And,” continued Brenda glowingly, “she wouldn’t
tell on us, so there.”
Barby let Beryl’s arm go, to stand poised upon one
leg, the other caught up in her left hand, looking like
a sleek and wet blue stork as she waited for Bob’s cer-
tain and justifiable anger.
Beryl felt a glow of something like fire pass through
her at what she saw in the tall boy’s face—applause,
surprise, and then rage. She felt at least two inches
higher when he remarked slowly, after an amazed pause:
“You’re a sportsman, Beryl. But they deserved to be
told on. What a madhead trick to play. Good kid,”
Bob vanished dramatically, throwing himself with a
resounding splash into the sea to hastily swim outwards
again. The emotional depths of that minute were far
deeper than the water.
Beryl watched him reflectively.
Barby then did a difficult thing, her sister upholding
her with expressive glances anything but hostile.
“Beryl! I’m sorry I did that to you, and you were
jolly decent not to sneak.”
The monkey that had slid from Beryl’s back came
back then, as she shrugged her shoulders with comical
effect—clad as she was.


“Ohl I didn’t stop from telling on you to get you
out of a wigging. I was merely indifferent.”
The bridge that had been thrown between the girls
was dashed down immediately. Beryl, for some strange
reason, wanted to weep, and to hide this she turned
away and shakily began to walk up the slope of the
sand to the front gate.
“Stuck-up pig,” murmured Bar by impolitely.
“She’s not a tell-tale, anyway,” said the other dripping
and salty maiden fairly, “and I believe she just puts
on the swank because she isn’t used to us. She’s different
underneath. She must be, or she’d have told on us.”
“Rats!” was the response.
While the two girls were swimming once more in
the sea, Bubbles remained seated on the sand, think-
ing out a perplexing problem. Then with an air of
finality, he rose and brushed the sand from the seat
of his bathing-suit and proceeded towards the house,
his mouth screwed into a button of determination, a
portentous frown on his brow. Scouting carefully, he
evidently discovered what he wished to know, and
planted himself firmly on the veranda outside the win-
dow of Beryl’s bedroom.
In full view of the window, he did a queer thing.
He lifted his head and began to sing very gravely, and
very much out of tune:
As I walked by my-y-y-y-self.
And talked to my-y-y-y-self,
Myself-f-f said unto me-e-e,
Look to thyself,
Take care of thyself,
For n-o-o-o-obody cares for thee.
I answered my-y-y-self.
And said to my-y-y-y-self.
In the self-same re-part-ee,
Look to thyself,
Or not look to thyself,
The self-same thing will be-e-e-e-e-e-e-e.


At the conclusion of this charming ditty, he waited
for applause from inside, but grew obviously uneasy
as none came.
He considered for a moment, then, without altering
his expression or position, sang the whole thing through
again, with the dismal and discordant drawling, if any-
thing, worse than formerly. He waited expectantly until
at last, unable to bear the suspense any longer, he drew
nearer to the fluttering curtains and poked his ruffled
head inside the room.
Beryl was seated, clad in a silken kimono, on the edge
of her bed, staring in amazement at the window.
Bubbles rubbed his diminutive nose with the back
of his hand which was very sandy, and knocked with
his knuckles on the inside of the window-frame, then
stepped into the room.
“ Did you like it?” he queried carelessly, and with
becoming modesty, considering the nature of his for-
mer entertainment.
“Like it? . . . like what?” was the astounded reply.
Beryl was embarrassed; the reddened eyelids being
furtively dabbed with a damp handkerchief.
“My song,” explained Bubbles blandly. “I sang it at
school last week, an’ every one clapped like anything.
Fm a good singer. Teacher said so.”
Beryl found herself laughing suddenly if shakily. “1
think it was a . . . wonderful song,” she said.
“Shall I sing it again?” was the eager offer, but the
girl shook her head quickly.
“No thanksl But why did you come like this and
sing ... to me?”
“Miserubble people are always cheered up like any-
thing when songs are sang to them. In olden days kings
gave bags of gold to justers . . . no, that’s not right
. . . jesters ... to sing to them and make them happy
with funny tricks. When you came up from the beach
jes now I saw two tears in your eyes, and your nose


were shiny. When 1 get miserubble 1 always sing to
myself—but it doesn’t cheer me. Isn’t that queer?’
“No! Yes! You are a funny little boy. Come here
and see what I’ve got.’’ Beryl wrapped her kimono tighter
around her and reached to the table for her hand-bag.
Taking from it a bright half-crown, she held it before
the spellbound boy’s face. He gasped and licked his
lips, then sighed breezily and shook his head lugu-
briously.
“I mussent. Mum won’t let me take money from
any one,’’ he sadly and finally remarked, overcoming
the stupendous temptation nobly. “But . . .’’ he added
thoughtfully and suggestively: “I don’t think Mum
would min’ if you gived me some chokoluts. In the
Bend there’s a bonser shop with boxes miles high, with
ladies on the lids, and ribbon.’’
Beryl stored away this hint for use in the near future.
Shooing the small intruder from her room, she was
alone again, and her unhappiness returned with a bump.
On the counterpane was a blue and brown checked
cambric dress, smocked and tucked by a master hand,
while black patent shoes and lisle thread stockings lay
on the rug.
She kicked these aside with an angry motion, and
tossed the frock scornfully into a corner.
“I’ll show them,” she said to herself. “I’ll show them
what I am,” and the stupid little girl crept from her
bedroom along the passage to the room where her trunks
were stored among the litter that always finds its way
to a room of this sort. Opening the largest trunk, she
removed from it an exquisite garment of heavy cherry-
coloured silk, embroidered in Oriental design as bright
as the hue of a butterfly’s wings. Shoes and stockings
followed, and a broad ribbon for her hair.
“I’ll show them . . .” she almost sobbed. “They haven’t
anything as good as these. . .


CHAPTER VII
BRENDA
“What are you always scribbling in that book?” asked
Beryl one day, pointing to the black exercise book in
Brenda’s hands.
The two girls were seated on the veranda, Brenda,
in a deep and ragged cane chair, leaning forward over
her writing; Beryl half lying with her legs hooked over
the arm of the wicker lounge. Barby was not home
from school, which accounted for the prominence of
the black-covered book. She had been detained by the
drawing mistress. The two other Bees had not waited,
knowing from experience that the drawing mistress
was not light with her punishments. Barby had thrown
an ink-filled wad of paper at the blackboard, during a
particularly boring moment, while the song of the whis-
pering pines and the near-by surf called maddeningly
to those shut in between walls. Barby would never be-
come an artist, it was easy to see, for her drawings
resembled nothing on earth so much as an elaborate
record of a terrific earthquake. The ink wad had un-
fortunately missed the board, and had hit a new and
shining map—much to the detriment of the latest addi-
tion to the classroom. At this moment, while the girls
were comfortably lazy on the veranda of the Beehive,
Barby was sighing and shuffling over a long list of French
translations, and thinking of the cool sea in front of her
home.


“Oh!" replied Brenda airily to the other’s query. “Just
writing.”
But this was one of Beryl’s insistent moments, and
she repeated her question firmly, having for a long
while wondered what Brenda had been putting with
such loving care and mental enjoyment into the ragged
edged book.
“Writing . . . just writing,” came again, not from
any desire to annoy, but because Brenda was loath to
expose the innermost thoughts of her soul.
“What kind of writing?” came again, and Brenda
wriggled uncomfortably.
“You’ll laugh if I tell you,” she said slowly, and the
other shook her head solemnly, and replied quickly:
“No! I shan’t. I promise.
“But you might feel like laughing, and that’d be as
bad,” went on Brenda aggravatingly, as the book closed
over the short pencil.
“1 won’t even think of laughing, Brenda, truly,”
avowed Beryl quite sincerely. “Do show me.”
“You’ll be . . . superior . . . no! I didn’t mean that—
don’t go away . . . but I mean . . . will you think I’m
silly?”—Brenda was plainly mixed, but very much in
earnest, and determined to sound the ideas of the other
girl before revealing her secret.
“No! Show me!” and Beryl squirmed into an upright
position and held out a hand. By this time she was
devoured with an eager curiosity that made the seconds
long ones, as her companion hesitated again, flushed.
and drew back.
“Barby teases me, and I haven’t shown it to any one
yet. If I show you, Beryl, will you promise to never
tell anybody even a hit of what is in here?”
“I promise on my honour never to reveal a hit of
it, to any one,” stated Beryl solemnly, wagging her head
to intensify her remarks. The two girls were fast ap-


proaching a friendship when insulting questions may be
asked without offence, if sufficient reason be behind the
query. With the Beehive all together, it was a different
matter, for a demon of discontent and irritability crept
invariably into the company. Barbara grew impatient
and savage, and was in and out of a temper in a mo-
ment, while Beryl said more than she intended to, and
was plunged a moment after into a well of shame and
stubbornness. Once in a while, undisturbed peace pre-
vailed, and then Mum sighed and wondered how soon
another storm would break.
Barby’s prickly nature and Beryl’s haughty little ways
did not agree, and many were the quarrels which came
from the clashing of the two natures. A dozen times they
both had been at the point of cementing a palship
that would have lasted, but always the little differences
and arguments and the bitter words that could not be
recalled, intervened. Brenda, alone, with her forgiving
ways and generosity that was so much like her mother’s
lovable personality, would quickly become a confidante
and close friend. With the warfare continually in the
Beehive’s midst, however, she would not forsake the side
of her sister for that of the enemy, a comparative stranger.
Mrs Campbell wisely watched all of this, during the
first weeks of Beryl’s new life, and commented upon it
only to Bob, who could be depended upon to listen and
say nothing beyond the words that held corrections that
he, as head of the house, thought were his right.
Beryl was honourable, thoughtful, very generous, and
Mrs Campbell had no misgivings as to the fineness of
her character. It was easy to see that the veneer which
had been placed over her by wrong instruction and liv-
ing, and much stupid luxury, was at least cracking under
the sensible and homely atmosphere of her new home.
The girls would, no doubt, battle and clash for a while,
then would come a better understanding. Bob agreed


with his mother. But the battles and the bickerings were
unpleasant and nerve-racking at the time, and often
Mum would murmur an excuse and leave the room to
go from the din of lesson-learning and argumentative
conversation to the peace and quiet of her bedroom,
where she would sit by the window under the light of
a brightly coloured reading-lamp of petrol flame, or
lie on her bed wearily trying to doze away a fluttering
headache. The lonely moments in her bedroom Mum
tried to avoid, for loneliness and quiet give rise to
thoughts, and her thoughts were always around one sub-
ject—in the noise of the living-room, the lonely island
of Keleme was a mere fantastic dream.
Now, on the veranda, the girls were not quarrelling,
but were deep in an enthralling chat, as Mum could
see as she passed the window of Bob’s bedroom, inside.
Brenda with an expression of deep solemnity was hand-
ing to Beryl, with a thrust forward, the book that was
the centre of the conversation. Now Mum moved away
from the window, and out into the hall, on the way to
the kitchen.
After a brief second of silence, Beryl gave a soft and
incredulous exclamation, and whispered mysteriously:
“Stories— and Fairy-tales! Brenda! Did you really write
them?”
The awe and surprise were sufficiently flattering for
the most conceited of authors, and Brenda, who was
not conceited, but was very much inclined to idealize
her attempts with the pencil, nodded complacently.
“Umnn,” she said lightly, with red face, “I’ve always,
ever since I could make pot-hooks, been making up
stories. I can do it easily.”
Beryl was a booklover—and booklovers are born, and
seldom made—with the true booklover’s tender worship
and respect. She fingered the ragged book reverently.
“Let me read them?” she asked breathlessly, and Brenda,


who was puffed to the limit of her pride by the adula-
tion of her first reader, nodded with apparent careless-
ness. “All right . . . but hide it. You know what you
promised.”
“f know! Look at this one. . . . Oh! Bren! I like
the title: ‘The Fat Prince Who Became Slim.’ What did
he do?”
But the authoress did not care to destroy the dra-
matic significance of her work so said: “Read it and
see.”
Beryl was wholly a little girl, unaffected and natural,
as she curled herself in a half-moon around the book
and avidly turned page after page, on which the neat
handwriting was numbered and titled with ravishing
wording.
Brenda started and pointed to the beach. “Look!
There’s Barby coming, running like a runaway. . . . Go
quickly and hide it in your drawer. Lock it.”
Beryl swung her limbs upwards and outwards in a
swift, graceful movement, landed on her feet firmly,
and scampered indoors, just as Barby arrived at the
gate, puffing and panting and full of indignation at the
treatment of the drawing mistress.
“Old pig,” she jerked, out of breath, “to make me
do all of that French. She just knew I was dying to get
home. What if the ink did dirty the old map. ft wiped
off.”
“How do you know?” queried Brenda, who had been
so interested in the fairy-tales that she had forgotten the
sufferings of her sister.
“7 wiped it off,” almost howled Barby, in fresh dis-
gust. “She made me.”
That night Beryl went to bed early, and a little later
Brenda confessed to being tired, saying she would go
and talk to Beryl for a while before retiring. Two
minutes after she had vanished from the dining-room,


she and Beryl were curled up on the latter’s bed, the
stories against a pillow; the door shut with a chair
under the handle.
. . and when the Prince of Darkness opened the
door, there stood a beautiful maiden with pearls in her
hair, and luminous fingers, and there was a sparkling
wand in her hand. , . .”
And so Brenda read on, her voice thrilling and thick-
ening with the emotions which were brought to the sur-
lace by the fishing into the Well of Imagination. Beryl,
her possessions and her ups and downs of happiness for-
gotten, chin on open hand, hung on every word, follow-
ing the turned leaves with eyes flatteringly eager to see
what was on the next.
Late that night the book was finished, and Brenda
rose from her cramped position to go to her own bed-
room.
“You’ll never tell, will you?’’ was the anxious query
from the authoress. The other girl patted her throat
with her finger-tips. “Never—may I die,” she quoted
fervently.
The other Bee crept along the passage to her room,
opened the door silently and felt her way to the shelf
where the matches were kept. Lighting a candle she saw
that Barby was asleep, lying with her face half covered
with her short hair. Brenda was too tired to lock her
book away, so tucked it under the pillow and laid her
head upon it, falling asleep almost immediately.
The next day was stormy, with a dull metallic sky
over the oily, pale blue sea that nearly always foretold
rough weather. The air was heavy and thick, the slightest
movement bringing out perspiration on the body. Por-
poises not far out made black chips of movement on
the water, and far away the sun shone through a break
in the murk above, lighting up a patch of glittering
sea. Heat ripples in the air crinkled in every direction,


like a transparent curtain in a breeze. Altogether, it
was a day to fray nerves already shredded at the edges.
The whole of the juvenile Beehive were swimming
and paddling idly in three or four feet of motionless
water, revelling in the coolness of the gulf. Barby had
twice “ducked” her sister. Beryl was annoyingly good
tempered, refusing to quarrel. Gibes and splashings did
not affect the calm of her mind. The muggy days that
so irritated South Australians, used to clear blinding
heat and warm nights, made no difference to the
emotions of Beryl, for she was accustomed to the enervat-
ing and sticky heat of a Perth summer—with, however,
the fragrantly cool nights when the breezes blow up the
river from the sea. She had been boasting, during mo-
ments of rivalry when the charms of the sister States
had been upheld loyally by the opponents, about the
climate of the place where date-palms and bananas grow
at the city’s edge, with its zoological gardens sprinkled
with steamy and luxuriant tropical corners. Ground
squirrels run at liberty and doves coo in their thou-
sands in the thick overhead branches of the beautiful
trees.
“I’d hate to live in a place where the heat was like
this always,” gibed Barby idly, filled with a desire to
torment more than to slander the next-door State, and
glancing at the girl swaying in the sea, her hands out-
spread paddle fashion in a lazy attempt at copying the
breast-stroke motions of a swimmer.
Beryl lifted her brows, but betrayed no further disturb-
ance.
“Perth is a stuffy little hole, isn’t it, Beryl?” came now,
casually. Beryl nodded. “Sometimes . . .” she said evenly.
“I wouldn’t live over there for a fortune” continued
Barby, and Beryl suddenly aroused.
“Nol” she said. “Because you couldn’t. Perth is a lovely
place. Just as good as your old city.” Beryl now dropped


her angry tones and dwelt upon the city she had known
when her father had been alive—so long ago it seemed.
Her eyes were far away as memories stirred within her.
“You should see the ferry-boats in the night-time from
up on the heights of King’s Park, with the little glim-
mers running across the river like dozens of glow-worms,
each with a million legs, and the city itself shining in
the light-haze to the left. I loved it . . . and my . . . daddy,
when he was alive, used to take me everywhere; on
the ferries; for motor drives; and up-river in launches.
I remember once going with him across the river in the
ferry to the Zoo, and we bought nuts at a little store
where we ate ices with latticed wood over us and lawn
under our feet. There was a cockatoo which asked us
who we were in the funniest voice imaginable.”
“We’ve got a Zoo, too,” said Bubbles, feeling some-
thing was demanded from him patriotically. “A bonser
one, with animiles in, and crocydiles and tigers. There’s
monkeys too, and ellyfunts what you ride on for frip-
pence. I rode on one once, and gave him a peanut.
He didn’t seem to take much interest in it, but I expect
peanuts isn’t very big for ellyfunts’ mouths.”
“I expect,” volunteered Brenda.
“They have awful little tails and eyes though,” com-
mented Bubbles earnestly, wrapped up now in his dis-
course. “f expect God made a mistake when he made
ellyfunts. They must be awful hard to make.”
Barby splashed with her feet noisily, not caring to
discuss either Biblical or zoological problems, and some
of the spray fell on Beryl’s upturned face. She could
swim a little now, and float with ease when the water
was smooth. Bob had been careful in his tuition, the
pupil willing and unafraid, both being pleased and
rather proud of their united efforts. Even Barby had
said: “You’re not getting along badly at all,” which re-


mark, however worded, was a concession for her to
make.
Beryl now laughed good-naturedly at the splashing,
still refusing to become out of temper. After failing with
Beryl, Barby turned her attention to her sister, watch-
ing the younger girl with speculative and measuring
glances.
With her tongue in her cheek, Barby waited until
she caught her sister’s roving eye, and then, porten-
tously and with a solemnity that was maddening, re-
cited slowly: . . and when the Prince of Darkness
opened the door, there stood a beautiful maiden with
pearls in her hair, and luminous fingers, and there was
a sparkling wand in her hand. Her eyes shone like the
dewy petals of periwinkles, and her hair was as black
as the sky of a stormy . . . Oh! Look at the Authoress!
Look . . .” and Barby kicked her heels until she was
completely hidden in a frenzy of beaten water. Brenda
dropped down from where she was floating, and stood
upright.
Beryl looked from one to the other of the sisters,
then also righted herself in the sea, feeling the har-
binger of trouble in the stillness of the girls, for Barby
had now ceased splashing. Something deeper than mere
bickering was in the air. Had Brenda shown Barby the
book after all, since last night, that she could repeat
parts of the stories so glibly?
“I’ll ...” a white-faced and wounded Brenda gulped
and stared in dazed indignation from one to the other.
“You . . .” she said, pointing at Beryl, who was amazed
and shocked at the scorn and bitterness on Brenda’s fea-
tures. Barby was dumbfounded at the result of her
taunting, even now not comprehending the full portent
of the looks exchanged between the other two girls.
“You are a sneak after all,” continued Brenda. “I trusted


you, and confided in you. You told what was in the
book. 1 will always remember that, Beryl Le Leivre.”
“Brenda, I didn’t . . .” Beryl jerked, trying to think
clearly, but Brenda waved her wet hands miserably,
and was deaf to the protest.
“. . . and I will never tell you anything again. Don’t
dare to speak to me . . . yet. Oh! And you promised.”
“Brenda . . .’’ began Beryl, aghast at the flame which
lit Brenda’s face to an expression which very often was
to be seen on Barby’s.
Brenda stood for a brief pause staring at the other
three Bees, endeavoured in vain to speak again, burst
into tears and ploughed her way through the still sea,
with one arm uplifted across her eyes. Slowly and list-
lessly she walked up past the sandhills to the gate and
round to the back of the house.
Beryl’s heart sank, her throat contracting with emotion
at the sight of the pain on the face of the girl she had
learned to love, while Barby, stunned by the over-
whelming result of her thoughtless teasing and desire
to annoy, remained speechless and motionless.
Beryl flushed to a bright scarlet, her eyes suffused.
“She showed her book to me last night, and made me
promise never to tell what was in it. It is sacred,” she
cried passionately, “and now you’ve been and looked
somehow, and she thinks I’ve told. You are a tiresome
busybody, Barbara Campbell.”
Barby, being in the wrong, was anything but plastic
in Beryl’s harsh hands, and feeling extremely sorry and
guilty, retorted sharply, “And you, Miss Le Leivre, are
too important.”
“I don’t care what I am,” that young lady asserted
defiantly, “excepting a sneak. I won’t be thought a
sneak by any one. You must tell her I didn’t tell you
about the tales. You know how Brenda feels things, and
<>he just can’t believe me, because . . . you saw how she


felt about it, and you know I didn’t do it. The stories
mean such a lot to her, and one day she will write books
and be famous, and then you’ll be sorry you were nasty.
Dukes and Lords and all kinds of people will visit her
and you’ll have to sit back and listen.”
“My goodness!” exclaimed Barby, lifted out from her
dismay into a profound surprise at another side of the
complex Beryl’s personality.
“I often read tales,” continued Beryl, eyes alight, “and
they’re not half as good as the ones Brenda writes, and
perhaps a publisher will come along to-morrow and
buy them and then she’ll have heaps of money and go
travelling to Europe, China and Borneo, Brazil, and
all of those places . . . see?”
Barby was dimly conscious of a familiarity about the
rapidly named places, then recollected that they had
all been mentioned during the last geography lesson
when Beryl had particularly distinguished herself by
her superior knowledge . . . knowledge that had been
arrived at by accident, as she had explained to the other
delighted Bees, through the reading of a magazine ar-
ticle. “And perhaps,” went on Beryl, inflated with her
own flow of more or less brilliant reasoning, “she will
marry a foreign Prince, or some one like that.”
“My hat!” said the wonderstruck and slightly im-
pressed Barby. “You’ll be writing tales next. You’ve got
the gift of the gab all right.”
“Don’t be vulgar, Barbara Campbell,” said Beryl, in
a haughty manner, glad to be able to correct her com-
panion. This was like throwing oil upon a temporarily
subdued fire. Barby’s brown eyes flashed. She flew
straight at the other girl, seizing her angrily, dipping
her into the sea, and plunging her again and again be-
neath the surface. “There! and there!" she said gustily,
dipping the dark head with each exclamation. But
Beryl’s muscles had hardened of late, and she wriggled


tree after the first amazed limpness. She in turn pushed
Barby under water, until the sea at that spot looked
as though a fight were taking place between two pas-
sionate primeval monsters. Beryl stamped upon Barby
with a bare foot twice before she let her rise to the
surface.
“Nowl” Beryl sniffed with streaming eyes and aching
head, as she released her companion. “Perhaps you’ll
think twice before you duck me again.”
Too worn out and disgusted with themselves and with
each other to do otherwise, the late combatants wound
their weary ways homewards, managing to evade each
other’s glances all the way to the bathroom door, where
a little strategic rush on the part of Barby secured her
the room to herself. She triumphantly slammed the door,
all the coats and hats hanging on the pegs falling to
the floor and over the wrathful one’s shoulders.
Beryl’s shrug came back with all its elegance of ex-
pression as she paused, then sauntered indifferently
round to the tap at the sink near the back door, where
she took her shower under difficulties, and in instal-
ments. Her hair partly free of salt water and sand,
she felt a little easier, but her heart was heavy as she
stood dripping on the sink edge, before going indoors.
The tamarisks were very still; the sky over the sea
darker and bluer; a low rumble came over the water.
Beryl shuddered. The faint sound was the heralding of
the coming storm.
Mrs Campbell frowned at the strained atmosphere
of the living-room that night, while the lightning flic-
kered in at the drawn curtains, hiding partly the un-
earthly glare of a sunset thunderstorm from those in
the room. Not only the stifling heat and thunder was
affecting the Beehive, however. Bob asked abruptly at
last who had been “scrapping”. There was no reply,
although Barby could not resist a toss of the head, at


which disguised insult Beryl tightened her lips and
swallowed scalding tea to keep from disgracing her-
self by replying hastily. Brenda was plainly nervous and
very near tears.
“What is wrong, children?” asked Mrs Campbell
wearily. She was tired after a long day in the kitchen
and wash-house. The storm had not improved her feel-
ings, and now here was the Beehive in hostile attitude
again.
Barby glanced at her mother, and Brenda deter-
minedly straightened her shoulders and mastered her
misery as she smiled towards Mum.
“Nothing, Mumdarling,” she said clearly.
Barby grunted. She was genuinely sorry for the mis-
chief she had made, but the stratum of stubbornness in
her kept her from telling her sister of the part played
in the matter of the fairy-tales. The longer she avoided
the confession, the harder she found it to tackle. Barby
frowned heavily.
Mrs Campbell had not touched the contents of her
plate, but only Beryl noticed that. She noticed also
that the mother’s shoulders had drooped and her lips
were pale.
The mound of blanc-mange and red jelly vanished
in comparative silence, while the thunder rolled out-
side.
“You look tired, Mrs Campbell,” Beryl said jerkily.
“If you like I will wash the dishes.”
“No, thank you, dear—you do your lessons, and Bob
will help me. I am a little tired, but we must blame
the frightful weather to-day.”
The others were apparently too engrossed in their
own affairs to heed what was said. Beryl, even in the
midst of her own unpleasant thoughts, felt a longing
to put her arms around the head that was grey at the
temples, and caress it with her fingers . . . and she also


felt a longing of a different nature—to shake the
shoulders of Barby and Brenda until they saw the weak
condition of their over-worked mother.
So the dishes went from the table, and the cloth was
swept off and folded into a sideboard drawer, and
Bubbles retired into a corner to draw weird pictures
on odd scraps of paper purloined from his mother’s writ-
ing-desk.
Beryl wriggled uneasily, being unable to comfort her-
self; finding it impossible too, to concentrate upon her
history lesson, and hearing all the time: “Sneak—sneak”
until her head throbbed and her hands shook.
“Brenda,” she said suddenly in a thin and unnatural
voice. “I didn’t tell Barby about the tales, truly”—and
daringly—“did f, Barby?”
Barby had a moment of impulsiveness that bade her
clear up the unpleasant little mystery, but another im-
pulse not so pleasant raced the first. “Who else would
tell?” she asked scoffingly, and Brenda, who had half-
smiled and looked hopeful, now turned away dully at
her sister’s words, shrinking back into her chair. “Don’t
try to explain to me,” she said slowly, addressing Beryl.
“You must have told, ft is all quite clear and lies won’t
help, f didn’t show the book to any one but you. It’s
been locked up all the time, ever since I put it in the
drawer. You promised, too. . . .” Her lips quivered. “I
thought your promise . . . real.”
Brenda did not say—did not think to say—that she had
not locked the book away until dawn, when she had
risen with the hard article hurting her back, to where
it had slipped from beneath her pillow. Who could
have seen it between bedtime in the silent room with
Barby asleep in the other bed, and dawn, with Barby
still asleep?
“—and I kept my promise,” said Beryl despairingly,


then challenged Barby with a last look that said: “Tell
her.”
Barby feigned not to see the helpless and baffled plea.
“I’ll not say it again, and I won’t speak to you until
you speak to me,” continued Beryl bitterly, throwing
down the gauntlet. “I’m not going to plead with any
one, but this last time I say, I did not tell Barby, or
any one else, about the book . . . and that is the truth.”
Brenda felt a lump move in her throat, and she opened
her lips to say the words that would relieve them all
of much unhappiness, but the instinct to relent was
too weak to combat the injury and disappointment
she had received. Brenda’s eyes swam and she saw in a
blur that Beryl was taking up her books and walking
from the room.
Had Brenda noticed her sister’s face, she would have
seen the white skin and tear-filled eyes; eyes which, at
the same time, were filled with stubborn defiancel


CHAPTER VIII
WARFARE
Beryl deliberately blinded herself to the unpleasant-
ness of what happened next, for gradually, mysteriously,
there arrived a state of warfare at Denning House. With
her money and her fine clothing, her ready generosity
and freedom with gifts and “treats”, the girl from the
West found that she had a band of followers who were
very willing to help and encourage her in “cutting” and
slighting the girls who were openly friends of the Camp-
bells. The warfare was accentuated by the hostility dis-
played by the mistresses against anybody caught offend-
ing through the medium of eloquent glances or sneers.
Many of the young folk who followed Beryl were
blinded by her display of wealth, the lavishness of her
“treats” at the tuckshop calling them as only buns,
ices, and sweets can call a certain section of youngsters
whose values have not yet been set in their unformed
minds. Beryl was slightly scornful of these members of
her “army”, and was not averse to cutting them if they
showed signs of favouring the opposing side.
In some strange manner the school was divided.
Teachers and seniors said “Those infants are a pest”,
but could not move in any direction to dispel the
friction that simmered like a gathering storm behind
all amenities. Cricket was bereft of its vim; hockey lost
some of its best members because some members would
not play with others who were Beryl’s pals, for this
savoured of disloyalty to the Campbell flag; lessons were


interrupted with an insidious flow of invisible sullen-
ness, and in the playground girls openly insulted one
another after the manner of schoolgirls all the world
over. The enmity was intense, but nobody could place a
finger precisely upon the reason for it.
Beryl was living in a whirl of bewilderment, mingled
with pain that struck deep into her developing young
soul. At night her heart ached beyond bearing, the sound
of the sea and Mum’s sweet good night somehow inten-
sifying the desire to throw up all the stupidity of
quarrel and bitterness, but the morning with its sun-
light and procession of everyday affairs found her again
in a spiteful mood. Good and bad impulses followed one
another so swiftly that her mind was wearied with the
strain, but doggedly she kept up her pose with every
scrap of enthusiasm she possessed. Gibing, taunting,
slighting, snubbing—these fires she kept burning by con-
tinual feeding with the fuel her bottomless purse pro-
vided.
Beryl, being of more than average intelligence, was
sub-consciously aware of the mean part she was playing,
but she would not allow herself to dwell upon it for
thought meant the weakness of “giving in”. She com-
menced this warfare by carrying the Beehive upset in-
to the school, and by gathering support from outsiders
not fully aware of the home quarrel. If they were bribed
by ices and chocolates into being school-girl “mercen-
aries”, then they compensated for the magnificent squan-
dering on the part of their leader, by drawing their
daggers and fighting ably behind her. Beryl before long
discovered that her strength lay in numbers not quality.
This angered her. The Campbells, with their steady
popularity and wholesomeness, held without effort the
affection and sturdy friendship of those in the school
who had reason to be liked best. And, from time to
time, other girls, realizing their loss of prestige and


taking advantage of the least excuse, allowed themselves
to be annexed.
For the mother’s sake, a truce was declared when
the beach was reached each night on the way home;
enmity was renewed with no small vim when the town
was reached in the morning. The week-end was a long,
infinitely long period, when politeness became a strain
and a nightmare. Relief often arrived in squabbles
and tempests that could be put down to one thing only
—the enforced amiability that did not in the least deceive
Mum. Life was intolerable. Beryl shuddered and thought
of running away, more than once, but her vanity for-
bade her to give a victory to the enemy’s camp. Un-
easiness, due to inner shame, increased the unhappiness,
but she could not, and would not, confess this in words,
or in the innermost corners of her heart. Tears often
soaked her pillow at night, and stained her eyelids for
the morning. Savage plunges under the tap before break-
fast eliminated a little of the ravages of grief, until she
found that nobody noticed, not even Bob. As a matter
of fact all of them noticed her state, but for various
reasons there was no comment.
With her forces visibly weakening, in strength and in
number, Beryl held a meeting one afternoon under a
clump of sun-meshed pines in the most remote corner
of the grounds. She stood, a slender, regal little figure
against a dark rough trunk, her black hair gleaming
with almost iridescent light, her eyes shining brightly.
Those amongst her band who honestly admired the girl
from the West, found their aesthetic instincts stirred to
passionate adoration by the exquisite picture she made;
others wondered if the meeting meant a “beano” at the
shop.
“Our side is the weakest,” she explained rapidly, hold-
ing the others in silence by the arresting spell of her
personality. “We just must stick together closer and


ignore them more and more. Susie Lind, I saw you speak
to Isobel Frantz yesterday, in full view of the rest.”
Susie wriggled and looked uncomfortable. She was
one of Beryl’s staunch admirers. “Mother- gave me a
message to deliver to her, about a dance,” came quickly.
“I had to, Beryl.”
“You should have written it, and had one of the
kindergarten youngsters deliver it,” came sternly and
coldly. “However, you had a small excuse. Now, at the
term’s end, I’ll give an immense box of chocolates to
those who stick to me, and a fountain-pen to the one
who gets most thrusts under the enemy’s armour. The
end of the term is very soon. It’s a kind of reward for
valour.”
Reward for valour. Beryl flushed as she said the words,
but went on hastily: “Of course, we must not do any-
thing sneaky, or rotten; that is forbidden.”
“Of course,” said a girl with blue eyes and golden
head. “It is a very valorous thing to cause discomfort
and perhaps distress. Sorry, Beryl, but I’m through. I’m
not going to lick the Campbells’ boots, but I’m jolly well
going to be a disinterested neutral.” Blue eyes flashed
and a fair head tossed. “And that’s that.”
“You can please yourself,” retorted the leader by
the tree-trunk. “Please go, and be a neutral, at once,
Queenie.”
Queenie vanished, with high colour and stumbling
footsteps, and it might be said with truth, that a few
others envied her her courage.
Into Beryl’s mind stole something she had once heard
Mum say. Strange how Mum always came to her mind
when Beryl sought for reasons for her actions. Mum
had said: “There is nothing in this world, Bees, which
can stand on its own legs if it is influenced by evil or
nastiness; it just dies, and is better dead.”
The girl shook her shoulders, and spoke so rapidly


that the others felt themselves moved to greater in-
spiration immediately. “If we start a thing we’ve got
to go through with it. We’re cowards if we give in. To
declare peace with them is impossible, and we can’t
just drift back into nothingness, can we?’’
“No, no,’’ came cries.
“Well, then, let’s go our hardest, and refuse to enter
into anything they take part in. Let’s show it openly in
class, instead of being weak and afraid, and let’s re-
member that we must have the courage of our convic-
tions.”
“What convictions?” asked the “swot” of the class,
a big lanky girl wearing goggles. “Have we any?”
This was too deep to examine at the moment. Beryl
turned smartly. “Come and have some ice-creams and
drinks,” she invited hurriedly, “or we’ll all be very late
home.”
She walked along the beach alone, knowing that to-
night she was too late to catch up with the others for
the sake of appearance. She dumbly wondered if the
Campbells’ clique had to hold mass meetings to stir
up lethargic loyalty that threatened to dissolve into
indifference through lack of emotion. Beryl’s heart was
heavy, but the pride that does so much damage in its
refusal to recognize facts, kept her stubborn.
The sand was cool, but hard to walk through where
it was as dry as powdered bone. She sat down with a
thump to remove her shoes and stockings, in order to
half-wade, half-wander along the narrow strip of golden-
grey shore where the waves had left it bare.
Stockings and shoes she threw down, as she tipped
into her lap the contents of her lightened purse. She
wanted to see how much money she had to last until
the arrival of her next week’s allowance. In her hand-
bag was a small gold-edged and enamelled mirror given
her by Nelly, but seldom gazed into nowadays; a bottle


of perfume with the depleted contents made by added
water into a milky and pallid substance; two stamps; a
train ticket; a small powder-puff devoid of powder, but
stuck to a caramel; a handkerchief, and some loose
coins.
“One and fivepence,” she counted aloud. “Heavensl
Em almost penniless/’ The exclamation had been over-
heard by somebody who paused to smile at the picture
of the unconsciously dramatic child exclaiming aloud
in her acute and staggered dismay. “How on earth will
I treat the crowd to tuck, on that ?”
Being apparently alone on the wide stretch of sand
made her start violently when a masculine voice said
breezily: “Hulloa, there, young Diana. Had a spill? Or
are you contemplating setting up as a politician?”
She slithered round as smartly as a lizard, clutching
too late at the coins which span out on to the sand.
Beryl beheld the merry face of a young man, pipe in
mouth, his loose shirt-collar revealing a throat even
browner than the clear tan of his face. His hat was off,
his hair fair, and lighter in colouring than his skin.
Beryl stood haughtily upright. Ignoring the grande-
dame pose completely, the stranger jammed his hat on
to his head, commenced picking up the articles on the
firm sand at their feet, gravely restored to her the dis-
carded shoes and stockings, and made a low bow comic-
ally exaggerating his homage. It is impossible to be
haughty for long when one is first of all caught uttering
loud exclamations as if alone, and then presented with
one’s own limp hosiery and sandy footwear. Beryl’s toes
wriggled in the coolness beneath her feet.
“What is it, youngster? Are you upset over some-
thing?”
The twinkling eyes and jolly face were very much
like Bob’s. “I’m quite all right, thank you,” came primly.
Then: “Thank you for picking up my things.”


“Along came the Knight,” recited this friendly young
man with a flourish of his most un-knight-like pipe, “to
stare with dismay upon the faire ladye in dire distress.
Her attitude was forlorn, her figure disconsolate, as
aloud she cried: ‘Heavens! I’m penniless.’ With par-
donable pride and conscious heroism that Knight
charged through the thicket, placing his services at the
feet of the damsel in distress. With becoming modesty
the maiden thanked him, saying: ‘Thither, Stranger, I
need thee not.’ ”
Beryl chuckled; it was irresistible, and the man struck
a pose that was eloquent of deep, even exaggerated,
astonishment. The astonishment seemed acute. “Ha,” he
cried melodramatically. “The maiden unbends.”
Somehow Beryl found herself talking to her com-
panion as naturally as she had talked at times with
Bob, who, after all, was a little graver than the stranger
who was exactly ten years old when he grinned, and
impressively grown-up when he chewed his pipe. She
discovered that it was the only thing to do to tell the
story of the feud at school, with the story of the fairy-
tales that had been indirectly the cause of it all. She
was afraid she would be laughed at, as the words tumbled
forth in the relief of expressing herself, but a quiet
word here and there showed her that the young man was
interested. The telling of the incidents sounded very
trivial to her own ears.
“Where do you live then, Miss Beryl?” he asked. She
pointed along to the curve of shore that hid the Beehive
roof. Her companion grinned again and whacked his
pipe into the palm of his hand.
“I live along there, too,” he remarked cheerfully.
“By the Point, so we can walk as far as your house,
together. I’ve admired the shady verandas of your home
many a time when my own little dug-out has been


cooking in the glare from the sandhills. Shall we
paddle?”
“I will if you do,” said Beryl. So the man who was
both very mature and very young, sat down to remove
his white canvas shoes and his socks, and tucked them
under his arm as an old lady tucks a parcel. He rolled
his trousers to the knees, and Beryl laughed at the
humorous picture he made. They started to wade in two
inches of lapping water, splashing slightly as they made
towards the Beehive.
The Beryl of Bluelawns was completely eclipsed by
the lovable, natural, sane little girl who did not know
how starved she had been for company of the right kind.
She talked, and talked, her cheeks glowing, her face
so beautiful in its animation that the hidden artist
which is in most men, gloried in her loveliness, youth,
freshness, and health, with the sparkling sea-waves and
the shore as a background.
Gradually the man discovered all about her and the
Campbells: their sorrow; their fun; their bravery in
refusing to lose hope when hope was almost gone; their
home-life, and their characters, clearly drawn with swift
strokes by the speaker. The fairy-tale affair was again
touched upon, details supplied truthfully, without spite
or exaggeration.
“. . . and I didn’t tell her, and Brenda is always
so forgiving and sweet. I wish I could make her believe
I didn’t tell Barby. I do wish it so. I don’t know how
Barby knew, for the book was locked away, there being
only the time between early morning and school, and
the time when we were bathing, for her to find out
about Brenda’s secret. It was a secret. She had not even
shown Mum. I know Barby wouldn’t unlock a drawer
and spy. Barby just couldn’t do that, whatever fun
she made of Brenda’s mysterious writing. Sisters are
curious, I know, and really hide an awful lot of love


under their scoffing, and Barby worships Brenda and
would fly at anybody who said things against her, or
did things to her. But she teases Brenda and calls her
‘softy’ if she gets sentimental about sunsets or sad or
beautiful things. It must hurt Brenda, to have her
stories laughed at and thrown back at her tauntingly,
like they were—don’t you think?”
“I do,” affirmed the man with emphasis. “It hurts
like billy-o.”
Beryl threw a swift glance sideways at the face that
was suddenly grave and bitter. It almost seemed that he
had experienced a similar wound.
“You see,” continued the girl after a brief pause,
“I don’t mind them being horrid to me so much as I
mind them thinking I told. It’s beastly to sneak and
tell lies, isn’t it?”
“Beastly; I should say so.”
“Do ... do you believe in me?” faltered Beryl.
“I do, youngster,” came firmly, with conviction.
Beryl’s heart swelled with gratitude, so that even the
word “youngster” was not resented.
“What is your name, please?” asked Beryl next.
“Pat Brent,” came the response, and Beryl stood stock
still in the shallows and faced him.
“Your initial—one of them—is B, too, and it seems that
every one nice whom I know, is B.” Then followed the
story of the naming of the Beehive.
“It’s a grand name,” said the young man as the
house came into sight, “because there’s a reason behind
it. It’s better than ‘The Pines’, eh, with no pines within
miles, or ‘Dolce Domum’ with flat-irons flying on Satur-
day nights.” As Beryl laughed appreciatively, Pat Brent
added, “I’d like to meet this Bob. He sounds a good
sort.”
Beryl nodded. “You must do that. I shall have to hurry
straight indoors now,” she remarked, with a glance at


the nearing house in its frame of tamarisks. “Thank
you for keeping me company. Would you like to come
in with me and see Mrs Campbell?”
“Not to-day, youngster, but I’ll be delighted to
another time, thanks.” With a lift of his battered felt
hat he strode onwards, long steps taking him quickly
out of sight along the otherwise bare beach, afloat with
late afternoon haze which the seagulls swooped through
like silver and grey aeroplanes.
Two days later Pat again met Beryl and walked along
with that entertaining young person.
“Well,” he asked cheerfully. “And have you been
buying any more bribes to corrupt your supporters
with?”
“Bribes!” repeated Beryl lifelessly. “It sounds horrid
doesn’t it?”
“It does!”
“Then ?”
“Friends who are purchased are poor investments,”
was the level reply, while the pipe was puffed steadily.
“I know. I’ve thought that, but . . . I do want to
beat the Campbell side, and they have crowds in favour
of them.”
“Were the crowds bought with sweets and ribbons?”
“No! The Bees wouldn’t buy any one. . . .” Beryl
stood aghast at the way in which she had condemned
herself.
For a few hundred yards there was silence, then:
“Pat Brent, I’ve made up my mind. I’m never going
to bribe any one again, I promise.”
“Good!”—and Brent’s hand shot out and shook Beryl’s
until she laughingly cried out for him to stop.
“And we are pals—Eh?”
“Yes, please,” replied Beryl delightedly. Then she
asked in curiosity: “Are you having a holiday down
here?”


“Well, not exactly,” was the explanation of the appar-
ent gentleman of leisure. “You see, I write things for
a newspaper, and stories for magazines . . . and I must
confess humbly that I’ve written a book . . . not any-
thing so scintillating as a best seller, though.”
“A hook! Then you are an author!— and Oh! What
book is it?” almost squealed Beryl in her excitement
and awe.
Brent smiled and crammed his hands deep down into
the pockets of his old tweed coat, which he usually
wore with the belt hanging in two ends down his back
from the waist. “It is an insignificant little volume
called The Bloom of the Peach, and not worth speaking
of,” came tenderly and yet bitterly. Beryl put her finger
on a sore spot when she astutely asked: “Don’t people
like it?”
“I believe they do . . . some of them. But one person
does not like it overmuch. She does not like dreams or
dreamers. She likes realities . . . but never mind such
things . . . there’s the Beehive.”
“I like dreams . . .” hesitated Beryl, then asked blund-
eringly: “Doesn’t the one who doesn’t like dreams like
you?” Brent tipped back his head and roared at this
ingenious query.
“She’s my sister,” he went on, “the dearest, most win-
some little piece of aggravation in the world. We were
the best of pals . . . but I forsook figures in my father’s
office for a folding typewriter; and the family residence
for the high-roads and by-ways of the hills and shore.”
“Did your father want you to write?” Beryl continued,
loath to discontinue this interesting “real” story.
“He wanted me to tie myself to stockbroking, and
learn to buy things with money I didn’t possess, and
sell them to people who hadn’t the money to pay for
them . . . but that mode of living doesn’t agree with
my constitution. But this is over your head, kiddie.


My father as good as kicked me out, and since that I
have scratched up a living somehow, and now can see
my way clear to add a grand piano and a what-not to
the cottage—should I wish for them. My sister, Cleo,
is the daintiest . . .” Here his voice broke. “She blames
me for leaving the pater alone. He died and the old
firm fizzled out, and now there are no ‘Brent’s, Stock-
brokers, etc.’ I loved Dad, and I love her. Now I feel
confoundedly lonely, in spite of The Bloom of the
Peach, and my typewriter.’’
Beryl nodded. She understood most of what her com-
panion had told her.
“I am an odd person—is that what you are thinking,
kiddie?” queried Brent lightly, his eyes gazing out
towards the blue horizon.
“No! I think you are wonderful,” stated the adoring
girl. “And Brenda would just love to meet a real author
. . . if she were not so ... if she knew I didn’t tell
Barby about the stories.”
“Well! I’ll be along at the Point, in the old cottage
there, all the summer, writing. You know the place, or
I suppose the others do. Bring the Beehive along when
your scrap is ended.”
All the way up through the sand Beryl repeated to
herself all that had been said on the walk home. A
real author, and if only Barby and Brenda were not
as they were, they could show the book of tales to him,
and get his opinion of them.
Bubbles entered the bedroom while Beryl was
changing her frock, and although she felt inclined to
hustle the little fellow from the room, she put aside
her dreams of authors and fairy-tales and reconciliation,
to listen unselfishly to the small boy’s chatter.
“I learned two twos is four and three threes is nine
to-day,” he said without pausing, “an’ I had a bonser
fight.”


Beryl paused with the comb in her busy hand. A fight!
“Whatever did you fight over?”
“Burton Wilson said he had better sisters’n me, and
I said my sisters were better’n his, and so they are. My
sisters is pretty with nice faces when they’s not cross,
and haven’t any freckles on their cheeks. Burton Wil-
son’s sisters’ve got freckles as big as . . . as . . . the spots
on loquats,’’ he finished breathlessly.
“Gracious! And why do freckles make his sisters not
as good as yours?’’
“I s’pect his ole sisters is all right, if it comes to that,”
said the warrior gallantly, “but he’s not going to say
my sisters is . . .”
Beryl did not want the whole tale again. “I wouldn’t
fight if I were you,” she advised in matronly manner.
“You would if you was me,” said Bubbles with sur-
prising insight, “but if I was you I wouldn’t.” He
pondered: “At least, not often.”
“Oh!” Beryl gasped and tried to elucidate the verbal
tangle.
“If some one said a nasty thing to you about your
sister, and you was little like me and felt all firey and
hot and you saw another fellow get firey and hot too,
then you’d fight. An’ my sisters is better’n his.”
“I thought Burton was a great pal of yours,” said
puzzled Beryl, trying to get to the bottom of Bubbles’
mind.
“So he is,” came in great indignation. “But if you
don’t fight sometimes you don’t have any fun . . .
go o’ness!”
“I see,” Beryl replied waveringly, but she did not see.
Bubbles was utterly disgusted at her denseness, but
apparently forgot it quickly, for he continued: “I
learned about Es-quee-mos, too, in school, in their little
iglooses in the snow. I think I’d go somewhere else to
live, wouldn’t you, Beryl?”


“I think so, dear/’ she said softly to the child now
leaning against her knee as she sat on the bed.
“And the kindergartner lady what visited the school
to-day said I sang good. I sang ‘Wynken, Blynken, and
Nod’, too, and lots of others, and she clapped. She said
she ‘ ’joyed it amensely’. So I guess she did. A kinder-
gartner wouldn’t tell lies, would she?”
“No!”
The plump little face lit up as from a lamp within.
“I like you better than the kindergartner,” he said
earnestly, “because you’ve got a nice nose and you talk
nice to me, and you smell nice,” and with that extrava-
gant utterance, he edged away and vanished precipi-
tously through the window. Beryl felt oddly comforted
as she watched the swaying curtains and dwelt upon
the events of the day.


CHAPTER IX
-AND PEACE
At school the next day Beryl made an important state-
ment among her followers.
“I haven’t any money left to buy things with,” she
said, arguing that it was the literal truth. “And I am
sorry that I can’t spend any more on chocolates and
ice-creams and drinks.”
There was a small chorus of whys and hows, and
Beryl repeated the gist of what she had said, but would
say no more. Just as she completed her explanation she
saw two girls openly sneer, whisper to one another,
and then, smiling unpleasantly, walk away arm in arm.
Two more blurted out that she was too mean to spend
her money—that she had plenty, and wanted to keep
it and spend it alone. Beryl flushed and held her head
disdainfully higher, as the characters of some of the
little band were revealed to her. One girl cried loudly
that Beryl had only been pretending to be rich and was
a stuck-up creature. She was howled down by the
remainder, who made a quick and earnest decision
under the next pine, and brought the result to their
leader.
“I say this,” Pinkey Nobel said assertively. “That
Beryl is very fair to own up and not shuffle out of it.
I say, too, that we all agree that the Campbell set is
jolly decent, and that we have been asses, and that the
first time we get the chance, we will join the Campbells,


and dissolve this silly war. We like Beryl and will stick
to her, and the Bennett crowd can go to Hanover.”
The goggled eyes of Pinkey blinked rapidly at this
effort, and she subsided in confusion. Beryl was touched
by this unexpected evidence of loyalty, and stood up
against the pine-trunk, a slight erect figure with the
sun spots in her hair, as she replied: “I am sorry that
I made you enemies of the Campbells, and as soon as
Barby and Brenda mend their quarrel with me, I shall
be glad. I haven’t lost my money, but some one told
me it is a mean thing to try and buy friends, so now
you know.” Beryl, her heart full, turned away; those
who had stood the test followed her to the gate, to
accompany her until their home paths called them to
the various corners of the little hamlet of Mangrove
Bend.
So the band of Le Leivre warriors dissolved, and
because of lack of opponents the Campbell band became
less aggressive also, until warfare settled into peace, and
the open “cutting” and slighting was a thing of the
past. Beryl was relieved, and so were they all, including
the mistresses, who, in staccato and sibilant voices,
talked in the lunch-room of the state of affairs in the
schoolrooms where once bosom pals stubbornly refused
to be friendly even during lessons.
“It is all because of that spoilt little Le Leivre child,”
said the peppery drawing mistress.
“I rather think she is finding herself now,” replied
the “maths.” teacher in her deep voice, “and is realizing
the value of the Campbells. Barby is certainly a mon-
key, but she is fine, and Brenda is extremely clever and
easy to manage.”
“The child Bubbles amuses me,” said the kinder-
garten mistress with a chuckle. “He is the drollest, most
solemn little owl in my room—and as full of loyalty
and love as an egg is full of meat. I am fond of him.”


“Queer about Major Campbell?” continued another,
and the talk drifted to tales relating to mysterious
happenings in the far corners of the globe, and ended
with the Major’s experiences on his last expedition.
Beryl, after a great deal of inward persuasion, went
up to Barby and spoke, the latter firmly closing her
lips and looking away with exaggerated nonchalance.
“Barby! Why don’t you tell Brenda what you know
about those fairy-stories? I can’t help speaking, even
if I am in Coventry, because it isn’t fair for her or for
me. I don’t want her to think I am a cad.”
Barby rocked on her heels and pursed her mouth
a little more.
“Well! If you won’t, then it can’t be helped, but I
know that if your father were here he would detest the
mean thing you are doing.”
“Mean . . . mean!” asked Barby energetically, sur-
prised out of her silence by the accusation which, as it
sank into her brain, she knew to be true. She flushed
darkly and looked wrathful.
“Mean?” she repeated with less force, faltering.
“Yes! You are telling a lie all the time you are
remaining silent . . .” Beryl choked.
Barby stared, her mouth dropped open, and then
she frowned and lifted her hand quickly—Beryl darted
back from the threatened blow—but dropped her arm,
while a peculiar expression that was almost shame
changed Barby’s features into a dim copy of her usual
vivacity. She gulped and fled.
Beryl watched the flying legs vanish around the
corner, to the haven between the cowshed and the wash-
house, where Barby often took her troubles. Nothing
seemed to matter now, to Beryl, as much as the friend-
ship between herself and Brenda. It seemed hopeless.
Beryl’s heart was leaden and her feet dragged as she
went indoors.


Mum was in the dining-room, placing dishes on the
sideboard as Beryl passed the open door. “Beryl . . .”
She paused and waited.
“Come in here”—and when she was inside the room:
“What is the matter with you, child? You are unhappy.
Can’t you tell me? I want you to be happy here, and
not like a little sad and wistful ghost drifting around.”
Beryl’s lips quivered, but she shook her head. Mum
must not be worried with the long tale of woe. “I am
all right, thank you, Mrs Campbell. I . . . I’m really
all right.”
And Mum watched with troubled gaze while the dis-
consolate girlish figure wandered out again.
That night, Beryl leaned on the chair-arm by her
window, with the blind high and the curtains back,
dreaming somewhat wistfully of seeing Brenda come
to her and say she knew the truth. The moon was
shining in a silver path on the water, the sea rocking
gently and splashing on the sand. From around the
North Point of the Bend came a regular tinkling plash-
plash-ripple, and near by in the tamarisks there were
faint rustles and whispers—beautiful and clean the night
was with the huge dim sky over it all.
The girls and the two boys, she knew, had gone for
a walk along the beach, but Beryl found it easy to say
she had not cared to accompany them. Bob had noticed
her absence on many occasions of late and had asked
questions, but replies had been vague and unsatisfying.
Brenda, thought Beryl, would no doubt be peopling
that shining moon-path with pixies and fairies as she
walked along the shore, conjuring sea demons out of
the dark, and bringing rescuing fairy queens out of the
light. Brenda was very much like Mum. Every one at
school had a Mum, and sometimes they talked of them.
She had no one and no home really. Beryl’s eyes stung.
There were only Nelly and Gil, and he didn’t write.


Of course he was too busy with Nelly and with travel-
ling, to write to a lonely and hungry-hearted little girl.
There was Pat Brent, though. He was her pal, for
he had said so, and somehow it was easy to believe
Pat Brent when he said a thing in his pleasantly breezy
voice. Later, when Brenda should discover the truth—
if ever that happened—they would all go round to the
Point and have tea with the Author.
There was a sound outside, and a dark little figure
crossed the sand and hurried through the moonlit trees
outside the window. Beryl left the land of dreams and
wondered which of the Beehive it was, and what she
was there for.
: ‘Beryl . . .” and Brenda stood inside the window,
with bare feet sandy, and face flushed with running.
The word had almost been sobbed, and her cheeks were
streaked with wet as well as being flushed, while her
breath came in short gasps, so that she was forced to
breathe deeply and heavily for a moment before
continuing.
Beryl's face lit up, and her fingers gripped the chair-
arms tightly. What was Brenda saying?
“Beryl! Barby told me that you didn’t tell her about
my book. She was not asleep that night after all, and
waited until I had gone to sleep, then lit a candle and
peeped at my stories. She said she was cross with you
and wanted to be revenged for all your funny ways; now
she says she can’t keep it back any longer, and I know
you must hate all of us, and I’m sorry you have been
miserable about it all. I know you weren’t really a
sneak, and I’m sorry I disbelieved you, but I didn’t
guess that any one could have seen my book between
bedtime that night and when I got up at dawn to
lock it away. I’ve been longing to give in, and remem-
bering about when you wouldn’t tell when we nearly
drowned you . . . and I’m awfully sorry, Beryl . . . I’m


so sorry . . . and . . . I . . . don’t . . . deserve to have
you forgive me.”
The long stream of jerky sentences came from the
depths of Brenda’s soul, and she glowed with exaltation
as she was talking, so that her voice thrilled the listener
with its message of peace and happiness. As Brenda
finished her oratory, however, she subsided like a pricked
balloon, into abject misery. Brenda’s hurts were very
real—as were her joys, while they lasted.
Beryl sat back in her chair, pride fighting against
forgiveness. The other seemed to sense this, and dropped
into a sobbing heap on the floor.
Before Beryl’s uncreditable and impulsive thought of
telling Brenda that her apology was not wanted could
mature into action, her real self asserted itself, and she
fell to her knees beside the other girl, placing an arm
tenderly round the shaking shoulders, pressing the
weeping girl nearer, and murmuring that it was all
right. It was another moral victory for the girl from
the West, and on such victories are our characters built.
Brenda sat up with a jerk, Beryl leaning back on
her heels on the rug.
“You’re better than any of us . . . except Bob . . .
and Mum,” Brenda hiccuped, “and even if you are
stuck-up sometimes, I love you.”
The doubtful compliment was swallowed whole, Beryl
smiling joyously, and both scrambling to their feet, as
they became immediately aware of the sticky sentimen-
tality of the atmosphere. Somehow the emotion of the
moment embarrassed Beryl, although Brenda plainly
wallowed in it. Storms of rapture or of agony shook her
like the wind shakes an aspen-tree, but not many of
the Beehive guessed how much she was hurt at times
by trivial incidents. Brenda mostly hid her wounds
under her endearing manners and genuinely affectionate


actions, but there was not quite so much need to hide
things from Beryl, who understood.
Brenda squeezed the other’s arm for a voiceless and
ecstatic minute, then walked to the dressing-table, took
up Beryl’s beautiful brush and comb of enamelled silver
to straighten tumbled locks, and brushed back sticking
strands of brown hair with swift movements. Beryl sat
on the edge of the bed out of the rays of the candle-
light and adored her friend. It was all right at last, and
the stormy sky was as clear as the sky outside, deeply
blue, luminous with stars, and the Milky Way a silvery
smudge above.
Quarrels were like storms, horrid and upsetting at
the time, but leaving a clear air afterwards.
“Barby said,” quoted Brenda carelessly, as she patted
stray wisps of bright hair into place, “that the fairy-
tales are tip-top, and that she enjoyed every one of them,
and read them until the candle snuffed out. She enjoyed
the one about the Prince of Darkness best, like you
did.”
“When did she tell you this, Brenda?”—How good
it was to talk naturally again.
“To-night, walking along the beach. She said she’d
burst if she didn’t tell, and that she’d cried about it
nearly every night since that day in the water when
she teased me.”
“Does Barby want to be friends with me?” asked
Beryl later. Brenda hesitated, and reluctantly replied,
“I don’t know. Barby is splendid when you know her,
and so are you—but you don’t seem to mix very well
somehow. I know Barby admires you, but Beryl—forgive
me for saying it, you do show off sometimes with your
frocks and money, and that hurts Barby. She’s not
jealous, please don’t think so, for Barby couldn’t be,
but Beryl . . . she . . . you . . . she thinks you are superior
and that you. . . sort of look down on her ... I think.


She naturally wants to show that she doesn’t care—
although really she does.”
Brenda was very uneasy then, as she truthfully and
jerkily tried to sum up the situation. The other girl
felt an anger flush her face, then dissolve into a part-
contentment. She understood Brenda.
“Perhaps later,” faltered Brenda, greatly daring and
yet timid for fear she should crack the newly cemented
friendship again, “she will realize that you don’t mean
all you say. I understand you now, Beryl, and you under-
stand me, and Barby is a brick when you know her, but
we all know she is prickly.”
The conversation dwindled into thinness, and the
candle was flickering when the girls rose. Then Beryl
suddenly caught her companion’s arm and pulled her to
the bed edge again, for she had remembered Pat Brent.
The moon was very low when they paused in their
excited chatter, and voices in other parts of the house
told them the remainder of the Beehive had returned
from their ramble.
“Let’s tell Barby,” was Beryl’s suggestion. “That is,
if she would like to know. Do you think . . . ?” but
Brenda laughed happily and nodded. “Of course she’ll
be glad to see you’re not resentful. She’s not a pig. But
I don’t expect she’ll fall into your arms. Barby is never
gushing.”
Barby, upon meeting the two girls a moment after,
was wise enough to pretend nothing had happened, and
a small slice of extremely disturbing existence fell away
as though it had not been.
“An author!” ejaculated Brenda for the fourteenth
time. “. . . and to think you discovered him yourself.”
“He discovered me,” was the modest reply.
“Perhaps he’ll put us in a book,” said Brenda rap-
turously.
“Perhaps he won’t," sniffed her sister. “Do you think
we’re interesting enough for that"


“I suppose not,” was the response. “Anyway, we can
go and visit him and take some fresh eggs and milk
and cream.”
“Authors can’t be bothered with groceries,” was the
scornful remark from Barby, who was slightly impatient
of the hero worship, “and I’ll bet he wears his hair long,
with spotted ties like sashes around his neck, and can’t
swim or anything.”
“He’s not a bit like that,” asserted Beryl smartly.
“And he is sunburnt to the colour of the dining-room
table, and has pale hair, with a gold shine on it, and
it’s as short as Bubbles’. He didn’t have any tie on when
1 saw him for his collar was open and sticking out over
his coat, and he can swim ... I know.”
“What did he say exactly,” Brenda asked once more,
“about the book he wrote?”
It was repeated carefully and with heavy emphasis.
“I expect his sister doesn’t like him scribbling and
just living anywhere,” Brenda said with a burr of satis-
faction in her voice, “and expects him to throw it all
up and go and live with her in their family mansion.”
“ Mansionl” snorted Barby in disgust. “We’re not living
in England—or Venice. I expect they quarrelled over
the book, and he walked out, and she won’t give in . . .”
Barby’s tones drawled away to nothing, as she realized
that the Beehive’s own case was almost identical with
that of the house of the author. There had been a
quarrel at the Beehive—and a lack of giving in.
“Gracious!” said Barby then, after a dazed pause.
“It sounds quite interesting, happening to the author.”
The other two, who could easily follow her trend of
thought, agreed silently.
It was eleven o’clock when the whispering and chat-
tering in the sisters’ bedroom ceased, when Beryl, who
was happier than she had been for many long days,
strode energetically down the passage into her own
room.


Mrs Campbell, with the mending-basket in her hands,
appeared from the dining-room a few moments after.
On the table in the stone-floored lobby, she placed the
big basket with the accumulated heap of stockings and
socks, hesitated, then turned towards the hall again, for
a moment ago she had seen a light under Beryl’s door.
Knocking, she was told to “Come in.” The usual good-
night words were spoken, and Mum rose to leave the
chair on which she sat by the bed where Beryl was
lying with the cat curled up on her feet. But two warm
arms were flung tightly around the amazed woman’s
neck, and she heard a small voice say: “I love you .. .
next to my own mother.
Beryl was trying to express a little of what was bub-
bling within her; trying to apologize for the many hasty
little remarks and small rudenesses which had been
regretted as they had been uttered. Mum understood,
and became aware in an enlightened second, of the
cleared atmosphere of the Beehive. The silent ghost of
discontent and fretfulness had flown.
Later, in the room of the two girls, where she went
also to say good-night, she heard the tale of the fairy-
book, and with the divine wisdom that seems to belong
to mothers alone, made no remark other than: “It is
far easier to be kind than unkind . . and the girls
felt their very souls ache with longing to be “good” and
follow Mum’s example.
But the cruel light of daytime scatters the most noble
resolves, and the morning dawned close and hot, with a
north wind that blew sand and dust in sharp and blazing
gusts. After rising late, Bob, sticky and half towelled
from his sea dip, hastened through his breakfast and
departed. Bubbles wailed because his porridge had
burnt his lips. Barby was irritable and did not want
to go to school, but after a short speech in which she
blamed the Government, or whoever was responsible,


for the necessary absorbing of knowledge, and the bore
of it all, reluctantly re-washed her face and followed
the others outside into the heat.
After an eternity of that endless school day, the three
girls trooped wearily out of the tall gates and plastered
their noses against the hot glass of the tuck-shop window.
The old attitude that was so resented by Barby, unfor-
tunately, returned to Beryl, as she said she would buy
drinks if they would have some. Barby was penniless,
having spent her week’s allowance of one shilling at a
swoop, when the charms of a patent pencil-sharpener
had lured her. The pencil-sharpener was very nice, but
oh! on such a day what wouldn’t her shilling have
purchased in this shop redolent of raspberry syrup and
vanilla ice-cream.
Brenda, remembering the night before, and thinking
that now it was quite all right to take the treat, nodded,
but her sister agreed with a breezy “Right-o”.
The trio walked into the shop without hesitation,
seized a small corner table, while Beryl ordered iced
drinks and fancy cakes in her customary extravagant
way. The girl who served them, a red-headed little crea-
ture with bright eyes and a winning smile, pushed
change from five shillings towards the pretty schoolgirl
at the table, but Beryl magnificently waved it away with
a: “Keep that.’’ The girl flushed, but picked up the
money, mostly small silver, and backed away. Beryl
turned to the others and remarked patronizingly: “Poor
little thing. I suppose the money means a lot to her.’’
The other Bees were uncomfortably silent. This was
the side of Beryl that they could not understand. They
partly found solace from any mental disturbances, how-
ever, in the iced and tinkling drinks, which left steam
on the outside of the glasses. “Nice . . remarked Brenda
gloatingly, rubbing her frock front. “. . . and cold."
“Umnnn,” murmured Barby, with a straw between


her lips, and the yellow contents of her glass diminished
in steps as she drank.
“Beryl!” exclaimed Brenda then. “You are not to buy
anything more . . . please . . .” but Beryl smiled and
shrugged her shoulders languidly, sauntered in grand
manner to the counter, and deliberately and defiantly
purchased a two-pound box of sweets of an expensive
imported brand. Her companions watched her with
blank countenances.
Brenda then fished three pennies from the depths of
her purse, and with colour a little high, and a little
afraid of the ludicrous contrast of the two purchases,
bought three-pennyworth of nuts—the brown and pun-
gently flavoured nuts known as peanuts.
With the wind in their faces, and the dry particles
of sand stinging their bare legs as they waded in the
edge of the sea, they moved silently homeward.
Barby was objecting to the obnoxious Beryl who had
replaced the pleasant Bee of the night before. Was the
north wind to blame with its dry and hot breath,
altering the landscape to a mere dull shadow of its bril-
liant self, or was Beryl herself to blame? Was her conceit
only stifled for the time? Now she was once more restored
to favour, she became “cocky”.
“Have some?” asked Beryl directly, pushing the
opened box of chocolates under Brenda’s nose. She took
a large and luscious cream. Barby followed, prompted
by a nudge from her sister. She then took from her
book satchel the small bag of nuts, offering them shyly
to the other two.
“Thanks,” said Beryl meekly. She did not dare say
that she had not tasted a peanut before, although she
had given them to the Zoo monkeys in Perth, often.
She watched the other girls to see what they did, and
shot the nut from the slippery skin and popped it in
her mouth. The rich taste was delicious.


Farther along the shore they overtook Bubbles, sob-
bing dismally, with face dirty and streaked. A terrible
tragedy had been enacted, for he had been “kept in”
for the first time in his short career, and the awfulness
of the happening had upset him woefully.
“We often get kept in; that’s nothing,” said Beryl
magnanimously, proffering the chocolate-box. “Have
some?” Bubbles was almost immediately pacified, and
the girls waited patiently while he removed his boots
and socks, washed his face and hands in the sea, and
returned for the sweets.
“They taste just like custard smells,” he explained
at last. The others knew what he meant. The nuts were
finished, and the chocolates reduced to about ten, which
were reserved for Mum. Beryl was resolved to buy
pounds of peanuts to-morrow. She had not guessed how
nice they could be.
It was tea-time when the Beehive had taken its usual
swim and had dressed again. Beryl’s eyes almost closed
with a delicious weariness that made the thought of her
white bed welcome. She remarked upon her sleepiness,
and Mrs Campbell nodded and remarked that she too
felt sleepy.
Beryl forgot her own tiredness in one of her flashes
of intuition. “You should go right to bed, now,” she
said briskly, surprising the rest of the occupants of the
room with her warm tones, “and I believe you’ve done
all of the work by yourself to-night, haven’t you?”
“I will go to bed as soon as I have mended some more
socks for Bubbles. I think he plays with barbed wire . . .
don’t you, young man?” said Mum, successfully avoiding
a reply to Beryl’s motherly query.
“No!” the little boy replied indignantly, and the
laughter was insulting to him. He had spoken the truth.
“You should have maids,” was Beryl’s next remark,


made absent-mindedly, with facts evaded without
thought.
“I would have, were my husband . . . alive,” was the
answer, and the Bees looked startled at the finality of
the last word. Mum had never used it before. She had
always said “here”.
Beryl gulped, feeling herself to blame for the occur-
rence. “Em sorry,” she said brokenly. “And hope more
than anything that he comes back.”


CHAPTER X
ARGUMENTS AND OTHER THINGS
With the approaching school vacation to anticipate and
plan for, the Beehive buzzed amiably in uneventful
existence, until one night there was a great commotion,
commencing with an argument between Beryl and
Barby.
Mum was in the kitchen, and could not hear, and
Bob, after a tiring day, was asleep on the lounge on the
front portion of the veranda. The two girls, also tired,
blazed into wrath over some trifling school matter.
Barby and Beryl, despite apparent friendliness, were
still far short of that perfect understanding which knits
true friends closely together.
“I tell you it was a five, Miss Knowall,” snapped
Barby, who was more cross than she should have been
because of her good resolutions remade ten minutes
before.
“It was not,” protested Beryl. “I watched particularly
because there was a fly sitting on it.”
“It was a five.”
“Oh . . .” and Beryl’s eyes flashed angrily, her own
good resolutions and impulses also melting in the heat
of the moment. “You should go to a proper school—
not a common, nasty little place like Denning House.”
As usual. Beryl had said more than she had intended,


and Barby echoed her words in stifled accents: “Proper
school!”—and in stupefied tones: “A proper schooll Ours
is as good a school as yours was, and we don’t learn to
quirk our little fingers and say, ‘haw-haw!’ ”
This was a slight upon Beryl’s accent, which had been
worn away gradually under the toughening influence of
the Beehive.
“Who says ‘haw-haw’?” demanded Beryl forcibly.
“You do—and if my father were here we wouldn’t
have you here at all. We don’t take boarders as a habit”
As the unfortunate and hasty speech was uttered Barby’s
mother, her eyes shocked as she caught sight of Barby’s
suffused face, and Brenda’s troubled one, appeared in
the doorway. Beryl had her back turned.
Beryl was also angry, incredibly wounded at the
other’s thoughtless and insincere remark. The girl from
the West stood up quickly, her chair tipping over back-
wards as her foot caught in the bar around which it
was curled. Her lips were quivering then, in spite of
her anger and surprise. She leaned forward, speaking
sharply in her desire to hurt Barby, as she herself had
been hurt, and not remembering to choose her weapons
carefully for fear of injuring others.
“You are glad enough of my money, anyway,” she
retorted.
Barby’s treacherous temper was rising, her mother
forgotten, as the peppery little girl shouted at the other,
who was now white and shaking. “I don’t like my
mother waiting on you,” was what Barby said loudly,
almost weeping with exasperation, “and running after
you and washing your clothes, and . . .” Barby’s voice
rose as Beryl flinched back from the words which were
whipping her. No one wanted her. Every one hated her.
Two impulses rose—those two troublesome selves that
always must be chosen between—and the better Beryl
vanished entirely, as an insufferably priggish little


woman of the world took her place, to shrug shoulders
and raise eyebrows superciliously.
“I pay your mother to wait upon me,” she exclaimed
in the affected tones that were resurrected for the
occasion, to hide the tears that were perilously near.
“And if I do that, then your mother is my servant . . .”
and the Beehive guest turned, and met Mum’s frowning
face in the doorway. After one startled and shamed
glance when she was Beryl again, she hastened past.
Mum stood aside silently. So Beryl, bewildered and
aware of her unforgivable speech, stumbled along to the
little bedroom where she could be alone.
Brenda was stunned. Mum hesitated, then stepped
slowly into the dining-room, and seated herself on
Beryl’s chair.
Barby, cheeks scarlet and mouth rebellious, met her
mother’s eyes defiantly, but slowly looked away to the
lesson book in front of her. She took up a pen and dug
it with a squeak into the inkpot. Mum spoke reluct-
antly, but firmly. “I can’t believe you have been so
rude, Barby,’’ were the words that were like a lash on
Barby’s smarting senses.
“Mum, she
“That is nothing to do with it. She is a guest here,
and you have been unpardonably vulgar.’’ Mrs Camp-
bell lifted a thin hand to command complete silence
as both sisters attempted to speak.
“And whatever has been said or done there is no
need to remind Beryl of her position here, just as she
is beginning to call the place ‘home’. It was cruel as
well as rude.”
“She was rude, too,” flashed Barby. “And I don't like
you to be waiting on her. She said you were her servant,
and I won’t have her say that.” Here she broke into
stormy sobs, ignoring every one in the room as she wept
into her gingham sleeve.


Brenda then ventured to speak to this stern mother,
who was coldly ignoring tears and broken protestations.
Mum, looking at the picture above the mantelshelf,
tapped the pages of an arithmetic book with a first
finger.
“Mum!” Brenda timidly began. “Barby didn’t mean
it. Beryl didn’t, either. They both had monkeys on their
backs, and it was so hot in school, and Miss Myles had
a cut hand and was cross, and there was a north wind.
You know what a north wind does to us all, Mum, and
Barby and Beryl are really friends.”
“No! We’re not!” came from behind the sleeve which
was now damp and creased.
Mrs Campbell sighed wearily. She, too, had been
aware of the irritating atmosphere of the hot day. There
had been many such days of late. “But for Beryl being
so lonely—such a waif—l would send her away,” came
heavily, “for there has been nothing but friction since
her arrival. She is not altogether to blame. You have
such widely different temperaments, and are both so
unbending that I wonder if you will ever be able to
remain in the same house without quarrelling. You must
try and restrain yourself, Barby, if you are to be a good
woman later on. Some day you will find how hard it is
to get along in the world if you are continually looking
for sharp corners to knock your head against. It is
dreadful for me, Barby, too.”
“She shouldn’t have said
“Hush! You should not have said what you said. You
were wrong. Beryl is a guest here, and after all, we are
glad of her money.”
“But
“It is a fact, Barby, and you must be kinder. I know
how little girls feel. I was a child myself once, but I
don’t think I ever said such things as you say. Brenda
is not rude and rough, child, and why are you?”


Barby raised puffed eyes from behind her sleeve, and
sniffed, almost chastened under the unusual lecture.
“I expect Brenda takes after you,” she said in muffled
tones. “I can’t help my ways.”
“You can help a lot,” was the quiet reply, “and in
the future you had better count ten before you speak.”
Mum smiled ever so little then and Barby echoed it
faintly.
“Shall I sing you a song to cheer you up?” came out
of the dim corner by the window-seat where Waggles,
in Bubbles’ arms, was now purring like a boiling kettle.
Mrs Campbell started visibly; her smile increased a
trifle.
“Not now, Bubbles, thank you, dear,” she replied
serenely. “But presently, when I am mending trousers,
you may.”
“I don’t expect it’d be any good then,” came in
resigned tones. “Ladies always look happy and quiet
when they mend trousis.”
Brenda stifled a giggle.
Mum, reluctant to be angry with the delinquent, and
knowing of the splendid spirit beneath the surface,
turned to the girls again, and with an obvious effort
said, “I am sorry that your father is not . . . here, for
many reasons; I am sure it would hurt him to see
his . . .” Here Mum blinked rapidly and paused to
change her tone to one of pleasantly interested curiosity:
“Barby, will you promise to try and check your impul-
sive temper? . . . and if ever he does return he will find
a nice little lady instead of an untamed hoyden.”
“Muml” came imploringly from Brenda. “You
wouldn’t like us really to be ‘nice little ladies’, would
you?”
“Well, not exactly,” Mum laughed. “But I think you
could be a little more so, Barby.”
Barby nodded fiercely. This was becoming senti-


mental. “Don’t be sticky, Mum,” she muttered, and
Mum, understanding, suddenly gathered the severely
scolded little girl into her soft arms, and comforted her.
“We must all try to be better people, eh, dear?”
Barby pressed her nose into her mother’s shoulder as
a sign of agreement.
That night in her little bedroom Beryl waited for
hours until all hope had gone, for the usual kiss that
did not come. The house grew silent, and the sea mur-
mured plaintively. The morrow seemed very appalling
to the girl who stumbled sleepily from bed to chair and
from chair to bed again. She was forlorn, overwhelmed
utterly by what she had said of Mrs Campbell.
At breakfast the next morning Beryl’s misery and
remorse had vanished before a grim defiance that was
an echo of the days with Nelly, and when Barby came
forward to do the right thing, to please her mother,
Beryl met the stammered apology with a short “Thank
you. You may apologize, but I’m not a bit sorry for
what I said.”
Barby stole a glance at her mother, who appeared to
notice nothing, but frowned all the same over the siz-
zling bacon in the frying-pan.
Barby tossed her head characteristically. “Very well,
then, I won’t talk to you again until you apologize to
Mum. You can’t even answer decently, in spite of your
wonderful schooling in the West. Brenda and Bob and
all of us think you’re a proud, stuck-up pig.”
“Barby! How dare you say that?” said Mum sharply.
“Well! You’re not her servant.”
Mum longed frantically for a moment, for the man
who could quell household disturbances so easily with
a quiet word. She watched the tilt of the pretty head
of the Beehive boarder. After ten minutes of troubled
thought, Mrs Campbell decided that the children must
straighten their tangles themselves in future. It was


beyond her. They must fight alone. She placed a dish
of eggs and bacon on the table and left the room. The
Bees took their breakfast in the kitchen for the sake of
the labour involved in carrying trays to and fro.
Beryl walked alone to school that morning, and from
school that night. Barby was determined to keep Beryl
in Coventry, and to Brenda’s chagrin and dismay the
unhappy state of affairs so recently ended, was resumed
with redoubled intensity. To side now with Beryl would
be openly approving of what she had said to Mum.
The younger girl Bee was troubled, and would take no
active part in any open insult.
One night after the painful and unnerving state of
affairs had continued for some time, with resistance and
pride on both sides, Beryl looked up from her geography
book and broke the studious silence. She flushed as she
spoke and her blue eyes were very dark. “I’m not saying
it for your sakes,” she said quickly, with a lift of her
chin, “but your mother is ill. You don’t see it, and don’t
care, and let her work and work, and she should be in
bed. You never help her now.”
The speaker gathered up her books and swept from
the room in lengthy strides, her chin trembling.
Bob, who had listened with tightening jaw, waited
for the reappearance of his mother. All three Bees
watched her furtively as she moved around from side-
board to table, and back again. What Bob saw made
him almost groan aloud.
She left the room again, laden with a forgotten tea-
tray and piled up articles from the last meal. Brenda
and Barby, the former paling to her lips, eyed their
brother with startled glances.
“Beryl’s right,” the boy whispered gruffly to hide his
emotion. “Did you see? And we should have noticed it;
not Beryl. Mum is our mother, and not hers. She is thin
and tired, and her skin’s like tissue paper. She’s slaving


and fretting and ... we ...” he gulped and ceased
speaking.
“But . . .” Brenda was incoherent.
“But . . .” mocked Bob bitterly. “We’ve been so full
up with our own petty affairs that we haven’t noticed
how she’s faded. When Beryl came you said you would
help with the extra work, and you’ve let it all slide on
to Mum’s shoulders just because she has been kind
enough to let you play and swim without interruption.
Hang it all! You kids never help with the dishes now.
You’re too dashed full of your quarrels. If I don’t dry
the dishes she has to do it alone.”
“Mum said she’d call us if she wanted us to help,”
said Barby weakly.
“Call you! You shouldn’t wait to be called. She’s your
mother, and mine ... I could do more, too.”
There was a guilty silence.
“And she cooks and washes and sews; all the evening
she mends the clothes that we tear and toss aside, and
you kids go and swim as soon as you come in from
school, and stay in the water until it’s too late to help
with the table-setting. Beryl makes a lot of work, but
we’ve got to be fair. She pays for it. That doesn’t make
Mum stronger though, and the money goes for shoes
and linen and fares and suits. I don’t like her paying
for my fares and clothes, but you know all about that,
and I’ll soon be earning money now. It would kill her
if I gave up now and looked for a job. .. .” Bob’s savage,
throaty tones wavered, and his sisters were unable to
find suitable answers. Their hearts were beating rapidly
now with a new and terrible fear, and they could not
meet one another’s eyes squarely.
And to himself Bob was saying: “Oh! You beast, you.
You beast, not to see it. To go away and not notice
Tired! Hard work! What if I am tired? What if it is
hard work? What is she doing for meY’


The boy buried his face in his hands and fell into
a profound and unhappy reverie, while the girls abstrac-
tedly returned to their lessons.
The following morning after a boisterous dawn when
memories of a close night had been washed away by
a cool southerly wind, Bob’s ruminations took a prac-
tical turn. He had to bend his head as he walked train-
wards, to keep his hat on in the wind, but although
it was difficult to walk against it, it was pleasantly
bracing after the preceding days.
“Twelve bob a week I spend,” was what Bob was
thinking. “I must cut it down somehow. I can have
buns or pies, instead of sandwiches and coffee, and that’d
be sixpence a day . . . five days . . . two and six.” Bob
did not stop at the station, but walked on past it down
the main street, and turned to the left where a big
house was hiding behind a hedge of tamarisks and bam-
boos which were swinging and crossing, swishing and
creaking in the small gale.
It was the home of Dr and Mrs Morden, the best-
loved couple in the district. The doctor was quiet and
thoughtful, having a half-shy laugh that was a tonic
to any patient. Spinning at break-neck speed around the
roads in his little beetle-like grey car, smiling and nod-
ding to patients and acquaintances alike, he spread cheer
and hope wherever he went. His wife was somewhat like
him, but a little more business-like in her direct and
cheery manner, and a little less inclined to believe the
hard luck tales which the good little doctor swallowed
whole. Mrs Morden would sigh over the fees that were
never paid them, and the cheques that were given away,
and wag a finger at her guilty, busy husband; but she,
too, could answer for more than one sum of money pre-
sented surreptitiously out of the household or linen
allowance.
The doctor was out, as usual, but his wife was in


the drawing-room lovingly dusting the curios brought
back by them from Borneo on their honeymoon.
“Why! Bob Campbell!” called the cheery little woman,
in pleasure and surprise. “Why are you not on your
way to town to draw cathedrals and hen-coops?”
“Cut out the cathedrals,” laughed the boy, as he
crossed the carpet. “Hen-coops are more in my line now.
The ladder of architecture is a stiff one to climb.”
“Like all other ladders worth climbing; and the
climbing is worth the labour involved, eh?”
“Rather!”
And then Bob explained why he had paid such an
early visit, and asked Mrs Morden for the address of the
washerwoman who each week attended to the large
amount of laundering at the doctor’s house and sur-
gery. “You see, Mum won’t give in, and we have very
little to live on now, you know. If father were here,
of course, it would all be different, and although Mr
Carslake explains it all, I can’t confess my ignorance
of legal affairs by asking too many questions: the legal
wriggles and wherefores baffle me. The little girl who
stays with us means three pounds a week more, and
enables Mum who was behind with bills to pay them
off. She had even sold her watch—the one with the
diamonds in the case. I know, because she sent me to
Mr Carslake with it. I thought that if I saved a few bob
on my lunches, I could eat bigger dinners and breakfasts
and pay for a washerwoman that way.”
Mrs Morden replied a little huskily.
“If I had a son like you, Bob, I would be the hap-
piest woman alive.”
She spoke again. “You are very much like your father,
Bob, and I often wonder if ever again we will play
bridge together . . . your mother, the doctor, your father
and myself. . . .”


“I . . . hope so.”
“Now for the wash-lady/’ and after directions and a
cup of coffee, and a home-made cake, Bob went from
the old tiled house along the main street again, and
turned down a road leading away from the sea, to a
part of the town adjoining the swampy land that was
periodically under water from the hill floods. A little
single-fronted house at the end of the road was his des-
tination. It appeared dismal and unhealthy, with a high-
water mark on the fence and much green mould up
the window-sills of the house itself.
“Miserable hole,” the boy remarked to himself as he
pushed open the protesting gate and walked on to the
narrow little veranda.
Mrs Pent was in, and Bob quickly stated his busi-
ness, with the vast glow of satisfaction that nearly always
results from an unselfish action.
“I wash Mrs Doctor Morden on Chewsday,” Mrs
Pent said enthusiastically, “and would be glad of another
nice place.”
So that much was settled. At the gate, to which the
pleasant, fresh-faced woman accompanied him, the boy
remarked upon the mould on the walls.
“It is bad, I know, but what can I do. This place
is dear enough, let alone paying for a proper house.
I had me daughter staying with me. That’s why I got
a house and didn’t stay in lodgin’s. Blow lodgin’s, I
say, with the landlady pokin’ her nose in and watching
to see how much electric light you uses. Not for me.
I’d rather manage as best I could under me own roof.
I know the house ain’t very hygennic, but then I’m
tough. It’s the frogs what worry me most. They croak
and sing something awful, and even have the cheek
to sit on me doorsteps and hop into the rooms.”
“Has the water been inside yet?” asked Bob with in-


terest, pointing to the high-water line on the walls. Any-
thing to do with houses and walls interested Bob.
“Not while I’ve been here, but if it does I haven’t
got much to spoil.”
“Your daughter—is she coming back?”
“Not her. She’s married to a man in Broken Hill,
and has four children. I might pay her a visit some
time, though. She don’t like travelling and on’y came
down because her husband was out’a work.”
“Right-o, Mrs Pent, we’ll expect you on Monday
morning then. It’s a mile along the shore from the
station.”
Mrs Pent did not mind walking. She was of the optim-
istic order of women to whom all things come as fresh
experiences, and had the breezy disposition that finds
pleasure in everyday events. Bob thanked Providence
that he had thought of the doctor’s wash-lady.
So Bob went to work much happier, and whistled
under his breath during the run to the city in the later
train. It would not be long before he would have an
office of his own, with commissions rolling in; with
Mum visiting him in her silk dress and high-heeled
shoes, with furs around her shoulders; and with Brenda
and Barby dressed as well as Beryl. At lunch-time, in-
stead of going out with the other lads of the office,
Bob shook his head and decided against the charms of a
chat over coffee and pastry in the smoke lounge of a
near-by restaurant, and sent the office boy for buttered
buns. They tasted dry and rather dusty, but with a
book propped upon his drawing-board, and the paper
bag on his knees, no one can say Bob did not enjoy
his meal more than an hotel luncheon.
Bob passed Beryl that evening, in the hall of the
Beehive, and he nodded cordially. Bob was a disgusted
neutral in the war that was waging in the house by the
sea. This he stoutly asserted at intervals.


“Thanks for jogging my memory last night,” he said
gratefully and hurried on, while Beryl lifted her head
a little higher, a shade happier in the knowledge of
having done something for Mum, thereby helping a
little to square accounts, as she thought, and to make
up for her rudeness.


CHAPTER XI
THE BEEHIVE IS TROUBLED
On the following Monday, Mrs Pent arrived with her
battered suit-case holding her apron and “washing” dress,
into which she changed behind the wash-house door.
Emerging determinedly, she attacked, with noisy energy,
the big heaps of garments lying in assorted piles, and
plunged towels, frocks, and shirts into their respective
tubs with almost lightning speed. She plainly under-
stood her business. Mrs Campbell, who had refused to
allow Bob to forfeit more than half a crown each week
from his necessary allowance, sighed with profound re-
lief, for a wash-lady was an almost unbelievable luxury
in these days of high wages and disinclination for labour
except of the “lady-like” order. Mrs Pent had no aspira-
tions to become “lady-like”, being quite contented to
remain the simple, trustworthy and honest soul that she
was.
Mrs Campbell exclaimed in surprise that Mrs Pent
had been able to spare the first day in the week for
the Beehive washing, but the reply told much more
than the mere words. “You see, Mrs Campbell, my
daughter and her four were with me, and I had to
take what washing I could through people bringing it
to me and me doing it home. The children took a lot
of minding and my daughter is a bit sickly. Now her
husband ’as got a good permanent job in the Hill,
of course I’ve got more time on me hands, and I haven’t


had time yet to look around for more washing. I always
have washed for Mrs Doctor Morden though.”
“Doesn’t your daughter send you money, to make up
for the time she spent with you?” queried Mrs Campbell
kindly.
“Lor’ bless you, me dear” (Mum felt quite youthful
at this moment) “I don’t expect nothing. Besides, with
six to keep they can’t spare me anything . . . and her
husband keeps racin’ dogs, too, an’ they’re expensive.”
“Why don’t you get a position in a large house, Mrs
Pent?”
“I would if I could see one ... if the people was
nice,” was the reply. “Lena don’t need me no more
now.”
Mrs Campbell felt that her lot was indeed easy beside
the life of this brave woman, who with her little, could
still spare some of it for another.
Mrs Pent had cocoa at eleven, a hearty lunch at one,
tea at three o’clock, and departing at five, left the wash-
house swept and clean; ashes taken from the copper;
piles of sheets and towels dry and folded on the lobby
table; the clothes-horse hung with smoothly ironed shirts,
dresses, and under-linen; and woollen stockings and
socks still hanging out over the hotly reflecting sand
in the corner of the yard by the woodshed. With her
frock changed again, and her hat “fixed”, Mrs Pent sat
down for a moment while Mrs Campbell took the wages
for the day from her purse. Wangles was stretched out
across the wash-lady’s knees, and she stroked him until
he purred with delight, looking, however, as sorrowful as
ever. Mrs Pent was enthusiastic over the “wash”, assert-
ing that never before had she “done such a clean one-
no dungarees nor nothing—and lunch fit for anybody
and no stintin’, and as nice a lady as any one could
meet to tell her what to do”. The beaming woman
smiled more broadly still when Mrs Campbell slipped


a tin of sardines and serviette full of scones into the
water-soaked fingers.
“I’m sure Mrs Campbell, it’s a pleasure to wash for
you,’’ said the departing wash-lady at five o’clock, “and
I always says that a true lady is one what don’t stuff
her fancy manners down your throat.” The voluble
lady vanished, leaving behind her an impression of bluff
heartiness allied with a memory of red cheeks and twink-
ling eyes. Mrs Campbell smiled with satisfaction over
her good fortune in securing her services, and felt the
sum of ten shillings to be inadequate for the difference
already made in the house.
Bob slapped his mother gently on the back on the
second week of Mrs Pent’s advent, and loudly said that
she, meaning his mother, should not work at all.
“Dear me!” was the dry reply. “Life would be very
dull with nothing to do. I sternly refuse to be a lounger.”
Bob was intensely amused at the idea.
“What I wish you could do, son, is to impress upon
the girls the uselessness of this wearisome enmity.”
“Let them fight it out. Mum. Let them climb out
of their own puddles. They made them.”
“I don’t like it. It worries me.”
“Nonsense! They’ll have a blow-up soon and then
see what asses they’ve been. You mark my words.”
“I know that, and I am feeling sorry because I have
been punishing Beryl by not kissing her each night
at bedtime. That has hurt her more than anything else
could have done, poor*little lonely thing, and I wonder
am I too severe.”
“Don’t kiss her until she apologizes. Barby apologized,
and this will teach both of them a lesson. They are
aching to make up the quarrel, and don’t know how.”
“I wonder.”
“They’ve quarrelled so often. Never mind about them,
dearest, you are thin and worn looking enough as it is.


Something will happen soon to clear the air . . . you’ll
see.”
Bob was correct, but he did not know in what way
the happening was to come about.
During a depressed moment after tea that night, when
Beryl was seated in the chair by her window, Bubbles
appeared in the room in his usual genie-like manner,
and heaved a stentorian sigh to find the room tenanted
by its owner. “Thought you was here,” was the contented
remark. “ ’Cos the others are on the sand and you’re
not.”
“I see.”
“I want to cheer you up,” was the brief statement
in Bubbles’ best style, as he braced his feet on the rug
and took a deep breath preparatory to rendering one
of his store of pointless and unamusing songs. Beryl
sprang upright and clapped her hands over her ears.
“Bubbles! Please don’t sing that awful ‘As I walked by
Myself’ again. It would kill me!”
Bubbles was not insulted. He was amazed and in-
terested, and also slightly thrilled. “Really kill you?”
he asked with due solemnity and much politeness. “Then
you’d be dead and have flowers on you and a ride in a
coffing.”
“Yes!” came sarcastically from the girl. “Wouldn’t it
be amusing? Oh . . . !” and Beryl lapsed into heaving
sobs at this doleful and sorrowful picture, drawn by the
well-meaning small boy. In a moment he was close
beside her where she fell back into the chair again,
with his sticky little face pressed against the masses of
hair falling over her right ear.
“Don’t cry, Beryl darling,” was the beseeching whis-
per. “I didn’t sing it.”
The little fellow was gathered suddenly into hungry
arms, and was kissed surprisingly on his round cheeks,
many times, and when he was released he stood back


and regarded his companion with the inquisitive look
of a fox-terrier with a beetle.
“Beryl, I really don’t min’ you kissing me, but don’t
you tell the others, whatever you do, will you, Beryl?’’
She smiled through her tears and pushed the small
boy through the low window, nodding her head gravely.
“1 won’t tell, honour bright, Bubbles.”
“That’s all right, then,” was the complacent answer.
“ ’Cos Barby the other day said you was stuck-up and
horrid, but you weren’t a sneak, and wouldn’t tell tales
if you was dying.”
Beryl turned her back suddenly, and applied herself
to the diligent cleaning of her finger-nails.
“Stuck-upl Horrid!” she repeated aloud, watching her
own face in the mirror as she spoke. Her cheeks were
not pale and “aristocratic” now—she blushed to think
of once saying that—but browned faintly and far pret-
tier, and her nose had a dozen or so tiny freckles, sun-
kisses, scattered over the bridge. She somehow liked her
face like that. “I suppose I must be horrid,” she decided
heavily, “but then—” with a spurt of anger: “so is she.”
With that comforting reflection, she had to be content.
Then one evening on the return from school, the
“something” that Bob had predicted as a means of
ending the quarrel happened. The children filed into the
kitchen, expecting to find the usual spotless room with
the dinner simmering on the shining stove—but—a cold
stove and littered sink met their astonished gaze. A
broom stood against the table with a small heap of
fluff and dust beside it. Traces of egg on a frying-pan
against the back of the stove told them the breakfast
o
dishes had not been washed. They went quickly from
the kitchen, perturbed and uneasy, and afraid to speak
of what each thought. What was wrong?
Cries of “Mum” were echoed through the house, and
bathing and refreshments were forgotten in their need


of solving the small mystery. The Bees went from room
to room in growing fear. Then, in the last room of all.
Mum’s own bedroom, they found her, lying across the
bed white-faced, limp and helpless, her morning cam-
bric still on and her hands listless on the counterpane.
Her eyes were closed.
Brenda blanched as she saw the drawn and pale face
of her mother, pressed cheek down upon the quilt.
The girl shrank back as the others stepped towards
the still form which looked so old and tired, so small
and slender, in its deathly silence.
Beryl arrived then. She went naturally to the kitchen
and then to where the subdued voices sounded in oddly
piercing whispers from the large front bedroom. Brenda
was crouching at the foot of the bed, in an agony of
terror as she stared at the ashen face.
“Mum! What is it? Don’t look like that! Mum! Answer
me,’’ she cried shrilly. Barby pressed close to her mother
and lifted one of the thin hands, the terrified Bubbles
gaping with wide-open mouth at the awesome spectacle.
Beryl hesitated just one minute while she took in
the facts of the scene, then beckoned the little boy to
the doorway and led the way into the dining-room,
where she took from the mantelshelf a writing-block
and pencil. “Run to Doctor Morden with this at once,”
she ordered. “And don’t stop playing on the way. Run
as fast as you like, and remember that you are doing
it to make Mum better. . . . Hurry!’’ Bubbles seized the
note, and without disputing the girl’s authority, scam-
pered out through the open window to the back track
and along the swamp road.
Beryl stood outside Mum’s door again, waiting to
be asked inside, but Barby did not so much as look
away from the pale face on the bed. The girl at the
door, watching with straining eyes, heard what was
being said. Her sight blurred with the terror of her


thoughts. She walked away with her hands tightly
clenched and her heart afraid.
After a moment’s deliberation, Beryl went to the
kitchen again and unhung a large white apron from
behind the door. If they did not want her in Mum’s
room, then she could do something else to show her
desire to help in this house that had suddenly stopped
working, like a clock that had not been wound. She
took sticks from a box outside the lobby door, wood
from the wash-house, and with considerable difficulty
and very smutty fingers, at last succeeded in lighting a
fire and placing two filled kettles above the flames. The
greasy dishes she scraped and piled neatly; the dust she
swept into a heap and took outside to the dustbin; then
from the drawer she took the table-cloth and spread
it over the table. Beryl was very proud of her endeavours
and, as she bustled around in the midst of her novel
doings, flushed with pleasure as the lids of the kettles
rattled as they boiled.
Then came the sound of a motor-car on the swamp
road, and the doctor was inside the hall in two minutes;
at his heels was Bubbles, filled with awe because of the
unusual disturbance, and joy, owing to the swift ride
in the little grey motor-car.
Beryl met the doctor in the hall and explained in a
brisk and satisfactory manner, all that she knew of the
sudden illness; but as the other two girls emerged to
greet the new-comer, she retired again to the kitchen.
Bob arrived an hour later, to find a red-eyed Beryl
before the stove, with his mother’s apron round her
slight figure. He was quickly told of what had hap-
pened, and without speaking a word, went in long
strides to his mother’s room. His face was white as
chalk, his mouth grim.
Then came the doctor’s car again, after a trip back
to the Bend, and a tall young woman in spotless white


suddenly seemed to take the house and its contents into
her well scoured fingers. Nurse Penrose was capable and
experienced, and smiled quietly at the frenzied offers
to help. “I’ll give you plenty to do,” she said in the
deep voice that was so reassuring. “But the nicest and
kindest thing you can do now is to make no noise and
to see that the big boy gets his dinner.”
The first numbing fright was over, and the tea dishes
were cleared from the table after a doleful and quiet
meal at which no one ate more than an ounce of food.
Nurse Penrose, her invalid cookery done, hung a dish-
towel on the rack above the oven and left the room
spotless again.
Brenda waited until the soft footsteps were dying
away down the passage, then leaned back against the
wall by the back door, and whispered to her sister:
“We’ve made Mum like that—with our carelessness and
laziness. I wish I’d done more to help. . . . Oh Barby
and I haven’t milked Daisy once this week. I’ve for-
gotten each time until Mum has done it.
The choking self-accusation seemed to comfort the
speaker a little, and Barby, for once, was not critical of
her sister’s remarks. “I forgot lots of things, too,” she
said miserably. “I guess it’s mostly our fault that she’s
ill. A breakdown . . . and even an engine will break
down sometimes . . . and she . . . she . . .” Barby stam-
mered here and cleared her throat noisily. “We’ve been
selfish, beastly things, and if she doesn’t get better I’ll
go into a convent for ever and cut my hair and say
prayers all day long.”
“Dorit”— and a whirlwind in a long white apron,
topped with a wild black head, flashing deep-blue eyes
and scarlet cheeks, swept towards the two girls in the
lobby. “How can you talk like that . . . about the con-
vent. You know you don’t mean itl She . . . she might
die .” The woe and anguish in the hurried cry ex-


pressed a little of what was in the hearts of the other
two, and then Barby turned to her sister and remarked
in surprise: ‘Td forgotten all about her”
The white apron with its wearer shot through the
doorway of the smallest bedroom, remaining there until
much later in the long evening, when sounds in the
kitchen, where the nurse was again cooking over the
stove, drew the Bees disconsolately together, to get what
comfort they could from companionship. Beryl could
not bear her loneliness any longer, and came out, to enter
the warm room in the midst of a discussion. From rather
wonder-struck queries directed on to the nurse, who had
replied in short and amused sentences, the Beehive wan-
dered to the immediate necessity of making some sort
of plans for the near future. They were bewildered,
feeling very much like the passengers in a runaway
train, heading for an unknown and steep gully, where
anything might await them. If mother died! The
thought was too dreadful to put into words, but each
knew it was there.
Bob, in the reaction of his shock, now felt weary and
irritable, until Nurse Penrose sensibly suggested supper,
knowing that none of the Bees had really eaten since
midday. Beryl, too embarrassed in her in-between posi-
tion to attempt to help, sat still while the table was
sketchily spread with odds and ends from the safe. The
Beehive was almost itself again, but for the awe in the
quietened voices, and the softened footsteps, and the
sub-conscious dread of losing “Mum”.
Bob spread a thick slice of brown bread with rasp-
berry jam, and Bubbles followed suit. The big boy took
a bite, masticated it, and addressed the nurse. “Nurse
—honour bright—is it necessary for me to stay at home
from the office to-morrow?”
“You’d be in the way,” was the response, made with-


out hesitation. “Men are always nuisances in a house
with sick folk."
The insult of being called a nuisance was alleviated
by the use of the word “men". Bob grunted. He was
relieved, but still uneasy and troubled. “I’ll go to the
office then, but I won’t swot much, I imagine. I’ll try
to come home early."
The young woman with the business-like and cheery
face nodded, but said no more. Barby was pondering,
evidently struggling inwardly with a conviction that
warred with another. At last she wriggled and blurted:
“It’s pax in this house, Beryl Le Leivre, while Mum’s
ill"—and with a sudden rush—“but we needn’t be kiss-
ing one another any the more for that."
“I see," Beryl replied, attacking a slice of bread and
jam with a gusto that was assumed. It tasted like straw
and mud in her mouth.
“And we must all do the work—cooking and all,”
Brenda added.
“And what about your school?" came quietly from the
region of the stove.
“School!" was the dismayed echo in two different
voices. “And we don’t get home till nearly five!"
“The holidays begin soon, do they not?" then asked
the comforting person as she fished on the mantelshelf
for a salt-castor.
Of course! The Christmas vacation! It lasted six weeks,
or more, and the joyfully planned period of sea-bath-
ing and long rambles, picnics, lazy days in the garden,
and excursions to town for the express purpose of visit-
ing picture-shows, and perhaps a pantomime matinee
vanished.
Without a regret the Beehive gave up all thoughts
of pleasure during the approaching freedom from
school, devoting immediate thoughts to the whys and
wherefores of housekeeping.


“We will take it in turn,” said Brenda. “Mrs Pent
will do the washing and ironing just the same. She’s
a good old stick, and with the laundry work out of the
way, there won’t be much else to do.”
The nurse smiled at this. She said nothing, knowing
the particular brand of optimism before her; knowing
too, that experience was the only teacher to convince
the children of the endlessness of the work in a roomy
house filled with people. Brenda was now becoming
enthusiastic over household matters, her imagination
supplying her with details that appeared interesting to
the imagination only.
Nurse Penrose spoke now. “It will do you all a lot
of good, to know what your mother has been doing
for so long, and fretting into the bargain. The brain
does more than the body to make a person so sick.”
She tipped a savoury mess into a blue bowl and wagged
her head as if to say: “You will find out what work
is when you start.” The doctor had given her a brief
outline of the history of Major Campbell, on the way
out from the township in the car.
“We can do it all right,” Barby said bravely. “If only
Mum will get better.”
“Of course she’ll get better,” replied her sister, then
lifted her head, struck by a new thought. “ How did the
doctor knoxv?”
Bubbles spoke up, glad to be able to at last contri-
bute to the conversation: “Beryl sent me with a note,
and I ran and walked, and walked and ran, and was
puffed like anything, and Mrs Morden gived me a cake
an a’napple.”
“Beryl sent you?” queried Barby sharply, and looked
away. Bob lifted his head and awoke from his reverie,
glancing past Beryl as though she was not there. “At a
time like this, kids, you might forget past rows.”
Barby was not sure. “She shouldn’t have said Mum


was her servant,” she said tactlessly, and Beryl, who had
looked up expectantly, with eager face, swallowed a
mouthful of cold tea, and clattered her cup into her
saucer.
“A servant is honourable,” said Bob thoughtfully.
“And we are all servants of a kind. I’m a servant, in the
office.
“You’re a student more than anything,” said the
caustic Barby. “And if you were a servant, even a street-
sweeper, you’d kick any one who said it to you in the
way”—with a nod at Beryl—“she did.”
Beryl’s downcast features glowed a little more, then
she paled to the colour of cream paper, the small freckles
standing out on her nose and cheekbones. Her eyes
seemed to cloud and darken as she made a big resolve
that consigned the teachings and influence of Nelly and
the Misses Holloway into the limbo of the past.
“1 . . .” she began her apology, and the words stuck
in her throat with so many eyes watching her frankly.
“What did the doctor say the second time he came?”
she asked dully.
Bob replied, noting the concern in the pretty face
“Mum’ll recover with care . . . just what the nurse said
eh Nurse?”
“That’s correct.”
Beryl struggled again with the words that had been
almost uttered, longing to end the miserable period of
pride and enmity, her good sense all at once telling her
of the futility and wickedness of continual stress. There
was so much in life to hurt one, that it was stupid to
deliberately try to hurt oneself more. “I . . . Barby . . .
let me help too.” It was out, and although not quite
an apology, it could have been taken for such with a
little generosity, and had Barby not been so tired and
upset.
“No!” Barby almost wept. “You can’t! You’re a


boarder, and we’re your servants . . . now that the other
servant is ill. Naturally, Miss Le Leivre, we are to wait
upon you. What will you have? Chicken and coffee-
caviare—champagne? Oh!” in mock surprise that was
hurting the speaker even more than Beryl. “Milady is
not hungry—” and the throaty sound in Barby’s tones
was evident to all but the girl the sarcasm was directed
upon. Beryl, with a look that reminded Bob of a caged
tiger in the Zoo, when it had been teased by a thought-
less sightseer, rose quickly, shaking with suppressed sobs
and anger, to bolt from the room.
Outside in the shadows Beryl sobbed, the dull light
from Mum’s window reproaching her silently. Why was
Barby so ... ? Then the little girl paused and sniffed
as she rubbed her already puffed nose. Perhaps— perhaps
Barby was like she was, herself—trying to put things right
and making them worse.
After ten minutes, while the biggest fight which Beryl
had ever fought was still continuing within her, she
lifted her head bravely. Wisdom and generosity came in
full measure to Beryl then, and a new glow of kindness
somehow made her feel better.
With white and pinched face and red-rimmed eyes,
she went with slow steps to the kitchen again, where
the Bees were still dismally talking over nothing in par-
ticular. Barby was flushed and excited; Brenda miserably
conscious of the atmosphere of the disturbed house;
Bob full of his separate troubled thoughts; Bubbles awed
—but interested.
Beryl opened the wire door which separated the
kitchen from the stone-flagged lobby, and paused, her
hand on the white knob. She looked from the girls to
their brother, and her lips trembled pitifully.
“Barby!” she said quickly and clearly, her colour
mounting. “I apologize for all I’ve said and done to
hurt you and your mother. I ... I say things I don’t


mean . . . and I hope ... I mean I think you do too.
I . . . I . . . I . . .” and Beryl the Magnificent stammered
like a frightened baby, her chin quivering helplessly.
Even Barby could not take the proffered hand of
friendship other than graciously, and, with an inward
relief that she hardly recognized, after a short glance
at the others said: “Right-o, Beryl, we’ve been asses—
that’s all right.”
Beryl swallowed an uncomfortable lump. “I care for
your mother more than any one else in the world, and
will you . . . ?”
“ Rather,” broke in the delighted Brenda, guessing at
once what the other said and anticipating the remark
that was coming. “We’ll love to have you help.”
Bob grunted. “Pity you kids couldn’t have been sen-
sible while she was about. Of course you had to wait
until she fell ill before you would be pals.”
“Pals?” queried Beryl humbly, her pride forgotten,
or put aside, in that anxious moment. Barby rose and
buttered a stale scone lavishly.
“We’ll make you work like billy-o now—Beryl,” she
remarked, as she took a huge bite. “Won’t we, Bren?”
“Rather!”
“I’m going to work, too,” broke in the little boy.
“Aren’t you a boarder now. Beryl?”
“No fear,” said Beryl, as she too helped herself to a
scone and butter. “I’m a Bee—just a Bee.”
“Rather,” said Barby, enthusiastically, and with gen-
uine emotion.
“Hear, hear,” said Bob. “See that it lasts.”


CHAPTER XII
AMATEUR HOUSEKEEPERS
The refreshing atmosphere of peace which now pre-
vailed with no undercurrents of simmering disagreeable-
ness; with Brenda glad; with Beryl happier than she
had been for a long time; and with Barby outwardly
indifferent but inwardly elated, was satisfactory to all
concerned.
Mum was ill, though, and all the Bees outdid one
another in trying to give what assistance they could to-
wards bettering her condition, trying to make up for
the time when they had forgotten, in their own absorbed
interest in themselves, that their mother was breaking
her heart and her body—uncomplainingly and unsel-
fishly. Now she was lying there in the big room, on the
large white pillows, a mere shadow of herself, hands
thin, white, and listless, eyes weary and dark rimmed.
She watched the girls and boys as they entered the room,
in just the same apathetic manner that she watched the
actions of the nurse at her daily tasks. Mum was like
a little sick child, taking her food obediently, and sipping
her broth slowly, with no word to say whether she en-
joyed it or not. Nurse Penrose was cheerful and brisk,
allowing the children to see only a little of the anxiety
she felt. Nobody could help loving the woman who was
so patient, so wan, and so helpless. The nurse said to
Bob one day: “I’ve nursed many patients, until each
one is just the same to me as a post in a long fence,


but your mother . . . she is different; sweet and gentle,
with something in her eyes that one sees in the eyes of a
painted Madonna. I take a personal interest in the
case, and would be pleased to see her stir from her
lethargy. She is stunned . . . sick . . . and living merely
because her heart is beating.”
Bob had frowned to hide his emotion, and turned
away.
The doctor would sit on the chair by the bedside and
talk quietly to Mrs Campbell, whom he valued amongst
his best friends, but both his coming and his going
did not stir her. He tapped his teeth with his glasses
when Bob accosted him one Saturday afternoon just
outside his mother’s door.
“Doctor! Is she improving?” the boy asked huskily.
“Well—” hesitated the little man blankly, at this query
that must be answered truthfully. “She is better than she
was.
The words told very little, and Bob clenched his
hands inside his blazer pockets, shaking his head as he
smiled slowly.
“You’re not satisfied, Sir, and I’m not either,” he
said quietly. The doctor saw that he might speak plainly
to this lad with the sense and outlook of a man. The
teeth were tapped again, and the eye-glasses replaced
fussily. “I don’t know, Bob, my boy,” came very slowly,
as the doctor picked his words. “She is well as far as
her body is concerned, but extremely weak, and in un-
professional terms it all amounts to this: she has not
the will-power to carry her through. She must be aroused;
the driving force is lacking. It will be a hard job, lad,
but try and wake her out of this stupor with tales of out-
side doings. Tell her Mrs Pent has burnt the bottom
out of the copper,” he ended, smiling feebly at his at-
tempt at wit.
“I go and tell her things . . . about Barby and Bubbles


and the others, and she smiles . . . and that’s all . . .
just smiles and looks right through me, and doesn’t
ask me about my work or anything else . . Bob stam-
mered with a straightening of his shoulders as he realized
that the head of a house must not cry like a child. The
man patted his arm. “Her mind is sick .. .” was all that
he said as he took his watch from his vest-pocket and
consulted it.
Five minutes later the buzzing of the departing motor
sounded from the swamp road. Bob waited until the
slight hum ceased altogether, then struggling desper-
ately with his sorrow, put his head down and plunged
out of the hall and around the house into a thicket of
tamarisks and pines on the rise.
Beryl, seated in a deck-chair under Mum’s window,
saw the boy, who did not see her, and she rose and fol-
lowed him. She found him lying face down in the
dappled shadows, where the pine-needles lay among the
warm sand. In his agony, his shoulders were shaking
under the old blazer, and his feet were crossed and
wound together. Beryl’s own heart was bursting with
grief over Mum’s condition, as, whenever she was alone
for five minutes, she sat like a patient watch-dog under
one of the windows of the big bedroom. She walked
very softly and slowly now, until she was quite close
to the oldest Bee, who did not hear her footsteps on
the soft ground. She dropped to her knees impulsively.
“Bob!”—she choked and swallowed frantically in her
darin g—“please don’t!”
He swung round quickly, sitting upright, with his tear-
streaked face not hidden at all from her. Bob was too
unhappy then to mind about his appearance, but he was
angry at the intrusion. “Well!” he asked thickly. “What
do you want?”
“Bob! Don’t mind me. I feel like that too—often. I
love her too, and I can’t seem to say it to any one else.


You see, she’s not my real mother, and 1 don’t seem to
have . . . the right . . . to . . .
Beryl sat back on her heels then, her fingers twisting
her handkerchief into a thin coil, her brows puckered
as she tried to express herself. The boy watched her for
a moment, his anger melting as he did so. He was oddly
comforted, without knowing why, by the presence of the
girl who crouched beside him, her soul in her eyes, her
hair shining blue-black in the sunbeams.
“Bob!” Beryl’s voice thrilled him, it was so full of
hope and faith. “She’ll get better. It’s weakness and not
a fever or anything like that. You’ll see. She’ll soon
remember about the house and things, and then she
will want to get up and when she wants that she’ll
be better, see? Something will stir her, and then she’ll
be asking for the mending-basket and the broom
you’ll see.”
“She’s had too much broom and mending-basket, ever
since my father was lost,” said Bob, stripping a pine-
cone of its scallops as he spoke. “It’s mostly the anxiety
about him, though, that has broken her up. You should
have seen her before he went away last—as pretty as a
picture, and always busy and ready with a laugh. Her
hands were soft then, and not scarred and rough so
that the silk she sews with clings to her finger-tips.
I hate to see her ... a fellow doesn’t like to see his
mother like a slave—and with her heart aching all the
time. I don’t think any one could love a husband as
much as my mother loved my father.”
“I know,” was the low reply, “but you always help
her, Bob, and I even saw you washing out some shirts
one day before Mrs Pent came. I ... I think it was
splendid, and not demeaning at all.” Bob had muttered
something then, but Beryl’s fervent speech seemed to
send his head an inch higher. The kid certainly did un-
derstand things; she certainly had altered from the girl


she was when she had first arrived at the house by the
sea.
“Oh, stow itl” was his brief and uncomfortable reply,
as she repeated her last phrase, while he flushed to scar-
let. “A fellow . . . anyway—shut up about it.”
Beryl gazed out over the sea, which could be seen in
ultramarine patches through the trunks and branches.
“Eve been a cad and a beast,” went on Beryl, her voice
vibrating with what she felt, “and if I don’t talk to some
one I’ll explode. I know what a horrid little wretch
I was when I came here, and I know now what a home
really is. It isn’t bricks and walls and carpets and fur-
niture that no one uses, is it? It’s just all living together
and all wanting one another . . . Boh! I’d be poor for
ever for a Mum like yours.”
“Don’t fret, kid, you’re as thin as a stick now, but
certainly an improvement upon the fashion drawing that
arrived at the Bend some time back. You’re coming
out of your shell. I always said you would. Barby’s a fire-
brand, but now she knows you she’ll stick to you through
thick and thin.”
Beryl wagged her head emphatically.
“Barby’s not demonstrative, but I heard her dress
Bubbles down the other day for saying ‘Beryl made my
bed all lumpy.’ Barby said ‘Well, you can make it your-
self next time. Beryl was jolly decent to make it at all.’ ”
Beryl half-smiled—glowingly. “Did she really?”
Bob nodded.
“I wish I hadn’t said that, that time,” she continued
with an effort, plainly embarrassed and ashamed,
“—about servants. I really didn’t mean it.” Beryl had
not forgotten her remark which had caused so much
trouble, however the others may have put it aside.
“You forgive easily, anyway, kid,” was the grown-up
and somewhat patronizing reply. “But you were a silly
little ass, weren’t you? You could have had a ripping


time here if you’d liked . . . but now, of course, things
are different, with Mum ill.”
“I’d crawl on my hands and knees for her,” jerked
the girl passionately. “If that’d make her well.”
Bob regarded the animated face intently. “I believe
you would” he said at last, “and the Beehive certainly
has changed you, hasn’t it?”
“I feel different, somehow.”
“And look it. You were a pasty-faced, slim and elegant
arrangement when you came, but now— well—you’re none
of that.” There was admiration in his tones, and Beryl
said over and over inside of her, “I love them . . . love
them all . . . and never, never want to go away.”
And Bob was now saying thoughtfully, gazing at the
sand and trying to hide his distress—personalities dis-
pensed with, “I don’t know what we’d do if anything
happened to Mum.”
The words struck cold terror into the girl. “Bob! The
doctor didn’t say . . .?” she cried, the sharp sound start-
ling both of them.
“No,” said the boy hastily. “Of course not, but
“I . . . would I have to leave the Beehive?” followed
in stammered dismay.
“If we left here you’d have to—but don’t talk of such
rotten things. We’re becoming morbid. Buck up, kid.
Of course nothing will happen to her. We’ll see to that,
eh? But . . . here I am, earning nothing, and bills for
doctors and groceries mounting up faster than we can
pay them. Bills in shoals and Mum lying there like a
baby! I pay the nurse out of your money for your board,
and there’s cash coming in January that will cover the
school fees due then; but the rest of the bills .. . Oh! I
dunno! All I am doing is draw ground plans and side
elevations of silly bungalows, and fiddle with ink and
tom-fool brushes when I should be working. Working—
grafting—and not keeping my hands white while I mess


around with a lot of swotting. Gothic arches—fantracery
—buttresses—ohl Hang!”
Beryl blinked and laid a friendly hand on his sleeve.
“If you left the office you’d disappoint her terribly,
and you know what it will mean to your future. You
love architecture, don’t you?”
“Yesl But I feel mean,”
“You’re not mean, so don’t be silly,” came firmly.
“Right-ol” Bob found himself saying to his surprise.
“But the bills are awful, and the grocer, and the butcher
let them go because they know they’ll get the money in
the end, even if we sell up.”
“Wouldn’t it be wonderful if he . . . the Major . . .
came back now?”
“Wonderful!” said Bob lifting his head and regarding
the topmost branches of the pines. “ Wonderful! It’d be
a blessed miracle. A heavenly miracle! Dad is big and
quiet and everything runs on oiled wheels when he’s
about.”
“Do you really think he’ll come back, Bob?” ventured
the girl, afraid of treading on sacred ground.
“I don’t know—and that’s the truth. Sometimes it
seems that he is on the way, and at other times it seems
impossible that he can be alive.”
“The South Seas are very strange, aren’t they? The
things we read make us inclined to believe that funny
things can happen there. The islands are so . . . isolated
. . . and so . . . you know what I mean—that it is nothing
for any one to be living out of touch of ships for years.
That’s what I read.”
“In some places, I expect.”
“He might be in one of those places.”
“You’re a born little optimist, Beryl, anyway, and I
hope he does come. We need him.”
For a long time in the fragrance of the little glade
there was no sound but that of the idle sea and the


sighing overhead, while Beryl sat with her knees to her
chin looking oceanwards, Bob on his lace again drawing
designs with a pine stem in the sand. The girl half
turned, then paused as she said excitedly: “Bob . .
but she did not say more, and applied herself again to
searching the horizon.
“What is it?” was the lazy answer, but Beryl remained
frozen in the same position, her hair hiding her face
from the boy who lifted his to speak.
“Nothing . . . just thought of something. Nothing
much,” she said in jumbled fashion. She waited a full
minute, then: “Bob, don’t worry over bills. Something
will turn up. You’ll see.”
Then Bob made a remark that stuck tightly in Beryl’s
swiftly working brain. “You’d be absolutely one of us,
kid, if only you could lose your bally cash.” He hoisted
himself with athletic neatness to his feet and nodded as
he left her sitting there. “So long, see you at tea-time: I’m
going to hit the ball around the sand a bit.” Hitting
the ball around the sand, with the old clubs given him
by a golfer so long ago, was Bob’s second favourite mode
of exercise. The favourite being, of course, swimming.
Beryl nodded complacently and absentmindedly, and
went on gazing out to where the blue was splashed with
two triangles of white, as two small ships sailed ahead of
the tiny whispering breeze.
It was Brenda’s turn to-night to cook the tea. She was
placing two big dishes, holding rice and vegetables, on
the dining-room table as Beryl entered the room later,
just ahead of Bob. Barby was standing by the tea-tray
pouring a dark brown fluid into the cups. Both Brenda
and her sister were tired; housework seems so easy when
others are doing it. When one helps another it seems also
that one learns very little of the most important details,
and disaster comes when attempting the same tasks en-
tirely unassisted. There are thousands of pitfalls in the


most humble of culinary attempts, and they had not
realized, until now, what a lot Mum had had to do.
There were the torn stockings, and the untidy dining-
room; the garments which should have been put out
into the wash-basket and which had been forgotten; the
swimming-suits left on the bathroom floor until stiff and
hard; the books which accumulated in such heaps in bed-
rooms, hall, and lobby, not to mention the veranda and
the living-room window-seat; the sand that would come
in on bare feet and inside shoes and socks; the cook-
ing; and the dishes . . . those dishes that piled up and
up on the draining board, and which, no sooner were
they laboriously washed and placed away, returned again.
Nurse Penrose smiled at the heroic attempts of the do-
mestic Bees, and lightened the burdens considerably by
many surreptitious deeds. She had her own ideas about
the need of responsibility to assist in the training of
youth.
Bob, who kept the wood-box filled, the cow milked,
and the outside appearance of the rough garden and
verandas within bounds, had all he could manage to
get through, with his office work and his studies. Very
often he did not take his swim until ten o’clock at night,
while sometimes it was midnight before he ran down
to the dark water of the gulf ... to fall into bed on his
return and dream heavily of trembling towers built by
himself, sloppy puddings concocted by his sisters, exam-
inations held by professors with no heads—or eight arms
—or no legs—all mixed in indescribable confusion.
Christmas Day came and went like any other day,
but for the sad little attempt at revelry that fell lament-
ably flat. There had been a dinner of roast fowl, which,
to use Brenda’s disgusted remark, had “gone and got
itself burnt’’. The pudding, instead of being fruity and
rich, as the cookery book promised, was sodden and
floury, with white lumps of suet evident, reminding Bob,


as he said, of a slab of marble. Mum was not so well
that day, and the nurse was occupied wholly with her
patient. These facts, assisted by a soaring thermometer,
caused depression and worry.
This evening, after the talk on the rise, the meal was
not what one could call a success. The potatoes were
suggestive of a creamy soup. Beryl and Barby eyed the
mess in the dish with disfavour, at which Brenda
frowned and bit her lip. She lifted her roughened fingers
and smoothed back her not-too-tidy hair. “I can’t help
it,” she said. “For in the book it said mix them with
milk and butter, so I guessed the quantities. They taste
nice—l think,” she added dubiously, dropping into a
chair.
“You should have just boiled them, like I did yester-
day,” volunteered her sister, and Brenda turned her head
swiftly, her face a picture of righteous indignation.
“Just boiled them,” she echoed. “And you filled us up
with them until we just dreamed of them; and you just
boiled them with their skins on, and we took half an
hour to peel the dirty things, and by that time the chops
were cold.”
Barby stirred the liquid potatoes in her plate with a
vinegar-stained fork, the action expressing all the insult
she was capable then of feeling. “Have you any straws?”
she asked with a sniff that said volumes. “It seems to be
the only way to eat them ... it, I mean.”
“Stop ragging,” Bob ordered, “and use a spoon if you
like.”
The meal progressed with the usual amount of chaff
and sarcasm that accompanies a meal served under diffi-
culties, and by amateurs. The tea, which looked like
coffee, and tasted like quinine well sugared, was referred
to with biting wit by the head of the house. The bread,
cut thickly when it was not crumbled into small wedges,
was pushed aside scornfully, to be taken a moment later


and devoured with gusto. Beryl ate her potatoes and
corned beef, rather stringy and tasteless, almost in
silence, for she was busy with matters that were engross-
ing and pleasing to think over, and passed on to the
next course, which was boiled rice, without any scathing
comment upon the edibles before her. The rice was
more like glue than anything else. It had been put on
to boil about two hours before tea, in the hope of having
it well cooked. It was. However, the plentiful supply
of sugar and cream made it palatable.
“The rice you cooked, Barby,” Bob grunted, with a
spoonful of the glutinous substance held in mid-air, “the
other day, was like birdseed, and now this is like . . .
nothing on earth.”
“He means it’s heavenly, Barby,” ingeniously suggested
the girl who so far had contributed nothing to the con-
versation but the necessary requests for the sugar and
salt.
“Brrr,” said Bob to this, and there fell a busy silence
in the room that was lit to a ruddy glow by the sunset
over the sea.
Beryl, preoccupied and busy with her visions, which,
by the expression on her features, must have been pleas-
ing and interesting, suddenly startled her companions
with an announcement: “I’m going to town to-morrow!”
she said, meeting the array of curious eyes with a quiet
smile.
“Certainly,” said Barby languidly, with an excellent
imitation of Beryl’s shrug which had been discarded now
for ever. Barby’s clever mimicry was upset by her expres-
sion, for it was one of mischief, that did not match the
elegant movement of her shoulders. Beryl flushed, but
not with anger, for gradually she was learning to under-
stand the playful little ways of the Beehive.
“Is there anything I can get for you in town?” she
asked unemotionally.


“Oh! Yes!” retorted Barby in sarcasm, “you may bring
me four Rolls Royce cars and a drawing-room suite,
please, and a maid or two.”
There was a laugh that was more because of the Bees’
penniless state, than Barby’s pert speech. Beryl joined
in.
“Eve got sixpence,” said Brenda, “and I’d love some
jubes, but I’ll keep my sixpence, I think—for a while
anyway, until my desires overpower me, and then I’ll
take a walk to the Bend.”
“I’ll . . .” Beryl was beginning to say “I’ll bring home
as many jubes as we can eat . . .” when she remembered
Barby’s dislike of the “showing off” of her wealth. “I’ll
be back early” came instead.
When she had left the room, leaving the rest sitting
still at the table, Barby turned and nodded her head
energetically, with much speculative wisdom. “Going to
town ,” she said curtly, but not unpleasantly. “I wouldn’t
mind betting she’s going to Mr Carslake’s office to ask
him to put her with other people to board, after the
muck we’ve been serving lately.”
Bob stood up, scraping his chair back with the sud-
denness of the action. “Serve us right if she does,” he
remarked bitterly. “And where’ll the money come from
then for the nurse, I’d like to know? I hope you’re satis-
fied”—glaring at Barby’s astounded and crestfallen coun-
tenance—“She’s worth a dozen of you. You sicken a
fellow.”
As the door shut after the boy’s heels, Barby turned
and took up his serviette out of the emptied rice dish,
where he had thrown it, and said: “There!”— with almost
triumphant excitement—“ Miss Midas has bewitched
him.”
“Don’t be idiotic,” returned her sister with unusual
heat. “You know you don’t mean what you say.” Brenda
piled up a heap of dirty plates, and continued in a


quieter tone: “We are awful, squabbling over food and
over everything else—with Mum so ill. I agree with Bob;
she is worth a dozen of us.”
Barby reflected deeply while she scraped a plate with
a stained knife. “I wouldn’t like her to leave here now
would you?’’
“I’d hate it,” and Beryl’s heart certainly would have
leapt at what followed. “She’s absolutely one of us.”


CHAPTER XIII
BERYL GOES TO TOWN
Early in the following forenoon Beryl busily made her
bed and “tidied” her bedroom, hanging clothes in the
small wardrobe and placing shoes, towels, and stockings
in their proper places. All that done, she went to the
room where her trunks were, and making sure Bubbles
was not within the immediate vicinity, she took from
the largest trunk the treasured box of jewellery, which
she had never spoken of to the others, tipped the con-
tents into a towel, tied the corners and placed the bundle
in a small suit-case.
She dressed herself in a white voile frock, straight and
simple, but edged with exquisite lace and embroidered
by hand, slipped a dark blue silk dust-coat over that,
and pulled a small navy hat over her hair. With the suit-
case in her hand she finally left her room, and after
saying good-bye to the girls, crept silently round the
house to the front, where the hall door was wide open
behind the wire screen. She pushed that apart silently,
and entered the cool hall, fresh from the air of the night.
Noises of dishwashing came up the passage from the back
of the Beehive, and shouts from the shed where Bubbles
was having an argument with Daisy, the red cow. Beryl’s
reason for avoiding the other Bees was that she wished
to see Mrs Campbell before going to town, and to see
her alone, if that was possible.


“May I speak to Mrs Campbell, please, if she is
awake?” she asked, her heart beating rapidly, for she
was about to do a brave thing.
The nurse smiled and nodded. “For a moment,” she
said. “It is nearly bath-time.”
Beryl left her suit-case by the door and tiptoed in,
catching her breath in dismay at the thinness and white-
ness of the woman in the big bed. She had not received
visitors for days, and the difference in her appearance
was noticeable to Beryl’s discerning eyes. Nurse Penrose
was tactful, and caught the half-glance from Beryl cor-
rectly, and retired with a water-jug in her hands.
“Please,” came a tender little query. “Are you awake?”
The blue lidded eyes opened slowly, and stared with-
out comprehension for a second or two, then lit up
ever so little with a slight surprise and pleasure at the
sight of the girl who had not dared to approach the sick
room alone before.
“I am awake, Beryl. Are you going out?” came drearily,
with an attempt at a smile that was very pathetic. The
little girl nodded soundlessly, twice, before finding her
voice.
“Yes”—pressing closer to the bed in her desire to un-
burden herself of what had troubled her for so long,
and what had seemed to her as needing a great deal of
daring to rectify. Beryl slid into the chair beside Mum's
head, and tried to speak.
“You haven’t been in much to see me, have you?”
was the faltering, dazed query. “Where have you been?”
“Nowhere,” came chaotically, and with a rush that
was mostly a fierce whisper: “I . . . at least . . . Mrs
Campbell, I have been too ashamed to come in alone.
I've been making up my mind for days to apologize
for what I said to the girls that night when . . , you
know. I hate myself, and I’ve never stopped thinking
about it, and the girls have forgiven me and we are


friends, but I want you to forgive me ... if you could.”
The head in the blue hat bowed until it was level with
Mum’s shoulders.
Then a wonderful thing happened, for thin arms were
lifted and wound around the shoulders of the stooping
and eager little girl, and she was slowly drawn closer.
and a soft kiss was pressed on her forehead.
“I remember,” Mum said not quite so vaguely as her
memory stirred. “I think I know . . . Yes! I remember
I was waiting for you to say that, dear,” and Beryl, un-
able to speak, sobbed with relief and sympathy until
her eyes stung.
“There! It’s all right now, and you are my little girl
too,” and a cool handkerchief was taken from beneath
the pillow and pressed into Beryl’s hot fingers. She slowly
wiped her face and became still.
“I am nobody’s girl really,” she said then, watching
the window as she regained her composure, “and I be-
long to no one. It’s silly to be sentimental, but some-
times one can’t help it, and I know you don’t think I’m
idiotic. It’s just been boiling up inside of me for weeks.
and now I’ve said it to you, and I’m glad.”
“You are my girl, and belong to me, is that not right?”
asked Mrs Campbell as her brain slowly cleared of the
web it was in.
“Not really ,” corrected the other dully. “You see, to
really belong is so different. It means for ever , no matter
what happens, and there is no need to look forward
to parting, and I . . . you see . . . when Nelly comes
back I expect I will have to go and live with her, or to
a boarding-school, and I hate the thoughts of it.”
“Well, let us say that you belong to me until Nelly
comes back, and no one knows what will turn up. So
remember that I love you. You love us all, I know.”
Mrs Campbell’s face was almost animated in a colour-
less way, as she spoke.


“I love you best,” stoutly asserted Beryl. . . . “Next to
my own mother. I really do, Mrs Campbell.”
“Not ‘Mrs Campbell’,” smiled Mum with a little of
her old brightness that the girl thought very wonderful
to behold. “Call me ‘Mum’.”
“May I?”—and the happiest little girl in all of Aus-
tralia walked from the sick room comforted and glowing
with the thoughts within her.
Nurse Penrose stared with unbelieving eyes when she
returned a little later to her patient’s bedroom, for
Mrs Campbell was sitting up and watching through the
window, a small figure growing smaller as it walked
along the beach from the Beehive. Mum’s elbow was
supporting her weight as she leaned sideways to peer
a little farther. “Hullol” the nurse said brightly. “Your
visitor has done you good.”
“I think so,” came softly. “Nurse, how are the children
getting along?”
By the time she had been bathed and dressed again
in a lacy nightgown and pink jacket, her hair tied with
pink ribbon, Mrs Campbell had a touch of pink also in
her cheeks. The nurse was considerably elated at this,
and answered questions with witty remarks and sarcastic
fun that was refreshing to the mind that had so long
been slumbering.
And later still—“ Nurse, I expect Bubbles has torn
into ribbons everything he possesses. May I do a little
sewing this afternoon. I am sleepy now.”
“Beryl has been doing a lot of mending lately,” the
nurse replied willingly. “She is a nice, sensible girl,
but you are quite welcome to do what you wish in that
direction.”
The starched and spotless young woman then shook
her thermometer. “Now for a temperature—and then
a doze.”
But Mrs Campbell had not yet finished speaking, a


little of the wistfulness vanishing from her features.
• . and nurse, I really have been selfish, wishing to . . .
leave them all alone. For I have wished that, so often.
1 must get well . . . their holidays . . . working like
that . . . Oh dear, I . . .” but she said no more, for
the thermometer was plunged unceremoniously into her
mouth, and silence prevailed.
With her suit-case in one hand and her small hand-
bag containing money and handkerchief and other
trifles in the other, Beryl walked smartly along the
warm sand on the still, beautiful morning, looking
back once at the Beehive and pondering tenderly for
a second upon the familiar line of roof and tree. Since
the little talk with Mum the world seemed much gayer
and the Beehive to belong to her almost as much as it
belonged to the other Bees. The gulls were shrieking
overhead, bone-white in the blue sky, or were standing
in groups in the pale steamy shallows which the turning
tide had left behind. The far-distant town and watering
place of Gray’s Bay, miles around the curving shore,
were shaking like jelly in the heat ripples, with white
roofs upside down on top of other white roofs, in
mirage effect. Her heart swelled as she feasted her eyes
on the beauty of the gulf, lying like pale blue silk in
the clear light, with a far-off streak of dim and dark
blue apparently holding up a small ship, transformed by
the Eastern sun into a fairy boat with sails of rose-
tinted gossamer, and prow of pearl, with white foam
thrown up in front of it.
The redness cleared from her eyes in the fresh air
that was laden with the pungent smell of salt and
rotting seaweed, and she had regained her usual self-
possession by the time she had reached the small station
of Mangrove Bend, just as the ten o’clock train puffed
in from Hamlin Beach, on its way to the city. There
was a number of people in the carriage with her, mostly


nicely dressed women and girls going shopping in the
city, or fulfilling luncheon or dentist or theatre appoint-
ments. Three girls from Beryl’s form, with the familiar
green and gold badge on their hats, were holidaying
with their mother, and they crossed the carriage to talk
with her while the train steamed through the wide
stretches of the well-known golf-links of the beach dis-
trict, and on to the suburbs on the outskirts of the city..
The Blake trio were talking of the pantomime seen
the week before. “The clown was as funny as pie,
giggled the youngest and fattest of the trio. “And he
threw an apple (not a real one) with a picture of him-
self inside, and I caught it.’’
“She tells every one that,” said the next Blake maiden
scornfully. “Lots of people caught them.”
But Beryl was not interested in clowns and unreal
apples at the moment, for through her head was going
the programme of the day, many times rehearsed and
gloated over.
A very happy little girl stepped from the train in
the city station and parted with the Blake trio and their
mother at the top of the steps. The asphalt was hot,
and the soles of her feet scorched in the thin shoes she
had chosen. It was much hotter in the town than at the
seaside. Before she had gone far she had removed her
silk dust-coat and was carrying it over her arm so that
it half hid the suit-case in her gloved hand.
The last time Beryl had been in the city was when
Nelly and Gil were with her, and how different it was
then. There had been much money spent, and Nelly
had sailed importantly into shops, while Gil and his
stepdaughter had stood by uncomfortably as clothing
was examined and criticized and shop girls harassed by
the pretty purchaser. It had seemed quite an everyday
matter then to purchase gloves and stockings by the
half-dozen pairs, and to spend a ten-pound note upon


a hand-bag or an undergarment, but now, as Beryl
glanced into the windows and observed the luxurious
and beautiful things inside the glass which allows one
to go so near, and yet is such a barrier, she frowned
thoughtfully. With her new ideas of values, Beryl saw
that much of the world was indeed a long way off from
the unnecessary loveliness of the fragile silks and chiffons
displayed. One pleated silk skirt which Nelly had pur-
chased for ship-board life, would keep the Beehive in
comestibles for a month. Slowly Beryl was learning of
the downs as well as the ups of life.
Twice Beryl stopped in her walk to Mr Carslake’s
office, once to buy a succulent piece of chicken that
was temptingly displayed on a white plate in a ham-
shop window, and once to purchase a pound of fluffy
wafer biscuits—for Mum. In the same shop she also
bought a box of preserved figs, soft and juicy, packed
in neat rows, fresh from the River Murray district, and
a packet of Turkish dates, also for Mum.
With the parcels added to the bundle in her suit-case,
Beryl went on and turned a corner, finding without
any trouble the building which contained the offices
of Mr Carslake. She was shown by a clerk into a room
smelling of leather and papers, and asked to wait.
Mr Carslake would be in at any moment, explained
the young man, with a glance of interest and curiosity
at the pretty face of the well-mannered little girl before
him.
The minutes dragged, with Beryl seated in one of
the large shiny chairs in the sombre outer office. In the
middle of her vision-painting, the solicitor bustled in.
A little later Beryl was with him in the inner office,
which was as dark as a cave until the blinds were
drawn to the tops of the narrow windows. The little
man regarded her from behind his glasses as though
she were a hobgoblin, or a burglar planning to rob the


big iron safe, she thought; then he tugged his waist-
coat down for the fourth time since he had seated
himself, and asked her to state her business. It took
Beryl exactly ten minutes to tell her story, and then the
old man tugged his waistcoat once more and stroked
his bald head lovingly and thoughtfully. He stared as
the odd little girl unlatched her suit-case and lifted from
it something weighty wrapped and tied in a towel, but
he literally gasped as she tipped out on to the polished
table a tangled litter of bangles, brooches, chains, and
wristlet watches.
He knew Beryl’s history, naturally, and had read
letters in which she had been mentioned by Mrs Camp-
bell, but no jewellery had been spoken of. tie was not
surprised to see the jewels to be of considerable value,
but their number and variety astounded him, accus-
tomed even as he was to being astounded. He stroked
his head again, amazed, as she talked, reading from
her words much of the story she held back, kindly,
because of betraying Nelly to this lawyer. She did not
know that the few minutes he had spent in the company
of the new Mrs Gilmore had given to the old man, well
versed in the ways of men and women, her character.
This was the stepchild—the child that Mrs Gilmore had
mentioned as “stubborn, wilful and with no idea of
manners’’. Well, welll
“. . . you see, Mr Carslake,’’ Beryl explained carefully,
“she used to smack me, and I suppose I deserved it,
for I must have been an obnoxious little wretch.” (The
lawyer hid a smile.) “When she smacked me she gave
me something to keep, as a sort of bribe, and although
at first I wouldn’t have them, I thought that after all
they belonged to my father, which they did. I thought
that one day when the money had all been spent, I—
could sell the jewellery and be rich again. Of course,
now I know that this much wouldn’t make any one rich.


These things are really mine, and I can do as I like
with them. My father, if he could come here now.
would say that. They were not bought with Nelly’s
money, and now she has plenty of Gil’s this much
would be nothing to her. You know I haven’t stolen
them or anything, because you know me ... or of me.
\ou must never tell Nelly or her husband about this
because it is my secret, and you must never, never tell
Mrs Campbell.”
“Great Scott!” gasped the fat little solicitor.
“You see, I’ve found out that nice girls don’t talk
about money and wear jewellery, and Mrs Campbell
told me how wrong it is to look down on people because
they are not rich. I’ve been an awful rotter, you know,
Mr Carslake, and I want to make up for it. Mrs Camp-
bell is an . . . angel, and . . . anyway, Nelly told me
everything all wrong. She brought me up that way, I
think, just out of spite, for not calling her what she
wanted me to, and for not letting her boss me.”
“Dear me!” came a weak exclamation from behind
the table.
“And now,” continued the eager and talkative little
girl, in a surprisingly business-like manner, “I want you
to sell all of this stuff for me, and give the money to
Mrs Campbell. You will have to tell her something to
explain it, but surely you can do that—make up a story
about an unpaid bill or something like that. Lawyers
can do anything with papers and wills and bills and
things, can’t they?”
At this corrupting plea Mr Carslake frowned and
shot his eyebrows up and down ferociously, but Beryl
smiled in her most winning manner and leaned for-
ward. “Please?” she said.
“Dear me,” came feebly, “and where did you get your
astonishing knowledge of the law from, young lady?”
“I read books,” was the illuminating reply.


And then the girl went on, her face alight with
enthusiasm and the desire to perform a service for those
she loved, taking the solicitor’s assent as granted, accep-
ting it with a smile of thanks that the old man, inclining
his head courteously without being aware of it, took
dazedly.
and if Mrs Campbell did all that for you and
you were a girl, then you’d feel like repaying her,
wouldn’t you?”—here Beryl paused and looked horror-
stricken. “The police wouldn’t think you’d stolen the
jewellery, if you sold it, would they?”
The very knobs and bolts of the big safe seemed to
express horror at the thought, and the owner of the safe
said hastily: “No, no, of course not.”
“That’s all right then,” said Beryl—allowing a huge
sigh to escape. “So now you can go straight ahead.”
Mr Carslake sat back in contemplative silence while
Beryl completed her appeal with a sketch of the Bee-
hive’s housekeeping activities, commenting upon the
appalling price of potatoes (was this Beryl speaking?)
and concluding with the mysterious manner in which
food burns if one turns one’s back for a moment,
refusing to as much as simmer when one is hovering
in anxiety near the stove. Then in the midst of a vivid
description of the wars at the Beehive, she paused, and
asked: “I must be boring you to distraction.”
“On the contrary,” was the reply, sincerely uttered.
Mr Carslake had not been so entertained for many
a year.
Beryl smiled and waited.
“It’s a peculiar case,” the man remarked slowly and
ponderously, “and most unusual, but if you will leave
it with me I will do what I can for you. Let us make
a list now of these baubles, and you must sign a paper,
but . . . hum . . . that would be of no use. Just leave
it with me, Miss Beryl of the Persuasive Tongue, and


I’ll see that your orders are attended to. Most unusual
. . . most unusual. In the circumstances, however, I
think I may . . . Yes!”
After the details of the important matter had been
settled to the satisfaction of both of them, and to Beryl’s
amazement when she learnt the estimated value of
what she had hidden for so long in her trunk, she hesi-
tated, then jerked: “And now there’s one thing more.
I have too much pocket-money and I want to have the
same as Barby and Brenda, please.”
“ UmmnnnT ’
“Barby and Brenda have a shilling a week, and
Bubbles threepence, and they seem to get an awful lot
of fun out of their money, and I spend and spend, and
don’t seem to enjoy it at all. If I have a shilling a week
too, then I’ll be level, and they won’t always jump at
the idea that I’m cocky when I’m not.”
“I see.”
“So please give me a shilling a week, and put the
rest into the bank or your safe or somewhere, where
I can get it if Mum gets into a tight corner again.”
Presently, the dazed and bewildered solicitor escorted
his young client out of the office, ushering her politely
into the waiting-room which was empty. But she paused
there, her face contemplative. “About the Major, Mr
Carslake ... is it rude to ask . . . but do you think
he’ll come back?”
“I don’t know, Beryl,” and into the man’s tones crept
a grim doubt that struck fear into the girl. “I . . . don’t
know. John Campbell is not the man to die if living
is possible, with his family waiting for him at home.
But neither is he the man to live without writing home.
I don’t . . . know. My acquaintance with the South Seas
has been through the pages of Coral Island , and books
of that type, and I can’t speak with any authority, but


He is away somewhere now, on a steamer, but he cer-
tainly did all he could to assist in the search for the
Major. There, now, don’t worry your head about that,
run along . . . any day he might return.”
“But you don’t think he will, Mr Carslake, I can
tell.”
“Bless my soul . . . there . . . run along, and don’t
I believe that much can happen there that is impossible
anywhere else.”
“Mrs Campbell thinks he will come back, and they
all talk about him as though he is alive. Do you think
that steward was really within reach of him, Mr Cars-
lake, on that island?”
“I saw the man, and questioned him, and as far as I
can judge, he was speaking the truth—as far as he knew
it. But sick men suffer from delusions, and delusions
to them are as real as the things which go on around us.
get lost,” and Beryl left a very disturbed little man
furiously rubbing misty spectacles, while she hastened
through the building and into the white light of the
open air.
She examined her purse as she walked down the
street, discovering a half-crown there. “If I spend it
then I’m square with the Bees,” she argued, then pro-
ceeded to buy the tempting delicacies advertised on show
card masterpieces outside a chemist shop window. An
ice-cream followed a fruity and fizzy drink, another ice-
cream smothered in crushed pineapple following that.
She ended her purchases with a small box of sweets for
the smallest Bee, feeling that indeed she had paid a
fitting farewell to luxuries. She counted out five coppers
gravely and cheerfully. “That is to last me until Mon-
day,” she stated silently. “I don’t know how I’ll do it—
but I must.”
At the Bend, leaving the station and walking on
to the beach, she found Brent, with a collection of


brown paper bags under both arms, his hat over his
eyes and his long legs carrying him swiftly homewards.
“Coo-ee-ee” called Beryl, scampering after him, and
he turned and waited, a smile on his sunburned features.
“Lift my hat for me, there’s a good girl,’’ he said,
“for I can’t manage it alone and must be polite.’’
Beryl laughed and gravely obliged him, dropping
her suit-case on to the sand. “Put what you can in my
case,” she said, “and then if you meet any more females
you will be able to be polite. What’s in that squishy
parcel—butter?”
“I suppose. 1 believe I did buy some. 1 intended to,
but a grocery store always seems to be so filled with
ladies poking long fingers at sides of bacon, and asking
the price of eggs, that I become embarrassed, and take
whatever the kind young person behind the counter
suggests.” He reflected ruefully. “She has a remarkable
memory.”
“What’s this?” the girl asked, squeezing a soft, limp
and cold parcel enquiringly.
“Sausages, I trust. And there are hot pies, and buns,
and fritz sausage, and the knobby one is dried apri-
cots—but I don’t know what one does with them.”
“And that's how you housekeep,” said Beryl, pursing
up her lips and looking motherly and stern together.
She pressed the very soft butter into a corner beside
a flat parcel which held bread, and shut down the suit-
case lid. As they walked along together, Beryl listening
with beaming face to the author’s cheery nonsense and
impromptu verses, he suddenly broke off in his self-
named Ode to a Footprint, and asked: “What’s the
matter with you? You look vulgarly cheerful. Have you
come into a fortune?”
“Nol I’ve lost one—well, not exactly,” she corrected,
at the author’s stupefaction upon hearing her reply.
She explained, a little incoherently and very rapidly,


what had happened since she had seen him last, particu-
larly the doings of the same day. Brent listened until
the Beehive came into view.
“Good kid!” he said carelessly, and Beryl squirmed
with pleasure at the inflexion in his voice.
“Don’t tell, honestly,” she demanded.
“Honour bright!” he assured her, and she remarked
gratefully and enthusiastically, “I just worship you.”
“1 wish Cleo did,” sighed the author, passing over
Beryl’s exclamation modestly, as becomes an author.
Beryl remained silent, feeling that more confidences
were about to be unfolded.
“Is she pretty?” she asked at last.
“Pretty?” queried the brother of one of the under-
estimated sisters of the world. (All brothers are like
that.) “I don’t know. I suppose so. She is dainty and
tiny, and has eyes like saucers of grey paint, and short
curly hair and little slim hands that seem hardly able
to lift a plate, yet they drive a six-cylinder car over the
toughest hill roads. Yes! She’s pretty.”
“I hope she’ll read your new book and love it, and
I hope she understands soon that you just couldn't go
and add up figures in an office, and buy things you
haven’t got . . . you know what I mean.” Beryl’s attempt
at explaining the mysteries of stock-broking met with a
loud burst of laughter. She echoed it softly and happily.
“We haven’t been to have afternoon-tea with you yet,
and see where you write,” she said naively, “but we
shall soon.”
“Great Hanover!” was the dismayed utterance. “I
write in the middle of a whirlwind of papers and lunch-
remains. I have a handsome bevy of seagulls that have
quite adopted me, and that live outside my door, waiting
for scraps. Meat will go bad you know, this weather,
and the bread will go dry, so they have feasts rather
often.”


“Your house must be funny,” laughed Beryl, “and
1 think we had better tell you when we’re coming—
not till Mum is a little better—so that you can clear
up a bit. Well bring some cake if we come.”
“Cake! Home-made cake?” was the greedy query.
Beryl twinkled and nodded. “. . . and scones,” she
added.
“Come” Brent entreated then, very suddenly changing
his dismay to a pressing invitation. “Come to-morrow.”
Beryl, from a few yards up the slope towards the
house, said mischievously, “Well come soon—but we
might forget the cake.”
Brent, loaded again with his many parcels, pretended
to be overcome with horror at the thought of the lack
of cake, and staggered so realistically that he scattered
his bundles over the sand. Beryl heartlessly laughed.
Barby, watching from the window of Mum’s bed-
room, mumbled: “That’s the author, I suppose. He
does look human, anyway.” Barby’s ideas of authors
having been a composite mental photograph of Hall
Caine, Shakespeare, a Bolshevik, and a Parisian art
student of the Quartier Latin.
After removing her coat and hat, and washing her
dusty features. Beryl wandered round the cool side of
the house until she found the other two girl Bees
struggling with luncheon washing-up. They were alone.
“Mum’s ever so much better, Nurse says,” Brenda
remarked before the new-comer could speak. “Isn’t it
glorious?”
Beryl’s eyes shone. “Rather,” she said.
“I didn’t know you’d be back so soon,” said Barby.
“Was that the author you walked along with?”
“Yes! We must go soon and have tea with him,” and
Beryl told the incident of the promise of the cake. That
made Beryl aware of her own hollow interior, and she
anxiouslv asked if there was any tea left in the pot.


“No," Barby replied. “I thought you’d be having a
swanky lunch in town. The water’s nearly boiling.”
She examined the kettle and kicked the protruding
sticks of wood farther in with her foot. “Make some
cocoa, that’s better than tea if you drink it quickly
and keep stirring it to keep it from settling. There’s
some cheese left, but it’s not very soft, and some cold
chipped potatoes, for the fat didn’t boil enough some-
how, and the grease soaked in. Bubbles. liked them.”
But Beryl shook her head and poked sticks of pine
under the kettle until it sang and rattled its lid, and
then made cocoa and toast. She sat on the table edge,
taking large bites and sips.
“Did . . . did you have a nice time?” asked Brenda
at last, almost afraid to hear that Beryl had gone to ask
to be removed from the Beehive.
Beryl looked steadily at the steaming sink, then said
slowly: “1 went to Mr Carslake’s office”—Brenda bit her
lip and her sister lifted her chin—“to ask him to give
me the same pocket-money as you get—so as to all be
even.”
In that moment of doubt and hesitation, all clouds
passed from the horizon, and Barby, after an effort, met
Beryl’s gaze steadily. “Beryl, you’re a brick. I thought—
perhaps you’d gone to him to ask him to put you some-
where else to . . . board.”
Beryl gripped the slippery hand of the scullery maid
and squeezed it without speaking. She knew what Barby
had suffered through the morning, and knew why.
“And you’re only going to have a shilling a week,
instead of over a pound?” asked Barby, as she success-
fully bridged an emotional moment.
“Yes.”
“Beryl Le Leivre,” came fervently and solemnly. “I’d
howl myself sick if you went away”—and Beryl’s heart


sang, until lifted into heights never before dreamed of.
She raced madly up the hall and into her bedroom,
to emerge in one of her gingham frocks, faded and torn
with wear and tear by the sea, and on her feet were a
worn pair of sandals, with no stockings beneath them.
Who cared any more for clothes}


CHAPTER XIV
A SOCIAL EVENT
From the morning of Beryl’s visit to the sick-room
Mrs Campbell brightened, a very few days elapsing
before the delighted Bees saw that indeed she was on
the high-road to recovery. They declared over and over
that they liked the housework, believing then that they
spoke the truth, and that they did not mind missing
the leisure of their vacation.
There were but a few days of the holidays left. Mum,
slightly pale and very thin, was now accustomed to
appearing at the evening meal, proudly assisted by each
girl in turn. It seemed but a few days since they had
been afraid that Mum was to die, and miraculously,
here she was smiling at stupid jokes, and joining in
with the chatter that circulated in the room.
“Don’t overdo it, Mumdarling, or you’ll be in bed
again. You know what the doctor said. Then perhaps
you’ll never get better’’ (it was easy to say this now she
was better) “and then what’d we all do?’’
“I will never leave you, dears, that way. I was wicked
not to think of that when I was so despondent and
weak.’’
Loud denials of this were uttered in chorus, Mum
smiling as though she would like to take all of her flock
at once into her arms and hug them; at least, that is
how Brenda put it.
One afternoon, leaving Bubbles to sit with Mum on


die warm veranda, the work done, and the evening
meal prepared and in the safe, the three girls excitedly
packed home-made cakes and scones (the three cooks
had combined their efforts and surpassed themselves)
into a basket and set forth on the long anticipated visit
to the cottage of the author.
"I’ve skinned some tomatoes and put them in water
to cool, and the lettuce too,” said Beryl. “And Barby’s
peeled potatoes and left the corned beef in the water to
set, so now all we have to do at tea-time is to light the
fire and open a tin of peaches and make the tea.”
“How lazy I am,” said Mum, after praising the
methods of her three maids, and passing comment upon
their fresh frocks and well-brushed hair.
“Do we look nice?” asked Brenda. Barby sniffed.
“We didn’t an hour ago,” the latter remarked truth-
fully. “I don’t mind burning the skin off my nose and
smothering myself in perspiration for starving authors—
but it’s the cleaning of the kitchen afterwards that I
object to.” The kitchen, it was true, upon cessation of
culinary activities, did somewhat resemble an apartment
visited by a shower of flour and dripping. However, the
Bees were thorough, and left the room as spotless as it
was before they had commenced.
Mrs Campbell leaned forward in her chair to wave
to the three girls walking along the beach through a
typical January heat, while Bubbles, full of importance
and caution, told her to lean back or she’d strain her
neck or somethin’, placing a cushion most uncomfort-
ably against her already hot back. She did not remove
it, but kissed the small boy instead.
Beryl was radiant, striding as fast as her legs could
carry her, the others keeping pace with difficulty.
“You’re a whale of a walker, Beryl; slow down a bit,
it’s hot,” ordered Barby. She was obeyed.
“I hope he’s home,” came a whisper from Brenda,


who was carrying under her arm ihe exercise book of
fairy-tales, watching anxiously for signs of life around
the cottage they were nearing.
“Of course he’s home. Didn’t Bubbles watch all day
to see that he didn’t go past?”
“He may have gone the swamp way,” argued Brenda.
But Pat Brent was home, without a doubt, for the
clicketty-clack of a typewriter came to meet them across
the white sandhills, and Brenda nudged Beryl ecstati-
cally.
“Ye Gods!” came from within as a knock was deliv-
ered upon the half-open door. The author appeared in
the opening, his hair ruffled and his face blank. “Per-
haps we should have told him we were coming, after
all,” whispered Brenda to her sister, receiving a dig in
the ribs for her pains.
“Come in,” said the young man, after a great deal
of grinning and hesitation.
The guests filed in, and the host asked them to remove
their hats, hoping that was a correct procedure for such
an occasion, but completely at a loss to know where to
place his visitors.
“There’s one chair and a kerosene case,” he said in
helpless dismay, “and the typewriter lid. You’ll have
to sit where you can. My bed’s behind the curtain or
I’d have plenty of room for you . . . stretchers make
good seats when the wire’s taut.”
“Please don’t be polite,” said Beryl fervently, adding
in doubtful compliment: “Just be as you always are.
It’s lovely for grown-ups not to be proper and stiff,
isn’t it, Barby and Bren?” Then remembering due
introductions: “This is Brenda and this is Barby—
Campbell, and this is Mr Brent.”
“Pat, please,” came a murmur. But it took exactly
ten minutes for the four to know one another. The
author commenced social obligations by placing a


smutty kettle upon a small oil stove, searching for cups
and plates while the girls cut up cake and handed out
scones. Papers were lifted reverently from the table by
Brenda and placed on the mantelshelf. The typewriter,
being hoisted by the muscular Barby to the window-sill,
caused her more than a moderate fright by the sudden
releasing of the carriage and its resultant scraping shriek.
The feast was arrayed at last in all the glory of embroid-
ered table-napkins, provided by the Beehive, and
assorted crockery.
“I don’t often entertain three ladies at once in my
humble abode,” the author confessed, scratching his ear,
“and I’m afraid I have only two cups and three saucers.
I don’t like to offer you a saucer to drink from as I
believe that utensil, for the imbibing of tea, is not con-
sidered respectable in polite society—however, as we are
not polite society (at Miss Beryl’s request) here goes.
Beryl can use a vase to drink from, if she doesn’t object.
It’s never had flowers in.”
Beryl had considerable difficulty in drinking from
a six-inch and very slender vase, and damped her chin
in the process, but the tea certainly seemed to taste
better than any tea had before. The author ate five
scones and six pieces of cake, and firmly demanded
more of each.
“You are greedy,” chided Beryl. “You may only have
one more scone—because it is the last.”
“Stiff luck!”
“1 didn’t know authors were like you,” remarked
Brenda. “I thought they were clever and prim and
stiff . . . you know.”
“I can be awfully prim and clever when I wish,”
Pat Brent stated solemnly, and Barby suddenly giggled.
The gulls, fighting and screaming and darting for the
largest pieces, came around in flocks for the scraps that
were tipped inelegantly through the doorway. The


author picked out one of them: “See that chap with
the large prominence”—he indicated the bird by throw-
ing a scrap of cake at it—“l call him Falstaff—you see
why. That one with the mincing gait is Beau Brummel,
and the one in the corner with the furtive eye and
grabbing habits, the Smuggler. Little Willy hovers over-
head, looking for tasty bits, but is scared to come near.
That chap there with the ragamuffin look and scalawag
eye I call my pet Bolshie. I’m certain that one is a lady
bird, for you see how she shrieks gently and sits back
until she gets a chance to dart in and . . . but, I am
talking to ladies; I must behave.”
The guests at the cottage were shaking with mirth
at the whimsical descriptions which fitted the birds so.
Character in seagulls is surprisingly evident, if one cares
to watch them long enough to observe.
For a while the four watched the birds, then the
author suggested sitting on the beach on a seaweed heap,
so they wandered slowly out into the afternoon warmth,
with the cool air from the sea puffing in their faces.
Brent pointed with his pipe at the horizon.
“In six weeks I’ll be passing by out there, on my
way West,” he observed.
“Then you are going to Perth,” said Beryl. “You
know I lived there once.”
“And she had gardeners and bathed from lawns,”
said Barby, and Beryl laughed good-naturedly. The davs
of misunderstandings had gone.
“I’m going to write a series of articles for a paper,”
explained the young man who honoured the girls by
treating them as persons of full intellect. They humbly
realized this, and were very careful to show how inter-
ested they were. “These articles will take me from the
caves in the South-west to the far North, including the
towns of Carnarvon and Broome, and I will incidentally
sketch out a novel,”


“When 1 was in Perth I saw the first aeroplanes leave
for Carnarvon; I think they called themselves the Nor’-
West Aerial Mail Service. Nelly used to send letters to
the north-west towns by aeroplane. I went to the hangar
of the Service, on the Swan, too, and saw the walls hung
with spare wings and parts, and both Bristols and Sop-
withs standing on the oily floors. And out at the back
of the hangar was the remains of a terribly smashed
’plane. An aviator named McKintosh was killed in it
when it crashed, and the wreck looked just like a coffin,
draped with ragged canvas and silk.’’
“The Winged Pioneers,’’ said Brent gravely and sol-
emnly, his eyes looking over the sea. “The best of the
best. Look at Ross Smith and his record. He faced
innumerable dangers, as others have and will, smiling,
and flew around the world, still smiling, and died . . .
smiling still, I should imagine. And did not the first
trip of the Nor’-West Service end fatally for another
South Australian?’’
“Yes!’’ replied Beryl. “We stood on the lawn and
looked up at the return, with the sun laughing and
glittering on everything—and one of the planes was
left behind away up in the lonely North. . . .’’ Beryl’s
voice thickened. “Every one had a heavy heart in Perth
that day.’’
“I should like to fly,’’ stated Barby, looking up.
“Before long I expect we will have seaplanes pushing
off from this very beach, and then we might get a
ride.’’
“Stick to swimming for a while, Miss Barby,” said
Brent. “It is safer for young ladies. Shall we go in now
and finish off the cake that is left?”
“You may keep that,” said Beryl generously. “Oh—
and Mum would like you to call in one day when you
come our way again, and have tea with us.”
In the cottage again, the author took the black exer-


else book from the mantelshelf where it had been placed
by Brenda, to examine the contents thoughtfully, read-
ing a scrap here and a scrap there, pausing and smiling,
frowning and turning a page, puffing steadily at his pipe
the while.
Brenda watched his change of expressions with
anxiety; the other two watched Brenda.
The author then snapped the book shut, and rapped
his pipe on the table edge, slowly refilling it and lighting
it again before he spoke.
“They’re good,” he said, “but crude in places. Keep
on writing, Brenda, and you will be a second Hans
Andersen.”
“Wasn’t he German?” asked Barby unappreciatively,
but her sister drowned the remark with her own joyous:
“Really?”
“You want to remember to discipline your fairy-tales
by reality, Brenda, and to fill them with the wind and
the sky, and the trees and creeks—fitting truth in a gay
jacket, and embroidering with incidents that catch the
imagination ... do you understand?”
“I think I do.”
“Don’t write incidents unless they mean something,
and practise by writing up everything you see or do.
Put reality in your sketches, and tint them with just
enough unreality to charm . . . see?”
“Yes!”
“You must see a thing before you write about it, and
to end my little lecture I will tell you what has helped
me. The speech of a famous poet who said his advice
to authors was: ‘When in doubt—cut it out.’ Now for
the cake.”
The talk swung round to the Beehive, during cake-
eating on the part of the author, and from that to Mum.
Then Brenda exclaimed, “Her birthday—it’s nearly here,
and I haven’t saved a penny.”


A birthday in the Beehive would not be a birthday
at all, without presents from one and all.
“Nor have I!” echoed Barby, and Beryl became silent.
She now had no money for gifts either, and how she
wanted to give Mum something on her birthday. Should
she get some money from Mr Carslake—but no! that
would not really be a gift. It would cost the donor
nothing. The author was speaking: “. . . and if you’ll
leave the book with me I’ll go over the tales and pick
out one and correct and type it for you; then I’ll hand
it in to the paper. It will be printed in the following
Saturday’s magazine section. In the children’s page, it
will be, and that will give you the ‘necessary’ for the
birthday gift, eh?’’
“Oh!’’ Brenda gasped, her joyful sigh seeming endless.
Barby stared in awe. Brenda Campbell to have a story
printed in the paper! Brenda Campbell with her name
on a fairy-tale in print!
All the way back to the Beehive, as the three girls
paddled in the lapping water, they discussed ways and
means of birthday problems.
“How can you save out of a shilling a week?’’ asked
Beryl in disgust.
“Well! If you want to go back to the fleshpots of
Egypt, you only have to say so,” snorted Barby. “It’s
easy for you to buy presents.”
“I’ve given that up now,” was the firm reply, “and
intend to do as you do. I’ll get some money somehow,
and I know Mum would be more pleased with a jam-
tin with a ribbon round it than a gold watch that was
got just by asking for it. I want to earn my gift, the
same as you. Brenda has her money already—or will
have soon.”
“That’s right,” said Barby. “But I don’t see what we
can do. There’s over a week yet, and only one more
shilling to come, and the swimming sports and yacht


races are next Saturday too. We must have the shillings
for that, and besides a shilling wouldn’t buy much of
a present, either. I’m going early to the Bend to get a
good spot on the jetty, aren’t you?”
“Rather.”
“Then school,” came from Brenda. “It seems terrible
to have to go to school, when I want to be writing more
stories all the time.”
“You must be educated to write stories,” Beryl said
with such certainty and conviction that the others had
no reply ready. “You must be educated for everything
or you’ll be left behind.”
“ You’ll be left behind,” shouted Barby suddenly,
darting off at express speed, and the other two set their
teeth and raced after her, all finishing in a heap at the
foot of Mum’s deck-chair, where she had sensibly sunned
herself all through the afternoon.
For a half-hour the doings and sayings of the author
were quoted, the visit re-lived through for the benefit
of Mum. The group ended their meeting by hoping
with many extravagant terms that the weather would be
“all right” next Saturday.
“Time for a dip before tea,” shouted Barby, and the
trio of girls vanished, to be followed later by Bubbles
who had been relieved from his post of duty beside
Mrs Campbell’s chair. She had an excellent grand-stand
view of the swimmers in the cool blue deep, thankful
to be once more able to take some part in the doings
of the Beehive.
“You can beat all of us,” said Beryl in disgust, as
she turned on her back to puff and blow, “and ought
. . . puff ... to enter the races . . . puff . . . Saturday . . .
and I bet you’d win.
Barby paused and forgot to tread water. Consequently
she sank into eight feet of sea, and emerged spluttering


and laughing and mysteriously elated, instead of being
subdued as one might have expected.
“Race you to the bathroom,” she again challenged,
and went off in swift overarm movement, with hardly
a splash where her arms cut the water.
A little later, with wet hair piled up above cotton
frocks, and bare feet thrust into sandals, the three cooks
prepared tea.
“The tomatoes are as cool as cool,” stated Beryl
jovially, “and so tempting. I believe I’m crystallized
inside with salt, and I’ll drink about eight cups of tea
presently.” With neat deft movements she sliced the
round red fruits and shredded the lettuce to fibre-like
fineness. “I’d better make a cream dressing, I expect.
Mum and Bob like it, and . . . Pooh! The cream’s bad.
I'd better use condensed milk. Smell . . .” and a bowl
was thrust under Barby’s nose. She thrust it away, with
a quick: “Give it to Waggles.”
“No fear,” said the new economist. “I’ll make butter
out of it—if Mum will tell me how.”
That evening, when all signs of food had been re-
moved from the almost tidy living-room, Barby
vanished. A long-legged girl suspiciously like her might
have been seen tearing down the main street of the
Bend, stopping at the local chemist’s, where the entries
for the various races for the sports were accepted. She
did her mile along the swamp road, in a very few
moments, arriving puffing at the kitchen door about half
an hour after she had been missed.
“Where did you go? Mum’s in bed and wants to say
good-night,” said Brenda suspiciously.
“Just for a little stroll,” replied the other carelessly,
but Brenda eyed the heated visage and sniffed at the
breathless tones of the reply.
Brenda’s reply was short and sarcastic. “It seems to
have been frightfully soothing,” she said placidly.


CHAPTER XV
THE BEND EN FETE
On the morning of the sports the Bees woke early, made
beds, and attended to the housework with unusual speed
and efficiency. Barby had risen at daylight to go swim-
ming for an hour. Emerging from the water glowing
with exercise, she scampered many times round the
house until her suit was dry. From the kitchen window
the others, in puzzled wonder, watched these antics. Bob
suggested that perhaps his sister had been bitten by a
mad dog. Bubbles of course took this literally, and ran
off in great alarm to discover the truth for himself, but
was squashed severely by the indignant Barby.
The oven in the kitchen was hot, from the cooking
of breakfast, but Mum, beating eggs energetically in a
bowl while she sat in the rocker, wagged her head as
she insisted upon making a cake. The others watched
her actions with pride, mingled with fear for an imme-
diate collapse. “I want a coffee-cake for tea,” she said
sternly, then laughed at the anxious expressions con-
fronting her. “Em not made of eggshell, children, and
absolutely refuse to be an invalid any more. I will be
too fat to get through the door soon.”
“Take it easy, Mumdarling,” cautioned Brenda for
the hundredth time that week, and Mum solemnly
agreed to obey her second daughter.
With the hoots of “trip” steamers sounding in enticing
echoes from the jetty of the Bend, the morning seemed


long to the younger members of the Beehive. After a
very early dinner, there was a rush to dress, and Bubbles
ran to Mum four times to ask if his tie was straight.
He stroked his white shirt and navy knickers with com-
placency and conscious pride. It was his first “scout”
suit, for up-to-date he had worn blouses, with jerseys
for cold weather. Barby dressed swiftly, with not much
attention to detail, and quite content for her hat to
“stick on”, without expecting it to look artistic as well.
Brenda, having brushed her hair faithfully with fifty
strokes, and having arranged her wide-brimmed straw
hat with care and precision, was as neat and tidy as
usual. Beryl thought the occasion merited a best frock,
and was not afraid of being thought “cocky” now, as
she lifted from its bed of tissue paper a beautifully
embroidered Indian muslin. Long silk stockings and
white buckskin sandals followed.
“Aren’t we smart?” exclaimed Bob with the usual
masculine amazement upon beholding a frock not seen
before. Beryl gracefully bowed and smiled up through
her lashes in mock humility and gratitude, and the boy
laughed. Mum followed the girls about like a hen with
ducklings, preening a feather here and a feather there,
until Barby asked her did she think they were going
to a ball. But Brenda patted Mum on the arm, and
found yet another hook that had become mysteriously
undone. At last Mum was satisfied with the appearance
of her family.
“Are you sure you won’t be lonely?” asked Brenda
anxiously for the fourth time.
“Lonely! With Bob with me!” was the quick response,
“We will flirt all afternoon, won’t we, son?”
“Rather,” was the smiling answer.
At last they were off, and the walk to the jetty of
the little township had never seemed so far. The day
was moderately warm, with a hint of thunder in the


metallically blue and motionless sky, and the oily water
that was just the colour of faded periwinkles—a perfect
day for swimming, and for yachting if a breeze sprang
up, and even more perfect for the crowds on the shore
on this day of sports and picnics. Beneath her arm
Barby carried a bundle, and, in spite of pressing re-
quests, refused to disclose its contents.
Then the jetty with the holiday crowds came into
view, and the Bees wound their way among traps and
horses, tents and beach-umbrellas, and groups of people
on the sand. Yachts swung round in the sun, with their
varied signs standing out on the almost transparent
sails, while white-clad figures lounged or bobbed about
on the small clean decks. Lads with complexions like
Mediterranean fisher-boys, and with very little on, darted
to and fro under the jetty in small and crazy canoes,
colliding and upsetting one another with squeals of
merriment and shouts of sarcastic advice. Over it all
poured the sun, throwing coloured frocks into splashes
of vivid light, bringing sparkles from the water where
the boats rippled its smooth surface; and burning the
backs and arms of city dwellers unused to the salty air.
Mangrove Bend was en fete indeed. Ice-cream booths
were erected near the jetty head, and swings and see-
saws were patronized by swarms of sandy and dishevelled
youngsters. Frantic Mammas called to adventurous sons
and daughters sitting in ten inches of pale sea, and fat
elderly ladies dabbled their toes in the wavelets and
shrieked coyly. The holiday spirit was present every-
where. The three girls squeezed one another’s arms in
keen enjoyment and peered about them.
“You wouldn’t know the Bend to-day, would you?’’
said Beryl in amazement.
“On New Year’s day it’s worse,’’ replied Barby. “I
suppose Mr Carlton (the local ice-cream vender) will
make his fortune to-day, and serve out the stingiest


ices imaginable. T he more trade people get the meaner
they are, I notice."
"Well," said Beryl, "we can afford a penny one each,
anyway."
So they wound a tortuous way among paper bags and
sandwich crusts, lemonade bottles, and babies, and
approached the seething mass of juvenile humanity
craving and demanding frozen refreshments.
After a long wait, during which their toes were trod-
den upon and their ribs stabbed with plunging elbows,
they were served, one at a time.
"He didn’t seem to like serving us much," said Barby
reflectively, licking a small biscuit cup delicately. "But
perhaps it was because we all made him give us eleven-
pence change."
Bubbles had been claimed noisily a few minutes
before, by some of his satellites, and Barby muttered
disloyally: "Hurrayl"
The jetty was crowded to the point of discomfort,
the girls having to squeeze and dodge until they were
actually at the extreme end overlooking the water. Here
a large bevy of Denning Houseites greeted them mirth-
fully and clamorously, making room in remarkable
fashion upon an already packed rail. The hats were
touching at the brims, and long-stockinged legs swung
down over the heads of the spectators on the sloping
ramp below. As the jetty ended in a T-shaped piece of
architecture, the girls had a grand-stand view, par
excellence.
"This is scrummy," squealed Joyce Wood as she
clutched her twin to save herself from toppling on to
the crowded heads below. "And our brother Bill’s in
the first race. Isn’t the sea ripping?"
"Glorious," remarked another girl farther along.
‘Have a bun, Barby?"
So Barby took a bun, and that was the signal for


the passing round of sundry sweets and edibles. Barby,
after one bite of the bun, appeared to remember some-
thing, for she hurriedly stuffed it behind her back,
where it was grabbed by a baby and devoured wolfishly.
Bella Hardy shrieked as her hat fell off, and giggled as
it was restored sheepishly to her by a lad in a college
cap. Beryl quietly enjoyed it all, taking no active part
in the merriment, but watching the skimming boats and
the bright figures on the arms of the pier.
“There’s the buoy,” suddenly sang out a leading light
of the Denning House brigade, and Bella blushed and
said, “What boy?” looking down expecting to see the
rescuer of her hat. She was chaffed unmercifully, and
subsided, scarlet and crushed for the day.
“The yachts must be racing,” said Beryl, “but I never
seem to make head or tail of it. They go out. swing
round and circle about, and crawl all over the place,
and then some one shouts out ‘Trident wins.’ They
don’t race, they crawl. On the river at home, the yachts,
like big white butterflies, seem to always spin along
when they race, and the wind often upsets them.”
“They upset here too,” flashed Barby. “Often and
often they drift in to shore with their crews clinging to
the keels. I’ve seen them scudding along in a gale, with
the jib plunging right into the waves and the masts at
a fifty degree angle . . . and more.”
“They are beautiful,” sighed Beryl, as a graceful boat
turned in its own length apparently on the verge of
charging the jetty, to swing out to sea again, spilling
the little wind from the sails with a soft flap-flap.
“First race . . . look,” and the Wood twins clung
together and chanted a little ditty about Bill Wood,
and Bill wouldn’t, much to the embarrassment of a tall
and angular youth standing among a row of swimmers,
on a rail at the starting place, below the people.
There was a sharp report that echoed out over the


water, and nine splashes decorated the blue directly
under the crowd of babbling schoolgirls. Nine heads
bobbed evenly for a time, and then one, a brilliant red
one, was seen to be a yard in front. Then a black one
was level with the red, and a pale mop of wet hair
caught up with them both. The excitement was tremen-
dous, and many were the exclamations that broke from
the backers of the racers.
“Bill! Bill!” shrieked Joyce Wood in shrill falsetto,
quite oblivious of the fact that Bill had his ears and
mouth full of salt water.
The buoy was rounded with the competitors almost
in a body, and the angular Bill was then seen to fall
back. Groans came from the twins, but Bill was wise,
and was storing his strength for the last spurt. Two
others, with the same plan in their heads, no doubt,
joined him. Arms flashed white over wet heads, and
little spurts of spray flew from open mouths. The girls
on the rail were silent. Then Bill became serious, shot
forward in a determined effort to turn himself into a
threshing-machine, and finished in grand style four feet
ahead of the red-headed boy who, thinking he was the
winner, grinned gawkily for a while. He was speedily
disillusioned. The elder twin (by four minutes), in her
ecstasy fell over backwards on to the back of a justly
indignant elderly lady, and no amount of profuse
apology was of any avail. The twin gave it up in disgust
and clambered back.
“Back in a minute,” Barby suddenly said into Beryl’s
ear, and before she could reply the rail was covered
again by the instinctive closing up of the crowd seated
upon it. Brenda laughed aloud as she straightened her
hat. It was a wonderful day.
“Have a peanut?” A large bag was passed along
generously.
“I wish I’d bought peanuts,” grunted a fat girl with


elastic under her chin. “1 bought chocolates and only
got seven for a shilling. I ate four of them and didn’t
even taste them while Bill Wood was winning.”
“Cheer up, Mimi,” came a pert reply from her neigh-
bour. “Why didn’t you enter for the next race, then
you could have bought pounds of chocs with the prize
money.”
There was a roar, for Mimi’s swimming was some-
thing like that of a stranded rubber ball. She could
stay up, but was powerless to move far unless washed
by the current.
“Never mind, Mimi,” came from another girl, “you
mightn’t be an Annette Kellerman, but you’re nice.”
Mimi took a chocolate complacently and blinked at
the last speaker, who changed her tone to one of chiding
kindness, “But, Mimi, please don’t eat any more chocs,
for this rail is not too thick. I should hate to fall in the
water with new shoes on.”
Until the next race much polite badinage was
exchanged. Some of it was witty and some merely
attempting to be, but it all passed and was enjoyed.
The coming race was for girls under fourteen, and as
many friends of the Denning Houseites were taking part,
the noise of acclamation and advice and good cheer that
came from the rail was deafening. In the middle of it
Brenda clutched Beryl, squeezing her unmercifully, and
pointing with her unoccupied hand to the starting rail
below, where eleven girls were clinging by their heels
on the slippery wet wood. One of the girls wore a bright
red oilskin cap pulled down over her ears and fixed
beneath her chin. There were other red caps, but this
one was patched with emerald. Beryl recognized it, then
the boyish figure beneath it.
“Barby,” she murmured. “Barby!”— and so it was.
The Campbell admirers cheered vociferously upon
this discovery, so that people coming across the gang-


way of the small steamer which had just returned from
a trip out in the gulf, almost fell over one another to
discover the cause of such elation. Encouragement and
more advice was shouted in staccato, to which Barby
retorted by poking out her pink tongue. But Barby
was always the wiry and erect Barby, whatever she did,
and were she to be discovered with blackened face
dancing for pennies on the sand, the others would
merely clap and applaud—for Barby was Barby. Some
people are blessed in that way, while others look ridicu-
lous and rude if they indulge in the least breach of
strict convention and behaviour. The unmannerly inci-
dent drew more laughter from the beaming Denning
Houseites, until every eardrum in the vicinity was
afflicted with “ringing noises”.
Bang! The race had begun, Barby with a splendid
start, pushing off and throwing herself like a red- and
green-headed spear into the disturbed sea, eleven pairs
of arms beating in the track the boys had followed
shortly before. Silence followed, and peanuts and apples
were devoured absent-mindedly, while the apparently
slow progress of the swimmers was watched with avidity.
The patched cap was merely a blur. There was no
cheering yet, the interest being too intense, but presently
four heads forged in front and left the buoy with the
remainder winding around it. Ten minutes more, and
the same four heads were still in front.
“It’s a stiff race,” came in a hoarse croak from Beryl’s
right, and she fixed her gaze on the swimmers and
grunted a reply. “But they’re crack swimmers,” came
a further croaking, “and that’s Grace Hemmingway and
Winnie LeLu in front . . . and Barby.”
But Barby was not dropping back, in spite of the
quality named “crack” which belonged by repute to
the others, and very soon one of these selfsame “crack”
swimmers fell back just a little, then Grace Hemming-


way stole a foot in front. With a superhuman effort
Barby caught up with her, and three feet from the
winning-post, shot forward with the impetus of her
spurt, sliding under the rails of the jetty into the cold
green shadows beneath it.
The noise from the pier was then reminiscent of a
fish-market on a Saturday night. Grown-ups upon the
kiosk, sipping drinks and tea, looked down with indul-
gence and approval, for they too had enjoyed the
gallant finish. Grown-ups, however, prove their grown-
up-ness by remaining silent and serene upon such
thrilling occasions. Perhaps they were glad that they
had some one to express their feelings for them. There
was a quality in the sparkling day that seemed to bring
forth the gaiety from every heart, and the sea was like
a sounding-board for the din.
Barby emerged bashfully from beneath the jetty
licking salt from her sticky lips.
There were eight more races punctuated by much
high and fancy diving, and at the fourth race Barby
reappeared to slip silently and with some wriggling into
her seat between the other two Bees. “I wish I hadn’t
given that bun away,” she said with a loud groan of
anguish, but was partly consoled by a sticky and limp
chocolate-stick proffered by an admiring maiden of a
lower form. She thanked the ecstatic youngster with the
carelessness that always goes with thanks from one in
higher position scholastically, and hungrily licked
melted chocolate from adhesive silver-paper.
“What did you do it for?” asked Brenda in a whisper.
Barby smiled contentedly. “For a guinea,” she stated
briefly. “Don’t forget Mum’s birthday. You’re not the
only one who can make money.”
Beryl’s face fell as she overheard this. “I’ll get her a
present somehow,” she said, “and I must earn it . . .
like the others.”


CHAPTER XVI
BERYL CATCHES UP
“Refreshments” was the one word thought of as the
sports died a natural death after the last race, and the
three Bees with half a dozen friends made their erratic
ways up the jetty and on to solid land again, pushing
determinedly through the throng that was dividing into
two sections. One section was bent upon catching trains
and starting cars, the other was preparing for a meal,
in order to get it over and secure a good stand for the
event of the evening, namely, a long band programme.
Avoiding hooting motors with casual skill, the girls
entered the main street. The shops were full of pur-
chasers, buying everything from oysters at the fish-shop
to ices at the small shop and restaurant combined, which
stood near the school. The nine girls occupied two
tables, and as they each spent a penny or twopence
upon ice-creams, sitting there for half an hour talking,
and licking their purchases, it was no wonder that the
proprietor was peeved, for other customers were
waiting.
At last the girls, realizing that they were de trop, so
to speak, filed away, and the perspiring man behind
a mass of empty cool-drink bottles heaved a sigh of
relief. The tables were filled as soon as they were deserted,
and scones and soda-water, pies and temperance beer,
sundaes and lemonade, were demanded vociferously.
The little shop with the sticky floor resembled the inside
of a wasp’s nest.


The girls dispersed in various directions with cheery
calls that hinted at the probability of meeting on the
following Monday, at the beginning of the new term.
Beryl replied suitably, and left Barby and Brenda still
talking, while she went back into the shop to buy some
nuts to eat on the walk home along the beach. She
found the shop owner almost tearing his hair, and the
pretty little waitress defiantly tossing her head at him.
“You didn’t include all this into your bargain when
1 came to work here,” she was saying loudly, conscious
of her audience. “And 1 won’t do any more. Why didn’t
you get an extra in for this rush? I don’t want my feet
worn off to stumps.”
“Extra! Didn’t I try to get some one extra in? How
can I find extras on a day like this?”
“Well, I won’t do any more.”
“But the people are waiting,” the harassed man
groaned, “and I can’t serve at the counter and the tables
too.”
“You should have thought of that before,” retorted
the girl impertinently. “I can get a job at the Kiosk at
any time.”
The man’s looks said: “Go and get it,” but his tongue
said imploringly: “I’ll give you a pound if you’ll stay
to-night. You can’t leave me in the lurch like this. I’ll
give you thirty shillings to stay until the shop shuts.”
The girl tossed her elaborately dressed head again,
and walked away, flinging her small flowered apron on
to a baby’s head at a table near by. The infant howled
piercingly, and this additional din seemed to madden
the man, but Beryl, whose colour was high and whose
heart was thumping as it never had before, breathed a
small prayer for bravery, and touched him on the arm.
“Please, I’ll work for you to-night for a pound,” she
said, to his consternation. This was the girl who had
spent so much money in his shop. He stopped waving


his arms and regarded the pretty frock and exquisitely
formed face.
“You? And Ed have your people descending on me
in shoals and lose my custom for letting you do it,” he
said, wondering what whim was at work in this child’s
head. “No fear,” he said, wiping his face with a large
handkerchief.
“It’s all right,” said Beryl in fervent undertone. “I
have no people. I’m only boarding here and no one will
mind. Please let me.”
Once more the man looked at the girl; at her school
hat-band; at her expensive frock; at her eager face.
He shrugged helplessly and philosophically: “Right-o!
I can’t refuse. I’ll give you a pound and a big box of
sweets if you’ll help me out. Straightaway . . . people
are waiting now.”
Like a shot from a gun Beryl was out on the pave-
ment and was telling the other amazed Bees what she
intended doing, and before they could reply she was
back again and tying the little apron around her waist.
“Well! I’m jiggered,” said Brenda.
“Beryl!” Barby said in profound stupefaction. “Sew-
ing in a cranky little shop. Let’s go and see her.”
“Let’s go home and tell Bob to come and fetch her
away, you mean,” answered Brenda practically. The two
hurried off, their feet carrying them swiftly out of the
town and along the almost deserted farther beach to
the Beehive. Even so far along, a few straying walkers,
arms entwined and the rest of the world pleasantly
forgotten, were to be seen.
Bob and his mother listened to the tale the girls had
to relate, and were astounded when they learnt of
Beryl’s original action.
“Why does she want to do that?” asked Mrs Camp-
bell in stupefied enquiry. Barby and Brenda had arrived
at the conclusion, on the hasty walk home, that Beryl’s


madness held a method—and that that method in turn
held the possibility of the purchase of a birthday present
for Mum. They were quite right; but they could not
say so, and they laughed as Bob, not knowing how nearly
he had been correct, said that perhaps Beryl was feeling
the overpowering pressure of poverty.
“It’s a whim,” said Brenda, covering Beryl’s tracks
with commendable deceit, “Just a whim.”
Mum nodded. That must be it . . . but for Beryl to
choose such an odd way to become temperamental!
Bob spoke. “I’ll go for her at closing time,” he said.
“Let her rip. I think all of the snobbery is knocked out
of her now, don’t you, Mum? My hat! Fancy the high
and mighty maiden who descended upon us some
months back, serving in a little shop, and wanting to.
We’il discover afterwards why she did it.”
While Beryl, in the shop, found her head swimming,
and her feet sore, with the rapidity of the orders she
received as she trotted to and fro. She kept her head,
however, and delivered bun orders to those demanding
buns, and pies to those wanting such unseasonable
delicacies; and gave change and answered queries as to
prices, etc., with smartness and directness that brooked
no repetition. She worked so surely and so well that the
shopkeeper smiled again and dispensed edibles with the
air of a Grand Vizier giving favours.
The cash-register rattled and clanged through the
long evening, until at ten-thirty the picture-show dis-
gorged its patrons. The rush of custom then was frantic.
The empty bottles piled up in the little back room, and
the floor became stickier. Beryl was greeted uproariously
by a few of her school friends, and asked imploringly
to tell them what the joke was. No one would believe
her, naturally, when she said she was poor and had to
work now for a living. Other girls, three in number,
gave her orders in conscious superiority, and Beryl felt


her face grow red, but her natural breeding showed
itself and she ignored their studied insults. Beryl was
thinking of one thing—the solid fact of a pound note
to come—the money she was actually earning! The
strangeness of her position she never once considered,
although she winced and shuddered as a boy upset a
glass of pink fluid into her shoes.
“I say, I’m awfully sorry,” was the stammered apology,
“but I was bumped.”
“That’s all right,” Beryl replied wearily, sickened by
the smell of the place and yet hungry for her tea. She
just remembered she had not had it. “It was an
accident.”
At closing time Bob was outside the little shop,
smilingly watching through the window as the girl
finished off the last stragglers who were buying ham
and pickled onions for their supper. After the sweet
odours of melted ice-cream and bottled gaseous drinks,
the pickles gave off a pleasantly sharp smell which made
her sniff hungrily. At last the place was clear of people.
The proprietor opened the cash register with a flour-
ish, and extracted a pound note from many others
reposing under a weight there, saying as he presented it:
“You’ve earned it, my dear, and if ever you want a job
you know where to come.”
Beryl shuddered as she thanked the man and took
the money, then as she took her hat from beneath the
counter where the shopkeeper had put it, she saw a
monstrous box of chocolates beside it. She flushed
warmly: “Thank you, Mr Phipps, I hope I am not
getting too much pay.”
“You are not,” was the truthful response, and turning
to go, she saw Bob outside, on the doorstep.
He hooked his arm in hers, and laughingly asked her
to share the joke, but for a long time Beryl could not
arrange her tired wits to say anything. She was weary


and aching, and her feet burned like coals of fire. The
way had never seemed so hard nor the sand so soft and
retarding.
“f never thought before what it was like—for a wait-
ress,” she said at last. “But now I know. Ohl my feetV ’
Beryl had learned another lesson; one that she would
never forget.
When they had walked for a while, she suddenly
caught her breath and sitting down without ceremony,
tugged off her once white sandals and stockings. She
swayed as she stood upright again with the sand cool
against the soles of her feet. With Bob carrying the
footwear, she paddled in the soothing water, as they
walked slowly towards the Beehive.
Mum was in bed and asleep, and so was Bubbles,
who had returned half an hour late for tea, but the
two girls were waiting in the kitchen with hot tea and
fresh coffee-cake, made by Mum that day. They greeted
the new arrivals with subdued invitations to the supper.
Beryl needed no inviting to sit down, for she literally
sank into the rocker, to rest her pale face heavily on
her outspread fingers, her elbows on her knees.
Barby poured tea while Brenda cut cake and buttered
scones, and then Barby spoke. “Well?” she asked.
Beryl drew a pound note from the purse in her lap,
and placed the box of chocolates on the table, the
other two girls whistling softly as Beryl tore off the
wrappings and showed the immensely fat creams, each
reposing in a little puckered paper nest of its own.
“Whew!” said Bob. “Some boxl”
“Help yourselves,” invited Beryl sleepily, “but leave
the bottom row for Mum and Bubbles. I must give
Mrs Pent a couple on Monday. Ohl We’ll be at school,
I forgot.”
“Leave them with Mum for her,” said Bob thickly,
through the juicyness of a big marron glace , “but tell


me sensibly, Beryl—what is the joke? Why did you do
that? You don’t usually go round waitressing for cash.
What’s your giddy secret?”
“My secret is . . . Mum’s birthday,” was the reply,
with a glimmer of triumph that her aching body could
not drive from the deep blue eyes. “You see, Bob, Barby
won a race to-day, and earned a guinea, and that is
why she entered for it, and why she won too, perhaps.
Brenda is an authoress, and is having a real story in a
real paper, and I am useless and can do nothing. Noth-
ing but serve grimy youngsters with sticky buns and
drinks. When that girl was cheeking Mr Phipps, a little
bird sat on my shoulder and whispered: ‘Here’s your
chance to prove really how much you want to buy some-
thing for Mum.’ I’m jolly glad it’s over,” she added in
relief.
“Well, all I can say is that you are a brick. A jolly
little true-blue brick,” acclaimed Bob with enthusiasm.
“Do you remember when you tipped the porter five
shillings ‘to encourage them, you know’.”
“Oh! Bob! Don’t! I’m ashamed to think of all that.”
“But you never would sneak, would you. Berry,” said
Brenda affectionately, “and that is why we didn’t hate
you all the time.”
“Thank you very much,” was the reply, and they
laughed with due regard for the sleeping convalescent
in the big bedroom at the other end of the house.
“I’ll meet you kids one day after school, in town,”
said Bob then, after thoughtfully drinking a half-cup
of tea. “We’ll have a shopping excursion and buy all of
those important presents. You can catch the four-ten to
town and meet me at a quarter to five, and we’ll catch
the six-ten home again. We’ll buy some ham and tongue
in town and bring it home with us, so Mum won’t have
to cook.”
“Hurray!” murmured Barby with silent glee, waving


her hand with an invisible flag in her fingers. “Now
let’s have a think—what shall we give her?”
“It’s after twelve—hark!—there’s the whistle of the last
train,” Brenda interrupted, but was squashed under a
volley of protests.
‘7 m nearly asleep,” Beryl remarked drowsily, “but
I don’t want to go to bed before you, all the same; I
might miss something. I feel excited. Do you know that
when we were in Perth the thought of a shopping trip
used to bore me stiff, and now I nearly leap with joy
at the thought of going to town. Being poor has its
compensations. I suppose millionaires have nothing to
look forward to except what they can’t get, and even
that’s got for them.”
Beryl’s mixed philosophy was ignored in sisterly
fashion.
“I’d like to buy her a beautiful silk kimono,” sighed
Brenda wistfully, “with darling dragons crawling all over
it, and slippers with pom-poms on the toes.”
“Ten pounds!” scoffed her brother. “So scat that idea.
Any more tea, Barby?”
“Heaps, but it’s black. Put plenty of milk in.
“I’m going to buy her a nice brush and comb, I
think,” Beryl said quietly as she languidly stirred the
contents of her cup. “Hers is all moulted.”
“Perhaps it’ll just be slippers,” sighed Brenda, “and
something else too,” and her sister remarked firmly: “I’ll
see what I’ll get when I go into town. Because what-
ever I decide on beforehand, I don’t buy. I always change
my mind until I have the present in my hands, and even
then I change it sometimes. As soon as you buy a nice
gift, you see something better and cheaper farther
along.”
Brenda sat up with a jerk. “Beryl! Beryl! I won’t have
my money in time,” she almost wailed.
“Don’t wake the house then,” said Barby, but the


disappointment on her sister’s face was too much for
her. “How will we manage?” she asked kindly.
Bob looked up. “I’ll lend you a pound, Bren. 1 expect
your story will be paid for at about that rate. I’ve got
a pound to spare for a few weeks; I’m saving up for a
suit, but can’t get it yet.”
Brenda was rapturous again, and voluble in her
thanks. The awful calamity of going shopping without
money had momentarily appalled her, but the danger
was now averted.
“Bed now,” Bob remarked crisply. “Wake up, Beryl”
—for she was nodding in her chair. “Who gets breakfast
in the morning?” Since Nurse Penrose’s departure, some
days back, the three girls had joined forces and found
the housework easier to do that way. “We share,” they
said together, in varying keys.
Bob threw a dish-towel over the crockery piled hastily
by him into the sink, and hustled the girls out like a
small flock of sheep. Beryl limped painfully, with her
chocolate box under one arm, and her sandals and
stained and dirty stockings in the other.
“I’ll keep this box always,” she stoutly asserted. “If
I have to guard it with my life. But—my feetV ’
Her squeak of anguish as she tripped over the mat
was hard-heartedly laughed at by the others, who were
keenly alive to the humour, as well as the pathos of the
situation.
“She’s splendid, isn’t she, Barby?” said Brenda as the
two entered their bedroom.
“Rather,” answered Barby. “I should think so!”


CHAPTER XVII
A SHOPPING EXPEDITION
Perhaps because of memories of other mysterious trips
that always occurred the day before the anniversary of
her birthday, Mum made no objection to the proposed
excursion to town after school on Wednesday. “We just
want to go to town, Mumdarling,” Brenda said politely
and carelessly, and Mum had replied equally carelessly,
and with becoming meekness. “Certainly, dear"—and
with a gay little smile that somehow she could not keep
back, she added, “Catch the six-ten homewards, and I
will have a nice tea waiting for you.”
“We’ll buy cold meat . . . and bring it,” the three in-
sisted, but Mum shook her head. At last a compromise
was effected. Mum was to prepare the table that evening
for tea, and make a salad and skim the cream, and the
little party of five Bees, including Bubbles and Bob, were
to be responsible for the remainder.
“So we’ll bring ham and beef and fruit and things,
darling,’’ said Brenda soothingly, “and you must rest
and snooze on the veranda.’’ Brenda felt her mother’s
arm solemnly, and pinched her gently round the shoul-
der-blades, all of which Mum stood unprotestingly, be-
yond one little remark which brought the ready laugh-
ter to the lips of the others. “I believe she is thinking of
selling me, at so much per pound.”
So straight from school that day the three girls went
to the city with their small brother. They all waited


in the cool afternoon shadow of the large block of build-
ings where the half-floor devoted to the activities of Mr
Du Crane and his staff was situated. They were to be
“picked up” at that spot by Bob.
Mum had thoughtfully given them all extra shillings
to spend, which they had accepted thankfully, for
Bubbles had no wealth at all, and this windfall could be
pooled for his especial use. “Now buy something sen-
sible,” admonished Barby as she handed over three silver
coins to join Bubbles’ one. “See you don’t get a bucket
and spade—or a gun—like you did last year.” Here Barby
snorted. “Nice sort of a present to give a grown-up per-
son. Of course”—to the others—“he got the gun himself
afterwards.”
Bubbles hung his head, then brightened perceptibly
as Bob appeared, immaculate in a navy suit and black
tie, with his old felt hat with the bump in the crown
just as the girls loved to see it. If brothers but knew
how their wearing apparel is criticized by their sisters,
who are born with the sense of what to wear and how
to wear it, their advice would be taken with less hilarity
and more caution. “That tucked shirt looks tip-top,” said
Barby appreciatively. “No one could guess it was patched
under the arms.”
Bob bowed extravagantly, much to the delight of three
little print-frocked children standing close against their
mother, a thin little woman with a baby in her arms.
Indeed, it would be difficult for any one to look with-
out pleasure upon the little group on the pavement:
The girls were trim and neat in school navy tunics, with
coloured hat-bands, their long-stockinged legs ending
in shining shoes, and their faces aglow with fun and
enjoyment. The tall boy, his face also alight with simple
enjoyment, and with an air of manliness and school-
boy freshness, smiled pleasantly. The small boy, spotless
in white shirt, navy knickers and buckled belt, with the


school badge on the banded linen hat, and his face
polished with excitement and much scrubbing by his
sisters, stood wrapped in thought. Barby had said, forty
times, in the train to town, that she did not know how
they all had escaped being “kept in” on this important
afternoon.
“Now where shall we go first?” asked Bob at last.
“We only have a little time, you know.”
“Let’s go right down the street to Randall’s store—
we can buy anything we like there, and it will save a
lot of trotting up and down the town,” suggested
Brenda.
“Right,” said Bob. “You kids take Bubbles on ahead
and Brenda and I will walk behind. We’ll be arrested if
we string out five abreast.”
“And don’t ‘jay-walk,’ ” advised Barby. “Cross the
street at right angles, or you’ll have a bobby pouncing
on you. I don’t want to pay fines, anyway.”
“No fear,” was the echo from Beryl, who had her
pound note safely clasped in her hand-bag. All three
girls had somehow managed to scrape up sevenpence
each for their return railway fares, without breaking
into their hoards. Bob had advanced sixpence to Bubbles,
and he had a penny of his own.
At many shop windows, gay with evidences of the
window-dresser’s art, they glanced with interest and
speculation, but Bob hurried them on, remarking with
no little emphasis upon the lack of time. Barby once
paused, drawn to a standstill by the bewildering array
of gems and jewellery with a background of amber vel-
vet. “I’d like to buy her that,” she said hopefully, point-
ing to a small square-faced wristlet watch studded with
white, sparkling stones. “I don’t believe they’re
diamonds. They look like aquamarines. I’ll ask the
price.” So Barby darted into the shop, and presently
the other Bees saw a long hand uncannily dive into the


window among the expensive decoration, and lift out the
cushion on which the watch reposed.
After two minutes Barby reappeared, a trifle red and
inclined to giggle. She clutched Beryl’s arm, and they
all moved on, crossing the street with speed. “Forty
guineas,” chuckled Barby, alive to the humour of the
incident. “And I knew by his face and manner that he
knew I had only a guinea. I believe he looked right
through my purse.”
“It isn’t usual,” sniffed Bob in superior enlighten-
ment, “for school kids with short hair and frocks to their
knees, to sail into shops and buy forty-guinea watches.”
“It isn’t usual either,” added Brenda as she was hurried
along by the paternal Bob, “for us to have a guinea
all at once. I feel so wealthy that I’m afraid every man
I see is a pickpocket.”
Bob drew a great deal of attention upon himself by
his loud roar of laughter, which he cut short even as
he began it. “Come on in here,” he ordered hastily,
as he approached the door of a large department store.
“Make up your minds. Only about an hour left.”
Many counters were inspected anxiously, and prices
asked with equal anxiety, and at five-thirty no one had
yet bought a gift. “Everything sensible seems to cost
about a hundred pounds,” sniffed Barby in utter dis-
gust, “and everything silly that we don’t want is cheap.”
Bob paused in front of a gay array of cushions and
pillows: cushions like bolsters, and cushions like half-
moons, cushions like anything but cushions, and pillows
that no one could possibly discover the identity of but
for their elaborate labels. “Here’s where I make a pur-
chase, anyway,” the boy muttered.
“How much is that?” he asked of the salesman, and
pointed to an immense black silk sausage generously
besprinkled with very artificial silken fruit.


“Five guineas, sir,” said the assistant, who tried not to
look pained when Bob asked: “Per dozen?”
“No, sir. Oh! No, sir!” came a gentle reproof. “Each,
sir.”
“Ye gods!” was the customer’s frank response.
“Of course, sir, if you are looking for something more
serviceable ,” the assistant continued, with the air of one
no longer interested but determined to do his best, “I
can show you something more suitable as to price.”
“Show away,” demanded Bob. “But only show me soft
ones.”
With extreme disdain the man lifted from a drawer
four or five gaudy proofs of the cushion-artist’s labour,
and Bob took one up and punched it enquiringly. “This
looks less bilious than the rest,” he said finally. “How
much is it?”
“Eighteen and six, but of course
“Right-o!” interrupted the boy. “Wrap it up. I’ll have
it.”
So the blue corded silk pillow with the orange and
violet plasters upon it was tied into a bulging parcel
by the man behind the counter, and the change from a
pound note was counted out tenderly.
“And that’s that ,” said Bob. “Now for the next,” and
the Bees filed slowly onwards.
Barby wandered away to a fragrant corner of the
shop where powders and soaps and creams were piled
among large white and pink puffs and long-handled
mirrors. The others spied her, and followed, to stand in
solid and unimaginative conclave around her while she
asked their advice fruitlessly.
“My brain is woolly,” said Brenda. “I can’t think of
a thing Mum would like.”
“She’s been using that horrid green medicated soap
that she bought from a pedlar,” Barby replied crisply.
“And I don’t know when she finished her last bottle of


bath-salts. Mum loves these nice, scented, slinky things.
Shall 1 buy some?”
And in the end Barby bought two cakes of delicately
scented soap; a large bottle of bath-salts; a box of face
powder; a tin of fragrant talc powder and a small bottle
of eau-de-Cologne.
With their parcels tucked beneath their arms, Barby
and Bob were satisfied, and scoured their brains to assist
the others.
Brenda found herself in the slipper department, lov-
ingly fingering some soft silken things with high heels
and satin toes. Bob scorned them, and they fell to arguing
so intensely that the pleasant featured little person serv-
ing them became self-conscious, while many other cus-
tomers listened with amusement and sympathy. At last
Brenda, her face pink, picked up a pair of slippers in
dull blue felt, with soft leather soles and ribbon threaded
through the uppers. To these, with firmness that brooked
no criticism, she added a new novel, brought to her
by the obliging girl, who no doubt was glad to escape for
a moment.
So Brenda was satisfied.
Beryl smiled as she fingered her precious note. “I’ll
get what I said I would,” she said, “so come with me,”
and a few yards from the counter at which they had
bought the soap and powder, they investigated a tray
of white-backed brushes and combs. Beryl was not long
choosing. She had a pound to spend and she spent it.
Eighteen shillings for the brush and two for the comb.
“What about mine?” wailed Bubbles, as the shop
showed signs of closing. He had up to date been so
absorbed in this reckless squandering of wealth, that he
had forgotten his own part in the expedition.
But he was hustled out, and farther along the street
discovered his gift in the form of a box of peppermint
creams. As he emerged from the door after having been


served with many smiles by a girl with much curly hair,
he said: “Mum likes pep’mint creams better’n anything,
and I can’t stand them, so I guess I haven’t bought this
time so I’ll have some.’’
“Darling!” exclaimed Brenda, touched by this evi-
dence of generosity, and swooped down upon him. He
dodged and waved an expressive arm. “Have a bit’a
sense,” he said in agitation. “Look at the people.”
With eleven minutes before train catching, what was
there to do but accept Bob’s invitation to a repast of
threepenny ice-creams, so they followed him into a small
corner restaurant where they settled themselves with
joyous sighs of anticipation. At three minutes past six,
Bob gulped his ice down with more haste than polite-
ness, and leaped from his chair. “The meat,” he gasped.
“Here”— he threw one-and-three on the table. “Pay for
these, and I’ll go to the ham shop. Hurry straight on
down to the station and I’ll catch you up. Don’t you
miss the train.”
Bob dived out of the restaurant, and into the next
place, which was a ham shop, and fortunately secured
a disengaged assistant in the five to six o’clock rush. He
paid for the meat with his last pennies, having an un-
comfortable moment while he extracted the coins from
his pocket, and finding one-and-eight more by luck than
calculation. With his parcels he flew down a side street,
to emerge at eight minutes past six in front of the
station, and discovered the other Bees, all laden and
puffing, hurrying down the steps. The bell tinged as they
trotted on to the platform, and as they seated themselves
in the nearest carriage the train moved out.
“That was a spurt,” puffed Bob, removing his beloved
old felt hat and fanning his hot face with it.
“We’ve got . . . (puff) . . . the things . . . (puff) . . .
anyway,” said his younger sister.
Beryl was watching through the window the small


dingy houses Hying past the train—but she was not think-
ing of the dwellings. She was wondering how much Mr
Carslake had received for her jewellery, and how soon
Mum was to know of her unexpected good fortune.
Beryl wriggled luxuriously. Wouldn’t Mum’s face light
up when she read the letter from him, and better still,
saw the money—or perhaps it would be a cheque.
“Day dreaming?” asked Bob.
“Umn,” was the contented reply.
The sea was beautiful under the evening haze that
sometimes hung like a fog over the horizon. Two
schooners, not far out, were drifting through it, with
the lowering sun throwing the sails into dull crimson,
and turning the prows to fuzzy brown. The tamarisks
were still, the sand cool and white. After a scouting
journey by Bob, as far as the veranda edge, the parcels
were stowed under a tree. They would come out after,
when it was dark, and remove the tell-tale evidence of
the shopping expedition, into their rooms. The Bees,
one and all, were ecstatic, for there was no day antici-
pated so much and so unselfishly, as that of Mum’s
birthday. It is true that there is more pleasure in giving
than receiving. And now that Mrs Campbell was well
again and almost her old charming and pretty self, the
delight of the Bees knew no bounds. It was hard to ex-
press all they felt at the relief that surged through them
when they remembered those bad days of worry and
fear, when Mum was but a thin body lying in a silent
room, and when the sea had appeared ugly and treacher-
ous, and the sky black—and what would this birthday
have been had Mum died? These thoughts were in the
minds of all four older Bees, all silent and profoundly
stirred, as they walked up through the sand from the
gate to the front door.
“It’s great,” said Bob in a low voice, as they paused
at the wire screen, “to have her . . . safe.”


“Rather,” came three times, each “rather” increasing a
little in emphasis.
The arch conspirators sauntered carelessly down the
hall, after hanging their hats on the pegs and removing
gloves and putting purses aside. Mum was in the kitchen
rocking idly in the old chair, and greeted the flock in
the manner expected by them with their air of subdued
excitement. Of course, thought the girls, she had no idea
of why they had gone to town.
Of course Bubbles nearly let the cat out of the bag,
and was wildly shushed and waved at by Beryl, who
happened to be standing behind Mum’s chair untying
the parcel of meat at the dresser.
“And in town we had to hunt and hunt . . . for . . .
and here Bubbles extravagantly paused and covered his
mouth with one hand, goggling his eyes at the grimacing
Barby.
“For the meat, eh, Bubbles,” grinned Beryl, helpfully,
and Mum replied cleverly, with not too much interest
shown: “Yes! At that time of the day I expect some
of the ham shops would be sold nearly out.”
The Bees drew wavering sighs of relief.
Mrs Campbell went on rocking, and watched the
window. It seemed to be the only safe place to watch.
with such secretive frowning and whisperings going on.
Then while the salad was being served, later, in the
dining-room, the little boy again played with fire.
“There was some lovely pep’mint creams in town.
Mum,” he remarked with misleading innocence. “You
like pep’mint creams awfully, don’t you, Mum? I don’t.”
“Yes! Sonny—they are very nice . . . but I don’t expect
to be going to town for some time, and there are no
little fairies to bring me any, are there?”
Bubbles squirmed in ecstasy, and addressed Barby.
“You never know,” he remarked sagely. “Do you, Barby?”
The others sat still and waited, while Barby forced


matters to a climax by stabbing the small offender with
her foot under cover of the table. “Ow-w-w!” he yelled
with alarming suddenness. “What did you do that for?”
“Oh! Did I kick you?” asked Barby sweetly with false
solicitude.
“Yes! You did,” came the scowling reply. “Keep your
feet under your own chair ’nuther time.”
The dangerous meal ended in safety, however. Bubbles
being packed off to bed before any more damage could
be done. He wondered why Brenda and Barby were all
at once so anxious about his fatigue, as he protested.
“Em not tired,” he insisted.
“You must be,” was the reply, which could be taken
two ways. However, he went to bed.
Undressing for bed later on, Beryl, who was in the
other girls’ room for the usual half-hour before retiring,
wagged her head and grunted as she tied back her hair
in two large bunches: “I was just on pins and needles
in case that awful kid should let the cat out of the bag
and put his foot in it.”
With this mixing of metaphors which the other two
did not notice, so engrossed were they, Beryl sat down
and hunched her knees to her chin. “Bob told me he’s
got his cushion under his bed, stuffed in his old cricket
bag.”
“Ours are under our mattresses, at the top,” said the
two Campbells in a duet.
“And mine’s in the wardrobe, under some blouses,”
said Beryl dreamily, then: “Barb! Barb! how about ask-
ing the author to tea to-morrow, and having a birth-
day tea. There’s plenty of cake, and we’ll get up early
in the morning and make cream-puffs and eclairs and
scones, and you can make some of that squishy lemon
squash, Barby, and let’s have sandwiches and fruit salad.”
“And tinned peaches,” added Barby, greedily. “Yes!
We shall.”


“And let it be a surprise for Mum. We can do it all
before she gets up, and in the afternoon we must just
fly home and wriggle her into her best dress and make her
stylish.”
“Rather!” agreed the others heartily, and they scat-
tered silently to sleep well so that they could rise early
to commence baking operations. Beryl, in her bedroom,
lifted out the small parcel and kissed it tenderly. “I wish
it were ten million pound notes, instead of one,” she
said softly.
Bubbles, lying awake and not at all sleepy, was re-
viewing the doings of the afternoon. As he wandered
into dreamland, he might have been heard to murmur
regretfully: “After all, I might've got rarsberry creams
or lemin.”


CHAPTER XVIII
THE BIRTHDAY TEA
Bubbles was dragged from his bed that morning of the
birthday, with the same haste that he had been put into
it the night before. Ele was sent with a note to the
author, with instructions to wait for an answer, and if
the author had not yet risen, to wake him. With the note
in his pocket, his feet paddling in the small cold waves
of early morning, and a large slice of bread and butter
in one hand, Bubbles was almost reconciled to the walk
before him.
Brenda and Beryl made rather weary-looking eclairs
while Barby prepared breakfast, and Bob lounged
sleepily by the back door which was bathed in the early
sun. He lit the fire for the girls, chopped wood, and was
now contemplating a swim, while watching the sandhills
turn from grey and blue to pink and white. He suddenly
dragged off his pyjama coat and fingered his braces as
he made for the bathroom. “Off for a swim,” he said
through the kitchen window. “Have brekker for me in
half an hour.” In two minutes he was running down
over the sand to the sea.
Barby peered into the oven. “They’re puffed gor-
geously,” she said in a sort of hissing whisper. “We’ll
put the cream in when we come home from school. Mix
some cocoa and icing-sugar, Berry, and I’ll put it all
ready for the tops of the eclairs. They smell scrummy,”
and Barby licked her fingers and rubbed her frock im-
politely.


“I’ll do Mum’s tray this morning,” announced Beryl
sternly. “I’ve been cheated out of it for four morn-
ings.” So Beryl took a small crochet-edged linen cloth
and a fine d’oyley from the safe drawer, cut the thinnest
of brown bread and butter, toasted a slice of white bread,
sliced it into delicate fingers, and buttered them lavishly.
Boiling an egg is a comparatively easy task, but Beryl
watched the sand in the three-minute glass like a poli-
tician watching the result of an election. “That’s done,”
she remarked complacently, “and five seconds for luck.”
She surveyed with pride the result of her labours, and
took the tray carefully to Mum’s room.
She returned from the bedroom glowing.
“She’s awake,” she said, “and is asking what all the
nice smells are for. I said we were cooking a few cakes
because it was her birthday, and she looked surprised,
and said, ‘So it is. I am too old now to be reminded of
birthdays.’ We’ll take the presents in as soon as Bob
comes in. I didn’t say ‘Many happy returns’ because I
wanted to wait until you said it. . . . You’re first. Here’s
Bob, and Bubbles too.”
A shrill call was sent echoing through the window,
the wire screen was pushed open as well as the sash to
facilitate hearing, and the smallest Bee hastened at the
sound and sniffed appreciatively as he entered the warm
room. “Give me one,” he said eagerly. “I could eat a
million after that walk. The sun’s getting hot already.”
“One only,” said Barby, and handed out a ragged
and scraggy piece of puffed paste, “and the cream’s
not in yet so you’ll have to use jam.” Bubbles did not
mind that small detail, and contented himself, thinking
of the tea of the evening.
The author’s reply was read aloud, with many breath-
less gasps and splutterings. “He was up,” said Bubbles,
“and was swimming, ever so far out. I told him some
people saw a shark last week, and he said no sharks


would bite him because he tied a red ribbon on his
ankle, to show that he was dangerous. Do you think
that’s true , Barby?”
“Mnnn,” Barby replied. “Listen: ‘Dear Bees, Do I
have to wear a net over my head, as I am invited to a
Beehive for tea, and shall we eat honey? Thank you
for asking me. I shall appear sharp at five, with my
tongue hanging down to my collar, for the mere thought
of cream-puffs and home-made cake, with tomato sand-
wiches and fruit salad, and scalded cream, is causing
an acute pain where I generally keep an aching void.
1 have twenty pages or so of typing to do to-day, and
only that will keep me from stealing from your larder
in your absence at school. I also have something to tell
Miss Brenda. Au revoir until five. Pat Brent. P.S.: I
shall bring my bathers, and perhaps we will have a swim
after tea—but you must promise to hold my hands if we
go in deep water.’ ”
The chuckles which emerged from the region of the
kitchen, allied with the baking odours, made Mrs Camp-
bell intensely curious, as she sat in bed behind the
dainty tray prepared by Beryl. Having the good sense
to connect the mirth with the date of the month, she
waited and endeavoured to look as though nothing un-
usual were going on, as scuffles and giggles sounded out-
side her door. Then came a rush of bare feet, and a flying
of bodies into her bedroom. “Many happy returns,
Mum,” came a deafening chorus, and the bed was quickly
covered with bulging and knobby parcels and scrambling
arms and legs. The kisses nearly smothered her, and she
lifted a hand to smooth back her ruffled hair.
“Dear me!” came from beneath the tornado. “What
has happened?” and again came the chorus: “Many
happy returns of the day.”
Bob glowed with a delight that he could not hide,
when his cushion was unpacked and admired. He took a


kiss without protest, before the remainder of the com-
pany. Then Barby untied her collection of beauty mys-
teries, her mother’s eyes shining with pleasure. “I’ve
been longing for nice soap and powder, dear, but you
will make me awfully vain. Dear me, you have left the
lip paint out,” and at this remark the room fairly
trembled with merriment.
Brenda pushed forward the slippers and the new
novel, and waited with her teeth tightly nipping her
lower lip as her mother examined them with speech-
less rapture. There was another kiss, and an answering
squeeze that almost took her breath away. “I will have
a relapse after all this battering,” she remarked in an
un-invalid-like manner.
Bubbles proffered his gift. “And they’re pep’mint,” he
added quickly. “So I won’t eat any of them. Taste one
now,” and his mother popped one in her mouth with
a grimace of overwhelming joy at the taste. The small
Bee squirmed and grinned.
Beryl handed her parcel silently, turning away just a
little afraid to hope that she would be treated exactly
the same as the other Bees. The Bees quite understood,
however, when Mum took the big girl into her arms and
kissed her not once, but three times—and Beryl felt a
queer lump slide into her throat as she caught the
whisper: “Unselfish little girl—to pay for this with sore
feet and aching legs. Thank you, dear.”
“Now,” said Mum, after a few appropriate remarks
which served as further admiration of the gifts showered
all over the bed, “you are spoiling me. With a cushion
at my back—new blue slippers on my feet—a new novel
in my hand—scented powder upon my face—and my hair
brushed with a new brush—chocolates beside me—l abso-
lutely refuse to do any more work, and shall turn into
a lady of leisure and shall insist upon moving in only
the best society.”


Howls of disbelief and murmurs of satisfaction came
from the presentation committee, until the clock was
consulted, when there was a general scattering, and Mum
was left alone—with her heart leaping with love and
happiness, and just one tear for the man who should
have been there to share it all.
The hours at school that day seemed very long, until
the Bees raced homewards, taking no notice of the heat.
Their souls were full of visions of cream-puffs, and
scones, and authors eating them—and tables surrounded
with Bees.
Flying feet, and shouts, giggles and loud clatterings of
dishes, low murmurs and quick replies came from the
vicinity of the stove, and at last the cake was iced and
the puffs filled to their bloated utmost with vanilla-flav-
oured cream. “Mnnnth!” sniffed Mum from the window-
seat in the living-room. “They are the best Eve ever
tasted.”
“And you haven’t tasted them yet,” laughed Beryl,
“because you mustn’t spoil your appetite—but they smell
awfully— slushy.”
“Coo-ee,” came a cry from the kitchen, and Beryl
turned and ran out. “Here’s the author.”
Sure enough, with long legs clad in cream trousers
in honour of the occasion, Pat Brent was striding up
the path with Bubbles, who had been an out-post on the
sandhills. The girls, brushed and tidied, introduced the
author to their mother, who immediately smiled and
looked about seventeen, as Barby said.
Then Bob arrived home, having left the office early,
and Pat Brent pulled from his pocket with a shame-
faced air, a small volume bound in blue. “A little gift,
Mrs Campbell, if you will accept it—with the compli-
ments of the author,” he added with the grin that seemed
always ready. Of course Mum was pleased to accept it,
and the girls and even Bob, stood back in awe while


Mum and Pat Brent talked of things that sounded won-
derfully strange and mysterious.
“We must bore him to extinction,” whispered Beryl.
“Just listen to what they are talking about.”
But Brent showed plainly that he was anything but
bored that day, and ate so many puffs and cakes that
Bubbles stared and asked him did he ever get a pain.
The girls were openly horrified, but the author
laughed with Mrs Campbell, and said that his tea was
worth ten pains. Bubbles did not see the joke. One pain
was bad enough—but ten. Was any tea worth that?
To the girls’ incoherent joy and slight dismay, the
author insisted upon carrying dishes from the dining-
room to the sink, where he and Bob tied towels around
each other gravely, and carefully and with great cere-
mony dried the best china. Mum was forcibly placed
in a chair on the front veranda, with the new cushion
behind her and the pep’mint creams on hand. “We
insist,” the two young men said firmly, and she gave in
meekly, commencing to read The Bloom of the Peach ,
in the sweetness and charm of a whimsical and unusual
tale quickly forgetting the Beehive and its rather noisy
occupants. “The boy’s a genius,” she murmured after
the second chapter.
Then, after the washing-up came laziness, until Bob
rose and stretched himself, and suggested a swim. “Sun’s
getting low, and the girls don’t like bathing in the dark—
so how about it?” And Brent and Bob went to the bath-
room, and the girls to their bedrooms, presently emerg-
ing clad in suits and caps.
Brent and Bob and Barby were quickly over the blue
line, but Brenda and Beryl were content to float above
the shallows of five feet or so, and talk.
“I just love authors,” sighed Brenda. “And fancy him
saying the editor liked my story and will publish another


one later on. Mr Brent will soon be going to the West
though.”
“Fancy him washing up,” remarked Beryl. “I think
he is awfully nice. He must feel lonely in that little
cottage.”
“I wish his sister could see him in that little place
with the litter of papers and crockery, and the awful
food he eats. Just scraps of cheese and pies and pasties
from the shops—made out of mice I expect,” Brenda
added bitterly.
“You eat pasties sometimes,” was the even reply, and
Brenda blinked. “They seem different at school,” she
said, “but I don’t eat them this weather.”
After dressing, the younger members of the house
by the sea took a passive part in the talk that followed,
for Mrs Campbell took the author into the room that was
sacred now to them all, and showed him the result of
many years of labour and discovery. The author was
plainly interested, asking numerous questions, lifting
photos and articles reverently and respectfully. “A
treasure trove, Mrs Campbell,” he asserted gravely. “You
must value them highly.
“I do! But not because of their material value.”
Mrs Campbell talked gently of brighter days at the
Beehive, telling Brent of some of the most famous of the
Major’s expeditions, while the children, never tired of
hearing it all, sat back and listened. It was not often
that Mum could bring herself to talk intimately on the
subject that could so easily sadden the Beehive.
“My husband has always promised me a trip to the
Islands, Mr Brent,” she said with a smile that was alto-
gether sweet. “And I still hope that some day it will
come to pass. Papeete, I think he loves most of all places
in beaten tracks, and he calls it the fairy-town of the
Pacific. I can almost see the clusters of red roofs in the
shadows of tall peaks, the dense foliage, and the little


wharf with the strange crowds. The smell of the
stephanotis comes to me as I listen to him, the scent of
the tuber-roses, and the tiere flower, and I can see the
dug-out canoes slipping over the still water.”
Brent listened, intent upon the pictures conjured into
the small and slightly stuffy room by the low pitched
words.
"And Raratonga—which you know is the chief island
of the Cook group—with its pointed peaks and rich
purple and green growth, and its valleys and precipices
smothered in lacy streamers and bathed in rising mists
from falling streams. Vivid flowers in the dim shadows,
and the surf pounding on white beaches, with the blue
seas beyond complete the picture.”
Brent took up a photo of a reef showing plainly the
coral formation, with the fanlike beauty just beneath
the surface of the glassy clear water. "This is a wonder-
ful picture,” he said. "I suppose it is the place where
the specimens in that case came from.” He pointed to a
stand against the western wall.
"Yes! And I think the very name of coral awakes
romance and adventure in the hearts of most of us. I
as am keen as Bob is to see the lagoons and the reefs,
and the odd fish and sea monsters which live there
with the prickly sea-urchins, the spiny poison-fish, and
the coloured starfish.”
Bob was glowing. "And Mum, do you remember what
he told us of the way they catch sharks in the Aitutaki
lagoon. Wasn’t it ... by diving into the warm water
and plunging down into the depths where the sharks
hide with their heads in the cool hollows of the coral.
The islanders carry rope and tickle the sharks’ bodies,
like a trout is tickled, slip the rope over them, dart
away, climb aboard, and then haul up the shark. My
father says sharks’ fins are not bad to eat.”
“I’d like to know your father,” said Brent sincerely.


“I hope you will have che chance,” was Mrs Camp-
bell's low response, her eyes clouding as she sank from
gaiety into sadness which she tried to hide.
“You never know what will happen in the South Seas,
Mrs Campbell. One apparently counts time by incidents
rather than by days and months there. I remember that
steward fellow’s story. It filled the papers for weeks, in
all the States, and was revived again with photographs
when the Genii returned from her unsuccessful trip.
Don’t lose hope, Mrs Campbell,” the author added, hop-
ing that his voice carried more conviction than he felt.
“He probably is all right, somewhere or other.”
“Perhaps . . . Mr Brent. 1 hope it is so.”
“Not Mr Brent! Pat.”
“Well, Pat then,” said Mum with a smile. “Come into
the other room and I will show you a photo of him.
We moved it there from here a few days ago.”
The girls and the two boys followed their mother
and the guest into the living-room, and she took a
picture from the shelf and handed it to him.
“Always the best . . . are missed most,” she said
steadily.
“Your faith is beautiful, Mrs Campbell, and if all we
hear is true, that alone should bring him back.”
“I’m afraid to examine my faith too closely
was the faltering reply.
The author passed his arm behind Mum and patted
her shoulder just as Bob often did. She smiled wanly,
and then fought away her depression.
“You must come often,” she said warmly. The author
nodded his head and said just as Bob did, “Rather!”
He certainly was a nice author—they all agreed.


CHAPTER XIX
THE PAYMENT OF A DEBT
The girls came home from school one afternoon to find
Mum waiting on the veranda for them, with an open
letter in her hand. The baker, as usual, had just left
the mail, and she could not collect her senses to reply
to their questions clearly.
They threw their books and hats down and clustered
nearer, clamouring for news. Mum’s face was pale, but
she was smiling now, and they saw that it was not bad
news. Beryl thought she knew what was in the letter.
“It can’t be true . . .” Mum said at last. “I don’t
remember any such . . . but listen’’—and she read out:
“Dear Mrs Campbell, I have a small amount of cheering
news for you, not relating, however, to what we are all
so anxious to hear. A client of mine who has recently
acquired some money through inheritance” (“1 thought
he’d do it” said Beryl to herself), “confesses to having
borrowed a small amount of money from the Major,
and now I am pleased to inform you that the debt is
paid, and the money is placed to your credit at the bank.
The slip, as you see, is enclosed as visible proof of the
happening. The amount is three hundred and thirteen
pounds ten and sixpence. I am sorry I have not greater
news for you, but the world is good to one at times,
and things happen when one least expects them. I re-
main, your faithful friend, H. Carslake.”
“Three hundred and thirteen pounds!” gasped Beryl,
in genuine amazement. She glowed then over her secret,
and the noble way in which the old man had told fibs


on Mum’s behalf. Mrs Campbell clearly showed her per-
plexity, as well as joy.
“I wonder who it was?” she asked of the small crowd
of amazed Bees.
“Mr Carslake will tell you perhaps, when you are fit
to go gossiping,” said Barby soothingly. “What a stroke
of luck! I’ll never say again that people have no con-
sciences. What will you do with it, Mum?”
Beryl had her reward, when Mum looked up then.
“What will I do with . . . What will I not do with
it, you mean.”
“Will you buy a new dress?” asked Beryl seriously.
“I believe I shall,” said Mum after contemplation—
“for afternoons. But first I shall pay Dr Morden, when
I finally persuade him to send an account in; and the
grocer and butcher are overdue. It is astounding to see
what amounts of beef can be used by one invalid with
a small appetite—even for nice broths. Then Bob will
use the money he has saved for books, and I will buy
his suit for him, and shoes and other things. Next, the
girls shall have winter clothes; Bubbles also. I will re-
place the dining-room carpet and put the old one into
your room, Barby. It will be nice for your feet, with
winter coming on. I must have a new rain-water tank
put up too. The rust eats the iron dreadfully. I should
have the house painted . . . but that can wait a few
more months. I must save some of this for more rainy
days.”
Beryl smiled with sheer delight.
“Whoever it was,” added Mum after a lengthy pause
while she furrowed her brows in vain thought, “he does
not know how much he has done for us by the payment
of the debt. Now I shall sleep at nights instead of being
haunted by a procession of bills on long legs. . . .”
Of course Bob was told as soon as he reached the
back door. He sometimes walked along the swamp road,


and this was one of the days. “Well Fm blowed,” he
said, hanging his hat up behind the door of the useful
lobby. “1 had a sort of feeling that something was in
the air, and came home the swamp way. Well! I’m
blowed! ’’ he said again. “I wonder who it could have
been. People don’t generally pay their debts after debts
are forgotten. Did you know anything about it before,
Mum?”
“No! But of course your father probably did not be-
tray his friend by telling us about it. He was always
ready with a helping hand.”
Beryl frowned and wondered if ever the Beehive would
discover her part in the affair of the mysterious debt,
but decided after a moment that solicitors are clever
at hiding things, and Mr Carslake would not betray his
own part in it, so he would not betray hers.
Mr Carslake was visited by Bob the next day, and the
boy went right to the point.
“Look here,” he said. “Who was the chap who paid
the money to us?”
“My dear boy, it is a professional secret,” said the
old man who at that moment felt very much of a hum-
bug. “The er . . . man who borrowed the money does
not wish his name to be mentioned. You see the money
here, and you have me to vouch for the genuineness of
what I have said.”
The kindly old solicitor wondered if he would be
forgiven the small lies necessary for his part in aiding
Beryl with her gentle deception. He decided that neither
the lies nor the deception could be put on the black
list. Bob seemed loath to proceed, frowning.
“It’s queer,” he said hesitatingly.
“It was certainly unusual,” agreed Mr Carslake
heartily, glad to be making a remark utterly the truth.
“I was never so dumbfounded before in my career, as
when I was faced by my . . . er client. Most unusual.”


Bob nodded his head ponderously. “Well, sir, i£ you
say it’s all in order, it must be. We’re jolly thankful
for it, anyway, and you might say that to the chap
who paid it, if he’s not a bounder—dash it, how could
he be, doing a thing like that. It’s an unexpected nest-
egg for Mum, but not a very large one by the time she’s
finished paying her bills. She was absolutely biffed by
your letter. She’s . . .” Bob cleared his throat. “She’s
nearly her old self; would be, but for worrying over
Dad. Pretty rotten, isn’t it?”
“It is, my boy, but your mother is blessed by a fine
set of sons and daughters, and that should compensate
in some measure.”
Bob’s clean-cut features took on an expression that
would have dignified the face of an older man than he.
He had more than the ordinary youthful understanding
of currents that flowed beneath the surface. His mouth
was wry as he shook his head. “She thinks we’re the cat’s
whiskers, of course,” he said, the inelegant phrase very
odd in the use he put it to. “But with Dad, it was
different. Children, however much they’re adored,
rightly or wrongly, don’t give much companionship to
a woman like Mum. She presides, and worships, and
scolds, and soothes, and acts as a sort of a ‘candlestick’
in our see-saw emotions, but when we are with her
she’s still alone. However much we talk to her, and wait
on her, or let her wait on us, more likely, there’s still
a bit of her that belongs only to Dad, and that bit is
away, with him.”
“Your mother would break her heart if anything hap-
pened to one of you,” stated Mr Carslake gruffly.
The boy’s eyes lit up. “I know it. Nevertheless, Dad
is her biggest love. Don’t shake your head, sir, there’s
nothing to be upset over in that. It’s different from
loving us. It’s like this; she cares for us as much as any


mother could—more than most. That side of her proves
itself every day, in service and tenderness and under-
standing, but there’s another side which we can’t supply
with what she needs. She can talk to us upon limited
subjects only; there are jokes we don’t understand, and
discussions we can’t enter upon. Dad with a word could
explain things that now she tries to get out of books,
to sort of ease the ache inside her. In a nutshell, Mr
Carslake, Mum’s lost, like a ship without its captain.
We’re the crew . . . and a darned bad crew at that. The
whole vessel would founder if she were not such a fine
first mate . . . but she’s afraid of storms too big for her
that might come.” Bob hung his head a little for a
moment, under the realization of his flow of metaphor,
but the lawyer nodded reflectively. The boy had struck
the nail on the head; the ship was without its captain.
“I understand, my lad.”
“What cads,” said Bob heatedly, “we should be if we
did anything really bad. By Jove, sir, she’s wonderful.
We thought she’d die, too, when she was ill. I guess
it wasn’t to be, for she’s quite perky now.”
“How is the little boarder getting along?” asked the
older man then.
“She’s a Briton,” stated Bob enthusiastically, “and
do you know what she did the other night to get money
for a birthday present for Mum?” Here followed an ac-
count of Beryl’s escapade in the little shop-restaurant.
“She did}” exclaimed the old man. “What a blow that
would be for her stepmother!” He chuckled.
“She seems a bit panicky, I fancy, when we mention
anything to do with her—the stepmother’s—return. She
detests her, and no wonder.”
It is a pity.”
“I’m hanged it 1 know what we’ll do when the kid
does leave the Beehive,” said Bob miserably.
“Sufficient unto the day . . . Eh?”


Bob rose and held out his hand. “Eve taken up quite
a lot of your time, sir, and thanks very much for talking
to me about things, and I’ll tell Mum what you said.”
Bob found Brent at the Beehive on arrival home,
and entered the dining-room in time to hear Brent say:
“On Saturday 1 am going into the hills to visit a con-
valescent and mental hospital there, and write up some-
thing for the paper. I’d like to take one or two of you
girls with me.”
Brenda hesitated.
“There’s no school, of course, on Saturday, but we
generally do a good bit of work in the house, and cook
for Sunday. Bob is going yachting with some friends”—
she saw Bob and he nodded agreement with what she
said—“in the afternoon. He bought a new pair of cream
trousers, didn’t you, Bob—but I don’t know why he
wants them, for all he wears is an awful old coat and
bathers underneath it. I suppose he wants the trousers
to show off before they go out with the boat.”
“That’s it, no doubt,” laughed the Beehive visitor,
“but what about this excursion. Who is coming?”
“Beryl could go, and she hasn’t seen the ranges yet.
Have you, Beryl?”
Beryl, longing to go, shook her head. She was afraid
to show her wish too plainly, feeling herself selfish to
be looking forward already to the ride to the hills. Mrs
Campbell came in and the question w T as put to her. “Go,
child, certainly,” she said at once. “It will do you good,
and you’ve not seen our hills either.”
“Just what I said,” remarked Barby.
So Beryl promised to be ready at twelve on the next
Saturday.
“Have lunch with us,” said Mum, as Brent was leav-
ing. “Arrive about twelve-fifteen, in time to have a good
meal, and make sure of catching the train. Will that
do?”


“Splendidly, thanks. I am becoming rather tired of
fritz sausage and pies, and I think the gulls are too.
Make yourself handsome, Beryl, on Saturday, for I in-
sist upon being done justice to. Ta-ta.” And the
author vacated his seat and vaulted first the chair he
had been sitting on, and then the fence outside, which
he reached in four strides from the window.
Pat Brent was very gallant as he and Beryl, after going
to town in the train, and entering a large garage in the
city, were whisked higher and higher into the hills in
a little blue car. The Saturday so looked forward to by
Beryl was neither cold nor hot, humid nor windy, but
just one of those spring-like days that make one think
of the Pipes of Pan, and fairies under the bushes.
“This is beautiful,” sighed the little girl, looking at
the towering gums marching past, and reaching up from
the thickets that smelled of sap and leaves and all the
incense of the out-of-doors. Hidden creeks chortled down
in shady gullies, magpies chortled too, like echoes come
to life, up in the branches above. Here and there tall
pines speared upwards in grandeur, seeming to pierce
the fleecy clouds that sailed overhead. The intoxicating
sight of sunlight caught in transparent leaves brought
a happiness that she had seldom felt before. She wriggled
nearer to Brent and breathed in the freshness with lungs
just learning to appreciate such sweetness. Lacy shadows
danced on the ground, the willows swayed gently over
pools that were half smothered in cress and mint, cows
browsed lazily, and horses lifted their heads to gaze at
the car as it whizzed by.
Little houses, crumbling and old, white walls pink
with age, roofs capped in patterned moss, sheltered under
tall hedges of hawthorns and laurel. The white road
wound like a thin ribbon thrown down on a multi-col-
oured carpet. Rising roads and hairpin bends permitted
glimpses of tracks far below, dropping back to valleys


that faded in blue wedges and bluer depths, until a
V-shaped gap showed the distant city, merging into the
haze that the miles deepened. The little car seeming
glad too, that the day was so gay, crawled upward in
singing comfort. Beyond the just discernible city and
plains showed a far-off pale blue streak that was the
sea.
Higher still they climbed, the air purifying until it
stung their cheeks and tasted clean on their lips. They
passed through wild-rose hedges, blackberry tangles over
quiet creeks, gullies filled with matted growth, and
wattles sticking out like great mops, with the gums
above them spreading fans of grey-green and tender
brown.
Beryl removed her hat. “Look at the sun through
those boughs,” she said, her face serious and intent.
“The beams look like gold-dust, as if one of Brenda’s
fairy-folk had come along and thrown it everywhere,
even on the trunks. Red-gold . . . egg-shell green . . .
white, silver and amber. . . . Isn’t it lovely, Pat ... to
soak it all in like this?”
The hospital was a big white building on a slope,
and the slope a mass of broken shadow from the pines
which were stippled all over it. The windows of the big
place looked down towards the road and a wide open
gate on a gravelled drive, and then out over a rolling
stretch that lifted again into crags covered with bush.
Lawns and flower-beds were planted here and there, but
the original design of nature was not spoiled. What a
place to get well in, thought the little girl as she saw
sick folk sitting or walking in the dim cool shade of
trees. White gleams told of nurses hovering about, or
sitting with their patients.
Beryl pointed, swallowing visibly, as she looked at
the wan, pale wreck of a once splendid man. His face
was vacant, and his hands were playing with a child’s


toy engine. “Pat, can God let that happen to him, for
just being loyal to his country?” Brent shook his head.
“The war, little girl, has a lot to answer for; don’t let’s
blame the One who made this.” He swept one hand
towards the pines and wealth of life-giving light, and
Beryl fell into a choking silence. A woman, helped by
two smiling nurses, passed. They were joking over the
feeble attempts at walking by legs learning childhood’s
first lesson. “Crippled since babyhood,” explained the
young man briefly. “A jolly soul, always happy, shoes
on for the first time in thirty-five years.”
Beryl bit her lips, her eyes swimming, and the trees
and white building floated as if reflected in a distorted
mirror at a fair. She wouldn’t go inside; she couldn’t.
She prayed that Brent would let her remain in the
grounds while he went indoors.
O
He introduced her to the secretary of the hospital,
but she drew back as they started to walk towards the
open arched doors. “Do you mind if I wait in the open,
please?” she breathlessly entreated. Pat understood; he
always did, nodding and smiling as Beryl moved away.
A nurse spoke to her as she wandered among the
sweet-smelling flowers that seemed twice as sweet in the
high thin air. “You are waiting for somebody?” she asked
briskly.
The pretty nurse and Beryl commenced talking. The
former had deep brown eyes and thick fluffy brown hair,
on which her pointed cap sat like a wee white bird
on a nest too big for it, Beryl thought. The well-man-
nered, beautifully clad little girl caught the fancy of
the nurse, more accustomed to wrecks of humanity than
the perfection of youth. She could not take her eyes
off the flawless skin and curling hair; Beryl’s hat still
dangled in her gloved fingers. As she talked she peeled
the gloves off, and tucked them into a pocket on her
hip. “Are all these poor people . . . mental?” asked Beryl


timidly, using the word which the nurse introduced so
glibly into her conversation.
“Bless us, no. We have patients resting after opera-
tions; patients resting because they are lazy; patients
resting because they must, or break down. We have nice
old ladies with their knitting-bags and sciatica, and nice
old gentlemen with their pet aversions and their rheu-
matism, and even young people . . . young people old,
rather, with terrible complaints, I’m sorry to say. There’s
a tiny Chinese girl in there, deserted, who was brought
to us by a wealthy old man who, people say, is an opium
smuggler, but who loves that child, and has given her
a home. There’s a baby who suffers more than any baby
should, and a woman with so much money that she is
bored into taking ‘rest-cures’ half a dozen times a year.’’
The nurse smiled and blinked her brown eyes. “Come
across here with me and I’ll introduce you to our newest
patient, a pet.’’
“A lady?”
“No. A man. A man with the saddest eyes you’ll ever
see, young lady, and the nicest voice you’ll ever hear.
We’re all in love with him. He came here the other
day from a well-known brain and nerve specialist in
Auckland. This man—John Smith he is called—doesn’t
even know how he reached Auckland. The doctor being
interested in what you would call loss-of-memory cases,
studied him, and what is more, kept him at the Auck-
land house purposely to do so. He seems to be familiar
with every country, including Australia and the South
Seas, and is most entertaining, when he’s not too weary
to talk. Dr Forsythe, who is studying him here, is very
interested. Mr Smith is of course a gentleman in manner
and in speech. It was because of an old shirt he wore
when in Auckland, that he came here.”
“An old shirt?” asked Beryl in amazement.
The nurse laughed merrily. “Sounds mysterious,


doesn’t it, but the shirt had a tag on the inside of the
neck, and this tag bore the name and address of an
Adelaide factory. Wearing a shirt made in this city is
a thin due to hold on to, but it is the only one they
possess to help trace his people, if he has any. Had the
shirt been a suit, the matter would have been easier,
for then the tailor of the suit would have been able to
help us. John Smith had not even a coin, or a handker-
chief in his pockets, when in Auckland. It is a mystery
that makes us discuss the poor man by the hour—when
we have time. We are hoping that somebody in this
city will recognize him, and claim him. Some home is
grieving for him, of that I am certain. I’ll swear he’s
not a bachelor.”
“Why?”
“Because he doesn’t hold a baby upside down,”
chuckled the young woman walking beside Beryl. “He
held one for me the other day when I ran to pick up
a man who tripped ... a hip case.”
“I know of some one who was lost, a long time ago,”
said Beryl suffocatingly. “Some one who sounds just
like Mr Smith.” But the nurse shook her head.
“My dear, he’s unusual in many ways, but there are
thousands of men who would answer to his description.
Already, scores of people have been to see him and
gone away disappointed. There are hundreds who have
lost their men, sons, husbands, brothers, and still cling
to hope, believing that some day they may turn up.
The war has left its wake of grief, hasn’t it?”
“This was not the war,” replied Beryl gravely.
“No? Well, we intend having liis photo taken very
soon, and having it put into every paper in the Com-
monwealth, but if I know anything about it, he has
altered too much for recognition by the badly-blurred
photos that newspapers print. He is so thin, and weary,
and so troubled.”


“Where is the New Zealand doctor—Dr Bell, didn’t
you say his name was?’’ asked Beryl persistently.
Her companion shrugged. “Gone back to New Zea-
land, to his patients,’’ was the prompt reply. “He’s
coming here again on special hospital work in six
months’ time, and expects to find John Smith here, in
just the same condition. You know, it sometimes takes
years before one recovers one’s memory, sometimes it
never returns. Then again, a small familiar gesture
might bring it all back to him. Let us hope so.”
“If the chance comes in this place, so far from every
one, with nobody but doctors, patients, visitors, and
nurses, it will be wonderful,” said the girl. “It would
be better for him to mix with people, in the city.”
“That’s a wise remark, but he’s not fit, yet. He may
be later.”
“Is he old?” asked Beryl, who seemed to be following
a train of thought all her own.
“Not very. There he is, see? The tall man just seat-
ing himself in a cane chair, surrounded by newspapers.
He reads everything he can find, that might tell him
about himself.”
Beryl’s face contracted with pity as she singled out
the patient indicated by the nurse. As they approached
near enough to distinguish features, the little girl from
the West was able to see the grey at the temples of
John Smith, the troubled, harassed face, and the thin
gentle hands that moved idly, yet eagerly, amid the
tumble of papers on his knees. The pathos of it
wrenched at Beryl, but she blinked away the threatened
tears.
“He always vows he belongs to somebody,” said Nurse
Kingdon in a whisper. “And that he can feel his brain
almost touching what he knows must be behind the
fog. He is allowed to do whatever he wishes, being
mentally well but for his memory, and physically fit


but for weakness and strain. He’s been through a great
deal no doubt. . . . Mr Smith,” the nurse said breezily,
in the patronizing tone most nurses become used to
when nearly all patients are like children. “Here is a
young visitor to talk to you.”
Beryl stared, with what she hoped was not rude intent-
ness, at the man who looked up enquiringly, folding
the newspaper in his hands, quietly dropping it to the
grass, and rising to take her hand. The nurse pulled
forward another cane chair. “Now I’ll run and leave
you to gossip; I suppose Mrs Follet is drowned in her
bath, I almost forgot her.”
Beryl smiled, and John Smith smiled. “I’ll tell Mr
Brent where you are,” Nurse Kingdon called back over
her shoulder. “We all know him here.”
There was nothing, decided Beryl, about Mr Smith
to tell the tale of his sufferings, but the gap in the
memory which could not be seen by strangers. He was
like any other man, but for his weakness, speaking
gently, however, with a sadness that Beryl well under-
stood. “He’s thinking,” ran through her busy mind,
“that even I could be his daughter and he wouldn’t
know it.” Beryl was right. John Smith was thinking
that.
“Please, I’m so sorry about everything,” faltered the
little girl childishly.
Mr Smith smiled, and at the transformation of his
features Beryl’s heart thumped wildly. What if she had
guessed correctly, before, when talking to the nurse of
this patient! What if fate had brought John Smith to
his native place to be recognized by the Beehive! What
if he . . . but it was all so improbable, almost impos-
sible, that she faltered in her visions. Despite the
impossibility of it, the little girl was almost dizzy with
the thought of what it would all mean should this man
be Major Campbell. The idea was wonderful, daring,


and wildly fantastic, but . . . you never know. Thus
did the old slogan of the Beehive come to Beryl’s lips
and heart. You never know.
“I am slowly becoming used to the painful business
of losing one life to start another, my dear,” he said
very listlessly. “It is somewhat difficult, at my age.”
“Have you forgotten everything}” asked Beryl impul-
sively, trying to visualize what it must be like.
“Everything, but it’s there, like a dam built up in
front of past years. They say, to encourage me, no
doubt, that the dam may burst at any moment, and
the removal of one small brick might start the flood
of recollections.” The quiet tones held a smile that was
very brave. The slim hands made a movement expres-
sive of renunciation and acceptance of the inevitable.
“I can endure it—but only just. We are made to endure
what is meted out to us, without a doubt. It is very
hard to realize that somewhere I might possess a family,
worrying over me. Maybe ... if that is true, forgetting
me.
“They couldn’t. They wouldn’t,” came abruptly and
firmly from John Smith’s sedate and dignified little
visitor. “People don’t forget those whom they love; they
fret, and love them the more, and wait, and hope on,
and never, never forget.”
The man raised his eyebrows. She spoke from con-
viction. Perhaps something similar in her young life
. . . and John Smith tried to close the subject. “You are
here with your father?” asked the patient.
“No! My father is dead. Mr Brent brought me here.
He’s an author,” continued Beryl, glad to find some
subject to speak upon, not mixed up with the thoughts
racing in chaos through her mind. “He visits our house,
and brought me up here for a drive. I’m from the West,
and I’ve never seen the ranges from the inside. I didn’t
want to go indoors, because of . . . you know . . . that


medicine-y smell, and white beds and table and
maimed people. I just couldn’t go in.”
“I am sensitive about such things, also,” replied John
Smith. “I like the scent of the bush, or the sea, or any-
thing that is not shut up inside stone walls. Salt winds
and spray . . . eh? Heavy perfume of flowers—stepha-
notis, the tiere, magnolias; flowers . . .” he seemed to
be trying to free some memory. “Flowers, by a still
lagoon . . .” He frowned, pausing, but the elusive some-
thing behind the dammed-up reservoir of thought
melted and was gone. Then, with a change of tone:
“Do you live in the city, or the suburbs, Miss Beryl?”
Beryl felt her heart leap, and her face drain to pale-
ness as she answered, wondering what effect her reply
might have, afraid almost to voice the simple response
that could hold the key to the hidden store in his brain.
“I live . . .” she said with a rush, then halted. “I live
at a place called Mangrove Bend.” She spoke clearly.
allowing each sentence to sink in, watching him with
darkened eyes. “At the seaside. In a house called
the Beehive.”
She felt as if suffocating, for Mr Smith had frowned
again, moving a hand over his forehead as if trying to
brush away cobwebs. She went on: “I live with a lady
called Mrs Campbell . . . and her boys and girls . . .
Bob, Brenda, Barbara, and Bubbles. . . .” John Smith
was repeating the names over after her, moving his
lips slowly, his eyes holding a strange expression of
baffled torment. He tried to speak to the girl regarding
him, with her own face as grave and almost as anxious
as his. “The Beehive,” he said at last, while Beryl waited
through what seemed to be an eternity. “The Bee-
hive . . .” But as she watched, the eyes lost their brief
expression of keenness, and he murmured formally:
“That is an odd name to give a house, and somehow
rather attractive.”


But Beryl was not satisfied. Leaning forward and in
her eagerness taking one of the thin hands in both of
hers, she said: “Try, oh, please, please try.”
He stared, pulling the hand away, shaking himself
as if afraid of something. “My dear . . .”
“Please try and think of it; think hard. Their mother
is called ... do you remember ‘Maryghi’?”
At the name, John Smith straightened his emaciated
body, moving himself sharply in his chair. The fight
with past days was telling upon him; his lips were blue,
his face pinched. “God! Say that . . . again.
“Maryghi,” said Beryl thickly. “And the Beehive, and
Bubbles . . . and Mangrove Bend. Major Campbell . . .
the yacht . . . Keleme . . .
His poor working face was distraught; beads of sweat
stood out on his forehead, until he swayed sideways,
to recover himself with an effort that left him ghastly.
Beryl, her eyes streaming now, herself forgotten, dropped
to her knees before him, looking upwards. “Don’t worry
now. Don’t worry over it.’’ She was beaten for the time,
but her whole soul sang; she had found out something.
Mr Smith spoke at last, the words blurring with his
weakness of body and spirit; he fell back against the
cushions. “I can’t remember. Child . . . torture.’’ Almost
as if she were grown-up he addressed her. “The torture
is too much.’’
At that moment Pat Brent was seen at the front door
of the big hospital, shaking hands with its secretary.
Turning, and glancing about him, the author spied
Beryl, and proceeded towards her. Beryl touched John
Smith on the knee, saying in a whisper: “Don’t worry
any more. I’m sorry I upset you, but I’m almost sure
I know something about you. Wait . . . don’t say a word
to any one. You’ll see; it must come right soon, and
nobody could ever forget you!'
The impulsive cheer warmed the stricken heart of


the man, stirring nobody knows what springs of hope.
She added with a nod: “I’ll find a way. . . .”
“Hulloa, Beryl!” The author had joined them, light-
ing his pipe and greeting John Smith, whom he had
met last week. “How do you do,- sir; feeling a shade
better?” John Smith, who was gripping the sides of his
chair, responded to the author, but looked back at the
little girl with an expression that made her want to
weep. She managed a more or less normal smile. In a
moment the patient was alone, in the cool of the shade
made by the pine which reared above him.
On the way home, with the sinking sun striking
horizontally through the gum-tops in golden and scarlet
shafts, the city beneath in its summer-night bath of
crimson haze, Beryl stammeringly but eagerly related
the precis of the conversation in the hospital grounds
that afternoon. She was almost afraid to put her sus-
picions into words, so improbable and wild did they
seem.
The car swerved violently. “Great Caesar’s ghost,”
exclaimed Pat. “This is an immense matter; why didn’t
you tell me up there?”
“I couldn’t. You see, Pat, I’d tried, as I told you, but
he was not ready, if it was the Major, to remember. I
think it would take just a little more to bring his
memory back. Perhaps something visible, such as . . .
the Beehive, and . . . Mum.”
“Lord, if it were,” breathed the young man.
“It’s just possible to stumble upon anything like that
as I did; Pat, say you’ll help me?” she implored.
“Help you; I’d give away all I possessed, to help you,
but this is too darn serious to treat crudely. We’ll have
to be certain it is not the Major, before we dare speak
of it.”
“Pat, if it is Major Campbell, how could it have all
come about?”


The man at the wheel shrugged helplessly. “Don’t
ask me,” he begged, “I’m dazed now.”
“John Smith was just like that photograph of the
Major, if he were thin and tired and rather grey, but
when he smiled it was just like Bob looking at me;
Bob with whiskers,” Beryl added with unconscious
humour. “It made me feel all funny inside.”
“It would have made me look funny, outside,” admit-
ted Brent candidly. “You carried it off well, for me not
to suspect anything unusual.”
“Yes, Mr Sleuth, but you didn’t wait,” was the calm
retort.
“Well ... I say, Beryl, not a word. To as much as
hint of this to the Beehive would be the most cruel
thing we could do. I’ll have a good blink at that photo
when we get back to-night. Don’t appear to notice me
if I grab it and stare. I’ve done it before, and they won’t
think it queer, bless them.”
Back at the garage again and with the car parked
in its oily den, Brent buttonholed Beryl and said some-
thing in a rapid undertone, smacking his leg with
delight at his “brain-wave”, wffiich really had been
Beryl’s. “Now that’s my plan, and I’ll come and get
this little bus to-morrow and fix it up. Wait while I
see the nabob of the palace.” The nabob of the palace
was the garage proprietor. Pat returned smartly, and
taking the girl’s arm hustled her to the train.
In the living-room of the Beehive again, that evening,
the author carelessly lifted the important photograph
from the shelf, regarding the pictured face apparently
with casual interest. In reality he was comparing the
picture with the patient up amongst the pines, putting
it down again to whistle cheerfully and nod very slightly
to the girl who was counting the minutes to the morrow.
Pat walked to the window through which the water
showed like a sea of ink, with chips of silver thrown


down upon it in a wide band of lemon, a crack in the
curtain of the night.
Beryl carelessly, with a yawn, stepped to where the
author stood. “It looks like him,” he muttered through
the stem of his pipe, then swung round and addressed
his hostess.
“Mrs Campbell, I have a friend up at the hospital
we visited to-day; may I ask you to have the two of us
to tea to-morrow, instead of merely my august self?”
With a grin he added: “I haven’t much room at my
cottage for social festivities.”
“Why, certainly. A man?” asked Mum.
Brent looked pained. “Of course,” he said.
Hiding a smile Mum asked gently: “Would you like
him to remain through the evening—the nights are
exquisite now?”
“Well, it depends upon circumstances,” came the
ambiguous reply. “It’s quite likely that he will stay
through the evening.” Beryl, listening eagerly, sent up
a silent prayer that Pat’s remark might come true.
Mum took five stitches in a jumper, snipping off the
thread to say fondly: “A friend of yours is very wel-
come, Pat.” She looked up at the big boy who was a
man: “Always.”


CHAPTER XX
MR SMITH COMES TO TEA
At three o’clock on the next day the little car was heard
outside the sandbanks on the swamp road. Beryl, who
had been oddly nervous and excitable since morning,
scampered wildly, without a hat, through the scorching
sunlight into the backyard. From there she ran at a
wild pace to the gate, swinging it open to rush through.
In the motor, now standing still, were two figures. She
nodded shyly. John Smith took her hand into his with
a pressure that restored her somewhat. But her calm
did not last long. She waited until the author and his
companion were strolling towards the house, then
breathing fast, said: “They’re expecting you, please
come straight in. The front way, Pat”—with a significant
glance at him.
Beryl waited for a moment, gulped, then bolted back
to take the arms of the other two girls who were won-
dering if she had taken leave of her senses. She hurried
them into the house and through to the front veranda.
“Why are you dragging us?” cried Barby pepperly. “One
might think we’d never had any one to tea before.”
But Beryl laughed excitedly, her face flaming, her
hands cold. “That Mr Smith will think he’s come to a
house of lunatics,” added Barby crossly.
Brent watched John Smith expectantly as they neared
the house. He had not known the purpose of the drive,
taking it solely as a kindly thought on the part of the
young man whom he had liked instinctively at first


sight. But the finely cut features of the hospital patient
were tightening now, as he stared fixedly at the house
with the long windows deep in shade. He paused to look
through the tamarisks to the blue water, caught in a
million diamond points by the brilliant sun. “This . . .
seems very familiar, somehow, Brent.” He caught the
young man’s arm suddenly. Pat thought he would fall,
but he recovered in a step, and proceeded at the same
leisurely pace through the sand.
“Bit of a pull, eh?” smiled Brent, but he himself was
almost stumbling, with some of the same sensations
which were assailing Beryl at the moment, as she
trembled and talked rapidly in a flow of nonsense that
achieved its purpose, that of keeping the two girl Bees
at her side.
Brent took the dazed man round the side of the house
to the sandy patches bordered with almost covered
stones, leading to the veranda and the worn steps. His
own heart misfired as he saw Mrs Campbell seated in
a cane chair facing them, with Bob’s bright cushion
at her back.
The cushion rolled to the floor as Mum stood erect,
smiling a welcome to the two men approaching her.
Then Pat’s mouth moved with some words that were
uttered only inside him, for Mum, her eyes levelled at
John Smith, was paling as if she were seeing an appari-
tion. Brent put his hands in his pockets, uneasily,
watching with keen anxiety for the result of the experi-
ment upon which so much depended. Mrs Campbell
had not moved since beholding the stranger. She had
forgotten everything about her, excepting the leaping
question her own mind was incredulously asking her.
It seemed that Beryl had been correct, for across
John Smith’s face was stealing an expression from which
Brent turned his eyes. It was like treading upon sacred
ground to stare at what he saw.


wonderful thing he had ever said
: “Marygirl . . . God
has been good . . . Fve found you .
, . . this long time.”
“John! John I” she sobbed with
a catch in her voice
that was like a hiccup. “You have come back. Is it true?
John, dear . . . John . . . you are thin . . . John, I knew
Mrs Campbell caught at the back of the chair, sway-
ing as she did so, but stood firm again as she whispered
something through dry lips; something that the new-
comer seemed to understand.
John Smith was petrified, and one brief second after
a flash of lightning in his brain, he plunged forward.
“Marygirl . . .” he cried. At the sound, a strange lump
slipped up into Brent’s throat, and he was not ashamed
of the wetness of his eyes. John Smith had his arms
around Mum, laughing, talking, stumbling into speech
which neither of them heard, but which was the most
you were not dead.” The exultant cry was straight from
the depths of her faithful soul.
Barby and Brenda crept to within ten feet of the
woman who did not know they were there, looked in
awe from the silent and motionless Brent, to Bob, who
was frozen with amazement and a joyous relief that
could scarcely be realized, then back to Mum again.
Mum was crying, but it was the kind of crying that held
no sorrow. Mum was laughing, but the laughter held
more tears than the weeping. Their faces half afraid,
as faces are before a miracle, the girls stood still.
While Beryl, choking, knowing that her work was
done, flew on wild feet to her room, where she slammed
the door and fell into a sobbing, distraught heap on
the mat. She shook from head to foot, twisting in the
agony of knowing what she had done by bringing the
Major home. She had done it. She had had to do it,
when she had suspected. There had been nothing else
to do, even though it meant . . . Beryl paused in a dread-
ful silence that froze her face into a mask of terror.


“God,” she cried, eyes screwed shut, hands clenched.
“God, make them want me still. Make them, Ohl make
them want me to stay.”
She listened, her skin white, her face ravaged by her
grief and loneliness in this wonderful moment of re-
union which she had brought about. Her ears strained
to catch a sound that might tell her what they were
doing, then her skin prickled into goose-flesh all over,
as a cooee ol such gladness as she had never before
heard at the Beehive, was followed by her name. Still
she sat there, afraid to go out.
“Coo-ee-ee, Beryl. Beryl, where are you? Beryl, come
quick. Beryl . . . coo-ee-ee.”
She rose languidly to her feet, spent and shaken, and,
with trembling lips, listened again. They called her.
T hey wanted to tell her what she already knew. She
couldn’t go out. Screwing up the sodden handkerchief,
as was her habit when distressed, she crept to the head
of the bed and slipped to the floor to lean her throbbing
face against the cool counterpane. There she remained
motionless, staring at the sun-patterns on the floor.
While outside Brenda and Barby were shyly allowing
themselves to be hugged by the big man who had lived
in their hearts for so long, while he had been absent.
Already, as the little group drew together, John Smith
was losing his vagueness and his listlessness. His grey
eyes were lightening, his bent figure seeming to lift
itself into its old strong erectness. Mum was touching
Bob’s ruffled head, as he sat close beside her, gazing
wonderingly into his father’s lined face.
“This has been my man while you were away, John.”
All that the Major said then, was: “Thank you, my
son.” But that was enough to reward Bob for any small
service he might have remembered.
Bubbles sat watching the proceedings which had des-
cended into the tranquillity of the Beehive as a bomb
drops from an aeroplane.


“Don’t you know me, little chap?” asked this tall thin
man with a break in his tones. “Don’t you know your
father? You were a small fellow indeed when I left, so
it is not surprising. We’ll have to make up for this
slice lifted out of our lives, eh? Two whippings a day
instead of one, to catch up.”
Bubbles looked transparently alarmed, but a smile
reassured him. Why, this new man who was his father
was joking. What fun! Fathers did joke, then. So a new
father who was really an old one, was not bad after all.
Bubbles was touched in some manner, but it was
obviously hard for him to show it. “My father’s name
wassent Mr Smiff,” he said conversationally. “It was
Major Campbell.”
“Well, that’s me, although I didn’t know it until
to-day,” said the Major, slightly husky. The youngest
Bee stuck his tongue in his cheek and looked at his
mother for help in this bewildering affair. Mother was
smiling, smiling and young and happy and glowing,
her voice all up and down. “That’s right, dear, this is
Dad.”
Bubbles hesitated for one moment, then vanished
abruptly with a wild dive past Bob’s sprawling legs.
Presently he reappeared with the beloved photograph
which now held no poignancy in its lights and shadows.
Gravely placing the picture close to the Major’s very
real face, Bubbles compared the two, remarking at last
with a huge and noisy sigh: “I s’pect you are him, but
you’re not very fat, like this one”—with a nod at the
photo. With a complete change of demeanour and
expression he asked in an engaging and inviting tone:
“Did you bring any ole cannobles home with you?”
Beryl, crouching in her room like a wounded creature,
heard the laughter, and winced. But in the middle of
the joyous talk they again remembered her, Mum saying
in surprise: “Beryl didn’t answer you just now. Where
can she be?”


“She ran away howling like anything when he grab-
bed you/’ explained Bubbles, the only one not too
absorbed to observe outside events.
“Will you ask her to come here?” ordered the Major.
Bubbles, who said he always knew where to find Beryl
when she was miserubble, scrambled off.
“My father, Major Campbell who’s Mr Smiff, wants
you,” he announced grandly into Beryl’s apparently
unoccupied room. “Are you under the bed?”
Beryl did not answer, but stood up shakily, to brush
back her wild hair with her fingers, and try to compose
her unsteady self. She finally emerged from the shade
of the western veranda, after slipping through her win-
dow and creeping round the wall. She gasped, for this
Mr Smith was utterly different from the languid and
tormented man at the hospital. What a change a short
interval can make when it is filled with such gladness
as the last hour! The sad lines were now anything but
sad, as he held his two girls, one on each knee, one thin
hand held tightly by Mum. Brent was leaning against
a veranda post, an interested and sympathetic spectator
who knew he had a slight right to be present on this
day of days.
“Come here, Beryl. Where have you been hiding?”
Mum put out her disengaged hand to pull forward the
shy girl facing the family whose faces were so eloquent
of the good she had done for them. “I ... I didn’t like
to ... to intrude,” she said huskily. Mrs Campbell felt
a stab of pity as she realized what the child had been
through in the quietness of her room. The tear-stains
were like bruises beneath Beryl’s eyes; her skin was the
colour of paper, her lips bloodless.
The Major smiled at her, in that smile being every-
thing that Beryl could desire. “God’s ways are strange,”
he said slowly, with a reverence that seemed to fit in
with the peace of the momentous Sunday afternoon.


“He saw fit on this occasion to use Beryl to bring me
home.” The words were simple, but the girls felt as
if they were in a church. Beryl choked, and glanced
away. The pride that now surged through her was
touched with humility, for, as the Major said, she had
been used by God—to bring him home.
“Beryl has been a wonderful little daughter to me,”
said Mrs Campbell hastily, to relieve the tension.
“Working like a Briton at all sorts of menial tasks,
and cooking my breakfast beautifully when I was ill.”
“111?” queried her husband sharply.
“Dad! She nearly died,” cried Barby shrilly, under
the stress that held them all. “And we were horrid and
forgot to help with the dishes, and we let her wait on
us and worry about everything, and we didn’t think
about anything but bathing and having quarrels. The
bills, and fretting for you, and the work, made her
sick. She broke down. It was all our fault.”
The bitter indictment was against herself, as Barby
relieved her bursting heart by weeping stormily for a
moment into Dad’s tweed pocket. The man patted her
shoulder, but watched his wife hungrily.
“Thank God I’m here now, Marygirl—” he shook his
head. “And that you are.”
Beryl sat beside Barby, huddled somehow on to the
Major’s knee, but the former slid away in a moment.
“You’re tired enough,” she said with one of her quickly
practical moments. “Without us squashing you to
death.” The three rose almost as one, the Major
stretching his legs thankfully.
“I appreciated the armful I was holding,” he observed
flatteringly. “But it was a weighty one. Our three girls
are big lumps, what do you say, Mum?”
“Our three girls,” whispered Beryl to herself. “Our
three girls.” Again she said to herself, “Three— not two,
but three.”


Tea was forgotten, among other things, while the
Major, with many broken utterances and mental expedi-
tions into events forgotten for so long, told the story
of his adventure. With glistening eyes the little com-
pany arranged itself round the new-comer’s feet, wor-
shipping, while the tale was commenced.
Brent thought what a ripping scoop it would be for
the paper that the young writer called “his”, and Mum
again and again rejoiced inwardly for the wonderful
thing that had come to them this beautiful Sunday;
beautiful for ever, for what it held.
“. . . and of course you know what happened until
then,” the Major went on very slowly from the point
where he had been on board the yacht before the hurri-
cane. “Because I wrote to you regularly until the storm
came. The storm that wrecked the vessel and drowned
my companions and the crew. The sky was as blue that
morning as it ever had been, but towards midday a
deathly hush fell over the sea. The water was like oil,
weighted down by the atmosphere, which was intensely
oppressive. A thick murk gathered on the horizon,
muddy-looking and swirling in a way that aroused awe
and apprehension in all of us. Captain Harvey and the
mate were anxious indeed, for the waters in which we
were then, were practically uncharted, but for mental
records secured through former expeditions. The dark
fell that night like a blanket, suffocating us, the calm
water a menace, the night appallingly full of dread.
We were sure that a mighty storm was at hand.’’
Bob blinked, and his small brother opened his eyes
wider. The Major moved himself in what was almost a
shudder; “The storm came; we had not been mistaken
with our misgivings. The sea came too, descending out
of nowhere, apparently, mountains of it, crashing,
rending, rearing in chaos about us, the wind that accom-
panied it being fiercely wild. The crashing of glass and


china, the sudden acrobatics of the vessel, the shouting
of commands in the midst of the din of the elements,
all created an impression that I admit, lasts yet. We
were not aware of the hours, for they were filled with
such demoniac confusion that my one clear thought was
the only thought I had—would the yacht live? No ship
could stand it for long. Luck held with us for a time,
but after a few hours of fury we heard a familiar sound
that came at intervals from close at hand. I hope never
to experience the same thing again. The sound was the
surf, hidden not far away with its deathly ridges waiting
for us, with our boat a helpless, spinning derelict. I
remember clutching a rail, and feeling it give way with
a splintering rip as we crashed. The yacht went to match-
wood. I was in a mass of sea and spray, torn to shreds
and whipped in all directions by the wind, but I clung
on until the wood was wrenched from my hands. Then,
sliding on a roller, I missed a patch of whiteness that
was a ledge of coral, and slid through an opening into
a calm that was as terrifying as the roughness outside.
I was in a lagoon. The lagoon was not still, however,
despite its rim of reef. Great combers carried me and
buffeted me until I could not draw a breath without
intense pain. Then, dazed, with the sea beating and
hissing at me, I felt hard sand under my feet. Barely
alive, acting with that strange instinct for self-preserva-
tion that is inherent in all of us, I clawed and fought
and gasped and choked, until I was out of reach of the
worst of the scallops of foaming water which shot yards
up the sandy beach towards the coco-nuts. The sea
sucked at my legs, but I reached safe ground at last,
exhausted, and unable to stir from where I rested. A
gleam of starlight above showed me tall palm-trunks
almost over my head; the noise of the sea was majestic.
The leaves above were rustling and rattling like stiff
paper being crumpled by giant hands, trunks were


swishing and slashing and creaking, and sand was whip-
ped against my body like well-directed bullets. Later
on, the moon rose, showing me such waste and wrack
and desolation that in my weak state almost made me
weep. Then followed wild sea, a dying wind, and peace.
1 slept, where I lay, oblivious of the world and escape.”
The speaker dropped his head into his cupped hands,
paused, then looked up and waved a hand as Bob leaned
forward to utter some word of enquiry. “It is very vivid
now. It seems incredible that so many should die, and I
live. The sharks were thick in that lagoon.”
“A steward escaped too,” exclaimed Barby excitedly.
“He came to Adelaide on a ship, with information about
you and the island where you were tossed. He was
beached there, too. He tried to make the natives under-
stand that he wanted to see you, but couldn’t talk their
language. Then, when he was able to move about, you’d
gone, just swallowed up, he said, as if you’d never been.
It was in the papers.”
“A steward . . . why, I remember. After sleeping
through the next morning I stood beside him when he
was being tended by the natives on the island. He raved
and rambled all that day, unconscious, with ghastly
blows and gashes all over him. I recall now that I
thought he must be dying. He was almost dead that
evening, as I sat there wondering what next was to
come. So he lived? He was in even better hands than
I expected. I thought nothing could be done for him.
This is very amazing. So he must have partly regained
consciousness just at the moment when I was on the
beach trying to think out where I actually was. I am
not the only hero of the tale, then?” The father of the
Beehive smiled at his family.
Mum caught the smile and answered it with another.
“You would rather poor Perks be dead, then, than share
your fame?” At the pretence of outraged horror and


indignation that followed, the young people chuckled.
“I suppose he must have thought me part of his
world of delirium at first,” went on the Major thought-
fully. “Although I was very real, and very much of a
vagabond, sore, stiff, and ragged. I had on only a tough
white shirt, a pair of ducks, and a thin garment beneath
them. The heat on board had been enervating. Well—
to proceed—a few nights after being tossed up, as you
call it, Barby, a schooner sailed in for copra and dried
bananas, and fresh water. I talked with the captain, a
sullen, hairy, taciturn Dane—the result of the conver-
sation being a suspicious and reluctant agreement to
take me (for a sum of money to be paid him later when
I reached Auckland), to the first port-of-call where I
could communicate with you. Having nothing to pack,
I merely waited, and looked for the steward whom 1
failed to find and considered dead and buried. He most
probably had been moved to another part of the island,
f had not any reason for looking for him. That night
there was a great celebration, native liquor was imbibed
freely, and a dance lasted until dawn. With the morn-
ing wind we got away.
“For a week I existed as well as I could, thankful
for anything that would take me nearer you, thank-
ful even for the small cramped cabin, smelling evilly
of every odour connected with the sea—copra, cock-
roaches, engine-oil, grease, and the last occupant of the
berth. The long cruise was flavoured with strange events
which I will gradually tell you about later; mysterious
running ahead of other vessels, odd handling of cargo
in the dead of night, cries and shouts below, and the
boarding and unloading of bands of bound natives at
the various plantation islands we touched. There was an
air of secretiveness present that I thought it wise to
ignore, for I was in a dangerous position and knew the


imperative need of wirelessing, or sending in some way
to tell you I was alive.
“There was illegal work on that ship, and its signifi-
cance impressed me with the need of caution.”
“Were they chopping up cannobles?” asked Bubbles
eagerly. What gory tales to tell to his pals at school!
“Not that I was aware of, son,” came the amused
reply. “But later I will tell you of some other queer
things that occurred—big men dancing, dressed in clay
and feathers—devil fish with arms twenty feet long-
sharks—all sorts of oddities that soon I shall be putting
upon paper for others to read.”
“And you will be an author, too,” gloated Brenda,
with a glance at the young man who from now must
share his throne.
“Not exactly an author,” replied Major Campbell.
“My nose will be out of joint, all right,” sighed Brent,
but they suspected him of flippancy and turned back
to their father.
“What happened next, Dad?” asked the big boy who
was merely the “son of the house” again.
“Something very ordinary, Bob, I must confess. The
Dane commenced to ill-treat brutally an old man who
was a kind of venerable cabin-boy, half-witted, feeble,
and infinitely pathetic. I lost my temper. I knocked the
Dane down, and his weight and strength being greater
than mine, he knocked me down. Not very heroic, was
it, to be whacked with one blow. That was the last
active part I took in the misnamed Sea-dove. My head
had struck a bolt, my memory must have been upset
then, for I dimly became aware of a slow procession of
events in a vague mist of foul language, the buffeting
of the waves, heat, ports which were only uncharted
lagoons, the scent of flowers in the night when we were
still, the din of dancing, drunken islanders, and .. .”
The speaker swayed and almost pitched forward. Mum


was close to him at once, and gently lifted him back
to a cushion. The others, alarmed, started forward.
Brent grunted. “This is too great a strain,” he said
curtly, hiding his emotion. “He’s knocked out. Let’s
have tea and wait a while longer for the rest of the
yarn. He’s not strong yet.”
But the Major opened his eyes, the pinched look
about his mouth and nostrils fading away as he stirred
in his chair. “Very foolish of me, Brent. My head is
merely a little—out of gear.”
Mum looked anxiously at her husband, and Brent
said gruffly: “I should think so.”
“One moment, and the rest is told. I reached Auck-
land, but do not remember much of that. Being put
ashore as a parcel might be, I was literally placed on
the wharf, and left. Wandering, with a few shillings
somebody pushed into my hand as I stood beside a
public-house distraught in my unenviable distress, 1
found in a wide street the sign of a brain specialist,
Dr Bell. Taking hold of what faculties I had left to me, I
summoned courage and wit enough to enter his surgery
and announce myself for what I was, a nameless, ill,
penniless man, with no knowledge of anything that had
occurred to me. My voice proclaimed me not of the
beach-comber class, no doubt, although I’ve heard some
Oxford accents in strange places. My manner perhaps
convinced this good man that I was genuine. His pro-
fessional curiosity and enthusiasm, apart from his ready
sympathy, resulted in my being cared for at his home,
as he said, to study me. As I thought, to commit a decent
and Godly action. You must thank him for my return.
He watched me assiduously. The trouble he took with
me was worthy of some one more important than I. One
night he was examining for the thirtieth time the old
shirt, which, ragged and filthy, was part of the poor
outfit I had arrived in the town with. Under the grease


and discolourment of the collar, he found part of a tag
which unmistakably spelt the name of this capital. No
more. The tattered garment brought me here. But Bell
must be thanked for my return and perhaps for my
life. Beryl did the rest.”
“How simple it all sounds now,” remarked Barby
thoughtfully, frowning up at the man who was her
father. “That shirt must have been a strong one; you
ought to get a lot of money for allowing the makers to
advertise its wearing properties.”
‘ Great snakes,” cried Bob in disgust. “Why commer-
cialize at this moment.”
“Ass! Did you think I meant it?” Barby, her face
flaming, was outraged.
The Major rose and quietly suggested tea. The meal
was a quiet one, leisurely and surely the happiest for
a long, long time. The lamplight glowed on young faces
whose eyes watched in varying expressions the man at
the head of the table—the place which they had begun
to fear would never be filled by him again. Bob, because
of his joyous dethronement, was now between Brenda
and Barby.
“Whom did you lend money to, John?” asked the
mother when the protracted meal was finally over.
“Before you went away last time, or maybe before that.”
“Money! I don’t . . . for the moment I can’t recall
a loan, Mary.”
“Mr Carslake sent me three hundred and thirteen
pounds that somebody paid him, for you.” Mum told
the Major of the pleasant surprise which had spared
her so much worry.
“I can’t remember, but I expect there are many inci-
dents which are now blank, to come to light later in
my ragged brain.”
The two were alone. The man said with a frown: “I’ll


have difficulty in taking hold of the reins again, you
know, Marygirl.”
“I’ll help, dear. John, you’ve come home. Nothing
else in the wide world matters.’’
Presently they spoke of Beryl. “What a fine child she
is,’’ said the Major with a shake of his head. “Sensitive,
proud, with the carriage of an aristocrat. Clever, too.’’
Mum explained, speaking warmly of the little girl
and telling the Major of her father, who long ago had
also written down his experiences and discoveries for
the benefit of those who liked to know the world they
live in. Major Campbell vaguely recalled the name, then
remembered clearly the work which Beryl’s father had
once loved. “Almost a relative,” he said whimsically.
“Strange that she should be here. A relative through
kindred tastes in her real and adopted fathers, eh?” His
face sobered. “Why was the child weeping so bitterly,
after I came . . . home?”
“John. The children have had storms. Beryl has rag-
ged the girls, and they in turn have ragged her. They’ve
found their characters through this ragging. During
upheavals it was said by one of them that when you—
if you—were home we should not have a ‘boarder’.”
“Quite right,” was the firm response. The wife’s face
fell.
“John dear, we love her.” Her eyes clouded. “John,”
she said again. “Have you . . .?” But she saw the twinkle
in his eyes and laughed at herself for her stupidity.
“We’ll come to a better arrangement than the present
one,” he smiled. “Without ridding ourselves of the little
maid’s company.”
Already, thought Mum, a little of the weight of
responsibility was shifting from her tired shoulders.
How good it was for the captain to have charge of his
ship again, with weary, but capable hands.
He leaned over and took her fingers in his hands and


patted them adoringly. “The time has been long, Mary-
girl. . . .”
“An eternity
“But now we are together there shall be no more
worries to cloud your pretty eyes.”
“Pretty—Oh! John!” and Mum blushed like a girl.
What a number of tales were told that evening, with
the sea moonlit and gently tossing, and a softly whis-
pering wind sighing in the listening tamarisks. Brent
had gone to return the car, but the Beehive hung on
every word that fell from the lips of their father.
“. . . and surely a big lesson has been taught us, by
the happenings of to-day. I was helpless—although not
hopeless—and you too worked on and hoped, and now,
we are together after it all.”
Beryl was afraid to move then, in the silence that was
to her like the hush of a cathedral at prayer-time.
“Some have hoped—but in vain,” murmured his wife
at last.
“You always think of others, Marygirl, just as you
always have done, and always will do.”
Bubbles created a diversion at that moment by falling
over backwards. Bob suspected that it had been done
on purpose, as a kind of bravado to call attention upon
the person of the small boy himself.
“Didn’t hurt,” he said valiantly. “I could fall off the
roof and it wouldn’t hurt.”
His bombastic utterance was pricked suddenly by a
quiet: “Please don’t try”, and Bubbles at last realized
he had a father like the other boys at school. “No, Dad,”
he said obediently, and scuttled away to think it out
alone.
“And how does Beryl like living at the Beehive?”
asked the Major suddenly. Beryl did not hesitate. “I
love it,” she said fervently. “And didn’t know before
how nice a house could be.”


“There are houses—and homes,” stated the Major.
“Yes! I understand what you mean, but I didn’t when
I came here. I was horrid and stuck-up. I hated my
room because it wasn’t big, and hated everything
because it wasn’t exactly like our house in Perth.”
“You would not like to go back to your Perth home,
would you?” queried the man quietly, watching her.
“I would if all the Beehive came with me . . . but
1 . . . I don’t care where I am as long as the Bees are
with me.” Beryl gulped and faltered, slightly embar-
rassed before the bombardment of so many pairs of
eyes. “I don’t like being rich without being loved. I
would be as poor as poor for ever to have some one
like . . . Mum ... to own me.” Almost defiantly she
said firmly: “She’s like my own Mother come back again.
with another face.”
There was a silence that held nothing but under-
standing.
“Do ... do you mind my calling her ‘Mum’?” she
asked thinly.
“Mind?” came the ready answer. “I should not like
to have you calling her anything else.”
Beryl brightened.
“Perhaps,” she thought that night as she climbed into
her bed in the moonlit room, “they’ll want me to stay
on after all, until Nelly comes back. If Nelly takes me,
I’ll . . . run away.” She clenched her hands, 'a tired,
happy, glorified little girl with the spectre of her step-
mother’s return the only terror in the future. “Perhaps
even the Beehive couldn’t keep me, if she wanted me
to go. Perhaps . . . Oh, I’d work, I’d scrub , I’d even
be a waitress I'—with 1 '—with a reminiscent shiver—“to belong to
the Beehive. Perhaps now I’m not quite the same as
a boarder. I wonder am I?”
The cool sheets caressed her arms and cheek as she
snuggled down, eyelids heavy with sleep, her whole


to reply.
Later, when sleep
was finally claiming the drowsy,
spent little girl, she
murmured with closed eyes: “If I
am sent away it will
be punishment . . . for . . . when
I first . . . came. . .
9f
being aching with the longing to be “one of them”,
for ever more. “But Ed rather have brought him back,
even if I had to go, than let them be without him.”
Her eyes stung, and ran over. “He’s all they said he
was, and I love him too.”
Mum came in for the good-night kiss that even to-
night was not omitted. Clinging on to wakefulness in
hope of this nightly event, Beryl clung to Mrs Camp-
bell with arms that clasped her tightly and strongly.
The wordless appeal was understood.
We are counting on you, Beryl, to help us take care
of . . . him. He must be petted now and looked after,
after his ordeal.” The woman held the slim, tense body
close to her, stroking the tumbled hair with loving
fingers. “We owe you a lot, child. More than you under-
stand.”
Beryl squeezed harder than ever, but was too choked


CHAPTER XXI
A HORSE AND A GIRL
As the Major recovered his strength, he began paying
short visits among the people whom he knew in the
city and small township of Mangrove Bend, and the
larger one of Hamlin Beach. He quickly became sun-
burned and a new elasticity came to his stride as the
days passed.
Among the first of the visits was a call upon Mr Cars-
lake, who was so astounded that he said little but “Well!
Well!” in growing amazement, as the men talked
through the morning.
The Major had slipped back very easily into his old
life, marvelling at the large gap that had been sliced
out of it without permanent alteration. “Of course, I
am older,” he said to the solicitor. “Such a period of . . .
let us call it adventure . . . would hardly make a man
look or feel youthful.”
The old man laughed and slapped his friend once
more on the back. “You’re just as good looking as ever,
lines and all, bless my buttons if you’re not,” he
exclaimed.
Major Campbell roared. A comfortable sound that
could not be connected with the pet patient of the rest-
home in the hills—a rest-home, very proud, by the way,
of the romantic tale and fine record of one of its in-
mates. And Mr Carslake once more uttered a profound,
“Well, well!”
“What about this money,” then asked the thin man


with the happy eyes, “that my wife has received? 1 can’t
recall it at all. Who borrowed that sum from me? It is
odd that I cannot remember it, as no other detail has
slipped me now.”
Mr Carslake tugged his waistcoat and grunted, then
he stroked his bald patch and grunted again, looking
very guilty and perplexed. His companion dug him in
the ribs and said firmly: “Out with it. . . . You’re dealing
with me now.”
“Well, well,” said the old man feebly.
It isn’t ‘Well, well’ at all,” was the amused remark
1 promised not to tell,” was the confused response
At least I promised not to tell your wife . . . you
see . . . that is, look here, old chap, let it rest. It’s all
right.”
“It can’t be done,” was the firm remark, “so tell me
the rights of it. Have you been emulating Santa Claus?
I believe you are more or less famous for your quixotic
_ 99
acts.
“Quixotic caterpillars!” ejaculated the harassed little
man. “For heaven’s sake listen while I relate the tale.
It is beyond me. One doesn’t normally expect a dead
man to rise up and walk into one’s office. The occasion
demands a climax.”
“Go on.”
And so the tale of Beryl’s jewellery was told, among
many “You sees” and “Of courses” from the speaker.
His companion nodded thoughtfully, not betraying
what he felt.
“So you see,” came lamely, “. . . what the child is.
“She . . . upon my word, Ned ... I hardly know
what to say. What do you advise me to do about it?
Of course the money must be returned without hurting
her, and kept for her somehow.”
“I can fix it,” said the other man. “But we will tell
Gilmore, and I fancy he won’t be angry.”


“No man would be angry with what she did,” was
the decided reply.
“Gilmore is a stout specimen under his gilt,” said
the solicitor.
“When are they expected back?”
“I don’t know. They have left Switzerland, and are
now in Monaco. I will let you know as soon as I hear.”
“I don’t like the idea of that child going back to
Mrs Gilmore, Ned,” said the Major after a long silence,
“after what I have gleaned of the woman’s character.”
“Gilmore’s servants are in the house in Toorak now,”
said Mr Carslake, “waiting for the return. I have spoken
with Wilbur, the maid who attended Beryl in the West.
A prim woman with a heart. She told me of the blows
and ill-treatment the child received, and also of the
bribes given her. She has a picture of Beryl’s mother,
and is keeping it against the time when the child will
want it.”
“Get the picture,” requested the Major. “I will give
it to Beryl.”
“Certainly.”
“Now, what I have in my head is this,” and the Major
unfolded a plan to which his friend listened with wise
face and frowning forehead. At last the speaker paused.
“Do you not think it a good idea?” he asked.
“A good and a kind idea, I think.”
“She is rich, and objections may be raised on those
grounds, but it can be fixed for Gilmore to have control
over the spending of her money. Could that be done?”
“If Gilmore agrees.”
“Well, then, you know what to do when he returns,”
and the visitor picked up his hat and held out his hand.
That night Brent called in, with his arms full of
parcels from the shop in the Bend. “Corned beef and
pickled onions,” he said as he thumped one parcel down
on the table. Another followed.


“Apples. Potatoes. Radishes. Bread. Cake. Tomatoes.”
He sighed and wiped his forehead. “And that’s all.”
“You want a wife,” laughed the Major.
“I’m afraid I do,” was the reply, but a rueful sigh
went with it. “Such a diet is undermining, but then,”
he added amid laugher, “the wife and bad cooking
would be worse than just the bad cooking.”
The Major shook his head, amused but sceptical.
“Here’s a cheque for Brenda,” continued the author,
“for two guineas. The editor will take two more stories
at the same price, provided they are typed and up to
the standard of the first one.”
“Oh! Dad! Mum! Isn’t it wonderful? Now I can buy
a typewriter.”
“My dear child. A good typewriter would cost about
forty pounds,” stated Brent calmly. “Twenty at the
least.” Brenda was taken aback, but said philosophi-
cally: “Then I’ll save, if it takes years.”
“Dad! Do you know what Beryl did to get a present
for Mum, on her birthday?” and in spite of a cry of
“Please don’t tell”, Barby told the tale.
“And Barby went in for a swimming race, and won
it.”
“And Brenda earned her money by writing the tales,”
was the triumphant remark by Beryl. “And so we all
did something.”
Dad called them all his little soldiers, which remark
sent Bubbles into a heaven of his own. The fact of
Dad possessing no cannibals’ corpses, though, still
plunged him occasionally into great grief. The boys at
school were all envious of the boy who had a real Major
for a father and demanded gory tales in great quantities.
It is to be regretted that Bubbles gave them; all original,
but blood-thirsty enough, and so full of decapitated
enemies and wrecks as to fill with delight the heart of
any small boy.


The next day was a Saturday. The three girls and
Bubbles were lying in their bathing garments in the
dry sand, when the sound of galloping hoofs came to
them from the direction of Mangrove Bend. They
looked along the beach and saw coming towards them
a tall brown horse with flying mane. Hanging on to
the saddle was a slim, breeched figure, coat-tails flying
fantastically, and hat hanging at the back of her neck
by a strap. They knew it was a girl by the short mass
of hair which was lit by the sun to a warm red.
"It’s running away,” said Brenda with a gasp. “Look!”
The four waited while the bay galloped nearer, still
pounding on the hard sand, with the rider, by a miracle,
clinging on, her hands fastened in the mane of the
snorting and plunging animal.
“Brenda!” cried Barby suddenly in terror. “If she’s
thrown on that hard sand she’ll break her neck. She’s
slipping. . . .”
As she spoke Barby darted up like a streak of blue
and white lightning, right into the path of the coming
horse. It swerved sideways, plunged in fright, and ran
up into the sandhills, with the figure in the saddle, her
face paper-white, sliding farther and farther to one side.
Like rabbits the other three Bees followed, while Barby
rushed across a bare stretch and again faced the bay.
He swerved again, and stood on his hind-legs, waving
his forefeet almost over the little girl’s red-capped head.
Then with a final wrench sideways he leaped at a soft
bank, and threw his rider into the air, her feet for-
tunately free of the stirrups.
The thud sickened them as they ran forward, but
Barby was close to the girl where she fell, and at once
dropped beside her and lifted the limp head into her
arms. “Call Mum quickly,” she said . . . “and Dad,”
she added as an afterthought. They had become used
to doing without Dad.


Bay, and I rode along this way ... to ... to explore.
But for those youngsters Fd have been going yet ... if
Beryl, leaping the fence which was low in the sand,
ran indoors frantically. Bob, who had been reading, was
upon the scene almost immediately.
With the help of the father Bob carried the small
figure of the unconscious girl into the house, and placed
her on Barby’s bed, which was the first one they reached
from the front door.
“Is she dead?” asked Brenda in an awestruck voice.
“Nonsense!” said her father. “But one of you must
run for Dr Morden.”
It was Barby who dressed first and hastened with
damp hair flying and sandals hastily buckled on, along
the swamp road to the telephone-box at the beginning
of the Bend.
The Doctor picked Barby up on the way to the Bee-
hive, and by the time he arrived the stranger was in
bed, with the tall boots and crash riding-suit removed
by Mrs Campbell, and her short curly hair brushed
back from an extremely pretty face. The girl was con-
scious, very white and shaken, and complained of a
hurt ankle.
The horse had shied at a paper bag, and she had lost
the stirrups. When he had bolted she had merely clung
on and waited for him to stop, but she was slipping
“. . . and I didn’t know the horse. I’ve never ridden
him before, but I am staying with the Hales at Corner
I hadn’t fallen and broken my legs. I never knew a
horse could do so much in such a little time.”
Mrs Campbell sat still while the doctor quickly ascer-
tained that there were no serious injuries, but the girl
moaned and almost fainted when he touched her foot.
“Sprain,” he said briefly, and in ten minutes the foot
was bathed and bound.
“I am frightfully sorry to cause such a lot of fuss,”


the pretty girl said weakly, “and that little girl in the
green-and-red cap really saved me from something
worse. The soft sand was bad enough/’ she laughed
ruefully.
Barby blushed.
It was Barby who took tea and toast into the stranger’s
room (which was really Barby’s and Brenda’s), and it
was Barby who sat and told the girl of all the wonderful
things that had happened of late.
“I heard about it,’’ said the girl, “but I never guessed
I’d be pitched right into Major Campbell’s own front
yard. What an adventure! I am afraid I’ll have to stay
here all night, but the Doctor—isn’t he a duck?—has
reassured my hosts by now as to my safety. I expect
Pepper— now I know why he’s called that—has galloped
home ages ago.’’
Brenda and Beryl filed in rather shyly after helping
with the tea dishes, eager to speak to the rider who had
landed so unceremoniously at their feet. But they were
not shy for long, for this girl sitting back in the bed
was a very cheery and jolly personage, with great grey
eyes that could smile at nonsense while her lips were
quite solemnly set.
“I wonder if the author will call in,’’ said Brenda
suddenly. “He would be awfully interested.’’
“What author?” asked the girl.
“He’s a friend of ours. He lives in a poky little cot-
tage round the point a mile farther on, and cooks
saveloys and sausages over a silly little oilstove that
makes smuts all over his papers, and he eats pies and
pasties from the cake-shop in the Bend, and writes with
a typewriter.”
“I—see,” said the girl slowly. Her eyes were very big
then and filled with a vagueness that somehow hurt
Brenda, who was watching her devouringly. “Does the
author come here often?” was the next query.


“Rather!” came in chorus, and Brenda went on
quickly. “He is an angel, and he was the one who
helped Beryl find my father. He swims and is browner
than his hair which is the colour of honey . . . dark
honey.”
“Is the author going to live here for good?” asked
the stranger in studious reflection.
“Not in that little place. He’s finishing his new book,
and then he’s going to Perth and all over the West to
write things. He wrote a book called The Bloom of the
Peach but he said his sister doesn’t like it. Mum and
my father both say he is a genius, but that he’s too
happy-go-lucky to ever get rich.”
The girl in the bed flushed. “Did he say anything
else about his sister?” she asked.
“He said she had eyes like saucers of grey paint and
pretty hair and wee little soft hands—like yours, I
imagine . . . and that she was the best little pal in
the world, and that he’d rather be with her than any one,
but that he expects he’ll have to marry some one to
keep him company.”
“He didn’t mean that,” snorted Barby. “He said that
bad cooking was not so bad as a wife and bad cooking.”
The stranger laughed aloud. Brenda looked up. “I’ll
get you his book,” she said, and in a flash returned
with the precious volume, which she thrust into the in-
valid’s hands. She put it on the counterpane. “I’ve read
it,” she said curtly.
“Isn’t it wonderful?” asked Brenda.
“It is well written, certainly,” was the short answer,
“but I don’t care for such idealistically beautiful stories
thanks.”
These odd children understood exactly what she
meant, thought the girl in amazement, for Beryl replied
gently: “Perhaps you were cross when you read it.”
Anxious not to cause offence she explained more fully.


“Books always seem different when you’re cross. They
seem to laugh at you, and when you’re not cross they
laugh with you.”
Large grey eyes blinked thoughtfully, then the curly
head tipped to one side as the book was regarded with
a new interest. “Right you are, chicks ... I mean Bees
. . .” she said carelessly. “I’ll read it again and try and
laugh with it. Shoo . . .” and the three obediently
shoo-ed.
The guest settled down more comfortably into the big
pillows, wincing as she moved. Then she opened the
book at the first page.
An hour later Mrs Campbell entered with a tray
bearing wine and biscuits, and the book was turned
reluctantly down on the sheet.
“You are reading Pat Brent’s book,” said Mrs Camp-
bell. “I expect Brenda got it for you. She worships Mr
Brent.”
“Do yow?” asked the girl abruptly.
“We are all very fond of him,” was the reply, and the
girl sipped the wine and crunched a biscuit.
“Would you say,” she then asked, “that the author of
this book is the kind of man who is capable of making
his future with writing?”
“Decidedly! He is whimsically clever and one day we
shall be treasuring the memory of our friendship with
a famous man. Read what Punch says of the book, and
you have our opinion.” Mrs Campbell was quite sure
that Brent was in some way connected with this girl,
and that the apparently casual questioning was disguis-
ing a reason for it.
“I know Brent’s sister,” the girl said later, after a
pause while she frowned and wagged her head several
times. “This girl wanted him to work in his father’s
office and take over the business later. But . . . the author
would not . . . and there was a bitter family quarrel.


The girl was catty and unjustly blamed him for his
father’s death. She would not read the book properly,
and said to her brother that she did not like it and
would not agree with his writing. He went away, and
the girl has been fretting over it, but was too proud
to give in. She really is longing for the old days of
companionship. The brother and sister went everywhere
together.”
“And now . . . ?” insinuated Mum.
“She has taken a long time to find out that she was all
in the wrong.”
“And that girl . . . ?” asked Mrs Campbell softly.
“ ... is me,” finished her companion.
The other nodded, smiling as she did so.
“And then when I was invited down to Corner Bay
I jumped at the chance, and to-day I took that horse
against the advice of my host. I understand cars better
than horses. There are no hand-brakes on horses,
although the accelerator seems to be there all right.
I didn’t expect to be thrown into the famous Major
Campbell’s front garden though, while 1 was exploring
for Pat. It is quite romantic.”
“You were going to see your brother.”
“I don’t know what I would have done. I was rather
unhappy, but I sort of hoped I would meet him,” she
added thoughtfully.
The girl waited for five seconds while Mrs Campbell
took up the tray. “After meeting you and talking with
those stunning kids—and hearing of what you’ve been
through—l realize what an idiot I’ve been.” Then the
low tones broke, and Cleo Brent straightened her back.
“But I won’t be any more. I’m not going to let him
marry some one just to cook for him. . . . Til look after
him in future.”


CHAPTER XXII
NELLY RETURNS
“Why the doleful expression?” asked the author as he
swung himself over the garden fence towards Bubbles.
“You look just like a Bonzo pup.”
“I don’t,” said Bubbles crossly. “Those pups are all
naked and pink and loose. I’m not a pup. I’m a boy.
The girls are talking to the lady who fell offen her
horse, and they won’t let me in.”
“What lady?”
“The lady what fell offen her horse,” explained
Bubbles with exasperating emphasis. He was clearly
pained.
“I quite understand now,” said the author. “Thank
you, my son, for your clever explanation—which, to say
the least of it, was more forcible than polite.”
Bubbles took this for a compliment and bridled with
pleasure, when Brent left him with a “So long—l’m go-
ing to find out about this lady.”
He went down the passage to the room where the
curios were, and peeped in. Major Campbell was writ-
ing at a small table, and rumpling his hair with his free
hand. They conversed for a few minutes then Brent
said: “Who’s the lady who fell off her horse?’’
“Ask my wife,” said the other. “I have been forbidden
to mention a word of it in case I should put my foot
in it.”


“Mention what?”
“There ... go and ask Mary. She’s in the kitchen,
I think, with Bob.”
Sure enough, Bob was found with his mother, who
was slicing cucumbers into a glass bowl.
“Who’s this mysterious lady that the Major is not
allowed to mention in case he puts his foot in it?”
asked the author in a long and rapid sentence.
Mrs Campbell rose, and deserted the cucumbers.
“Come with me, and I’ll introduce you,” she said
brightly.
At the door of the second bedroom Mum paused and
called the Bees. They came out giggling and were
bundled off in the direction of the lobby. Brent by this
time was completely mystified.
“It’s not another Major turned up in female guise,
I hope,” he asked anxiously, and it was Mrs Campbell
this time who giggled. It was almost a giggle, anyway.
She suddenly pushed the horrified author into the room,
and shut the door behind him.
In the lobby three girls were excitedly chattering and
laughing, until Bubbles appeared and was admitted into
the group.
“You’re nice ones, you are,” he grumbled, “going and
talking all the day to that . . . lady in there. Where’s
the aufor?”
“Talking to the lady,” said Barby with a splutter.
“Him too,” said the small boy in terrible accents.
I thought he'd have had more sense.”
It was half an hour later when a cooee came from
the bedroom along the hall, and the whole of the Bee-
hive trooped noisily and hastily from all parts of the
house to the door.
The author was standing by the window with one
hand held tightly by the girl, who was in Beryl’s blue
kimono. She was rosy-cheeked now, and her eyes were


sparkling and merry. She shrugged her small shoulders.
“Allow me to introduce you, Beehive,” said the author
in pride and contentment, “to my sister, Miss Cleo Brent,
who has dutifully and charmingly promised to forswear
a life of luxury and accompany me to the West where
she hopes to frustrate the designs of all matchmaking
females with cookery books under their arms, and has
sworn also never to allow me to eat a saveloy, pasty, pie,
or fritz sausage again.” With an elaborate bow the
author ended his impromptu speech. Perhaps no speech
has ever met with such whole-hearted approval and un-
stinted mirth.
“Mind her foot, you owl,” Bob grunted at Bubbles,
who, in his desire to be in at the death, although not
understanding why so much fuss had been made, had
climbed on to the foot of the bed. He fell to the floor
with more haste than dignity, and Cleo chuckled.
The restored sister was picked up bodily, to the de-
light of Bubbles, and carried to the table by the author.
The author had come into his own again—as well as the
Beehive.
“I think this house,” said Beryl earnestly that night at
bedtime, “is just the loveliest place in the world.”
The remainder of the Bees who were with her agreed
unanimously. On Tuesday Cleo went away from the
house by the sea, in a long red car with the Hales.
Brent accompanied them, but promised to return before
evening.
“If I am to go away with this ruffian,” said Cleo
sternly, from the front seat next to Mr Hale, a portly,
happy person with a bald head and a pink face, “I
insist upon first of all being left alone long enough to
buy a lot of clothes. I shall want heaps.”
“Of course,” said her brother. “That is all you women
think of. Now I . . .” with great emphasis “could travel


for weeks with a tweed suit, a tooth-brush, and a spare
collar.”
“Well,” remarked his sister complacently and finally
as the car started off. “You’re not going to. You can go
shopping when I do . . . two heads are better than
one.”
“Helpl” said Brent feebly, but was whisked away be-
fore the Bees could sympathize—or more probably, grin.
That afternoon, upon returning from school. Beryl
found a letter with a foreign postmark and stamp wait-
ing for her. She tore it open and scanned it swiftly. Mrs
Campbell watched the girl’s expression change from
eagerness to blank amazement, then to dismay and
white-faced despair.
“What is it, dear?”
“I. . . Ohl Read it,” and Beryl thrust the letter blindly
at Mum, and turned away.
“My dear Beryl, (the letter ran) We are now in
Monte Carlo, and as my husband does not approve of
spending any more money, we will be returning almost
at once. You may expect us home within three months,
most likely before. I have some new clothes for you
which I bought in Paris, and I have a French maid who
will also see to your wardrobe and hair for you. The
house is ready and I will expect you to be ready also,
to go with us. Wilbur is there, as you know, and I will
get you an experienced governess at once upon return-
ing. There must be no disobedience or insolence in the
future, or I will find a way to cure it. Please do not
expect Gil to take your part, as you have in some way
wormed yourself into his good graces. You need not re-
ply to this. Mother.”
“Mother,” echoed Beryl, as the letter was handed back
after the last line had been read aloud by Mrs Camp-
bell. “That is her way of smacking my face—even from
over there. I can’t ... I can't go and live with her.


wear one.”
“Hmn.”
“Dad! I’m not rude . . . but I feel I could jump off
the jetty rather than go with Nelly away from you all.”
“Now look here, girlie,” said Dad, pulling the tremb-
ling little creature to his knees and patting her shoulders
softly. “You must wait. Hope on, and see what happens.
What happened to the others, and to me? What hap-
pened to Brent? You are our girlie, and I will find a
way for you, and the weeks will slip by and then we
shall see Mr Gilmore . . . and . . . there, there, don’t
I don’t want a horrid governess. I want to go to school
like other girls, and I won’t be made like a French
doll, with a maid and stupid dresses.”
The angry storm was soon over, but Beryl was de-
pressed and forlorn that night, in spite of the Beehive’s
more or less consoling remarks.
“I’d run away rather than live with her,” she cried
to the girls, her voice strained and thick with crying.
“I just can't face her. If she ever smacked my face again,
Ld stab her, I believe.”
The Major overheard this, and put down his paper.
He saw the overwrought state of the girl they had learnt
to love.
“Hullo!” he said briskly. “Who will stab whom?”
The genial voice calmed Beryl, but she turned to the
man and gulped: “I dread it, Dad, I really dread it.
You don’t know what Nelly is. I would rather live in
a boarding-school if I must leave here, than go to the
new house with a silly maid and governess. What does
Nelly want a maid for? It’s because she thinks it is
smart. If it was smart to wear false noses Nelly would
cry.”
Beryl dried her eyes, rather ashamed of her outburst,
but there was nothing but sympathy on the faces of the
rest of the Beehive, and the words of the Major had


implied a lot. Perhaps he had a plan. She would do as
he said—and wait.
The weeks slipped quickly by, as the Major had said,
with school and books and the sea, and all that the
changing seasons brought with them to interest and
amuse.
It was easy to see that the head of the house had re-
turned, for a new tank was erected, and the roof of the
Beehive painted, and a new name The Beehive was
screwed to the front wall by the door. The fences were
mended, and the track cleared so that the butcher could
get in with his cart, and a fishman stopped regularly at
the back door each Monday and Friday, on his way
from the Port to the beach towns. Mrs Pent came three
times each week, too, and was seriously considering the
Major’s offer of permanent employment, with the small
box room, furnished and papered, for her own domain.
“A nicer lady and gentleman I never did meet, and
the Major such an adventurous person and all,” she
said to the delighted Mrs Morden. “And the washing
so clean too. The house is not what you might call
stylish, but everything’s there, as you might say, and I
know Mrs Campbell wouldn’t set on one, for she’s what
I call a real lady. The only thing that dispers me” (what
did Mrs Pent mean by dispers) “is that I wouldn’t be
able to wash you any more, Mrs Morden. But I know
a good girl, a war-widow what wants to rent me cottage
after me if I leave, and she’d be reely glad of the job,
and constant too.”
The doctor’s wife took the hint, in the interests of the
Campbells.
“I will be quite pleased to have her if you recom-
mend her, Mrs Pent,” she said, hiding a smile. “And
I am sure you are wise to accept the Major’s offer. You


will have a good home and liberal wages and nice people
to work with.”
“Then I will, then,” replied Mrs Pent joyously, re-
lieved from the nightmare thoughts of frogs and floods
at her door. “And the winter coming on, too. Ell tell
them this coming Monday.”
Not only did the fishman, and the painted roof, and
the acquisition of Mrs Pent tell the tale of the Major’s
homecoming, but the girls had pretty Sunday frocks once
more, and were not in terror of scampering their shoes
out. They had new soft school hats of navy and white
straw, and gymnasium suits that fitted wonderfully.
They had new serge pinafores and hand-worked blouses
of heavy silk, and Dad was talking of bicycles, and a
pony for Bubbles.
In the dining-room had appeared a new carpet, large
and spongy armchairs, and some new pictures on the
walls. Mum had a new silk dress that even satisfied Bob,
and Bob himself at last was accepting the invitations
he could now afford to return.
Motor headlights were seen more often flashing along
the swamp road, and the old box of bridge-cards was
taken out from the dusty hiding-place in the sideboard.
Life at the Beehive flowed pleasantly and evenly once
more, with no background of pain and sorrow.
The winter came abruptly with an angry whirl of wind
that tore out of a chaotic purple west, lightning flashed
and thunder roared, until the pouring rain drowned all
other sounds. All night the gale blew, until the inmates
of the Beehive prayed for the safety of the roof. In the
morning it was still raining, Bob ploughing forth in a
long mackintosh of his father’s over his own raincoat.
The children had a great deal of fun wrapping them-
selves in antiquated, unspoilable garments that were
wet-proof. It was very thrilling thought Beryl, who once
would have been disgusted with the whole proceeding,


to tuck spare shoes and stockings under their arms and
cloaks, and run and leap and dart from tree to tree, and
so on to school. Mrs Pent wailed loudly about the “poor
dears” who were out in the wet, but Mum laughed and
said there were plenty of umbrellas. The sea was grey,
covered with drifting veils of rain, and the swamps were
eerie and ghostly, shrouded in fog, through which came
queer and uncanny sounds of bubbling and rippling,
and the cries of frogs.
For days it rained, and then Bob came home one
evening to say that the floods were down again from
the hills, and that the cars had stopped running between
Hamlin and the next suburb on the way to town. Then
die trains ceased, and Bob returned to the Beehive to
tell of houses with water rushing through them, and
fowls and cows and ducks—not that the ducks minded-
standing in puddles in the yards.
Hundreds of dwellings were ruined, while tomato
plants, glass-houses, brick-kilns and bricks were destroyed
in one night—and still the floods came down.
But at last the rain cleared away, leaving the sea
grey, cold, and tossing gently, the sky pale and chilly,
and the swamps still and fiat and echoing with their
guggle, guggle, and the song of the frogs. The water
was too far over the swamp road for the children to come
home that way, so instead, there was a bracing walk
along the beach, piled high with weed and scum from
the sea.
Small boys took their canoes inland, as the sea was
too rough, and sailed them and paddled them over the
land which a week before had been the grazing place
for cows, but was now so deep in water that the canoes
flew over the tops of the boxthorn bushes that had been
inundated.
Gradually the cold and gusty days and nights settled
into days and nights of even keener weather. Frosts and


icy winds cut the skin and froze noses, and over the
swamps in the morning drifted a milk-white mist,
shrouding the wild ducks and cranes from the eyes of
human beings—and Beryl received a telegram.
“Leaving Fremantle to-day. Gilmore.”
“They’re on the way home,” Beryl said to the Major,
as she handed him the wire after reading it. “You won’t
let me go with her, will you?” she asked, with blue eyes
wistful and troubled.
“Not if I can prevent it, girlie,” was the reply, and
with that Beryl had to be content.
A further message—a wireless—reached the Beehive a
day or so later. It read: “Meet at Carslake’s office. Thurs-
day noon.”
Beryl frowned and looked panic-stricken until the
Major said he would accompany her. So on Thursday
Beryl did not go to school, and said good-bye miserably
to the other Bees.
With excusable perversity she dressed in a navy coat
and skirt that already had given her good service, and
tied the black ribbon under the collar of her blouse
savagely. She crammed a black velour hat upon her
curls and gave it a savage stab as she did so. Her gloves
and shoes she chose because of their shabbiness, and glee-
fully took from the wardrobe her rain-coat, which had
faded badly through contact with the salt air.
“I’m ready now,” she said to the Major.
“Good”—and they set forth, the tall distinguished man
and the well-bred little girl, who with all her oldest
clothes could look nothing but what she was. She almost
wished she had dressed better, in honour of the occasion
of being seen with the Major, but Mum had said she
looked very nice, before leaving home, and she supposed
that she must be passable.
At Mr Carslake’s office they had to wait ten minutes
for the Gilmores. At the end of that time, in sailed


Nelly. She was dressed with such extreme smartness that
even the Major was seen to gasp. Beryl stiffened her back
and looked disdainful. A small echo of the Beryl of old.
Nelly swept the room with a gaze that she had
acquired upon her travels, beaming upon the girl in
obviously false affection. “How well you look, Beryl,”
she remarked lightly, “but very swn-burned.”
“I do look better now, don't I?” answered Beryl pertly.
Gil took Beryl’s hands kindly, and she smiled up at
him, thinking how plump and well he looked, but how
tired.
“Well, and how’s Beryl?” was all he said, but she
liked the way in which he said it.
“I feel very well, thanks.’
“Come in with us, Major,” said Mr Gilmore, “to the
inner office,” and the tall man rose and bowed stiffly,
following the others through the doorway.
Beryl, at a nod from Mr Carslake, entered the office
too.
After a little preliminary chatter upon small matters,
the old solicitor tugged at his waistcoat and rustled some
papers suggestively, then cleared his throat noisily,
“Major Campbell wishes to adopt Beryl officially, Mr
Gilmore—leaving her money under your control,” he
said slowly and portentously, and there was a stifled gasp
from the direction of Beryl, and then silence.
The hoot of the motors down in the street made the
silence more intense, and the little girl wondered if the
others would hear her heart thumping.
“Quite correct,” said the Bees’ father, “we are all ex-
tremely fond of Beryl and I hope you will agree to my
proposition. I want no pay for her, and will provide
her with everything the same as my own two daughters,
and bring her up in exactly the same way. Her money
you may do as you wish with. I will not have her if I


am to control the money, although I do not mind a
joint control, with Mr Gilmore.”
There was a discussion then, while Beryl sat in sicken-
ing silence with her fate hanging in the balance. At last
Mr Gilmore spoke determinedly to his wife who was
differing stubbornly with all he suggested. Getting no
further with the matter, the two rose and went to the
outer office, from where he presently returned, alone,
and cheerfully signalled a message of hope to the little
girl on the edge of the leather chair. Nelly appeared in
the doorway, pulling her heavy furs around her
shoulders. “You seem to be able to manage without
me,” she snapped. “I will go.”
“Take the motor, Nelly,” said her husband quietly.
“I shall walk.
“I heartily approve of the Major’s wise and generous
proposition,” Mr Gilmore said to those seated in the
office. “It is an immense relief to me, to realize that she
will be part of a home which I feel is the one place for
her. Although not directly responsible, her future has
worried me more than a little. My own home—er—my
wife and myself do not understand children, and we
could not offer Beryl anything apart from walls, a few
luxuries, and a great deal of loneliness.” He smiled at
the child on the chair-edge. “I can still take you—and
the rest of the Beehive, to a matinee occasionally, eh?
I’m rather fond of pantomimes myself.”
Turning to the others again, he continued, his hands
lifting and dropping a pencil on the desk before him.
“There is a condition attached to Beryl’s adoption, how-
ever, which I think, Major, you will realize as beneficial
to all concerned.”
Mr Carslake muttered one of his typical “Well, wells,”
while Major Campbell sat with unaltered expression,
waiting. Beryl dared not breathe for fear something
might go wrong with this wonderful surprise.


“You see/’ said Mr Gilmore speaking simply for
Beryl’s benefit, “Beryl is gaining something worth untold
gold; something which makes money useless. I think
that she has found that out, have you not, Beryl?” She
nodded, her gaze fixed on his face. “Now, the upbringing
of girls, young or otherwise, is no small matter. Clothes,
and schooling, cost a considerable amount to the head
of the house. We cannot allow the Major to shoulder
all such weights, when the child herself is so well . . .
endowed. Again, we cannot insult the Major by deliber-
ately misrepresenting the offer he has made. Placing all
stupid pride aside, my proposition is this: upon the
twenty-first birthday of each Bee, girls and boys, they
are to receive the sum of five thousand pounds, to be
placed at once in trust for them. Our good friend here
can arrange the legal side of it.”
Major Campbell was staggered. It was a difficult
matter to resent the suggestion of Gilmore’s, yet a
difficult matter to agree to it. He looked at the other
man, troubled and perplexed. “If you consider my offer
generous, Gilmore,” he asked, “then what might yours
be named? Also, placing pride aside, I thank you sin-
cerely for the thought, but I’m afraid I couldn’t allow
•. y j
it.
Mr Gilmore showed his chagrin, while the solicitor
gasped audibly. Would the Campbell-Gilmore alliance
reveal any more shocks for his system?
The Major was obviously uneasy, but Gilmore leaned
forward and pointed with the pencil at the other man.
“Major,” he said seriously, “our children outlive us; are
you a wealthy man?”
There was no thought of offence in that query. “I
am not,” he admitted frankly with a rueful smile to
both men who faced him. “But what I have will not be
seriously damaged by Beryl’s expenses. In my mind, and
in my wife’s mind, and in our hearts, she is our


daughter. Does one expect payment for the caring for
one’s own?”
Beryl bit her lips, through the seemingly interminable
discussion that wound all about her. Mr Gilmore was
not satisfied. “My reference to your financial standing,
my dear Major, was without thought of Beryl. My mind
was busy with a problem.”
Major Campbell’s eyebrows lifted.
“The problem is this: Have you the right to refuse
a large sum of money that would materially benefit your
sons and daughters, when perhaps they would need it
most?”
The other man was silent. At last he looked up, capitu-
lation in his face. “You are right, Gilmore; I can’t refuse
it, for them.”
Then Beryl was sent from the room by the Major, who
had business details to discuss at greater length with
the solicitor and Mr Gilmore. Twenty minutes later the
two men left Mr Carslake rapidly stroking his bald head,
and found Beryl in the outer office, behind the desk,
her feet high on a radiator as she talked in glowing terms
of the Beehive and its inmates to a boy who was listen-
ing avidly, his mouth open, as the graphic recital of the
adventure in the South Seas was recounted. Mr Gilmore
restrained the Major as he stepped forward, and they
listened. The vivid, natural little girl making friends
with the sleek-headed office boy was a revelation to the
man who had known her in the West.
“You’ve transformed that youngster, Major,” Mr Gil-
more said enthusiastically in an undertone.
The other shook his head, whimsically laughing. “Not
I, Gilmore—the Beehive,” was the decided reply.
The street again, a sweets-shop visited, then a hand-
shake between two men who were to be firm friends
through the future, and Beryl with her arms full of
handsome boxes of chocolates which were gifts from


Gil to the whole of the Beehive. “And look out for
them on every birthday,” he warned as he shook hands
with the happy girl, and left her with “Dad”.
“I can’t believe it,” she wriggled. “I just can’t believe
it.” Hoping that everybody they met would know how
much she belonged to the tall, dignified man with the
fine features, she proudly walked beside him to the
station, on their way home. Really home. The Major
understood when she emptied her purse into the cap of
a surprised blind man on the way. “It’s dreadful to be
so happy,” she said to her companion. “It almost hurts.”
That night the Beehive was clamorous with the ex-
citement of really owning Beryl and the magnificent
gifts which had been bestowed upon the Bees. The din
they made was pardonable in the wild discussions of
“what they would do some day”. The glow from the big
log fire fell across the faces of Beryl and Brenda as they
sat at the table, their elbows planted firmly on the dark
cloth, their faces ecstatic.
“I’ll build castles instead of hen-coops,” said Bob
gruffly, “and live in one of ’em.”
“A hen-coop?” wildly cried Barby.
A cushion flew her way; she caught it and tossed
it back.
“And I’ll go to wonderful places,” breathed the more
sedate Brenda, filled with visions of strange cities, plains,
and deserts, “and poke round in all sorts of quaint cor-
ners just stuffed with ancient things.”
“And I’ll go with you,” sniffed Barby, “and dig you
out of musty old book-shops and rescue you from
beggars.”
The Major smiled at Mum as they listened, presum-
ably occupied with reading and sewing. “What about
you, Bubbles? What’ll you do when you are twenty-one?”
“I won’t go to school,” came portentously from that
youth.


“Well,” said Bob. “His ambition will come true, at
any rate.” He looked at Beryl, dreaming at the moment,
with her chin cupped in her hands. “What about you,
Berry?”
She started: “I ... I think, I’d just like to stay home
with Mum.”


Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney


ferf JZj]
<72989000 8051 £
Australian news and information bureau
630 FiFi'CAP'’ 7 —, 'nFJvM C?,N 20, N. Y.
LIBRARY


feiteilil
: '.'.'
■
iiliilli
I-
mmm
§Sp;i:i:iigg|i: ■
SlSci?
wmßm
SSBSKB®KteaBS »w
w l^v&KsNh 1 !? »k®SSBr»
isaipi
mMmm
liiiiiSil
Il H 5 ! SB W J
mmSSBBm
iiiiiii
mmmmm
mmmm
raITOJ Rh’wfer
sjsxgra
mmsmm
illllf
to^SsmSkr?:
SiliSiil:
:feiK»lii!i
iliiliiiii
iiil»
'‘SUgWSJftK-
mmm
fiIBWKKh > .K-'ft!
MS
mmm
