

THE WRECK
OF THE
MISSION BARQUE
“JOHN WILLIAMS,’’
WITH REMINISCENCES OF
DANGER ISLAND;
BY
REY. HENRY ROYLE,
AND THE DATE
REY. AARON BUZACOTT.
Price Sixpence.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELT,BANK, BRIDGE STREET.
1865.




THE WRECK
OF THE
MISSION BARQUE
“JOHN WILLIAMS,”
WITH REMINISCENCES OF
DANGER ISLAND;
BY
REV. HENRY ROYLE,
AND THE LATE
REV. AARON BUZACOTT.
Price Sixpence.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK, BRIDGE STREET.
1865.


The wreck of the Mission Barque
“THE JOHN WILLIAMS,”
&c. &c.
The history of the successful war-ship is the
record of blood-shed aud destruction. The history
of the successful trading-ship is the record
of enterprize and gain. The history of the
successful mission-ship is the record of messages
of mercy sent to perishing men, and blest to
their salvation from idolatry, cannibalism, and
eternal death. The mission-ship is one of the
noblest embodiments of the idea of human
brotherhood, and one of the most effective means
of fulfilling the great commission, “ Gro ye into all
the world, and preach the Glospel to every
creature.” Almost every great Missionary Society
has its mission-ship. While these sentences are
being penned, two of these messengers of mercy,
the “ John Wesley ” and the “ Day Spring,”
have just returned from visiting various groups
of islands in the Pacific; and, having done noble


services, are lying in our harbour. But one of
our most widely-known and useful mission-ships
has finished her service ; and, in the midst of
her work, has gone down into the depths of the
sea. The mission barque “ John Williams ”
perished off Danger Island on her way from
Tahiti to Sydney, on the 17th of May last.
All hands on board, however, were mercifully
saved from the wreck. Before the late beloved
and devoted Missionary, the Rev. A. Buzacott,
was suddenly called to endless rest, he wrote the
following account of the introduction of the
Gospel to Danger Island. He intended it to
form part of the material of an appeal to the
young to aid in launching a successor to the
lamented barque “ John Williams.” For this
purpose he put it into my hand for publication,
so soon as we should know the decision of the
Directors of the London Missionary Society to
have a new vessel for the service of missions in
the Pacific.
PUKAPUKA OR DANGER ISLAND.
As the small group of Islands of which Pukapuka is
the principal has become notorious as the place where the
“ John Williams ” has been wrecked, a short account of
the introduction and success of the Gospel there may at
this time he acceptable.


In November, 1858, owing to a return of my old
complaint, I had finally to leave Rarotonga, the scene of
more than thirty years labour, and where God had
eminently blessed us, for Sydney. In our way thither we
had to call at several of the Islands where our native
brethren were labouring, such as Mangarongaro
(Penrhyn), Manihihi (Humphrey’s Island), and Raka-
anga. We found that in each of these places heathenism
had completely disappeared, the people all under Chris-
tian instruction, Churches formed and the Bible read
by most of the people, Chapels and School-houses erected,
the people happy and contented, and generally in a
state of prosperity.
We had long heard of Pukapuka, but could not
ascertain its exact locality until now ; Captain Williams
had obtained its latitude and longitude from some one
who had fallen in with it. As it was not out of our way
we determined to call, and took with us Luka and his
wife, Native Teachers, from the training Institution at
Rarotonga, to locate there if we found the door open.
On December sth, Pukapuka was in sight, and by the
aid of our glasses we could see many of the inhabitants.
As we approached the shore several canoes were seen to
come through the surf and paddle towards our ship. It
was some time however ere they ventured to come near
enough to have any communication. At last one of the
largest, containing about a dozen men, all standing up
and talking at the top of their voices, approached and
threw some small pieces of matting over the stem of the
vesse l— W e also threw a number of fish-hooks into their
canoe. But it was sometime ere any of them would ven-
ture very near. At last the people in one of the canoes
accepted a ropesend with which to fasten their canoe, and
we drew it alongside, but none of them could be persuaded


to come on board. Luka asked to be allowed to go down
among them to shew them that he was not afraid, but no
sooner had he got there than he was hugged by two
powerful men before and behind as almost to deprive him
of breath. They now began to untie the rope which held
their canoe, but Luba by a desperate effort managed to
disengage himself and seized the rope; they now attempted
to cut it, but by our loud and continued remonstrance
they were induced to let him go, and he escaped again on
board, to the great disappointment of those in the canoe,
and notes of disapprobation from the others that they had
allowed their man to escape. One of them was induced
to climb up the side of the ship and look in over but not
until we had all moved to the other side. While his
attention was engaged in viewing the ship, I quietly went
over to him, and ere he was aware had put my hand upon
his, he immediately descended greatly frightened at his
narrow escape. Night was now drawing on and we had
to stand off, but before parting I enquired for the chief
and told them we should come again in the morning—that
then they must bring off their chief, as I wanted to see
him: this they appeared to understand, and we parted for
the night. .
In the evening earnest prayers were pxxt up to our
Heavenly Father that He would grant success to our
endeavours to benefit these benighted people. Luka’s wife
appeared quite terrified at their wild and savage appear-
ance, and told her husband that she could not think of
landing among them. We had Ngutimoare with us, a
young man from the Training Institution, whom we
thought would be serviceable to us in Sydney, while his
studies could be attended to, as he had no idea of giving
up the mission work to which he had consecrated his life.


On seeing these people, and being a single man, he begged
to he allowed to remain among them. Luka also express-
ed his willingness to accompany him, if we would take
care of his wife, and bring her back again in the vessel.
December 6th, this was the Sabbath, and early we
were close in shore. All on board agreed to leave me and
the native Teacher alone to talk with the strangers.
Twenty-two canoes, averaging twelve men in a canoe,
were soon alongside. The foremost approached us boldly,
and, when near enough, one of the men threw on board
the top part of a cocoanut leaf, saying as he did it: Tera
te naukuru o te Kainga,—that the cession of our country
to you. Ei an to tatou, —let there be peace between us:
which was joyfully responded to by us. We now enquired,
where is your chief ? He was pointed out to us and was
invited on board. He quickly jumped over the side, and,
ere I was aware, I was locked in his arms, and received
a very warm but rather greasy rubbing of noses. I was
quite willing however to submit to this for the sake of
our enterprise. He now turned round to the ladies, to
salute them in like manner, and succeeded in laying hold
of one of them, but ere he had done, all the others had
disappeared. No sooner had the chief got on deck than
he was followed by so many, that our decks became
crowded, and the alarm was soon given that every thing
they could find loose on the decks was walking overboard.
The cook was calling out for his pots and kettles, the iron
belaying pins, the buckets, and a live pig went over the
side in quick time. Mrs. Wyat Gills’ children were also
in danger of being kidnapped, and she had to lay hold of
them and keep them near to protect them.
The mate on seeing one of the buckets passed over-
board, laid hold of the telescope and pointed it to the


canoe where the bucket was deposited, they thought this
to he a fearful instrument of destruction, and all in the
canoe immediately leaped overboard; a rope was thrown
to them and the bucket was returned. This stopped the
pilfering, and a note of wailing was heard from all sides
that they should have been so wicked; those who had
been most active wailed the loudest. I followed the Chief
to every part of the vessel, but he was in such a state of
excitement, attempting to barter his strips of matting and
bits of sinnet, that he could not, or would not give heed to
anything I had to say until late in the day. I now took him
by the hand and led him to a chair and obliged him to sit
still till I had called Luka and Ngutimoare to come before
Rim. 1 then asked him if he would allow these two men
to go ashore with him, and would he treat them kindly,
and take care of them till the vessel returned ? What!
said he, will they go ashore with me ? He then hugged
and rubbed noses with both, and said they should be his
fathers. In a moment he called out to those in his own
canoe to come near, and at a word of command all the
others were manned and waiting around. Luka and
Ngutimoare were again asked if they would trust them-
selves among these wild people ? They answered they were
quite willing, if we would stand off for the night and come
in next morning to see how they did. They now prepared
to go, and were soon ready, taking nothing with them but
the clothes they had on. They came round to give us all
a hearty shake by the hand—the captain, officers, and crew
all standing by, wondering at their courage. The old
chief was already in his canoe waiting to receive them,
and they cheerfully passed over the side of the vessel and
were soon seated by his side. During this there was such
a drumming with paddles from all the surrounding canoes


as almost to put one in mind of an Exeter Hall approba-
tion ; while from more than one of the sailors we heard the
expression, noble fellows, noble fellows ; and such, they
certainly were. It was one of the most interesting sights
I ever witnessed, to see these two courageous young men
venture themselves among such a host of savages. The
chief’s canoe leading the way, and the rest following, they
were soon off with their prize; and we stood off again for
the night. A mixed prayer-meeting was that evening
held on the deck of the “ John Williams,” and earnest
supplications were presented both in English and Karoton-
gan for the safety of our beloved brethren, and the
success of our enterprize.
7th. —Having spent an anxious night, early this
morning we were standing in toward the shore, watching
anxiously for a canoe from the island. After a time, one
was seen coming over the reef; but, instead of approach-
ing us, it seemed to avoid coming too near. We made
towards it, and when within hail, inquired where are
the teachers ? They answered, ashore : we have been
feeding them until they are quite big—accompanying
the words with their folded hands before their stomachs,
to intimate the size to which they had grown. Another
canoe came with the same story. At last, the chief’s
canoe was seen approaching, but without the teachers.
Our anxiety had now reached its highest pitch, and we
thought our worst fears were to be realized. The canoe,
however, drew near; and in answer to the question, where
are the teachers ? the same answer was returned. The
old chief now said he was come to fetch me and Mrs.
Buzacott, the Captain, and any others who may like to
accompany us. This we thought to be a mere decoy to
draw us also into their net: and looking angry at the
chief, and striking my hand on the side of the bulwarks,


I commanded him to go immediately and fetch the
teachers. The old chief now appeared frightened, but
recollecting he had something given him hy the teachers,
which he was ordered to present to me, he held up some
cocoanut leaves carefully folded and tied, inside of which
was a leaf which had scratched on it the following joyful
news :—(Translation) —“ This is a very good land; the
people will not allow us to go on hoard again; send all
our goods ashore. Send also Luka Yaine. Blessings on
you, (or good bye,) pray for us.” This was all we
wanted ; and the chief being invited on hoard, came up,
bringing with him some of the native pudding with
which, he said, they had been feeding the teachers. The
effect produced on us by the letter was witnessed hy these
poor, ignorant people with the greatest surprise ; and I
was both amused and interested to hear the chief describe
the change produced to those who came afterwards on
deck. He said, “ when I came first, they looked so angry,
and stormed at me, saying, where are the teachers ?
where are the teachers ? hut they had no sooner looked at
that bit of cocoanut leaf than they began to laugh, and
invited me on deck, and have been very kind.” He
appeared quite as much astonished as the Rarotongan
chief, who exclaimed, under similar circumstances,
when he carried a chip to Mrs. Williams for some
tool, “ these are the wonderful people—they can make
chips speak.” Luka Yaine was now quite willing to
join her husband, and having dressed the chief in a black
alpacca coat of my own, accompanied with several other
(to him) valuable presents, he left us for the shore, light-
hearted and joyful, with Luka Yaine and the teachers’
goods; and we set sail for Samoa, thankful to God for
the success He had vouchsafed to grant us.
From time to time we had the pleasure of hearing of


the success of the teachers —that idolatry was abandoned,
a church and school erected, and the people all atten-
tively learning the great truths of Christianity.
The Peruvian slavers found their way there, and
succeeded in decoying away some 140 of these poor
people, with one of their teachers, Ngutimoare. Luka
and wife have returned home, and they have now Ohotai
and wife, both excellent and intelligent persons, as their
teachers. The last news we have of Ngutimoare is that
he is some 300 miles inland in South America, worked as
a slave. The likeness of him, accompanying this, was
NGUTIMOARE, Native Teacher at Pukapuka.


taken by my daughter, by the aid of the Camera Obscura;
the outlines are, therefore, correct.
I leave my brother Missionary, the Rev. Henry
Royle, who was on board the “John Williams” when
wrecked at this place, to give an account of their present
condition, and the kindness they all received from these
once wild savages.
Such was Pukapuka when first the native
Christian teachers landed to disseminate the
Word of Grod. The following paper of Rev.
Henry Royle, the devoted missionary of Aitu-
taki, who, with his daughter, were mercifully
saved from the wreck, gives an account of the
loss of the vessel, and the cordial hospitality of
the natives, who, before the Grospel reached
them, were ferocious, degraded savages.
It was early on the morning of the 17th May, that
jubilant month with the churches at home, when we
were called out of a profound slumber by a gentle voice,
accompanied with a light touch-of a soft hand, “Mr,
Royle, get up and pray to God for the ‘John Williams/
she is just upon the reef.” Affrighted I started from my
sleeping place and cast off my night dress, hardly know-
ing what I did, but fully conscious of the reality and
extent of our danger by the dizzy height to which our
fated vessel was raised on the surging billows, and the
fearful roar of the breaking waters. I forgot the “ John
Williams.” I sprang to the couch of my dear child, who
yet lay in profound and peaceful slumber, unconscious


of the anguish of her father and her own proximity to a
watery grave. I looked for a moment on her placid and
innocent features, and spell-hound I could not awake her
to the anguish I was then enduring; it came over me too
like a flash of lightning, that the dear mother’s life was
bound up in that of this dear child. All my agonized
feelings were compressed in one intense prayer, I fell on
my knees and exclaimed, “Oh God! save my child.”
Again at this moment the same soft plaintive hut unexcited
voice of the amiable wife of our Captain, called “Mr. Eoyle,
bring dear Harriet up on deck immediately; throw some-
thing warm round the dear child, but come quickly, the
vessel has struck.” I heard not the awful crash, I knelt
paralyzed by my child.
Now however roused to action, I gently awoke my
child—“ Harriet, my dear, come quickly, the vessel is lost.”
She started towards me greatly affrighted, exclaiming,
“ Oh! Papa, where shall we go ? ” “To God, my child,”
was my prompt reply. I dragged from her sleeping place
the dear child, almost naked, to the deck.
The rudder and the stern had given way. Oh! deeply
affecting was the scene. On the deck stood three aged
saints, from seventy to eighty years of age, four young
children trembling and naked by our sides. Our Aituta-
kian young men came near to us, drew off their upper
garments and took possession of my child.
Somewhat relieved by their devotion, and satisfied
that they were contemplating the means of rescue, I
threw myself with prayerful confidence in the arms of a
covenant-keeping God, and awaited the result.
Orders were given to get out the boats, which, after
great labour, devotion, and many chivalrous traits of
character displayed, they succeeded, (the vessel meantime


filling with water); at length success attended their efforts,
and a call was made for the ladies and children to he put
into the boats. Aiding my venerable friend, the Rev. 0.
Barff to follow, I beheld with greatful emotion their
rescue from an impending death, my own child being
one of the number.
Seated on the deck of the ill-fated vessel, breathing
a prayer for the noble-minded men who composed the
crew of our barque, I saw Mrs. Williams, whom I sup-
posed to be in the boat, approaching the spot I occupied;
she said, “ Mr. Boyle, I give you my place in the boat—
go, take care of dear Harriet, I remain to share the fate
of my husband, I cannot leave him.” My reply
was, “Mrs. Williams, I cannot leave the ship without
orders from the Captain.” She disappeared, and in a few
minutes the Captain came and requested me to enter the
boat, and to keep her out of the reach of falling spars,
but within hailing distance for any contingency. Gladly
did I obey the welcome order, —now out of the reach of
immediate danger I looked around upon the affecting scene.
We a naked throng, our pleasant home a wreck, the tre-
mendous crashes echoed mournfully upon the silence of
the night; every blow the ill-fated vessel received sent a
vibratory stroke to the ship’s bell, and a pang of sorrow
to our hearts.
At five o’clock a.m., while yet dark, orders were
given for all to enter the boats, and to seek a new home
among a so recently savage people.
Forty-two in number occupied three boats. We pro-
ceeded along at safe distance from the barrier reef to
seek an opening, whereby we could communicate with
the natives of Danger Island.
We could not help sorrowfully contrasting our present


condition with that of yesterday, then rejoicingly we
approached these Isles with wealth to distribute among
them, the gift of other churches more favoured than they.
Now we approached them destitute of all things, and sup-
pliants at their shores to seek a temporary home among
them, and beg their hospitalities—uncertain withal as to
how our application would be met.
As the day dawned it opened to the Islanders our x
loss and our dependance upon their sympathies.
As soon as they saw us, crowds of them hastened to
our relief, embraced us in their generous pity, and car-
ried us to their homes.
Clothing they had none to offer us, for they them-
selves were naked, but the best of their food they reserved
for us and brought it daily to our table, denying them-
selves of the only food that we could eat. A sacrifice the
more admired by us, as they could plainly see we had
been deprived of the ability to reward them for such
kindness; their exertions to save from the sinking ship
some provisions, although unsuccessful, yet brought out
a noble trait in their Christian character. But while we
were destitute of earthly goods with which to repay their
kindness, we had still a heavenly treasure of which the
sea could not deprive. God had prepared them in a won-
derful manner by the efforts of our Native Teachers to be
more fully instructed in the faith of Jesus. Day by day
they fed us (42 in number) with their best but still
perishable food, while we preached to them the unsearch-
able riches of Christ,
Day and night too would they have sat listening to
the wonderful story of the Cross, and ofttimes, after we
had been obliged from exhaustion and that from inade-
quate nourishment, they would steal at the dead hour of


night around our home, rapping at each window until
they had found mine, when on inquiry of their nocturnal
visit, they would reply timidly “ Tell us more of the
death of Jesus. Oh! tell us again the word about
Calvary.”
And when we spoke to them of the dying love of
Jesus to sinners, and of His command to His disciples
that that love should he celebrated in the instituted
supper of Our Lord, they asked in the utmost simplicity
with the Eunuch of old, “What doth hinder us?” &c.,
and thus had we the happiness after careful selection and
due examination, to form a Church of Christ in this place;
forty-two individuals made a public profession of their
faith in a Crucified Redeemer. These avowals were made
in the presence of five hundred spectators, who were
appealed to as to the blameless deportment of their
brethren, and no exception being taken to any, we
accepted them as brethren in Christ, to whom we
gave the right hand of fellowship in His name, as the
Church in “ Danger Island.” We need not say that in
our intercourse with these Islanders we found their conduct
strictly honest, not one article rescued from the wreck or
any that floated to shore was detained from us, but every
one restored to its owner. A few years only have elapsed
since the introduction among them of the Word of God.
Then they were notorious thieves and savages but
they have now the Bible and have been taught by its pure
and holy teachings to steal no more, but rather to desiie
to labour with their own hands in the thing that is good
and honourable.
The British Consul, T. C. Williams, Esq., so struck
with this wonderful change in their character, and appre-
ciating their kindness and hospitality to the ship-wrecked


ones, that he sent a present of cotton goods, valued at
£SO sterling, to he distributed among the natives in the
name of Queen Victoria and the British Government.
When we were relieved hy the prompt and energetic
action of the British Consul—and we were enabled to
leave them, they followed us to the ship, and with tears
and lamentations sorrowfully hade us “ Farewell.” Never
will the impression made upon our hearts by the kindness
of these people he erased from our memory. And while
we see in their case the holiness of the Gospel vindicated,
we give God the glory of His own Divine workmanship.
o
It was, indeed, a sorrowful sight to the
rescued crew and passengers, to see the noble
barque settle and sink for ever from view. Had
she had half an hour’s action of an auxiliary
steam screw, she would have successfully beat
against the current, and avoided the fate which
so often similarly threatened her before. Bat in
vain the brave sailors, under the orders of their
officers, pulled in the boats, till they repeatedly
wrung out the perspiration from their saturated
shirts. The force of the current overpowered
their strength, and she sank, as above narrated,
in more than ninety fathoms of water. Several
of the sailors, as well as the captain, could not
repress the tear of sorrow as their loved barque
disappeared under the remorseless waves. To
them she was more than a ship : she was their


home, and the messenger of mercy to tens of
thousands of Christian natives, who often hailed
her as if a messenger from Heaven. She had
nobly served the cause of Christ among the
isles of the sea for more than twenty years. While
other vessels were carrying rum to madden the
natives and counteract all agencies for their
good; while the sailors of many ships carried
demoralization and disease among these islands ;
the “ John Williams ” distributed Bibles in the
mother tongue of hundreds of islands and brought
them Missionaries ; and her captain and crew
had the confidence and blessing of all islands
where she touched.
The friends of missions must thank God that
she was protected in such a long, perilous, bene-
ficent course. Blessing on the memory of the
children’s ship, the barque of peace, the good
“ John Williams.”
But now the question arises, are we to have
another Mission Ship for the isles of the great
Pacific ? and of what kind shall she be ?
It is determined that, by God’s help, a ship
we shall have. All our missionaries in all the
christianized groups implore the continuance of
our aid, without which their work must flag and
decrease.' The christianized natives are coming
nobly forward with liberal subscriptions for


another “ John Williams,” whose welcome advent
may gladden their eyes and fan the flame of
missionary zeal in their hearts. Distance as yet
prevents onr knowing what the children of
England are doing ; but we feel assured they are
collecting for another ship. In several of the
Colonies noble efforts are being made; and we
trust soon to learn that the authorities at home
are procuring a ship with auxiliary Steam power
to escape the peril of winds and currents, that
often endanger and wreck sailing vessels among
the southern coral reefs. New Guinea, an
island as large as England, with many, many
more in the Western Pacific are still sunk in
savage degradation and abominable idolatry.
None but a vessel with auxiliary steam power can
pervade all the groups between New Guinea and
Tahiti so as to sustain successful missions.
Granted, that the building and maintaining of
such a vessel would entail additional expense ;
yet ig'it too much to ask from opulent British
Christians, and from these flourishing colonies to
Maintain one such messenger, of mercy for Christ
to the island's'oft he sea! $
. ’' , ‘
Shall commerce grhdgsh to God one such
V • ... mojT
ves'Sel, While hundreds, dfsuch are employed for
her own aggrandizement ?
Let merchants remember “ who it is that


giveth them power to get wealth,” and let
them deal liberally with the Giver of all good.
Let the young exert self-denial and activity ; and
they will rejoice in the services of a more power-
ful mission ship than their first “ John Williams.”
These colonies profit commercially by the Chris-
tian civilization of the South Sea Islands. They
are honoured to be the nearest points of approach
for aggression on their fearful paganism. May
these colonies be faithful to that light and liberty
that make them prosperous and happy! They
have now an opportunity of proving their loyalty
to Christ and His Kingdom. Reader, God
expects every man to do his duty, and therefore
expects you to do yours in helping the new
mission ship. You can give; you can collect
for the object. “Whatever thine hand findeth
to do, do it with thy might.”
JOHN GRAHAM.
January, 1865.
READING A*]) WET.LBANK, PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
20
THE WRECK OF “THE JOHN WILLIAMS.”




