





■ -¥
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE QUEEN v. BEATON
ADDRESS TO THE JURY.
I feel much honored in occupying’ my present
position, for I well know, and so does the Police Ma-
gistrate of Ballarat, and others like him, that I stand
here a sufferer for righteousness sake —a sufferer, not
to satisfy the forms of law, but to satisfy the malice of
those that hate me ; and in order to enable you to
comprehend how this malice has fallen so heavily upon
my head, I must ask you to glance at my past career,
and by doing so I hope you maybe able here to judge
correctly about how I have been placed as a crimi-
nal before you to-day.
Fifteen years ago I found myself placed in a position
so painful as rarely falls to the lot of man in lands
where actual slavery does not exist. I was worked
from day to day, till I could scarcely stand —my earn-
ings squandered away in debauchery —beaten and
abused—and denied as far as could be the right to
exercise my own judgment in matters of duty; —need
you wonder that I felt desirous of freedom from such
a bondage—need you wonder that I earnestly desired
it for six younger brothers who shared it with me—
that I often shed bitter tears for the sorrows of them
and a mother whom I could not help; and that their
freedom became for many years of my life my constant
dream j'—■that I used my means unsparing to accom-
plish it, - and circumnavigated the globe for their sake ;
they are now all free, and I have learnt the value of


freedom, not only to individuals, but to communities,
for I have lived where it has made all men equal, by
exalting’ all—lived where I have seen it flourishing’ in
all its beauty and g’randeur, and it has ever seemed to
me so heavenly and so fair, that I could not help
loving- it, and from loving becoming its advocate ; and
many of those in power here hate its very name—they
cannot punish me for speaking in its behalf, but they
think to stop my mouth and tie my hands by dragging
me up here, like a criminal, and charging me with a
crime which I never dreamt of committing.
I have lived in Otago, in New Zealand, a colony
whose charter is such as no other under the British
Crown possesses—its institutions are republican—all
are allowed to vote in the election of k their representa-
tives, and the consequence is that they have laws to
suit their necessities. I have seen the operation of these
same laws in the United States, and found that the
lands were- as free to the people as the air they
breathed, and that every one who chose might select
IGO acres of the best land he could find, and by build-
ing upon it and making it his home, secure his title to
it. On coming to this country I found that I could
not plant a cabbage garden without being subjected to
a fine of £5O, because some squatter wanted the land
for his sheep. I found that lands were sold very spa-
ringly at £lO to £l5 per acre, and that although tens
of thousands were desirous of obtaining homes, it was
impossible for them to get them, as the abominable
laws in existence prevented them most effectually from
obtaining a settlement on the lands of the colony, and
consequently the people were huddled together on the
gold fields, or in the towns of Melbourne and Geelong,
without any proper field of employment, and some-
times with scarcely bread to eat, when but for these
had laws they might have been a community of thri-
ving prosperous farmers.


• I was employed as a contractor on the Mount Alex-
ander road at the time the disturbance took place at
Bendigo, and I then spoke freely to the engineer and
his assistants of my abhorrence of these laws, and of
the idea of sending soldiers to shoot and bayonet the
people, because they would not submit quietly to such
gross injustice. I had seen that the government of
the United States exercised a paternal care for the set-
tlement of the people, while that of this country
seemed to aim at driving them out of it, as it it
were afraid of their settling and becoming too powerful
to submit to its oppressive measures. I told them I
had now a proof before my eyes of the truth of what
the Americans told me, that while their laws aimed at
giving equal justice to all, those of England aimed at
making one class very rich and another very poor -
that the first thing people wanted here was a home of
their own, and that was what was virtually denied
them, and that thousands would die from exposure
and discomfort, aud thousands more from drunkenness
and vice, who might be comfortably and prosperously
settled if a proper sphere of action had not been denied
them.
I never for one moment dreamt of giving any offence
to the' engineer by my frankly avowing these senti-
ments, but I soon found out that I had given him
offence indeed in some way or other, for I had pre-
viously finished several contracts much to his satisfac-
tion, and somehow or other I now began to find that
all my work was done wrong*, that in fact I could do
nothing right, and I found that from that time he had
been making snares to catch me, in much the same
w-ay as a spider makes webs to ensnare its victims;
and he soon got me into one of these snares, in which
he had hoped to ruin me both in character and cir-
cumstances 5 and if it had not been for the interference
of Mr. Richard Parker, who was then a Government


Nominee M.L.C., lie would have most completely suc-
ceeded ; and I am sorry to say that from that time to
this I have been persecuted without intermission by
some one or other of these government officials, and I
believe that men who hold republican opinions are
considered dangerous to the interests of those who hold
their commissions from the crown, and that there is in
existence in this land and extensive and efficient ma-
chinery for accomplishing the overthrow of all such.
The laws of England will not allow a man to be lagged
or shot or hung for his opinions, and therefore it is
necessary to get up a charge against him of stealing
cows, or robbing n bank, or something of the sort;
and although I were sent from Ballarat to-morrow in
the chains of a convict, I shall have the satisfaction of
thinking that nobler victims than I am have gone the
same way before me. I have lately made many in-
quiries in Sydney respecting Lang, who was con-
victed of robbing a bank on Ballarat, and all who
-know him say that his integrity is above suspicion,
and I firmly believe that he was one of their
victims. The first time I heard his story told it
struck me that it was the case, and every sub-
sequent inquiry has confirmed my opinion. The party
who robbed the bank is now in Ireland, with (as is
well known) an estate worth £25,000; he was known
in Sydney as a water-policeman, and noted for his low
cunning,—and, from the best information I can glean,
it appears to me that he had been sent to rob the bank,
in order to involve an innocent man in ruin, for no
other crime than that of writing articles in the JBallarat
Times , exposing the evils of our system of government.
And where was there ever such a thing heard of in
England as the manager of a bank being charged with
felony (because a bank was robbed), unless there was
some evidence to prove that he was connected with
the robbery, and in Lang’s case there are none that I


.can find. But it seems that the laws are made very
accommodating- in certain cases here, and particularly
about Ballarat, —of this I shall g-ive you proofs from
my own experience, hut I bless God that there are
judg-es left in this land who would not swerve from
their duty to please any parties, and that I am this
day in the hands of a judg-e from a distance, and a
Ballarat Jury who have neither wish or interest in seek-
ing- to injure me. But I said that there was in existence
a system for accomplishing the overthrow of those who
hold republican principles, and there are good reasons
for the establishment and the keeping up of such a
system, for it is a well known fact that if we had re-
publican institutions, there are many men now in
places of power who are useless, inefficient, or dis-
honest, who would never fill these places by the elec-
tion of their fellow colonists; they know that well
themselves, and know that the establishment of a
better system of government would deprive them of
the places by which they get their bread, and in which
they often contrive to enrich themselves, and they
therefore use every unjust means within their reach
for the attainment of their unholy purposes. There
are, I well know, among them men who would' scorn
to stoop to anything that is wrong, but there are others
among them mean enough for anything, and who will
not hesitate to ally themselves with thieves and pros-
titutes to accomplish their purposes.
The clever engineer on the Mount Alexander Road,
who first taught me part of these truths, began, by
not only finding fault with all my work, but he also
kept back the money due to me on the contract ; say-
ing, “ the Government had run short.” My workmen
summoned me for their wages, and I did not well
know how to do • I had done all my previous contracts
by a verbal agreement of so much per yard, and 1 was
•ftt thistime engaged with one worth about £7OOO, and


wlien it was almost finished, I was requested to sign a
written contract, binding myself to metal the whole
line with hard blue metal, instead of the soft freestone
which had been used on all the contracts up to that
time. I told him, what he well knew, that it would
take £12,000 to do it so ; and that, besides, how could
I do it with such stone when it was already done with
the other; to this he replied, that it was merely a
form which had been sent from Melbourne, and that
all contractors must sign it. I refused to sign it for
some time, but he told me he would give me no money
on the contract until I did it, and knowing he had it
quite in his power to do with me just as he pleased, I
at last signed it and got £6OO, instead of £I6OO which
was due to me, and after I had signed the said con-
tract, the engineer repeatedly exclaimed, “I have him,”
‘ I have him.” I could not tell at the time what he
meant, but I learnt afterwards, to my sorrow, that he
had me indeed. I finished the contract.according to first
agreement, and on requesting payment, he told me he
wanted me to put a large amount of hard metal upon
it before he would pay me; and after calling often on
him, unsuccessfully, for a settlement, he told me one
day he wanted my gig and harness for £4O, which was
iess than half their value, and I informed him he might
have the gig as a compliment, and money besides, if
he would settle with me, as I could not wait for my
money any longer; he then turned round on me, told
me I was a great rogue, that I had tried to bribe him
horn doing his duty, and he would thereby prevent me
from getting another contract on any of the roads of
the Colony; and soon after there appeared an article
m the 1 Argus,’ headed “An attempt to bribe a Go-
vernment Officer,” in which he took great credit to
himself, and I was denounced as an unprincipled
scoundrel ; but had he told the truth, he would have
headed the said article with “An account of how a cim-


ning' rogue had victimised an inexperienced Man,
lately arrived in the Colony.” He told me he would
now make me fulfil the contract according to the writ-
ten agreement, and that I should not get a shilling
until f did so; he also told an acquaintance of mine
that he would put me in jail, because I had signed a
contract which I could not fulfil. I was driven almost
to madness by the cruel sense of injustice with which I
had been treated, and I was constantly tormented as I
lay in my tent, with temptations to load my gun and
watch for him until I got an opportunity of shooting
him. I saw that he had wound me into a snare from
which I saw no way of escape (for the contract ex-
pressly stated that there was to he no appeal from jus
decision). He had frequently -hinted to me, before
asking about the gig, that a bribe would settle the
matter; and as I had earned my money honestly, and
saw no other way of getting it, except by letting him
have his will, I should have felt very glad to give him
£SOO, if I could thereby have obtained the amount of
£ISOO due to me, for I had nearly lost all hopes cf
getting any money from him at all, and would have
sold my chance of it for a few hundred pounds.
Mr. Brees, the Colonial Engineer, who had given
me my first appointment on the roads, had sailed for
England, I knew no one that could help me, and was
preparing to leave, when I heard that a Road Board
had been formed in Melbourne, I told the whole aftair
to the Chairman of the said Board, and he sent Mr.
Harris, tho Inspector of Roads, who rode up 70 miles
to see about the matter; he scarcely looked at my
work, but called me to a public house, asked me il it
was true that I had tried to bribe the Engineer, and
then threatened him with a revolver ? Said he had
formed a bad opinion of me and a bad opinion of my
work, and he should tell the Road Board so on his re-
turn to town. I then obtained, through a friend in


Melbourne, the influence of Mr. Richard Parker, he
had been associated with Mr. La Trobe in the govern-
ment of the Colony, and was known and feared and
respected for his integrity and uprightness of charac-
ter ; it was easy for him to see that I had been drawn
into a snare, and he proposed to have my work valued
and paid for, and it was accordingly taken out of the
hands of the Engineer and valued by two men ap-
pointed for the purpose, and I was paid £1550, instead
of being, as was intended by my enemies, stripped of
everything 1 and lodged in a jail. I then took a sub-
contract under this engineer, and the contractor who
let me it lost every thing and had to fly, with debts
amounting to £IOOO due to his workmen, and I never
got paid for my work.*
I then came to the Geelong and Ballarat Road, and
finished one of two contracts before I was found out;
but as soon as I was known, notice was given that no
siib-contracts would be let, and a Mr. Smith told me
that he was informed by one of the engineers (Mr.
Wetzel) that he had better have nothing to do with
me. I then bought a farm at Burrumbeet, thinking I
should be quit of the annoyance of Government officials
for ever, but in this I soon found I was bitterly mis-
taken j the Eureka Stockade had been got up, and I
was sitting one day in the tent of one of my neighbours,
with whom I was not exactly on friendly terms, be-
cause, a short time before, I had hurt his pride by re-
fusing to loan him money, which he said he could get
from an uncle of his, who was a M.L.C. for Geelong,
only he was too proud to ask it from him. I was ex-
amining a fine x’ifle he had got, and he said he believed
he should have to shoulder it soon, to help to put down
those damned rebels. I said that I had thought about
shouldering one, but that if I ever did, it would be to
help the oppressed and not the oppressors; some eight
days after 1 found, one morning, that a horse of mine


was missing’, I rode round the country but could see it
no where, until I lighted upon this same neighbour
with the horse leading through the bush, at his cart’s
tail, some two or three mile from my farm. I de-
manded what he meant by taking off my horse, he
said he found it in his oats and he meant to drive it
away in the hush. I told him it had never left my
horses before and believed it had been taken from
among’ them at night, and demanded possession of it.
He told me he would give it me only on condition that
I would hobble it; I told him I would do with it
whatever I pleased. lie then told his servant to keep
hold of it, and gave me such a volley of blackguard
abuse that I was very glad to ride out of his hearing;
I then had him arrested for taking off my horse, he
was not locked up, but was treated by Mr. Foster,
the Police Magistrate of Ballarat, with the greatest
kindness, and I with the most disgusting insolence
by this said Mr. Foster and every one about the
place, which was quite deserted by all save those in-
terested, the case having been delayed until all the
others were disposed of; the horse was restored to me,
and my neighbour was told he had done quite right;
he told me that he meant to give me a damned good
hammering on the way home, a threat which I fully
expected him to put in execution, and which would in
all probability have involved my death, as I had been
for years past so weak as to be unable often to walk a
quarter of a mile, and I had to bully the Stipendary
Magistrate before I could induce him to take the usual
course to compel him to keep the*peace. He sued me
at the next County Court for £IOO damages, and I put
the summons into the hands of Mr. Lynn, saying I
would call again with written instructions for a de-
fence, but before the Court came on, I was laid up in
bed, and so dangerously ill that I was not expected to
live; Dr. Stewart, of Ballarat, was attending me, and


lie took a letter from me to Mr. Lynn, stating- that I
was dangerously ill and unable to leave my bed, and
that he must therefore postpone the case on that ac-
count ; Dr. Stewart also left his certificate to the same
effect, or rather, he put both it and the letter into Mr.
Lynn’s own hand, and you may judge of my surprise
on learning that this said Lynn had brought the case into
Court; because, I suppose, he saw I was hated by
these magistrates and it would please them to do so; I
never knew what defence he put in, but I had to pay
£ll4 into Court before I could rise from my bed to do
so, and on asking Lynn afterwards why he did not
attend to my instructions, sent by Dr. Stewart, he said
u that he was very busy in his office at the time he got
them from the Doctor and so he forgot all about it,”
and this was all the satisfaction I ever got ; need I
tell you how, when I have since found myself riding
behind this man in the streets of Ballarat, I have felt
my fingers clasp my whip shaft mechannically, and
thoughts arise in my heart about burying the iron
handle of it in this old hoary sinner’s head; and
this, Gentlemen, was the first sample of justice
to which I was treated in Ballarat The local
magistrates have ever been civil to me, but Mr. Foster
has ever treated me with the bitterest hatred; and
has, I believe, done all he could to j)rejudice the other
magistrates against me; I have never (except on
a late occasion) been brought before their court
without being insulted and mocked, so that I have
ceased to seek for any redress there in any case
whatever. But till case I have just related I
found was only like the scattered drops which pre-
cede a thunder-storm, for my farm became the scene
of an endless series of depradations ; grain, vegetables,
potatoes, tools, eggs, poultry, everything, in short, that
could be conveniently carried off was removed, and I
became fully convinced that a plan had been contrived


for the purpose of plundering*, harrassing and distress-
ing* me until I should be glad to leave the place for
the sake of peace, and that a g*ang* of thieves was
org-anised for this purpose, part of them located in my
own neighbourhood, part at Fiery Creek, and others
at Mount Arrarat; they seemed to be in the habit of
sending* their agents to hire themselves to me, and
during these three years I have lost sixteen horses and
Ido not know how many head of cattle; on one occasion
one of the g’ang I allude to took a double horse dray
load of potatoes to Fiery Creek, and the following day
he returned leading the horses and stating that, at
night, some one yoked up his loaded dray and took it
off, two sets of harness, tarpaulin and all, and he tracked
it into Fiery Creek and told the police there, who couly
not see it any farther, and this was a theft of such a
most extraordinary nature that I do not think and
thief would have attempted it without license from the
police to do so, and that I have good reasons for be-
lieving that our Superintendent of Police at Ballarat
had freely accorded them, for it was only a few weeks
previous to that occurrence, that a part of the said
gang of thieves, who had just returned from an inter-
view with Mr. Foster, came to my house, on Sabbath
afternoon, and demanded some half a week’s wages due
to them, which I told them they would have on Mon-
day morning, but not earlier, as I did not settle accounts
on the Sabbath, whereupon one of them went into my
parlor and siezed a double-barrelled gun, went off with
it and fired it off, then went into a shed where my
brother was quietly employed reading a book and put-
ting the muzzle of it to his mouth he snapped it in his
face, he then struck him a severe blow below the ear,
stupifying him and causing a swelling. I then wrote
a note to Mr. Foster, stating what was going on and
requesting him to send policemen to arrest the men in
question, and he sent me back word that I could do it


myself; my brother is here to-day, and can prove
this, and when he complained of the assault committed
upon him, and of his refusing him redress, he told him
something* to the purport of which was that I was a
bad man, and as he was my brother he must be like
me, and that therefore his being* beaten was a matter
of no moment; that same nig’ht these thieves took a
horse from my enclosure, worth £BO, and were seen on
the road with it 20 miles off, the following morning,
and I pursued them unsuccessfully; and I mention
this circumstance as a proof of the ill will home me
by this Police Magistrate, and if the court will allow
it I am prepared to prove it, and it is important to me
to prove how and why I have been hated, for the
proofs which I can produce of the ill will borne me by
this man, and by Robinson himself, and by the man
who sold me the cow (or one like the one now claimed
by Robinson) is the only grounds on which I can solve
the mystery in which I have ever found this charge
now against me involved. I wrote to the Chief
Commissioner of Police in Melbourne, requesting
the dismission of the Police Magistrate here, on the
ground of his been leagued with thieves, and acting as
an assistant instead of a check to them; he sent me
one or two shuffling replies, and I employed Lalor and
Humffreys to bring the conduct of the Chief Com-
missioner of Police and that of the Police Magistrate
here before the Assembly, in order that they might be
dismissed, or held up to scorn and contempt, but before
Messrs. Humffrey and Lalor had taken their seats in the
Assembly I was charged with stealing this cow and calf,
and was told that the magistrates seemed quite mad
against me, amd would have Robinson charge me witli
stealing his cow, whether he would or not, and had
issued a warrant for my apprehension. Well knowing
the bitter hatred of those I had to deal with, and how
easy it is for a eunning rogue to ruin an innocent per-


son, I fled to Sydney, not knowing what to do, but
believing that some well contrived plot had been got
up for my ruin. I stopped in S} r dney two months, and
on my return I found a letter from the Chief Com-
missioner of Police, of which the following is a copy:—
[No. 1891.]
Police Department,
Chief Commissioner’s Office, Melbourne,
Cth Dec., 1856.
Sir,
With reference to 3'our communication of
the Ist September last, I do myself the honor to inform
you that the whole of the correspondence relating to the
complaint made by you against the Superintendent of
Police at present in charge of the Ballarat District,
having been laid before the Government, the Stipen-
diary Magistrate at Ballarat has been directed to en-
quire into and report upon the matter in question, he
has replied to the effect that it is impossible for him to
institute that enquiry, as in consequence of two warrants
having been issued by the Bench at Ballarat for your
apprehension you cannot be found.
The warrants alluded to are, one for cattle stealing,
and the other for deserting an illegitimate child.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
C, McMahon,
Chief Commissioner.
On examining this letter I concluded that this Com-
missioner of Police had got notice that his conduct
would be exposed, and he had written this letter when
it was not called for in order to blind the public, for
the affair in question had occurred about fourteen
months ago, and he had long ago told me the matter
had already been before the bench and dismissed, and


could not again be attended to, and as any investiga-
tion of the matter by the Stipendary Magistrate would
have probably produced the same result as that of the
Inspector of Roads, I looked upon the proposal with
the utmost contempt.
I beg your attention to this charge which I have just
now stated against Mr. Foster, he well knows that I
have ample evidence to prove it; and it bears very
deeply on the charge now got up against me; both
Foster and the Chief Commissioner of Police well know
that if they can send me otf from here in the chains ot
a convict that then I shall be gagged most effectually,
and it has come to this between them and me—they
must put me down or else I will put them down, or
if I do not it will not be because I won’t try.
This letter was written in reply to one of mine
on the subject, written many months ago, and
I have very little doubt but he fancied before he wrote
this letter that I was effectually frightened out
of this neighbourhood. And I wish you to give
these circumstances your strictest attention. i
can prove that Lewis, the man who sold me the cows,
has shown me the the most violent hatred, as well as
Mr. Foster, and the malice of them and others with
whom they have been associated, is the key by which
alone I can solve the mystery in which this affair is
iuvolved, for it has ever been involved in the deepest
mystery to me, —and all I can tell you about it is
this —that about the 27th September, 1854, a cattle
drover brought a mob of cows and calves, and put
them on my grass, and sold them to Lewis, Robertson
and others. I was from home at the time, and on re-
turning I went to Lewis and bought two cows with
calves which I pointed out to him in the herd. I paid
him for them in his own house and got his bill of sale.
He refused to insert the brands, saying I could do it
myself, as he did not know them. I thought nothing


about tbe matter at the time, but since this charge has
been got got up against me, I have been led to believe
that he must have had some special reason for not doing
so, as he was in his own house at the time, where he
must have had the bill of sale he got the day before
containing the brands and description of the ten or
twelve cows he had bought, and had only to refer to it
in order to fill up the one he gave me. If this had
been done no one would ever have been able to place
me where I now stand, as I could not by any possible
scheming have been led to make a mistake such
as would leave me exposed to the charge now against
me. One of the cows he sold me was a red and white
cow and I now doubt if this cow, which I pointed out,
and bought from him, was Robertson’s cow, and that
on that account he refused to insert the brands in his
bill of sale; or whether he sold me a cow resembling
Robertson’s cow I cannot tell. If he did not sell me
Robertson’s cow he mdt have sold me one very like it,
and it must have been removed soon after I bought it,
as I never saw a cow about the place at all resembling
the one I bought except the one I sold, which Robert-
son now claims. I sold it in the fullest faith that it
was the one I bought from Lewis, but Lewis was the
first to tell Robertson that I had sold his cow to
Hiscock, so that it seems to me he must have been
paying more than ordinary attention to the matte.
I had a quarrel with Robertson about 800 acres of
grass land, which the proprietor, in Melbourne, had
instructed me to take charge of and to prosecute
any parties stealing the timber off it, which is very
scarce in the neighbourhood. Robertson had cut.
down some fifty or sixty tons on it, and I had told
him I was instructed to put a stop to it. I
had found too that he and others had spread a report
that 1 had no right to impound stock from off the said
lands. I told him I had a right to do so, and meant


to exercise it; and as he had disputed it I would send
any stock found upon it to pound the following 1 morn-
ing- which I did. In consequence of these matters
Robertson and myself have not 'been on the best of
terms. I had property at Burrambeet worth £SOOO,
and not long ago I had 220 head of cattle. I have
never had my honesty questioned till this time, and if
I had sold this cow of Robertson’s to any one at a dis-
tance it might have looked like guilt, but the fact of
my having sold it to a neighbor half a mile olf is proof
of my innocence, for such a thing was never heard of as
a man stealing- an animal from a neighbor half a mile on
one side of him and selling it to a neighbor half a mile
on the other side of him. The God who rules in earth
and heaven has thus interposed to defeat their hellish
designs against me, and had it not been that their
rage and malice has urged them on, such a charge as
stealing a cow would never have been for one moment
entertained against me. My forefathers have been
for ages tenant farmers of the Earl of Aberdeen, and
'the meanest wretch that ever bore my name was never
once to my knowledge suspected for a thief. I can
bring forward evidence enough to show that none who
knew me would ever dream of such a thing. I ask
you if a man in my circumstances who has preserved a
character for honesty is likely to turn thief at the age
of thirty-seven.
It is no uncommon thing for one to sell the cattle of
another in mistake, but that would never prove theft
against anyone, unless there were other reasons for it.
But as I said to you already, these men will know
that they must put me down, or else I shall
put them down. . The police magistrate has been leav-
ing no means untried by which he thinks to floor me.
He lately brought forward a person no better than a
common prostitute, for the purpose of exhibiting me
before the public as a villain so corrupt as to be capa-


ble of seducing an unprotected woman, and leaving
her and my child unprovided for, and I have no doubt
but this* was meant to smooth the way for what was to
follow, for any man can easily believe that the scoun-
drel who could be guilty of the one crime would have
no scruples about committing the other. I brought
no witnesses to clear myself of the charge in the
Police Court, because it is long since I ceased to look
for any justice there, but I have witnesses here to
prove that I am neither guilty of seducing the woman
in question nor deserting my child; and as the one
charge was got up to help to fix the other upon me,
I feel called upon to clear myself from an assertion
so unjust and so unmerited.
When this woman came into my service she told
me her father had been a Methodist clergyman in Man-
chester, that her parents were dead, that she had been
four years from England, that her brother was a
brickmaker in Geelong, and had lately bought a small
farm on the Conewarre Lake, she had got an excellent
education, and a stock of excellent books, and the
idea of her being such a wholesale liar never for once
entered my brain. She seemed very pious, and in a
fortnight I engaged to marry her, and wrote to the
Rev. Mr, Hastie, of Buninyong, for that purpose, but
on the following Sabbath I went out to walk, leaving
her in the house, and a couple of accomplished black-
guards in the kitchen. I happened to loiter near the
door for a few minutes, and was much grieved and
surprised to hear an uproarious scene of merriment
enacting by tire rogues in question, and she seemed to
me to be taking a part in it. One of the men came
out evidently to see where I was, and he seemed very
much taken aback when he found I was not very far
off. I paid him off the next day, and began to suspect
my intended wife was not what I expected. I post-
poned the proposed marriage till I should be able to


find grounds on which to form fin estimate of lier
character. This man I dismissed took occasion to
visit my farm the following 1 Saturday evening. He
slept on my sofa all night, and rose at three o clock
next morning, which I thought very extraordinary as
I had often found it difficult to get him up before
eight o’clock. He had told me that lie had main-
tained himself in California by gambling* and showed
me cuts on his person which he said he had got there
while fighting with knives. He was very clever and
I could see he had got some very interesting business
on hand, although what the nature of it was I could
not exactly say. He left my house before daylight
and it struck me that he had concealed himself some-
where for the purpose of having an interview with my
intended bride next night, and I watched his bedroom
door, but found it was not opened, but I discovered by
an artifice that he had stopped nearly all the Sabbath
day in the hut of a man of character congenial to his
own. I became convinced that he must have been
"endeavoring to obtain an interview with the w oman
m question, but I could not conceive how he couk
possibly see her, —the window of her bedroom could
not be opened, and the door of it made a deal of noise
when opened, but I found the hinges of it oiled, w hie i
made me fancy she meant to try to get out there, but
sifter many contrivances I proved to my ow r n satisfac-
tion that she never opened her bedroom door at all at
night, so I went one night and called her, about one
o’clock in the morning, and got no answer, I knocked
at her door and at last tried to break it open, but did
not succeed as it was locked inside, but the nohe I
made was such as no living’ sensible being could lie p
hearing, so I concluded she either was out of her room
or did not wish to speak to me, and on examining her
bed I found the nails of one of the panels in the bottom
of it were broke, and that she could take it out and


get into tlie provision store, and from it into the
kitchen, by the large folding window of which she had
access to the fields; and her guilt being no longer a
matter of doubt to me, I told her to leave, and she
did so in company with one of my men, whom she said
she meant to marry, and he returned with a spring-
cart for her clothes box some days after she left, and
she swore in court the other day that I sent this man
for her clothes, and that I was in Ballarat every day
after she left my farm, whereas I have witnesses here
to-day to prove that I was confined to bed a week
before and a week after she left, and that on getting
up I went up the country a journey of 80 miles, and
on my return went to Melbourne ; and as she bore this
child some ten months after leaving my farm, she
found it necessary to say she was in the habit of seeing
me when she fell with it, to make it appear that it
belonged to me, hut as I have ceased to look for
any justice in a police court at Ballarat, I did not bring
forward my witnesses till I should be likely to find
their evidence attended to, and as this case was gto
up to help to make it he believed that I am capable of
stealing cattle, I have thought fit to state these things
here and to prove them if desirable.
This woman was well aware of the great grief I felt-
on discovering that she was degraded so as to be fit
only to mix with the worthless and those who hated
virtue and all that is excellent. Soon after she left
me she wrote me three letters expressing the bitterest
sorrow for her past conduct and stating that her in-
tended husband on his way home with her clothes had
been drinking, and that in consequence of that he had
upset the cart and broke her boxes, and lost part of her
clothes, and consequently she had broke up her en-
gagement with him. Some six weeks after she paid
a visit to my farm, she shed many tears, and gave me
at different times a very full account of her past his.


tory. She said she was not a clergyman’s daughter,
but one of 26 girls which, to the credit of our govern-
ment had been brought here some four years ago, with
not a soul in the colony to whom they could look for
assistance or advice ; that two or three were married,
some of them dead, and the others were all turned to
prostitution; that she had been seduced before she
was in the colony a fortnight by some old convict;
she had roamed about from one service to another, and
at last lived without a service at all, and earned her
livelihood at diiferent places as a prostitute; she told
me her pretended brother in Geelong was a married
rake who had maintained her for sometime in a private
lodging; that she had been taken to court by Watts
the auctioneer in Moorabool street for stealing his pro-
perty. She also told me of many different thefts
which she had committed. She told me also how she
had been engaged in a party who had laid a plan to
steal a large sum of money from a dwelling house,
which failed in consequence of her timidity. She told
me she had kept up a criminal correspondence with
this old Californian gambler from the first day she
came to my farm, and that she was in the habit of
meeting all the bad characters about the neighborhood
at night. I was much surprised to find the first two
men which I heard of being* summoned on the jury
this session, were two of this woman’s midnight asso-
ciates. I was led to suspect that it was meant to
frighten me off from my trial. There are several
huts near my farm which she told me she enlivened
with her company at night. There are three of
these huts within a stone’s throw of each other, and
one of them is a sly-grog-selling* establishment, where
a single woman lives, and Lewis lives in one of those
adjoining huts. She did not say that she had been in
the habit of visiting all these huts, but as they are
all close to each other, and are all inhabited by conge-


nitil spirits who are intimate together, there is no doubt
but she was a very welcome guest at each of - them in
the criminal capacity in which she had been accustomed
to serve. And as it was about these huts that the thieves
who carried off my horses and other property used to
meet to drink and mature their plans. It soon became
evident to me that she must have been well acquainted
with their proceedings, which I told her, but she would
not admit that such was the case.
She made these confessions to me in hopes that I
would forgive and marry her. She told me she was
with child and she did not know who it belonged to.
She told me the names of some half dozen men she
had been cohabiting with at Ballarat. The name of
one of these men was Leith, a married man whose wife
I had introduced her to, but she soon became much
better acquainted with the husband than the wife, so
much so that she sent him to my farm to steal her
letters and a dissolution of a marriage agreement which
I had required her to put in writing at the time it
occurred or else to leave my farm. He came to my
house one evening while I was on the jury at Ballarat
and said he was a very particular friend of mine and
that he meant to sleep in my room, but the party in
charge of my house said he suspected he had some
meaning in it, and so he sent him to sleep in the
kitchen. She then came herself the day following
from Ballarat to my farm, and made her appearance
in my kitchen about seven o’clock in the morning, said
she came late last night and slept all night in my
stable, (but if she had told the truth I have no doubt
but she could have stated that she stopt all night with
Lewis or some of his neighbours, and that she came
to the stable before daylight, just as she had been ac-
customed to come to her bed before I found her in the
habit of leaving it), she told my housekeeper that
she had been stopping there some time ago, wanted to


see me, was wearied and wished to wash and rest her-
self on the sofa, all of which she consented to. Soon
after I came home, and was a great deal surprised to find
her there, and on examining a leather trunk which stood
in my room, which contained my letters and hers, 1
found she had abstracted her letters from it, not
by unlocking it, but by an opening which she had
made by tearing up the lid of it, and I have a gentle-
man here to-day who heard her say that she took these
letters to enable her to compel me to keep her and her
child. She has mixed with infidels till she has become
like one of them, and can swear to any lie that will
suit her wishes. She swore in court that her child
was mine, but she bore it some ten months after
leaving my farm, and although the child was not
mine, I had written her that I would provide her a
home for it and herself before I left this country, and
that I had ordered my brother to pay her 15s. per
week to enable her to maintain herself and child with-
out being obliged to ask assistance from those who
had helped to ruin her, and on returning from Sydney
to this neighbourhood, to arrange my affairs before
leaving, I became quite indifferent about being ar-
rested ; I found that my solicitor had been employed
to frighten me off by various tricks and falsehoods,
which I kept him ignorant of my having discovered till
lately, when I removed my defence out of his hands
and I believe it was expected that I would be very
glad to run off and forfeit my bail after being a week
in gaol, and that it was made low for that purpose.
They fancied I was simple, and would be easily
disposed of, and I believe some of them are
rather disappointed at finding me here to-day. This
woman I believe gets money and everything else she
wants from her associates about Ballarat, and she was
not brought to court to extort money from me, but the
Police Magistrate wished to exhibit her to the public


as a victim of mine, wished to make it be believed that I
promised to marry her, then seduced her, then deserted
her and my illegitimate child, and he thinks that by
making- it be believed that I am capable of all this, it
will easily be believed that I am capable of stealing
people’s cows.
I am told / that this good lady and this Police Ma-
gistrate are observed to be very intimate together.
She lately boasted to me of having dined with him at
his own table on Christmas day, and boasted of the
variety of wines that were in circulation on the occa-
sion. I have often studied the characters of the two
of them, and I never saw a better match, and I have
no doubt they enjoy together all that satisfaction
which kindred spirits feel in each other’s company,
and if I were to hazard an opinion about whose pro-
perty this child of hers might be, I shoidd think it not
at all improbable that it may belong to this Police
Magistrate himself.
The day after he had her up against me he had five
unfortunate girls in court charged with being prosti-
tutes, and he looked very virtuous while in the witness
box giving his evidence against them. 1 sat and
looked at him and I thought he was not then reckon-
ing that the people of Ballarat would ever know that
only the day before he had knowingly brought up a
prostitute more detestable than any of them for the
purpose of helping to ruin an innocent man. I thought
too that it was kind of him and others such to help to
make such girls what they are and then punish them
for being what they had helped to make them, for if
laws were made expressly on purpose to convert these
gold fields into one universal den of drunkenness and
prostitution, they could not fall on a better method to
do it than by keeping the people from obtaining homes,
as is done now by making land sell, as it did
lately near Lake Burrambeet, as high as £B,


£lo and £l6 per acre; and because they cannot
punish me for speaking- against these bad laws, they
must get me charged with stealing cows, and then
they can shove me in a convict’s chains, and shave my
head, and lodge and feed me like a dog, and give me
work to do which I could never accomplish, and then
lash me for the non-performance of it, till death re-
move me beyond the reach of their wickedness. I
have often been led to question myself of late whether
or not I did right in not joining those brave men who
fell in defence of their liberties. I excused myself to
my conscience from the duty at the time, on the
ground of their being driven into action by their pas-
sions and not by that calm deliberate determination of
purpose which a principle of duty alone can inspire;
but now that I have found so many wicked people
combining to rob me of my good name, my property,
my liberty, and my life, I have often thought that by
their treacherous ingenuity they might succeed in
placing me where I would weep, and wish in the bit-
terness of my soul that I had made my grave among
them, instead of being led away to die like a convict
and a thief. If I had the health I once had
I might have laughed in scorn at all the ills
their malice could have inflicted upon me, but/
five years ago I had my constitution so broken*
with ague and fever that I have not been able to get
over my farm ever since without a horse to carry me,
and what in health would have been sport to me, would
be death to me now. I woke two nights in succession
in the Ballarat jail shivering with cold, and the fol-
lowing morning I was seized with a fever so violent
as, left me scarcely able to stand when taken to court.
I was bailed out for £SOO, and it would have been a
trifle for me to lose who had property here worth
£SOOO, and when my father had lately died and left
me a property in my native place of more value jthan


the one I own here; and I believe it was expected
that after I had been exposed as a villain I would fly
like a coward; and if I had been let alone I should
have gone quietly out of the country; but it seems to
me as if God had arrested me to testify against the
wickedness of these wicked men, and against the
wicked means which they use to put down any one
who would interfere with the iniquitous system of go-
vernment which now exists here; and if I was the first
that had been called to suffer on this account I might
be surprised, but I am only called to follow in the wake
of young Lang and his honored father, who has done
more for the g’ood of these colonies than any one who
ever landed on these shores, and yet he has been made
familiar with imprisonment for opposing these evils.
He lately told me himself they would hang him up at
the top of any of the streets of Sydney if they could
find any excuse to enable them to do so ; but posterity
will raise monuments to his memory when those who
injured him are rotting in abhorrence; and I stand
here prepared to suffer till I die for the noble, holy
and righteous cause which he has so ably supported;
and if my sufferings and death would in any degree
advance the interests of civil liberty in these lands, I
should think that I had not suffered or died in vain,
I well know how easily the Almighty can enable
me to bear far more than all their malice can inflict
upon me, for since this trouble came upon me, and
while prostrated by illness, I have felt the light and
joy of heaven streaming through my soul till it ha»
sent the tears in torrents down my cheeks; they might
shut me up in a convict’s cell, but they cannot shut
out the presence and blessing of God from me, and
that will make it a palace, when the gnawing worm
and fire of hell is burning in the guilty souls.
It is more than fifteen months since I had seen that
my ruin was resolved upon, and I had employed Ran-


kin and Douglass to advertise my farm and sell it;
and suck was the rage of Foster against me that on
one occasion he refused in his official capacity to take
my oath, (as Mr. Douglass can testify, when he called
upon him with me for that purpose); and it seems
this feeling of ill will is extending to every department
of the government establishment, for when I first had
occasion to write to the Survey Office, Captain Clark
replied promptly and politely to my letters, hut the
last communication I sent in that direction was treated
with sdence, and when I complained to Mr. Humffray,
M. L, A., of Mr. Foster’s conduct, he said he knew
it was customary to withdraw protection from such
men as me; and when I have thought of a Police Ma-
gistrate using* the power which had been delegated to
him for the purpose of enabling criminals to harrass and
rob and ruin an honest man, I have felt so exasperated
that I could have torn the heart from his bosom and
yelled for joy to have scattered his brains about, and
if it had not been that I had learnt from my Bible that
vengeance is the prerogative of the Almighty, and
that I could not arrogate it to myself without proving
that I had no faith in his providence or grace. I
would have made dung for the earth of his carcase,
and that of half-a-dozen others like him; and I hope
the jury will forgive me for using such strong ex-
pressions, for when I think of all the cruel injustice
that has been heaped upon me since I came to this
neighbourhood, I find it very difficult to use temperate
language in speaking of it. I well know there are
many noble excellent men connected with the govern-
ment of this colony, and I have nothing to say against
them, but only against a system of evil which gives
scope to the wickedness of bad men.
I believe it had been expected that I might be sent
away quietly from here as an ordinary convict, and I
find it is easy to make tools of lawyers to make ignorant


or'bad jnen say and swear to anything they please which
may help to accomplish their wicked ends. They don’t
doubt my honesty, they well know I am too honest
to let their evil practices go on unnoticed, and there-
fore they want to get me away from here; —but if
they should succeed in convicting me I shall have the
satisfaction of thinking that the people of Ballarat
will know the reason of it.
Jurymen, I have tried to show you why and how I
have been hated, and I would now once more call your
attention to the facts connected with the accusation
now against me, it has been and will continue to be in-
volved in mystery to me, but I think it is no very hard
matter to guess pretty correctly about how it has been
brought about. This prostitute, which I have al-
ready referred to, entered my service on the 14th
of August, and six weeks after I bought two cows
off Lewis, —and at that time this woman was in
the habit of visiting these huts at night, and she was
quite aware long before that time that I had become
suspicious of her character and would not be long in
discovering it, and all the prospects of a good marriage
and plenty of money and all that would vanish, and I
can easily fancy that nothing would be more delightful
to the natures of such a parcel of devils than to re-
venge their disappointed hopes by getting me into
just some such trap as they had set for me. And
the countenance of such a gentleman as the Police
Magistrate would greatly encourage them to such an
undertaking, and that this was not wanting I had
plenty of proofs, for it was about this period that
Strachan took off my horse, and that my horse and
gun were taken; and on the morning following that
occurrence I was visited by two of her associates from
these huts. I was not very much in the way of seeing
them often at my farm, and they did not seem to have
any particular business with me, but they had known


from her what had taken the night before, and
had come to have the pleasure of seeing me look very
unhappy after seeing my brother assaulted, and my
horse and gun carried off, and the assistance of the
police denied me; and these associates of her’s were
all deeply interested in the marriage. Some of them
I believe had a difficulty in getting their rations—
ray store was always well supplied —and I discovered
at had been a store for general use, for one day near
the close of her career I found a cwt. of meat disappear
in one piece,—and if thehnarriage had been brought
about I have no doubt but some one of her gambling
associates would have thought it an excellent game
to treat me to a charge of buck shot, or dispose of me
in some convenient way, and there would have been
a lady and a fortune and a farm for him, and all
those debauched enjoyments which such souls can
delight in, —but if all their schemes should fail
revenge would be sweet, and I can now see plainly
that when Lewis sold me these cows he had some
scheme in view, although I did not dream of it at
the time, —for I can now perceive distinctly that
the reason he assigned to me for not putting the
brands on his bill was not the true one—he said he did
not know them and I could do it myself—but he had
O’Bryan’s bill by him at the time, and had only to
refer to it in order to complete mine, by putting the
brands on it; and now he swears that he sold me a
white and yellow cow instead of a red and white one,
and he fancies that I have lost his bill of sale, as I had
alone till I found it again, and he thinks no doubt to
help to prove me guilty by denying the color of the
cow, and proving that she did not resemble Robinson’s
one, —and it appears to me that he must either have
sold me his cow or one veiy like it, and that soon
afterwards it had been removed from the mob, leaving
no one at all resembling it except this one now


claimed by Robertson’s, and I have no doubt but
be bad been watching the result of bis invention
with no little interest. McDougal can testify to the
malice be showed me a week or so before, be told Ro-
bertson that Mr. Hiscock bad bis cow, and that I bad
sold it to him. This Lewis is known as one of the hard-
est drinkers about Burrambeet, and a man who will sell
his body to the devil for drink will not care much
what may become of bis conscience and bis soul, and I
believe him to be an excellent tool to do any dirty
work which harlots and police magistrates might
sug’gest to him. 1 can scarcely believe that Robertson
is so base as to plot to ruin any one, but he was mean
enough to bear me an ill will because I had been au-
thorised by Mr. Glass, of Melbourne, to stop him from
cutting timber on his lands, and so he had proposed
with the advice of Lewis to vent his'dislike on me by
charging me with stealing his cow, and he now tells
me that although he is quite conscious of my innocence
he is compelled to swear that I stole the cow* or else
he will be liable to be punished himself; —and I found
my solicitor had been his adviser as well as mine, and
when I requested an explanation of the circumstance,
he said he could make him say whatever he pleased,
which he tried to make me believe was a very great
advantage to me, but I was sorry to find he had been
using this advantage for the use of my enemies, and
so I got another who did not seem likely to join with
them against me; and although all that malice could
do has been done for my conviction, the God of Heaven
has interposed to save me. If I had tried to conceal
this cow by killing it, or selling it to any one ten
or fifteen miles off, as a thief would have done,
then they might have tried and hoped to prove
me guilty of stealing this property, but I defy all the
ingenuity of all the Grown Prosecutors in all the crea-
tion of God to make theft out of such a transaction.


My innocence is so clearly staxnpted on the face of it,
that no one cold fail, for a moment to see it. The idea
of a man stealing a cow from one neighbour half a
mile on one side of him and selling it to another neigh-
bour half a mile on the other side of him, is_ such an
absurdity as was never heard of in all the history of
thievin 0 ’ in all these Colonies. Robertson swears the
cow was driven away from his farm, which is about
as much of a lie as his saying in the Police Court he
lived two miles, instead of half a mile, from my farm.
This cow, as I can prove, was running among my cattle
and on my grass, from the time it was bought till tho
time I sold it. His brand was on the calf, but its coat
was long and I did not see it nor look for it, as 1 had
no suspicion of its being anybody’s but my own.
Robertson’s brand was not on the cow, else 1 should
have seen it when I sold it, and would have made in-
quiry of him about how he had put it there, it this
cow had been branded like his other cattle, then 1
could not have made any mistake; and why was it not
branded when he branded the call ? perhaps it was left
unbranded by accident, and not to mislead me.
I find it difficult to convince myself that he is so base
as to seek to ruin an honest man, and yet I find many
c ircumstances that seem to prove it. He now tells me
he is quite satisfied I did not steal the cow, and that
the Police Magistrate after vainly trying' to induce
both him and Hiscock to prosecute me, had got the
case put to the crown for prosecution, and I believe
Poster and his associates have been so often so success-
fid that they think nothing too difficult for them to
accomplish. There are twenty of their victims sleeping
in the cemetery of Ballarat, besides Lang in bis chains
and God only knows how many more which none may
have ever dreamt of, and I have little doubt but t ia
be hoped by some means or other to add me to ie
list. His spies tried to induce the miners when they


had taken up arms, to attack the Camp, and when
they could not induce them to do so, these spies
shammed firing at the military when they approached
the stockade in order to give them an excuse for
slaughtering the people; and as he and others have now
no unlicensed miners to hunt, they have time to vic-
timise farmers. I wish someone could write and publish a
book on the subject. It would be valuable to the people
here, as well as those at home. It would induce them
to call aloud to sever at once and for ever the unholy
tie by which this country is bound to the parent state,
and if Raffaello’s book did not look so much like
the production of a playacter I should have been in-
clined to think that he was something of a prophet,
for he says there are too many Fosters fostering and
festering on the land, and I have found two of them
who have truly been festering sore to me since I came
to Ballarat. I have not come here to-day to flatter
anyone. I felt myself called upon to come and speak
the truth, and I have come to do it. My brother can
prove that even while living in tents and removing
from place to place, I have been in the habit of leading
nightly in the discharge of those duties which we owe
to God as Christians; and when I think of harlots,
drunkards, and murderers combining to prove me
guilty of the gross violation of the duty which I owe
to my neighbor, in order to deprive me of my liberty
my property and my life I leel as if I could call down
the fire of God from heaven to consume them.
I have heard that I am blamed for breaking down
the Government enclosure, and taking this cow from it,
and although I will not confess to having done so, I
will not deny that I know of plenty who could do it.
I have had the sympathy of every intelligent working
man on Ballarat to whom I have ever spoken on the
subject. I lately heard a miner swear he would take
away this magistrate’s life, and if the people here knew


what I know of this business it would have been no
wonder although this cow had been removed from this
enclosure. It would rather have been a wonder if ten
thousands of them had not collected together and
taken several of the parties concerned in this transac-
tion and hung them up by their necks on the nearest
tree.
. There is plenty of evidence to show that I sold a
cow which Robertson now claims, and that is a very
common mistake, but although I sold it, I defy any
one to say that I stole it. One of my stolen horses
was found some time ago, but it was not in the pos-
session of my next door neighbour but on the Arrarat
gold fields, sixty miles off. Lewis has tried to deny
that he sold me this cow, or one resembling it, and has
been proved a liar by his own bill of sale, which he
believed I had lost. He sold me a cow resembling the
one in dispute, if not the one in dispute itself. Last
winter his friend the lady at the grog-shop told me
she would sell me a leg of meat at 3|d. , as she had
quarrelled with the butcher, and meant to undersell
him. This I found to be untrue, as she never sold
any more. I got the leg of meat; it was a very
poor one, and I believe it had been a leg of my own
cow, the selling of which to me would of course be an
excellent joke to them,
I have a document in my possession signed by every
respectable farmer about Burrambeet that I called
upon, except Mr. Howard, who is on the
jury, and Mr. Cooper who keeps the public
house, and as I have been a member of the
Teetotal society these fifteen years past, I have never
been able to secure the esteem of many such gen-
tlemen in any locality I have ever been in, so that I
did not much wonder. Although Mr Cooper did not
sign the document in question, it is signed by the party
to whom I sold the cow, and it would have been


signed by Robertson bimself only be is afraid he
says of doing anything lest he be prosecuted by the
Crown. This document states that the undersigned,
being settlers near me and Robertson, hereby certify
that they are fully satisfied that I had sold the cow
by mistake, as is often done without any wrong inten-
tion, that my honesty is above suspicion, and that a
snare must have been contrived for me by some ill-dis-
posed persons, and that no man in his senses could
ever for a moment dream of stealing a cow from one
neighbour, half a mile on one side of him, and selling
it to a neighbour half a mile on the other side of him,
as in an open country like that about Burrambeet it
could not fail to be soon found out. They also say
that they have even found me an obliging good neigh-
bor ; and this document is signed by some thirty or
forty of the most respectable farmers in the immediate
neighborhood, and farmers are pretty good judges of
their neighbors’ honesty. They cannot exactly make
out why the Police Magistrate of Ballarat should join
with rogues to set traps for me; they have no know-
ledge of the existence of disaffected scoundrels,
(as the Camp officials used to term them), who
must be put down or driven off wherever they are
found. But I understand all about it myself but God
in his good Providence has broken the snare which had
been carefully set for me as he has done others before,
and he seems to have put me here to day much against
my will, and compelled me to expose the wicked means
which bad men resort to for the purpose of helping to
perpetuate a system of iniquity, and if I have been
honored as the means of doing anything to help to
level it in the dust, 1 shall think myself richly rewarded
for all the loss and trouble 1 have been at or may be
put to.
1 have already been put to a loss of some five or
six hundred pounds by this affair, besides being put


m o'aol, and put to a great deal of trouble and anxiety.
1 found too that some forty head of my cattle and
two horses are now missing, and 1 have no doubt
that the thieves of the district have been un-
usually busy with my property since 1 was engaged
in this matter. When 1 first heard of it 1 believed
it would be a question merely about the price of
the cow, till my solicitor who had been leagued
against me, told me that a warrant had been
sent to my farm (while 1 was in Ballarat) to
arrest me for stealing Robertson’s cow, and 1 now find
it w T as not a warrant as he assured me, but only a
summons. 33ut 1 belioved liim at the and not
knowing well the subtle ingenious enemies 1 had to
deal with, 1 fled, believing that some infernal plot had
been contrived to ruin me, and this was what Mr.
Foster had wanted, and what Mr. Randall had aimed
at, in telling me that Mr Turner seemed mad against
me, for from all 1 have seen 1 have every reason to
believe that he meant to do me justice, and if 1 had
obeyed the summons which he had sent me, I should-
have in all probability been acquitted in the Police
Court, but Foster had got me into the mire, and 1
believe he has been very glad to use every dirty tool
he could lay hold of to shove me into it again when
he feared 1 might get out. And if 1 had been left
alone for a short time 1 would have left the country
as 1 had received a letter sometime ago from Lord
Aberdeen’s factor, stating that he had a valuable pro-
perty waiting for my occupation.
I am no lawyer, and my case needs none; my inno-
cence is engraven on the face of it, and I repeat
what I have said already, that I defy all the Crown
Prosecutors, and all others under Heaven, to make
theft of it, however desirable it may be to do so, and
it is all through the good providence of God, for I
have had plenty of cows sold 10, 20 and 40 miles off,


and if anj one at a distance had asked to buy this cow,
I would have readily sold it, and then I might have
been suspected of stealing it; but 1 take and steal it
from a neighbour half a mile on one side of me, and
sell it to another half a mile on the other side of me,
on the side of the public road to Ballarat, in an open
grazing country, where every one could see it, is an
idea so ridiculous and so absurd, that no man in his
senses, who took the trouble to think of the matter,
could believe that any man, even though he were a
thief, would think of doing such a thing.
There are plenty of highly respectable men here who
have known me from infancy, and can testify to my
integrity. I have in my possession letters and papers
from various ministers in Scotland, and from the Earl
of Aberdeen and his father, which will support their
evidence, and if I were to be punished for this transac-
tion you might as well punish one of the jury if he
should happen to take away his neighbour’s hat out
of the box instead of his own. The trap was strong
and carefully set, but instead of crushing me to death,
it has only as it were caught me by the toe of the boot
and I ought to have little else to do but pull the boot
off and walk away, and while they are gnashing their
teeth in rage at my escape, I can lift my eyes in grati-
tude to heaven, which alone saved me the fate of poor
young Lang. And I hope the jury will exeus® the
jumbled way in which these truths have been thrown
together. I know their existence to be a terrible
reality, but the plough is the only business I have been
bred to, and the necessities my present position have
imposed upon me, a task which my want of a liberal
education has left me ill qualified to discharge.
I have learned since sending this address to the
press that Lang has been set at liberty, which proves f :
that he is now (after spending two years of his best
days as a convict) found to be innocentj—he is not


t 3>\>U ‘"i
36
more innocent than I am, and I hope the jury will save
me from being’ sent after him.
TOWNSHIP PRINTING OFFICE, LYDIARD STREET.




