

COLONISTS’ RIGHT:
HEAVEN’S GIFT ALLOTMENTS,
BY J. S. K.
pßlrmtm:
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.




THE COLONISTS’ EIGHT, &c.
More fully, the subject of these remarks might have been
entitled “The Colonizing Million’s Right; or Heaven’s Gift
Allotments, and Ho Price, beyond a small Law-and-Order
Fee.”
As the pending re-discussion of the Land question affords an
opportunity of getting some attention paid to elementary
views, the following are respectfully offered from a conviction
of their truth, Justice, and necessity. Of course they are far
from new, or even rare, but are seldom propounded in a
definite form, or with the single object of establishing one all-
important principle—the ignoring of which must inevitably
prolong discord and postpone any final and satisfactory
measure.
That principle is the right of the colonizing million to the
land. True, only half a million are here, but a million is the
least number to be assumed as having, or to have, an interest
in the question. With a constant increase of population, by
immigration and births, the day of the million cannot be far
distant. _
The right of the colonizing million to the land is the point
to be established. Once freely recognised, its legitimate con-
sequences are not difficult to be traced. Far from anarchy
and confusion, the very opposite results will then be secured—
all rights respected, all existing interests afforded room.
Let us then see how this right comes to exist.' ■ It is involved
in the truth of two propositions ; first—that the land was a
gift of Heaven to the British nation ; and secondly—that it is
a gift of the British nation and Parliament to the colonizing
million. If these can be established, they are* the axiomatic
truths that ought to shape our legislation.
The Victorian Territory a Gift of Heaven to the British
nation.
The British colonies are the gift of God to the British
nation, or piratical acquisitions. Where the region acquired
is uninhabited, it is clearly a gift. Such is the will of the Crea-


tor, so far as we can ascertain it. “ Replenish the earth, and
subdue it.”—(Genesis i. 27). So says the Mosaic record—a
text, whatever its origin, not likely to be mended, coinciding
as it does with the necessities of our earthly condition and the
instinct of self-preservation.
Where the region acquired is already inhabited, the gift is
to be questioned. Is it not already given ? Can there be a
better title than the undisturbed tenure of ages? If the
people possess the' rudiments of civilization—maintain the
institutions of property, marriage, and civil government, and
cultivate the ground, then, however primitive their ways, the
forcible acquisition of their country is piratical.
When the aboriginal people are so scanty in number, and
in the above respects so deficient that the land lies wholly
waste—a land that might support millions—then, and then
only, may the surplus population of an overcrowded civilized
country say to the aborigines, “We struggle for existence ;
you, the natives of this country, make a most inadequate use
of it. Therefore, without injuring you, we will cultivate it,
for our support and for yours. ”
Thus only can modern colonization be distinguished from
barbaric invasion. It must be a friendly intrusion for the
benefit of all. As a gift of Heaven to the civilised, the newly
acquired territory has its attendant equity and trust. In all
respects must the natives be cared and provided for. How
far this trust has been fulfilled in the Australian colonies, is
not the question here. Let us hope it has not been altogether
neglected.
The settlers having arrived to “replenish the earth and
subdue it,” for the common benefit of themselves and the
aborigines, to whom does that land belong? Were they
exempt from allegiance and legal obligation to any power on
earth, it would belong to the settlers and natives. They
would simply make it their own. But this is not the case
where the settlers are British subjects. The land, proclaimed
a colony, and protected by the British flag, becomes by law
the property of the British Crown, subject to the supreme
power of the state —the British Parliament. If, therefore,
that Parliament, supported by the nation, choose to say,
this newly acquired territory, or its mineral wealth, shall
be made the means of paying the National Debt, no power
on earth can prevent them. In our case, nothing of this sort
has been contemplated.
The Victorian Territory a Gift of the British nation and
Parliament to the Colonizing Million.
When a shipload of emigrants leave a British port, to


suppose them on their way to commit a great trespass, or that
the land of their intended settlement should be withheld from
them, or sold at a price, is about the last idea enter the
heads of the emigrants or the people they leave. They go to
convert the wilderness into a home ; and are encouraged in
their enterprise by the blessings of friends and the good
wishes of all. If shipwrecked and lost, the sorrow is national.
And thus, as to the property of the land, the emigrants des-
tination, the nation virtually says, Take it.
And what says the British Parliament? “The entire
management and control of the waste lands belonging to the
Crown in the said Colony of Victoria, and of the proceeds
thereof, including all royalties, mines, and minerals, shall be
vested in the Legislature of the said colony.” (Victoria 18
and 19, cap. lv., section 2.)
And again, in the Colonial Constitution Act, made part of
the above British Act, as schedule Ist thereto —the 54th
section declares that, “Subject to the provisions herein con-
tained, it shall be lawful for the Legislature of Victoria to make
laws for regulating the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation
of the waste lands of the Crown within the said colony, and
of all mines and minerals therein. ”
Thus, with precision, emphasis, and repetition, is the dis-
posal of our lands vested in the Colonial Legislature—every
function of ownership transferred from the British Legislature
to the Colonial.
For whose benefit? “For the benefit of the present and
future colonists of the said colony. ” This is not said, but left
to be implied —a strange omission. Literally, our legislature
is invested with a power without a trust. Literally, they may
so manage and control the lands as to dispose of the occupation
to themselves —or to a foreign power. Literally, the right or
beneficial interest of the colonists is ignored. But in vain—
if intentional the omission.
The duty of the Legislature, as representatives, consisting
solely in promoting the public good—or in other words the
common interest of the represented, it may have been deemed
superfluous to specify the objects of the land trust, or to refer
more particularly to the persons beneficially interested. It
may have been so. But the tenor of our land laws, the ut-
most profession of which has been to facilitate the settlement
of the colonists on their own property, certainly indicates an
intentional obscurity of the Act on this point. Its language
seems to have been guarded for a purpose—to prevent the
colonists from perceiving too plainly their unfettered right to
the land.
Still, enough has been said. The Act is clear in its effect.


By the above extracted clauses, the British Parliament give
away the Victorian territory—relinquish and transfer, not
only the power of dealing with, but the beneficial interest in,
the whole land of the colony —to whom ?
Certainly not to France, Austria, or any foreign power.
Certainly not to the inhabitants of the British Isles there
remaining.
Certainly not to the Victorian Legislature as a public com-
pany for their own use and benefit.
To whom but to the people who, for their own benefit, call
into existence the legislature invested with this power over
the land. The legislation of representatives is, or should be,
for the benefit of the represented. And when the British
Parliament remit to the legislators of the colony the control
of the lands—they make this control part of the colonial
legislation for the benefit of the colonists. Thus, the meaning
and effect of the British Act, above cited, are as clear as if
expressed in the words ‘ ‘ Colonists, colonizing million, the land
is yours.”
The land is ours. This, the British Parliament, by their
absolute transfer of all right to the Victorian territory, em-
power the colonists to declare, and to elect representatives to
give effect to that declaration. The land is ours ; and for its
fair division in shares, so that we may individually appro-
priate and use it, we have a right to look to our Parliament as
a national committee appointed, with adequate power, for that
and other works.
The Colonizing Million hitherto wronged of this Gift.
With this gift to the colonizing million their representatives
in Parliament are bound to deal precisely in the same manner
as if they, the million, and not the British Parliament, had
entrusted them with its management.
And is it fair dealing with the gift to set it up for sale to
its own proprietors ? And this at a price prohibitive to three-
fourths of those proprietors ? No. It is wrong, and injury-bn
a large scale, whatever the pretext. The simple settlAs- are
thereby made to buy their own property or lose it.
Price is the sum that a purchaser pays to the owner, who
agrees to sell at that sum. But the land already belonging to
the million, to demand of them “price,” is to wrong them.
As well might the trustees under a will demand of the legatees
“price” for their legacies. The gift is not the property of
the legislators; and for them to annihilate the gift to the
majority of the million, by a price, is a wrong. It is not to
fulfil, but to defeat the gift. In effect, those legislators say
to the Almighty, “ Thou shalt not make a free gift of land to


the colonizing millionand to the latter, “thou shall not
accept Heaven’s gift allotments. ” And such in effect is the
voice of past legislation.
Not less than 40 acres at a uniform price of a pound an acre,
says the present Land Act. (Sections 14, 15, 19.) Wonder-
ful fulfilment of the trust of sharing out to the people their
own property !
Legislators ought to know that £4O is more than the great
majority of the colonizing million have to spare as a law-and-
order fee on taking up their shares of the land given them by
Heaven and the British Parliament—that as a price they
ought not to pay it—the property being their own. To the
majority the demand of £4O is a veto, an exclusion. By this
piece of parliamentary magic the shares of the majority in
the common property are to them forbidden—in effect annihi-
lated—might as well be submerged in the ocean. It is for the
colonists to say whether they will submit to this gross and
enormous wrong. Past colonial legislation is not unchangeable.
Their individual rights and shares, though too long undefined,
remain as real and enduring as Providence and a British
Act of Parliament can make them.
We may not impute to past legislators, any more than to
theorising authors, deliberate fraud. Just possibly Wakefield
thought it a very great benefit to the colonising million that
not one of them should be permitted to appropriate to himself
a small plot of ground, or to purchase a less quantity than a
square mile at the price of £640. And just possibly, the
pound an acre system, with no smaller allotments than forty
acres, is a lingering remnant of this unique sort of beneficence.
But whether it be mistaken beneficence, or sinister interest, or
a false notion of revenue, that persists in charging people a
price for their own property, and so in effect despoiling them,
it is high time the spoliation should cease. If our legislators
want a precedent, let them look to Canada and the far West,
where, consistently with the light of the age, plots of a
hundred acres are now given gratis to bona fide settlers.
Were a pirate to land, and say to the settlers of a small and
weak colony, “Come, hand me over £4O a-piece for your
shares of this ground,” he would, in all probability, be re-
sisted to the death. And which of a colonizing million,
in or out of Parliament, has a right to say the very same
thing ?
“ The demand is for your good, ” he may say. “We think
otherwise,” is the answer, “and must insist, with all due
courtesy, that you drop this demand. If benevolence prompts
you, we can dispense with it; if sinister interest, it must be
thwarted ; if a deficient revenue, meet it with taxation or


retrenchment, and not with legalized plunder—for such is
price when exacted as the condition of obtaining our own.
The new Ministry, as a vast stretch of liberality, offer
twenty acres for £2O, with leave to take an adjoining twenty
acres at the same price, payable by instalments in eight years.
Commendable, certainly, in comparison with past legislation,
but only commendable as a step in the right direction. We
want no liberality,»but our own property.
Heaven's Gift Allotments, the first step —their extent.
The Victorian territory may be roughly estimated at fifty
millions of acres. Deduct ten millions for existing engage-
ments and reserves, and there remain forty millions for
division among the colonizing million, or forty acres for each,
supposing they all claim their shares.
But we know from the merest observation that the great
majority will not make their claim, at least for agricultural
purposes, but will confine their industry to customary pursuits
in all their variety. Thus a large surplus stock of land will,
for a long and indefinite period, remain on hand for disposal
by the State,—partly by sale at a fixed price (disputed priority
determinable by lot), and partly by public auction to the
highest bidder, for of both methods of disposal there is need
and occasion.
The first duty, however, is the provision of Heaven’s Gift
Allotments for the normal colonizer —the cultivator, the very
word colonist being from colo, ‘ to till. ’
Let then a simple enactment be passed that any British
subject, upon making a solemn declaration before a magistrate
of his intention of permanent settlement in the colony, paying
the law-and-order fee (to be fixed by the Act), and under-
taking to reside upon the Heaven’s Gift Allotment he selects
for not less than nine calendar months in each of the three
years next ensuing, or to return the grant or certificate of
property for cancellation, with a forfeit of £5, within 42 days,
shall receive from the (office to be named) a grant or certificate
of property, embodying these latter conditions, and, subject
thereto, conferring upon him the fee-simple of that Heaven’s
Gift Allotment.
And what security will be held by the State for the per-
formance of these conditions ? What is to prevent a host of
speculators obtaining these grants, immediately selling them,
and taking themselves off ? Supervision of the State. There
must be a staff of inspectors to visit these allotments, and see
that the condition of residence be performed. Mere residence
is enough. Some use the allottee will make of his land;
whether good, bad or indifferent, ia best left to the dictates of
his interest.


The first plain duty of the Colonial Parliament is to see that
not one of the colonizing million be deprived of his Heaven s
Gift Allotment, if he claim it. Claim or no claim being made,
it is the legislators’ duty to make provision of those allotments
always in abundance to anticipate demand. Of course this
cannot be effected without survey and the preparation of
maps, nor can the individual claimant be assured of his share
without an official certificate, proceedings attended with ex-
pense, and therefore justifying the charge of a law-and-order
fee—but no price. , n .,
The individual colonizer being entitled to a Heaven s vmt
Allotment to the extent of forty acres, if he claim it, the
further liberty is implied of his claiming a less quantity. It
is no matter of course that every claimant will claim his full
share. The same reasons that prevent the majority from
claiming at all will prevent many claimants from taking more
than they want. One may need ten acres and not more for
an orchard; another, a single acre for a factory; another,
only a rood for his residence. And the duty of the State is to
provide these allotments, in equal abundance to meet the
demand.
These Heaven’s Gift Allotments are, or ought to be, tne
peculiar blessing of a colony, exempting a man from rent, the
heaviest burden of the old country, a perpetual payment for
room to exist, devouring the best earnings of the best years of
life, the ultimate sinking of millions.
State Land Sales at a Fixed Price.
We have seen the limit of the Heaven’s Gift Allotments
to wit, 40 acres. If an individual require more, then, as to
the further quantity, he assumes the position of a dealer with
the State, and price may fairly be demanded —a uniform fixed
price—except the further quantity required be extraordinary
in extent.
Areas from 40 to (say) 400 acres should be at a uniform
fixed price (say £1 an acre); because the smaller capitalists,
a numerous class, requiring them, would otherwise be at the
mercy of large capitalists—comparatively few.
For the intermediate class, the uniform price system is un-
doubtedly the most fair and simple. Extended downward to
the humbler class, it is a wrong, as a denial of their Heaven s
Gift shares. Extended upward to the rich, it is a wrong to
the State, which thereby loses the increase of price that would
arise from competition of large capitalists, able and willing to
compete in their offers.
Uniformity of price is apt to seem as fair as equal laws, but
is not really so. “ Equity is, as it were, equality,” says the


old law maxim—a lame recognition of the truth that equity
is equality of dealing, in effect, not in form.
Why, in penal statutes, is the penalty so often left to the
discretion of the judge—ranging from a small sum named to
one much larger ? Because a fixed sum would not effect equal
justice, being over-penal to the poor and a trifle to the rich.
So a poll-tax of £4 per head, imposed upon a population of
half-a-million, would, on paper, raise two millions sterling.
But would the burden be equal to rich and poor, old and
young—man, woman and child ? Its inequality, inequity,
iniquity, would render it impracticable.
And such is the real multiformity of mischief comprised
under the seemingly fair and simple system, uniformity of
price for our lands, as a demand to be enforced in all cases.
Nevertheless, uniform price has its place—an intermediate
one—between the Heaven’s Gift Allotments and the larger
tract sales, say for areas above 40 and not exceeding 400 acres
State Land Sales by Auction.
The surplus public domain, beyond the Heaven’s Gift Allot-
ments, being the common property of the settlers as a state, —■
in other words State property—may fairly be made chargeable
with price, fixed, to the intermediate class of settlers, unfixed
and to be ascertained by auction where capitalists contend for
large sections. By auction in this case no one is wronged.
The State is a gainer by the increase, if any, of the price ; and
capitalists will not bid beyond the sum the land is worth for
their purposes. There is no compulsion to bid high or to bid
at all. The first forty acres the capitalist obtains free, as his
Heaven’s Gift Allotment, and neither he nor the fixed price
purchaser is compelled to take more if he dislike the terms.
And what the maximum of these larger areas ? The existing
Act assigns the limit at a square mile, perhaps too small an
area. The price being £1 per acre, the State cannot obtain
more from one purchaser than £O4O. Were the capitalist
allowed scope to double that extent, neither he nor the com-
munity would seem likely to suffer loss. The outlay of £1,200
for land would generally be followed by at least as large an
outlay for materials and labour.
Objections Answered.
Such is an outline of the land law the colonizing million
have a right to expect and demand—a re-cast of the classifica-
tion of our common property into the following shape:—
I. Land for Heaven’s Gift Allotments.
11. State surplus Lands for sale at a fixed price.
111. State surplus Lauds for sale by public Auction.


Of course, against any such plan a host" of objections will be
raised from one quarter and another—all the old stereotyped
fallacies brought forward that have served as impediments to
any advance of legislation in this direction.
All very well, it may be said, this newfangled scheme, had
no other been established. But what an injustice to those
who have paid price, for others to commence obtaining their
land gratis!
Answer : As to those who only bought what they were
entitled to as a Heaven’s Gift Allotment, why did they pay at
all for their own property ? Why not unite to resist the
spoliation ? Had they not sense to discern that others had no
more right to make them pay than they themselves to make
others pay ? Their tame submission to wrong is no rule for all
after-comers. Shall an illegal toll, or an oppressive tax, be
continued for ever, because many have chosen to submit to the
extortion ? The idea is absurd. Their complaint amounts to
this, that in a certain purchase the individual has paid forty
pounds more than he ought to have paid. Let the law become
what it ought to be, and he may easily adjust the account by
taking up a Heaven’s gift allotment. New arrivals or old,
aborigines, squatters, respectable old hands, naturalized
foreigners, and single women of good character, are, and under
a just law should and would be every one of them entitled to
his or her Heaven’s gift allotment.
We shall be told, as often before, this claim of the land ori-
ginates with a handful of Socialists, holding, with the French-
man Prudhon, all property robbery, aiming to subvert the
very institution of property. Answer: British honesty is
general as British industry—“ the giant that rules the world. ”
Again, to give away the land would be sacrificing the public
domain. Answer : It is not giving, but restoring in a definite
form, the shares already owned in an indefinite form. The
domain is owned by the public, and to keep the public off it,
is to sacrifice not the land, but the owners.
A"ain, this is the .old war of the house of Want against the
house of Have. Answer : Fallacy or falsehood, insolent and
wicked. With the recipients of Heaven’s bounty there is no
distinction of persons. Suppose a ship at sea with direst
famine on board picks up a barrel of biscuits. Is it there the
house of Want against the house of Have to insist upon an
equal distribution ? Colonists bring with them the inevitable
distinctions, intellectual, moral, physical, monetary—but as
realisers of a God-sent boon are equal all.
It would be class legislation, says another. Answer : The
present system is class legislation—excluding the majority of
rightful owners from their own. Anything short of recognising


the right of all to their Heaven’s Gift Allotments must be class
legislation.
Your Heaven’s Gift Allotments will encourage idle pauperism.
Not so. To the vagrant and the loafer compulsory residence
for three years on an allotment would be a punishment little
less than imprisonment or the roads. As a rule, none but the
industrious and intelligent would avail themselves of the Hea-
ven’s Gift Allotments.
The plan is complex, we may be told. Answer : It is more
simple than the plans either of the late or present ministry,
both of which look to a gathering of rent for a series of years,
and must require an army of bailiffs enough to eat up landlord
and tenant.
We hear occasionally—a land revenue is essential to the
maintenance of law and order. Answer : If a dozen small
farmers may not occupy their farms without payment of near
£SOO, it is robbery in the name of law and order—which can-
not possibly need any such impost.
Most emphatically we shall be told that millions of money
have been borrowed on the land-fund as security. Answer ;
The true security is the honest will and ability of the colonists
at large to pay. Making the payment of this debt dependent
upon unfair dealing with the land, was indeed an error, if such
the fact. With our legislators, to see that the colonizing million
have their own land, is one duty; to pay the debt—another.
And a wise and bold statesman will neither sacrifice one duty
for the other, nor disregard either. The colonists must have
their land. And the debenture-holders must be paid their
money, though the infant nation be heavily taxed for the pur-
pose. But to keep the colonists off the land —out of their own
homes—is to nip that infant nation in the bud, to starve the
growing power that has to accomplish the discharge of this
frightful debt.
The new ministry promise to the purchasers a return of
their money in some other shape—roads, local improvements,
and assisted immigration. Again commendable, but liable to
this answer, “If you return us less than we pay, we are
wronged ;if more, we dispense with the boon. The advan-
tages you offer, are to be sought by other means, and not made
an excuse for charging us a price where none is due.”
Mischief of continuing to frustrate the gift.
The voice of past legislation is renewed by the legislation
now threatened—“ Migrators, you may settle in this land,
at the price of forty millions of pounds sterling for the boon,”
—to which the colonizing million, could they collectively
hear, might j ustly reply, ‘‘ By what authority this demand i


Is not the land ours by the dispensation of Providence, and
an Act of the British Parliament ? On that right we
will act, not forcibly, but legally and constitutionally, send-
ing representatives to Parliament to repeal any Act you now
pass that ignores this our right. We will submit to no such
extortion.”
True, this is not actually said, any more than the Colonial
Land Act speaks audibly. True, there is no agitation, or clamour,
or cry to this effect. But the grievance remains. There is deep
dissatisfaction with the law as it stands. It is seen to be at
once lavish and oppressive. But the perception is vague and
without practical effect —from overlooking the distinct pro-
vinces of no price and price, and where price should begin
and end.
The seeming indifference or supineuess of the colonists is
not difficult to be accounted for. People with a certain amount
of money are apt to look only for the arrangements that will
suit their own means, forgetful of the rights of others who
have less. The trader resorting to a populous town to find or
to make room for an establishment, is intent solely on that object.
The miner thinks of nuggets and new rushes. Here there
is a trade interest to be upheld—-there a local object to be ob-
tained. Add to this the possible prevalence of some delusive
political cry, that must run its course like any quack “ ology ”
or “ism” of the day, and there is nothing surprising in a
general obliviousness of the question, What would be the just
land arrangements of a body of settlers first landing in a
colony —arrangements adapted, from their truth and justice,
to a small or large number, and never to be forgotten or over-
looked (as they have been here) without incurring the evils of
disappointment, distress, animosity, and the re-embarkation of
those who have the means. To these might he added, as in-
direct consequences of the present wrong system, much vice and
crime, and many a sad suicide.
Now, whether the masses clamour for their shares without
price, or contentedly submit to the price system, or even say,
“Let it be so; let price be maintained; we don’t all want
land”—whether they offer this or any other excuse for cul-
Jiable indifference about the whole matter, the duty of
egislators is the same. They ought thus to address the
colonizing million—“ Good people, keep your money, if
you have any. The land is yours. Our duty is merely that
of trustees of your property upon trust, to distribute it
fairly among you, and this we will do without fear or
favour—of course without price, the property being yours,
and not ours; though not without payment of the requisite
small fee to ensure proper measurement of the land, with


books of record, certificates of property, and other small ex-
penses attending the distribution of your shares. If some of
you need more than their share, or ground of special value,
in those cases our responsibility is changed, and different rules
must be adopted. For the surplus stock of the state you will
have to pay price.”
Why not at once adopt this tone of legislation, and stay
the mischief inseparable from the old plan ? The new
ministry assure us there are ten millions of acres available for
settlement as fast as settlers are likely to require it—enough for
a long while on the true plan. Once frankly admit and adopt
that plan, and a field will be opened for the capitalist; wealth
freely invested ; the treasury filled ; public works carried on ;
employment abundant—scope for all—and the curse of robbing
the settler for his land swept away.
The policy of the squatters is clear. It is to aid, heart and
hand, in securing to the million their Heaven’s Gift Allot-
ments. It is their policy to be just, seeing they depend en-
tirely upon a generous construction of their claims. Rights at
law to a continuance of their tenure, they have none. Right
cognizable in a Court of Equity, they have none. Their case
is entirely one of moral equity—a just claim to the forbearance
of the State from a consideration that the State itself has
fostered their monopoly—has, by its yearly renewals of license,
led them on for a series of years to the investment of
capital and formation of a class, numbering hundreds of
employers and thousands of employed—a class, therefore, not
to be ruthlessly consigned to ejectment and ruin. True, it is
a case of landlord and tenant. But the State is more than
landlord-—is the supreme power, bound to possess and to ex-
ercise wisdom and goodness, and not aggressively strike down
a being of its own creation. The more rational of the squatters
admit they must recede before the tide of population. Enough,
Heaven’s Gift Allotments require previous survey, so that a
wise and firm government ought to experience little or no
difficulty in adjusting the claims of both parties. But
under the present system how stands the matter ? What are
the comparative positions of great squatters and new arrivals
now ? Mere migrators both—mere wanderers from an old
country to a new—mere fellow emigrants—mere units of the
colonising million—with perfectly equal rights in the sharing
of the Godsent wilderness—we find one holding 1600 square
miles on fortune-making terms, while another may not take
1600 square feet for a cottage without falling into the iron
hands of the law. Is settlement, or prosperity, or even peace,
to be expected with such a system ?
The introduction of a religious link in this argument may


seem to need an apology, which, therefore, is simply that it
was indispensable. It might have appeared sufficient to prove
the Victorian territory a gift of the British nation and Parlia-
ment to the colonizing million—as involving an equality of
their rights; leaving the religious aspect of the case to the
abundance of religious professors, whose very presence might
have indicated the clearness of their right with respect to the
blacks. But the uninquiring, when they do hear it said the
Victorian territory is the property of the colonizing million,
are apt to stare with surprise, and then question after question
will follow, for the most part absurd and irrelevant. To them
at least it is needful to prove the equality of rights of the
colonizing million, whether as missionaries or pirates, and how
it is they are neither, and yet equal shareholders of the common
property—as donees of Providence, with the sanction of the
home government.
“An Act for allotting to colonists their shares, and dis-
posing of surplus lands in the colony of Victoria,” must neces-
sarily contain sufficient matter of detail for a single act. Were
the squatting question admitted, the aborigines question also
might claim to be admitted. The three subjects are distinct,
and each of them worthy of distinct legislation.
Printed at the Herald Office, Bourke Street, Melbourne.


