

The Prophetic Aspect
THE SEVEN
Apocalyptic Churches
iObf* P/mHS
RO* Cj
“None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand.’' — Dan. ail. 10.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
f- l A
9




I MrM
To the beloved brethren of the Philadel-
phian Church, is this short and imperfect letter
most affectionately addressed, with the request
that they will unite with the Author in sincere
and earnest prayer, that—although brief and
exceedingly imperfect—it may, through the teach-
ing and the guidance of the Holy Spirit, be blest
abundantly to all the Churches.
Victoria, March, 1875.




THE PROPHETIC ASPECT
OF THE
SEVEN APOCALYPTIC CHURCHES.
My Beloved Brethren—
In bringing before your notice my
view of the prophetic nature of the Epistles
addressed to the churches, in the Book of the
Apocalypse, I wish it to be distinctly under
stood, that I do not view them merely in a
prophetic light, as they certainly were appli-
cable to the churches to whom they were at
first addressed, but from the fact that the Holy
Spirit speaks of the “ mystery of the seven
candlesticks,” it appears to me extremely clear
that they should not be regarded in the light
of mere ordinary epistles, and that as we
are so repeatedly called to “ hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches,” it behoves
us, through divine assistance, to endeavour
to unravel that which is here said to be a
mystery, and, inasmuch as “ the things of
God knoweth no man but by the Spirit of


God/’ I trust that all who read this letter
will lift up their hearts with me in earnest
prayer, that He may now shed His own light
upon this mystery.
It has been remarked by writers on the
prophecies that we must not suppose because
one interpretation is correct, that any other
therefore must be incorrect. The prophecy
of “ Rachel weeping for her children” was
fulfilled, and yet remains to be fulfilled ; and
the same also may be said, of many prophe-
cies of Holy Scripture, and among others,
the prophecy which is addressed by the Spirit
to the churches.
There is, however, one aspect in particular
in which these Epistles may be viewed, which
seems to me to throw more light upon this
mystery, than any other whatsoever; and that
is, that the Epistles are prophetic of seven
distinct stages of the church’s history.
This view, indeed, has been expressed by
others who have written on the subject, but
I may be allowed to state, that it was enter-
tained by me, without the aid of any of those
authors; and since my views were formed,
I have only had an opportunity of reading
“ Trotter's Plain Papers on the Seven
Epistles.”
The fact that the Book of Revelation is a
prophetic book, and that this portion of it


is distinctly said to be a “ mystery/’ led me
to entertain the view, that the mystery would
be solved, if its prophetic nature were but
fully understood, and inasmuch as names are
often very significant in Scripture, it was
suggested to my mind, that the meaning of
the names given to those churches, might
possibly reflect some light upon the subject;
and it appears to me, after due deliberation,
that the names of all the churches are
remarkably significant; and that in connec-
tion with the history of the church, and the
important matter which is contained in the
Epistles, they distinctly mark seven great
epochs in the Christian church, in its present
earthly state —I say in its present “ earthly
state,” as it is in this state alone that it is
here presented to our view. It is not a
description of the “ glorious church” as it
will hereafter be presented by the Saviour
to the Father, but of the church as it is now
struggling through what the Holy Spirit
seems to call its “boggy” state, for the Epistles
are addressed to the seven churches in Asia,
or as the words may be correctly rendered,
the seven churches in the bog, or the seven
churches in their boggy state.
He, then, that hath an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit saith unto the churches in
their present boggy state.


The first church addressed is that of
Ephesus, and we may clearly gather from
the epistle to this church, that it is only
applicable to those who lived in the days
of the apostles, for none would say they
were apostles, but those who lived somewhere
about the time of the apostles. But there
were some in this church who said they
were apostles, and who were £C tried by the
members of this church, and were found to
be “ liars.”
This then, in connection with the fact of
the Church of Ephesus being the jfirst of the
seven churches, seems to mark the time to
which this Epistle more particularly applies,
and even at this early stage, the church had
lost its “ first love.”
Its members, indeed, were still influenced
by strong desires to labour for their Heavenly
Master, and to maintain the church in its
original purity and loveliness —Ephesus, in-
deed, means desire, and this it is very clear
these Christians had not lost, but their first
love, we are told, had lost its holy ardour,
and without this, Christ would not even own
His Church, and hence He threatened that
He would remove this candlestick out of its
place, unless they were influenced by deep
repentance.
When the Lord calls His people to repent-


ance, He often calls them by severe and
weighty trials, and hence we might expect,
that the next stage would he, a stage of grief
and painful bitterness ; and hence the church
in its second stage, is styled “ Smyrna ,”
which means myrrh, or bitterness.
The whole of this Epistle shows that this
was indeed a time of awful bitterness. Some
of these Christians were to be “imprisoned by
the devil.” They were to have “tribulation
ten days,” and it is clear that they would be
called to suffer cruel martyrdom, for they
were told to be “ faithful unto death,” and
they had the precious promise given, that
they should not be “ hurt of the second
death.”
We might imagine that the G9th Psalm
was composed specially to guide the church
in this her sad and deep affliction, in which
the Psalmist cries with fervour, “ Bring my
soul out of prison, I sink in deep mire where
there is no standing, I am come into deep
waters where the floods overflow me.”
But not only was the church in a state of
fearful bitterness, in what appears to be
marked clearly as her second stage; but
wherever myrrh is spoken of in Scripture, it
is spoken of as something very precious. It
was one of the precious gifts presented to
our Lord at the time of His nativity. It


was one of the ingredients with which the
high priest was anointed to his holy office ;
and both Christ and His church are spoken
of as myrrh in the canticles of Solomon ;
and never was the church more precious in
the Saviours sight, than in this stage of grief
and bitterness, as we may clearly gather from
the whole of this Epistle.
The time to which it prophetically points,
appears to have commenced with the (l ten
days,” or ten years’, persecution under the
Emperor Domitian, but continued till the
time of its deliverance under the illustrious
Constantine.
Under Constantine a neiv era dawned upon
the church. Not only was persecution effect-
ually arrested, but under him the church was
raised to great dignity and honour, insomuch
that many thought that the great millennium
had commenced its glorious dawn upon the
earth.
In this stage the church is called the
church of Pergamos, or, as the word implies,
the elevated church, or the church of eleva-
tion.
At first this church was pure , for even
there where “ Satan had his seat” they “ held
fast the name of Christ, and did not deny
the faith,” but at length they had there, those
who held the doctrine of Balaam, who


taught Balac to cast a stumbling-block
before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto idols, and to commit forni-
cation ; and so also had they there those
who held the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes,
which thing the Lord is said to hate, and
severely did He threaten them, that provid-
ing they should not “ repent/’ “ He would
come to them quickly, and would fight against
them with the sword of His mouth.”
This stage marks the history of the church
from the time of Constantine up to the time
of the glorious Reformation, when the
threatening, “ I will fight against thee with
the sword of my mouth ,” was so remarkably
fulfilled; after which the church of Thyatim
appears.
In reading Trotter’s views upon this all-
important subject, and that (as I have al-
ready stated), after my own views were
pretty fully formed, I cannot possibly
describe the thrill of pleasure which I felt,
to find that his views up to this point,
agreed fully with my own, and that too
without his ever having fixed his thoughts
upon the meaning of the names given
to the churches; and had he been in posses-
sion of this key —for I certainly regard it as
a key which assists in unravelling this
mystery —I consider that his view of the


church of Thyatira and the church of Sardis
would also have agreed with the views
which I have formed, as they appear to me
to be so unquestionably correct.
Trotter’s view of Thyatira is, that it is an
advanced stage of the church described be-
fore (the church of Pergamos), and this view
was formed because the woman Jezebel is
spoken of in this Epistle, as “ seducing God’s
servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto idols but he seems
quite to have overlooked the fact, that the
woman Jezebel is not the church of Thya-
tira, but merely steps in and corrupts the
church of Thyatira, and that too, after the
church of Thyatira had been remarkable for
holiness.
Thyatira means a daughter, and it also
means perfume, and each meaning appears
to me, to be remarkably significant.
The first meaning—daughter —fixes Thya-
tira as an offspring of the church of Per-
gamos ; and the second meaning—perfume
—shows what precious incense would ascend
to God at this period of the church’s history,
and hence the commendation —“ I know thy
works, and thy charity, and thy service, and
thy faith, and thy patience, and thy last
works to be more than the first.”
This is the description of the church, till


“the woman Jezebel,* which calleth herself a
prophetess, is suffered to teach and to seduce
God’s servants to commit fornication, and to
eat things sacrificed unto idols”—the very
evils which the Spirit had condemned in
Pergamos —and God “ gave her space to
repent, and she repented not.”
Ever since the period of the Keformation,
has space been given her for repentance ; but
instead of repenting of her fornication, she is
now endeavouring to corrupt her children
with her deadly doctrines, and now the awful
threatening is hanging over her and all her
children—“ Behold, I will cast her into a bed,
and them that commit adultery with her
into great tribulation, except they repent;
and I will kill her children with death, and
all the churches shall know that I am He
which searcheth the reins and heart, and I
will give unto every one of you according to
your works.”
Thank God, there were to be some in
Thyatira, who would not tolerate this doc-
trine ; and who would not know the depths
of Satan as they would be brought before
them by the accursed Jezebel, and the only
burden which the Holy Spirit puts on such,
is—“ That which ye have already, hold fast
till I come.”
* No doubt Jezebel herself is an advanced stage of the
church of Pergamos, but Jezebel is not the church of Thyatira,


It appears to me that here there is scarcely
any room for comment, as everything appears
so plain and palpable. The past, indeed, we
see in clear and even vivid light. And who
cannot see at present how this cursed woman
is now suffered to corrupt her children ? And
even now there are indications of this Jezebel
and her children, being cast into one common
bed ; in which, if they do not repent, they
must remain for awful judgment; which
judgment will entirely overwhelm them,
when the ten kings referred to in the 16th
verse of the 17th chapter of this book,
“ shall hate the whore, and make her deso-
late, and eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire.”
The next great epoch in the church, was
ushered in by Whitfield and the Wesleys
which the Spirit addresses as the “ Church
of Sardis” or “ the Prince of Joy.” This is
admitted by those who have never viewed
the Church in its 'prophetic aspect.
It is true that Whitfield and the Wesleys
were clergy of the Church of England, but it
is clear that their mission was to usher in a
distinct era in the church’s history.
There can be no doubt but that each of
those individuals who ushered in this glorious
* This is admitted by those who have never viewed the
Church in its prophetic aspect.


era, was a “ Prince of Joy.” How dead were
they to earthly objects ! How intently were
they bent on seeking heavenly treasures, and
on labouring for their heavenly Master, and
with what glowing hopes were they looking-
forward to their Saviours coming ! And if
we look into the writings of those holy and
devoted men, how earnestly do they warn
their followers against earthly things ; and
how did they tremble at the prospect of
their acquiring worldly influences or worldly
treasures!
But this, like most of the other churches,
is represented as being in a terribly declining
state, inasmuch as “ Sardis” —or “ Prince of
Joy”—is now to them no longer applicable.
They still have a name of being churches filled
with joy, for they still have a name to live;
but the Holy Spirit tells us they are dead, or
as we may gather from the context, they
were as churches in a dying state, for they
were called to be watchful, and to strengthen
the things which remained which were ready
to die ; and they were specially called upon to
remember how they had received and heard,
and to hold fast and to repent, and it is clear
that as churches, they were unwatchful of
their Saviour s coming; as He threatened them
that “ if they did not watch, He would come
upon them as a thief”—just as He would come


on those who professedly were of the world—
and “ they should not know what hour He
would come upon them.”
As in Thyatira, however, so in Sardis,
there were a few who had not defiled their
garments, a few who were dead to the w T oiid,
and who were watching for their Saviours
coming, and to all such the Saviour gives a
precious and most glorious promise, “ They
shall walk with Me in white, for they are
worthy, and I will not blot out their name out
of the Book of Life, but I will confess their
name before My Father, and before His
angels.”
No doubt it will be considered strange
that the Holy Spirit says, “ Thou hast a few
names even in Sardis which have not defiled
their garments,” as it would appear from this
expression, that in this church, Christians
would stand in great danger of defiling their
garments; but it seems to me that as no one
can keep his garments pure, without being
always looking and watching for the Saviour s
coming, that the Christians of Sardis do indeed
stand in fearful peril, for it is very clear, that
as a church, they are not looking for their
Saviours coming,* and" we fear that unless
they turn their speedy attention to this
* Inasmuch as they hold that there must be a thousand years
of universal righteousness and blessedness upon the earth
before He comes.


weighty subject, Christ will indeed come
upon them as a thief, and they will not
know what hour He will come upon them.
They will be looking for a thousand years of
universal peace and blessedness before the
great day of Christ’s appearing, and while
the great body of professing Christians in
that church, will be saying, “ Peace and
safety,” then we fear that “ sudden destruc-
tion will come upon them, as travail upon
a woman with child, and they shall not
escape.”
In the language of the Holy Spirit, then,
we would humbly say to the members of this
church, not —“Flee hastily from this church,
and unite yourselves to some other church,
where its members are taught to be looking
daily for their Saviour’s coming,” but, “ Be
watchful and strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to die.” “ Remember
how thou hast received and heard, and hold
fast and repent,” for, as we have already
seen, “ if you do not watch, Christ will come
upon you as a thief, and you shall not know
what hour He will come upon you.” (iii. 3.)
The next stage to which the Holy Spirit
leads us, is, that of the Philadelphian stage,
or that stage where —as the word implies —
the “ love of the brethren ” would very strik-
ingly appear.


It seems to me that this stage commenced
about the time of the formation of the
Evangelical Alliance, and never did it
appear in such a striking light, as it does at
present, in the glorious bonds of Christian
union, which we see in the great revivals of
religion, which are now fast spreading over
Christendom.
This was not to be a union of the
churches, but a union among Christian
brethren, while they would be surrounded
by professing Christians, who would be
made of “ the synagogue of Satan.”
But if we have really entered on this stage,
then —presuming I have viewed the matter
rightly—there will soon be something which
will test our “ patience’’ when it will require
a “ little strength” to keep the word of Christ,
and to confess His name. (iii. 8.)
It seems to me probable that we shall
have some great church union somewhere
about this time, when the prediction to
which we have referred will be fulfilled —
when “ Jezebel and her children” —all, in-
deed, who are influenced by the error of
Balaam, who loved the reward of unrighteous-
ness —will be cast into one common bed
for judgment, which will bring us to “ the
hour of temptation, which shall come upon
all the world, to try them that dwell upon
the earth.”


But from this hour of temptation, there is
a promise made to the Philadelphian Chris-
tians, that they shall be entirely kept. The
original implies, not that they shall be sus-
tained and supported in this trying hour,
but shall be entirely kept out of it.
Our Lord in speaking of this fearful hour,
tells us that there shall be, just immediately
before His coming, “ affliction such as was
not from the beginning of the creation which
God created” (Mark xiii. 19), and He directs
His people to “ watch and pray always, that
they may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man.” (Luke xxi.
36.)
The Philadelphian Christians will probably
be brethren from among all churches, for it
does not follow that when one stage com-
mences, that the other therefore disappears.
There will be the repentant Ephesian
brethren who formerly had “ lost their first
love.” There will be the afflicted brethren
of the Church of Smyrna, some of whom
will suffer martyrdom. There will be the
repentant brethren of the Church of Per-
gamos. There will be “ the rest” of Thyatira
who will “ hold fast until the Saviour come ,”
and the “ few” of the Church of Sardis, who
were “ watchful, and who had not defiled


their garments but whoever may compose
this church, inasmuch as they will all escape
“ the hour of temptation,” so also will they be
all attending to their Saviour s loving although
truly solemn admonition, by watching for
His glorious coming, and praying always
that “they may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to
pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.”
(Luke xxi. 36.)
With regard to the nature of the escape
which the Philadelphian brethren will have
“ from the hour of temptation,” it is clear
that it will be an escape entirely away from
earth, as the hour of temptation will come
“ on all them that dwell upon the earth.”
This escape was typified by the transla-
tion of Enoch before the ungodly world was
deluged with a flood. It is referred to by
our Lord in the parable of the wise virgins,
who “ went forth to meet the bridegroom,”
and by St. John in his description of the man
child who was caught up to God and to His
throne (Rev. xii. 5), and by St. Paul, who
tells us that “ we who are alive, and remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall be caught
up together with the risen saints, to meet the
Lord in the air” (1 Thess. iv. 17) ; and in the
14 th chapter of the Book of Revelation this
glorious company is spoken of in the first


five verses, as “ standing on Mount Zion,’’
and singing a “ song which none could learn
hut those who were redeemed from the earth,’’
and we clearly gather from the following
verses, that these will be redeemed from the
earth, before the hour of His judgment comes.
The next and final stage, and a stage to
which I believe we are very fast approaching,,
is that of the Church of Laodicea, the mean-
ing of which is “just people,'’ and their
boast is : “I am rich and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing.”
As we have seen that the Philadelphian
stage is to be a loving union of the Saviour’s
brethren, so it appears to me that the
Laodicean stage, is to be a cold and lifeless
union of lukewarm, self-satisfied, and worldly
churches, which union will, perhaps, pay all
respect to what is called in the present day
“ scientific principles,” and which, so far as
we can gather from the name which the Holy
Spirit has been pleased to give it, will be
based upon professions of strict equity and
justice, and as in this Epistle these Christians
are described as being “ rich and increased in
goods, and in need of nothing,” so the same
condition seems to me to be described in the
seventeenth chapter, with the woman Jezebel
sitting in proud triumph at her head —after
having “ intoxicated the kings and the


inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her
fornication” —“arrayed in purple and scarlet,
and decked with gold and precious stones and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full
of abominations and filthiness of her fornica-
tion and her song of triumph is—now that
she sees herself surrounded with her children,
and sitting in great worldly glory —“ I sit a
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorroio ;” and it is in this stage that St. John
is called to see her fearful and alarming judg-
ment, which judgment is described in the
Laodicean Epistle, by Christ “ spueing it out
of His mouth;” and in this seventeenth
chapter, by ten kings making her “ desolate
and naked, and eating her flesh, and burning
her with fire.” (v. 16.)
I cannot conceive, when I consider how
churches generally are wedded to the world,
and how very much they are unlike the Bride
of Christ, that the term “ great whore” can
be applied exclusively to any church, as it
appears applicable to all churches who, in the
Laodicean stage, will join together in this
worldly union, or, in other words, to “Jezebel
and her childrenbut even in this fearful
stage, Christ will have His chosen people, for
in this final stage, Christ is said to “ stand at
the door and knock,” and His people are
called to “ come out of her” before she


meets her final judgment—“ come out of her.
My people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.”
(xviii. 4.)
It is perhaps difficult to say whether or
not the Laodicean stage will have set in
before the Philadelphian Christians will be
taken from the earth; but they will certainly
be taken away before the last hour of her
judgment comes.
We have seen that in this church, Christ
will have His people, and inasmuch as all
His people must be gathered to Himself,
before “ the battle of that great day of God
Almighty 7 ’ (xvi. 14), were it not revealed,
that there is to be first the gathering of the
“ first fruitsand after the great tribulation,
the gathering of the “ harvest” (see Rev. xiv.),
I should certainly conclude, that none will be
gathered, till after the commencement at least
of this last and most alarming stage.
But as the first fruits and the ingathering
were clearly typified by two great Jewish
festivals, and as the “ great multitude, which
no man could number,” are said to have
come up out of “ the great tribulation and
as the first fruits and the harvest are clearly
separated in the chapter to which we
have referred, by “ the hour of God’s jud;
* See the Greek.


ment,” it seems to me that the first fruits
may he gathered any moment, even before
the commencement of the Laodicean stage;
and that, therefore, we should be daily and
hourly looking for the Saviour’s coming
I have now endeavoured, according to the
light which God has given me, to bring
before my brethren what the Spirit saith
unto the churches, and must humbly ask
them, in conclusion, not to look so much
to what is said to any of the churches in par-
ticular, but —as the Holy Spir it saith —“ He
that hath an ear, let. him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches
Although the various stages in the
O o
churches’ history, appear to me to be so
clearly and distinctly marked; there never
was a stage, in which each of the Epistles was
not applicable to every Christian.
If we have lost our first love, however
laborious we may be, or however anxious fo
maintain pure doctrines in the church, let us
carefully remember, that God will “ remove
our candlestick out of its place, except we
repentand thatHe may see it needful, to
bring us into deep affliction, to restore us to
our former state.
Again, it is not sufficient that we hold /ast
the faith, and confess the name of Christ, as
did the elevated Church of Pergamos ; for if


(like her), we hold unholy doctrines, and cast
a stumbling-block before the church, by eat-
ing things sacrificed unto idols, or by com-
mitting fornication, Christ will come to us
quickly, and will fight against us with the
sword of His mouth ; not, indeed, merely as
He fought against the elevated Church of
Pergamos, but as He shall hereafter fight
against all ungodly professors of religion, in
the great day of His appearing, when, “ with
the breath of His lips He shall slay the
wicked.” (Isa. xi, 4.)
Again, it is not sufficient that He “ whose
eyes are as a flame of fire” should behold with
approval our “ works, our love, our service,
our faith, and our patience.” He may indeed
smell in us a very precious and delightful per-
fume, yet, although He will not cast us off on
account of our being the daughters of the ac-
cursed Jezebel, inasmuch as the “ children shall
not bear the iniquity of the parent ” (Ezek.
xviii. 20), yet if we be at length seduced by
our parent, to commit the very sins for which
she herself was so severely censured; we
must expect to meet at length her fearful
and o’erwhelming judgment; when in her
maturity of wickedness, the infidel kings, to
whom we have referred, who shall ultimately
make war against the Lamb (see Rev. xvii.
14, and xix. 19), shall “make her desolate


and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire.” (Rev. xvii. 16.)
Again, it is not sufficient that we “have a
name to live, that we received and heard the
word,” and that our hearts were filled with
unutterable joy, for all this was true of the
hearers whom our Lord describes, as “ seed
which was cast into stony ground,” for
though there may be very bright appearances
at first, the stony ground will never bring
forth perfect fruit. “The hour of temptation ”
is very rapidly approaching, and “ in time of
temptation,” all such will “ fall away.”
If, then, we are in a dying state; if we are
not looking and watching and longing for
our Saviours coming; if our feelings do not
agree with the writer of that glorious hymn,
“ How happy is the pilgrim’s lot,” oh, let us
remember “how we have received and heard,”
and let us “hold fast and repent,” or else —as
we have already seen —Christ will surely
come upon us as a thief, and we shall not
know what “ hour He will come.”
Again, it is not sufficient that we be
depending on our justice and integrity, and
that we be fully satisfied with our condition,
for it is in this very stage that Christ will
view the church, as being “ wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked,”
and that He will no longer regard it as His


church, but will “spue it out of His mouth, ,y
after which it will become “ the synagogue,”
or church “ of Satan,” for when Babylon
falls, the kings of the earth will agree to
give their kingdom to the Beast (xvii. 17),
and those who are made of the synagogue of
Satan, will in that synagogue “ worship the
Beast and his Image (see Kev. xiv. 9), until
at length this “ vine of the earth is cast into
the great wine-press of the wrath of God”
(xiv. 19)
But not only do these Epistles furnish us
with solemn warning, but, perhaps, there is
no other part of Scripture in which we are
furnished with such words of comfort.
Even in the churches’ darkest aspect, Christ
does not immediately reject His church, but
first stands knocking at the door, and seeking
for admittance; while He calls them in this-
patient and long-suffering attitude ; and tells
them that “ if any man will only hear His
voice, and open the door, He will come in to
him and sup with him, and he”—says his
patient and forgiving Lord—“ shall sup with
Me,” and further, to allure and to inspire
them with confidence, He says —“To him that
overcometh, will I grant to sit with Me in
My throne ; even as I also overcame, and am
set down with My Father in His throne
and in each of the Epistles, where churches


are admonished, there are like words of
precious comfort, and when nothing is re-
quired but words to comfort and sustain His
people, He tells His people in their bitterness
and sorrow, who it is who is the cause of their
affliction. “ The devil shall cast some of you
into prison while He tells them in the pros-
pect of their cruel martyrdom, that they
“ shall not be hurt of the second death,” and
tells them to endure “ unto death” with noble
faithfulness ; while He holds out to them the
glorious prosjject of “ a crown of life.”
And with what holy joy and triumph should
Christ’s loving brethren, hail the Epistle to
the Philadelphian Church, the stage on which
I doubt not we have even now already en-
tered. There seems indeed to be some inti-
mation given that this stage will be a stage of
trial, but what will be the trial, when com-
pared with “ the hour of temptation which
shall come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth ;” but—as we have
already seen —the Philadelphian Christians
will have nothing to do with this hour of
temptation, for before this hour of temptation
comes, they will be taken from the earth, and
whatever may be the nature of their trials,
they will have “ a little strength,” and will
“ keep the word of Christ’s patience,” and
“ will not deny His name.” Before them


Christ will set “ an open door,” and one which
“ no one will have power to shut,” and hence
this door will continue open, so long as they
are on the earth.
“ The hour of temptation” will not come
till the Antichrist appears, but the mighty
influences of the Spirit —here described as “a
little strength”—which will appear in these
Philadelphian Christians, as they will be
found witnessing for Christ, and gathering
the elect into His fold ; will hinder the mani-
festation of the Antichrist, till this church
indwelt by the Spirit, be “ taken out of the
way” and then I fear that (for a season at
least) this door will be shut, for then instead
of heavenly messengers of truth, God will
send on those who have refused His light,
“ strong delusions to believe a lie, because
they loved not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.” (2 Thes. ii.)
It is in this Philadelphian stage, that
Christ tells His people He is coming quickly,
and to those before whom He has set this
open door, He says, “ Hold that fast which
thou hast, that no man take thy crown;” and
again, “ Him that overcometh will I make a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out, and I will write upon him
the name of my God, and the name of the
city of my God, which is New Jerusalem,


which cometh down out of heaven from my
God, and I will write upon him my new
name.”
Oh, that all who have “an ear” may
hear in time, “ what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.”
“ The things that are,” are not intended to
continue long ; and soon those who shall be
on the earth, will have to enter on those
things which shall be “ after these.”*
Oh, pray that you may be accounted
worthy to escape “ the hour of temptation,”
and to “ stand before the Son of Man,” and
should you have to pass through that fearful
and alarming hour, may you not be of those
who shall “ worship the Beast and his image,”
but of those who shall “ come up out of the
great tribulation, having washed their robes
and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.”
*See the Greek.


MASON, FIRTH AND M'CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


