

THE
Mount Morgan
Gold mine,
QUEENSLAND.
Mine Works and Treatment
Up to Date, Ist October, 1892,
TOGETHER WITH A
Concise History of the Mine and District,
. AND
SCHEDULES, TABLES AND SUMMARIES.
COMPILED FROM WORKING RECORDS
By Special Permission of the Board of Directors.
BY
FRANK W. SYKES,




THE
Mount Morgan Gold Mine,
QUEENSLAND.
An Authentic Treatise
ON THE
MINE, WORKS & TREATMENT
Up to date 1st October , 1892, together with a concise
History of the Mine and District, and Schedules, Tables and Summaries
COMPILED FROM WORKING RECORDS
BY SPECIAL PERMISSION of the BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
BY
FRANK W. SYKES,




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
x. INTRODUCTORY 7
2. Rockhampton, Past and Present, from the Canoona Gold Rush to Date 9
3 Mining in the District prior to the Discovery of Mount Morgan ... 14
4. The Discovery of Mount Morgan, giving Mr. Edwin F. Morgan’s
Statement ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ... 15
5. The “Jumping” of Mount Morgan ... ... ... ... ... 22
6. The Mine Workings .. ... ... 26
7. Geological Features of the Mount, and Scientific Theories on the
Origin of the Deposit by Jack, Cameron, Wilkinson, and others 47
8. Works and Treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •• 57
9. Departments :
Water Supply, Dams, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Firewood ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •• 72
Engineers’ Work Shop 72
Sawmills ... ... ••• ••• ... ••• ••• ••• 73
Electric Light Installation ... ... ... ... ... 73
Sulphuric Acid Works .. ... ... ... ••• ... 74
Officials and Men Employed, and Rate of Wages 75
Laboratory ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 77
10. The Share Boom ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 79
11. Purity of the Gold ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 80
12. The Future Prospects of the Mine... ... ... ... ... ... 81
13. Comparative Tables, &c. ... • .. ... ... ••• ••• 83




CAPITAL—I,OOO,OOO Shares of £1 each, Paid up to 17s. 6d.
Directors:
W\ O' •v.-m- A
THOMAS SKARRATT HALL -
WILLIAM KNOX D’ARCY
WtLLtAM-TWFTfSUN
JOHN R-HLE
b+ RCHgTi^
A General Manager:
ROGER LISLE.
Secretary:
HOLYOAKE WOODD.
Solicitors:
REES, R. & SYDNEY JONES.
Bankers:
. QUEENSLAND NATIONAL BANK, LIMITED.
MINE AND WORKS - MOUNT MORGAN
MOUNT MORCAN GOLD MINING GO., LIMITED,
QUEENSLAND.
Registered Office—MANSFIELD’S BUILDINGS, QUAY STREET
ROCKHAMPTON.
WALTER R. HALL r a
J. WESLEY HALL "
A. J. CALLAN **
V. M. DOWLING
L> cL—




INTRODUCTORY.
THE name of Mount Morgan and the word “Gold” are inseparably
associated with each other all the world over. From what may be
read in the following pages it will be seen that Mount Morgan has
no parallel as a gold producer ; that it has made struggling prospectors
millionaires ; that it has been, and is, a large employer of labour; a scientific
nursery for the treatment of gold-bearing ores ; a geological puzzle, baffling
experts ; a heavy contributor to the revenues of the colony ; a place of interest
to visitors to Queensland ; and that, in all human probability, it will continue
to sustain—though in a somewhat modified degree—the proud position it has
won for itself in the mining annals of Australasia.
The data and statistics contained herein have been compiled from the best
sources to hand at time of writing, the latter being from the records of the
Company, and therefore beyond question. Facts concerning which any doubt
existed have been determined as far as practicable by corroborative testimony.
For the rest, the work is a reproduction in readable form of all such
information as is best calculated to be of general interest to the speculating
public, and of special interest to those who make a study of geology, metallurgy
and cognate subjects.
The Mount Morgan Mine has been written about times out of number,
of reports and descriptions there is no end ; but beyond the Half-yearly and
Annual Reports furnished for the information of shareholders by the Directors
and General Manager, nothing with the stamp of authenticity has so far been
published. The mining world has not been content. It wanted something
more. Articles have from time to time appeared in the public press with
covert and open hints at concealment as to the true state of the mine. This
being so, it was determined by the Directors to vindicate oft-repeated assur-
ances that no concealment has ever been aimed at, and the present work is the
immediate outcome of this resolution.


It is a complete record of everything appertaining to the mine, and may be
regarded as a reference book dealing with all matters of any moment up to
October, 1892.
In what measure the writer may have succeeded in doing what is pro-
fessed must be left for others to decide ; but, at least, he can perform a duty and
a pleasure at the same time by thankfully recognising the unstinted assistance
and kindly co-operation he has invariably received at the hands of the
Company’s officers in the compilation of the work.


ROCKHAMPTON.
The Port of Call for Mount Morgan.
ROCKHAMPTON, the chief port of Central Queensland, is situated on the Fitzroy River,
which has its embouchure into the waters of Keppel Bay, 30 miles north of Cape
Capricorn, and some 5 00 miles north of Point Danger, the southern maritime boundary of
Queensland.
Ihe kitzroy drains an enormous expanse of territory, its watershed comprising a larger area
than England, Scotland and Wales combined.
The town is 25 miles distant from the mouth of the river.
The waterway allows vessels up to 1,500 tons burthen to approach and discharge; dredging
operations, however, have to be persisted in periodically to counteract the silting up of the passage
by floods.
The larger coastal boats and ocean-going steamers anchor in Keppel Bay, where transhipment
is effected.
Rockhampton stands on level country on both sides of the river, the chief town being on the
south. The two portions, Rockhampton proper and North Rockhampton, are connected by a
handsome suspension bridge 1,100 feet long.
The otherwise monotonous aspect of the place is relieved by a bold range of mountains —the
Berserkers lying only a few miles distant from the town on the north side of the river.
The western side of the town is flanked by a gentle eminence known as the Athelstane range,
upon the healthy slopes of which are the Hospital, Orphanage and Grammar Schools.
The central city, now boasting a population of about 15,000 inhabitants, owes its origin, in
common with so many other Australian townships, to a gold rush. It was in July, 1858, that
what has been termed “ one of the maddest rushes in Australia ” —the Canoona rush —occurred.
Previous to this, Gladstone was the furthest northern settlement in Queensland. The newly
discovered goldfield, some 20 miles up the Fitzroy from the present site of Rockhampton, could
only be approached by land after “ The Rocks ” (just above the bridge) were reached. The
debarkation of the diggers at this spot was therefore the primary cause of the formation of early
Rockhampton.
The news of payable gold attracted as many as 16,000 people from the other colonies, but
probably not more than one-third of that number—fever being very prevalent among them—ever
got further than Rockhampton. The rush soon came to an end, but though short its duration,
40,000 ounces of gold were won from the shallow alluvial of Canoona. In less than six months
very few men were left on the field.
A deplorable amount of misery was the lot of the unfortunate crowds who had flocked to the


banks of the Fitzroy. Some managed to return in the vessels by which they had arrived, others
settled in the district, and the balance gradually left or distributed themselves over the colony.
A writer of that day in the Sydney Herald said the Victorian Government paid the return passages
of 2,000 diggers at 10s. per head. A sum of ,£1,700 was subscribed as a relief in New South
Wales, and the Government of that colony added a similar amount. An old resident thus
concisely records the rush: —“It was in 1858. I cannot say positively who was the discoverer,
but the honour or otherwise of inducing the rush is generally given to a man named Chappell.
The first gold was brought from Canoona by Dr. Robeitson and Mr. George Gannon, both of
whom are dead. On the sth June the Doctor and Chappell started for Gladstone, and on the 9th
Phil. Hardy, who kept the Gladstone Hotel, left for Sydney wfith tidings of the rush, producing
the gold as a proof of the value of the field. On the 21st, the goldfield called “Canoona” was
proclaimed, and before the close of the month 500 men w r ere on the ground. The procurable
gold was rapidly exhausted, and an exodus almost unparalleled for rapidity followed.”
Notwithstanding the fact that the rush gave the first start to Rockhampton, the credit of
pioneering the district belongs to the Messrs. Archer Brothers, of Gracemere Station, who squatted
there as far back as August, 1855, and one of whom, Mr. Archibald Archer, is now the junior
member for the district.
The first craft that navigated the river was a cutter that arrived at The Rocks in the Fitzroy
on the Ist September of that year.
When the Canoona rush broke out there were about a dozen houses altogether; at the
present day there are in Rockhampton approximately 2,500 houses, on property of an annual
value of ;£i 09,000, and a capital value of ,£1,280,000. This remarkable increase, it will be noted,
has taken place within the comparatively short space of 35 years.
A glance at Rockhampton to-day will show what in a brief space of time, under favourable
circumstances, may be effected.
Apart from mining, which, with the exception of Mount Morgan, is not so great an industrial
factor as the early days of the district would seem to have made promise of, Rockhampton is the
medium for trade—import and export—of the extensive pastoral country of the west.
This back country is said to be the finest in Australia, and extends right away to the South
Australian border —about 900 miles distant from Rockhampton.
The Municipality of Rockhampton was formed in the year iB6O, with an area of 15,072 acres.
North Rockhampton is a separate Municipality, and has the credit of comprising the most
extensive area of any in the colonies, viz., 19,840 acres.
The town is well laid out in fine broad streets 132 feet in width; the two principal ones, East
and Quay Streets, run parallel with the river and contain the principal public offices and mercantile
houses. The press is represented by the Morning Bulletin and Daily Northern Argus, dailies,
and the Capricotnian and Times (North Rockhampton), weeklies. The two chief hotels, the
Criterion and Leichhardt, offer excellent accommodation, and are admittedly equal to anything in
the colony.
Lake’s Creek, 3 miles down the river from Rockhampton, the Central Queensland Meat
Export Co. conduct extensive operations in freezing and preserving meat and the manufacture of
extracts. This is the largest establishment and most complete plant of its kind in Australia.


The climate of Rockhampton is considered very trying during the hot months of the year, the
humidity of the atmosphere rendering the heat more oppressive than would be the case if the town
occupied a more elevated position.
This has earned for it the sobriquet of “ the city of the three S’s—Sin, Sweat and Sorrow.”
The Central Railway.
The first sod of the Central Railway was turned on the 17th September, 1865, and the first
section, 30 miles, was opened for traffic two years later. This is the great highway between the
port of the Central division and the western parts of the colony. The latest extension is to Long-
reach, on the Thompson River, a distance of 425 miles from the port.
Thus Rockhampton has been placed in direct communication with the main stock routes of
Queensland.
There are two branch lines —one to Springsure, the other to Clermont.
Kabra, 10 miles up the line from Rockhampton, is the point at which travellers en route to
Mount Morgan take coach, the Mount thence being r 6 miles distant. A line of 29 miles connects
Rockhampton with the watering-places of Emu Park and Yeppoon on the shores of Keppel Bay.
The coastal railway is being brought up north by degrees. When the line from Bundaberg
and Gladstone is extended to Rockhampton, which it must be before long, the central city will be
in direct railway communication with Adelaide, South Australia.
Shipping.
The Australasian United Steam Navigation Company and Messrs. Howard Smith and Sons
maintain a regular and frequent service of steamers with the port. The former company have a
bi-weekly service between Sydney and Rockhampton, calling at intermediate ports ; a weekly
service between Melbourne and Cooktown and Melbourne and Normanton, calling at Keppel Bay ;
and a monthly service between Brisbane and Cooktown, via Keppel Bay, carrying the English
mails and vice versa.
Thus there are two steamers arriving each week from the south and two departing; two others
from the south which call in at the bay; and two which, coming from the north, call in on their
way south.
Messrs. Wm. Howard Smith and Sons have a weekly service between Rockhampton and
Mackay, lownsville and vice versa ; also a weekly service between Rockhampton and Brisbane, via
Maryborough and vice versa ; and another between Melbourne and Rockhampton, via Sydney,
Brisbane and Maryborough, and vice versa.
I he British India Steam Navigation Company’s boats, subsidised by the Queensland Govern-
ment as mail steamers, call in at Keppel Bay monthly, thence via the northern ports to Java, Aden
and the Suez Canal, sometimes touching at Colombo, Naples and Malta.
Passages may be booked by other trans-oceanic lines —Orient, Peninsular and Oriental, and
Messageries Maritimes, &c.—in Rockhampton for those wishing to travel down the south coast of
Australia.


Postal Arrangements.
As regards postal communication mails arrive regularly from the south three times a week —
generally on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Mails from the north arrive twice a week—on
Monday and Thursday—and are despatched on Sunday and Wednesday. Ihe inland mails are
conveyed by the trains which leave Rockhampton on Monday, Ihursday and Saturday. Ihere is
a daily mail service between Rockhampton and Mount Morgan by train and coach.
Parliamentary Representation.
The Members of the House of Legislative Assembly for Rockhampton proper are the Honour-
able William Pattison and Mr. Archibald Archer. Mr. Pattison is one of the oldest residents, and
has once occupied the mayoral chair, and has been closely identified with the Mount Morgan
Gold Mining Company since its formation, both as a large shareholder and as Chairman of
Directors. Mr. Archibald Archer has been previously mentioned as one of the pioneer settlers.
North Rockhampton is represented by Mr. Rees R. Jones, a member of an old-established firm of
solicitors in Rockhampton.


RETURN
Showing revenue, total value imports and exports, weight and value of wool, tallow, gold,
meats preserved, meat frozen at the port of Rockhampton during years 1882 to 1891, and from Ist
January, 1892, to 30th June, 1892.
1882
Revenue.
.£106.470 13
5
Total Value
Imports.
Total Value
Exports.
£630,908
1883
n5.S 2 7 13
2
664,147
1,074,752
1884
114,767 5
6
... 620,962
... 841,040
1885
121,916 6
6
552,400
1,152.106
1886
99,840 4
8
424,273
837,096
1887
ii4,37 6 l 3
11
437,948
i,35 i » i6 4
1888
132,393 ' l6
10
506,469
i,555,929
1889
132,710 9
10
457,682
2,445,697
1890
128,756 14
9
3 8 9,425
2,051,317
2,205,546
1891
138,088 2
10
420,408
1st Jan. to 30th
June, 1892
67. 1 3 7 10
5
208,948
981,379
Weight & Value Wool.
Weight & Value Gold.
Weight & Value
Tallow.
lb.
oz.
dwt.
gr.
£
tons cwt. qr.
£
1884
... 12.445,172
669,214
... 22,158
5
2
84,347
548 19
0
16,582
i88 5
... 16,025,382
8 35, 181
... 19,569
9
7
73,616 ...
1,612 19
1
45,584
1886
... 11,239,642
596,810
... 50,781
r 7
2
195,854 •••
297 18
2
5,825
1887
... 15,828,273
8 57,947
... 92,495
13
12
348,091 ...
1,681 7
0
3 i , i8 9
1888
... i9,477 5 9 2 5
933, 6 44
... 120,815
3
11
477,908 ...
i,493 7
2
26,077
1889
... 21,442,053
906,668
340,859
7
20
1,381,269 ...
1,282 1
2
24,675
1890
21,906,249
874,958
... 228,722
18
20
955,948 •••
2,107 16
2
38,141
1891
— 33>°5°> 802
1,268,392
••• i43,5 2 3
14
12
597,693 •••
2,258 14
2
47, 1 67
1st Jan.
June,
to 30th
892. 12,960,205
5 1 3,759
... 69,191
6
9
285,044 ...
1,482 2
0
27,75°
00
to
M
o
VO
S3
On
to
to
M
M
t^vO
CO
M
M
Ov
to
H-+
00
to
VO
£
rovo
lo o
oo'
o
o
Ov
o
VO
VO
M
*
00
to
W
LOVO
Ov
W
VO
to
o
OV M
VO
ov
S3
00
CO
to
o
to
M M
VO
o
to
M
1— 1
M Cl
W
to
to
lO Tf
to
M
Ov
o
ro
O fO
CO
CO
tO
CO
o
to
M
00 o
vO
VO
ro
>-ooo
Cl
CO rf
to
-Q
o"
to
_T
rOVO
to
to
M
w
Cv
G\
to
M
ro
Cl
1— 1
ovoo VO
VO
Cl
1— I
VO
ro
fO
M
Cl
3C
:
o
M
rf
u-)VO
00
ov o
M
Ov
00
00
00
oo
oo
00 OV
Ov
o
00
CO
00
00
00
CO
oo oo
00
M
M
M
M
M
M M
M
c
<u
ci
c
3
4_,
C/J
M
Weight & Value Meat Preserved. Weight & Value Frozen Meat.


MINING IN THE DISTRICT
Prior to the Discovery of Mount Morgan.
THE development of a district may be counted upon with some certainty once the occurrence
of gold therein has become an established fact. Those who founded a city on necessity
the ill-starred Canoona diggers—when they found themselves virtually stranded in a terra incognita,
were forced by stress of their position to make the best of the incident. The work of pioneering
lay before them. With the Port of Rockhampton as a centre, the diggers radiated in all directions,
and the result was that other alluvial fields were prospected and opened up. Gold, since the
Canoona days, has been found in every direction around Rockhampton ; to the south at Calliope,
Norton and Raglan ; south-west, Crocodile, Mount Morgan and Rannes; west, Stanwell and
Clermont; north-west, Morimsh, Ridgelands and Rosewood; north-north-west, Bonnie Doon and
Marlborough ; east, Mount Wheeler, Cawarral and New Zealand Gully. All these within
40 miles of Rockhampton, with the exception of Clermont, Marlborough and Rannes. At each
have been found rich alluvial deposits, one solid nugget, the second largest in the colony, weighing
247 ounces, being unearthed at Mount Wheeler, near Cawarral. The next chapter of note in the
history of gold-mining hereabouts to be recorded is the Crocodile rush, which occuned in 1866.
1 welve miles or so to the south-west of Rockhampton a water-course—Crocodile Creek—heads
from a steep rocky gorge in the main coastal range. Immediately at the foot of the range here is a
large alluvial flat, the commencement of the low-lying country stretching away to the coast. This
was the scene of the rush. One or two old identities who still reside there—for the place is well
nigh deserted—can recall the time when there was a population variously estimated at from 5,000
to 8,000, a large proportion being Chinamen. The presence of these acquisitive aliens became
extremely irritating to the European diggers, and collisions between white and yellow were of
frequent occurrence. The climax was the forcible expulsion of the obnoxious element from the
field. Digging for alluvial was carried on with vigour here for more than two years, one nugget of
109 ounces being turned up from the wash.
Ihe Crocodile Creek Gold Field was first proclaimed on Bth September, 1866, and included
all the water shed into Crocodile Creek above or to the north of the range between Rockhampton
and Gladstone. In December, 1866, the field comprised an area of 96 square miles; in February,
1868, 24 square miles; in January, 1869, 8 square miles; in September, 1883, 56 square miles,
when it was extended to include the “ Dee Gold Mine,” as Mount Morgan was then called ; in
November, 1884, 3 r 4 square miles, which last is its present area. It will appear strange that at a
time when hundreds of prospectors were busy seeking the precious metal, when every gully on both
sides of the range was carefully searched, the discovery of Mount Morgan should be delayed until
16 years after.


Since the alluvial days the district has not advanced greatly ir. mining. This is somewhat
remarkable where gold-bearing reefs so frequently occur. That payable claims now lie abandoned
for lack of available capital to assist mining operations is a fact too well known and deplored. The
withholding of much outside capital is in a large measure due to investors in London and the
southern colonies lending a too ready ear to the plausible but false reports of unscrupulous
syndicators and so-called mining experts.
Mount Morgan was by no means the first discovery of gold in the immediate locality where it
is situated. Thousands of ounces of alluvial were won from the head of the Dee and its tributary
creeks and gullies by the diggers from the Crocodile long before Mount Morgan was thought about.
The Chinamen driven from the Fitzroy fall of the range found their way onto the Dee water-
shed on the other side, and, from what old miners say, were profitably employed for many years
“ fossicking” the water courses in the neighbourhood of Mount Morgan. At Quarry Creek, 3 miles
to the north of the Mount, rich finds were made, as also at Stoney Creek, 5 miles away to the
south-west near what is now knownas Mount Victoria, the goldbearing belt of country stretching
away thence west to Bottle Tree Creek towards Westwood, and south to Rannes. The very creeks
surrounding the base of Mount Morgan —Mundic and Lindu Creeks (See 1 lan B) were
systematically worked, evidence of which remains to this day in the numerous pot-holes sunk in
their beds and along their sides. The question may well be asked, “ How was it Mount Morgan
escaped notice for so long ? ” The reason is that the days of reefing, scrip, syndicates, and mining
experts w r ere not yet. The diggers were in quest of water-worn nuggets and wash gold. 1 hey were
not educated up to reef-prospecting. All they wanted was the metal which they could pan out in
the dish, convert into ready money and spend it without any further trouble at the nearest township.
Anyone to have suggested the possibility of finding gold in a lump of ironstone would have
been laughed to scorn for his verdant notions about mining.
And so, as time went on, the alluvial patches among the Dee Ranges became worked out, and
those spots, for a while the haunt of pick and dish miners, once more reverted to their normal
solitude, save for the presence of the lonely “ hatter,” loth to shift his camp so long as tucker was
to be made.
Later on the copper mania set in, and mines rich in this metal were opened up in various parts
of the colony—Mount Perry, Degilbo, and elsewhere.
Amongst other places copper was discovered, and for some time worked on a large scale at the
Dee Copper Mine, about 13 miles from Mount Morgan, to the right of the Dee River.
The Discovery of Mount Morgan.
From what appears in the foregoing chapter it will have been gathered that Mount Morgan, or
as it was previously known, the “ Ironstone Mountain, ’ was in evidence for many years prior to
its annunciation, occupying as it did almost a central position amongst the numerous scattered
alluvial diggings dotted here and there all over the Dee Ranges.
Old diggers will to-day relate with enthusiasm, not untinged with a sense of regret at their
own blindness, how day after day they passed over its summit or skirted its sides wnile in quest of
a fresh patch of payable “ wash ” Little did these alluvial fossickers dream, when stumbling over
the rugged ironstone boulders, that, all unconscious of the fact, they were treading upon ground


which years later was to become world-famous for its great wealth. They know it now, but what
avails it when others have reaped the golden harvest ?
Before giving the discoverer’s version of what must always be of great historical interest to the
mining world at large, a few preliminary remarks will be necessary.
What is now the Company’s freehold (shown on Plans A and B as Selection No. 247) was
originally taken up by a man named Donald Gordon for grazing purposes in the year 1864, being
situated on an outlying position of a cattle run known as “ Calliungal ’’—the aboriginal equivalent
for thunderstorm.
Donald only met with indifferent success in his pastoral venture, and after losing most of his
cattle in the big drought of 1876-7 he abandoned the holding and went north..
Meanwhile a brother of his, Sandy Gordon, was working for the Morgans at Mount Wheeler
—a newly-developed mining centre to the east of Rockhampton, about 53 miles from the future
Mount Morgan.
The Morgans—an enterprising family hailing from the sister colony, New South Wales—were
three brothers, Ned, Tom and Fred.* They were all men with an eye to “a good thing” in
mining speculation, and generally to the fore in prospecting new and untried country.
How the mine took its name from them is best told in the words of Ned (Mr. Edwin F.
Morgan), who, on being approached, courteously supplied the following interesting narrative :
How I Discovered Mount Morgan.
“ So far as I am aware there has never been a true report published in any of the Queensland
papers. Some I contradicted, and others I did not think it worth while bothering about. I
have a record of everything that transpired in this connection, so that what follows may be taken
as absolutely true.
“ In July, 1882, my brother Tom and I decided to go out on a trip prospecting, the reason
being that Sandy Gordon, who was working in our employ at Mount Wheeler, had promised to
take us to a plabFWerehe knew there was a silver lode. I provided horses, to:., and we started
from Rockhampton on Thursday, 13th July, "talcmg Gordon with uZ" The first place he
. HMMUnw* . . 1
took us to was a mountain peak of sandstone known as the ‘ Pigeon Box,’ where there was a
copper lode on one side of it. We intended to have a day or two prospecting there, but when we
arrived dCTKeTTop and saw nothing, we came down and searched round for a spot with water to
camp at for the night. I said the best thing to do under the circumstances was to go back to Jones’
selection—the nearest water handy—or get on the other side of the range. It was then dark.
Sandy said he knew of water three miles away. We went over the range at the * Razorback ’ that
night and camped on Dairy Creek, a tributary of the Dee. Next morning we started off for what
he called the ‘Nine-mile Creek,’ down towards Calliungal head station. This was where the sjjver
lode was supposed to be —some 18 or 20 miles from Mount Morgan. We arrived at the Nine-
mile in the afternoon, and camped that nigKt on the point of a spur, having a good prospect all
round the creek and ridges before turning in. On Saturday morning we went where he thought the
silver lode was, but found nothing. We put down two shafts on the spots he pointed out, and I
* The present Mayor of Rockhampton.


think there were five or six reefs we cut trenches across. We day until sundown,
npypy getting more than a few specks of gold to reward our labours. The night brought with it a
very heavy downpour of rain—it might almost be called a waterspout —lasting for two hours or
more. The creek came down in a torrent, and every gully was a ‘ banker.’ Nearly everything was
washed out of the tent. I got up in the night and put the horses out of the angle of the creek on
to the top of the range for safety. Having covered the fire with a sheet of bark, I £>ut another over
myself and awaited daylight. Next morning (Sunday) everything was in such a sodden condition
we thought it the wisest thing to pack up and clearliome. This was easier said than done with
the river and all the blind gullies running a banker. However, we packed up and left camp at
8 a.m. Before leaving I cut my initials in a big gum tree. We swam a number of blind gullies,
and at length arrived at of T)srify 'Creek with the Dee. There was drizzling rain all
the time. Sandy Gordon told us there was an old hut on the opposite sj,d&. of the creek, and
directed us to it. It was the hut of a Chinaman who kept some sheep. I was riding a little chest-
nut pony named Bravo. I swam across to the other side, and was followed by my brother and
Sandy. We eventually got everything landed by means of the pack-horses. This was about i p.m.
on Sunday. It was bitterly cold and still raining. We got some dinner as well as we coul3;“aruT
making a big fire dried our clothes. After we had finished dinner I said to Tom, ‘ What do you
say if we take a dish and go up to the head of the gullies just to put in the evening ?’ He was not
strong or feeling very well, and therefore seemed disinclined to join me. So I said, ‘ Well, if you
are not coming, I will go up to the head of those gullies and see what we can do there.’
We travelled 2 miles north of the huti fossicking as we went along in the gullies and ravines.
After prospecting several places we got over on to the range, which we crossed in a westerly direc-
tion. We then came down the gully, neither of us at the time knowing exactly where we were.
About a quarter-of-a-mile along the gully I saw a_ black boulder. Sandy Gordon was then some
20 or 30 yards away from me. Having a pick I knocked a piece of the stone off. I saw there
was something in it, and put it into my pocket. I noticed some similar
stone, and took a piece of it as well. I saw numbers of these black boulders, which appeared to
have Mountain, but mentioned nothing of my discovery to Sandy Gordon, who was
completely unaware of it. I now suggested that we should endeavour to gain the high ground, so
as to discover the position of our camp. The whole of the mountain was covered with a dense
scrub—dogwood, wattles and ironbark. When we arrived at the top we were no better off, as we
could not see our camp owing to the fog and mist. Before starting down for the river, which was
just discernible, I picked up some of the black stones on the top of the mountain. After making
in various directions to find the whereabouts of the camp, I came in sight of itlrbm the top of a
ridge and coo-eed to Gordon, who then joined me, and we returned to the hut together.
“ When I had had a talk for a while with my brother, we took a pick, shovel and dish, together
with some of the stone, down to the creek, where, after crushing it on a shovel, we washed it. We
were still doubtful what it was. In panning off there was apparently more gold than stone —if gold
indeed it was.
“We said nothing to Sandy Gordon about it. My brother was a bit excited over the matter,
and suggested returning at once to town to have the stone tested. As it was late in the evening,
however, I counselled waiting until morning, and then going over the mountain and thoroughly


prospecting the place, which course we adopted. At about 6 o’clock on Monday morning we
shifted our camp to the mountain. We could not well find the place owing to the dense under-
growth. We went to the north side, where I had been the day before, thinking the stuff might
have come down the gully, as it was there below us all the time. We went all round the place
and sunk a few pot-holes, getting colours now and again. We worked up the gullies on the north
of the mountain until dinner time, reserving an inspection of the south side until the afternoon,
when we followed up one of the gullies from the south as far as we could. We had to cut away
the grass-trees and dogwood to pitch our tent on what is now the south claim. Next morning we
went over the mountain prospecting, finding any amount of good stone, some of which we took to
the creek and tried in the dish. On Wednesday we again prospected, and on Thursday we sent
Sandy to Mount Wheeler to my brother Fred with samples for him to test ; this was with the idea
that we should all meet in Rockhampton on Saturday, when we could learn the results. Sandy
accordingly started off with some stone in a bag. I afterwards heard he never went to Mount
Wheeler at all, and that instead of doing so he stopped at Wyatt’s Hotel, about half-way, on the
drink. My brother Fred was surprised on Saturday night when we told him. On Sunday we set
to work and crushed every sample we had brought from the mountain. Just as formerly, we '
discovered that each sample was literally charged with gold. There was so much that we actually
|» i j Mil—ll'
had doubts whether it really was gold. On Monday we went out again, taking rations, &c., with
us, and continued the work of prospecting until Wednesday night. On Thursday we took up as
much of the ground as we could. We continued to camp in the same spot for several months, no
one outside ourselves knowing we were there. Everything was carried on in the name of
‘ Morgan Brothers.’ The next trip from Rockhampton my brother Fred came with us. We
rented a buggy and horses at Rutherford’s. The journey up Razorback was, at that time, no light
undertaking. Our horses were fairly exhausted when we arrived at the top. We did some more
prospecting and took back samples from all places known to us. My brother, I believe, gave a
couple of pieces of stone to T. S. Hall, then Manager of the Queensland National Bank, who
tested them. A few days after, T. S. Hall and W. K. D’Arcy came out to the mount and stopped
there a night or two in tents. All were perfectly satisfied with what they saw. Some stone was
sent for assay by Hall to Gympie and other places, the return being about 3,700 ounces to the ton.
Arrangements were then entered into to go halves, i.e., the Morgans on the one side, and Hall,
D’Arcy and Pattison on the other. Following this, definite steps were taken to get machinery on
the ground, Burns and Twigg, of Rockhampton, receiving the order to supply (No. 1).
In the meantime men were engaged and mining operations entered upon. The results were, for
obvious reasons, kept as secret as possible. With regard to a statement that has been made to the
effect that Sandy Gordon sold the place for a bottle of grog, I may remark that he never had
anything to do with it. DonaTcl Gordon was out somewhere near Normanton at the time of the
discovery. When he came back he was camped at Jones’ at ‘ Table Mountain.’ He used to beg
and pray us to buy his selection, which for some time we refused to do. Only was it when we
wanted a right of way I marked off ten acres and asked him to sell that. We got Surveyor
Byerley to mark it, and then he again asked us to buy the whole freehold, which we did shortly
after. We never wanted the selection for gold. When Donald Gordon came out to the Mount
he did not think there was much prospect from a mining point of view, but seeing us working


there he imagined it was a first-rate opportunity to dispose of his selection on the quiet, as it had
been abandoned for about six years. We never on any occasion asked him for his selection, and
when we eventually bought it we paid him in cash at the rate of per acre. The only arrange-
ment ever made with Sandy Gordon was on setting out in July, when it was understood that if his
‘ silver lode ’ was any good, we would give him £ 2O , equal to one-third interest with ourselves.
“(Signed) EDWIN FRANCIS MORGAN.
“ Brisbane, December 1, 1892.”
Several claimants to the honourable distinction of being the discoverer of Mount Morgan
have come forward from time to time.
Doubtless many people knew the mountain well enough, and some might have been aware
that it contained gold, though the latter is open to question. But the mere fact of possessing
such knowledge and not putting it to any practical use no more entitled them to the name than
the very blacks who wandered over the mountain before them in search of game.
To Edwin Morgan in particular and his two brothers is the credit alone due for discovering
and commencing to develop the greatest gold mine of the age.


FORMATION OF THE COMPANY.
Directorate, Management, Meetings, &c.
r "T''HE original shareholders in the Mount were Fred, Edwin, and Thomas Morgan, and
l a nephew, who reserving one half in the family sold the other half to Messrs. T. S.
Hall, W. Hall, W. K. D’Arcy, and W. Pattison. Afterwards the Morgans subdivided their half
into five shares, and Mr. T. S. Hall became possessor of one-fifth of their half. Mr. Edwin
Morgan sold his share to his brother, Mr. Fred Morgan, for the sum of ,£IO,OOO. Thus Mr. Fred
Morgan with his own original share, that of his son, and that purchased from his brother Ned,
possessed three-tenths of the whole mine. This interest he eventually sold to the original share-
holders of the second half for the sum of .£62,000. On the same day as this sale the purchasers
sold one-tenth interest in the mine for £26,000 to Mr. John Ferguson, the senior M.L.A. for the
district, and he afterwards split up portion of that interest among a number of Rockhampton
people, who have invested various sums from £SOO to £I,OOO and upwards. Finally, the original
shareholders of the second half bought out Thomas Morgan’s one-tenth for £31,000. A Limited
Company was then formed with a capital of 1,000,000 shares of £1 each. The total area of
ground held by the Company, including the freehold, leasehold, and the consolidated claim, which
embraces 30 men’s ground, is about 730 acres; the last mentioned leasehold and consolidated
areas having been subsequently taken upradjoming the freehold to the west, and thus including
the whole of the mountain, as the original selection had its boundary line running almost through
the summit of the mountain, which is the most valuable part of the property. About this boundary
and the late notorious “jumping cases” further remarks will be made.
The Company was registered in the Supreme Court of Queensland on the first day of October,
1886.
The original agreement between the owners of the mine (prior to the formation of the
Company) is set forth as follows in the Articles of Association :
“An Agreement made the twenty-fifth day of May, one thousand eight hundred and
eighty-six between Thomas Skarratt Hall, of Rockhampton, in the colony of Queensland,
bank manager, William Knox D’Arcy, of the same place, solicitor, William Pattison, of the same
place, grazier, John Ferguson, of the same place, contractor, Walter Russell Hall, of Sydney, in
the colony of New South Wales, grazier, Charles Carlton Skarratt, of Sydney aforesaid, gentleman,
Alexander William Robertson, of Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, grazier, and John Wagner,
of Melbourne aforesaid, grazier (hereinafter called ‘the Vendors’), of the one part, and The
Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company Limited (hereinafter called ‘the Company’) of the other
part. Whereas the Vendors have for some time past carried on business together in partnership as
auriferous quartz miners at Mount Morgan, in the parish of Calliungal, in the county of Raglan, in
the colony of Queensland And whereas the nominal capital of the Company is one million


pounds divided into one million shares of one pound each. And whereas the Vendors have by
the Memorandum of Association of the Company agreed to take all shares in manner following,
viz , the said Thomas Skarratt Hall, one hundred and fifty-eight thousand three hundred and thirty-
two ; the said William Knox D’Arcy, three hundred and fifty-eight thousand three hundred and
thirty-four; each of them the said William Pattison and Walter Russell Hall, one hundred and
twenty-five thousand ; the said John Ferguson, one hundred and sixteen thousand six hundred and
sixty seven ; the said Charles Carlton Skarratt, fifty-eight thousand three hundred and thirty-four ;
and the said Alexander William Robertson and John Wagner, fifty-eight thousand three hundred
and thirty-three of such shares.”
The first Directors of the Company were those gentlemen appearing as vendors of the
property in the above, who practically floated the Company amongst themselves, each taking up
respectively the number of shares specified therein. Shares afterwards were disposed of to the
public in the usual way.
Directorate and Management,
The first Chairman of Directors was Mr. T, S. Hall. He was succeeded by the Hon. William
Pattison, who held that office up to the end of 1888, when the present Chairman of Directors, Mr.
James Stewart, succeeded him.
The first General Manager (afterwards Managing Director) was Mr. J. Wesley Hall, who
controlled the mine from September, 1884, until December, 1891, being at that time succeeded by
the present General Manager of the Company, Mr. Roger Lisle.
The qualification of the first Directors was the holding of 5,000 shares, which was altered in
July of this year (1892) to 500 shares.
Meeting’s.
The Annual Meetings up to 1889 were held in December of each year, when for the sake of
convenience it was decided to hold them in July, which they have been since.
The local Directors, with the Chairman, meet from week to week as the occasion arises for
their doing so.


THE “JUMPING” OF MOUNT MORGAN.
NOT the least interesting episode in the history of Mount Morgan is that furnished by the
jumping cases.
It was but natural that the great wealth of the mine, when it became a common topic of
discussion, should arouse the cupidity of mining adventurers and occasion them to dispute
possession with the men of enterprise who had already installed themselves as holders of the
property.
Jumpers, a class of men to be found ready to hand wherever a rich discovery affords scope for
their litigious propensities, made their appearance in Mount Morgan towards the latter end of 1885
and assailed the title of the Company to portions of the ground they now hold. If successful, the
prize would have been a golden one. But, as after events demonstrated, the actual discovery
of a flaw in the machinery by which the original holders had obtained possession of the property
was not sufficient to establish their claim to any portion of it.
“ Possession ” proved to be the proverbial “ nine points of the law.”
The excitement arising from the right of proprietorship over a considerable and valuable part
of the golden hill being held in the balance, was general all over the colonies; this was accentuated
by the formation of a syndicate for prosecuting the claims of the jumpers. A limited liability
company was indeed organized, shares in which were freely bought and sold, quoted on ’Change and
their fluctuations in price on the market, as the prospects of the successful issue of the jumpers’
case advanced or receded, were duly recorded.
These proceedings brought the Mount Morgan Mine very prominently before the world, and
people began to realize the magnitude and worth of the property at stake.
The jumpers were most persistent in their efforts to acquire a share in the coveted Mount. To
maintain public interest in their hypothetical venture fabulous reports were circulated and obtained
credence amongst the more gullible section of mining speculators. No sooner was one combina-
tion of jumpers disposed of than, like the many-headed Hydra, another sprang up in its place.
For more than two years (1886-1888) public interest centred in the mine and the legal
disputes associated with it.
The notoriety thus gained probably in no small degree led to the exaggerated estimate placed
upon it at the time of the share boom in 1887. The promoters of the syndicate mentioned so
expatiated on the value of the portion they fiaH Jumped that in time the of the property became
to be treated relatively, the assumed value of the mine being regarded a&its intrinsic value.
This, combined with other circumstances, disarmed even the most Wiry, and may be accounted
largely responsible for the inflated state of the share market and the undesirable consequences that
inevitably followed in its wake.


Jumping of the Leases.
The first jumping, or experimental annexation of some of the Company’s property, was by
Osborne and others in 1885. They pegged off a portion of leases Nos. 72 and 73, their
claim being that the goldfield (proclaimed 20th September, 1883) had not been two years
proclaimed, and therefore, according to the Gold Fields’ Regulations, no lease could be granted
by the Department of Mines. But the leases had been granted. The case was brought before
Warden Cribb, at Rockhampton, who refused to hear it on the ground that the applicants had no
title, and thereforelt wasH^yoncTftis jurisdiction to do so. An appeal for a mandamus was made'
to the Supreme Court, to which the defendants set up a demurrer.
This latter, on hearing by the Full Court (March, 1886) was upheld, the same finding being
afterwards arrived at by the Privy Council in London.
Another similar case with the same issues was heard at the same time, Martin and others
being the appellants
Two months later (June, 1886) Williams and others v. Morgan and others was heard on
demurrer, when the demurrer by the defendants was again upheld.
From the judgment delivered by His Honor Justice Harding, the following extract may be
taken as showing wherein the jumpers failed to establish their claim :
“ So far as the action is said to be an action, which before the Judicature Act would have been
called ejectment, but which now is called an action for the recovery of land, it has always been
held that in that action the plaintiff must recover by the strength of his own title, and not by the
weakness of that of his antagonist; and that possession has been given as, and is, a sufficient
answer to an action by a plaintiff seeking recovery of land. ‘lam in possession,’ and that is a
sufficient answer, is the argument. If, then, the plaintiff can show a title, and if that title should
be a good title, then, besides the possession, the defendant has to show his title, and if there is a
flaw in his title, out he goes, and the possession is handed over to the other. Now, in this case,
what the plaintiffs say amounts to this : ‘ You, defendants, are in possession, but you are in posses-
sion under a void or voidable lease.’ Plaintiffs say (the best view to them): ‘ltis an absolutely
void lease ; if not void it is at all events voidable, and we are entitled to litigate that title with you
and take the possession which you have away from you.’ But, in order to do that, the plaintiffs,
before they go behind the actual possession of the defendants, must show a title in themselves to
the land. What they produce here is a miner’s right, and the miner’s right gives, as already
pointed out, no interest. It may be said that they have the same interest in every portion of
ground in the colony ; and, whatever is the particular interest they have, every other man in the
colony who chooses to expend 10s. in the purchase of a miner’s right has exactly the same
interest in this piece of land. Where have these plaintiffs any more right than all the rest of the
holders of miner’s rights to oust the defendants ? For these reasons I hold that as an answer to
such a title possession is sufficient.”
It should be mentioned that had the cases resulted in favour of the jumpers they would have
secured the western half of the hill, as the western boundary of the freehold traverses its centre
as near as possible.


Jumping* of the Freehold.
“ A further attempt was made to obtain the right, title and ownership of a portion of the
freehold land of the Company (portion 247), registered in the names of T. S. Hall and
W. Pattison. This was by one Richard Bond, who made application to the Warden in
December, 1885, for ‘a piece of ground situated 'aT^ount' Morgan, in the westerly boundary of
SeiectiorTNo. 247 7 . . . . containing about 2,000 feet in length and about width.’ *
Warden CriKTretused to grant this; an order for a mandamus was therefore appliedloTTo the
Supreme Court, and the case, ‘ The Queen v. Cribb,’ was heard before the Full Court in June,
1886. Mr. Darley, Q.C., of the New South Wales Bar and of the Queensland Bar, appeared for
the applicant for the writ —Richard Bond—together with Mr. Lilley; while Mr. Griffith, Q.C. (now
Sir Samuel), with Mr. Power, appeared for Hall and Pattison.
It was contended by the applicant that the freehold comprised an area of 648 instead of 640
acres, who laid claim to the odd acres within the Company’s fence on the top of tlie mountain.
This was taken for granted, although there was no ground for the assumption, as was afterwards
shown. The erroneous belief arose from the customary usage when surveying a selection
comprising 640 acres, of allowing 8 acres over and above for the purposes of a road, so that in the
event of the selection being hemmed in by others there is a right of way through them. When
the survey is made it is not known where this will be. It was, therefore, assumed that this
custom had been followed in the survey of portion 247. The ground was re-surveyed during the
hearing of the case, when it was found to comprise acres only. This, of course, put the
jumpers out of Court on this count. The second alleged cause why a mandamus should be
granted was that the line of the western boundary of the freehold had been laid out on the
bearing of magnetic north instead of true north, the variation between the two being 10 degrees.
By reference to the diagram and plan B it will be seen that the jumpers claimed the rectangular
piece of ground marked on both, and containing 8 acres. This involved a larger and richer
portion of the hill than the jumping of the leaseholds.
The judgment of the Court was that the land applied for was freehold and not Crown land,
and that the applicant had not made out a prima facie case that it was not freehold land. The
application for the rule absolute was therefore refused.
The jumping of the freehold occasioned exciting times on the mine. Watchers were posted
day and night along the western boundary in the interests of the Company. The tactics of the
jumpers to obtain their object were unique It is necessary, in order to comply with the Act, that
on making application for ground to the Warden, notices must be posted up on the ground applied
for, and copies of the same at the Warden’s office. These notices are usually affixed to some large
tree within the claim. Owing, however, to the precautions of the Company the ordinary mode of
procedure was not practicable. Accordingly the jumpers supplied themselves with poles sharpened
at one end, and having on the other a cross-piece of wood with the requisite notice attached.
One morning the jumpers were observed coming over the hill. Forty or fifty of the Company’s
men were at once called out to receive the enemy, and if possible prevent them from getting inside the
fence and planting the notices. Notwithstanding a tough resistance, the jumpers succeeded in
doing so.
* Shown on Plan B.


At the meeting in December, 1887, it was mentioned that a report was current to the effect
that the Directors had offered the jumpers from one to five millions sterling to settle their case.
The chairman, alluding to this, denied that any such offer had been made. He said : “ One would
surely think that to hold the title deeds of a property was a sufficient title without being called upon
at every turn to defend it. We have already shown our title in the various courts of law, and are
prepared to do so again; but I think it is about time some law was passed to prevent these gentle-
men from carrying on the thing for a series of years. Their aim is to gull the public, and
they will do so as long as they can. They say to themselves, ‘lt is costing those fellows a very nice
sum of money, and very likely they will give us by-and-bye to settle the thing.’ That is
where they make a mistake. As long as lam a Director they will never get a threepenny bit. It
is well that this should go forth to gulls. These people are damaging the value of our shares and
lifting that of their own. That has been their object all through, and I know that the rumour Mr.
Little speaks of had the effect of sending up their shares. But there is no truth in it, nor is there
likely to be as long as the present Directors are at the head of affairs.’’
Jumping* the Water Right, &c.
In 1888 an application was made by one George Gorrie for a lease of land, which included
part of the machinery area and water right of the Company. The application was recommended
by the Warden, who held that these areas were only granted to the Company so far as the surface
was concerned, and the lease was in due course issued by the Department. At the time of the
application it was rumoured that the Company had sunk a shaft within the lease in the expectation
of getting gold, whereas the shaft in question had been put down for obtaining water. A large
company was floated on the strength of the rumour. Gornejj.old
of money, and left the district. When the true state of affairs became known the whole thing col-
lapsed, and no more was heard of the Dee Bed Prospecting Company —the title by which it was
known. At the June meeting, 1888, Mr. Pattison said f“ We nave only pigmies to deal with on
this occasion, I think,” and his aruTopaUonTwere feaTTzecfr


THE
Physical Characteristics of the Mount.
THE Mount Morgan is a subsidiary spur of the main coastal range, having a trend or bearing
of W.N.W. by E.S.E., with a longitudinal and diametric base of about one and a half and
half a mile respectively.
On its eastern side it rises almost precipitously from the level of the Dee River, a tributary of
the Dawson and Fitzroy, and attains an altitude of 1,225 feet above sea-level, or 520 feet above
that of the Dee.
It connects with the higher country on the north-west.
There is nothing whatever in the outward appearance of Mount Morgan to indicate that, with a
close semblance to the neighbouring hills, this particular one possesses such a remarkable distinction.
The vegetation on its sides—stunted ironbark and sparse undergrowth—is precisely the same, the
contour of the hill is of the ordinary type that meets the eye in every direction ; in brief, there is
nothing striking to arrest attention or call for special comment.
Within a radius of a few miles Mount Morgan has hundreds of counterparts, that is from a
physical standpoint, but directly its geological features come to be inquired into the similarity
disappears. The question of its origin and the various opinions thereon will be found discussed
later on. After perusing an account of the mine workings and of the nature of the country
composing the Mount, the theories advanced will be the better weighed and conclusions drawn.
The Company’s Property.
The Mount Morgan property consists of a freehold 640 acres in extent, two leases containing
about 42 acres, and 30 acres held under miners’ rights.
By reference to Plan A it will be observed that the western boundary line of the Company’s
freehold runs north and south across the centre of the hill. That portion of the ground lying outside
or to the west was first taken up by the Morgan, Hall, and D’Arcy syndicate under the title of
Consolidated Miners’ Rights Claims, 78 acres, viz., 78 men’s ground, being so held. Later on
application was made to the Government for leaseholds, and the two leases, Nos. 72 and 73 (now
known as Nos. 94 and 95) were granted. No. 72 measures 20a. 2r. Bp., and No. 73, 22a. 2r. 37P.
The remaining 30 acres contiguous to the leases on the west and south were, and at the present
time continue to be, held under miners’ rights (see Plan B.).
The leases embrace all the upper portion of the hill that lies to the west of the freehold, and
are almost enclosed by the consolidated claim.


The first excavations made on the surface of the Mount were started on the leases in 1882. A
face was opened out on No. 72 lease, 30 feet from the summit, whence all the richest stone was
obtained at the commencement. Simultaneously a larger cutting was opened out on No. 73 lease,
about 100 feet lower down the hill to the south.
All the stone from the upper working was sent to No. i battery, that from the other face
(afterwards known as Magazine Quarry and eventually merged into No. 4 Bench) being treated at
No. 2 battery. The reason for this arrangement was that all the shareholders at that date had not
equal interests in the two claims, and separate treatment was therefore necessary for a proportional
allotment of the proceeds from the gold.


SURFACE WORKINGS.
Description of the Quarries or Benches on the Top of the Mountain.
THE means employed for obtaining the ore from Mount Morgan, viz., by a wholesale system
of quarrying, is a fact too well known throughout the whole mining world to require any
particular comment.
For the past ten years the fame of Mount Morgan as a mine of enormous richness has been
noised far and wide. Visitors from all parts of the globe have come to view this remarkable
deposit, and accounts of it, whose name is Legion, have been published.
Exaggerated reports, and the reverse as well, have been circulated concerning the mine, due
to superficial observation or interested motives. But whatever may have been said or written, well
attested facts and figures must be taken as the only true standard as to what has been and is.
When placed before reasoning and practical minds they speak for themselves.
Nothing impresses strangers more with the vastness of Mount Morgan than a view of the open
workings on the upper portion of the mount.
It is not so much the ordinary sight-seer as the practical mining man with an eye to outputs
and returns who is struck with astonishment.
The first glance at the result of ten years work on the hill-top convinces him that in modern
times at least no parallel to it is to be found.
The sight of rich gold-bearing stone being quarried from open faces, varying from 200 to 600
feet in extent, much in the same way as marble or sandstone, is calculated to arouse, even in the
most phlegmatic mind, some feeling of enthusiasm.
General View.
Mount Morgan is, or rather was, a cone-shaped hill, the summit (now removed) being 122
feet above what is now the main floor —Bench No. 4.
Taking up one’s stand on the southern extremity of this bench (see section D), and facing
northward, a comprehensive idea of the amount of work done on this portion of the Company’s
property is obtained. The first impression is that of a cutting of abnormal dimensions with
vertical walls irregular in depth and shape, composed of vari-coloured stone —red and yellow being
the dominating tints. To the left the grass surface of the hill, to where it has been cut away,
may be scanned right away to the highest point. Below that is a sheer face —the western terminal
wall of the gold deposit, 116 feet high. Between it and the point of observation are broken
fragments of the upper benches, having an average depth of 30 feet, and cut away from their
respective floors at irregular distances. Away to the north, or in front 200 feet, is a large block of
ironstone 65 feet high, behind which is a large fragment of No. 3 Bench. To the right or east is a
perpendicular face somewhat similiar in appearance to those on the opposite side of the cutting,


Original Working. Summit of Mount.




with the difference that, in addition to the red and yellow of the sinter, there are patches of black
ironstone here and there. The wall is 60 feet high, and the block of stone behind separates No. 4
Bench from another big open cutting on the same level —the Lady Musgrave Bench. This is
hereafter alluded to as the Dividing Block.
The floor of No. 4 Bench, from which these observations have been made, cuts right through
the hill to the northern surface, the distance from south to north being 300 feet.
The Dividing Block is being cut away by degrees. When this is accomplished the two main
floors will be made one large bench, measuring 490 feet from east to west, and averaging 1,350 feet
from north to south.
To realise in some measure the immense quantity of stone removed from these benches, the
eye must be allowed to travel from the summit of the wall on the extreme west to the upper surface
of the Dividing Block on the east; and when it is seen that all the intervening country from point
to point (a distance of 430 feet) has been cut out of the solid hill to a depth of 122 feet, it is no
longer a matter of surprise that Mount Morgan is regarded as phenomenal.
Leaving the No. 4 Bench, and going round the Dividing Block towards the east, one arrives
on the Lady Musgrave Bench.
The amount of gold-bearing stone taken from the benches is approximately estimated at
300,000 tons, yielding from a few dwts. up to 1300 oz., and maintaining a standard average of
4 oz. to 5 oz. for nearly five years.
Mode of Obtaining 1 the Ore.
From the summit down to the level of No. 4 Bench the mass of stone has been removed by
the simple process of quarrying. The hard country, haematite and dyke-stone, has been blasted
out, the softer, sinter, alumina and the like, being readily negotiated with pick and gad.
By means of steel drills and jumper holes, diameter at top and 14 feet deep, are put down
to receive the charge of blasting powder. Dynamite, being more local in its action, is only used to
break up the rock after being detached from the face. As great a quantity as 300 tons has been
displaced with one “sink.” It is only necessary to compare quarrying with underground mining
to appreciate with what cheapness and expedition the ore has been excavated.
Mr. Hall (then Managing Director) in his report in 1887, said : —“ I cannot give you a better
illustration of your marvellous mine than by calling attention to the fact that only six men are
required to break down the quantity of stone crushed; all the rest are engaged on the mountain
breaking it to battery size.”
No. 1 Bench.
This bench was started on the southern fall of the hill 32 feet from the summit. From the
door upwards all the crown or cap of the mountain was cut away, leaving a platform about 100
feet long by the same distance wide.
The entire summit of the hill was not altogether composed of gold-bearing stone, as a kaolin
dyke, 16 feet wide, trending from north-west to south-east, cut it off to the south. These in-
trusive dykes (shown on Plan C), will be found constantly referred to in the course of describing
the workings, as they have been closely associated with the gold-bearing ore from the earliest
operations to the present day.


They are well defined, being the only consistent feature in the character of the deposit. Mr.
Jack pronounces them to be of more recent origin than the auriferous lode stuff The following
description of this bench was given by Mr. Jack in his first report on the mine in 1884 :
“The central portion of the upper cutting is a large mass of brown hematite ironstone,
generally in great blocks (up to some tons in weight), with a stalactitic structure, as if the iron
oxide had gradually filled up cavities left in the original deposit. The ironstone contains gold of
extraordinary fineness, which, however, after a little practice, can be detected in almost every
fresh fracture. The ironstone is more or less mixed with fine silicious granules. Gradually to
right and left of the central mass the silica more and more replaces the ironstone. It is frothy,
spongy, or cellular sinter, sometimes so light from the enlargement of air in its pores that it floats
in the water like pumice. Fine gold is disseminated throughout this silicious deposit as well as
in the ironstone. Near the west end of the cutting is a vertical dyke of kaolin, mixed with fine
silicious granules, passing into pure kaolin with some silicates of magnesia, including a fine variety
of French chalk.
“ I selected a number of specimens as characteristic of the various deposits of the upper
cutting. These, when assayed by Mr. Karl Staiger, city analyst, Brisbane, gave the following
result: —
“ No. 5. Stalactitic brown haematite from middle of cutting, 6oz. ndwts. gold per ton.
“ No. 6. Silicious sinter veined with quartz, 40Z. sdwts. gold per ton.
“No. 7. A mixed mass of ironstone and silica from the level of the road, east of the dyke,
50Z. 3dwts. gold per ton.
“ No. 8. Iron-stained silicious sinter from west side of dyke, xooz. iydwts. gold per ton.”
In 1888 Mr. Jack says there was only a remnant of this bench remaining. Some of the
stone taken from here in 1887 was so rich that instead of being sent to the batteries it was care-
fully kept until the completion of the upper works.
No. 2 Bench.
This bench was 20 feet below No. 1, being 200 feet long and 140 feet wide. In his second
report Mr. Jack mentioned the kaolin dyke as crossing the south-western portion of the floor and
bounding the auriferous portion which is confined to the north-east of the dyke. He described
the deposit here as comprising large lumps of black ironstone (haematite) with brilliant irridescent
hues, angular blocks of silicious sinter, ironstone with cavities filled with stalactites. Gold showed
freely in the ironstone, and even in the heart of some pure limonite. Good returns were obtained
from black iron-stained sinter. The width of face at the beginning of 1887 was 275 feet.
No. 3 Bench.
This bench, 35 feet below No. 2, measured 330 feet long by 264 feet wide.
In Mr. Jack’s second report he says the face at the time of his visit at the end of 1888 con-
sisted of white sinter, bouldery quartz black with iron oxide, ferruginous silica, “ of which the
upper portion is very rich, giving 700 ounces of gold per ton.” He also mentions boulders of
ironstone weathering out of a decomposed ironstone matrix, good for about 3 ounces per ton, and
fine white silicious sinter coming in from the direction of the Old Magazine Cutting (No. 4 Bench
below).


The following reference to this Bench (No. 3) appeared in Mr. Wesley Hall’s annual report
for 1887 :—“ Our next bench is 35 feet high. I have caused a number of holes to be drilled and fire
assays made with the intention of making an estimate of the probable amount of gold contained
in this bench (35ft., 330 ft., 264 ft), but when I found the assays varied from 20Z. 9dwts. to 450 Z.
per ton I gave up the task.”
No. 4 Bench.
This bench is 35 feet below No. 3, and its floor measures 300 feet long, from south to north,
and 250 feet wide from east to west. In dealing with the characteristics of this bench it will be
necessary to refer back to Mr. Jack’s first report (1884), where he furnished a technical account of
the magazine face, which was in fact the commencement of No 4. He then stated :
“ The lower or magazine face presents a sort of fan-like arrangement of its various materials.
In the centre is a band (almost vertical) of brown haematite in large “ bombs, with a mamilated
botryoidal or sometimes reniform appearance. To the right (east) is a nearly vertical deposit of
aluminous iron ochre, followed by a mass (still nearly vertical) of red haematite in large cellular
bombs. To the east is a broad mass of loose iron-stained silicious and aluminous material, which
begins to lean eastward like the outer feathers of a fan. A great mass of loose earthy-red haematite,
another of brown haematite weathering to iron ochre, another of red earthy haematite, and another
of brown haematite in large (ton) blocks appear in succession as the cutting is followed to the east.
The magazine (near the east end of the cutting) is excavated in a fine white silicious earth, and
the cutting ends with a mass of soft earthy aluminite. Beginning from the west side of the nearly
vertical mass of brown haematite first described, we pass in succession in going westward a band
of yellow ochre, a broad belt of light silicious sinter, iron-stained and containing some angular
fragments of the quartzite of the “ country rock,” a belt of similar silicious sinter mixed with
earthy red haematite, and finally a broad mass of loose silicious sinter traversed by silicious veins,
and containing some angular fragments of the “ country rock,” the members of the series leaning
more and more fan-fashion to the west as they recede from the central vertical bands. At the
end of the cutting is a mass of magnesian and aluminous silicates, which is probably the pro-
longation of the dyke seen in the upper quarry. Mr. Lisle, the manager, informed me that he had
got ‘ prospects ’ in every part of this cutting, with the exception of the silicious earth at the
magazine This was corroborated by my own observations. I ground and washed a great
number of specimens (of my own selection) from both the upper and lower cutting, and from
every variety of material, and was surprised and delighted with the prospects obtained, in most
cases from stuff which miners would regard as most unpromising.”
Mr. Staiger’s assays of characteristic samples selected from the lower cutting yielded gold, as
follows :
No. 1. Brown haematite, 30Z. 6dwts. per ton.
No. 2. Red haematite, 6oz. ifidwts. per ton.
No. 3. Aluminous rock from west of dyke. No gold.
No. 4. Silicious sinter from among the aluminous rock, 30Z. isdwts. per ton.
In 1888 again, referring to the benches, Mr. Jack said : —“ So far as the surface excavations
show, the auriferous deposits are bounded to the south-west by the large felstone (kaolin) dyke on


No. t and No. 2 floors, but on No. 3 and No. 5 floors the dyke intersects the auriferous deposits,
some portion of the latter being formed on its south-west side. On the north-east side the whole
hill to the level of No. 2 floor has proved to be auriferous, and, indeed, has, for the most part, been
excavated. In No. 3 and No. 4 floors the eastern limit of the auriferous deposit has been
touched.”
On putting a crosscut through on this level a light, soft, silicious sinter was met with, carrying
gold from ioz. 2dwts. to 320 Z. per ton.
Sixty-two tons treated gave a return of 50Z. 6dwts. of gold per ton.
This sinter was a good deal mixed up with silicate of alumina.
Mr. Jack, in his third report (1892), specifies forty representative specimens from various
portions of the face over this bench; they assayed from idwt. isgrs. up to 170 Z. i4dwts. iogrs.
per ton.
Lady Musgrave Bench
This bench, on the same level as No. 4 just described, is situated on the eastern slope of the
mountain, and is separated from the No. 4 by the dividing block already mentioned.
The working was commenced towards the latter end of 1889 with the Lady Musgrave tunnel
(on the same level), which was driven right through this side of the hill, a distance of 280 feet from
south to north. It disclosed a large portion of the ground in this direction to be richly auriferous.
Mr. Wesley Hall, in his annual report, 1889, indicated that the make, or trend, of the golden
stone was towards this side of the hill after the level of No. 4 bench was reached. He said the
shareholders must bear in mind that Mount Morgan was only a gold mine, wonderfully rich in
patches, but subject to all the vicissitudes common to all mineral formations. The very rich patch
of golden stone around the centre of the mountain had cut out very unexpectedly in July of that
year, and had shot off to the northern side. Referring to this Musgrave lode he said : “ This lode
of stone, 84 feet wide with a back of 47 feet, opens out a new feature in Mount Morgan. It
carries an average of 50Z. of gold per ton. We are now opening a big face on it, and, judging
by the outcrop of auriferous ironstone, the belt of golden stone extends about 250 feet east
and w r est.
Ihe Chairman of Directors, at the annual meeting, 1889, told the shareholders: “You have
thus over 200 feet of perpendicular auriferous ground already proved, and, apparently, expanding as
it goes downwards. Six months later Mr. Hall, again referring to the Musgrave workings, had
occasion to remark :
“ In my report last November I stated that the gold had apparently taken a sudden jump to
the north side of the mountain, and that we had found it in the Lady Musgrave tunnel. I must now
correct myself, dhe Lady Musgrave appears to be a separate offshoot or outburst, although it is
probably connected with the golden stone in the freehold directly underneath it, but No. 5 tunnel,
coming in from the south side of the mountain, 62 feet below the original No. 2, or Magazine
Bench, has passed through 200 feet of payable stone in the centre of the mountain, being under-
neath the sandstone cap, on which, those shareholders who have visited Mount Morgan will
remember, the blacksmith s shop is situated. The sandstone was supposed to be a division
between the golden stone in the leases and the golden stone in the freehold, but No. 5 tunnel


shows that ihe sandstone is only floating, or a surface formation, with the golden stone underneath
it. I have called the Lady Musgrave a separate offshoot or outburst, but an offshoot of Mount
Morgan is not what is ordinarily known in quartz mines as a feeder or leader. The face we have
opened on the Lady Musgrave reef, and are still working, with results varying from ioz. to Boz.
per ton, is 43 feet high, 84 feet wide, and 150 feet long. There is good stone under foot, as a
matter of course, if it has any connection with the freehold crosscut I have before intimated.”
The face of the Lady Musgrave Bench was started from the north side of the hill, and has
followed round the contour of the hill in a south-easterly direction until it has assumed a sectional
bearing north and south, with a tendency to the west as the more northern side of the bench is
approached.
The working gradually cut out the Musgrave Tunnel, also a crosscut from it to the east.
The floor is 180 feet long from north to south, and 150 feet wide from west to east. The
main face of the dividing block over this bench is 60 feet high. Its characteristic features are
yellow and red spongy ironstone on the upper portion, assaying a few pennyweights. Beneath,
irregular patches of white silicious and red and yellow sinter, poor in quality. Underlying this is
ironstone, also poor. Speaking generally, the ironstone on this side of the hill, while exactly the
same in outward appearance as that met with in the upper benches already described, has not
maintained the gold bearing character for which it was noted in the earlier days of the mine. This,
however, has been compensated for in a great measure by an immense body of white kaolinic sinter
underlying the ironstone. It varies in quality from very rich to poor, with an average yield of
rather more than 20Z. per ton. It extends right away from the Musgrave Bench down to the
lower workings of the mine. It is the distinctive feature of the east and south-east portion of the
hill, and it may be considered the chief source of supply at the present time. The eastern face
over the Musgrave Bench, from the grass roots down, is entirely composed of this stuff; a sample
taken from there by Mr. Jack assayed over iooz Much higher assays of it than this have been
made on the mine. In places it contains a comparatively high percentage of silver, sometimes as
much as 220 Z. to the ton.
Lion’s Den Bench.
This bench was commenced towards the latter end of last year (1891) from the northern end
of the Lady Musgrave floor, below which it is 27 feet. On the western face of this cutting the dip
of the kaolinic sinter to the south beneath the superimposed ironstone is very clearly defined. The
eastern face is wholly composed of the sinter, while towards the south a rich patch of black iron-
stone (haematite) was cut, yielding up to 5 oz. Another opening has been made further south to
the same level for the purpose of passing the ore downwards to the trams, which will shortly con-
nect with the Lion’s Den.
Lady Norman Bench.
This bench (previously known as the Hopper Stopes Bench) received its new title in honour
of Lady Norman’s visit to the mine in October of this year (1892). The working attacks the hill
from the south-west, the floor being 26 feet below the Lady Musgrave Bench. The entire face
is composed of white kaolinic sinter, giving a steady uniform yield of 2 oz. This cutting is imme-
diately at the southern base of the dividing block, which, as the work progresses, it will remove,
and when continued to the north a face nearly 90 feet high will be opened up.


No. 5 Bench.
This bench has been recently started around the Crown Shaft from the floor of No. 4 Bench.
The ore now being excavated is yellow sinter and ferruginous quartz, assaying up to 10 oz. The
area at time of writing is about 60 feet in diameter and 16 feet deep. The work being of a pro-
gressive nature, arbitrary figures cannot be given.
Summary and Notable Features of the Surface Workings.
The surface excavations described above have disclosed an important fact in connection with
the present and future of the mine, namely, that the gold-bearing ore has a pronounced south-
easterly trend. The kaolinic sinter was first cut at the northern end of No. 3 Bench, some distance
to the east of the central line or freehold boundary. Thence it took a dip to the south-east
towards the Lady Musgrave workings. From the east and south of that portion of the hill it
appears to converge towards a point beneath the Dividing Block, and as it proceeds cuts out the
ironstone, the latter being invariably poorer in quality wherever there is a contact area.
The ironstone (haematite) has been proved to be entirely a surface deposit, although the
silicious sinter, with which it has been so far associated, continues downwards on the western side
of the hill, and is constantly met with in the higher underground levels. As will have been gathered,
the deposit downward through the benches has been a confused agglomeration of its numerous
component parts. Each face at every few feet has disclosed a change, both in nature and quality.
This fact alone rendered opinions as to what might be met with on the basis of what had been
exceedingly speculative. This peculiar inconsistency was referred to by Mr. Hall at the annual
meeting in December, 1889, in the following terms :
“ It is utterly impossible to form an estimate of the value of Mount Morgan, or of the quality
of the stone. If you saw the way the stone goes, and how we come upon an immense patch ot
rich stuff when we do not expect anything, you would see how difficult it is to form an estimate. A
fortnight ago, in what is known as No. 3 Face, we got 36 oz. stone, and I thought we had struck
another bonanza; but there was only 12 feet of it. I took out about 50 tons, and then it fell to
3 oz. 8 dwts. That is how it runs.”
The same applies to the underground workings as well. In 1890, at the annual meeting, a
shareholder aptly remarked, “You may work round a cube without knowing anything of what is
inside, and that is actually what is being done at Mount Morgan. To give absolute quantities is
impossible.” The most consistent or permanent feature of the country exposed by the open
cuttings has been the presence of a mass of barren felspathic dyke-stone, varying from 16 to 24
feet in thickness, vertical in elevation, and with a trend or bearing from north-west to south-east.
A smaller dyke, equally well defined, branched off from this in a fork-like manner to the north at
an angle of about 45 degrees, enclosing payable sinter between it and the western wall of country
rock. The large or parent dyke was met with on the top floors, and bounded the auriferous
deposit to the south-west, intersecting or intruding upon the latter as depth was attained. It will
be alluded to later on as making its appearance in the Hopper and Freehold Stopes. It is
distinctly seen outcropping on the surface from the level of where the floor of No. 2 Bench was,
and extends like an immense wall to the deepest levels yet worked in its neighbourhood.


So far most of the gold-bearing stone has been found on the upper or northern side of
the dyke.
In the early part of 1887 an opinion prevailed that the run of the gold deposit was towards
the west. Later developments have quite dispelled this theory, and in November, 1888, Mr. Jack
was able to state with assurance, “It is very evident that the bulk of the gold of Mount Morgan
yet lies intact within the limits of the freehold property.” This assertion has been fully
substantiated, as to-day the chief sources of supply are to the east of the dividing line of the
freehold and the western property.
Underground Workings.
Daring the progress of the various faces from the top of the hill downwards, tunnels and
crosscuts were put in for the purpose of passing the ore out from whatever levels were then being
worked. These were cut out as the work of excavation proceeded. What remains of them is
seen here and there on fragments of the benches still left standing.
Before describing the tunnels, &c., it will be necessary to state that the Crowm Shaft is the
main vertical working. It is put down through the centre of the hill. Six of the mam tunnels
are connected with it at various levels, and two more Linda Gully Tunnel and a drive from the
Sugar Loaf Shaft—are now being driven to cut it. It will be found more fully described later on,
this reference to its position being made for the purpose of rendering any immediate allusion the
more intelligible.
The sequence of description observed will be found to be in accordance with that of the
various levels, commencing with the highest workings. The measurements given are from the
most recent surveys.
The extent of progressive workings, such as the stopes, prospecting tunnels, shafts, &c., is
given up to the date of preparation of plans and letterpress, October, 1892.
Tables of assays taken by Mr. Jack at the beginning of the present year appear at the end of
the workings in their proper order; their low average, when compared with the average monthly
returns of the working assays of the Company, may be accounted for by the fact that Mr. Jack
obtained samples for assay indiscriminately from bodies of mullock (which would never be sent to
the works) as w r ell as from payable belts of country.
No. 2 Tunnel.
This tunnel was started in 1885. It bears north 10 degrees east. It enters the hill 12 feet
below No. 4 Bench, and cuts right through to the northern surface, passing 70 feet to the west of
the Crown Shaft. Its length is 516 feet. Thirty feet from the south end, or commencement, an
assay of red ferruginous material gave 170 Z. of gold per ton. At 120 feet the big dyke here, 26
feet wide, crosses the tunnel. The sinter met with beyond carried gold. No. 2 1 unnel is more
or less auriferous in its whole length, except where the silicious deposit is interrupted by felstone
dykes. In December, 1886, the Chairman of Directors said, “Throughout the whole of No. 2.
from side to side, there is stone which goes no less than 1 oz., and none of the stuff from any
part of the hill yields less than that quantity. A great portion of it goes 14 oz.


No. 2 Crosscut.
This crosscut was thus described in Mr. Jack’s Second Report:
.... “ A branCh tUnnel COmmences 220 feet from the south end of No. 2 Tunnel, and runs east
. it comes out on the hillside at a distance of 3 ro feet. This branch is crossed .6 feet from the
mam tunnel felstone dyke (.8 inches wide) probably the same which was noted as leaving
, ge yke /T , er S ° Uth “ the main tunnel ’ As far east as this dyke, and a little beyond, the
Fo e lbo7°°? dea, std “d oxide. Thence onward tothe east thesinter is nearly white.
• , , ,-T 7 ma "' tUn " el the branch < with the exception of the narrow dyke)
intersects light soft silicons sinter, in which, according to Mr. Lisle, gold varied from 1 oz 2 dwts
032 oz. per ton. Sixty-two tons, treated, gave a return of 5 oz. 6 dwts. gold per ton. At 2,6
feet from the main tunnel the silicons sinter is a good deal mixed up with silicate of alumina ■
and thence eastward, although it loses the silicate, it has a tolerably distinct dip east, at about «
degrees, and is poor in gold. Towards the east end the sinter becomes again more ferruginous,
ti in one place it is a mass of black ironstone boulders, pretty rich in gold ’’
Concerning this crosscut, Mr. Hall, in his Report at the first Annual Meeting, stated -
“We have made a crosscut and cut through No. 2 Tunnel, and in it there are layers of stone
running, giving an average of from r oz. some pennyweights to a little over 36 oz. In the cross-
cut which has come out on the freehold again, we have hit a reef which is 130 feet wide. This
assays from , oz. to 30 oz. to the ton. Taken altogether-that is, taking out a general assortment
of 40 tons and putting ,t through the barrels-,’, yields an average of 5 oz. Such, I think, you
will agree, is very satisfactory.” 3
No. 5 Tunnel.
(See Plan C. and Section E.)
rhis tunnel was started in ,890. It bears north, 30 degrees east. It enters the hill S o feet
below No. 4 Bench, and traverses it from side to side. Its length is 482 feet. Starting from the
south-west end, it cut through 30 feet of payable sinter, when the big dyke was passed The
format,on throughout is chiefly red, yellow, and kaolinic sinter, which occur in bands, interposed
here and there with .ronstone and felspathic dyke-stone. Roughly calculated, there is 200 feet of
payable country exposed (U, yielding from 10 dwts. upwards) the auriferous patches of sinter
coming in on either side at irregular intervals with a maximum width of 30 feet. At 207 feet
a sort of iron quicksand was encountered, which ran in like a sandhill from the top and sides of
the tunnel, and necessitated very close timbering to keep it in check. From the floor of this
tunnel, along its entire length, upwards to the main benches, may be regarded as uniformly
payable country. 3
At 260 feet a pass leads down to the Freehold Tunnel, 7 o feet through payable country,
and at 380 feet in is a “jump-up,' or “rise,” connecting with the Lion’s Den Bench, the ore from
the latter thus finding an outlet to the Upper Works by way of the Freehold Tunnel.
No. 5 Crosscut.
At the same point in the tunnel as the pass to the Freehold (2CO feet in, a crosscut is driven
through to the eastern surface of the hill, a distance of 295 feet. For roo feet outwards from the


tunnel it passes through poor silicious sinter, intersected by bands of decomposing felstone. For
about 40 feet onward, payable ore (kaolinic sinter) comes in ; the country, as the surface is
approached, merging into felstone and quartzite heavily charged with pyrites.
At 30 feet in, the crosscut from the tunnel is a shaft or pass communicating with the Lion’s
Den Bench, the country upwards to that working being chiefly kaolinic sinter, assaying 2 oz. and
over per ton. Another pass at 105 feet in, connects the crosscut with the Hopper Crosscut, 16
feet below.
No. 5a Tunnel.
(See Plan C.)
This tunnel was started at the same time as No. 5 on the same level. It traverses the hill
from south to north, cutting the Crown Shaft at 272 feet in, and at a level 59 feet below No. 4
Bench. Its length is 650 feet. Some payable kaolinic sinter was met with for 30 feet on the
south side of the big dyke, but the remainder of the country passed through was poor (felstone
dykes and low grade sinter).
This tunnel is situated too far to the west to cut the main gold deposit.
At 100 feet past its junction with the Crown Shaft a pass connects it with No. 4 Bench.
Hopper Tunnel.
{See Plan C.)
This tunnel was started at about the same time as No. SA. It bears 20 degrees north of
west, being driven into the hill from the south-east, about 16 feet below Nos. 5 and 5a tunnels.
After passing through the surface shales and quartzites it cuts a large body of kaolinic sinter
(previously mentioned as met with in the open cuttings) now being operated upon above and below
this level by an extensive system of stoping. This tunnel terminates in the big dyke a short
distance beyond the stopes.
Hopper Crosscuts. .
At 145 feet in the Hopper Tunnel a crosscut strikes off at right angles, and has been driven
through to the northern surface of the hill, a distance of 645 feet. The first 180 feet of this cross-
cut now forms a portion of the Hopper Stopes. For about 80 feet “ highly kaolinic sinter with
irregular red lines ” is passed through. Three samples from here, assayed by Mr. Jack, yielded as
follows :
GOLD.
SILVER.
oz. dwt. grs.
oz. dwt. grs.
A red portion from 198 feet
... ... 116
21 I 9
White kaolin from 226 feet
306
O 6l2
White kaolin from 264 feet
036
The remainder of the country to the end is
felstone dykes varying in width.
principally sinter, intersected by a number of


Hopper Stopes.
(See Section F)
Sloping operations (the first on the mine) were commenced from the north side of the Hopper
Tunnel in August, 1891. Their purpose was to work the large body of kaolin ore disclosed by the
Hopper Crosscut, the course of which represents the direction in which they are being extended.
These slopes have been carried upwards from the level of the Hopper Tunnel a distance of 46 feet
6 inches, that is, six sets of timbering, each set being 7 feet 9 inches high. The topmost floor is
the bench from which the Lady Norman face is being worked, thus connecting the stopes with the
workings on the surface.
Each successive floor upwards is less in extent than the one immediately below. The bottom
floor, taking the distance from south to north along the line of the Hopper Crosscut, is 160 feet long,
the greatest width from east to west being 114 feet. A sample from the western face taken by Mr.
Jack on his last visit to the mine assayed 14 oz. 14 dwts. 4 grs. The ore is readily detached from the
face with pick and gad and is trucked out through the Hopper Tunnel, thence along an elevated
line of rails over the supply hopper to the serial tramway, and so to the lower works. Equal facility
of access to the upper works is afforded by a main pass or shaft extending from the floor of the
Lady Norman Bench, through the Hopper Tunnel and Freehold Stopes down to the level of the
Grass-tree Crosscut, 115 feet below whence it may be trucked to the upper crushers by way of the
Grass-tree Tunnel. The total depth of this shaft is 160 feet.
The amount of ore by measurement removed from these stopes is 10,000 cubic yards.
Freehold Tunnel.
(See Section D.)
This tunnel, commenced in 1886, was the first underground working entered on by the
Company to prospect their freehold property at a depth. Its level is about 260 feet from the
original summit of the hill, or 138 feet below the Lady Musgrave Bench.
Before its terminal point—the Crown Shaft—was reached they had the satisfaction of knowing
that the gold-bearing sinter ore did go down, the country opened up proving this beyond question.
The first payable stone was met with 400 feet from the entrance.
The Hon. W. Pattison, Chairman of Directors, addressing the shareholders in June, 1887
said with reference to it:—
Although you need not think that the whole of the 600 feet, which is about the distance
from where we struck the golden stone to the boundary of the leasehold, is payable, you may
reasonably expect that the great bulk of it will be. That, of course, we can only judge by the
surface stone, and indications show that the great bulk of it is gold-bearing. If that is the case,
and having struck gold, as we have done, at a depth of 300 feet from the top of the hill, then it
appears to me that whatever value we might have attached to the mine a month ago, that value has
been more than doubled now, if not trebled, by the very fact of discovering such an enormous
body of stone on our freehold, which, I think, we are perfectly safe in assuring ourselves the
‘ jumpers ’ never can touch.”
It remains to-day as Mr. Jack described it in his Second Report:


“ The freehold tunnel is driven W. 30° N. for a distance of 789 feet till it strikes the main
shaft feet below No. 2 floor, and feet below the level of No. 2 tunnel. For the first 180
feet the tunnel traverses a decomposing felspathic crystalline rock. The next 40 feet are in
compact, massive, pyritous quartzite. The next 80 feet are in dolerite. To this succeed 30 feet of
a decomposing basic crystalline rock (dolerite), 20 feet of decomposed felspathic red and black
ferruginous rock (dolerite) which exudes sulphate of magnesia, and 42 feet of decomposing
felspathic yellow rock (dolerite). Beyond this point (392 feet from the mouth of the tunnel) and
on the main shaft the tunnel intersects (with the exception of a felstone dyke 482 feet from its
mouth) fine light silicious sinter, impregnated in places with brown hydrous iron oxide. For the
first 11 feet the sinter assayed for 70Z. 6dwts. of gold per ton. Gold continued for 49 feet further,
but was not so rich. At 525 feet from the mouth, about 8 feet of the sinter in the floor of the
tunnel assayed for 6oz. of gold to the ton. From this point to the shaft Mr. Lisle says there was
no free gold. A little pyrites can be "Saved in the dish on washing the sinter.
“From the main shaft a southern crosscut runs 237 feet from the main freehold tunnel in a
south-south-west direction. It is connected at the south end with a shaft feet up to No. 5
floor, and 33 feet down to No. 1 tunnel. For 138 feet from the main shaft an exceedingly light,
soft, white silicious sinter, without gold, is traversed by the tunnel; then a narrow felspar
(felstone) dyke is crossed, underlying to the south. After 48 feet of rather compact silica, the
felstone dyke, which bounds the auriferous deposit on the south-west side in No. 2 floor, is again
met with ;it is here 19 feet wide, and forms the limit of the sinter. Between it and the south end
of the tunnel only the quartzite of the country rock is seen.”
The freehold tunnel measures 7 feet in the clear, and has a double line of rails. All the ore
from the Lady Musgrave workings is passed dow r n to this level, and so on to the upper works.
Freehold Crosscut West.
(See Plan C and Section G.)
This crosscut is driven from the Freehold Tunnel at 390 feet in from the mouth in a south-
westerly direction. It is 416 feet long, and passing beneath the hopper workings at a level of 56
feet lower, cuts out to the surface of the main spur.
The country traversed outwards from the Main Tunnel for the first 130 feet or so is
principally silicious sinter when the kaolin of the Hopper Stopes is cut, and extends to within
100 feet of the mouth of the crosscut. At a little more than half-way out the big dyke passes
through the crosscut, its width here being 18 feet.
At 120 feet outwards a pass is put in connecting with the Lady Musgrave Bench by way of
the Hopper Stopes.
Freehold Crosscut Drive.
At 132 feet out is the Freehold Crosscut Drive, which branches off right and left at right
angles to the crosscut itself. It has been carried 148 feet west 28 degrees north, and 86 feet east
28 degrees south of the crosscut.
The first or western branch passes through alternating patches of silicious ferruginous and
kaolinic sinter, mostly of a low grade.


pyri “ 26 ** ° f kaO "“ C ™- d by bands of ironstone and
No. 1 Tunnel.
(See Plan C.)
This tunnel enters the hill from the south 163 feet below Nn u a • j •
through to the northern surface a distance of TT Lf , t 4 ’“ d 13 dnVen n S ht
west of the auriferous deposit’and tt f t \ Jt P ass es through barren country to the
same ch—sj: 7:\t sr Shaf ‘- having much the
th e UPPCT ?r ts met with
exception of “2c feet of silica wifh • a rough its whole length, with the
*5 feet of stl.ca w.th non ox.de, whtch assayed 3 ox. gold and 3 os. silver per ton.”
No. 1 Tunnel Crosscut West.
feet iaXliTepS ** ** 3?
No. 1 Tunnel Crosscut East.
A crosscut to the east, a,6 feet in length, connects No. 1 Tunnel with the Crown Shaft d
traverses country rock. wun tne Crown Shaft, and
The Freehold Stopes.
(See Section II.)
These Slopes are situated above and below the Freehold Western Crosscut In a ,r , r
beneath the Hopper Slopes, with which they are connected bv a main S$CUt a dlrect llne
both and previously mentioned. The pass intersects the Freehold r °- Co ” m ° n ‘°
North of the big felspathic dyke. The vertical extent of .h * to the
worked from eight floors, two above and six below the level of the Crosscut 6 thfd’ T bei " S
floors being 7 feet in the Henr Tk . rl6 crosscut > the distance between
xjsss** -;
, t , ove the P Jat form. Specimens shown to me were eciual to anvthtna •
r:'; t,“ “2,““ -*r ■*
floor, but not in No <or No T ’ a ' S ° “* With in lhe -ighbourhood of No. 4
4 and 5 floors. The greatest length a ZITJ ‘“‘r Shaft between Nos '
from east to west 48 feet. S ° Uth *° "° rth is 1 «**. and the width


South Freehold Stopes.
(See Section G.)
These stopes have been put in to the south of the big dyke 14 feet below the level of No. 2
floor (on the opposite or northern side.)
There are three stopes, the topmost one, No. 3, extending to the south a distance of no feet
through payable ore, principally kaolinic sinter. Mr. Jack, alluding to this portion of the stopes,
says, “ Payable kaolinic sinter is now being excavated from the south side of the dyke—a proof
that the dyke does not * cut off ’ the auriferous deposit. Although the fact is not new, its recurrence
at such a low level is very satisfactory. Recent tunnelling has shown that scores of similar dykes
intersect the auriferous deposit, and as they must be of more recent date than the latter, they could
not possibly, as they did not exist, have interfered with the deposition of the gold.” It is reason-
able to expect that gold-bearing stone will continue along the course of the dyke, especially when
considered with the fact that from the cutting near the entrance of No. 5 tunnel a large body of
payable sinter was removed ; this was also on the south side of the dyke. The total measurement
of ore excavated to date from all the Freehold stopes is 9,500 cubic yards.
Remarks on the Hopper and Freehold Stopes.
The Stoping operations above specified have been proceeded with uninterruptedly for fifteen
months and, as will have been noted, form an important branch of the progressive work of the
mine.
The system of dealing with the deposit by quarrying or surface cuttings was found to be
practicable only so long as the payable ore out-cropped on the surface. Upon its dipping to the
east and south-east beneath an overlying mass of barren country (shales and quartzites) which
gradually increased in thickness with depth, it became evident that it would be less costly to leave
the latter intact and stope out the payable ore in whatever direction it might be found to extend.
The tunnels and crosscuts put in at the various levels clearly indicated the course taken by the
body of kaolinic sinter.
By referring to the plans and descriptions of the stopes it will be observed that their purpose is
the excavation of all the payable country lying to the north of the dyke to its limits, as yet only
imperfectly defined, on that side of the hill. The vertical section of the stopes is identical with
that of the main pass (160 feet in depth). The intention is to extend the Freehold Stopes upwards
until the bottom of the Hopper Stopes is reached, when they will form a continuous series.
The latest developments in the stopes show that the main body of kaolinic sinter extends
upwards from the level of the Hopper Tunnel, and it is towards the neighbourhood of this working
that all the ore of that character converges from the No. 4 and Lady Musgrave Benches.
The Freehold Crosscut, traversing the same section of country 56 feet below, still shows a
continuance of the kaolinic sinter, here, however, containing a greater proportion of sinter than
kaolin, and dipping to the south. In the Freehold Stopes the kaolin appears to be gradually dis-
placed by silicious sinter and payable brown haematite, which in its turn rests on the pyritous country
of the Grass-tree workings. The South Freehold Stopes disclose the fact that the kaolinic sinter dips
to a lower level there than on the north side.


Mr. Jack, in the appendix to his Third Report, significantly remarks :
“ Our present knowledge of the Freehold and Hopper Stopes seems to give additional point
to the surmise that important developments may be looked for on the southern slope of the
Mount.”
Mode of Timbering the Stopes.
The system of timbering is on the model of that in use in the Broken Hill Silver Mines, New
South Wales. It is known as “ the square set system.” It is of recent date so far as Australia is
concerned, although it has been in use for many years in Germany and America for the purpose of
successfully working wide and extensive lodes at a depth from the surface.
The pieces, consisting of caps (5 feet), stretchers (6 feet), and legs (7 feet 9 inches), are made
of 9-inch x 9-inch square hardwood sawn on the mine. The caps and stretchers are checked and
fitted at their ends to form a 3-inch mortise, each leg having a corresponding 3-inch tenon. The
sets by this system can be continued in height, length and width as the nature of the work and
country require.
Each set represents roughly eight cubic yards. As the ore is worked out from the faces the
spaces between the timbers are filled in with “ mullock ” from the surface and boarded up, leaving
only passages between for trucking the ore out.
The floors are composed of 2-inch hardwood, and are removed as the work proceeds.
Grasstree Tunnel.
(See Plan C.)
This tunnel is situated 67 feet below and slightly to west of south of the Freehold Tunnel, and
on the same level as the hopper over the Upper Dry-crushers.
It is driven into the hill on a course of about west 40 degrees north, is 837 feet long, and
intersects the Crown Shaft 21 feet above the Sunbeam Level, or 198 feet below that of No. 4
Bench. After passing through an outer enveloping mass of country shales and quartzites (here 154
feet in thickness), pyritous rock is met with, some of which is auriferous serpentine. The country
halfway in the tunnel, for about 100 feet, is composed almost entirely of solid pyrites, including
arsenical and copper pyrites. The remainder consists of bands of sinter, intersected by felstone
dykes at irregular intervals, pyritous country coming in again from the east 100 feet before reaching
the Crown Shaft.
Grasstree Crosscut.
(See Platt Cl)
This crosscut runs right and left from the Grasstree Tunnel, 453 feet in from the mouth of the
latter and nearly at right angles. It is driven out to the surface of the hill slightly to east of north,
a distance of 585 feet from the tunnel. On the other side, namely, to the south-west, it penetrates
a distance of about 198 feet.
North Branch.
The North Branch at about 60 feet from the tunnel exposes a mass of solid pyrites weathering
to sulphate of copper. Further onward is a quartz reef heavily charged with pyrites, underlying to
the north-west. 1 his is followed by a large body of pyritous quartz, extending for about 70 feet


and carrying gold. Assays taken daily from this at time of driving varied from 3 dwts. to 5 oz.
Past this again is dioritic rock, and thence to the surface country shales and quartzites prevail.
South Branch.
The south branch for 80 feet from its junction with the tunnel shows a continuation of the
pyrites lode met with on the other side of the tunnel, the remainder being felspathic rock.
Drive from Crosscut.
At 96 feet in a drive leaves the crosscut at right angles to the west. It has been driven 70 feet,
and shows the country in that direction to consist of sinter, silicious and kaolinic, sometimes one
element and sometimes the other predominating. Small patches of payable ore were met with here.
Linda Tunnel.
(See Plan C.)
This tunnel is being driven into the hill from the east at a level 65 feet above the Dee bed,
and about 460 feet from the original top of the mount. It is designed to cut the Crown Shaft at a
point 140 feet below the level of the Grasstree Tunnel. The total distance from the mouth of the
tunnel to the Crown Shaft is 1,423 feet. So far it has been driven in 325 feet. The section exposes
country rock (granitic) with shales and quartzites intersected by several dolerite dykes.
Air Shaft.
At 544 feet in the Linda Tunnel an air shaft has been sunk from the surface, its depth being
158 feet through shales and diorite.
Crown Shaft.
C See Section 1.)
This shaft, the main vertical working of the mine proper, is sunk through the centre of the
hill, 620 feet below the level of No. 4 Bench. It is about 40 feet distant from the western
boundary line of the freehold property. No. 5 Bench is now being opened up around the top of
the shaft.
The Crown Shaft was first started by a rise or “ jump-up ” from the Eastern Crosscut of No. 2
Tunnel in order to pass out the ore from the open cuttings above. Down to the level of No. 1
Tunnel (163 feet) it is used as an oreway. measuring 8 feet by 4 the clear. Below that level
it develops into a prospecting shaft, measures 10 feet by 4 feet, and is divided into three compart-
ments, two winding shafts and a pump shaft all timbered with sawn hardwood, for some time
sinking operations were conducted from a plat in No. 1 Tunnel Crosscut, but, as depth was attained,
the base of operations w T as changed to the level of the Grasstree I unnel, where another plat was
cut for the purpose, and it is from this spot that the shaft is now being sunk.
The country cut by the Crown Shaft for about 25 feet from the No. 4 Bench is payable sinter,
becoming poorer in quality with depth, the rich ore dipping away to the east. Just above the
intersection of the Freehold Tunnel, 13° feet down, pyritous ore is met with, followed by serpentine


and quartzite boulders heavily charged with pyrites. This continues on down to withm 50 feet of
the level to which it has been sunk, when softer country, serpentine, comes in
This shaft is being put down by contract. The machinery erected m the plat consists .
pair of vertical winding engines rojin. cylinder, coin. stroke, working off the second motion by spur
gear and driven by steam from a boiler situated outside the mouth of the Grasstree Tunnel. Air
for working the rock drills is conveyed from the compressors at the Sugarloaf workings throug
2 coo feet of piping. Owing to the oxidation of the pyrites in the shaft there is a large proport
of free sulphuric acid in the water brought ,0 the surface. So damaging are the effects of this that
l in . iron pipes only stand good for about two weeks when constantly in contact win . .
The tunnels, &c., connecting with the Crown Shaft are : (See Pan .)
From the South No. 5a Tunnel at 59 feet below No. 4 Bench.
From South-east Freehold Tunnel at 131 feet below No. 4 Bench.
From the West No. 1 Tunnel Crosscut at 163 feet below No. 4 Bench.
From the South-east Grasstree Tunnel at t 9 t feet below No. 4 Bench.
From the West Sunbeam Tunnel at 219 feet below No. 4 Bench.
Linda Tunnel coming in from the east will connect with the Crown Shaft at 338 feet re ow
N °' Arrive from the Sugarloaf Shaft from the west will connect with the Crown Shaft at 683 feet
below No. 4 Bench.
Western Workings.
The following tunnels on the western claims were visited and described by Mr. J ack "^ is
last teport at the commencement of this year. They remain just as they were when he saw them.
Sunbeam Tunnel.
This tunnel runs from the hillside in Hall's Gully north-eastward to
communicates midway with the overlying No. r Crosscut by the Lady Brassey Shaft. At t y
Brassev Shaft is quartzite and serpentinous schist. Thence to the Crown Shaft the tunnel mostly
shows quartzite, which is always rather, and occasionally highly, pyritous, especia ly on the so -
.-a T , • howeV er, nothing like the masses of pyrites m the No. i 1 unnel. lne pyrno
auartzite is dykes. Near the Crown Shaft is a mass of pyritous
quartz. I was informed that the Crown Shaft below the level of the tunnel was sunk throng
from the Lady Brassey Shaft towards the mouth a large dolertte dyke is
met with a few yards from the shaft. There is another about 50 feet from the mouth of the tunnel
. . . nother con taining large felspar crystals about 150 feet from the mouth. The remainder
this portion of the tunnel is mainly in pyritous quartzite, with a few bands of shale an serpentinous
schist.
Rip-and-Tear Tunnel and Crosscuts.
This tunnel is at a low level on the south side of the Mount, and at a considerable d.stance
from the known auriferous deposit. The tunnel and crosscuts show nothing but country roc ,
consisting of quartzites, greywackes, and shales, intersected by basic and acidtc igneous dykes.


Western and Road Tunnels.
These are short tunnels in the western portion of the ground drained by Mundic Creek. Both
are in country rock throughout. The Road Tunnel is 62 feet above the level of the Sugarloaf
Tunnel, and 13 feet below the level of the Western. The latter is 14 feet below the Sunbeam level.
Sugarloaf Workings.
(See Section I and Plan B.)
The Sugarloaf is a minor hill or spur of Mount Morgan, leading up to it from the bed of
Mundic Creek on the south-west. It is drained by Hall’s Gully on the north and by Mundic
Creek on the west and south, being divided by the latter from what is known as “ Callan’s
Knob.”
Sugarloaf Shaft.
This shaft has been sunk on the northern fall of the Sugarloaf Hill to a depth of 1,016 feet
from the surface. The sill of this shaft is 297 feet below the original top of the Mount, or 15 feet
above the level of the Grasstree Tunnel. The distance separating the two main prospecting shafts
—the Crown and Sugarloaf—is 1,182 feet, the bearing of the former from the latter being north
64 degrees east. By reference to Plan Bit will be noted that this shaft is located at the south-
western corner of the boundary line, between No. 73 Lease and the Consolidated Claim, No. 452.
The reason for sinking at this spot was to determine the nature of the western property at a depth,
and enable the Company to open up levels to 1,000 feet (deeper if necessary), and so explore the
country on all sides.
The Sugarloaf Shaft measures 10 feet by 4 feet in the clear, being divided into three com-
partments—one pumping shaft 4 feet by 4 feet, and two winding shafts 2 feet 10 inches by 4 feet
in the clear. It is closely timbered with sawn hardwood from top to bottom. The shaft was sunk
by contract from the 316 feet level by Mr. J. Beith, late Manager of the Queensland Deep-
sinking Company, Charters Towers, the price being £lO per foot, inclusive of everything but
timber. The same contractor is now engaged in sinking the Crown Shaft. Mr. Beith started his
contract in the Sugarloaf on sth November of last year (1891), and completed it on 20th August
last, averaging 72 feet progress per month.
The following is the section of the strata exposed by the shaft From the surface for 197
feet brown gossan, thence to 520 feet, a solid mass of pyritous ore crossed at intervals by reefs of
white quartz assaying from 1 dwt. upwards; these reefs down to the 300 feet level dipped to the
north-east, but from that point downwards reversed, dipping away to the south-east. At 480 feet
a reef was cut 5 feet in width, assaying up to 1 oz.; at 530 feet the pyritous ore gave place to
shales, a large body of quartz coming in from the western side of the shaft for a distance of 27
feet. The remainder of the country to the bottom of the shaft consists of shales and quartzites.
Sugarloaf Tunnel.
This tunnel is driven from the 134 feet level in the Sugarloaf Shaft in a south-south-easterly
direction, and cuts the surface at 222 feet in the Sugarloaf Gully over Mundic Creek. Mr. Jack
thus described the nature of country intersected by this tunnel in his Third Report:
“ Silicious and ferruginous sinter is seen from a point about 40 feet south of the main shaft,
and extends as far as the shaft near the top of the hill. Ihe sinter is often compact, and not


easily distinguished from quartz. The sinter at the Hill Shaft (240 feet out from Sugarloaf Shaft),
and for a few yards beyond, contained some gold, but it is admitted that nothing payable has yet
been met with in the tunnel. From this point to the mouth of the tunnel in Sugarloaf Gully there
is nothing but country rock, consisting of pyritous greywackes and quartzites, intersected by
dolerite dykes.”
Eastern Drive.
At the 500 feet level in the Sugarloaf Shaft a drive is being put in to the east which is
designed to cut the Crown Shaft at a level 485 feet below the level of the Grasstree. It is in 35
feet through quartzite and hornblendic rock, almost transparent.
Western Drive.
At the 1000 feet level another drive is being put in to the west, its purpose being to cut a large
body of quartz outcropping in the bed of Mundic Creek, and also met with in the western tunnel ,
assays taken from this quartz blow yielded up to Boz. per ton. I his drive is in about 3°
through shales and quartzite.
Sugarloaf Machinery.
The Winding Machinery in connection with the Sugarloaf Shaft consists of:—A pair of
coupled winding engines (Harkness, Sandhurst) i6in. cylinder, 5 feet stroke, 7° h.p. nominal.
The winding drums are 10 feet diameter, working direct on the engine shaft between the two
engines. The engines are fitted with link motion and indicators. The poppet heads over the
shaft are 52 feet high, well braced together with stout round timber. They have safety appliances
to guard against any accident from over-winding, also safety cages. In the same buildings as the
engines described are :—One engine, i6in. cylinder, 4ft. stroke, for dnving, two air compressors
with i6in. cylinders, 3 feet strokes, which supply an air receiver 32 feet long by 5 feet diameter,
carrying a constant pressure of 751 b. to the square inch.
Steam is supplied to the engines by 3 Cornish flue boilers 26 feet long by 6 feet diameter with
the usual donkey pump and connections.
The compressors are used for working the rock drills (Ingersoll’s) in the Sugarloaf, and also
supply the necessary air pressure to the winding engines and rock drills at the Crown Shaft.
The Machinery, the largest of its kind in Queensland, is considered up to all requirements for
sinking to a depth of 3000 feet if necessary.
A winding speed of 1500 feet per minute can be easily maintained.
Outlay.
The amount expended on the Sugarloaf plant up to May last was ,£12,979 2s. id., the outlay
in mining, etc., being 19s. 4d.
Aggregate Driving and Sinking.
The following are the number of feet driven and sunk by the Company up to October of this
year (1892.) : „ „ ,
Tunnels ... ••• ••• ••• 8,898 feet
Drives, Crosscuts, &c. ... ... ••• 4> 6 7 8 „
Shafts, &c. ... ••• ••• ••• 3>677 »
Total ... 17)253 »


GEOLOGICAL FEATURES OF THE MOUNT.
SCIENTIFIC THEORIES ON THE ORIGIN OF THE DEPOSIT.
THE Mount Morgan, apart from its character as an extraordinary gold producer, has opened
up fresh fields of research in the twin sciences of metallurgy and geology.
In the province of each a problem presented itself.
The first was of a purely practical nature, and upon the success of those who found themselves
face to face with it, depended no less an issue than the complete and economic extraction of the
gold. How this, after costly experiments and unremitting energy, was eventually realized, and at
the present time is being effected, has already been told.
The second problem, on the contrary, was and is—for its quod erat demonstrandum —based on
conclusive evidence, has yet to be written within the region of speculative theory.
The origin of the Mount Morgan deposit, the whys and wherefores of its existence, have
afforded a fascinating theme for discussion since its discovery. Eminent geologists and expert
mining men have in turn examined the mount from summit to base, and given to the world the
results of their investigations.
Opinions formulated and expressed upon this vexed question are, for the greater part, widely
at variance ; some are rashly extravagant, and deserve only passing allusion, while others are the
outcome of intelligent observation and logical reasoning. It is with the latter class that we have
chiefly to deal.
Mr. Robert L. Jack, Government Geologist for Queensland, \s facile princeps the authority on
Mount Morgan as a geological phenomenon.
This gentleman has made a special study of the deposit and the neighbouring strata, having
officially inspected the mine on four separate occasions. The records of his diligent inquiry into
the matter are embodied in three carefully compiled reports, published “by authority ” in 1884, 1889,
and 1892 respectively, which thus treat upon the mine at three distinct periods of its development.
Between Mr. Jack’s first and second reports, Mr. J. MacDonald Cameron, M.P., F.G.S., &c.,
just recently appointed Master of the Sydney Mint, at the request of the Directors examined and
reported on the mine, February, 1887.
Extracts from these reports will serve the opinions of men well qualified to advance them,
and how far they agree as to the agencies accountable for the occurrence of the Mount Morgan
gold and it matrix.
Mr. Jack’s “ Thermal Spring” Theory.
The following expression of opinion appeared in Mr. Jack’s First Report, 1884:
“After a careful study of the whole formation I have come to the conclusion that nothing
but a thermal spring, in the open air, could have deposited the material under consideration. The
frothy silicious sinter agrees in every respect with the deposits of New Zealand and Iceland


geysers, and of the still more wonderful hot springs of the Yellowstone National Park, so graphic-
ally and scientifically described by D. A. C. Peale ‘On the Thermal Springs of Yellowstone,
National lark, Washington, 1883. The frothy and cavernous condition of the silicious sinter of
Mount Morgan may be accounted for by the escape of steam while the silica was yet (after the
deposition of the evaporation of the water) in the gelatinous condition so frequently observed in
the deposits of hot springs. The aluminous silicates represent the familiar outbursts and flow of
mud. The iron oxide appears to have been deposited in some cases along with the silica and
alumina, and in others to have been deposited later, its solvent fluid having been, as it were, in-
jected into the interstices, vesicles, and caverns of the silica and alumina. In some cases it may
have been originally pyrites, as it now and then occurs in cubical hollows. Calcareous sinter is
very common in silicious springs, and its absence from Mount Morgan must need simply the
local absence of limestones among the rocks from which the spring was fed. The silica would be
found abundantly in the quartzites, and the alumina in the shales and greywackes of the country
in the neighbourhood, and possibly both silica and alumina may have come in part from a deep-
seated underlying granite. Ihe gold, and to some extent the iron, may have been dissolved out of
the iron pyrites of such reefs as the ‘ Mundic Reef’ seen in Mundic Creek; the gold possibly by
chlorine produced by the contact of hydrochloric acid, derived from the decomposition of chlorides,
with manganese, which occurs sparingly in the form of pyrolusite along with the ironstone of
Mount Morgan.
“ Rhyolite dykes intersect the metamorphosed stratified rocks of the district.
Ihe rock may be thus described:—A hard, very fine-grained, almost compact, dark-grey
felsitic matrix, with numerous and large crystals of sanidine, and a few granules or blebs of quartz.
Fragments of hornblende crystals occur, but so rarely that the mineral must be regarded as
accidental. Noaugite; no olivine.
“ Several of these dykes run from north-west to south-east, through the area included in the
Plan; one runs from north-east to south-west through Mineral Selection No. 73, and still further
west (beyond the limits of the plan) a large—probably intensive—mass of rhyolite occurs.
That the deposit left by the thermal spring is newer than the altered stratified rocks through
which it has burst is obvious; and that it is even newer than the much later date, when the
rhyolite dykes filled up fissures in the stratified rocks, is proved by the fact that the dykes are
clearly seen in some instances to be covered over by the silicious, aluminous, and ferruginous
deposits of the springs.
But yet another circumstance helps us in our endeavour to ascertain the age of the outburst
of the Mount Morgan hot spring. About a mile to the west of the ‘ mountain ’ is a mass—
apparently about 150 feet in thickness—of horizontal bedded sandstone. It rests apparently at
this point on a mass of rhyolite, but in other places it may be seen lying on the upturned edges of
quartzite and greywacke strata, similar in character to those of the ‘country 5 around Mount
Morgan. The base of this formation is a fine volcanic dust. The upper beds are coarsely gritty,
and for the most part, silicious, varying from white to brown and red, and containing occasional
pebbles of quartz and quartzite. I recognise in it, without hesitation, Daintree’s ‘ Desert Sandstone/
which I have traced from Torres Straits to Maryborough, and which lies unconformably upon,


and is, consequently, newer than the strata of the Western Downs. The latter present strong
cretaceous affinities.
“The base of the ‘Desert Sandstone’ I should judge to be about ioo feet lower than the
summit of Mount Morgan.
“ Standing on the sandstone cliffs, so as to look to the east, past the south side of Mount
Morgan, the observer can descry across the valley of the Dee the familiar contour of horizontally-
bedded sandstone cliffs stretching north and south. As nearly as can be judged by the eye, they
are on the same level as the cliffs on the opposite side of the valley, and there can be no doubt
that the valley has been carved out of a once-continuous cake of horizontal sandstone. The
question arises, ‘ Was Mount Morgan an island in the sea or lake in which the sandstones were
laid down?’ In that case the hot spring was older than the desert sandstone.
“ The answer is easily made. Had there been shores to this sea or lake where Mount Morgan
now stands the sandstone in the neighbourhood would have been full of pebbles of sinter and iron-
stone, derived from the waste of such easily degraded rocks. But I saw none such, and I believe
they do not occur. The hot spring, then, was newer, and not older, than the Desert Sandstone.
“ In many places in the north the valleys carved out of the Desert Sandstone became theatres
of volcanic activity. Among such places are the Maclvor River, north of Cooktown, and the
Mulgrave River, near Cairns. These volcanos burst out near the heads of the valleys and filled the
lower reaches with flows of basaltic lava, to which we owe some of the richest agricultural land in
the colony. Another form of volcanic activity was developed at the same period near the head of the
Dee Valley. After the Desert Sandstone had been uplifted, and the carving out of the present
valleys had been carried on for long ages, in fact, till the valleys had nearly acquired their present
contours , basaltic lavas flowed down the valleys over the upturned slates of the Maclvor and over
the auriferous drifts of the Mulgrave, and a geyser of enormous proportions spouted fitfully in the
valley of the Dee, carrying with it not only water, but in all probability chloride of gold.
“ The Mount Morgan geyser, as well as the Mclvor and the Mulgrave volcanos, probably date
from tertiary times, and are contemporaneous with many of the basalts which cover, auriferous drifts
in Victoria.
“In the presence of so much ironstone a precipitant for the gold need not be far to seek.
Protoxide of iron was probably present in sufficient quantities to perform this important function,
but it may have been aided by tannic acid derived from vegetable matter accumulated in the
basin. Several instances of the occurrence of vegetable matter in the basin of hot springs in the
Yellowstone region are recorded in the report already quoted. Precipitation of gold by means of
tannic acid would accord better with the confinement of the gold to the basin or crater of Mount
Morgan (to be afterwards alluded to) than would precipitation by ferrous oxide.
“ I have laid down on the map the limits of the overflow deposit from the geyser. It would be
next to impossible, and I believe it would be useless, to map out the limits of silicious sinter,
aluminous deposit and ironstone, merging as they do into one another by insensible gradations, and
imperfectly exposed as they are on hillside and in gully. The outer boundary of the overflow
deposit is in some places ill defined, as the ‘country rock’ is frequently impregnated with
aluminous, silicious, and ferruginous material, so as to be distinguishable with difficulty from the
unmixed deposit. That the deposit does not extend far to the east of Mount Morgan is owing


simply to denudation, the deposit having been removed from the steep slope of the hill on that side.
“In such active geysers as are accessible to observation we find a narrow pipe or fissure,
terminating upward in a crater-like cup or basin. The Great Iceland geyser, for example, has a
pipe 12 feet in diameter, which has been sounded to a depth of 70 feet. I have seen no satis-
factory explanation of the necessity for a cup, nor can I suggest one; but, all the same, the
repeated occurrence of the cup evidently takes place in obedience to some natural law. It may be
taken for granted that the Mount Morgan geyser was no exception to the rule, and I believe that
the upper portion of the mount where ironstone predominates, and to which gold is almost confined,
represents a basin occasionally filled with a fluid, in which silicia, iron, alumina, manganese, and
gold were held in solution, to be deposited when the bulk of the water from time to time withdrew
into the pipe or the subterranean reservoirs with which the pipe communicated. The overflow of
the ejected fluid left a silicious, aluminous, and ferruginous deposit on the slopes of the hillside,
but the gold does not appear to have been deposited to any extent beyond the limits of the basin.
It may be remarked that ‘ prospects ’ of gold have been obtained in a few localities in the overflow
deposit. In such cases it may be a question whether the gold was carried down with the overflow
or whether it emanated from some of the subsidiary springs, which, in such cases, as our experience
of active geysers has shewn, are pretty sure to break out in the vicinity of the main outflow.
‘ Callan’s Knob,’ for instance, is suggestive of one of these smaller springs.
“ After the cessation of thermal activity, the powers of subaeriel denudation would come into
play. Such, I believe, is the history of Mount Morgan as we now see it. Denudation would
obliterate the lateral terraces which are so familiar a feature in the scenery of every important
geyser district in New Zealand and the Yellowstone, and which were probably not absent from
the slopes of Mount Morgan. Mud-puffs and other evidences of the outbreak of hot water and
gases from minor vents would be removed by the same process.
“ Can any idea be formed as to the amount of gold to be obtained from the cup of the Mount
Morgan geyser ? I fear that as every item of the calculation would have to be preceded by an if,
the answer would be of little value. The sectional area of the cup deposit is only approximately
known. The depth of the cup deposit is not known at all, further than that it must be less than
the difference between the levels of the summit of the hill and the bottom of the Dee Valley.
Lastly, the distribution of the gold throughout the whole of the cup deposit is a pure assumption,
in making which we are not assisted by a knowledge of any analogous case in nature. But the
amount of auriferous stone at present in sight is enormous, and there is no rashness in believing
that it extends over a large area and to a considerable depth.”
Mr. Cameron’s Opposing* Theory.
Mr. Cameron in his report declines to admit that any of the theories, advanced to account for
the apparently abnormal conditions under which the gold in Mount Morgan is met with, are
“ sufficiently complete to embrace all the conditions and circumstances under which we find the
precious metal in that locality.”
Although the opinion of Mr. Cameron, from his acknowledged position as an expert of some
repute, must be treated with respect, it should be borne in mind that his visit of inspection only
extended over four days, and further (as his report plainly shows), he felt it incumbent on him to


throw a new light on the subject and rebut what theories had already been advanced. In what
measure he succeeded may be gathered from what follows. His report is a running commentary
on that of Mr. Jack. He attacks Mr. Jack’s theory by asking:—
“ If nothing but a thermal spring in the open air could produce the condition of things that
obtain at Mount Morgan, ought we not to find an incrustation of the so-called silicious sinter
surrounding the central portion or vent hole of the mount ? And not only this, but would it not
overlap to some degree at any rate the other formations of which the mount is composed ?
“ I must freely confess that much as I respect the opinion of so painstaking and scientific a
worker as I know Mr. Jack to be, and logical as are the deductions which he draws from his own
set premises, the condition of things at Mount Morgan will, in my humble judgment, bear quite
another interpretation than that of the ‘ thermal spring theory.’
“ If, as Mr. Jack remarks, the silicious sinter could only be produced in the open air, how is
it that about a quarter of a mile to the west of Mount Morgan proper it has been found in the
bottom of what is known as the ‘ Sugarloaf Shaft,’ at a depth of about 250 feet from the summit
of the mountain immediately underlying a black lustrous quartz, similiar in appearance to that
found in the central zone of the mount ? Either the Sugarloaf Mount was itself a separate
thermal spring, as it has been suggested Callan’s Knob is, that vomited forth its auriferous contents
fitfully for a time in the open air, and becoming quiescent, owing to a cessation of the forces that
gave rise to it, was ultimately superimposed by a mass of rock of different composition to the
so-called sintery mass found at the depths alluded to, or it is in age, character, and method of
formation part and parcel of the iron bound clayey sandstone which is found to the east and west
of Mount Morgan proper. I must confess that my observations incline me to adopt the latter
theory, though I shall certainly differ from Mr. Jack as to the nature of the method of formation.
“ Then, again, the complete absence of calcareous tufa from the so-called silicious sinter is
somewhat against the thermal spring theory, for we know that from scarcely any of the eruptive
rocks containing augite, hornblende, and similarly composed minerals, do we find lime absent, and
if subjected to disintegrating solutions their lime would be taken up and deposited before, if not
simultaneously with, the silica. Moreover, the Kaolin dyke I believe to be the result of the
decomposition of a trachytic rock that once traversed the very ground now being occupied by the
Kaolin, would have furnished lime to the hot geyser water had the latter emerged in contiguity to
it, which, from the position of the so-called central pipe, it must have done if this theory be correct.
Neither is the presence, as Mr. Jack alleges, of iron pyrites in the vent hole of the geyser, in favour
of this theory, as water bubbling up from below containing silica gold and iron does not furnish
the conditions for the formation of pyritous compounds, nor is the theory strengthened by the
absence of gold from the Kaolin dyke.”
Mr. Cameron appears to sum up his ideas in the following remarks :
“ But the question may well be asked : From whence has come the gold that permeates the
quartz veins traversing the tufaceous masses as well as that contained in the several iron-stained
bands that show in the face of the Mount if originally there were only one large central group ot
pyritous quartz veins to which the central stalactitic and irridescent mass is the key ?
“ Although it serves no good purpose to dogmatically assert that gold can only be met with in
rocks of a certain age, yet I may mention the fact that hitherto it has been found in greatest


abundance in the quartz veins that traverse altered paleozoic slates, and particularly where eruptive
rocks junction with strata of Cambrian and Silurian age. It is also a generally-accepted fact that
the original home of gold is in the granular eruptive rocks of a granitic and hornblendic character,
where it is found disseminated in infinitesimal particles throughout their mass; and as I have
already noticed that eruptive rocks of a granular character, belonging to the secondary igneous
system, are to be found not only traversing the Mount itself, but in its immediate neighbour-
hood, we have not far to seek for the original source of its gold. During the decomposition of
these by saline acidulated waters their contained gold would become dissolved and deposited along
with the soluble silica in the crevices of the softer and more porous rocks of their vicinity. That
the tufaceous rock offered the greatest facilities for such deposition is evidenced by the fact that it
is permeated by a network of auriferous quartz veins that must have been deposited subse-
quently to those of the original mundic group—a very likely occurrence.
“ There is one fact, so far as I am aware, that has hitherto escaped notice, and it is that the
amount of the red oxides of iron varies in inverse proportion to the distance from the summit and
upwards from the southern front of the zone. That they are present in the upper terraces in
greater abundance than in the lower, and diminish the nearer the centre of the zone is approached,
is obviously due to the greater facilities offered to the oxidising influences of air and water at both
these points.”
Mr. Cameron concludes his treatise by paying tribute to the wealth of the mine. He says
“ I have now, I think, fully considered the data collected by me in the short period of time at
my disposal, relative to what I may justly term this phenomenal gold-yielding property. After
considerable and varied experience in almost every part of the world, I can conscientiously say
that I have not seen its equal for the extent and richness of its auriferous ores. That when the
vast zones of gold-bearing ore that are even now exposed in the several terraces and * drives ’ of the
Mount are considered, our minds are apt to wander into the realms of imagination for a parallel;
for truly within the realms of fact no parallel has yet, so far as lam aware, been met with. What-
ever difference of opinion there may exist among scientific and practical men as to the causes that
have produced so large, so varied in character, and so rich a mass of auriferous material, about the
enormous quantity, the richness and the extraordinary natural advantages offered for the
manipulation of its ores, there is but one undivided opinion.
“ The vastness of the mass even now exposed is absurdly beyond even approximate compu-
tation ; but are we justified in thinking that this state of things will continue ? So far as my
observations went I could see no limits, though, doubtless, there is one in the same sense as there
is a limit to all things ; and in this connection I may again quote the Government Geologist: £ But
the auriferous stone at present in sight is enormous, and there is no rashness in believing that it
extends over a large area and to a considerable length.’ ”
Mr. Jack’s Second Report.
In 1889 Mr. Jack says : “The development of the mine rendered it necessary that a further
examination should be made.
The evidence now to hand, in my opinion, goes to confirm my original view that the auriferous
material was deposited by a thermal spring. The deposit is freely intersected by felstone dykes,


and lies on and is surrounded by the pyritous quartzite country rock. Numerous dolerite and
rhyolite dykes intersect the country rock, but not one has been met with in the auriferous deposit.
Had the auriferous deposit been merely the silicious skeleton remaining after the removal of the
pyrites from the pyritous quartzite, the dolerite dykes would still have remained to attest the
original identity of the two masses. But there is at least one clear instance of a dolerite dyke
intersecting the quartzite country rock (in No. i tunnel, 120 feet north of the shaft sunk from No.
5 floor), and not intersecting the overlying sinter in the south branch of the Freehold Tunnel, only
33 fe e t higher. 1 his shows that the sinter and ironstone were deposited and were not altered
portions of the pyritous quartzite country rock. It is hardly credible that the highly auriferous,
silicious and ferruginous rocks now being worked represent merely a weathered condition of the
pyrites, with which the quartzite ‘ country rock ’ is so highly charged, and which is so poor in gold.
Again, the fact that the sinter is mainly a hydrous silicia is an argument against its being the
skeleton produced by the solution of-masses of pyrites from an hydrous quartzite. A sample of
the sinter from the Freehold Tunnel was submitted to Mr. A. W. Clarke, late Government Minera-
logical lecturer, who favoured me with the following interesting note :
“‘ A very large proportion of the substance is soluble in strong potash solution, the residue
being nearly pure crystalline silica. This is what ought to be expected of a silicious sinter, as, of
course, the silica would be hydrated and colloidal, and the presence of some quartz in it (or
crystalline silica) is quite conceivable.’
“ The occasionally angular condition of the sinter and tumbled condition of the ironstone
masses (as evidenced by the deflection of stalactites from the vertical) would appear to indicate
that explosive discharges of gases or steam occurred at intervals with sufficient violence to disturb
the deposits accumulated by the thermal spring.
“In view of the enormous quantities of pyrites associated with the quartzite country rock, it
may not be so necessary as it once seemed to ascribe the presence of gold on the summit of
Mount Morgan to the solvent action of hot water charged with chlorine on a number of auriferous
pyritous reefs, since even if gold existed in the pyrites in the country rock in a very infinitesimal
proportion it might be collected by a thermal spring charged with chlorine from the pyrites over a
wide area.”
By way of reply to Mr. Cameron’s criticism, Mr. Jack remarks :
“ I may say that recent exploratory work in Callan’s Knob has tended to strengthen the
belief that though it may be comparatively poor in gold, it is of similar origin to Mount Morgan
itself. I visited the upper and lower tunnels of the Sugarloaf last month, and saw nothing in the
upper tunnel which it seemed necessary to suppose was ‘superimposed’ at a later date on the ‘so-
called sintery mass ’ found in the lower tunnel.
“ I freely admit that many of the ‘ eruptive rocks ’ containing augite, hornblende, and
similarly composed minerals, would furnish a limited quantity of lime to the solvents which may
be supposed to have been present in a thermal spring, and it would be useless to deny that the
deposit of Mount Morgan may contain traces of lime, but the lime would have to be furnished
from a very wide area of eruptive dykes, &c., to form a calcareous tufa. I merely pointed out that
as the sinter was silicious and not calcareous, large masses of calcareous rock, such as beds of
limestone, were probably not among the rocks from which the spring was fed. The argument that


the kaolin dyke ‘would have furnished lime to the hot geyser water had the latter emerged in
contiguity to it,’ appears to be based on a misconception as to the age of the dyke in question.
The ‘ kaolin dyke,’ and other similar dykes, intersect the auriferous deposit. In other words, they
were erupted after the formation of the auriferous sinter, and could not have supplied the latter
with any of its contents.
“ Mr. Cameron, in the same report, refers to a ‘ fine volcanic dust ’ at the base of the Desert
Sandstone described by me (but which he did not see) as, possibly, even probably, identical in age,
character, and composition with what has elsewhere been termed the silicious sinter of Mount
Morgan, but what I verily believe to be none other than a trappean tufa or scoria.’ I quote the
remark as further illustrating Mr. Cameron’s view of the origin of the silicious deposit of Mount
Morgan, but I am certain that he would not have identified the ‘ sinter ’ of Mount Morgan with the
‘ fine volcanic'dust ’at the base of the Desert Sandstone if he had had an opportunity of inspecting
the latter. Moreover, abundant evidence is given in my former report, and need not be repeated,
that the Mount Morgan auriferous deposit is of later age than the Desert Sandstone.
“ As regards the age of the Mount Morgan geyser, some light has been thrown on it since
the issue of my former report by the discovery of fossils in the Desert Sandstone at Croydon,
proving that formation to be of cretaceous (say upper cretaceous) affinities, although resting
unconformably on the ‘Rolling Downs Beds,’ which have also cretaceous (say lower cretaceous)
affinities. The Mount Morgan auriferous deposit is newer than the Desert Sandstone.”
Mr. Jack’s Third Report.
This report was “merely intended to bring the record of Mount Morgan up to date, and does
not deal with any theoretical questions.”
The following paragraph, however, met with therein, goes to show that the latest developments
up to the end of last year (1891) tended to strengthen his adherence to the “ thermal spring ” theory
advanced by him more than four years previously. In describing the then appearance of the
dividing block facing No. 4 Bench he says :
“ The disposition of the layers met with in this section seems to me explicable only on the
theory that a cup or hollow, whose centre lay further to the south, was filled up successively by
muddy materials of varying composition, and that successive renewals of hydrothermal activity
again and again carved out the greater portion of the deposit, when subsequent calmer conditions
more favourable to deposition covered the remnant with fresh deposits—to be afterwards treated in
the same way. On purely theoretical grounds, therefore, I should expect a continuation of the
auriferous deposits to be met with to the south, unless the denudation of the hillside (here rather
steep) has entirely removed it.”
Report by Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, F.G.S., F.L.S., Geological Surveyor-in-Charge
for New South Wales.
Shortly after Mr. Cameron’s visit in 1887, Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, Government Geologist, New
South Wales (since deceased) inspected the mine. His report, as below, appeared in the Annual
Report of the Department of Mines, New South Wales, for 1891. As will be noted, Mr. Wilkinson
agrees with Mr Jack with regard to “geyser origin” of the deposit, but differs with him as to the
“ overflow.”


“ During my inspection of the Mount Morgan Gold Mine I collected samples of the rocks
associated with the gold-bearing ore, with the view of determining the source of the gold. I
entrusted the microscopical examination of the rocks to my able colleagues, Messrs. T. W. E.
David, 8.A., F.G.S., and W. Anderson, Geological Surveyors, and the result of their investigations
has been published in Volume 11., Part 111., of the Records of the Geological Survey of New
South Wales.
“ The conclusions arrived at afford important information regarding the nature of the
auriferous formations of which Mount Morgan is composed, and while they throw some light on
the probable origin and extent of the payable deposits, it is evident that further investigation is
required for the elucidation of the subject.
£< The suggestion of Mr. R. L. Jack, F.G.S., Government Geologist of Queensland, that the
auriferous deposit is of geyser origin, is supported as regards the deposition of the gold, and its
silicious and ferruginous matrix from thermal aqueous solution, but it appears that the deposit
accumulated in fissures and cavities in the rocks rather than as an overflow from the usual funnel-
shaped geyser-crater. Mount Morgan consists of highly metamorphosed sedimentary rocks, chiefly
‘ greywacke,’ as Mr. Jack has termed them, which from the fossils found in the neighbourhood, the
Palaeontologist, Mr. R. Etheridge, junior, considers to be of lower permo-carboniferous age.
These rocks contain auriferous iron pyrites disseminated more or less through them—in one
instance a mass of pyrites, with a little silica, was met with over 100 feet in diameter—and have
been intruded by dykes of hornblende, granite, and porphyritic dolerite.
“The intrusion of the granite was probably the older, and induced the formation of the
pyrites, and the silicious induration of the argillaceous strata. Subsequently, as water passed
through the jointed pyritous strata, near the intrusive dolerite dykes, chemical action set in,
kaolinising the dolerite and oxidizing the pyrites, the gold in the latter being dissolved, possibly as
sulphide, and re-deposited by itself, or with iron oxide, as the solution passed through the fissures
and cavities in the rocks. Apart from the kaolinisation of the dolerite, the cavernous quartzite
deprived of the pyrites, which its cavities once contained, and the deposition of silicious sinter
and of hydrous iron oxide with gold, there is also evidence of chemical re-action in the aluminous
rocks, being highly charged with sulphate of alumina, and in large and small segregated masses of
basic sulphate of iron. The latter has yielded, on analysis by Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye, F.1.C.,
Analyst and Assayer, as much as 24,419 per cent, of sulphuric anhydride, and might possibly be
hereafter utilised in the manufacture of sulphuric acid.
“ Until further observations have been made no definite conclusion can be formed as to the
source of the gold; but in my opinion the evidence so far tends to show that the gold has been
derived in the manner above stated, and that the heat generated by the kaolinisation of the dolerite
may have largely contributed to the effects produced. If so, the payable gold-bearing ore will be
found, as hitherto, chiefly within the region which has been affected by the decomposition of the
dolerite. The intrusion of the dolerite dykes was probably the cause of the fracturing of the strata,
and it appears to me that the principal line of disturbance is the fissure filled in with the ferruginous
lode-stuff, which was cut through in the Freehold Tunnel. The other fissures in the Mount may
be connected with this, such as the small ones containing the rich gossan, which has been worked
at the summit of the Mount.


“ The water, which first set up the chemical changes in the pyritous strata and dolerite, may
have permeated the fissured strata by infiltration from the surface, or it may have come up as
thermal water, containing gold, &c., in solution, as Mr. Jack has suggested, through a fissure or pipe
from below. Even should the latter have been the chief source of the gold, yet the gold derived
from the decomposition of the pyrites must have considerably enriched the deposit.
“ I am of opinion that the payable ore is confined to the region which has been thus effected,
or oxidised, and that the extent of the ore can be proved by sinking in or near the Freehold Tunnel
lode, close to the kaolin dyke, and driving on either side until the undecomposed pyritous rocks be
met with.
“ The principal gold-bearing deposits will, I think, be found in the vicinity of the kaolin dyke,
descending not vertically, but diagonally along the line of dyke in a south-easterly direction. From
the examination of the rocks microscopically, Messrs. David and Anderson believe that the intru-
sions of dolerite are of two ages.
“ highly important that as the mine works extend the different varieties of rock met with
should be collected, and their petrological characters determined, for such investigations will prove
of considerable value in connection with the discovery of similar deposits in other localities.
[Note. —A laboratory for this very purpose is now in course of erection on the mine.]
“ The occurrence of gold that has evidently been deposited from an aqueous solution is not
uncommon elsewhere ; but the remarkable association of the different rocks in Mount Morgan have
not as yet been observed in New South Wales. The Mount Morgan mine, therefore, both as
regards the great extent and mode of occurrence of its rich auriferous deposits, may be recorded as
unique in the history of gold mining. The natural purity or high quality of the gold has also been
stated by Dr. A. Leibius, M.A., b.G.S., Assayer to the Sydney Mint, to be unequalled by that of
any other gold hitherto found.”
Evidence in favour of the “Thermal Spring-” Theory
The following may be adduced in support of the statement that the Mount Morgan ore has
not been subjected to a heat greater than that supplied by a thermal spring
The existence of large quantities of iron oxide intimately mixed with the silica and the absence
of any silicate of iron ; the hydrated condition of all the ores; the ore undergoes a radical change
in the roasting process; in a great number of the lower levels of the Mine, and even near the
surface, there are considerable percentages of bi-sulphide of iron FeS2, which is changed at about
400° Fahrenheit to FeS, parting with one atom of sulphur; and, lastly, the gold, when heated up
to its melting point, even in the matrix, forms small spherules.
The “ Combustion ” Theory.
The next to be taken into account is what may be termed the “combustion ” theory.
This presumes that the origin of the gold deposit was due to the decomposition or oxidation
of an immense pyrites lode; that, while in a molten state, this came jn contact with water containing
salt; that chlorine was generated from the latter and the gold originally contained in the pyrites
dissolved into chloride of gold; that this was finally precipitated in a finely divided state.


It may be proper to remark that this particular theory is the one favoured by Mr. Lisle, the
present General Manager, whose daily association with the Mine for the past eight years has given
him special opportunities of studying the distinctive features of the deposit.
The “Volcanic” Theory.
Mr. W. H. Dick, in his “Mountain of Gold” (published in 1889) ventures his opinion as
follows :
“ I hat Mount Morgan is entirely volcanic —that it is part of a system which had its source in
the vast crucible of nature at unexplored depths, and which will yet be traced north and south of
the present mine, either traversing the centres of the hills or dipping below their base, to reappear
again where centres of activity have existed, or where, wholly or partially, opposing currents have
met in the bowels of the earth, and by pressing upon the superincumbent strata, have formed and
filled those fissures, which are nothing, but the gangues of quartz lodes that in most other parts are
more contracted, and evince only in a lesser degree the eruptive forces that have been at work.
I he agencies that were at work to upheave Mount Morgan have had (in Mr. Dick’s view), no
connection with any superficial or adjacent causes, but have had a centre and a source in those
subterranean molten currents, whose changing trends are yet very imperfectly understood.”
The Problem of Extraction.
Before proceeding to describe the treatment, as in vogue to-day on the mine, it will first be
advisable to explain why, as will be seen, a special process was necessary ; why the ordinary
methods of extraction in other quartz mines were unsuitable for adoption at Mount Morgan.
The answer to this is the peculiar occurrence of gold in the stone.
This very fact militated against the earlier discovery, and furnished a problem in metallurgy,
whose solution was only arrived at four years after that event.
To the ordinary mind the winning of gold from one spot to the value of more than three
millions sterling, though a sensational revelation in itself, does not convey an impression of
surprise when it is premised that gold in such quantity was there to win. But, as the proprietors
of the mine found, it was one thing to know that the gold existed, quite another to arrive at that
stage when they could point with satisfaction to pure ingots and worthless tailings as the result
of their endeavour.
The peculiarity of occurrence, presenting difficulties without a precedent to indicate how
they might be coped with, lay in the extreme fineness of the gold- In the whole history of the mine
no particle of the metal larger than a pin’s point has been met with, Wherever the gold is visible
u appears as if dusted over the ore. Less than two decades back the general system of gold-
mining was based upon the idea that gold is mainly coarse. An examination of the Mount
Morgan stone has shown that the high percentage is in atoms finer than flour itself; indeed, it may
be described as flour or powder of gold. To account for this notable characteristic, it will be
proper to mention here that the deposit is a secondary formation, and that the gold is not in the
original matrix. Nature has already mined, chemically treated, dissolved and re-precipitated it.
The MotrrrrMapgft« ore.fe a “refractory’’ but not a “base” ore, there being practically an
absence of sulphur and arsei/ic. QfcfeWould be a “ free-milling ” ore were the gold sufficiently coarse,


the latter being perfectly clean, and might, if this were so, readily be saved by ordinary amalga-
mation. In the earlier attempts to treat the ore the loss of gold was great. The contents from
assay returns varied from eight to ten ounces of gold per ton of ore. The ore was milled and
amalgamated with the utmost care by stamper batteries and other forms of plant, and tailings
ground in pans with mercury. The returns by this treatment were about aoz. per ton, and the tailings
assayed from five to six ounces. A large quantity of the tailings on the first opening of the mine
was washed down the creek, until the mistake became apparent. Under the amalgamation system
the separation of the gold from its matrix was only partial. The impossibility of effecting com-
plete separation by mechanical means has been demonstrated by grinding the ore in an agate
mortar to an impalpable powder, and amalgamating the gold when a large percentage is found
still adhering to and contained by the sand. A speck of this sand under the microscope
resembles a specimen from a reef. It is evident then that under such conditions amalgamation
could not be otherwise than ineffective, as what gold still adheres to the ore must of necessity be
washed away.
Dr. Leibius of the Sydney Mint thus describes the result of a careful experiment made by him
on a portion of the stone forwarded from the mine.
“In November last (1883) we received through Mr. Hall, of Sydney, 4581 b. of the ferruginous
quartz, part of it consisting of picked stone. It was carefully crushed and amalgamated in the
Chilian mill, with 2401 b. mercury. Thus 7.440 Z. of gold assaying 991.5 were extracted. Another
lot weighing 1741 b. was similarly treated, and 12.12 oz. of gold extracted, assaying 998.2. Thus
lot 1 gave gold at the rate of 39.32 oz. standard per ton of quartz, while in lot 2 the tailings assayed
64 oz. 5 dwt. 18 gr. of gold per ton. Both lots of tailings were now mixed, and passed for two or
three hours in the Chilian mill, with 2401 b. clean retorted mercury. Only 1.66 oz. of gold, assaying
981 were, however, obtained by this treatment. The tailings were dried and found to weigh 4761 b.,
containing gold at the rate of 410 Z. i3dwt. i6gr. per ton —or, in about 4761 b. tailings no less than
Boz. i7dwt. 3gr of gold. I have brought some of those tailings here. Under the microscope there
is no gold visible. I thought that if the oxide of iron were removed by boiling the tailings in
hydrochloric acid, and the solution filtered off, the gold might more readily be discernible in the
boiled-out residue. I found, however, that this was not the case, and that 1000 grains of tailings
thus boiled in strong hydrochloric acid, by which about 20 per cent, were dissolved, gave me only
0.73 grains of gold, the same as when boiled with nitric acid. The loss of gold by boiling in
hydrochloric acid was no doubt due to the action of this acid upon manganese in the ore, whereby
chlorine gas was formed—a ready solvent for gold. That the ordinary amalgamating Chilian mill
did not extract all the gold in this stone, I can only attribute to the supposition that the oxide ot
iron has liteially coated some of the fine gold, thus preventing it coming in contact with the
mercury.”
Parcels of ore were shipped to the German Government smelting works, to England, and to
metallurgists of the highest repute in San Francisco, so that the difficulty might be solved. By
smelting the Germans were able to get adequate returns, but, owing to the highly silicious nature
of the ore they could only use it in small quantities when it would flux with other ores, and
consequently guarantee no regular treatment in bulk; the negotiations came to nothing. In


England the same result followed, and the investigations in San Francisco did not result in a
solution of the difficulty.
The record that follows of the evolutionary treatment of the ore—from the stamper batteries
to the present system, from an extraction of 40 per cent, to one of 98 per cent.-will show how
well the experts on the mine have succeeded in mastering the problem set.
Experimental Treatment by Amalgamation.
The original proprietors of the mine, on commencing operations in 1882, took it for granted
that the ore could be satisfactorily treated by the ordinary method of stamper crushing and
mercury amalgamation.
Acting on this erroneous though excusable supposition, they erected a ten-head stamper
battery on the north bank of the Dee River, close to the present site of the lower works, and
started to put through stone obtained from the surface of the hill. The spot from which the first
crushings were taken is shown on Plan A, and referred to on pages 17 and 18. As it happened, they
struck on a particularly rich patch, and it was this fact, together with the invisibleness of a large
proportion of the gold, that probably blinded them for a time to the immense waste going on at
the battery. No. 2 Battery of 15 stamps soon followed, being erected 400 yards lower down the
river from No. 1. This process of treatment was continued until after the formation of the
present Company in 1886. Meanwhile, as soon as it became known that up to two-thirds of the
gold was being washed down stream, tailing pits were excavated and the tailings saved for future
treatment. No less than 20,000 tons were accumulated in this way.
Experiments to extract the gold by other amalgamating appliances were made. Among these
may be noted Berdan pans, Wheeler pans (16 being erected in separate works), Arrastra pans,
Watson and Denny pans, Cox and Huntingdon’s amalgamators, and Chilian mills. A number of
other amalgamating machines of lesser repute were also tried. The result of all these trials
proved conclusively what has already been stated, that any further attempts to employ amalga-
mation as a means of extraction must end in complete, or at best, partial failure. It was then
decided to resort to chemical methods, i.e., to save the gold by dissolving it from the ore. This
led up to experimental treatment
By Chlorination.—The “Plattner” Process
In June, 1884, Dr. Benson and Mr. Lymburner, two mining experts from the Gympie gold-
field, the latter at the time being proprietor of public chlorination works in that place, entered into
a contract with the Company to treat the tailings by the “Plattner” process. They were to
receive a percentage of all gold extracted above 75 per cent, which they guaranteed to return on
the assays of the ore. The system received a fair trial on a large scale extending over several
months, but the guarantee was never reached, the returns at times falling as low as 40 per cent
It was accordingly pronounced a failure, at any rate so far as the Mount Morgan stone was
concerned.
Hitherto this had been considered the best of all chlorination processes in vogue, being
extensively used in Queensland, Victoria, America, Hungary, Russia and other parts of the world.
Next to this was


The “ Newbery-Vautin ” Process.
In June, 1885, Mr. James Cosmo Newbery, 8.A., of the Technicological Museum, Melbourne,
well known in scientific circles, and Mr. Claude Vautin, also of Melbourne, entered into arrange-
ments with the Mount Morgan syndicate to introduce a method for the more complete extraction
of the gold. They first advised wet crushing, roasting the tailings, and then extracting the gold by
the old “ Plattner ” process. On becoming apprised of the scarcity of water and the results of
other trials they adopted barrel chlorination, and designed a plant which was made in Langland’s
Foundry, Melbourne, under their supervision. The plant consisted of 10 one-ton iron barrels with
corresponding vats, &c., which were in due course erected on the mine. The results, so far as the
extraction of gold, were fairly satisfactory ; but the barrels and fittings, owing to faulty construc-
tion, had to be continually altered and repaired, besides which the leaching appliances were totally
inadequate. The “ Newbery-Vautin ” process was abandoned early in 1887.
The Mount Morgan Process.
Meanwhile a trial plant of two barrels with four leaching vats each and two furnaces for roast-
ing the ore were erected by the Manager for the purpose of making independent experiments with
chlorination on somewhat different lines to that employed by Newbery and Vautin. These proved
entirely successful, 98 per cent, of the gold being extracted and a larger amount of ore
treated in a given time at a smaller cost than by any other process yet tried. This, as adopted and
improved upon to a treating capacity of 1,500 tons per week, will be found fully described
hereafter.
Dry Crushing*
With the proved facility of treatment afforded it was at once recognised that the system of
crushing must be so altered and extended as to keep pace with the improvements in the chlorination
process mentioned above. Wet crushing on a large scale was found to be impractible, owing to an
inadequate water supply for working on a large scale.
The dilemma in which the Directors found themselves placed with regard to a substitute for
this is plainly shadowed forth in the following remarks on the subject by the Hon. W. Pattison in
June, 1887. “In dealing,’’ he said, “with a mine like this it is very difficult for any man to say
exactly the class of machinery or the power he requires. We find the more we develop the mine
that our ideas of machinery which were large at the outset are simply dwarfed There is no mine
on the face of the earth to refer to to show us what we should do.” Dry crushing was first tried at
the battery, but the cost of this was great, moreover, the ore was pulverised into too fine a state of
division to ensure the sufficiently economic results in the after treatment.
The first crusher to be tried was the “ Bunche Disintegrator,” as it was taken to be the best
machine available of its type. It consisted of a steel disc armed on its periphery with replaceable
steel projections. This revolved in an iron case at the rate of 2,000 revolutions per minute. The
machine was fed from a hopper above and the pieces of ore as they entered were struck by the
projections on the disc and dashed against the corresponding projections on the iron casing. This
machine was condemned on account of the excessive wear and tear and the proportionately small
quantity of ore reduced.
The next was a “ Blake-Marsden ” stone-breaker discharging into a revolving screen, then into


z
<
h
z
3
o
s
Q
Z
<
01
0:
o
or
uj
Q-
O.
ZD
U.
o
5
u
>




steel rolls, afterwards into another screen, and thence back to rolls. This proved highly satisfactory,
hut experiments were persevered in to improve on it if possible Wall’s Rolls followed. They
differed from the ordinary type in that their crushing faces were spirally grooved. On trial they
were found to be vastly inferior to the plain-faced rolls already in use.
Dodge’s “Disintegrator” was the next machine to be placed on its merits It consisted of a
cast iron barrel-shaped frame containing a number of loose cylindrical pieces of cast iron. The ore
was fed into this and the undetached rolls broke up the ore when the whole was revolved. This
was sent up to the mine by the proprietors of the patent and afterwards removed by them at their
own expense. Finally, Krom’s stonebreakers and rolls were decided upon and are now being used.
A detailed description of these machines will be found in the next chapter.
Ore Drying*.
In addition to the numerous experiments made with crushing machinery, the comparative
merits of different arrangements for drying, screening, and elevating the ore were determined.
1 o prevent the ore “ caking ’’ on the rolls, also to ensure its passage through fine mesh screens,
it was necessary to render it practically free from moisture. To maintain a supply of ore during
wet weather, a large hopper of a capacity of 2,000 tons was erected in convenient proximity to the
open workings on the hill-side. This, however was only a temporary precaution until the best type
of dryer should be selected. The first dryer erected was an ordinary revolving furnace such as is
generally used for calcining, but without the brick lining. It was abandoned for various reasons.
1 he type of dryer ultimately employed was introduced by The Asphaltum Company, an American
firm.
Reduction and Chlorination Works of the Mount Morg*an Company,
These consist of two complete plants independent of each other. The New, or Upper Works,
built on the southern fall of the hill, one hundred feet above the Dee level, and the Old, or Lower
Works, situated on the bank of the Dee 600 yards or so from the south-eastern base of the
mountain. The Upper Works have a treating capacity of one thousand tons per week, and the
lower from five to eight hundred tons The Lower Works, the first of their kind in Australia, were
started in 1884. Towards the latter end of 1886 the Company, finding these quite inadequate to
keep pace with the output of stone from the mine, decided upon the erection of a plant with
double the capacity. The upper works, although of later date, being of the greater extent and
importance demand the first and fullest description.
The Upper Works.
These are situated one hundred feet below, and two hundred feet distant from, the Freehold
Tunnel, having a fall of one hundred and twenty feet available for tailings.
The first sod of the excavation for the Upper Works was turned on the 15th of February, 1887.
Three thousand cubic feet of rock had to be blasted and removed before the erection of the sheds
could be commenced. The works were started on August Ist, 1888; thus, in less than eighteen


months, the largest works of their kind in the world were planned and erected —a most creditable
fact to all concerned when the difficulties of transport to the mine and the extent of the under-
taking are considered. The works were designed by, and erected under the supervision of, Mr.
H. G. Neill, who was then the Company’s chief engineer. They are an enlarged replica of the
Lower Works, with such improvements in arrangement and additions as experience taught were
requisite for the expeditious treatment of the ore.
The whole of the works have been laid out with due regard to economy of labour, the ore
coming down from the mine to the point where it is tipped over as tailings by gravitation, and is
never handled except in the roasting furnaces.
The ore before leaving the mine is broken up to the size of ordinary road metal; it is then
filled into trucks and run on a double tramline to a large hopper close to the workings, into which
it is emptied. There is a double automatic tramway leading from the lower end of the hopper into
the Upper Works. This tramway is worked by a wire rope having one turn round a large drum.
The loaded trucks pull the empty ones up, and the whole is controlled by the man in charge by
means of a powerful brake on the drum. This tram carries the ore into the works, and discharges
it into a ioo-ton hopper over the stonebreakers.
Stonebreakers.
There are four stonebreakers (S. R. Krom, New York), Nos. i and 3 form one set, Nos. 2 and
4 another. The ore from the hopper is discharged upon the feeding platforms of Nos. 1 and 2
stonebreakers, when it is broken to pass through a one-inch space at the bottom of the jaws ; the
opening at the top between the jaws measures i6in. long by Bin. wide. Each machine can
break over 100 tons per day of 24 hours; they are at work 24 hours each day, Sundays excepted.
After the ore leaves Nos. 1 and 2 stonebreakers it falls into two horizontal troughs. In each
of these there is an Archimedean screw revolving, the use of which is to force the ore along and
into the revolving dryers.
Dryers.
There are two dryers (Burns and Twigg, Rockhampton), one to each set of stonebreakers,
with hollow trunions at each end which revolve on roller bearings. The hollow dryer is enclosed
within a heated flue of brickwork, the cylinder being 16 feet long and 6 feet diameter. A helical
projection inside, in the form of a screw, is attached to air-nipples, which projects inwards ißin.
thus preventing the escape of the ore through them.
Beneath the cylinder is a firebox from which the heated gases circulate around the cylinder,
and passing inwards through the air-nipples find an exit into the smoke stack.
The ore is delivered into the end nearest stonebreaker No. i, and is carried forward by a
spiral plate as the cylinder revolves. A piece of stone fed in would take about forty minutes to
pass through. The action is a continuous one, and, so long as the cylinder revolves there is a
constant supply at one end and discharge at the other. The object of drying at this stage is to


enable the stuff to pass through the fine screens met with later on. At the delivery end of the
dryer is a succession of holes round its circumference; as each hole in turn comes to the bottom
the stone is delivered into a revolving tube roin. diam., which leads the ore into stonebreakers
Nos. 3 and 4, where it is broken to pass through a half-inch space, the space at the top between
jaws being 2oin, long by 7m. wide.
Rolls and Screens.
The stone next passes on by gravitation to a set of Krom’s steel rolls. There are 3 pairs of
crushing rolls to each pair of stonebreakers. They are worked in sets of three. Nos. 1 and 2
rolls are 26m. diam. and i6in. wide, No. 3,30 m. diam. and i6in. wide. The rolls are constructed
of two outside tyres of hammered steel Bin. wide and 3m. thick, and secured to the boss of the
shaft by means of cones facing each other. One roll is fixed stationary on a bed, the other is
moveable on bearings attached to an upright steel pendulum strained by 2-|in. steel bolts. They
are kept pressed against each other by 12 spiral springs at each bearing, and are themselves
compressed by a powerful screw, thus avoiding an accident in the event of anything large finding
its way between the rolls. No. 1 rolls are 3-16th in. apart, and Nos. 2 and 3 close together. The
speed of rolls is about 100 revolutions per minute.
Under each pair of rolls is a screen The screens are hexagonal in section and like an obelisk
in elevation ; they consist of a horizontal shaft and a frame upon which seven sections are clamped.
They measure Bft. long, 3ft. diam. at the feed end, and 4ft. 4m. diam. at the discharge end. The
outside screening is of brass wire gauze 900 meshes to the square inch ; an inside protecting iron
wire screen serves to prevent the larger pieces of stone coming into contact with, and damaging the
brass gauze. The speed of the screens is 29 revolutions per minute. The fine ore that passes
through the screens drops into a large hopper underneath. In the bottom of this hopper an
Archimedian screw is continually working, which delivers it into an endless chain elevator. The
ore that is too coarse to pass through No. 1 screen, after being crushed in No. 2 rolls, falls through
a pipe from the elevator into revolving screen No. 2, and goes through the same treatment as in
No. 1 screen, the fine ore being sent to the roasters, and what was too coarse to pass through is
again elevated in the same manner, but by different elevators, and is delivered into crushing rolls
No. 3. After passing through these it is led into revolving screen No. 3. The fine ore that is
passed through this screen is lifted into trucks and sent to the roasting furnaces as before. What
is too coarse to pass through the screens is delivered at end of screen into a hopper, lifted over
rolls No. 3, and again passed through them. It will now be crushed fine enough so that the whole
of it can pass through the screens. All this time fresh ore has been working its way along from
the stonebreakers, through the rolls, so that fine ground ore is being delivered to the roasting
furnaces in a continuous stream. By the above means the ore is ground to the fineness requisite
for the extraction of the maximum amount of gold in the after treatment.
It may be mentioned that the dry-crushing department is divided into two sections, each
consisting of two stonebreakers, a dryer, and three pairs of rolls, so that in the event of any
portion of the machinery in one section becoming disabled, the other can still be kept working.


Below is a practical estimate of the cost of working two sets of Krom’s rolls for a period of
twelve months.
15 men, working in 3 shifts of 8 hours each
£
2,147
s.
12
d.
0
10 new brasses
53
12
0
24 new iron tyres
441
10
0
1,300 drums castor oil
1,495
0
0
6o°/ 0 off belts, originally costing 10s
r 37
2
0
Cotton waste and sundries, about ...
100
0
0
46 tons per week of firewood
956
16
0
52 casks tallow
260
0
0
Total
••• ,£5,591
12
0
Equals per week ...
•••
IO
78
Ore crushed for same period, 1,000 tons = 2s. ifd. per ton
Dust Collecting.
To prevent the escape of dust from the crushing and screening, with the consequent in-
convenience to workmen and damage to machinery, the fine particles are drawn off by two exhaust
fans through pipes 4 in. diameter, connected with the enclosing cases of the rolls, elevators, etc.
ihe dust so diverted is deposited in a large settling chamber, measuring 30 feet by 18 feet by 12
feet, whence, as it contains a high percentage of gold, it is periodically removed, and treated with
the remainder of the ore. This chamber is cleaned out twice a month, an average quantity of
50 tons per month being taken therefrom.
Motive Power.
Motive power is supplied to the four stonebreakers and the two revolving dryers by a 20-horse-
power high pressure horizontal engine (Marsden, Leeds), 15 in. cylinder and 20 in. stroke.
Ihe rolls, dryers, screens and elevators are driven by a compound non-condensing horizontal
engine (Davey and Paxman, Colchester), 80-horse-power nominal. The diameter of the high
pressure cylinder is in., that of the low pressure 30 in., length of stroke 33 in. Motion is
given to the main line of shafting by a leather belt, 24 in. wide, sewn with copper wire. The belt
is driven from the fly-wheel (12 ft. diameter, with a 24 in. face) off the main engine and passes
over a 7 ft. pulley fixed on the main shafting. The main steel shaft is 6 in. diameter, and traverses
the entire length of the building The feed water is heated by the exhaust steam from the engine,
thus effecting a saving in fuel.
Steam is supplied by 5 Cornish boilers (4 by Davey and Paxman, and 1 of Rockhampton
make) 26 ft. long by 6 ft. diameter, ranged alongside in the lower house. Water is delivered into
these boilers by a special donkey pump (Davey and Paxman).


Furnaces.
lhere are 22 furnaces in all, 18 of these in the main shed measure 11 feet x 10 feet x 6 feet,
the remaining four (recently erected), being in a detached building on the same level. The
latter are of an improved pattern and larger, measuring 22 feet xlO feet x 6 feet. The furnaces
are ordinary reverbatory charge roasters constructed of common brick, lined and arched with fire
brick, supported with iron buckstays and supplied with fireboxes with large flues acting as dust
chambers. The ore is stored in bins behind and on the same level as the top of the furnaces.
Ihe furnaces are charged through an opening in the crown. A charge consists of about one ton
of ore. The ore is roasted for about three hours, during which time it is constantly stirred with
“ rabbles.” By this process the organic matter is burned out, the waters of crystallisation liberated,
and whatever sulphides or arsenides may be present are decomposed.
Cooling.
The ore on being removed from the furnaces is deposited on the cooling floor, 385 feet long
x 100 feet wide. 1 his area of flooring, besides being used for cooling, serves also for storage when
the output from the furnaces is in excess of the requirements of the chlorinating department.
Chlorination.
Ihe chlorination of the ore in barrels, as practised by the Company from 1886 to the middle
of the present year, 1892, with satisfactory results, had its origin at Mount Morgan, as the arrange-
ments and methods of working which distinguish it from similar processes were elaborated on the
mine. But even this is now being superseded by another known as the “ Hall-Richard ” process
at the Lower Works, under which heading it will be found described.
The Mount Morgan Barrel Process.
The ore on leaving the cooling floor is trucked into hoppers ranged in line over the chlorinating
barrels, of which there are 25. A charge for a barrel is the same as for a furnace, about one ton.
To this quantity of ore are added 70 gallons of water, from 25 to 301 b. of bleaching powder (chloride
of lime), and about the same quantity of sulphuric acid (chamber acid), the proportion of each
being regulated by the nature of the ore treated.
Each barrel revolves, independently of the others, at the rate of 8 revolutions per minute,
being so kept in motion for a period of between two and three hours. During this time all the
gold is attacked by the chlorine (liberated from the bleaching powder by the sulphuric acid) and is
contained by the water in solution
Ihe barrels are constructed of hardwood (eucalyptus) staves 3 inches thick, the ends, of the
same material, being 4 inches thick Strong iron hoops, 3 inches x fths inch, are shrunk on the
barrels in the same manner as cart-wheel tyres. The shaft bearings are keyed into an iron frame,
which is secured to the barrel by three bolts passing over the hoops from one frame to another.
Ihe life of a barrel is about 10 months. The “ Newbery-Vautin ” barrels, alluded to before,
were made of wrought iron, lined with sheet lead lagged up inside with wood.
Power is supplied for driving the barrels by a horizontal engine 20 horse-power (Russell and
Proctor), with steam from the main boilers. The main line of shafting traverses the entire length


of the chlorination shed (285 feet), the barrels being driven from it by belts. The barrels are
carried on strong wooden framing, the top of which is floored, thus furnishing a platform for the
men employed in charging, and along which the trucks are taken to the barrel hoppers.
Leaching.
The contents of the barrels are discharged into leaching vats situated immediately underneath
They have a capacity of three tons each, and are one hundred in number. They are fitted with
sand and gravel filters, through which the gold solution drains, which is washed by repeated
applications of fresh water on the top of the ore. The passage of the liquor through the ore is
assisted by vacuum pumping. After about thirty-six hours all the gold has been drained or leached
from the ore. To ascertain when a complete separation is effected, the liquor is tested with
sulphate of iron. A sample of the residual ore is then taken for assay as a check upon the working
of the process, the remainder being shovelled into trucks and emptied out on the “ tips.” The
vats are simply large wooden tubs, 3 feet 6 inches deep and 6 feet diameter, lined with sheet lead
£ inch thick, and fitted with a pipe at the bottom for the exit of the gold solution. They have a
perforated false bottom, resting on bearers 3 inches from the bottom of the vat. Above this is a
filter composed of several layers of gravel of varying fineness, the topmost being of fine sand; this
last allows a passage for the gold solution, and prevents any particles of matrix coming through.
It is really there that the gold is finally separated from the. ore. The “ Newbery-Vautin ” type of
leaching vat —one to each barrel—was funnel-shaped, constructed of iron, lined with sheet lead,
and supported on trunnions, to the end of one of which a tooth wheel was keyed. By means of
this the vat was inverted and the charge emptied.
The idea of this method was to save the labour of shovelling, but as it involved re-lifting and
removal to the “ tips,” as well as a continual disturbance of the filters, it was found to be more
costly than the stationary vats now in use. Their filtering area was a little under 5 square feet;
of these there was only one to each barrel. Under the present system, each barrel has a comple
ment of four vats, having an aggregate filtering area of rather more than 100 square feet. The
gold solution is drained off the vats by vacuum pumps (10 inches diameter and 10 inches stroke),
specially designed, composed of an alloy of lead and antimony. They maintain the vacuum up to
12 inches.
To prevent any solid matter that might pass through the filters of the leaching vats becoming
deposited in the charcoal filters, the solution, after it leaves the pumps, is passed through a series
of sand filters, called separators.
Precipitation of the Gold.
This is effected in charcoal filters, 64 in number. They are pyramidal in shape, constructed of
wood and lined with sheet lead. They contain a bed of charcoal 2 feet 6 inches deep placed on a
perforated board covered with cheese cloth and kept from floating by a perforated sheet of lead.
The charcoal, before being laid in the filters, is crushed to pieces about i-i6th in diameter and the
fine dust discarded. The solution passing in from above percolates through the charcoal, depositing
all the contained gold in a finely-divided metallic state on the surface and in the pores of the
charcoal. This re-action may be accounted for partly by surface and partly by chemical attraction,


in
y
DC
O
s:
z
$
o
(-
o
I-
<
ct
(-
UJ
a;
<r




the chlorine combining with the hydrogen of the water. Occasionally some of the gold in a
soluble form escapes the charcoal filters, which is bound to occur before it is noticed by the testers.
The solution is then conducted through an auxiliary saw-dust filter when the same re-action takes
place. 1 hence it is passed on to tanks and from them passed up for re-use.
Other precipitants have been under consideration and experimented with. Sulphate of iron
was condemned as the spent liquor would not be available for re-use and because of the large area
of settling tanks necessary.
Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphurous acid each met with the same fate as a slight excess
remaining in the spent liquor would precipitate gold in the leaching vats.
Sulphide of iron was tried for its comparative cheapness, but as an appreciable amount ot
ferrous sulphate was formed it too was discarded.
The last re-agent tried was sulphide of copper, but owing to the cost it was necessary to
recover the copper by passing the solution over scrap iron. Again it was found that this
precipitated the gold, and the spent liquor, as in the above cases, was unavailable for re-use.
From the foregoing it will be gathered that charcoal offers special advantages over any other
known precipitant where the scarcity of water renders the re-use of the spent liquor necessary.
Not the least of these is that the gold with which it is charged is secure from theft, as the filters can
be always kept under lock and key.
Melting* of the Gold.
When a charcoal filter is sufficiently charged with gold the contents are removed to the
reverbatory furnaces in the melting department. These furnaces, two in number, measure 8 feet x 6
feet inside and are of precisely the same pattern as those previously described. The burning
occupies about 36 hours at a fairly low temperature, with no more draught than necessary to carry
off the combustion gases. The residue “gold dust,” consisting of gold, ash, and certain impurities,
is taken out and allowed to cool. It is then fused in plumbago crucibles with the requisite quantity
of flux. At the present time the amount of impurities present in the gold dust is so large that it is
found cheaper to amalgamate the gold in Arrastras:
The gold after melting is cast into ingots of from 300 to 350 oz. each with the initials of the
Company in sunk letters on the bottom.
These ingots are stored in Milner’s safes in a “ strong room,” the gold is then conveyed to
Rockhampton by a private escort, and thence through the Queensland National Bank to the
Sydney Mint.
The Lower Works.
These were the first to be erected on the Dee bank, and it was on their model that the Upper
Works were later on planned and built. -
The Aerial Tram. i
The ore from the mine is supplied to the Lower Works by an aerial tramway or, to describe it
more correctly, a system of telpherage. This consists of an endless iron wire cable iy% inch thick
running on pulleys over the tops of gantrys. Attached to the cable by steep clips are 60 oblong
iron buckets or boxes at a uniform distance of 120 feet apart. They overhang the centre of the


rope by 5 inches, thus allowing the buckets to clear the tops of the gantrys. Each bucket will
carry about two hundredweight average ore. The height of the gantrys (five in number) ranges
from 30 to 90 feet, according to the contour of the ground. The tramway is driven by the lower
works machinery from a vertical shaft with a grooved pulley, 5 feet 6 inches diameter, round which
the rope works. At the other end in the face of the hill is fixed a similar pulley. The buckets
are filled by a travelling supply bucket at the stone hopper on the mountain. As each bucket
arrives at the works it passes into a loft 30 feet from the ground, and, just previous to its passage
round the driving wheel, a station lry catch lifts a handle projecting from the side of the bucket
' and causes the bottom to drop. The contents of the bucket are immediately discharged and a
counter-balance re-closes the bucket, and it continues its journey for a fresh supply. The distance
between the point of supply and delivery is 3,300 feet, making the circuit about ij miles, with a
dropping elevation of about 350 feet. The circuit is performed in about 30 minutes. When at
work there is a strain of nearly three tons on the homeward bound portion of the cable. The
gantrys are constructed of 3-inch gas-piping, and are light, elegant structures in appearance.
Prior to the introduction of this contrivance, in January, 1888, all stone for treatment at the
Lower Works had to be carted from the mine in drays. By the use of the aerial tramway a saving
of 3s. per ton, or between ,£3,000 and ,£4,000 per annum, has been effected.
Crushing- Machinery, &c.
On delivery from the buckets the ore is fed into a “ Blake Marsden ” stonebreaker of a larger
pattern than ‘‘ Krom’s ”in the Upper Works. The jaws of this machine measure at the too
20 inches long 10 inches wide. The two fly-wheels make 350 revolutions per minute, and weigh
30 hundredweight each. The frame of the stonebreaker is very massive, weighing 8 tons It is
capable of cracking 120 tons in 24 hours. The-ore is broken ta-2-fflehcsdkmet^.
The crushed ore is then passed through a dryer similar to the ones
a - ii TvTom aL -steftehreaker, and then through four sets of Wall’s rolls and screens., Thence it is
trucked to the furnace shed, 60 yards away.
The power for the lower dry-crushing works is supplied by a horizontal engine (Davey and
Paxman) 40 h.p., 20 inches diameter and 3 feet stroke. Steam is obtained from five Cornish
boilers, 18 feet long, 6 feet diameter.
Furnaces.
The lower furnaces are twelve in number, ten of the ordinary size (n feet x io feet x 6 feet),
and two 22 feet x 10 feet x 6 feet, and all are ranged in line under one roof.
Chlorination.
After leaving the cooling floor the mode of treatment in the chlorination shed defers from that
in the Upper Works.
/ifj
barrel process has been dispensed with at —the—Lower—Works in favour of the new
“ Hall-Richard ” process receutlv introduced by Mr. J. Wesley Hall (then Managing Director) and
Mr. G. A. Richard (the Company’s GhlorinatonJ-






Hall-Richard Process.
This process, as will be shown, greatly economises the treatment. The method and applica-
tion are as VV'\ V
The ore is vats six. in number ; five of thoch are -t 2-feet by 24 fcct-in-the
f\ jprhpg xL*-p- with a capacity each\§firom tons, afccording to the weight
of the ore, which varies. rßhp r f>p-»oimng hoc hoif 1.. ...
~wfde.
On being filled a certain quantity of chlorine water (about a 6 per cent, solution) containing at
the rate of a little under 2 lb. of chlorine per ton of ore in the vat, is run on to the ore from the top
and allowed to percolate through. When the liquor coming out below shows gold no further <
addition of the chlorine solution is made, the leaching being continued with the spent liquor, until
, such time as all the gold is removed.
As in the Upper Works, vacuum pumps are used to accelerate the leaching. The gold solution
is then filtered through charcoal, and the treatment thereafter is precisely the same as that already
described.
» The-souree of chlorine in u-se-at—the present- time is LTencTting powder, but is nnf rrmsjHerprl
to its deterioration (frorrr~j6~.to... 2.g. per coirrt'friTOTp^rrd'Ldqfficulties
The process is designed for the employment of gaseeus chlorine/produced from"
salt, manganese, and vtmqj, similar to the manner in which it is obtained for the manufacture of
bleaching powder (chloride of lime). The chloriefce solution is made in a supply tank—common
all ibc and is laid on to the vats by a lead pipe. Each vat\
receives its supply by means of a specially constructed diaphragm valve.
\ This process in operation has been found entirely satisfactory.
Assays from the residual tailings prove that the gold remaining does-not amount -to-mere-than
a dwt. per ton au-an average ; VTOik-e£-tbe-barrels. It was commonly^
taken for granted by metallurgists that it was a sine qua non to render chlorine most active and
effective in its operation on the ore ; that the constituents must be kept in a state of continual
agitation, hence the revolving barrels and the like. To appreciate what its adoption on the
Company’s lower works really means, it is only necessary to add that all the barrels with their
hoppers, vats, &c., have been removed and the large vats already mentioned substituted instead.
The substantial reduction in cost of treatment will enable the Company to treat a lot of low-grade
ore from the open cuttings and stopes.
The “ Mac Arthur Forrest” Process.
In September oflast year (1891) the “ MacArthur Forrest ” cyanide process was tried on the
Mount Morgan ore. It was strongly recommended to the Company, as it was stated it would
extract the maximum percentage of gold and save roasting The patent is owned by the Cassel
Gold Extracting Co., Ltd., Glasgow. There is a large establishment at Ravenswood Queensland ;
also large works in South Africa, America and New Zealand. The modus opetandi as practised on
the mine consists of placing the ore in a leaching vat to the depth of about 18 inches, and running
on a solution of cyanide of potassium containing | per cent. This is allowed to percolate through
the ore and soak until all the gold is dissolved as double cyanide. The solution is then made to


pass through a series of drums containing five zinc shavings, in which the gold is deposited. The
leaching is finished off with fresh water.
After a trial of about three weeks it was found that a high percentage of the gold could only be
extracted from the very finely-divided ore. Other drawbacks were, the comparative cost of the
necessary re-agent and the danger of poisoning the watercourses. The Company therefore decided
against it.
The “Bohm” Process.
This process will shortly be under trial on the mine for treating the mundic (pyrites) ore
recently met with in the lower levels. The Refractory Ores Reduction Co. are the patentees.
The apparatus consists of an upright cylindrical vessel io feet high and 4 feet in diameter,
resting on trunnions with gear similar to the “ Newbery-Vautin ” vat. A solution of cyanide of
potassium is pumped up through a filter in the bottom, through the ore, and then through another
filter at the top. The recovery of the gold is similar to that employed in the “ MacArthur
Forrest” process described above. Up to date of writing no practical trial of the process had
been made.


DEPARTMENTS
Water Supply.
PREVIOUS to the successful introduction of dry-crushing, the serious difficulties that would
arise from an inadequate supply of water were recognised by the Company.
In 1885 a scheme for the erection of reduction works at Rockhampton, and conveying thence
all the ore from the mine by rail, was under consideration, and with this in view the first survey of
a railway to connect with the main central line at Kabra was made.
In June of the same year, owing to the scarcity of water to carry on operations, an exemption
for six months was obtained, and the works were closed for that period.
At the first meeting of the Company in December, 1886, the Hon. W. Paltison made allusion
to another scheme that had been mooted, involving an expenditure of from to
It was to convey water through pipes from the nearest chain of permanent water-holes in the Dee
at the Piebald Mountain, 16 miles distant from the mine.
Again, it was suggested to bore for water, but the idea was not favoured by Mr. Wesley Hall,
the natural features of the country being against the probability of striking water at a depth.
Dams.
During the exemption above referred to, the Company set about providing for the conservation
of water by constructing four concrete dams in the bed of the Dee at convenient points.
Later on, in 1888, it was decided to supplement these with a much larger one, and thus
ensure a permanent supply in the event of a protracted drought.
No. 5, or as generally designated “ the big dam,” was thrown across the creek bed just above
an acute bend of the Dee behind the Company’s offices.
On March 25th, 1890, the northern end of the wall was washed away by a heavy flood, when
the water rose a foot higher than on any previous occasion within the experience of the inhabitants.
Ihe construction up to that date cost Several months elapsed before repairs could be
made, owing to the wet weather.
To guard against a recurrence of the disaster, a wing 6 feet higher than the top of the overflow
was built some distance into the northern bank. The additions and repairs involved a further
expenditure of making a total of No. 5 is an “ overshot ” dam, constructed of a
concrete —four parts rubble, three parts sand, and one part Portland cement. The batter on the
inside is carried down on an incline of 1 foot in 1 foot, the apron on the overflow side being
curved to accommodate the flow of the water. The distance between No. 5 wall and that of the
one above (No. 4) is about 1,400 feet; the average depth of the water (when full) is 9 feet, and
the capacity of the dam is sixteen and a quarter million gallons. The length of No. 5 dam wall is
345 feet, and the height of the overflow 16 feet, the wing being 22 feet high.


The five dams back up the water in the creek for a distance of about one mile.
The watershed of the Dee and its tributaries above the point of conservation include an
extensive area of country on the inner fall of the main range.
The rainfall last year, as recorded by the Company’s rain-gauge, was 35.74 m; up to the end
of October this year, 21.26 m.
Supply Pumps.
The Upper and Lower Works are supplied with water by three plunger pumps, and a
“ Coventry ” pump below the engineers’ work shop on No. 5 Dam. Beside these there is a
“ Cameron ” pump, two plungers, diameter, 9m. stroke, with the requisite boiler power on No. 4
Dam ; this latter supplies the Upper Chlorination Works. The tailings from the Upper Works
are washed down from the tip heads into the valley by a powerful stream of water as they accumu-
late. Water is laid on to each of the several departments, also to the officers’ houses within a
quarter mile radius of the works.
Precautions against Fire.
A large water main (4m. pipe) fitted with fire plugs and hydrants is laid all over the works.
The shift men are practised regularly in the use of the fire hose connections. Fire signals are
sounded at unexpected hours to render them efficient at the work. At the Upper Works a fire
engine (Owen, London), is kept ready for use in case of the emergency arising. By these means
the safety of all destructible property is ensured as far as possible.
Firewood.
This is an important item in the requirements of the works.
About 4,000 tons per month are used in the Upper Works, the average consumption per diem
by furnaces and boilers for the whole works—Upper and Lower—being about 80 tons.
The amount in stock is about 18,500 tons, costing or 9s. 6d. per ton.
Engineers’ Workshop.
The Company effect all their own repairs to machinery, etc., having a well-equipped fitting
shop, and a large staff of skilled mechanics. The machinery in the fitting shop consists of:
A “ Root’s ” Blower (No. 3) for supplying a draught to the foundry and smithy fires ; drilling
and blocking machines; four screw-cutting lathes; a large lathe for turning rolls or wheels up to
4 feet diameter; a shafting machine, and punching and shearing machines. Adjoining this is the
blacksmiths’ shop, with four fires in use, and a steam hammer with a striking power of four tons.
Motive power is supplied to this department by a horizontal engine, io-horse-power (Lane and
Reynolds) io| in. cylinder and 18 in. stroke, with steam from a Cornish boiler, 18 feet long x 5 ft.
3 in. diameter.
Attached to the fitting shop is a foundry, with blast furnaces, where all duplicate parts of the
machinery are manufactured. Castings up to 2 tons weight can be turned out if required. Over-
head in the fitting shop is a powerful travelling crane for lifting, in connection with the lathes.
This department with regard to costs and general economy is conducted in the same manner as
ordinary engineering works.


Saw Mills.
All the hardwood used in the mine is broken down in the Company’s saw-mills.
I he main building measures 150 feet x 62 feet, with engine and boiler-house attached.
Ihe mill machinery consists of: —Two vertical saw frames and travelling gear; one rack
bench circular ; one large feed board frame circular; planing machine; sharpening and gumming
machine , one large pendulum crosscut; horizontal and vertical circulars : tenoning machine with
adjustable frame : one large band-saw; one billet crosscut circular; one shingle-sawing machine ;
one blocking-out circular; one io-ton capstan or mill “wench.”
In the joiners shop adjoining are:—Boring and morticing machines, a small band-saw and a
turning-lathe.
The whole of the above machines are driven from the main shaft.
The motive power is supplied by a horizontal engine (Pollock and Mac Nab) 40-horse-power,
with steam from two Cornish boilers of the same type as those below the dry-crushing shed.
The machinery is driven from a grooved fly-wheel to the main shaft, distant 150 feet, by five
coils of 5 in. Manilla rope. This latter has given great satisfaction, all the machinery having been
driven in this manner for two years without requiring alteration or renewal.
The hardwood timber sawn in 1891 measured 753,486 superficial feet.
The average cutting per month, during the present year, is approximately 80,000 superficial
feet, with from two to three thousand shingles per day of 8 hours.
The full productive power of the mill has only been required occasionally. When worked at
high pressure the mill can turn out 100,000 sup. feet of timber per month.
The hardwood is hauled from all parts of the bush in the neighbourhood of the mine by horse
and bullock teams, some logs being brought a distance of 16 miles.
All the square frame stope timber is prepared in the mill, also all shaft timber ready for
setting up.
The soft wood or pine required is obtained from the southern part of the colony, the amount
used being from 2,000 to 4,000 feet per month.
lor the past ten months (including October of this year) the average amount per month of
square frame timber and slabs used in the stopes was 38,854 sup. feet, and the demand for this
purpose is likely to be maintained.
Slightly over 9,000 sup. feet of timbering per month is prepared for the shafts and tunnels of the
mine, irrespective of round timber and rough slabs.
Electric Light Installation.
The whole of the Upper and Lower Works, together with the offices and manager’s house, are
lighted by electricity, the machinery for producing same is contained in a separate building and
forms a department of itself. This building is adjacent to the lower dry-crushing shed and contains
the following plant:—
A coupled high pressure engine, 13 inch cylinder, 24 inch stroke, 116 revolutions per minute,
supplied by two Lancashire boilers at 6olb. per square inch pressure. The engine (John Fowler
and Co., Leeds) is fitted with Hartnell’s patent governors and automatic expansion gear. This
engine drives from its 12 feet fly-wheel a counter shaft at 340 revolutions per minute from which


the dynamos are driven. The dynamos are three in number. No. lis a “ Kapp ” constant
current (10 ampere) Arc lighting dynamo driven at 850 revolutions per minute, and feeds 30
“ Brockie-Pell ” Arc lamps on a circuit over 2\ miles in length. It supplies light to the whole of
the Upper Works. No. 2is a “ Weston ” Arc lighter (20 ampere) and supplies 20 Arc lamps in the
Lower Works. No. 3is a “Crompton” Incandescent machine (65 amperes no volt) compound
wound, and supplies the current for the incandescent lamps in the manager’s house, offices and
Lower Works.
Both systems have complete automatic electric regulators and enamelled slate switchboards,
fitted complete with ammeters, voltmeters, switches, cut-outs, &c.
Square armatures are provided for the dynamos. Ihe whole of the wires are carried over-
head, and “ Pell's ” patent insulators are used.
The Kapp machine and (< Brockie-Pell ’ lamps have been supplied by the Rockhampton
Gas and Coke Company, Limited.
The entire installation is under the inspection of Mr. A. E. Neal, Consulting Electrical
Engineer to the Company.
Ihe plant is running exceptionally well. All re-wiring, additional work, &c., is carried out by
the Company’s men.
The arrangements are similar to a central electric lighting station.
Sulphuric Acid Works.
All the sulphuric acid required in the chlorination department is manufactured at the
Upper Works.
The acid shed is 200 feet long x 54 feet broad x 30 feet high.
In 1887 the Company were paying £6 per ton for acid which, with costs in Sydney, freight
to Rockhampton and carriage to Mount Morgan, together with breakages, amounted to over £2O
per ton.
It may be mentioned that the Company had made a trial of dry acid previously. Samples of
dry acid contained in infusorial earth were imported. The article, however, was not found to be
satisfactory. »
It was accordingly decided to make the acid on the mine, and thus save something near
per year.
In the acid sheds there are six fires or burners, the furnaces of which are led into a large pipe
which is connected with the tanks near the condensers.
There are four tanks or chambers composed of sheet lead—
No. 1 measures 40 feet x2O feet x 14 feet.
No. 2 „ 100 feet x 20 feet x 14 feet.
No. 3 „ 50 feet x 20 feet x 13 feet.
No. 4 „ 80 feet x 20 feet x 12 feet.
Two coke towers are attached to No. 4 Tank.
A tramway is laid into the acid shed to convey materials in, and to take the acid thence to the
Lower Works. The upper shed is supplied with acid through a system of pipes.
The quantity of sulphur burned when more acid was required in the chlorination department


amounted to about 40 tons per month ; about 20 tons per month being used at the present time.
About per cent, is the amount of nitrate of soda used proportionate to the sulphur.
The consumption of acid per month by the Upper Works is about 45 tons per month ; in
1890 as much as 80 tons per month was required.
The consumption of acid per month by the Lower Works is about 22 tons. The capacity of
the acid plant is equal to 100 tons per month. The acid manufactured is i,600° specific gravity,
the cost of manufacture varying from to according to the fluctuations in price of the
materials used to produce it.
The nitrate of soda originally comes from Chili, the sulphur being obtained from Sicily,
though both are forwarded to the Company through a London firm.
Officials and Men employed by the Company at Mount Morgan.
General'Manager, Roger Lisle.
Mine—
Mining Manager (John Dally)
1
Foremen; (2), Shift Bosses (2)
4
Blacksmith (1), Carpenters (2)
3
Watchman
1
Miners and Quarrymen
94
103
Upper Works —
Engineer (J. T. Richards)
Dry Crusher—
Shift Foremen...
3
Engine Drivers (3), Firemen (4)
7
Roll Men (27), Winchman (1)
28
Fitters (2), Carpenters (2)
4
Labourers
22
64
Furnaces —
Shift Foremen...
3
Furnace Men ...
13°
i33
Chlorination —
Shift Foremen
3
Engine Drivers (3), Carpenter
(1), Plumber (1)
5
Shift and Day Men ...
93
.
IOI
Blacksmiths’ Shop—
Blacksmiths (3), Boilermaker (1)
. 4
Strikers
3
General Labourers—
7
Foreman (1), and Watchman (1)
2
Labourers ...
J 3
15
Carried forward ...
...
423
Brought forward ...
...
423
Sulphuric Acid Works —
Manufacturing Foreman (A.
Dickie)
1
Labourers
4
Assay Office—
5
Assayer (H. B. F. Bunny)
1
Assistant Assayer
1
Watchman
1
“ Incline ” Tramway—
3
Engine Drivers(2),Foremen (2)
4
Labourers
16
20
Tramway—
Labourers
6
Lower Works —Dry Crusher—
Shift Foremen (3)
3
Engine Drivers (3), Firemen (3)
6
Roll Men (3), Carpenter (1)
4
Labourers
35
Chlorinator (G. A. Richard) ...
1
49
Furnaces —
Shift Foremen
3
Furnace Men ...
84
87
Chlorination —
Shift Foremen...
3
Engine Drivers (3), Fitters (2),
Carpenter (1)
6
Line Tester
1
Shift and Day Men ...
7i
81
Carried forward ...
• * •
674


Brought forward ...
674
Engineers’ Workshops—
Superintendent of Mechanics
(H. G. Neill)
1
Foreman (i), Blacksmiths and
Strikers (12)
Foreman (1), Fitters and Lathe
r 3
Men (13) ...
14
Boiler Maker (1), Labourer (1)
Foreman (1), Moulders (7)
2
Labourer (1)
9
39
Superintendent of Sawmills and
Carpenters (T. G. Cornes) ...
1
Sawmills—
Engine Driver (1), Saw
Sharpener (1)
2
Bench Men (8), Labourers (10)
Timber-yard Man
18
1
21
Carpenters’ Shop—
Foreman (1), Carpenters (12)
13
T 3
Bricklayers—
Foreman (1), Bricklayers and
Labourers (14)
T 5
i5
Plumbers’ Shop—
Foreman (i), Plumbers and
Labourers (7)
8
8
Horse Drivers and General
Labourers
13
x 3
Electric Light—
Foreman (1), Engine Drivers
(2), Firemen (2) ...
5
Labourers
3
8
Carried forward ...
792
s. d.
s. d.
Miners
7 6
to IO o
day of 8 hours
Dry Crusher...
8 o
,,84
) }
Furnacemen ..
8 o
Chlorination..
7 6
,, 80
Engine Drivers
IO o
...
;;
Fitters
IO o
., 12 0
”
Blacksmiths ...
IO o
» 13 4
Boilermakers .
IO o
f> 11 0
)>
Rates of Wages.
Brought forward ...
702
No. i Battf.ry and Pumps—
Engine Drivers
3
Labourers
7
xo
Smelting and Despatch of Gold
Superintendent (T. C. Skarratt)
1
Foreman
1
Labourers
2
Assay Office—
4
Analyst and Assayer (H. A. B.
Leipner)
1
Assistant (x), Watchmen (2) ...
3
General Office and Stores
4
(Upper and Lower Works) —
Accountant (E. Davies)
1
Clerks ...
2
Junior Clerk ...
1
Storeman (1), and Assistants (4)
5
Timekeeper ...
1
10
SUGARLOAF SHAFT —
Superintendent (Robert Lisle)
1
Engine Drivers (3), Fitters (1)
4
Blacksmith
1
Miners ..
T 9
2K
Mining Contracts—
Contractors and Men...
47
Road Contract —
47
Contractor and Men ...
3
Carriage Contract —
3
Contractor and Men ...
9
Various —
9
Wood Cutters and Carters, Log
Haulers, Charcoal Burners,
Brickmakers and Lime
Burners about ...
5°°
Total
L
404
Bricklayers ...
s.
IO
d.
o
j.
12
d.
6 day of 8 hours
Carpenters ...
ii
o
n
12
° i,
Plumbers
11
o
j j
12
° „
Moulders
IO
0
IO
6
Sawmill Hands
7
6
IO
o „
Shift Foremen
11
8
x 3
4 >>
Labourers ...
7
6
j >
8
o


The Laboratory.
*
The importance of collecting the different varieties of rock met with in the mine and deter-
mining their petrological character was recognised by Mr. C. S. Wilkinson in his report.
To carry this into effect the Directors recently decided to erect a complete laboratory. This,
when in operation, will also render it possible to ascertain with scientific accuracy the impurities
that may be retained in the charcoal filters and give a basis for future treatment. In addition to
this, all chemicals used in the various processes will be subjected to an analytical test as a check on
sellers’ valuation. The residues from the Berdan pans, in the amalgamation of the filters and
smelting pots, will also undergo a thorough analysis.
The building (constructed entirely of brick) is now approaching completion, its site being some
distance from the works so as to avoid the presence of dust and fumes.
It will contain three rooms : —The Laboratory, 28 feet long by 18 feet wide, fitted with the
necessary shelves and drawers ; the Balance Room, 14 feet by 12 feet, containing one of the latest
improved short-beamed chemical balances by Oertling, London ; and a third room, containing a
fusion furnace and a copper still for the supply of pure water fed from overhead tanks, the distilled
water then passing through a pipe into a condenser in the Laboratory. The height of the building
is 14 feet from floor to ceiling, and it is shielded from the heat and glare of the sun by a wide
verandah. The floors will be of concrete. A gas heating machine is to be attached to the
Laboratory in place of the ordinary spirit lamps as being more expeditious in working.
Mr. H. A. B. Leipner, one of the assayers of the Company, and an analytical chemist from
the University College, Bristol, is attending to the construction and fitting, and as that gentleman
has had considerable experience, the laboratory will without doubt be complete in every detail.
The necessity for taking the present step has long been recognised in consequence of the baffling
nature of the various strata met with and the different methods of treatment that have had to be
adopted from time to time since the mine was first worked. The existence of such a laboratory
in the district must prove of great value, for the Directors of the Company have always shown a
strong desire to aid in testing the value of the surrounding ventures by means of their plant, and
it is not too much to assume that they will not make an exception in this, their latest and not least
valuable addition to the works.
Proposed Railway from Kabra to Mount Morgan.
Kabra, up the line, io miles from Rockhampton, is the nearest point of the Central Railway
to Mount Morgan, being 14 miles distant. Owing to the healthy prospects of the mine and the
heavy traffic, both freight and passenger between Kabra and the Mount, the Government deemed
it expedient to survey a line between the two places. The Government survey commenced at
Kabra, and in working up the matter it was found a costly and extensive tunnel would have to be
driven through the main range at what is known as the Razor Back, miles from Kabra ; this
tunnel would measure half-a-mile in length. The estimated cost of the line was allowing
the odd for the construction of the tunnel. The latter was only an approximate estimate,
as no trial shaft had been sunk to discover the nature of the country the tunnel would penetrate.
For this survey the Company paid the Government the sum of £ 2,000. In 1889, Mr. Wesley
Hall, then Managing Director, determined on having another survey to avoid, if possible, the ex-


pensive tunnel. Accordingly a survey was started under Mr. Hannam, late Government Chief
Engineer for the Gulf of Carpentaria. It was completed in June of the same year, and plans were
forwarded to the Government for approval. Almost immediately following this a Special Bill was
passed enabling the Company to construct a line for themselves, the Company to pay the sum of
£2,000 for the original survey, and further to deposit for the land over which the line
would run. Upon inspecting the plans the Railway Commissioners condemned the line on
account of the steep grade and sharp curves, though in no case were they more acute than what
are to be found along the Central Railway Line. The cost of this line was estimated at
the distance into the Company’s yard being miles. It may be noted that Mr. Robert Ballard,
M.I C.E., Consulting Engineer to the Company, approved of this line. In October, 1889, another
survey was started, this time down the range, by Mr. E. Lloyd Elwood, the Company’s Surveyor. It
was completed in March, 1891, inspected by Mr. R. Ballard and Mr. Stanley, Government Chief
Engineer, and passed. The Company, however, considered it too good for their requirements.
This line avoided the tunnel, contouring down the range at the Razor Back on a grade of 1 in 50,
and then turning on a loop line to join the Government survey at the base of the range. The
cost of this line was estimated by Mr. Ballard at the distance being increased to 16
miles.
Yet another survey was made in July, 1891, and completed in August. This was also
thrown out by the Commissioners, who considered the grade too steep.
At the annual meeting, July, 1891, Mr. James Stewart, Chairman of Directors, thus alluded
to the proposed railway :
“ The building of your railway is still in abeyance, a new feature having been introduced into
its proposed construction, which, if carried out, will be of considerable monetary advantage to
shareholders. The proposition now is to apply to Parliament this session for power to construct
a light mineral line, suitable for light loads and slow travelling. From information at our disposal
we expect every assistance from the Government, and do not anticipate there will be any
difficulty in getting the sanction of Parliament for its construction.”
In September of the same year the survey of a “ratch” line on the Abts system up the
Razor Back was made, and approved by the Commissioners.
In the following month the permanent line survey from Kabra was started and was com-
pleted in August of this year, 1892, making the distance from Kabra to the Company’s yard 13!
miles, and the estimated cost
Thus, as has been shown, four trial and one pemanent survey of the proposed line have been
made up to June of this year (1892), the total outlay on railway surveys was 7s. od., in-
cluding the already mentioned as having been paid to the Government for the original
survey.
Note.— With reference to the above the Directors of the Company desire to state that they
do not think there is now any necessity for them to construct the line. The cost of carriage has
been very much reduced, and as it is thought that the works can be carried on in future without
chloride of lime, a still further reduction will be made. The Directors think that it would not be
to the shareholders interests to spend so much money as the railway would cost, as the interest
on the outlay would be much more than the amount they will have to pay for carriage.


THE SHARE BOOM.
A record of the mine would be incomplete without a brief allusion to the share boom of 1888.
Up to that year the development of the wonderful resources of the mine had caused the price of
shares to steadily increase the market quotation for the last three months of 1887, ranging from
£6 5s to £B. The maximum price, ss., was reached in July, 1888, when Mount Morgan
scrip actually changed hands at that figure.
As will be seen by referring to schedule C, there was nothing in the dividend list of 1888 to
warrant this exaggerated estimate, as there were only five dividends declared in that year, amount-
ing in the aggregate to £275,000, the twb shilling dividends not commencing until January, 1889.
Even had the splendid and unparalleled record of 1889, when one one and sixpenny dividend, and
one two and sixpenny dividend, amounting in all to were declared, been assured
certainty, there would have been no justification for such an excessive inflation in the price of
shares. This is sufficiently apparent when it is considered that a two and sixpenny dividend —the
highest paid—was only equal to about 9 per cent, on the then estimated market value.
Great as the known and prospective wealth of Mount Morgan indeed was at that time, there
was no warrant for such an absurdly optimistic view as the price implied. With few exceptions,
the large shareholders were not responsible for the spread and disastrous consequences of what has
aptly been termed the Mount Morgan mania. Over-speculation, the pernicious influences of time
and part payment sales, and the more than questionable tactics of stock jobbers, were the main
causes of the inflated price of shares.
People, hearing of the enormous yields of Mount Morgan, suffered their imagination to know
no bounds, and this was accentuated by the unprecedented character and extent of the gold-bearing
deposit.
A mountain of solid gold traversed the vision of over sanguine speculators, and all sense of
caution was completely obscured by the dazzling spectacle. It was freely rumoured that shares
would advance to as high as and those who bought in at with this expectation had
cause to rue their venture. The relationship that should exist between share values and dividends
taken with reserves of ore had been entirely ignored with the inevitable result. From £l7 the
shares, during 1889, notwithstanding the handsome dividends each month, slowly but surely
receded in price.
The reaction that has taken place since the boom has swayed the balance to the opposite
extreme, and the price of shares to-day can no more be regarded as a true index of the intrinsic
value of the mine than it was then. The present directorate have spared no pains to place before
the public every detail and information they themselves possess, in order, so far as lies in their
power, to guard against a recurrence of an episode which none regret more than they do. One of
the means adopted for attaining this end is the publication of this work, another, the establishment
of a registered office in London, so that by extending the field of investment beyond the colonies
a steady value of shares, proportionate to the actual value of the mine, might be maintained.


London Register.
a.rh l ' T'k addedthat a local Board of Directors and a Branch Register in London were
November 26th 18 So h “ Extraordinar y General Meeti "S of Shareholders on
er 26th, 1889, such resolution being confirmed on the following 17th December
tholt b° nOU UK le T' am PattiSOn (Chairma ")’ at the of the two meetings mentioned,
thought it would be admitted by everyone who had an interest in the mine that the opening of
a Register in London was a great necessity, and of vast importance-not only to the shareholders
’ and * S ° ’ at SeCt ' o ' 1 1 ° f ‘ he Engl ' Sh PUM, ' C Wh ° dealt in scri P' 11 would facilitate sales of shares’
arrangements could be made through it by which dividends could be paid in London two or
three days after they were declared out here. Then, when the people at home came to get their
IV,dends regularly every month, the price of shares would rise to such an extent as to add to the
value of the property. It had been a source of considerable annoyance and unpleasantness to
many that shares had fluctuated so frequently in value of late, but there could be no doubt that
as long as the dividends warranted, quotations in England would improve; and if they did not’
rise, they would, at any rate, remain firm. There were scores of other reasons for opening an
in London, but those he had given were sufficient to justify the step they were taking.”
Purity of the Mount Morgan Gold.
iS " 0t ° n ' y rCmarkab ' e f ° r ‘ he qU3ntity ° f g ° ,d Pr ° du “ d > b “‘ aI » ‘he
, K J ,r ' biUS ’ Master of the S y dne y Mi "t, in a lecture delivered by him in July, ,884 before
° f NCW S ° Uth Wa ' eS ’ ° n “ The Remarkab ' e °™« Gold in Queens-
“ While from a geological point of view the occurrence of this gold is highly interesting the
character of the gold obtained is not lpce cn t <-woi • 1. . S>
savs--<No u , ‘ °- L ° ck> ln h,s work on S° ld - published in 1882,
y s No gold has yet been found in nature unalloyed with silver.’ Yet this gold from the
Mount Morgan Mine, of which, since February last, already over .0,000 ounces hate been
excepted IT h Syd " eV iS foU " d ‘° be from siher ~* ™™te trace
excepted. have brought some of this retorted gold, rolled out very thin, to show its toughness.
assays 99.7 per cent, of gold, the rest is copper with a trace of iron. Gold assaying 99 7 per
. ‘ S W ° rth f* 4S ’ Bd ’ P“ °unce. Gold from the same mine, received at the Mint, assayed
as ig as 99. per cent. It is, as far as I know, the richest native gold hitherto found.”
Mr. J MacDonald Cameron said: “ If I except the product of the Mezquital Del Oro Gold
Mme, m the State of Zacatecas, Mexico, I have never seen gold of such extraordinary fine "aht “
Previous to .890, as shown in the Table of Average Monthly Assays, there was practically no
Sdver associated with the gold. Since the kaolin ore came in, however, there his be d a „
ppreciable amount of silver, the average in that now passing through being from 3 to 4 dwts pe
ton. Ihe value of the smelted gold per Mint returns is 4 s. 6d. 834 avvts ‘ P er


Future Prospects of the Mine.
In dealing with such a weighty subject as the prospective future of the mine, due care must be
taken that any conclusions arrived at are deduced from the actual and irrefutable evidence of
existing facts.
To say that the mine is inexhaustible is, on the face of it, absurd; the advancement of such
an opinion would lay its author open to well-merited censure, if not ridicule.
The question is often asked—perhaps more often than any other when alluding to Mount
Morgan—“ How long will it last ?” With a knowledge derived from inspection, it would be
difficult to decide otherwise than that it has a very extended life before it.
To commence with, it may be as well to note in what positions of the mine operations may
likely be conducted with profit, at any rate within the near future. The large body of kaolinic
sinter, the limits of which may be roughly guessed at in relation to the zone of barren country rock
whereby the deposit is bounded, may be 'safely regarded as a valuable future reserve, and, even at
the present rate of working, must take some years to exhaust. The yield from this has been very
consistent throughout, and there is nothing to indicate any deterioration in quality. The successful
treatment of this ore in the large vats has allayed whatever anxiety might have been felt on that
score.
In the Freehold Stopes the existence of payable haematite, which cuts out the kaolinic sinter to
the east towards the face of the hill, assures that the block of country between these stopes and the
Freehold Tunnel contains very rich patches, and also leads to the belief that the Freehold Stopes may
be extended for quite the same distance to the north as the Hopper Stopes above. Further, while
touching on this portion of the mine, it may be observed there is every reasonable expectation to
find that to the west of the Freehold Stopes and towards the Crown Shaft a body of payable sinter,
as yet untouched, exists; the ground for this surmise being that at 525 feet in the Freehold Tunnel
a body of this stone, 8 feet in width, was met with, assaying 6 ounces to the ton.
The next promising feature is the extension of payable sinter to the south of the big dyke at
the Grasstree level, and its proved continuance upwards to the level of No. 5 Tunnel.
An estimate of the large body of ore to be operated upon in this direction may be gained by
reference to plans and sections. This is of a somewhat higher grade in quality than the kaolinic
sinter of the stopes, and evidently improves upwards to the surface.
Again, at the upper benches, it must be remembered that all the faces as left standing are not
by any means barren on that account. All stone below a standard yield of iodwts. per ton has
been classed as unpayable. The poorer country has always been held in reserve awaiting the
introduction of a process specially adapted for the economic treatment in bulk of low grade ores.
It is more than probable that the system of large vats lately introduced in the Lower Works will
meet the requirements and enable all this, together with the thousands of tons of so-called mullock
tipped over the hill side and containing an appreciable amount of gold, to be treated as a profit.
The above alone would occupy the Company many years.
The next feature of promise is the immense mass of sulphide ore, which not only underlies the
whole body of kaolinic ore but also forms a large portion of the entire base of the Mount, and is
believed to extend in the direction of, if not up to, the Sugarloaf workings. It has been proved
payable by numerous assays To venture any estimate as to quantity and quality at this early


stage of its development would be entering the region of speculation, although the next few months
will do much to determine the value of it. To return to facts, there is a proved payable body of
this sulphide ore in the Grasstree Crosscut north, extending along the course of the drive a distance
of 70 feet. In the Grasstree Tunnel a similar body, probably a continuation of it, is met with and
extends across the tunnel to the south in the direction of Mundic Creek and the Sugarloaf.
A large Mundic lode outcropping in Mundic Creek and Hall’s Gully gave encouraging assays,
and its existence points to important developments in the western portion of the Company’s
property.
The section of country exposed by the Sugarloaf Shaft shows that reefs of auriferous quartz,
one at least of which is considered payable, come in at intervals and may be followed in their
course with advantage.
No attempt whatsoever has been made to conceal the fact that a repetition of the phenomenal
richness of the mine during the period when abnormally high yields were obtained from the
surface, is unlikely. But any tendency to rush to the other extreme is not justified by facts. There
are many years of steady prosperity—though, may be, on a less sensational scale—before the mine
ere it can possibly be exhausted.
In conclusion, there are few, if any, mines with such an enormous quantity of proved payable
ore in sight, and few, if any, mines give promise of so rich results from future prospecting, or afford
so safe a field for investment, as Mount Morgan.
In support of the above, and as showing that what has been written is not too sanguine an
estimate of the future of the mine, the following extract from the last report of Mr. Jack—a
gentleman whose caution is proverbial—may be appended. He says, “ For one thing, although
the mine has already turned out over a million ounces of gold, the sections show that only a very
small proportion of the known amount of payable ore has been excavated.”


COMPARATIVE TABLES.
The following comparative tables serve to show the relation Mount Morgan as a gold producer
bears to the other principal mines in Australasia.
Mines on Five of the Six Leading Goldfields of Australia Paying over in
Dividends During 1891.
£
Mount Morgan (Rockhampton) ... ... ... ... ... 300,000
Star of the East (Ballarat) ... ... ... ... ... ... 79,200
Brilliant (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... ... 75,000
Madame Berry (alluvial, Creswick) ... ... ... ... ... . 40,050
Day Dawn Block and Wyndham (Charters Towers) ... ... 37,500
Day Dawn P.C. (Charters Towers) ... ... . ... ... 37,500
Berry Consols (alluvial, Creswick) ... ... ... ... ... 30,500
Mills United (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... 26,250
New Red, White and Blue (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... 25,875
Black Horse (Egerton, Ballarat) ... . . ... ... ... 21,750
Sunburst (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... ... 20,400
Specimen Hill (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... ... ... 19.500
Golden Gate (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... 18,600
New Chum Railway (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... ... 1 7,55 2
New Argus (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,000
Victoria (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... ... 14,400
Sir Henry Loch (Ballarat) ... ... ... ... ... ... 14,400
Seven Hills Estate (alluvial, Smeaton) ... ... ... ... 13,500
New Queen’s (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... 12,000
Gympie Great Eastern (Gympie) ... ... ... ... ... 10,500
No. 7 S.E. Queen (Charters Towers)... ... ... ... ... 10,200
Great Extended Hustler’s (Bendigo)... ... ... ... ... 10,200
United Hustler’s and Redan (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... 10,193
No. 1 North Glanmire (Gympie) ... ... ... ... ... 9,300
Hustler’s Reef (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... 9,108
Phoenix No. 1 North (Gympie) ... ... ... ... ... 9,000
Earl Beaconsfield (alluvial, Ballarat) ... ... ... ... ... 7,800
New Hopeful (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,500
Confidence (Bendigo)... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,350
Dalzell’s (Ballarat) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,000
Queen’s Cross (Charters Towers) ... ... ... ... ... 5,700
Lazarus (Bendigo) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,625
Llanberris (Ballarat) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,500


The Gold Dividends for Australasia for 1891.
£
Mount Morgan ...
... 300,000
Charters Towers ...
... 272,347
Ballarat ...
... 230,466
Bendigo ...
... 148,937
£
Gympie ...
••• 53,876
Croydon (estimated)
••• 53,876
Isolated Mines (estimated)
... 190,498
The Mount Morgan Yield compared with Charters Towers and Gympie,
the two principal goldfields in Queensland.
Oz. Gold.
Mount Morgan, from 1887 to the end of 1891, produced 915,900
Charters Towers, from 1871 to the end of 1891, produced 2,300,677
Gympie, from 1867 to the end of 1891, produced 1,768,614
Which on analysis shows—
For a period of 5I years the average yearly production of Mount Morgan was 166,527
lor a period of 20 ~ ~ „ „ Charters Towers „ 11 5,°33
For a period of 24 „ „ „ „ Gympie ... 73,692
[Note.— The Charters Towers goldfield contains over one hundred gold-producing mines, that
of Gympie about seventy.]


APPENDIX TO SCHEDULES
The Statistical Tables are compiled from the books of the Company and the Half-yearly
Balance Sheets appearing in their published reports.
Schedule A.
Showing that 290,332 tons 14 cwt. had been treated on the mine from the formation of the
Company to 31st May, 1892, giving a yield of 968,670 oz. 16 dwts. 1 gr., or a general average of
3 oz. 6 dwts. 17.4796 grs. per ton over £he whole period ; that the proceeds from this gold
amounted to .£3,978,962 3s. 3d.; the Financial Expenditure .£1,035,752 7s. 3d. ; the Dividend
Duty (commencing January, 1891) being 750, making a total Expenditure of
,£1,069,502 7s. 3d , Dividends paid having been £2,900,000, or equal to £2 18s. per share.
Schedule B.
This, a working summary from the mine, is compiled for an average period of three and a half
years ending 31st May, 1892, and shows the total and average cost of mining the ore and
treating same in each department. The ore raised and crushed for the period named was
2 75, 1 73 tons 9 cwt. 3 grs. The ore furnaces and chlorinated, 247,420 tons 9 cwt. It will be
noted that there is a considerable difference between the quantity raised and crushed and that
chlorinated. This is owing to the variation in the character of the ore, loss by moisture, and the
amount always lying on the cooling floors at the end of each half-year, which must be regarded as
a floating balance. It shows the following total and average costs for the above period :
£
s.
d.
£
s. d.
Total cost of Mining ...
... 46,444
13
7
General Average ...
0
3 4 4
per cent.
Do.
do. Crushing ...
... iio,no
!9
2
Do.
do.
0
8 0.03
do.
Do.
do. Furnacing
... 115,308
0
2
Do.
do
0
9 3 8
do.
Do.
do Chlorinating
••• 213,345
18
0
Do.
do.
0
17 2.9
do.
Do.
do. General Expenses 85,287
3
2
Do.
do.
0
6 10.7
do.
Giving
a Gross Total of ...
14
1
and Total Average Cost of £
'2
4 9 i8 3
do.
Further that the average yield of gold was 30Z. odwt. 2i.2496gr5. per ton, and a total cost of
average yield 14s. B.yd. per ounce for the years.
Schedule C.
This shows that the Company have paid from the formation up to and inclusive of November
ist, 1892, being equal to jQ 3 os. 6d. per share, or at the rate on paid up value of
per cent.; also that the market value has fluctuated from jQi ss. to ,£l7 per share,
and is at present £2 ss.


Table of Assays.
The average Monthly Assays appearing in this table are computed from the Daily Assays
made on the mine.
Index of Schedules and Summaries.
Schedule A. Showing ore treated, yield, dividends, and expenditure from formation of
Company, July ist, 1886, to May 31st, 1892.
Schedule B.—Working Summary, showing total and average costs, mining and treating ore for a
period of three-and-a-half years.
Schedule C.-Showing dividends paid by the Company and fluctuation in market value of shares.
Schedule D.—Table of Assays, showing the average monthly assays from the formation of
Company.
Plans and Sections.
Plan A.—Showing Freehold, Leaseholds, and Claims, as in June, 1884.
Plan 8.-Showing Freehold, Leaseholds, and Claims, as in October, 1892, with levels, etc., of
Tunnels and Crosscuts.
Plan C.—Showing principal workings around the top of the Mount, October, 1892.
Section D. —Along the line of Freehold Tunnel.
Section E.—Along the line of No. 5 Tunnel.
Section F.—Hopper Stopes, October, 1892.
Section G. Along the line of the Freehold Crosscut, showing Freehold Stopes.
Section H.—Freehold Stopes, October, 1892.
Section I. — Crown and Sugarloaf Shafts.


APPENDIX.
THEORY OF AN OLD MINER.
AT my first visit to the Golden Mount, after carefully looking at the stone with all its associations
and conditions, I concluded that the great gold formation was oxidised pyrites (mundic), and
I have observed no feature during the deep and extensive development, which has gone on
since that time, which would cause me to change my first conclusion; on the contrary, each foot of
exploration has strengthened my first impression.
The immense beds of pyrites which have been brought to view by deep-sinking and proved to
be underlying the oxidised golden stone, proved beyond doubt that the one is a part of the other,
that it was originally all sulphide, but that part near the surface has been changed by atmospheric
action to oxide, sulphur having given place to oxygen. The oxidation of pyrites by atmospheric
action is so fully illustrated and amplified every day, that any doubt that may have arisen in the
mind as to its action is at once dispelled upon actual inspection.
Let us enquire what are the constituents of the Mount Morgan stone on that part of the
mountain which have been so abnormally rich in gold ? They are oxygen, silicate and alumina.
Then again, what are the constituents of the pyrites underlying this stone? They are iron,
sulphur, silica, and alumina, precisely the same as in the former, except that in the stone exposed
to atmospheric action sulphur has given place to oxygen, a change which nature never fails to
effect on pyrites. For example, bring up to the surface a thousand tons of the pyrites underlying
the oxidised stone at Mount Morgan, and place it under the influence of the atmosphere, similar
to that portion of the mountain whence the gold is obtained, and oxidation would at once
commence; nature would immediately start the process of decomposition, which clearly explains
the mode of occurrence of Mount Morgan.
It may be asked why the shallow or oxidised stone became so much richer in gold than the
sulphide. The reason is that there has been intense concentration by the agencies of air and
water going on for unknown ages. As decomposition went on, each shower of rain would carry
the decomposed dust down into the lower ground, filling up cracks, hollows, and recesses. It will
be readily understood that much of the decomposed portions awaiting each shower of rain would
be in the form of dry dust; thus the lighter part would be carried away by gusts of wind that so
often precede rain, the segregated portion remaining being deposited by water in the most
convenient receptacle. By the laws of gravity, the light portions would float off with the waste
water, while the heavier matter would settle down to the bottom, forming the rich deposits which
have been found. While oxidation went on, wind and water were employed in collecting and
concentrating the precious metals, so that all three agencies were at work simultaneously. No
doubt much of the liberated gold and oxidised matter would be taken by water through the more
porous ground into the interior of the hill to regions of high temperature, thus accounting for the
hydrated form in which the precious metal occurs at Mount Morgan.


What largely helps us to connect the Golden Mount with the underlying pyrites is the fact that
the pyrites is associated with all the elements, minus oxygen, which constitute the hill. There are
silica and alumina—the component parts of kaolin—and I have shown by what agencies the
material was collected as decomposition went on, clearly accounting for the kaolin and rich deposits
of gold to be found there.
It should not be forgotten that this work of oxidation, collecting, concentrating, and
purifying has been going on for possibly millions of years, which accounts for the thoroughness of
the work, the rich yield, and the purity of the metal.
There is nothing whatever in the Mount Morgan deposit, other than its enormous extent and
phenomenal richness, which causes it to differ from most other lodes. Take for instance a copper
lode. There you have first, gossan or iron oxide with carbonates of copper; then intervening these
ores and the permanent sulphide you have the sulphate. This last is where oxidation begins. All
these changes may be noted from the surface down to the sulphide at Mount Morgan. Each link
is clear and distinct, which unmistakably connects the sulphide with the oxide, and there would be
quite as much reason in saying that the oxidised portion of our smaller lodes and reefs were not
originally a part of the sulphide or in attempting to separate the two at Mount Morgan.
To further illustrate my remarks, let me say that, were it possible to turn Mount Morgan
upside down and place the pyrites ore which now occupies the bottom of the mine at the top, let
the conditions be the same, and in course of time another mountain of gold will be produced.
Oxidation, collection, concentrating and purifying would go on, and in ages hence precisely similar
results would be attained to those which surprised the discoverers of Mount Morgan.
But after all the problem of mode of occurrence is of little importance compared with the
fact that gold is there, in practically inexhaustible quantities, and the great beds of pyrites, which
underlie the oxidised stone, being more or less charged with gold, will considerably add' to the
wealth of the mine.
The exceptional facilities which the company offer for the encouragement of metallurgical
science will doubtless lead to the profitable treatment of low-grade pyrites, a source of incalculable
wealth to Mount Morgan shareholders.
I have derived much pleasure and profit from reading the report of our esteemed Government
Geologist, Mr. R. L Jack, on Mount Morgan, especially the last report which gives the outside
enquirer the fullest and most comprehensive idea of the exact position of the mine.
It should be read by all who wish to be thoroughly informed on this celebrated mine.


SCHEDULE A.
SHOWING ORE TREATED, YIELD, DIVIDENDS AND EXPENDITURE
From Formation of Company, July, 1886, to May, 1892.
Half-year ending
Ore Chlorinated.
Yield of Gold.
Proceeds from Gold.
Average per ton.
Dividend per
share.
Total Dividends paid.
Dividend duty.
Financial Expenditure.
Total expenditure.
Remarks.
Nov. 30th, 1886
May 31st l 88
| Nov. 30th S 87
| May 31st f
i Nov. 30th 1 1888
May 3ist | 03
j Nov. 30th 1 l88 9
May 3ist ) 0
Nov. 30th \ l8 9°
May 31st | 0
I Nov. 30th [ l8 9 r
j May 31st, 1892
tons cwt. qrs.
6,440 O O
6,631 3 O
8,740 5 O
8,500 14 O
12,600 3 O
36,675 14 O
38,415 16 O
37.799 6 0
37,847 18 0
36,893 2 0
30.358 15 0
29,429 18 0
ozs. dwts. grs.
19,476 IO O
38,550 15 0
45,154 10 0
45,469 8 O
66,804 13 12
168,386 I 13
155,156 12 0
io 3,793 6 0
113,251 19 0
88,330 9 0
63,322 19 0
60.973 13 0
£ S. d.
79,022 I 6
159,525 2 5
186,087 6 10
*87,995 11 8
274,607 15 5
691,839 *7 4
643,549 14 5
423,155 11 8
466.514 8 4
362,459 5 1
258,267 5 9
245.938 2 10
ozs. dwts. grs.
3 0 11.6
5 16 16.48
5 3 7-8i
5 6 23.472
5 6 0.864
4 11 I9-776
4 0 18.624
2 14 22.032
2 19 20.256
2 17 21.216
2 1 17.184
2 1 10473
£ S. d.
008
0 2 0
0 2 0
0 2 0
046
O II 6
0 10 6
0 6 10
072
0 4 10
030
030
£ s. d.
33,333 6 8
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
225,000 0 0
575.000 0 0
525,000 0 0
341.666 13 4
358.333 6 8
241.666 13 4
150,000 0 0
150,000 0 0
£ S. d.
18,750 O O
7,500 O O
7,500 O O
£ s. d.
29,145 2 1
51,386 15 10
71,644 14 3
85,191 6 2
76,863 17 8
118222 11 7
109,547 8 1
95,740 10 7
98,323 12 3
111,128 6 7
97,161 16 7
9T396 5 7
£ s. d.
29,145 2 1
51,386 15 10
71,644 14 3
85,191 6 2
76,863 17 8
118,222 11 7
109,547 8 1
95,740 10 7
98,323 12 3
129,878 6 7
104.661 16 7
98,896 5 7
* General Average Yield per Ton
taken from Gross Totals.
Gross Totals ...
290.332 14 0
968,670 16 1
3,978,962 3 3
* General average
3 6 17.4796
2 18 0
2,900,000 0 0
33,750 O O
1,035,752 7 3
1,069,502 7 3
SCHEDULE B.
WORKING SUMMARY, SHOWING TOTAL AND AVERAGE COSTS, MINING AND TREATING ORE
For a Period of Years, Ending May 31ST, 1892.
A.
B. C. D. E. F.
G.
Half-year ending.
Ore Mined
and Crushed.
Ore Furnaced
and Chlorinated.
Total Cost of
Mining.
Total Cost of
Crushing.
Total Cost of
Furnacing.
Total Cost of
Chlorinating,
Assaying, and
Smelting.
Total Cost of
General Expenses
and
Management.
Gross
Total Cost.
A. & C.
Average Cost per Ton (from Columns)
A. & D. B. & E. B. & F. B. & G.
Average Yield
Gold
per ton.
Average Cost
Gold
per oz.
Remarks.
Mining.
Crushing.
Furnacing.
Chlorinating,
Assaying, and
Smelting.
General Expenses
and Management.
Total Average
Cost per Ton.
h£&| ■*»
M - 8 90
Nov. 30 f ' 8 9.
May 31 1892
Tons cwt. qrs
35,490 12 I
39,925 8 2
40,906 l6 O
41,057 O O
4I-532 13 O
42.210 O 0
34.051 0 0
Tons cwt qrs
36,675 14 O
38,415 16 O
37,799 6 0
37,847 18 0
36,893 2 O
*30,358 15 O
29.429 18 O
£ s. d.
5,997 10 9
5,689 8 11
5,775 1 4
5,796 10 9
6,976 8 2
8,610 14 2
7,598 19 6
£ S. d.
16,651 I 3
14.820 17 7
16,706 3 4
15.281 12 7
I4.84I 9 5
16,926 II I
14,883 3 II
£ S. d.
14,727 2 I
15,386 19 10
17,469 18 II
1 7,203 13 5
15.352 6 6
17,298 5 10
1 7,869 13 7
£ s. d.
31,553 15 10
27,653 4 2
32,326 12 6
32,034 6 8
34A7I 2 1
27,662 19 2
27,943 i7 7
£ s. d.
12,947 19 9
11,618 16 8
12,412 18 11
I3A98 2 7
I2 >397 15 11
12,467 9 8
10,243 19 8
£ S. d.
81,877 9 8
75,i69 7 2
84,690 15 0
83,514 6 0
83,739 2 1
82,965 19 11
78,539 14 3
£ s. d.
0 3 44
0 2 11
0 2 9f
0 2 9f
0 3 4t
0 4 of
049
£ s. d.
0 9 4i
0 7 5
082
0 7 54
0 7 if
080
0 8 8J
£ s. d.
0 8 o|
0 8 04
0 9 3
0 9 ij
0 8 3f
0 11 4t
0 12 1$
£ s. d.
0 17 2i
0 14 4f
0 17 14
0 16 11
0 18 6^
Ol8
O 19 O
£ s. d.
0 7 of
0 6 oj
067
0 6 11
0 6 84
0 8 24
0 6 ii|
£ s. d.
2 5 04
1 18 94
2 3114
2 3 24
2 4 of
2 9 ioi
2 11 6|
Oz. dwt. grs.
4 II 19.776
4 O 18.624
2 14 22.032
2 19 20.256
2 7 21.216
2 I 17.184
2 I IO.473
£ s. d.
0 9 9-7
0 9 7.2
0 16 0
0 14 0
0 18 4-8
1 3 10.9
1 4 10.6
[weight
*Kaolin Ore, lighter
Gross Totals ...
275, *73 9 3
247,420 9 O
46,444 13 7
110,110 19 2
115,308 0 2
213,345 *8 0
85,287 3 2
570,496 14 1
*Gen’ral Av’ge
0 3 4-4
General Av’ge.
8 0.03
General Av’ge.
9 3-8
General Av’ge.
17 2.9
General Av’ge.
6 10.7
Total Averages
2 4 9.883
General Average
3 0 21.2496
Total Cost of
Average Yield.
0 14 8.7
* General Averages
computed from Gross




SCHEDULE C.
SHOWING DIVIDENDS PAID BY THE COMPANY (FROM FORMATION) AND FLUCTUATION IN MARKET VALUE OF SHARES.
No. of
Dividend.
Date of
Payment.
Amount
per Share.
Rate per cent,
of
Yearly Amounts
on
Paid-up Value
of Shares.
Total
Amount Paid.
Current Market
Value of Shares.
No. of
Dividend.
Date of
Payment.
Amount
per Share.
Rate per cent,
of
Yearly Amounts
on
Paid-up Value
of Shares.
Total
Amount Paid.
Current Market
Value of Shares.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
1886.
September 30
1887.
January 18
April 7
July 15
October 4
December 22
1888.
April c
June 6
October 9
November 7
December 1
1889.
January 3
February 2
March 4
April 1
May 1
June 1
July i
August 2
September 2
October 3
November 4
1890.
January 2
February 1
March 1
April 1
May r
June 2
£ s. d.
008
010
010
010
010
010
010
010
010
010
016
020
020
0 16
020
020
020
026
020
020
020
020
010
010
010
014
0 1 3
0 1 3
per cent.
3ii
28$
3i?
125$
£ s. d.
33.333 6 8
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
75,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
75,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
125,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100,000 0 0
100 000 0 0
100,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
66,666 13 4
62,500 0 0
62,500 0 0
£ s. d. £ s. d.
1 5 0 to 2 O O
2 O O „ 3 O O
3 0 0 „ 3 2 6
3 3 0 „ 6 2 6
6 5 0 „ 8 0 0
8 0 0 ,, 10 0 0
10 0 0 „ 14 0 0
14 0 0 „ 17 0 0
16 0 0
15 0 0
12 10 0
11 00
10 0 0
900
8 10 0
800
7 5 0
6 0 0 „ 7 10 0
6 0 0 „ 7 0 0
Forward
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
1890.
July 2
August 2
September 1
October 2
November 4
December 2
1891.
January 2
February 2
March 2
April 2
May 1
June 1
July 1
August 3
September 2
October 1
November 2
December 1
1892.
January 1
February 1
March 1
April 1
May 1
June 1
July 1
August 1
September 1
October 1
November 1
£ s. d.
£200
013
013
013
0 1 3
012
010
0 1 0
0 0 10
009
009
009
009
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
006
per cent.
189H
80
44i?
31$
£ s. d,
2,000,000 0 0
62,500 0 0
62,500 0 0
62,500 0 0
62.500 0 0
58.333 6 8
50,000 0 0
50,000 0 0
41,666 13 4
37.500 0 0
37,500 0 0
37,500 0 0
37,500 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25.000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25.000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25. coo 0 0
25,000 0 0
25.000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
25,000 0 0
£ S. d. £ S. d.
600
4 0 0 to 6 0 0
400
3 10 0 „ 4 0 0
250
1 10 0 „ 2 10 0
1 10 0 „ 2 10 0
2 0 0 „ 2 10 0
1 10 0 „ 2 5 0
1 10 0 „ 2 15 0
250
...
...
£200
£2,000,000 0 0
Totals ..
£3 0 6
345*
£3,025,000 0 0
4
— —




SCHEDULE D.
AVERAGE MONTHLY ASSAYS
From June, 1886, to October, 1892.
LOWER WOI
iKS.
LOWER WORKS.
UPPER WORKS.
LOWER WORKS.
UPPER WORKS.
Month.
No. 1 Shed.
No. 2 Shed.
Month.
No. 1 Shed.
No. 2 Shed.
Gold.
Month.
No. 1 Shed.
No. 2 Shed.
Fine Gold.
Fine Silver.
Gold.
Gold.
Gold.
Gold.
Fine Gold.
Fine Silver.
Fine Gold.
Fine Silver.
1886.
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1887.
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
Tune
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1888.
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
Oz. dwts. grs.
3 2 2
3 5 8
3 5 8
2 18 19
484
4 18 0
3 5 8
3 5 8
290
4 1 16
290
1 12 6
290
3 5 8
3 5 8
3 5 8
4 18 0
2 0 10
1 12 16
3 " 20
6 0 20
6 10 16
5 19 5
6 10 16
Oz. dwts. grs.
OOO
OOO
3 5 8
2 l8 19
3 12 23
6 10 16
3 5 8
3 5 8
5 14 8
4 18 0
290
290
4 1 16
4 1 16
4 9 20
3 5 8
5 14 8
2 17 4
2 0 12
4 9 20
6 0 20
7 7 0
6 15 11
6 5 18
1888.
June
July
£ ug ;
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1889.
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1890.
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
Oz. dwts. grs.
5 1 6
7 7o
5 7 19
643
7 5 8
5 9 10
5 19 5
4 11 11
2 12 6
484
5 2 21
4 1 16
2 12 6
290
3 5 8
2 0 10
1 9 9
2 2 11
2 2 11
3 18 9
4 6 13
3 11 20
278
278
Oz. dwts. grs.
5 7 19
8 3 8
6 10 16
5 14 8
8 18 0
584
7 7o
6 10 16
4 3 7
4 14 7
5 17 14
4 6 13
3 5 8
2 5 7
2 iS 12
2 5 8
1 7 18
2 5 17
2 0 20
3 13 12
484
3 5 8
290
290
Oz- dwts. grs.
4 0 22
5 2 21
5 14 8
6 4 3
7 3 17
OOO
5 11 I
2 17 3
2 II 13
1 17 3
2 13 21
3 0 10
3 *5 3
321
2 12 6
OOO
2 12 0
5 1 6
1890.
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1891.
Tan.
Feb.
March
April
May
Tune
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
1892.
Tan.
Feb.
March
April
May
Tune
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Oz. dwts. grs.
3 II 20
2 9 O'
2 2 II
1 19 4
2 IS 12
290
I 12 l6
I 19 4
I 2 20
i i 6
0 19 14
0 19 14
i 7 18
1 1 6
2 5 17
2 18 19
2 18 19
2 5 i7
1 12 16
1 9 9
1 7 18
1 14 7
1 12 16
1 9 9
1178
1 12 16
1 9 9
1 11 0
000
Oz. dwts. grs.
OOO
036
0 I 15
0 I 15
036
0 I 15
036
OOO
0421
036
036
036
0 4 21
036
0421
0612
0 4 21
0 4 21
0 II 10
0 4 21
0 6 12
OOO
Oz. dwts. grs.
3 18 9
2 13 21
242
2 2 11
2 18 19
278
1 11 0
2 0 20
1 1 6
0 19 4
1 2 20
0 19 14
1 4 12
1 4 12
242
2 17 4
2 17 4
290
1 17 14
1 12 6
2 0 20
1 15 22
1 11 0
163
1 9 9
1 19 4
1 17 18
1 14 7
1 4 12
Oz. dwts. grs.
OOO
036
0 i 15
O I IS
036
O I 15
036
OOO
0 4 21
036
036
036
0421
036
0 4 21
0421
0 4 21
0421
0 13 I
0 9 19
084
OOO
Oz. dwts. grs.
484
3 II 20
3 15 3
4 4 22
3 3 16
3 10 S
3 16 8
3 13 12
3 2 1
3 2 1
3 10 5
2 12 6
2 10 15
2 17 4
290
2 13 21
290
2 12 6
278
2 12 6
3 0 10
3 10 5
3 2 1
3 2 1
290
2 13 21
2 9 0
3 3 16
3 3 16
Oz. dwts. grs.
O I 15


A




B




c




D




E




F




G




H




I








MT. MORGAN MINE.
BRISBANE, July 11.
A new company, Mt. Morgan bid., has
purchased the remaining assets of the
old gold mining company.
The purchasing syndicate inelud *
Messrs. J. H. Kessell and A. A. Boyd.,
former manager of the Mt. Morgan Com-
pany.
It is stated that arrangements ha vs
been made for whatever working capi
tal is needed and an issue of 20,000
shares is offered to the public.
The assets include much machinery,
a large quantity of stores, time quarry,
coal mine and depot at Rockhampton.
That there are 700,000 tons of or r A
which is considered to be of payable
quality, available at Mt. Morgan under
the open cut system was the view pot
forward by the member for Mt. Morgan,
Mr, J. Stopford, to-day when com-
menting on the announced intention cl
a new company starting operations at
this once famous mining centre.
Mr. Stopford said he was glad to see
the name of Mr. A. A. Boyd, who was
manager under the old regime at Mb
Morgan, was associated with the ne'f
directorate for he realised that Mr.
Boyd’s association with any project was
an assurance that the business would
not be merely what was known in mining
circles as “wrecking” or the selling of
salvage from old plant. It certainly
looked as if the operations were to be
conducted on a fairly extensive scale.
Mr. Stopford said it was a common
idea that because the old company could
rot make the concern pay, neither
could a new one. That idea would not
stand analysis as the old company had
to pay share capital value on £1,000,000
while the new company would carry on
with a considerably lower share capital.


THURSDAY, JULY .11, W».
THE fOAPRIX-OIINIAK,
na ruffe P. Be Silva, Townsville, board- . '»
Tn house keeper. II &t\ M&O. | / „
Valle
’ ie r •
master
■ ,\ \. t-> o,< ;l\?&', ~* ; ;'"■ .-'. -; l i‘ t *.* 1
MINE.
.^^c?*^— -/; '*‘ ;*>- *; ? *‘ v •\‘V‘!'s ''‘l j*'V “’ \ f%* ;;^, VVr.'- r\/ f ' ' >'-* v; \j
•io.
one the former
Gold
Sydney
The Morgan
liquid-;-
fh'i'*
be l!


Mt. Morgan town, looking south-west, about 1909. //
fio/6 Z'? 2 -?.


THURSDAY, JULY 18, 1929,
It was definitely known, said M r *|
Ftopford, that at least 700,000 tons or
©re, considered to be of payable quality
■was available under the open cut system
proposed under the scheme formulated
3by the old company.
The American expert, Mr. Barker, who
reported on Mt. Morgan some time ago,
based all his calculations as far as the
©pen cut working of the mine was con-
cerned on a 45 degree face. Any one
acquainted with the Mt. Morgan mine
would know that operations were
carried on for years with a 60 degree
lace. Many of those faces were stand-
ing to-day, demonstrating that this
particular degree of face did not in any
way impair the safety of operations.
Furthermore, considerably less cost was
entailed in the matter of the removal
©f overburden.
One of the largest contributing
factors in regard to tlie working coats
of the old company was the expensive
timbering that was required. This
costly item was dispensed with under
the open cut system which it was pro-
posed to adopt for further operations
at Mt. Morgan.
Mr. Stopford said that open cut work
was also not so unhealthy as work
underground with dynamite fumes and
artificially supplied air. During the
time that he was negotiating with tbe
chairman of the Migration and Develop-
ment Commissioner (Mr, 11, W. Gepp)
on the question of the mine being placed
on a co-operative principle, data that
had been closely analysed, supported
statement that there was 700,000 tons
of easily accessible ore, as well as a
considerable quantity that could he made
available by very cheap methods of
mining. If the price of c-opper remain-
ed at what it had been lately, he con-
sidered that the new venture w r ould be
launched with every prospect of suc-
cess.
Gratification was expressed by the
Minister for Mines (Mr. Atherton) at
the report that a new company, Mt.
Morgan Ltd., had purchased tlie assets
of the old Mt. Morgan Gold Mining Coy.
Ltd., and intended to operate the area.
He said the new company would com-
mence work at the field as early as
possible.
SYDNEY, July 15.
Mt. Morgan Ltd., which will take over
the remaining assets of the Mt. Mor-
gan Goldmining Co. Ltd. (in liquida-
tion) will be registered in Sydney, ac-
cording to a draft prospectus, with »
nominal capital of £200,000 in shares ct
£1 each.
It is proposed to issue 110,000 shares,
of which 25,0001 will be fully paid ven- j
dors’ chares allotted aa part payment *
for the assets to be acquired. Of th® j
remaining 90,000 shares to he issued for
subscription only 30,000 shares will h®
offered publicly. The vendors will re'
ceive an additional £70,000 in cash.
The company’s object will be mainly
to purchase the Queensland assets or |
the old company as at July Ist, includ-
ing freehold at Rockhampton and Mt.
Morgan, mining leases, plant and equip-
ment, the coal mine at Baralaba and
the quarries at Marmor, and to dispose
of that portion of the plant, equipment
and stores not required in future opera-
tions and to recover copper by the pre-
cipitation process.
The company will deal with the r <*'
eovery and treatment of accessible ore,
estimated at 601,000 tons, mentioned in
idle report by Mr. A. A. Boyd, which
shews an estimated profit of over
£300,000.
It is also proposed to treat a quan-
tity of tailing-s, estimated at 250.000
tons. The assets to be acquired ar®
valued a,t £291.000 and stood in the
books of the old company at £672,050
at August 15th, 3927.
The policy of the company will 0®
to dispose of the plant as soon as pos-
sible, to increase the capacity of the
precipitation plant and to determine
the most suitable economic process fo"
treating the accessible ore estimated at
661,276 tons, containing metal values
which it is estimated can be mined for
31s. per ton, showing a profit of ?«
per ton.
The directors anticipate that the com- J
panv should begin to show profits im- ,
mediately. 5
Mr. Boyd, formerly general manager j
of the old company, estimates in a re- j
port that by an expenditure of £lO,O- 0 i
in new plant an annual profit could b® i
obtained of £27,518 with electroyltse
c*'pper at £77 per ton.
The directors are Messrs. J. Kassel!
(chairman), Erie Campbell, A. A. Boyd.
G. A. Crawford, T. G. Murray, M.L.»\,
and R. T. Thompson.
ON THE MARKET.
BRISBANE, July 16.
In pursuance of the Government’s
policy of disposing of State enterprises,
public tenders have been invited for the j
purchase of the first group of State
THE CAPRICORN I AN .
