

■JTVFp
BISHOP BROUGHTON
CENTENARY 1836-1936.
Bio
THE SOUTHERN VISITATIONS
OF BISHOP BROUGHTON
1837 1852.
DIOCESAN
CHURCH HOUSE
GOULBURN.




The Southern Visitations of Bishop
Broughton.
However enthusiastically priests and laymen of the
Diocese of Gonlbnrn join in the All Australian commem-
oration of the centenary of the consecration of William
Grant Broughton as Bishop of Australia, there must still
he a strong sectional interest. That interest will be a
grateful remembrance of all that Bishop Broughton did
for that southern portion of his huge diocese, which is
now comprised in the Diocese of Gonlbnrn. When the
sketchy nature of the roads south of Goulburn is recalled,
and the total absence of bridges, the regular episcopal
visitations which he made seem almost incredible. The
immediate and phenomenal success of Bishop Thomas in
the organisation of his new diocese in 1864 was due in no
small part to the faithful foundations laid more than
twenty years earlier by William Grant Broughton, first
and only Bishop of Australia.
His First Visit.
On February 14th, 1836, the Yen. Archdeacon
Broughton was consecrated Bishop of Australia. Al-
though there is no record in his official “Acts and Pro-
ceedings” in January of the following year he visited
Goulburn, then the most southerly point of his diocese.
The address presented to him on that occasion and his
reply can be read in the “Australian” of 27/1/1837. The
address described Goulburn as “the most recently estab-
lished, although not the least in increasing importance and
extent within your lordship’s diocese.” It concluded
with a prayer that God might “guide and protect you in
safety to your family throughout the remainder of your
visit in these remote districts.” It was signed amongst
others by F. Rossi, Andrew Gibson and W. P. Faithfull.
In his reply the Bishop hoped “before my departure to
make provision for the establishment of a school.” It
was upon this visit that the Bishop rejected the first site
allotted for a church and took steps to secure the present
Cathedral site. He also made arrangements for the
establishment of a school. His letter home includes refer-
ences to Yass and Queanbeyan, which he was unable to


visit on this occasion, and to "the extended plains of
Maneroo, and a great part of the Mnrrnmbidgee River"
which he says "are occupied by hundreds of beings to
whom the very name of religion is a stranger." It seems
strange to read in his 1837 report of his plans for "a
classical boarding school at Bnngonia and
much desired by the inhabitants."
Early Reports and Visits,
His next report of the 4/6/1839 to the Aus-
tralian Committee of the S.P.C. and the S.P.C.K.
tells of sufficient funds in hand for the erection
of a church at Queanbeyan and a parsonage house
at Goulburn ready for occupation. At Bnngonia "great
progress” had been made. 1840 saw his next visit. He
arrived in Goulburn on 1/5/1840 and gave confirmation
in "the temporary place of worship." This, he said,
"being the first celebration in that district." The par-
sonage was complete, the school established and the church
taking shape. From Goulburn he went to Yass, where he
"noticed many evil consequences which had arisen from
the long continued want of a clergyman’s presence." He
officiated twice in the Court House on the Sunday. On
the 11/5/1840 he reached "Bombolla . . . (Bombow-
lee near Tumut) 300 miles from Sydney." On the next
day the Bishop read Morning Prayer and administered
the "Sacrament of Baptism and the Ordinance of Matri-
mony to such as were in attendance to partake of them.”
He notes for the information of the committee that one
clergyman (Brigstocke of Yass) cannot be expected to
officiate in a "tract of country, extending from Gunning,
30 miles on one side of Yass, to ... 100 miles in the
other direction.” From Yass the Bishop, accompanied by
Robert Campbell of Duntroon, went to Limestone Plains
(Canberra) to choose the site of a church. He then
visited "Bungadow” (Bungendore) and Braidwood.
At Bungendore the Bishop complains that the Gov-
ernment refuses land for a church "though it be but half
an acre valued at from £1 to £5, which is applied for,
because the full sum of £3OO had not been raised. He
visited "Bungadow" again in 1845 and "Bungandore" in
1847. He was there twice in 1847 in January and Novem-
ber and was very disappointed that the church had not
been finished although he himself had provided the doors
and windows. Apparently transport from Sydney was
the difficulty.
At Braidwood, too, he was faced with the difficulty
that the Government refused a grant of land until £3OO
had been raised. This was on the 18th or 19th May, 1840.


By July as a result of the Bishop’s visit and of some
difficulty, which the Bishop describes in detail, with the
Roman priest over the use of the Court House, the whole
amount was raised.
The Bishop visited Braidwood again in 1845, in 1847
and in 1850, when he laid the foundation stone of the first
church there. On the 1840 trip he returned by
Bungonia, where he consecrated the cemetery on 20/5/-
1840, and Marulan, where he “ halted and performed the
evening service on the 27th.” The Bungonia registers
show that he baptised two children there on 24/5/1840.
In his letter of the 24/6/1840 he describes his visit to
Marulan.
“At Marulan, I halted and performed the Evening
Service on the 27th. Here, a site for a church has been
set apart in the village, and I had within a few hours the
promise of £l5O to £2OO towards its erection, but the
Grovernment, as in other places, declines to grant the
land, which unquestionably is not worth £lO unless the
people can raise £3OO, which is entirely out of their
power.”
He notes in another place that another two months’
steady work on the Bungonia parsonage should see it
ready for habitation. The Bishop’s next report of
1/10/1841 records the licensing of temporary churches at
Yass and Bungonia. “The Church at Duntroon,” he said,
“is also in a forward state.” “The parsonage at Bun-
gonia, though not quite finished, is inhabited by the in-
cumbent.” His next report in 1845 covering the years
1843/4 records “the most complete exhaustion of the re-
sources of the Church within the Colony, and of the total
cessation of all efforts for the augmentation of the num-
ber of edifices dedicated.”
The 1845 Tours.
On the 29/1/1845 after visiting Bathurst he arrived
at “a solitary station called Meringa (Marengo), the
house much dilapidated and nearly deserted.” . . . .
“There was no bed in the house,” he goes on to say.
“There were shepherds and stockmen, I heard, scattered
here and there; but so situated as to render hopeless any
effort which I could make for supplying them with the
means of grace, or of education for their children, if any
there should be.” He went on to Boorowa, where he met
the Rev. Robert Cartwright, still working, although over
80.
An interesting sidelight on the Bishop’s methods is
shed by his entry in his visitation journal of this visit:


“During my stay I made, as usual, every possible
enquiry respecting the number and distribution of the
people on all sides, and especially of the children. From
a very careful summary and comparison of the various
accounts which were given me, my conclusion was, that
the average distance between family and family is eight
miles; and this circumstance creates an extreme perplexity
as to how they can be collected for united instruction.”
On the- 1/2/1845 he selected a spot of ground “on
which many interments had taken place” as a site for a
burial ground and a church. He made arrangements for
the fencing of the ground and the building of a wooden
church.
At Yass there was still no church. He gave confirm-
ation there in the “temporary chapel.” At Gunning he
approved a site for a church. On the 7/2/1845 he con-
secrated Old S. Saviour’s, Goulburn. He stayed at Rossi-
ville, the residence of Captain Rossi. He has just arrived
when the terrible storm of 1845 struck Goulburn and very
nearly wrecked it. Even the new church was damaged.
The Bishop examined the school children in the denomina-
tional school established two years previously (the old
registry building). On the 11/2/1845 he crossed Lake
George, discussed the building of a church and then drove
to Duntroon. On the 12th/13th he journeyed through
“Macalego” to “Coomer,” where he was joined by the
Rev. E. G. Bryce. Here he selected a site and himself de-
signed the old Christ Church and entered into an arrange-
ment with a stonemason to build the rubble walls. With a
pardonable pride, but less accuracy, he calls his design
“Early English.” On the 16/2/1845 he celebrated and
preached at Cooma and went on to Jcjereric (Gegedze-
rick) for an afternoon service. On the 17/2/45 he laid
the foundation stone of old Christ Church at Cooma. On
his way to Cooma he had ministered to a sick man at
Michelago and on his way back he called in on him again.
Then he went to “Gandaro” (Gundaroo) and arranged
for it to be worked alternately by Brigstocke from Yass
and Smith from Queanbeyan. On the 22/2/1845 he went
to Bungonia and gave confirmation there on the 23rd.
On the 24th he laid the foundation stone of a more per-
manent church, a project which, however, was not pro-
ceeded with for many years. He spent some time in the
neighbourhood visiting Bronte, “Windeloma,” Braid-
wood, for a confirmation on 2/3/1845, Manar and Dun-
troon again. On the Bth March he went to Queanbeyan
and consecrated Christ Church, gave confirmation on the
9th and consecrated S. John the Baptist’s Church and
churchyard, Canberra, on the 10th.


The “Sydney Morning Herald’s” account of the
consecration, published on 21/3/1845, has often been re-
produced. It is printed in Professor Robinson’s “Can-
berra’s First Hundred Years.”
He mentions later in his journal that whilst on this
tour he had made arrangements for a wooden church to be
called S. Thomas to be built at “Terrago” (Lake
Bathurst). Possibly this was a church which formerly
stood at Taradale. The Lake Bathurst church was not
built until 1859.
The 1847 Tour.
The Bishop visited these southern districts
again in 1847, visiting, mainly for confirmations,
Goulburn, “Tarrago,” Gunning, Yass, Limestone, Quean-
beyan, Bungendore and Braidwood. At Yass he laid the
foundation stone of S. Clement’s on the 26/11/1847 (in
other places he says the 27/11/1847). In his letter to the
diocesan committee he writes:
“On the 28th (that was a Sunday) I officiated at Yass,
having a few days previously laid the foundation stone
of a Church to be named S. Clement’s, the erection of
which is now being proceeded with. The building com-
mittee I had reason to believe had a deep sense of their
duty, and were prepared to make every exertion. It can-
not but impress everyone with a renewed conviction of
the uncertainty of life, when I mention that out of the
five who were named as Trustees at the period of my visit,
two were within a very short period removed from this
life.”
The whole trip occupied from 15/11/1847 to 20/12/-
1847. He found Bungonia “much decayed and the
neighbourhood comparatively depopulated.” At Marulan
he said there was “a commodious chapel, in which divine
service is periodically performed. ’ ’
The 1850 Tour.
In January and February, 1850, he was back in these
parts again. On the 23rd and 24th January he visited
Yass and examined the school and was somewhat critical
of it. He went to Gundagai to arrange for a clergyman
to take charge of Gundagai and Tumut. The story of
this visit is told in his report of 1/1/1851.
“On the 24th (i.e. January, 1850) proceeded to Reedy
Creek on the way to Gundagai, arrived at the latter place
on the 25th, and on the 26th attended a meeting of the
principal residents in that quarter, and from the Tumut,
to consult on the practicability of erecting churches at the


two townships, and providing for the support of a clergy-
man who should minister in them conjointly.” The
attendance was numerous and respectable, and so earnest
a disposition in support of both objects was shown, that
a sum was in each instance promised which fairly encour-
aged an expectation that each would be sufficiently pro-
vided for. I felt much encouraged and very grateful.
But writing now after the interval of almost a year, I
experience equal mortification in saying, that up to this
time it has not been in my power to provide a clergyman
to undertake those duties On Sunday, 27th,
officiated at Gundagai in a large room belonging to the
Inn: on two sides of which was a spacious verandah com-
municating with the room, which opened into by several
windows. The congregation was so numerous as com-
pletely to fill the space within doors and without. In the
afternoon also the same. The numbers were reported to
me to exceed 120 In coming down a very pre-
cipitous hill into this town, the pole of the carriage broke;
but providentially the parts held together until we
reached level ground. At Guneagai a new pole was
made.”
On this trip he visited Tarcutta, “Kiamba,” “Mullin-
gandra,” Albury and Wagga. At Albury (1/2/1850) he
met the Bishop of Melbourne (the meeting had been
arranged some months before). The proprietor of the inn
lent them a big room. It was filled up with benches, and
on the Sunday (3/2/1850) service was held there and the
Holy Communion celebrated “with a degree of regularity
and propriety which left little or nothing to be desired.”
The Bishop goes on to say in his report:
“During the day I was much employed in the exam-
ination of those who came, many from a considerable dis-
tance, as candidates for confirmation. Of these, I admit-
ted seventeen.”
A public meeting was held to arrange for the stipend
and residence of a clergyman to officiate in both dioceses
(Sydney and* Melbourne). On the Sunday morning the
Bishop of Melbourne read Morning Prayer and Bishop
Broughton preached. The service included the whole of
Matins, the confirmation and a celebration of Holy Com-
munion, and Bishop Broughton adds “there were no
apparent signs of weariness.” In the afternoon Bishop
Broughton read Evensong and the Bishop of Melbourne
preached.
On the 30/1/1850 the Bishop stayed at the inn at
at Mullengandra and on his return journey he gave them
an evening service on 5/2/1850. A long and interesting


correspondence between George Shelley and Bishop
Broughton commencing in 1847 and concluding in 1851
relative to the stationing of a clergyman in the Tumut
district and the building of a church at Tnmnt is quoted
in full in Mrs. A. N. Stacy’s “History of the Anglican
Church in Tumut.” It is too long to quote here but it
serves to show how close the Bishop was in touch with the
remotest corner of his diocese. On his return journey
he visited Yass again on 14/2/1850. He gave confirma-
tion in the school room and recorded his impressions of
S. Clement’s:
“Handsome stone building, after a design supplied
by Mr. Blacket, was then in a state of forwardness, and
will now be ready for consecration as soon as I can repeat
my visit to this town.”
On this return journey he visited “ Gininderry, ” Dun-
troon, “Canberry” for a preachment, Queanbeyan for the
consecration of the cemetery, Braidwood to lay the found-
ation stone of the first church, “Bungendow” for a
preachment and Bungonia and Marulan for the same.
His Last Tour.
In December, 1851, he visited Gundagai, spending
several days “preparing the candidates for confirmation.”
He held service and gave confirmation on 7/12/1851 in the
“Inn’s best room.” On the 14/12/1851 he preached at
Wagga, and on the 28th “after encountering many diffi-
culties and spending another night under the canopy of
heaven” he preached in the Court House at Albury, con-
firmed several candidates and celebrated the Holy Com-
munion. They knew nothing of services lasting only an
hour in those days. From Albury he started home via
Mullingandra, Tarcutta and Gundagai. At Gundagai he
examined his confirmees again and celebrated the Holy
Communion. He speaks of the “willing minds” and
“sufficient acquaintance” of the candidates although all
the preparation they had was what he gave them himself.
At this time he was still trying to place a clergyman
to minister in Wagga, Tumut and Gundagai. On the
8/1/1852 he had reached Yass where he consecrated the
church and cemetery.
That was his last ministration in these southern dis-
tricts. He died in England 20/2/1853 and was buried
in Canterbury Cathedral. From 1837 to 1851 ho
made six long visitations of this area including
one to the Monaro and three to the Riverina.
He established ten parishes or charges, Goul-


burn, Collector, Yass, Queanbeyan, Bungonia, Canberra,
Monaro, Braidwood, Tumut and Albury. He appointed
some of our grandest pioneers, Sowerby, Cartwright, Brig-
stocke, Edward Smith, Halliard Smith and Bryce, men
whose work has endured to this day and upon whose
foundations all that we have or are as a diocese has been
built. He rests from his labours but his works do follow
him.
Acknowledgments.
Thanks are due to the Yen. Archdeacon Johnstone, Registrar
of the Diocese of Sydney, Mr. H. V. Archinal, Diocesan Secretary,
and Mr. A. T. Maguire, Chief Clerk, for searches, help and advice;
to Miss Leeson and the staff of the Mitchell Library for much
help; and to the Rev. Frank Cash, 8.D., rector of Christ Church,
Lavender Bay, for permission to use his photographic block of the
portrait of Bishop Broughton hanging in the Cowper Room of the
Diocesan Church House, Sydney.
R.T.W.
Johnstone & Davie, Printers, Goulburn, Phone 265.


1508
00074368


