

THE ELDER EXPLORING EXPEDITION,
DESPATCHES FROM THE PARTY.
[Reprinted from S.A. Register, November 9, 1891.
The President of the Royal Geographical
Society (South Australian Branch) has received
detailed despatches from Mr. David Lindsay,
the leader of the Elder Exploring Expedition,
as well as reports from the scientific members
of the party. We subjoin the principal por-
tions of two letters written by Mr. Lindsay,
passages of a confidential nature and others
which are not of public interest being
omitted. We are also able to give the prin-
cipal portions of the reports of the scientific
officers and extracts from some private
letters: —
Fraser Range, Western Australia,
October 5, 1891.
Sir—l would have gone to Esperance Bay,
but could not borrow any horses here. The man
in charge very kindly has promised to send a
native in with despatches, who will wait and
bring back replies, on receipt of which we will
proceed on our journey. The scientific gentle-
men have shown zeal in their special depart-
ments, besides being at all times ready and
willing to assist in any way possible. They
have borne all the necessary hardships cheer-
fully and uncomplainingly. Please convey to
the Surveyor-General my thanks for sending
such a capable and excellent surveyor. He
(Mr. Wells) has been of the greatest possible
assistance to me, and his work exhibits the
greatest care and accuracy. Queen Vic-
toria Spring being dry was a great
blow to me, for the distance to there was suffi-
ciently long, and my anxiety about the camels
was very great, as 150 miles more added to the
journey would probably cause me to leave load-
ing and some of the camels, for some were very
poor and lame ; but with very careful travel-
ling and constant watchfulness I was enabled
to reach water safely, only one camel being
knocked up, and he reached the water shortly
after the others. I think the journey is un-
paralleled and one of which we all may justly
feel proud. We were fortunate in the time,
because August was a hotter month than Sep-
tember. Immediately on leaving Mount
Squires I put the party on an allowance of two
quarts of water per man per diem, which
caused considerable trouble for a few days
with the Afghans, no washing of hands or
plates allowed; each man cleaned his own
Elate, knife, and fork with the tealeaves.
lach of us walked from two to five hours
per day, thus saving our riding camels greatly.
When we reached the water here we gave them
only two buckets each first day, two buckets
the second day, and on the third day let them
drink their fill. Most of the poor patient
brutes are very thin, the feed in many places
having been very scarce. Some are very lame
from having staked their feet amongst the
fallen sticks, and the spinifex has made bleed-
ing sores on the outer side of all their feet.
Two or three weeks’ rest here will be absolutely
necessary before they will be fit to travel.
Latterly we have been rising at 3.30 a.m ,
saddling up, breakfasting at 4 o’clock, and
starting as soon as it was possible to see fifty
yards ahead, thus getting a satisfactory stage
done by 1 o’clock, giving the camels time to
rest and feed. We had 40 gallons of water
left in our casks when we reached this station.
The camel left at Mount Jubilee, where there
was plenty of feed and water, will by this
time, I hope, have recovered, and probably
Mr. Carruthers may find him. One died at
Barrow Ranges after a week’s illness, and
one three miles from Queen Victoria Spring
from urinic poisoning. One hour before he
died he was feeding, and apparently nothing
the matter with him. From the scarcity of
water and feed in the country over which we
have travelled you will see how fully I was
justified in keeping the party and the number
of camels as small as possible. Mr. Helms
has, I believe, made a very large and good
collection of plants ; he has worked with un-
tiring energy. You will be gratified to know
that although we saw many natives, some of
whom were hostile, on each occasion I was able
to pacify them without resort to firearms, and
give them presents of handkerchiefs, knives,
tobacco to chew, and some food, thus estab-
lishing friendly relations. At times we had
ten to twenty natives travelling with us and
camping near us, but saw no women or
chidren until at the Barrow Ranges I sur-
prised two camps. Dr. Elliott has only had
an opportunity to photograph one female, and
she was a child six or seven years of age. The
botanical and geological specimens, also photo
plates, will be sent from here in Mr. Gwynne’s
care, and full reports will accompany them.
Will you kindly convey my compliments to Sir
Thomas Elder, and express the hope that his
health has improved, and that so far as the
expedition has gone he will be satisfied with
the work done?
I much regret that the state of the country
will prevent me carrying out my intentions re
Block A when we left Mount Squires for
Queen Victoria Spring (which name must for
the future be expunged from maps of Aus-
tralia). That was to have gone north from the
latter place to lat. 27° 30', when, if we found
no water, we would turn north-westerly to say
Windich Spring. Now it seems to me that the
best I can do is, as conveyed to you by wire, to
go through Hampton Plains, where I hope to
find water, cross Giles’s track at Ullaring,
Forrest’s 1869 track at Mount Ida, where Sir
John assured me I could depend on finding
water, but of which I now have grave doubts ;
thence on to Hope’s Station via the new gold-
fields. Of course if we find water I may
deviate from that course. After leaving
Hope’s we can form a depot at Windich
Springs, and make a flying trip south-east
to lat. 28°, which would, I think, suffi-
ciently complete the examination of Block A.
During our march across the Victoria Desert
we occasionally saw natives’ tracks and smokes,
and although I visited some of the smokes I
saw no natives or water, but there was abun-
dant evidence right to Fraser Range that
they subsist on water obtained from the roots
of the kurrajong and certain mallee-trees.
Emu tracks were sometimes seen, but they, we
know, exist for many months without water.
All likely places for water were visited, I thus
riding my camel seventy miles extra. The
desert cannot properly be called so, unless it
be from its want of water and anima life. The
whole country is more or less clothed with
bushes and trees. For many miles there is a
veritable gum forest, which reaches right over
into South Australia, some trees attaining the
repectable size of 3 ft. diameter and 40 to 50 ft.
high. Their clean white boles and dark green
tops from a short distance present a very
charming aspect to the eye, but a nearer
acquaintance reveals the fact that the ground
is covered with nothing but spinifex and use-
less shrubs. Pines are abundant, mallee,
acacias, and mulga; the graceful kurrajong,
too, oft lends a beauty to the scene. The
sandhills rise in regular wave-like procession,
and render travelling tedious and slow, but
about the centre of the desert there is a long
stretch of country without sandhills.
Shortly after leaving Queen Victoria Spring
we passed through a country of high ridges
and deep depressions thickly clothed with
mallee of many varieties. At twenty-eight
miles we found granite outcropping, which
continued for some distance; passed a salt
creek and salt lakes. Farther on still we
passed through splendid mallee forests, the
yellow bark with its freshly varnished-like
bark and its brilliant green leaves glistening
in the sunshine, and the useful blackbutt
reaching a height of from 70 to 100 feet, and
a girth measurement of from 9to 15 ft. The
very dark foliaged and peculiarly shaped
stems of the “ fluted mallee,” white mallee,
the eucalypt with bluish-green leaves and long
drooping willow-like branches, and the tall
clean stem of another sort with its bark hang-
ing in long ribbon-like strips 30 feet or more in
length, help to make up about ten varieties of
the mallee, forming very pleasing views; and as
we had left the spinifex behind us, and were
passing over good soil, with good stock bushes,
the travelling was easier and more pleasant.
I hope to prepare a map and full report to
go with Mr. G wynne while we are resting
here. I have, &c.,
David Lindsay,
Leader Elder Exploring Expedition.
Esperance Bay, W.A., October 16, 1891.
Sir —When I reached the station at Fraser
Range on Tuesday evening last week, wet
through and very cold, 1 found that the
native who was to have brought my despatches
on foot to Esperance Bay had run away, and
that there was no reliable native on the station
to send. The old man in charge said, “I’ll
have the camels brought in, and if you can use
them to go to the Bay you are welcome. ’
He referred to two camels belonging to
Messrs. Dempster Brothers. Next day when
the two camels were brought I found it im-
possible to get the largest riding saddle on, they


being so wonderfully fat. The man then said,
“Well, I’ll give you the only two saddle horses
and the only saddle we have here, and you can
take a native on foot to protect your things
from wild natives when you are out for your
horses in the mornings.” I sent a messenger
back to camp, asking Mr. Leech to come in
and bring a few things I wanted. On Friday
morning I started, the native leading the
packhorse, for 160 miles journey. We
pushed on, I walking ten or twelve
miles each day, letting the native ride
my horse, and reached here at midday on the
sixth day. The country about Fraser Range is
really good, and with good water supply would
make an excellent sheep run ; but from there
to here is very wretched, dense mallee thickets,
sandy soil, very little grass —absolutely none
for many miles each day. Mr. Bostock, the
Manager of Messrs. Dempster’s station here,
received me with great kindness, and invited
me to stay with him. I am more than ever
convinced that the fewer Afghans on an ex-
pedition of this sort the better. They are
somewhat difficult to manage amongst a lot of
white men, their religious scruples so often
get unintentionally offended. They are waste-
ful of both provisions and water, and will noteat
tinned meat, therefore more water is necessary
on dry stages to enable them to cook their salt
meat. In many ways their presence is objec-
tionable, and I am sure the majority of them
never worked camels until they came to Aus-
tralia. Of the five men I have one was a
house servant in India until two years ago,
another was a navvy until twelve months ago,
and the others, except Hadji, have only had
about three years’ camel work. There was no
means of getting the men here in time to catch
the boat which takes this letter, but a dray
having this week gone to Fraser Range, I will
be able to arrange for them to be here in
plenty of time to go with her next month to
Albany. I have had congratula ory tele-
grams from the Administrator of the
Government, the Premier, and the Postmaster-
General of this colony, all offering to do
anything they could for me. Sir John Forrest
has wired that when he saw the spring at
Mount Ida it had every appearance of being
peimanent, but he is sure I can depend on
Windich and Weld Springs. Unless the
drought breaks up before the end of the year I
shall not be surprised to find one or both of
those places dry. The mallee thickets through
which we shall have to push our way for the
first 100 miles or more render travelling very
slow; sometimes the pace for hours averages
one mile per hour. I desire to thank the Council
for their congratulations conveyed by wire
yesterday. As regards Queen Victoria Spring,
we had Giles’s description of surroundings,
which was very faithful. We had his latitude
and longitude. We cut on to his latitude
east of his position, and could, from a hill
there, see that for fifteen miles to the east-
ward there was no country answering to that
surrounding Queen V’ctoria Spring. We
travelled along the latitude, and I kept from
half to three miles south of caravan, and from
the very sandhill they crossed the very same
view was presented to my gaze. The caravan
would have seen the place, as the latitude was
only taking them some 200 or 300 yards on the
north side of the open space. There were
trees which had been cut down by axes. I have
no dcubt Newman was there last year, although
in that report or letter by J. P. Brooks
there are some evident misprints. He says
small area grass land 40,000 acres in extent —
well, it should be forty acres We sank the
well on what Giles considered a natural well
up on the slope. It is not a country in which
one would expect to find permanent springs,
but in good seasons there can be no doubt a
very strong soakage would be found in that
spot. Read Giles’s and Forrest’s description of
Fort Mueller and Barlee Springs, and I think
you will be more surprised that we found no
water there. After crossing the Western
Australian boundary water was so scarce that
we were on short allowance nearly ever since.
I almost despaired of being able to find enough
water to enable us to start for the long journey
to Queen Victoria Spring, and had it not been
for a shower of rain which had fallen only on
Mount Squires say two months previous to our
being there I certainly should have had to fall
back on Mount Aloysius for water. Our
camels —that is, those which were not in use
when Messrs. Leech, Wells, and I were away—
were kept shifting from place to place on
waterbush for twenty-four days, during which
time they had no water to drink. My idea of
working from Windich Spring was a flying
tiip to the south-east —at the same time a
flying trip through Weld Springs over to
South Australian Border or thereabouts. As
it is the wish of the Council that I complete
Block A while en route to Murchison I
will do so if at all possible, but you must
bear in mind that this country was never
known to be so dry. Many so-called springs
are dry, and as the drought is so severe right
inland from the west coast there seems but
little probability of my finding any water.
Owing to this delay I shall not get away from
the Murchison until January, so that you need
not send my goods to Derby until April next.
We can depend on cartage in May and June.
I will, therefore, send you list of things re-
quired from the Murchison. I have not been
able to get a good blackboy up to the present,
and George Lindsay tells me he has one of our
Mac Donnell Range boys with him. Will you,
therefore, please send him with the others ? I
have to do all the tracking myself if any camels
go astray. We expect a boat here this evening
on her way to Albany. She is just calling for
the mails The camels 1 have purchased are
two cows belonging to Dempster Brothers.
They are young and very fat.—l have, &c.,
David Lindsay.
We take the following from the report of
Mr. R. Helms, the naturalist: —
I beg to report that up to date I have been
collecting daily, and in a couple of weeks’ time
from hence my collection will be dispatched to
Adelaide, when I probably will be in the posi-
tion to furnish you with a more detailed
report, which, at the present, time will not
allow me to do. I may only mention that I
have used more than two bundles of botanical
labels, each of which was supposed to contain
1,000 labels, and then I have not been able to
put a label with every specimen as it ought to
be done. There will be more than six complete
sets of the plants, and of many of them there
are perhaps a dozen or more specimens owing
to the occurrence of thoplant in districts which
lie widely apart from each other, or in different
soils and under variable conditions, or because
they were tine specimens. Besides the botani-
cal specimens I have collected a variety of
reptilia, which will be forwarded in spirits, and
also some skins of mammals and birds aswellas
nests and eggs. Insects, however. I regret to
say, I have not been able to obtain to a great
extent. I am very much disappointed, but it
is quite impossible to collect what is not to be
found. In the outset it was too early in the
season, and when the best time for them was
approaching we have been constantly in burnt
country, which, besides, is terribly parched upby
the drought. Unfortunately, as I learnt here
recently, the drought extends all the way to
the Murchison, and I am justified in fearing
that my endeavours to obtain insects will not
be rewarded by much success. The best time
for insects is from now till Christmas, always
providing that the country is favourable to the
production of same.
Mr. Lindsay has endorsed this report as
follows “ I have much pleasure in saying
that Mr. Helms has shown a most untiring
energy, often under trying circumstances, and
am sure that the collection he sends will prove
very fully representative of the country
through which we have passed.”
We take the following from the report of
Mr. Victor Streich, the geologist of the expe-
dition ;
In a few weeks hence I will have the
honour to forward you a series of mineral and
rock specimens collected during the journey of
the Elder Exploring Expedition from Warinna,
(S.A.)tothe Fraser Ranges (W.A.), and the
accompanying report on the geological features
of this country travelled over during this trip.
Section 1, from Warinna to the hills sur-
rounding the Everard Ranges, is not repre-
sented by specimen, having been geologically
explored previously by Mr. Brown, the Go-
vernment Geologist. Section 2, comprising
the country between the Everard Ranges and
the Warburton Ranges, is represented by the
specimen NN. 1—49, showing that the up-
heavals met with towards the northern edge of
this region are to be looked upon as belonging
to the Archagan formation, being identical with
the formation forming the Musgrave Ranges
and their continuation to the west, and that
the ranges to the south, which surround these
generally eruptive formations as a broad belt,
extending from Mount Chandler to the
Townsend Ridges, belong to the Palaizoio
formation. Section 3 represents the formations
met with during the journey across the Great
Victoria Desert, and are these formations,
which aresufficiently described by the specimens
50—62, of a more recent, probably Mesozoic,
age.
Mr. Lindsay endorses the report as follows:
“ I have much pleasure in saying that Mr.
Streich has shown great zeal in the prosecution
of his geological researches as well as the
meteorological observations. Unfortunately
the country traversed has not been of a very
interesting character to a geologist. ”
We h<*ve been permitted to make the follow-
ing interesting extracts from a private letter
written by Mr. L. A. Wells, the surveyor of
the expedition:—
Our trip from Cootanoorinna Station to
Mount Illbillee (startingpoint), and in fact the
whole of our work on the South Australian
side, was most pleasant. Spendid weather,
and water to be found almost everywhere, but
not permanent. Immediately after crossing
into Western Australia we experienced a great
change, the country presenting a most wretched
appearance, and evidenced a prolonged
drought of, in my opinion, at least
two years, almost all watering-places
being dry, Fort Muller, which was de-
scribed by both Messrs. Giles and Forrest,
being quite dry, and evidently not a spring.
There had been a local shower at Mount
Squires, leaving sufficient water in rockholes
to Enable us to make a start for Queen Vic-
toria Spring, which we reached on the
twenty-fifth day, the camels having had but an


average of six gallons of water up to this time,
and had travelled over miserable sandridges
and trivdea flats, and through dense and fallen
timber. We were most fortunate in having a
good stretch of cold weather, owing to the
equinox, and also in finding a patch of para-
kilia, a plant that contains about 80 per cent,
of water. The spring being almost dry, and
yielding only seventy gallons of water when we
required about 2,000 gallons for our wants, we
were compelled to push on and try and reach
here, a distance of 140 miles, with footsore and
leg weary thirsty camels. We accomplished
this in eight days, having less than forty
gallons of water left in our kegs. It will be
some time before the camels are fit to travel
again. During the trip of 540 miles all mem-
bers of the party walked a great way—about
200 miles—getting up at 3 a.m., and generally
making a start before 5 a.m.
The whole of the country from Mount
Squires to Queen Victoria Spring and thence
to here was inhabited by natives, those in the
northern latitudes being a rather fine-looking
race, whilst about here they are very miserable
and almost dwarfs. In many instances they
obtain their supplies of water by draining the
roots of certain mallee trees, some of which
yield large quantities of pure water; but it
requires a native to select the most suitable
trees. I should not care to undertake to give
a camel a drink in this way. I noticed on one
occasion where a number of natives had
camped without water, but had a good substi-
tute in the bark from the root of the curra-
jong, which they had been chewing in large
quantities. The natives have supplied me
with a number of names for different things,
and from Mount Illbillee to here the language,
in my opinion, is almost similar. A list of
these names and others I hope to get during
the remainder of our journeyings I will be
pleased to give you, together with copies of
some native drawings, on our return.
The following are extracts from a private
letter from Dr. Elliot, the medical officer: —
The general health of all the members of
the party has been very good, and little or no
unpleasantness. The last 560 miles was very
trying ; two quarts of water per man a day
occasionally ; 90° in the shade does not tend to
make things jolly. The camels have per-
formed a really wonderful feat, haying
travelled as the crow flies 560 odd miles,
which is equal to about 800 ordinary miles,
taking the sandhills and winding round
the spinifex into consideration, without a
drink for thirty-four whole days. Started
from Mount Squires midday on Sunday,
August 30, reaching the Fraser Ranges Friday
evening, October 2. Sunday midday, August
30, all camels drunk their fill; Tuesday mid-
day, September 1, all camels three gallons
each; Friday midday, September 4, riding
camels, three gallons each; Monday midday,
September 7, pack camels, three gallons each;
Thursday midday, September 24, all camels,
two gallons each ; Saturday midday, October
3, all camels, six gallons each. So you see
that the brutes had only eight gallons of water
during the thirty-four days’ march.
The following letter has been received by
the Surveyor-General (Mr. G. W. Goyder,
C.M.G.) from Mr. L. A. Wells, Surveyor to
the Elder Exploration Expedition : —“Fraser’s
Range, near Esperance Bay, October 5, 1891.
—Sir —Having now reached a place of mail
communication I will avail myself of the oppor-
tunity of relating to you our doings since
leaving Cootanoorinna Station in May last.
Being detained at the latter-mentioned
place through heavy rains and floods for some
ten days we made oar final start on May 12.
Travelling in a west-north-westerly direction
generally, and following Chambers’s tracks for
the greater portion of the way, we passed
through fair pastoral land for the whole of the
distance until we reached Mount Illbillee
(Trigonometrical Station), in the Everard
Ranges. The soil was a red loam and gene-
rally clothed with dense mulga, patches of
saltbush, and coarse grass—the mulga grass.
Heavy rains had evidently fallen for the
whole of the distance, and probably we saw
the country at its best, that portion in the
vicinity of Chambers’s Bluff being the best
unoccupied and showing most saltbush. Leav-
ing Mount Illbillee on June 2 we then examined
all that blank portion to the west and south-
west. South from the Tomkinson and Mus-
grave Ranges the country is fair pastoral land,
generally clothed with mulga and
grass as far down as latitude 27'30",
the remainder being miserable sand
ridges (continuous generally) and triodea,
belts of mulga, desert gums, mallee, cur-
rajong, acacia, and other bushes. It is
all waterless except small soakages and rock-
holes. Crossing the border and proceeding
via Fort Muller, which we found dry, we
passed over poor sandhill country suffering
from a prolonged drought as far as Mount
Squires nf the Barrow Ranges, where a local
shower had previously fallen and leaving suffi-
cient water in a rockhole discovered by Mr.
Giles. This enabled us to make a start
in a south-west direction for Queen Vic-
toria Spring, distant about 400 miles.
Leaving on August 30 with all vessels full of
water reached at twenty-seven miles canvas
troughs previously filled, where we again
watered the camels, giving them 150 gallons.
At ninety miles we caught a young lubra, who
took us to a rockhole with 60 gallon* of water.
At 120 miles we got 90 gallons from
some rockholes I had previously found.
This was the last water we found until
we reached Queen Victoria Spring on Sep-
tember 25, but fortunately when at about
latitude 27° we found a patch of parakelia,
which, in my opinion, contains 80 per cent,
water. This, together with the remarkably
cool weather, assisted us greatly. We found
Queen Victoria Spring merely a native soakage
well in the bottom of a natural basin of drift
sand and blue clay bottom at 15 ft. There
were only 70 gallons of water in it after work-
ing at it for a day and a half. We were
now compelled to push on for the Fraser
Range, about 140 miles distant. The camels
being very leg weary and footsore from spinifex
and fallen timber, it took eight days to reach
here, making the total about 540 miles and
thirty-five days’ travelling, the whole of
the distance traversed being generally con-
tinuous sand ridges and sandstone outcrops
covered with mulga scrub, dense triodea
almost everywhere. The flats have some
large gum forests (desert gums ?), currajong,
and mallee. The mallee includes very large
and beautiful trees; we saw one over 70 ft.
high and 15 ft. in girth, and many kinds. The
whole of the country from Mount Squires to
the Fraser Range is inhabited by natives ; bub
in many instances and during the summer
months they obtain their water supplies from
the mallee roots, and sometimes from the root
of the currajong. I noticed in many instances
large stacks of the roots of the former-
mentioned tree. The country 200 miles
back from Victoria Spring and between
there and here is almost destitute of game, and
the natives are a small miserable-looking race,
those in the higher latitudes and vicinity of
the ranges being a rather fine-looking race.
We expect to leave here about the end of the
present month, and to reach Hope’s Station,
on the Murchison River, during December.
Mr. Lindsay is not yet decided as to the route
we will take. The camels are not yet fit to
undertake another long dry stage.”
W. K. Thomas & Co , Printers. Grenfell Street, Adelaide.




