

Price 6d.
'-'t ' : •' * *». ■ «
■'M w .■ 1 '* . » ' . . * • ,
s : tf# } *. -JK ' - , ' "
THE^
White
Book
Pi I
BOOK
■ Wm m
'-;.. V , < *£, f . ' ' ' . , ' ' M
The European Crisis
Official Correspondence
»■ * , /f,; 1 4 ' . *■* • *•'-#' - * -
*y , v $ ,„ -t " Jr
Presented to Parliament I
By Command of HIS? MAJESTY I
%;]'j |*l *, ' V \ * •# ; , "I
GORDON & GOTCH, Auotralasia,
' ,■■ ,9,4: '
■■» * * * jk i • ; , I


LIST OF OFFICIALS
BENCKENDORFF, • COUNT—
Russian Ambassador in Great Britain.
BERCHTOLD, COUNT—
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
BERTIE, SIR F. -
British Minister, Paris.
BIENVENU-MARTIN, M.—
Acting French Minister for Foreign Affairs
BOSCHKOVITCH, M
Servian Minister in London.
BUCHANAN, SIR G
British Ambassador, St. Petersburgh.
BUNSEN, SIR M. DE
British Ambassador, Vienna.
CAMBON, M.—French Ambassador in London.
CRACKANTHORPE, D. E. M
Charge d'Affaires, Belgrade.
GOSCHEN, SIR E
British Ambassador at Berlin.
GREY, SIR EDWARD—
British Minister for Foreign Affairs, London
LICHNOWSKY, PRINCE—
German Ambassador in London.
MENSDORFF, COUNT—
Austrian Ambassador in London.
NICOLSON, SIR A
Permanent Under-Secretary for Foreign
Affairs, London.
RUMBOLD, SIR H
Second in Charge, British Embassy, Berlin.
RODD, SIR R.—British Ambassador, Rome.
SAZONOF, M.—Minister for Foreign Affairs, St. Petersburgh
SCHEBEKO, M.-
Russian Ambassador at Vienna.
VILLIERS, Sir F.-
British Minister at Brussels.
VIVIANI, M. —Prime Minister of France.


HP:' , ' ?
' '
.


(From the " Parliamentary Debates House of
Commons, Monday, August, 1914.)
Great Britain and European Pswers
STATEMENT BY SIR EDWARD GREY
The SECRETARY of STATE for FOREIGN AFFAIRS
(Sir Edward Grey). —Last week I stated that we working for
peace not only for this country, but to preserve the peace of Europe.
To-day events move so rapidly that it is exceedingly difficult to state
with technical accuracy the actual state of affairs, but it is clear that
the peace of Europe cannot be preserved. Russia and Germany,
at any rate, have declared war upon each other.
Before I proceed to state the position of His Majesty's Govern-
ment, I would like to clear the ground so that, before I come to
state to the House what our attitude is with regard to the present
crisis, the House may know exactly under what obligations the
Government is, or the House can be said to be, in coming to a
decision on the matter. First of all let me say, very shortly, that
we have consistently worked with a single mind, with all the earnest-
ness in our power, to preserve peace. The House may be satisfied
on that point. We have always done it. During these last years,
as far as His Majesty's Government are concerned, we would have
no difficulty in proving that we have done so. Throughout the
Balkan crisis, by general admission, we worked for peace. The
co-operation of the Great Powers of Europe was successful in work-
ing for peace in the Balkan crisis. It is true that some of the
Powers had great difficulty in adjusting their points of view. It
took much time and labour and discussion before they could settle
their differences, but peace was secured, because peace was their
main object, and they were willing to give time and trouble rather
than accentuate difference rapidly.
In the present crisis, it has not been possible to secure the peace
of Europe; because there has been little time, and there has been a
disposition—at any rate in some quarters on which I will not dwell
—to force things rapidly to an issue, at any rate, to the great risk
of peace, and, as we now know, the result of that is that the policy
of peace, as far as the Great Powers generally are concerned, is in


danger. Ido not want to dwell on that, anqLto comment on it, and
to say where the blame seems to us to lie, which Powers were most
in favour of peace, which were most disposed to risk or endanger
peace, because I would like the House to approach this crisis in
which we are now, from the point of view of British interests, Bri-
tish honour, and British obligations, free from all passion as to why
peace has not been preserved.
We shall publish Papers as soon as we can regarding what took
place last week when we were working for peace; and when those
Papers are published, j have no doubt that to every human being
they will make it clear how strenuous and genuine and whole-
hearted our efforts for peace were, and that they will enable people
to form their own judgment as to what forces were at work which
operated against peace.
I come first, now, to the question of British obligations. I
have assured the House—and the Prime Minister has assured the
House more than once—that if any crisis such as this arose, we
should come before the Plouse of Commons and be able to say to the
House that it was free to decide what the British attitude should be,
that we would have no secret engagement which we should spring
upon the House, and tell the House that, because we had entered
into that engagement, there was an obligation of honour upon the
country. I will deal with that point to clear the ground first. %
There has been in Europe two diplomatic groups, the Triple
Alliance and what came to be called the "Triple Entente,' 5 for some
years past. The Triple Entente was not an Alliance—it was a
Diplomatic group. The House will remember that in 1908 there
was a crisis, also a Balkan crisis, originating in the annexation of
Bosnia and Plerzegovina. The Russian Minister, M. Isvolskv.
came to London, or happened to come to London, because his visit
was planned before the crisis broke out. I told him definitely
then, this being a Balkan crisis, a Balkan affair, I did not consider
that public opinion in this country would justify us in promising to
give anything more than diplomatic support. , More was never
asked from us, more was never given, and more was never promised.
In this present crisis, up till yesterday, we have also given no
promise of anything more than diplomatic support—up till yesterday
no promise of more than diplomatic support. Now I must make
this question of obligation clear to the House. I must go back to
the first Moroccan crisis in 1906. That was the time of the
Algeciras Conference, and it came at a time of very great difficulty
to His Majesty's Government when a General Election was in pro-
gress, and Ministers were scattered over the country, and I—spend-
ing three days a week in my constituency and three days at the
Foreign Office—was asked the question whether if that crisis
developed into war between France and Germany we would give
armed support. I said then that I could promise nothing to any
foreign Power unless it was subsequently to receive the whole-hearted
support of public opinion here if the occasion arose. I said, in


my opinion, if war was'"forced upon France, then on the question
of Morocco —a question which had just been the subject of agree-
ment between this country and France, an agreement exceedingly
popular on both sides—that if out of that agreement war was forced
on France at that time, in my view public opinion in this country
would have rallied to the material support of France.
I gave no promise, but I expressed that opinion during the
crisis, as far as I remember, almost in the same words, to the French
Ambassador and the German Ambassador at the time. I made no
promise, and I used no threats; but I expressed that opinion. That
position was accepted by the French Government, but they said to
me at the time—and I think very reasonably—"lf you think it pos-
sible that the public opinion of Great Britain might, should a sudden
crisis arise, justify you in giving to France the armed support which
you cannot promise in advance, you will not be able to give that
support, even if you wish to give it,when the time comes, unless some
"conversations have already taken place between naval and military
experts." There was force in that. I agreed to it, and authorised
those conversations to take place, but on the distinct understanding
that nothing which passed between military or naval experts should
bind either Government or restrict in any way their freedom to make
a decision as to whether or not they would give that support when
the time arose.
As I have told the House, upon that occasion a General Elec-
tion was in prospect. X had to take the responsibility of doing that
without the Cabinet. It could not be summoned. An answer had
to be given. I consulted Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, the
Prime Minister; I consulted, I remember, Lord Haldane, who was
then Secretary of State for War, and the present Prime Minister,
who was then Chancellor of the Exchequer. That was the most I
could do, and they authorised that on the distinct understanding that
it left the hands of the Government free whenever the crisis arose.
The fact that conversations between military and naval experts took
place was later on—l think much later on, because that crisis passed,
and the thing ceased to be of importance—but later on it was
brought to the knowledge of the Cabinet.
The Agadir crisis came—another Morocco crisis—and through-
out that I took precisely the same line that had been taken in 1906.
But subsequently, in 1912, after discussion and consideration in the
Cabinet it was decided that we ought to have a definite under-
standing in writing, which was to be only in the form of an un-
official letter, that these conversations which took place were not
binding upon the freedom of either Government ; and on the 22nd of
November, 1912, I wrote to the French Ambassador the letter which
I will now read to the House, and I received from him a letter in
similar terms in reply. The letter which I have to read to the
House is this, and it will be known to the public noW as the record
that, whatever took place between military and naval experts, they
were not binding engagements upon the Government


4 4 My dear Ambassador,—From time to time in recent years-
the French and British naval and military experts have con-
sulted together. It has always been understood that such con-
sultation does not restrict the freedom of either Government to
decide at any future time whether or not to assist the other by
armed force. We have agreed that consultation between
experts is not and ought not to be regarded as an engagement
that commits either Government to action in a contingency that
has not yet arisen and may never arise. The disposition, for
instance, of the French and British Fleets respectively at the
present moment is not based upon an engagement to co-operate
in war.
44 You have, however, pointed out that, if either Government
had grave reason to expect an unprovoked attack by a third:
Power, it might become essential to know whether It could in
that event depend upon the armed assistance of the other.
4< l agree that, if either Government had grave reason te
expect an unprovoked attack by a third Power, or something
that threatened the general peace, it should immediately discuss
with the other whether both Governments should act together
to prevent aggression and to preserve peace, and, if so, what
measures they would be prepared to take in common."
Lord Charles Beresford. —What is the date of that?
Sir E. GREY.—-The 22nd November, 1912. That is the
starting point for the Government with regard to the present crisis.
I think it makes it clear that what the Prime Minister and I said
to tin Louse of Commons was perfectly justified, and that, as regards
our freedom to decide in a crisis what our line should be, whether
we should intervene or whether we should abstain, the Government
remained perfectly free, and, a fortiori, the House of Commons
remains perfectly free. That I say to clear the ground from the
point of view of obligation. I think it was due to prove our good
faith to the House of Commons that I should give that full informa-
tion to the House now, and say what I think is obvious from the
letter I have just read, that we do not construe anything which has
previously taken place in our diplomatic relations with other Powers
in this matter as restricting the freedom of the Government to decide
what attitude they should take now, or restrict the freedom of the
House of Commons to decide what their attitude should be.
Well, Sir, I will go further, and I will say this : The situation
in the present crisis is not precisely the same as it was in the Morocco
question. In the Morocco question it was primarily a dispute which
concerned France—a dispute which concerned France and France
primarily—a dispute, as it seemed to us, affecting France, out of an
agreement subsisting between us and France, and published to the
whole world, in which we engaged to give France diplomatic sup-
port. No doubt we were pledged to give nothing but diplomatic


support; we were, at any rate, pledged by a definite public agree-
ment to stand with France diplomatically in that question.
The present crisis has originated differently. It has not ori-
ginated with regard to Morocco. It has not originated as regards
anything with which we had a special agreement with France; it lias
not originated with anything which primarily concerned fiance,,
has originated in a dispute between Austria and Servia. 1 can say
this with the most absolute confidence—no Government and no coun-
try has less desire to be involved in war over a dispute with Austria
and Servia than the Government and the country of France. y
are involved in it because of their obligation of honour under a
definite alliance with Russia. Well, it is only fair to say to the
House that that obligation of honour cannot apply in the same way
to us. We are not parties to the Franco-Russian Alliance. \
do not even know the terms of that Alliance. So ■ far 1 have l
think, faithfully and completely cleared the ground with regard to
the question of obligation.
I now come to what we think the situation requires of us. For
many years we have had a long-standing friendship with France,
fin Hon. Member: "And with Germany!"] I remember well the
feeling in the House-and my own feeling-for 1 spoke on the
subject I think, when the late Government made their agreement
wth France-the warm and cordial feeling resulting from the: fact
That these two nations, who had had perpetual differences m the
nast had cleared these differences away. I remember saymg,
think that it seemed to me that some benign influence had been at
work'to produce the cordial atmosphere that had made that possb
But how far that friendship entails obligation-ut has been a
friendship between the nations and ratified by the nations
—how far that entails an obligation let every man look !nto
his own heart, and his own feelings, and construe the extent of the
obligation for himself. I construe it myself as I feel it taU do nqt
wish to urge upon any one else more than their feelings _ -
what thef should feel about the obligation. The House, nidividually
may judge for itself, I speak
I have given the House my own feeling m the matter.
The French fleet is now in the Mediterranean, and Northern
,h« friendship which
te bet" e» the two commies ha. g.ven them a sense of
security that there was nothing to be feared from os.
The French coasts b ™£r»S
is in the Me ® e ™teling of confidence and friendship which has
there because of the Icenng Mv own feeling is that if a
€ forefgn in a war which France had not sought, and in


which she had not been the aggressor, came down the English Chan-
nel and bombarded and battered the undefended coasts of France,
we could not stand aside and see this going on practically within
sight of our eyes, with our arms folded, looking on dispassionately,
doing nothing I I believe that Would be the feeling-of this country!
There are times when one feels that if these circumstances - actually
did arise, it would be a feeling which would spread with irresistible
force throughout the land,
But I also want to look at the matter without sentiment, and
from the point of view of British interests, and it is on that that I
am going to base and justify what I am presently going to say to
the House. If we say nothing at this moment, what is France to do
with her fleet in the Mediterranean? if she leaves it there, with no
statement from us as to what we will do, she leaves her Northern and
- Western coasts absolutely undefended, at the mercy of a German
fleet coming- down the Channel, to do as it pleases in a war which is
a war of life and death between them. If we say nothing, it may be
that the French fleet is withdrawn from the Mediterranean. We are
in the presence of a European conflagration; can anybody set limits
to the consequences that may arise out of it. Let us assume that
to-day we stand aside in an attitude of neutrality, saying, "No, we
cannot undertake and engage to help either party in this conflict"
Let us suppose the French fleet is withdrawn from the Mediterra-
nean , and let us assume that the consequences-—which are already
tremendous in what has happened in Europe even to countries which
are at peace—-in fact, equally whether countries are at peace or at war
-let us assume that out of that come consequences unforeseen, which
make it necessary at a sudden moment that, in defence of vital British
interests, we should go to war; and let us assume —which is quite
possible—that Italy, who is now neutral— [HON. MEMBERS : "Hear,
hear! ]- because, as I understand, she considers that this war is an
aggressive war, and the Triple Alliance being a defensive alliance
her obligation did not arise—let us assume that consequences which
are not yet foreseen, and which —perfectly legitimately consulting
her own interests —make Italy depart from her attitude of neutrality
at a time when we are forced in defence of vital British interests our-
selves to fight, what then will be the position in the Mediterranean?
It might be that at some critical moment those consequences would
be forced upon us because our trade routes- in the Mediterranean
might be vital to this country?
Nobody can say that, in the course of the next few weeks, there
is any particular trade route the keeping open of which may not be
vital to this country. What will be our position then? We have
not kept a fleet in the" Mediterranean which is equal to dealing alone
with a combination of other fleets in the Mediterranean. It would
be the very moment when we could not detach more ships to the
Mediterranean, and we might have exposed this country from our
negative attitude at the present moment to the most appalling risk.


I say that from the point of view of British interests. We feel
strongly that France was entitled to know—and to know at once! —
whether or not in the event of attack upon her unprotected Northern
and Western Coasts, she could depend upon British support. In
that emergency, and in these compelling circumstances, yesterday
afternoon I gave to the French' Ambassador the following state-
ment
"I am authorized to give an assurance that if the German
Fleet comes into the Channel or through the North Sea to
undertake hostile operations against the French coasts or ship-
ping, the British Fleet will give all the protection in its power.
This assurance is, of course, subject to the policy of His Ma-
jesty's Government receiving the support of Parliament, and
must not be taken as binding His Majesty's Government to take
any action until the above contingency of action by the German
Fleet takes place."
I read that to the House, not as a declaration of war on our
part, not as entailing immediate aggressive action on our part, but as
binding us to take aggressive action should that contingency arise.
Things move very hurriedly from hour to hour. Fresh news comes
in, and I cannot give this in any very formal way; but I understand
that the German Government would be prepared if we would pledge
ourselves to neutrality, to agree that its fleet would not attack the
Northern coast of France. I have only heard that shortly before I
came to the House, but it is far too narrow an engagement for us.
And, Sir, there is the more serious consideration—becoming more
serious every hour —there is the question of the neutrality of Bel-
gium.
I shall have to put before the House at some length what is our
position in regard to Belgium. The governing factor is the Treaty
of 1839, but this is a Treaty with a history, a history accumulated
since. In 1870, when there was war between France and Germany,
the question of the neutrality of Belgium arose, and various things
were said. Amongst other things, Prince Bismarck gave an assur-
ance to Belgium that, confirming his verbal assurance, he gave m
writing a declaration which he said was superfluous in reference cO
the Treaty in existence—that the German Confederation and its
allies would respect the neutrality of Belgium, it being always under-
stood that that neutrality would be respected by the other belligerent
Powers. That is valuable as a recognition in 1870 on the part oi:
Germany of the sacredness of these Treaty rights.
What was our own attitude? The people, who laid down the
attitude of the British Government were Lord Granville in the House
of Lords, and Mr. Gladstone in the House of Commons, L, ora
Granville, on the Bth of August, 1870, used these words. He said:
' this country was bound either morally, or internationally or
that its interests were concerned inrthe- maintenance of toe neu-


trality of Belgium, though this course might have had some
conveniences, though it might have been easy to adhere to it,
though it might have saved us from some immediate danger,
it is a course which Her Majesty's Government thought it im-
possible to adopt in the name of the country with any due regard
to the country's honour or to the country's interests."
Mr. Gladstone spoke as follows two days later:—
"There is, I admit, the obligation of the Treaty. It is
not necessary, nor would time permit me, to enter into the com-
plicated question of the nature of the obligations of that Treaty;
but I am not able to subscribe to the doctrine of those who have
held in this House what plainly amounts to an assertion, that
the simple fact of the existence of a guarantee is binding on
every party to it, irrespectively altogether of the particular
position in which it may find itself at the time when the occasion
for acting on the guarantee arises. The great authorities upon
foreign policy to whom I have been accustomed to listen, such
as Lord Aberdeen and Lord Palmerston, never to my knowledge
took that rigid and, if I may venture to say so, that impractic-
able view of the guarantee. The circumstance that there is
already an existing guarantee in force is of necessity an im-
portant fact, and a weighty element in the case to which we are
bound to give full and ample consideration. There is also this
further consideration, the force of which we must all feel most
deeply, and that is, the common interests against the unmea-
sured aggrandisement of any Power whatever."
The Treaty is an old Treaty—lB39—and that was the view
taken of it in 1870. It is one of those Treaties which are founded,
not only on consideration for Belgium, which benefits under the
Treaty, but in the interests of those who guarantee the neutrality of
Belgium. The honour and interests are, at least, as strong to-day as
in 1870, and we cannot take a more narrow view or a less serious
view of our obligations and of the importance of those obligations
than was taken by Mr. Gladstone's Government in 1870.
I will read to the House what took place last week on this
subject. When mobilization was beginning, I knew that this ques-
tion must be a most important element in our policy—a most im-
portant subject for the House of Commons. I telegraphed at the
same time in similar terms to both Paris and Berlin to say that it
was essential for us to know whether the French and German Go-
vernments respectively were prepared to undertake an engagement
to respect the neutrality of Belgium. These are the replies. I got
from the French Government this reply:—
"The French Government are resolved to respect the neu-
trality of Belgium, and it would only be in the event of some
other Power violating that neutrality that France might find
herself under the necessity, in order to assure the defence of her
security, to act otherwise. This assurance has been given several


times. The President of the Republic spoke of it to the King
of the Belgians, and the French Minister at Brussels has spon-
taneously renewed the assurance to the Belgian Minister of
Foreign Affairs to-day."
From the German Government the reply was
"The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs could not pos-
sibly give an answer before consulting the Emperor and the
Imperial Chancellor."
Sir Edward Goschen, to whom I had said it was important to have
an answer soon, said he hoped the answer would not be too long
delayed. The German Minister for Foreign Affairs then gave Sir
Edward Goschen to understand that he rather doubted whether they
could answer at all, as any reply they might give could not
fail, in the event of war, to have the undesirable effect of
disclosing, to a certain extent, part of their plan of campaign. I
telegraphed at the same time to Brussels to the Belgian Government*
and I got the following reply from Sir Francis Villiers: —
"The Minister for Foreign Affairs thanks me for the com-
munication, and replies that Belgium will, to the utmost of her
power, maintain neutrality, and expects and desires other
Powers to observe and uphold it. He begged me to add that
the relations between Belgium and the neighbouring Powers
were excellent, and there was no reason to suspect their inten-
tions, but that the Belgian Government believe, in the case of
violation, they were in a position to defend the neutrality of
their country."
It now appears from the news I have received to-day—which has
come quite recently, and I am not yet quite sure how far it has
reached me in an accurate form—that an ultimatum has been given
to Belgium by Germany, the object of which was to offer Belgium
friendly relations with Germany on condition that she would facili-
tate the passage of German troops through Belgium. Well, Sir,
until one has these things absolutely definitely, up to the last moment,
I do not wish to say all that one would say if one were in a position
to give the House full, complete, and absolute information upon the
point. We were sounded in the course of last week as to whether
if a guarantee were given that, after the war, Belgium integrity
would be preserved that would content us. We replied that we could
not bargain away whatever interests or obligations we had in Bel-
gian neutrality.
Shortly before I reached the House I was informed that the
following telegram had been received from the King of the Belgians
by our King —King George:—
"Remembering the numerous proofs of Your Majesty's
friendship and that of your predecessors, and the friendly atti-
tude of England in 1870, and the proof of friendship she has


just given us again, I make a supreme appeal to the Diplomatic
intervention of* Your Majesty's Government to safeguard the
integrity of Belgium."
Diplomatic intervention took place last week on our part. What
can diplomatic intervention do now? We have great and vital in-
terests in the independence—and integrity is the least part—of Bel-
gium. If Belgium is compelled to submit to allow her neutrality
to be violated, of course the situation is clear. Even if by agree-
ment she admitted the violation of her neutrality, it is clear she
could only do so under duress. The smaller States in that region
of Europe ask but one thing. Their one desire is that they should
be left alone and independent. The one thing they fear is, I think,
not so much that their integrity but that their independence should
be interfered with. If in this war which is before Europe the neu-
trality of one of those countries is violated, if the troops of one of
the combatants violate its neutrality and no action be taken to resent
it, at the end of the war, whatever the integrity may be, the indepen-
dence will be gone.
I have one further quotation from Mr. Gladstone as to what
he thought about the independence of Belgium. It will be found
in Hansard, volume 203, page 1787. I have not had time to read
the whole speech and verify the context, but the thing seems to me
so clear that no context could make any difference to the meaning
of it Mr. Gladstone said:—
"We have an interest in the independence of Belgium which
is wider than that which we may have in the literal operation
of the guarantee. It is found in the answer to the question
whether under the circumstances of the case, this country, en-
dowed as it is with influence and power, would quietly stand by
and witness the perpetration of the direst crime that ever stained
the pages of history, and thus become participators in the sin."
No, Sir, if it be the case that there has been anything in the
nature of an ultimatum to Belgium, asking her to compromise or
violate her neutrality, whatever may have been offered to her in
return, her independence is gone if that holds. If her independence
goes/the independence of Holland will follow. I ask the House
from the point of view of British interests, to consider what may
be at stake. If France is beaten in a struggle of life and death,
beaten to her knees, loses her position as a great Power, becomes
subordinate to the will and power of one greater than herself—con-
sequences which I do not anticipate, because I am sure that France
has the power to defend herself with all the energy and ability and
patriotism which she has shown so often—still, if that were to
happen, and if Belgium fell under the same dominating influence,
and then Holland, and then Denmark, then would not Mr. Glad-
stone's word's come true, that just opposite to us there would be a
common interest, against the unmeasured aggrandisement of any
Power ?


It may be said, I suppose that we might stand aside, husband
our strength.-and that whatever happened in the course of this "war
at the end of it intervene with effect to put things right, and to
adjust them to our own point of view. If, in a crisis like this, we.
run away from those obligations; of honour and interest as regards
the Belgian Treaty, I doubt whether, whatever material force we
might have at the end, it would be of very much value in face of
the respect that we should have lost. And do not believe, whether a
great Power stands outside this war or not, it is going to be in a
position at the end of it to exert its superior strength. For us, with
a powerful Fleet, which we believe able to protect our commerce,
to protect our shores, and to protect our interests, if we are engaged
in war, we shall suffer but little more than we shall suffer even if
we-stand aside.
We are going to suffer. I am afraid, terribly in this war whe-
ther we are in it or whether we stand aside. Foreign trade is going
to stop, not because the trade routes are closed, but because there is
no trade at the other end. Continental nations engaged in war—all
their populations, all their energies, all their wealth, engaged in a
desperate struggle —they cannot carry on the trade with us that they
are carrying on in times of peace, whether we are parties to the war
or whether we are not. Ido not believe for a moment, that at the
end of this war, even if we stood aside and remained aside, we should
be in a position, a material position, to use our force decisively to
undo what had happened in the course, of the war, to prevent the
whole of the west of Europe opposite to us—if that had been the
result of the war—falling under the domination of a single Power,
and I am quite sure that our moral position would be such as to have
lost us all respect. I can only say that I have put the question of
Belgium somewhat hypothetically, because I am not yet sure of all
the facts, but, if the facts turn out to be as they have reached us at
present, it is quite clear that there is an obligation on this country
to do its utmost to prevent the consequences to which those facts
will lead if they are undisputed.
I have read to the House the only engagements that we have
yet taken definitely with regard to the use of force. I think it is
due to the House to say that we have taken no engagement yet with
regard to sending an Expeditionary armed force out of the country.
Mobilisation of the Fleet has taken place; mobilisation of the Army
is taking place; but we have as yet taken no engagement, because
I do feel that in the case of a European conflagration such as this,
unprecedented, with our enormous responsibilities in India and other
parts of the Empire, or in countries in British occupation, with all
the unknown factors, we must take very carefully into consideration
the use which we make of sending an Expeditionary Force out of the
country until we know how we stand. One thing I would say.
The one bright spot in the whole of this terrible situation is
Ireland. The general feeling throughout Ireland —and I would like
this to be clearly understood abroad. —does not make the Irish ques-


tion a consideration which we feel we. have now to take into account.
I have told the House how far we have at present gone in commit-
ments and the conditions which influence our policy, and I have
put to the House and dwelt at length upon how vital is the condition
■of the neutrality of Belgium.
What other policy is there before the Hoyse ? There is but one
way in which the Government could make certain at the present
moment of keeping outside this war, and that would be that it should
immediately issue a proclamation of unconditional neutrality. We
cannot do that. We have made the commitment to France that I
have read to the House which prevents us from doing that. We have
got the consideration of Belgium, which prevents us also from any
unconditional neutrality, and, without those conditions absolutely
satisfied and satisfactory, we are bound not to shrink from proceeding
to the use of all the forces in our power. If we did take that line
by saying, "We will have nothing whatever to do with this matter"
under no conditions—the Belgian Treaty obligations, the possible
position in the Mediterranean, with damage to British interests, and
what may happen to France from our failure to support Fiance—- if
we were to say that all those things mattered nothing, were as noth-
ing, and to say we would stand aside, we should, I believe, sacrifice
our respect and good name and reputation before the world, and
should not escape the most serious economic consequences.
My object has been to explain the view of the Govern-
ment, and to place before the House the issue and the choice.
I do not for a moment conceal, after what I have said,
and after the information, incomplete as it is, that I have
given to the House with regard to Belgium, that we must
be prepared, and we are prepared, for the consequences of
having to use all the strength we have at any moment—we know
not how soon; —to defend ourselves and to take our part. We know,
if the facts all be as I have stated them, though I have announced
no intending aggressive action on our part, no final decision to resort
to force at a moment's notice, until we know the whole of the case,
that the use of it may be forced upon us. As far as the forces of the
Crown are concerned, we are ready. I believe the Prime Minister
and my right honourable Friend the First Lord of the Admiralty
have no doubt whatever that the readiness and the efficiency of those
Forces were never at a higher mark than they are to-day, and never
was there a time when confidence was more justified in the power of
the Navy to protect our commerce and to protect our shores. The
thought is with us always of the suffering and misery entailed, from
which no country in Europe will escape abstention, and from which
no neutrality will save us. The amount of harm that can be done
by an enemy ship to our trade is infinitesimal, compared with the
amount of harm that must be done by the econothic condition that is
caused on the Continent.
The most awful responsibility is resting upon the Government in
deciding what to advise the House of Commons to do. We have


■disclosed our mind to the House of Commons. We have disclosed
the issue, the information which we have, and made clear to the
House, I trust, that we are prepared to face that situation, and that
■should it develop, we will face it. We worked for peace up to the
last moment and beyond the last moment. How hard, how per-
sistently, and how earnestly we strove for peace last week, the
House will see from the Papers that will be before it.
But that is over, as far as the peace of Europe is concerned.
We are now face to face with a situation and all the consequences
which it may yet have to unfold. We believe we shall have the sup-
port of the House at large in proceeding to whatever the conse-
quences mav be and whatever measures may be forced upon us by the
development of facts or action taken by others. I believe the country
so quickly has the situation been forced upon it, has not had time
realise the issue. It perhaps is still thinking of thei quarrel between
Austria and Servia, and not the complications of this.matter which
have grown out of the quarrel between Austria and Servia. Russia
and Germany we know are at war. We do not yet know official y
that Austria, the ally whom Germany is to support, is yet at war
with Russia. We know that a good deal has been happening on the
French frontier. We do not know that the German Ambassador has
left Paris.
The situation has developed so rapidly that technically, as J° e
gards the condition of the war, it is most difficult to describe what
has actually happened. I wanted to bring out the underlying issues
which would affect our own conduct, and our_own P ol "j£
them clearly. I have put the vital facts before the House, and 1 ,
as seems not improbable, we are forced, and rapidly forced, to take
■our stand upon those issues, then I believe, when the country realizes
what is at stake, what the real issues are, the magnitude of the 1
pending dangers in the West of Europe, which I have endea^
to describe to the House, we shall be supported throughout, not only
by the House of Commons, but by the determination, the resolution,
the courage, and the endurance of the whole country.
Mr BONAR LAW.—The right honorable gentleman has made
an appeal for support, and it is necessary I should say ar wotd or two.
Thev shall be very few. I wish to say, in the fi p ' ,
Lldfve the,, is a single member of this House who donb e. d,ab
K snrjrsyrsx ah
that they have absolutely no alternative. One thing only, f ur ™ er ',
would like to sav. The right honorable gentleman spoke of the
Cht spot in the Y picture which only a day or two ago was a black
snot on the political horizon. Everything he has said I am sure is
true I should like to say, further, that if the contingencies, which
he has not put into words, but which are in all our minds as possible,


arise, then we have already had, indications' that there is another
bright spot, and that every one" of His. Majesty's Dominions beyond
the seas will be behind us in whatever action it is necessary to take,
This ; only I ; shall add: .The Government already know, but I give
them now the assurance on behalf of the party of which I am leader
in. this House,." that in whatever steps they think it necessary to take
for the honour and security of this country, they can rely on the un-
hesitating support of the Opposition.
Mr. JOHN REDMOND. —I hope the House will not consider
it improper on my part, in the grave circumstances in which we are
assembled, if I intervene for a very few moments. I was moved a
great deal by that sentence in the speech of the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs in which he said that the one bright spot in the
situation was the changed feeling in Ireland. In past times when
this Empire has been engaged in these terrible enterprises, it is true
—it would be the utmost affectation and folly on my part to deny it
—the sympathy of the Nationalists of Ireland, for reasons to he
found deep down in the centuries of history, have been estranged
from this country. Allow me to say that what has occurred in recent
years has altered the situation completely. I must not touch, and I
may be trusted not to touch, on any controversial topic; But this I
may be allowed to say, that a wider knowledge of the real facts of
Irish history have, I think, altered the views of the democracy of
this country towards the Irish question, and to-day I honestly believe
that the democracy of Ireland will turn with the utmost anxiety and
sympathy to this country in every trial and every danger that may
overtake it. There is a possibility, at any rate, of history repeating
itself. The House will remember that in 1778, at the end of the
disastrous American war, when it might, I think, truly be said that
Tie military power of this country was almost at its lowest ebb, and
when the shores of Ireland were threatened with foreign invasion,
a body of 100,000 Irish Volunteers sprang into existence for the
purpose of defending her shores. At first no Catholic—ah, how sad
the reading of the history of those days is! —was allowed to be
enrolled in that body of Volunteers, and yet, from the very first day
the Catholics of the South and West subscribed money and sent it
towards the arming of their Protestant fellow countrymen. Ideas
widened as time went on, and finally the Catholics of the South
were armed and enrolled as brothers in arms with their fellow coun-
trymen of a different creed in the North. May history repeat itself.
To-day .. there are in Ireland two large bodies of Volunteers,
One of them sprang into existence in the North. Another has sprung
into existence in the South, I say to the Government that they may
to-morrow withdraw every one of their tioops from Ireland. I say
that the coast of Ireland will be defended from foreign invasion
by her armed sons, and for this purpose armed Nationalist Catholics
in the South w:D be only too glad to join "arms with the armed Pro-
testant Ulstermen in the North. Is it too much to hope that out of
this situation there may spring a result which will be good not merely


for the Empire, but good for the future welfare and integrity of the
Irish nation? X ought to apologize for having intervened, but while
Irishmen generally are in favour of peace, and would desire to save
the democracy of this country from all the horrors of war, while We
would make every possible sacrifice for that purpose, still if the dire
necessity is forced upon this country we offer to the Government of
the day that they may take their troops away, and that if it is
allowed to us, in comradeship with our brethren in the North,, we will
ourselves defend the coasts of our country.
Mr. RAMSAY MAC DO NAL D .dpi should, had circumstances
permitted, have preferred to remain silent this afternoon. But cir-
cumstances do not permit of that. I shall model w T hat I have to say
on the two speeches we have listened to, and X shall be brief. The
right honorable gentleman, to a House which in a great majority
is with him, has delivered a speech'the echoes of which will go down
in history. The speech has been impressive, but, however much we
■may resist the conclusion to which he has come, we have not been able
to resist the moving character of his appeal. I think he is wrong.
I think the Government which he represents and for which he speaks
is wrong. I think the verdict of history will be that they are wrong.
We shall see. The effect of the right honorable gentleman's speech
in this House is not to be its final effect. There may be opportuni-
ties, or there may not be opportunities, for us to go into details, but
1 want to say to this Hotlse, and to say it without equivocation, if
the right honorable gentleman had come here to-day and told us
that our country is in danger, I do not care what party he appealed
to, or to what class he appealed, we would be with him and behind
him. If this is so, we will vote him what money he wants. Yes,
and we will go further. We will offer him ourselves if the country
is in danger. But he has not persuaded me that it is. He has not
persuaded my honorable friends who co-operate with me that it is,
and I am perfectly certain, when his speech gets into cold print to-
morrow, he will not persuade a large section of the country. If the
nation's honour were in danger we would be with him. There has
been no crime committed by statesmen of this character without those
statesmen appealing to their nation's honour. We fought the Crimean
War because of our honour. We rushed to South Africa because
of our honour. The right honorable gentleman is appealing
to us to-day because of our honour. There is a third point
If the right honorable gentleman could come to us and tell us the
a small European nationality like Belgium is in danger, and couk
■ assure us he ingoing to confine the conflict to that question, then w<
would support him.' What is the use of talking about coming to the
aid of Belgium, when, as a matter of fact, you are engaging in a
whole European war which is not going to leave the map of Europe
in the position it is in now. The right honorable gentleman said
nothing about Russia. We want to know about that. We want to
try to find out what is going to happen, when it is all over, to the
power of Russia in Europe, and we are not going to go blindly into


this conflict without having some sort of a rough idea as to what
is going to happen. Finally, so far as France is concerned, we say
solemnly and definitely that no such friendship as the right honor-
able gentleman describes between orie nation and another could ever
justify one of those nations entering into war on behalf of the other.
If France is really in danger, if, as the result of this, we are going
to have the power, civilization, and genius of France removed from
European history, then let him say so. But it is an absolutely im-
possible conception which we are talking about to endeavour to jus-
tify that which the right honorable gentleman has foreshadowed.
I not only know but I feel that the feeling of the House is against
us. I have been through this before, and 1906 came as part recom-
pense. It will come again. We are going to go through it all. We
will go through it all. So far as we are concerned, whatever may
happen, whatever may be said about us, whatever attacks may be
made upon us, we will take the action that we will take of saying
that this country ought to have remained neutral, because in the
deepest parts of our hearts we believe that that was right, and that
that alone was consistent with the honour of the country and the
traditions of the party that are now in office.
Correspondence respecting the European Crisis
No. 1
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen
Foreign Office, July 20, 1914.
Sir,
I asked the German Ambassador to-day if he had any news of
what was going on in Vienna with regard to Servia.
He said that he had not, but Austria was certainly going to
take some step, and he regarded the situation as very uncomfortable.
I said that I had not heard anything recently, except that Count
Berchtold, in speaking to the Italian Ambassador in Vienna, had
deprecated the suggestion that the situation was grave, but had said
that it should be cleared up.
The German Ambassador said that it would be a very desirable
thing if Russia could act as a mediator with regard to Servia.
I said that I assumed that the Austrian Government would not
do anything until they had first disclosed to the public their case
against Servia, founded presumably upon 'what they had discovered
at the trial.
The Ambassador said that he certainly assumed that they would
act upo~ "ome case that would be made known.


I said that this would make it easier for others, such as Russia,
to counsel moderation in Belgrade. In fact, the more Austria could
keep her demand within reasonable limits, and the stronger the jus-
tification she could produce for making any demand, the more chance
there would be of smoothing things over. 1 hated the idea of a war
between any of the Great Powers, and that any of them should be
dragged into a war by Servia would be detestable.
The Ambassador agreed whole-heartedly in this sentiment.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 2.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey. —-(Received July 22.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 22, 1914,
Last night I met Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and the
forthcoming Austrian demarche at Belgrade was alluded to by His
Excellency in the conversation that ensued. His Excellency was
evidently of opinion that this step on Austria's part would have been
made ere this. He insisted that question at issue was one for settle-
ment between Servia and Austria alone, and that there should be
no interference from outside in the discussions between those two
countries. He had therefore considered it inadvisable that the
Austro-Hungarian Government should be approached by the German
Government on the matter. He had, however, on several occasions,
in conversation with the Servian Minister, emphasized the extreme
importance that Austro-Servian relations should be put on a proper
footing.
Finally, His Excellency observed to me that for a long time
past the attitude adopted towards Servia by Austria had, in his
opinion, been one of great forbearance.
No. 3.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen
Foreign Office, July 23, 1914.
Sir,
Count Mensdorff told me to-day that he would be able to-
morrow morning to let me have officially the communication that he
understood was being made to Servia to-day by Austria. He then
explained privately what the nature of the demand would be. As
he told me that the facts would all be set out in the paper that he
would give me to-morrow, it is unnecessary to record them now.


I gathered that they would include proof of the complicity of some
Servian officials in the plot to murder the Archduke Franz Ferdinand,
and a long list of demands consequently made by Austria on Servia.
As regards all this, I said that it was not a matter on which 1
would make any comment until I received an official communication,
and it seemed to me probably a matter on which I should not be able
to make any comment at first sight.
But when Count Mensdorff told me that he supposed there
would be something in the nature of a time-limit, which was in effect
akin to an ultimatum, I said that I -regretted this very much.' "To
begin with, a time-limit might inflame opinion in Russia, and it
would make it difficult, if not impossible, to give more time, even if
after a few days it appeared that by giving more time there would be
a prospect of securing a peaceful settlement and getting a satisfac-
tory reply from Servia. I admitted that, if there was no time-limit,
the proceedings might be unduly protracted, but I urged that a time-
limit could always be introduced afterwards: that, if the demands
were made without a time-limit in the first instance, Russian public
opinion might be less excited, after a week it might have cooled
down, and if the Austrian/case was very strong it might be apparent
that the Russian Government would be in a position to use their
influence in favour of a satisfactory reply from Servia. A time-limit
was generally a thing to be used only in the last resort, after other
means had been tried and failed.
Count Mensdorff said that if Servia, in the interval that had
elapsed since the murder of the Archduke, had voluntarily insti-
tuted an inquiry on her own territory, all this might have been
avoided. In 1909, Servia had said in a note that she intended to
live on terms of good neighbourhood with Austria; but she had never
kept her promise, she had stirred up agitation the object of which
was to disintegrate Austria, and it was absolutely necessary for Aus-
tria to protect herself .
I said that I would not comment upon or criticise what Count
Mensdorff had told me this afternoon, but I could not help dwelling
upon the awful consequences involved in the situation. Great appre-
hension had been expressed to- me, not specially by M. Cambon and
Count Benckendorff, but also by others, as to what might happen,
and it had been represented. to me that it would be very desirable
that those who had influence in St. Petersburg!! should use it on
behalf, of patience and moderation. I had replied that the amount
of influence that could be used in this sense would, depend upon how
reasonable were the Austrian demands and how strong the justifica-
tion that Austria might have discovered for making her demands.
The possible consequences. of the' present situation were terrible.
If as many as four great Powers of- Europe—-let us say Austria,
France, Russia, and Germany—were' engaged in war, it seemed to-
me that it must involve the expenditure of so vast a sum of money,
and such an interference with trade, that, a war would be- accoin-


panied or followed by a complete collapse of European credit and
industry. In these days, in great industrial States, this would mean
a state of things worse than that of 1848, and, irrespective of who
were victors in the war, many things might be completely swept
away. 1
Count Mensdorff did not demur to this statement of the pos-
sible consequences of the present situation, but he said that all would
depend upon Russia.
I made the remark that, in a time of difficulties such as this, it
was just as true to say that it required two to keep the peace as it
was to say, ordinarily, that it took'two to make a quarrel. I hoped
very much that, if there were difficulties, Austria and Russia would
be able in the first instance to discuss them directly with each other.
Count- Mensdorff said that he hoped this would be possible, but
he was under the 1 impression that the attitude in St. Petersburgh had
not been, very favorable recently.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 4.
Count Berchtold to Count Mensdorff.—(Communicated by
Count Mensdorff, July 24, 1914.) (Translation.)
The Austro-Hungarian Government felt compelled to
address the following note to the Servian Government on the
23rd July, through the medium of the Austro-Hungarian
Minister at Belgrade :
" On .the 31st March, 1909, the Servian Minister in Vienna,
on the instructions of the Servian Government, made the
following declaration to the Imperial and Royal Government:
" 4 Servia recognises that the fait accompli regarding
Bosnia has not affected her rights, and consequently she will
conform to the decisions that the Powers may take in con-
formity with article 25 of the Treaty of Berlin. In deference
to the advice of the Great Powers, Servia undertakes to
renounce from now onwards the attitude of protest and opposi-
tion which she has adopted with regard to the annexation since
last autumn. She undertakes, moreover, to modify the direc-
tion of her policy with regard to Austria-Hungary and to live
in future on good neighbourly terms, with the latter/ "
The history of recent years, and in particular the painful
events of the 28th June last, have shown the existence of a
subversive movement with the object of detaching a part of.
the territories of Austria-Hungary from the Monarchy The
movement, which had its birth under the eye of the Servian


Government, has gone so far as to make itself manifest on
both sides of the Servian frontier in the shape of acts of ter-
rorism and a series of outrages and murders.
Far from carrying out the formal undertakings contained
in the declaration of the 31st March, 1909, the Royal Servian
Government has done nothing to repress these movements.
It has permitted the criminal machinations of various societies
and associations directed against the Monarchy, and has tole-
rated unrestrained language on the part of the press, the
glorification of the perpetrators of outrages, and the participa-
tion of officers and functionaries in subversive agitation. It
has permitted an unwholesome propaganda in public instruc-
tion. In short, it has permitted all manifestations of a nature
to incite the Servian population to hatred of the Monarchy and
contempt of its institutions.
This culpable tolerance of the Royal Servian Government
had not ceased at the moment when the events of the 28th
June last proved its fatal consequences to the whole world.
It results from the depositions and confessions of the
criminal perpetrators of the outrage of the 28th June that the
Serajevo assassinations were planned in Belgrade, that the
arms and explosives with which the murderers were provided
had been given to them by Servian officers and functionaries
belonging to the Narodna Odbrana, and, finally, that the
passage into Bosnia of the criminals and their arms was
organised and effected by the chiefs of the Servian frontier
service.
The above-mentioned results of the magisterial investiga-
tion do not permit the Austro-Hungarian Government to
pursue any longer the attitude of expectant forbearance which
it has maintained for years in face of the machinations hatched
in Belgrade, and thence propagated in the territories of the
Monarchy. The results, on the contrary, impose on it the
duty of putting an end to the intrigues which form a perpetual
menace to the tranquility of the Monarchy.
To achieve this end the Imperial and Royal Government
sees itself compelled to demand from the Royal Servian
Government a formal assurance that it condemns this dan-
gerous propaganda against the Monarchy; in other words, the
whole series of tendencies, the ultimate aim of which is to
detach from the Monarchy territories belonging to it, and that
it undertakes to suppress by every means this criminal and
terrorist propaganda.
In order to give a formal character to this undertaking,
the Royal Servian Government shall publish on the front
page of its " Official Journal " of the 26th June (13th July) the
following declaration
" The Royal Government of Servia condemns the pro-
paganda directed against Austria-Hungary— i.e., the general


tendency of which the final aim is to detach from the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy territories belonging to it, and it sin-
cerely deplores the fatal consequences of these criminal pro-
ceedings.
The Royal Government regrets that Servian officers and
functionaries participated in the above-mentioned propaganda
and thus compromised the good neighbourly relations to which
the Royal Government was solemnly pledged by its declara-
tion of the 31st March, 1909.
The Royal Government, which disapproves and repudiates
all idea of interfering or attempting to interfere with the
destinies of the inhabitants of any part whatsoever of Austria-
Hungary, considers it its duty formally to warn officers and
functionaries, and the whole population of the kingdom, that
henceforth it will proceed with the utmost rigour against
persons who may be guilty of such machinations, which it
will use all its efforts to anticipate and suppress.
This declaration shall simultaneously be communicated to
the Royal army as an order of the day by His Majesty the
King, and shall be published in the " Official Bulletin " of the
Army.
The Royal Servian Government further undertakes:
1. To suppress any publication which incites to hatred
and contempt of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and the
general tendency of which is directed against its territorial
integrity;
8. To dissolve immediately the society styled Narodna
Odbrana, to confiscate all its means of propaganda, and to
proceed in the same manner against other societies and their
branches in Servia which engage in propaganda against the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. The Royal Government shall
take the necessary measures to prevent the societies dissolved
from continuing their activity under another name and form;
3. To eliminate without delay from public instruction
in Servia, both as regards the teaching body, and also as
regards the methods of instruction, everything that serves,
or might serve, to foment the propaganda against Austria-
Hungary;
4. To remove from the military service, and from the
administration in general, all officers and functionaries guilty
of propaganda against the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy,
whose names and deeds the Austro-Hungarian Government
reserves to itself the right of communicating to the Royal
Government;
5. To accept the collaboration in Servia of representa-
tives of the Austro-Hungarian Government in the suppression
of the subversive movement directed against the territorial
integrity of the Monarchy


6. To take judicial proceedings against accessories to
the plot of the 28th June who are on Servian territory. Dele-
gates of the Austro-Hungarian Government will take part in
the investigation relating thereto;
To proceed without delay to the arrest of Major
Voija Tankositch, and of the individual named Milan Cigano-
vitch, a Servian State employee, who have been compromised
by the results of the magisterial inquiry at Serajevo;
8. To prevent by effective measures the co-operation of
the Servian authorities in the illicit traffic in arms and explo-
sives across the frontier, to dismiss and punish severely the
officials of the frontier service at Schabatz and Loznica guilty
of having assisted the perpetrators of the Serajevo crime by
facilitating their passage across the frontier ;
9. To furnish the Imperial and Royal Government with
explanations regarding the unjustifiable utterances of high
Servian officials, both in Servia and abroad, who, notwith-
standing their official position, did not hesitate after the crime
of the 28th June to express themselves in interviews in terms
of hostility to the Austro-Hungarian Government and
finally.
10. To notify the Imperial and Royal Government with-
out delay of the execution of the measures comprised under
the preceding heads
The Austro-Hungarian Government expects the reply of
the Royal Government at the latest by 6 o'clock on. Saturday
evening, the. 25th July.
A memorandum dealing with the results of the magisterial
inquiry at Serajevo, with regard to the officials mentioned
under heads (7) and (8), is attached to this note.
I have the honour to request your Excellency to bring
the contents of this note to the knowledge of Government
to which you are accredited, accompanying your communica-
tion with the following observations :
On the 31st March, 1909, the Royal Servian Government
addressed to Austria-Hungary the declaration of which the
text is reproduced above.
On the very day after this declaration Servia embarked
on a policy of instilling revolutionary ideas into the Serb
subjects of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and so preparing
the separation of the Austro-Hungarian territory on the Ser-
vian frontier.
Servia became the centre of a criminal agitation.
No time was lost in the formation of societies and groups,
whose object, either avowed or secret, was the creation of
disorders on Austro-Hungarian territory. These societies and


groups count among their members generals and diplomatists.
Government officials and judges—in short, men at the top oi
official and unofficial society in the kingdom.
Servian journalism is almost entirely at the service of
this propaganda, which is directed against Austria-Kungai y,
and not a day passes without the organs of the Servian press
stirring up their readers to hatred or contempt for the neigh-
bouring Monarchy, on to outrages directed more or less ope my
against its security and integrity.
A large number of agents are employed in carrying on
by every means the agitation against Austria-Hungary and
corrupting the youth in the frontier provinces.
Since"the recent Balkan crisis there has been a recrudes-
cence of the spirit of conspiracy inherent in Servian politicians,
which has left such sanguinary imprints on the history ot the
kingdom. Individuals belonging formerly to bands employed
in Macedonia have come to place themselves at the disposal
of the terrorist propaganda against Austria-Hungary.
In the presence of these doings, to which Austria-Hungary
has been exposed for years, the Servian Government has not
thought it incumbent on it to take the slightest step. Ihe
Servian Government has thus failed in the duty imposed on
it by the solemn declaration of the 31st March, 1909, and acted
in opposition to the will of Europe and the undertaking given
to Austria-Hungary.
. The patience of the Imperial and Royal Government, m
the face of the provocative attitude of Servia, was mspned . y
the territorial disinterestedness of the Austro-Hunganan
Monarchy and the hope that the Servian Government would
end in suite of everything by appreciating Austria-Hungary s
friendship : at its true value. By observing a benevolent atti-
tude towards the political interests of Servia, the Imperial
and Royal Government hoped that the kingdom would finally
decide to follow an analogous line of conduct on its own side.
In particular, Austria-Hungary expected a development of
this kind in the political ideas of Servia, when, after the
events of 1912, the Imperial and Royal Government, by its
disinterested and ungrudging attitude, made such a consider-
able aggrandisement of Servia possible.
The benevolence which Austria-Hungary showed towards
the neighbouring State had no restraining effect on the pro-
ceedings of the kingdom, which continued to tolerate on its
territory a propaganda of which the fatal consequences were
demonstrated to the whole world on the 28th June last, when
the Heir Presumptive to the Monarchy and his illustrious
consort fell victims to a plot hatched at Belgrade.
In the presence of this state of things, the Imperial and
Royal Government has felt compelled to take new and urgent


steps at Belgrade, with a view to inducing the Servian Govern-
ment to stop the incendiary movement that is threatening
the security and integrity of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.
1 he Imperial and Royal Government is convinced that,
in taking this step, it will find itself in full agreement with
the sentiments of all civilised nations, who cannot permit
regicide to become a weapon that can be employed with
impunity in political strife, and the peace of Europe to be
continually disturbed by movements emanating from Belgrade.
In support of the above, the Imperial and Royal Govern-
ment holds at the disposal of the British Government a dossicf
elucidating the Servian intrigues and the connection between
these intrigues and the murder of the 28th June.
An identical communication has been addressed to the
Imperial and Royal representatives accredited to the other
signatory Powers.
You are authorised to leave a copy of this despatch in
the hands of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Vienna, July 24, 1914.
ANNEX.
The criminal inquiry opened by the Court of Serajevo
against Gavrilo Princip and his accessories in and before the
act of assassination committed by them on the 28th June
last, has up to the present led to the following conclusions:—
1. The plot, having as its object the assassination of the
Archduke Francis Ferdinand at the time of his visit to Sera-
jevo, was formed at Belgrade by Gavrilo Princip, Nedeljko
Cabrinovic, one Milan Ciganovic, and Trifko Grabez, with
the assistance of Commander Voija Tankosic.
2. The six bombs and the four Browning pistols and
ammunition, with which the guilty parties committed the act,
were delivered to Princip, Cabrinovic and Grabez by the man
Milan Ciganovic and Commander Voija Tankosic at Belgrade.
3. Ihe bombs and hand-grenades coming from the arms
depot of the Servian army at Kragujevac.
4. In order to ensure the success of the act, Ciganovic
taught Princip, Cabrinovic and Grabez how to use the bombs,
and gave lessons in firing Browning pistols to Princip and'
Grabez in a forest near the shooting ground at Topschider.
5. To enable Princip, Cabrinovic and Grabez to cross the
frontier of Bosnia-Herzegovina and smuggle in their contra-
band of arms secretly, a secret system of transport was
organised by Ciganovic.


By this arrangement the introduction into Bosnia-Herze-
govina of criminals and their arms was effected by the officials
controlling the frontiers at Chabac (Rade Popovic) and
Loznica, as well as by the customs officer Rudivoj Grbic, of
SLoznica, with the assistance of various individuals.
No. 5.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 24, 1914.
Note addressed to Servia, together with an explanation
of the reasons leading up to it, has been communicated to me
by Count Mensdorff.
In the ensuing conversation with His Excellency I re-
marked that it seemed to me a matter for great regret that
a time limit, and such a short one at that, had been insisted
upon at this stage of the proceedings. The murder of the
Archduke and some of the circumstances respecting Servia
quoted in the note aroused sympathy with Austria, as was but
natural, but at the same time I had never before seen one State
address to another independent State a document of so formid-
able a character. Demand No. 5 would be hardly consistent
with the maintenance of Servia's independent sovereignty if
it were to mean, as it seemed it might, that Austria-Hungary
was to be invested with a right to appoint officials who
would have authority within the frontiers of Servia.
I added that X felt great apprehension, and that I should
concern myself with the matter simply and solely from the
point of view of the peace of Europe. The merits of the
dispute between Austria and Servia were not the concern of
His Majesty's Government, and such comments as I had
made above were not made in order to discuss those merits.
I ended by saying that doubtless we should enter into
an exchange of views with other Powers, and that I must
await their views as to what could be done to mitigate the
difficulties of the situation.
Count Mensdorff replied that the present situation might
never have arisen if Servia had held out a hand after the
murder of the Archduke; Servia had, however, shown no sign
of sympathy or help, though some weeks had already elapsed
since the murder; a time limit, said His Excellency, was
essential, owing to the procrastination on Servia's part.
I said that if Servia had procrastinated in replying, a time
limit could have been introduced later; but, as things now
stood, the terms of the Servian reply had been dictated by


Austria, who had not been content to limit herself to a
demand for a reply within a limit of forty-eight hours from
its presentation.
No. 6.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir. Edward Grey.—(Received July 24.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 24, 1914.
I had a telephone message this morning from M. Sazonof
to the effect that the text of the Austrian ultimatum had iust
reached him.
His Excellency added that a reply within forty-eight
nouis was demanded, and he begged me to meet him at the
-rrench Embassy to discuss matters, as Austrian step clearly
meant that war was imminent.
Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Austria's conduct
was both provocative and immoral; she would never have
taken such action unless Germany had first been consulted-
some of her demands were quite impossible of acceptance.'
He hoped that His Majesty's Government would not fail to-
proclaim their solidarity with Russia and France.
The French ambassador gave me to understand that
h ranee would fulfil all obligations entailed by her alliance
with Russia if necessity arose, besides supporting Russia
strongly in any diplomatic negotiations.
I said that I would telegraph a full report to you of what
their Excellencies had just said to me. I could not, of course,
speak in the name of His Majesty's Government, but person-
ally I saw no reason to expect any declaration of solidarity
from His Majesty's Government that would entail an uncon-
ditional engagement on their part to support Russia and
r ranee by force of arms. Direct British interests in Servia
were nil, and a war on behalf of that country would never
be sanctioned by British public opinion. To this M. Sazonof
replied that we must not forget that the general European
question was involved, the Servian question being but a part
or the former, and that Great Britain could not afford to
efface herself from the problems now at issue.
In reply to these remarks I observed that I gathered from
what he said that His Excellency was suggesting that Great
Britain should join in making a communication to Austria
to the effect that active intervention by her in the internal
affairs of Servia could not be tolerated. But supposing


Austria nevertheless proceeded to embark on military measures
against Servia in spite of our representations, was it the
intention of the Russian Government forthwith to declare
war on Austria?
M. Sazonof said that he himself thought that Russian
mobilization would at any rate have to be carried out; but
a council of Ministers was being held this afternoon to con-
sider the whole question. A further council would be held,
probably to-morrow, at which the Emperor would preside,
when a decision would be come to.
I said that it seemed to me that the important point was
to induce Austria to extend the time limit, and that the first
thing to do was to bring an influence to bear on Austria with
that end in view ; French Ambassador, however, thought that
either Austria had made up her mind to act at once or that
she was bluffing. Whichever it might be, our only chance
of averting war was for us to adopt a firm and united attitude.
He did not think there was time to carry out my suggestion
Thereupon I said that it seemed to me desirable that we should
know just how r far Servia was prepared to go to meet the
demands formulated by Austria in her note. M. Sazono
replied that he must first consult his colleagues on this point,
but that doubtless some of the Austrian demands could be
accepted by Servia.
French Ambassador and M. Sazonof both continued to
press me for a declaration of complete solidarity of His
Majesty's Government with French and Russian Govern-
ments, and I therefore said that it seemed to me possible that
you might perhaps be willing to make strong representations
to both German and Austrian Governments, urging upon
them that an attack upon Austria by Servia would endanger
the whole peace of Europe. Perhaps you might see your way
to saying to th<em that such action on the part of Austria
would probably mean Russian intervention, which would
involve France and Germany, and that it would be difficult
for Great Britain to keep out if the war were to become
general. M. Sazonof answered that we would sooner or later
be dragged into war if it did break out; we should have
rendered war more likely if we did not from the outset make
common cause with his country and with France; at any
rate, he hoped His Majesty's Government would express
strong reprobation of action taken by Austria.
President of French Republic and President of the Coun-
cil cannot reach France, on their return from Russia, for
four or five days, and it looks as though Austria purposely
chose this moment to present their ultimatum.
It seems to me, from the language held by French
Ambassador, that, even if we decline to join them, France
and Russia are determined to make a strong stand.


No. 7.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 24.
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 24, 1914.
Before departing on leave of absence, I was assured by
Russian Ambassador that any action taken by Austria to
humiliate Servia could not leave Russia indifferent.
Russian Charge de' Affaires was received this morning by
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and said to him, as his own
personal view, that Austrian note was drawn up in a form
rendering it impossible of acceptance as it stood, and that it
was both unusual and peremptory in its terms. Minister for
Foreign Affairs replied that Austrian Minister was under
instructions to leave Belgrade unless Austrian demands were
accepted integrally by 4 p.m. to-morrow. His Excellency
added that Dual Monarchy felt that its very existence was at
stake; and that the step taken had caused great satisfaction
throughout the country. He did not think that objections to*
what had been done could be raised by any Power.
No. 8.
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
24.) (1 legraphic.)
Belgrade, July 24, 1914.
Austrian demands are considered absolutely unaccept-
able by Servian Government, who earnestly trust that His
Majesty's Government may see their way to induce Austrian
Government to moderate them.
This request was conveyed to me by Servian Prime Minis-
ter, who returned early this morning to Belgrade. His
Excellency is dejected, and is clearly very anxious as to
developments that may arise.
No. 9.
Note communicated by German Ambassador, July 24, 1914.
The publication of the Austro-Hungarian Government
concerning the circumstances under which the assassination
of the Austrian heir presumptive and his consort has taken
place disclose unmistakably the aims which the Great Servian
propaganda has set itself, and the means it employs to realise
them. The facts now made known must also do away with


the last doubts that the centre of activity of all those tenden-
cies which are directed towards the detachment of the
Southern Slav provinces from the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy and their incorporation into the Servian Kingdom
is to be found in Belgrade, and is at work there with at least
the connivance of members of Government and army.
The Servian intrigues have been going 011 for many years.
In an especially marked form the Great Servian chauvinism
manifested itself during the Bosnian crisis. It was only owing
to the far-reaching self-restraint and moderation of the Austro-
Hungarian Government and to the energetic interference of
the Great Powers that the Servian provocations to which
Austria-Hungary was then exposed did not lead to a conflict.
The assurance of good conduct in future which was given
by the Servian Government at that time has not been kept.
Under the eyes, at least with the tacit permission of official
Servia, the Great Servian propaganda has continuously
increased in extension and intensity; to its account must be
set the recent crime, the threads of which lead to Belgrade.
It has become clearly evident that it would not be consistent
either with the dignity or with the self-preservation of the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy still longer to remain inactive in
face of this movement on the other side of the frontier, by
which the security and the integrity of her territories are
constantly menaced. Under these circumstances, the course
of procedure and demands of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment can only be regarded as equitable and moderate. In
spite of that, the attitude which public opinion as well as the
Government in Servia have recently adopted does not exclude
the apprehension that the Servian Government might refuse
to comply with those demands, and might allow themselves
to be carried away into a provocative attitude against Austria-
Hungary. The Austro-Hungarian Government, if it does not
wish definitively to abandon Austria's position as a Great
Power, would then have no choice but to obtain the fulfilment
of their demands from the Servian Government by strong-
pressure and, if necessary, by using- military measures, the
choice of the means having to be left to them.
The Imperial Government want to emphasise their opinion
that in the present case there is only question of a matter to
be settled exclusively between Austria-Hungary and Servia,
and that the Great Powers ought seriously to endeavour to
reserve it to those two immediately concerned. The Imperial
Government desire urgently the localisation of the conflict,
because every interference of another Power would, owing to
the different treaty obligations, be followed by incalculable
consequences.


No. 10.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
Foreign Office, July 24, 1914.
Sir,
After telling M. Cambon to-day of the Austrian communi-
cation to Servia, which I had received this morning, and of
the comment I had made to Count Mensdorff upon it yester-
day, I told M. Cambon that this afternoon I was to see the
German Ambassador, who some days ago had asked me
privately to exercise moderating influence in St. Petersburgh.
I would say to the Ambassador that, of course, if the presen-
tation of this ultimatum to Servia did not lead to trouble
between Austria and Russia, we need not concern ourselves
about it; but, if Russia took the view of the Austrian ulti-
matum, which it seemed to me that any Power interested in
Servia would take, I should be quite powerless, in face of the
terms of the ultimatum, to exercise any moderating influence.
I would say that I thought the only chance of any mediating
or moderating influence being exercised was that Germany,
France, Italy, and ourselves, who had not direct interests in
Servia, should act together for the sake of peace, simul-
taneously in Vienna and St. Petersburgh.
M. Cambon said that, if there was a chance of mediation
by the four Powers, he had no doubt that his Government
would be glad to join in it; but he pointed out that we could
not say anything in St. Petersburgh till Russia had expressed
some opinion or taken some action. But, when two days were
over, Austria would march into Servia, for the Servians could
not possibly accept the Austrian demand. Russia would be
compelled by her public opinion to take action as soon as
Austria attacked Servia, and, therefore, once the Austrians
had attacked Servia, it would be too late for any mediation.
I said that I had not contemplated anything being said
in St. Petersburgh until after it was clear that there must be
trouble between Austria and Russia. I had thought that if
Austria did move into Servia, and Russia then mobolised, it
would be possible for the four Powers to urge Austria to
stop her advance, and Russia also to stop hers, pending media-
tion. But it would be essential for any chance of success for
such a step that Germany should participate in it.
M. Cambon said that it would be too late after Austria
had once moved against Servia. The important thing was to
gain time by mediation in Vienna. The best chance of this
being accepted would be that Germany should propose it to
the other Powers.
I said that by this he meant a mediation between Austria
and Servia.


He replied that it was so.
I said that I would talk to the German Ambassador this
afternoon on the subject.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 11.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir H. Rumbold. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 24, 1914-.
German Ambassador has communicated to me the view
of the German Government about the Austrian demand in
Servia. 1 understand the German Government is making the
same communication to the Powers.
I said that if the Austrian ultimatum to Servia did not
lead to trouble between Austria and Russia I had no concern
with it; I had heard nothing yet from St. Petersburg, but I
was very apprehensive of the view Russia would take of the
situation. I reminded the German Ambassador that some
days ago he had expressed, a personal hope that if need
arose I would endeavour to exercise moderating influence at
St. Petersburg, but now I said that, in view of the extra-
ordinarily stiff character of the Austrian note, the shortness of
the time allowed, and the wide scope of the demands upon
Servia, I felt quite helpless as far as Russia was concerned,
and I did not believe any Power could exercise influence alone.
The only chance I could see of meditating or moderating
influence being effective, was that the four Powers —Germany,
Italy, France, and ourselves—should work together simul-
taneously at Vienna and St. Petersburgh in favour of modera-
tion in the event of the relations between Austria and Russia
becoming threatening.
The immediate danger was that in a few hours Austria
might march into Servia and Russian Slav opinion demand
that Russia should march to help Servia; it would be very
desirable to get Austria not to precipitate military action,
and so to gain more time. But none of us could influence
Austria in this direction, unless Germany would propose and
participate in such action at Vienna. You should inform
Secretary of State.
Prince Lichnowsky said that Austria might be expected
to move when the time limit expired unless Servia could give
unconditional acceptance of Austrian demands in toto. Speak-
ing privately, His Excellency suggested that a negative reply
must in no case be returned by Servia; a reply favourable on
some points must be sent at once, so that an excuse against
immediate action might be afforded to Austria.


No. 12.
Sir Edward Grey to Mr. Crackanthorpe. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 24, 1914.
Servia ought to promise that, if it is proved that Servian
officials, however subordinate they may be, were accomplices
in the murder of the Archduke at Serajevo, she will give
Austria the fullest satisfaction. She certainly ought to express
concern and regret. For the rest, Servian Government must
reply to Austrian demands as they consider best in Servian
interests.
It is impossible to say whether military action by Austria
when time limit expires can be averted by anything but
unconditional acceptance of her demands, but only chance
appears to lie in avoiding an absolute refusal and replying
favourably to as many' points as the time limit allows.
Servian Minister here has begged that His Majesty's
Government will express their views, but I cannot undertake
the responsibility of saying more than I have said above, and
I do not like to say even that without knowing what is being
said at Belgrade by French and Russian Governments. You
should therefore consult your French and Russian colleagues
as to repeating what my views are, as expressed above, to
Servian Government.
I have urged upon German Ambassador that Austria
should not precipitate military action.
No. 13.
Note communicated by Russian Ambassador, July 25.
(Translation.)
M. Sazonof telegraphs to the Russian Charge d'Affaires
at Vienna on the 11th (24-th) July, 1914: —
" The communication made by Austria-Hungary to the
Powders the day after the presentation of the ultimatum at
Belgrade leaves a period to the Powers which is quite insuffi-
cient to enable them to take any steps which might help to
smooth away the difficulties that have arisen.
"In order to prevent the consequences, equally incal-
culable and fatal to all the Powers, which may result from
the course of action followed by the Austro-Hungarian
Government, it seems to us to be above all essential that the
period allowed for the Servian reply should be extended.


Austria-Hungary, having declared her readiness to inform the
Powers of the results of the inquiry upon which the Imperial
and Royal Government base their accusations, should equally
allow them sufficient time to study them.
" In this case, if the Powers were convinced that certain
of the Austrian demands were well founded, they would be
in a position to offer advice to the Servian Government.
" A refusal to prolong the term of the ultimatum would
render nugatory the proposals made by the Austro-Hungarian
Government to the Powers, and would be in contradiction to
the very bases of international relations.
" Prince Kudachef is instructed to communicate the above
to the Cabinet at Vienna.
" M. Sazonof hopes that His Britannic Majesty's Govern-
ment will share to the point of view set forth above, and he
trusts that Sir E. Grey will see his way to furnish similar
instructions to the British Ambassador at Vienna."
No. 14.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie and to Sir G. Buchanan
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
Austrian Ambassador has been authorized to explain to
me that the step taken at Belgrade was not an ultimatum,
but a demarche with a time limit, and that if the Austrian
demands were not complied with within the time limit the
Austro-Plungarian Government would break off diplomatic
relations and begin military preparations, not operations.
In case Austro-Hungarian Government have not given
the same information at Paris (St. Petersburgh), you should
inform Minister for Foreign Affairs as soon as possible; it
makes the immediate situation rather less acute.
No. 15.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.-—(Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
Paris, July 25, 1914.
I learn from the Acting Political Director that the French
Government have not yet received the explanation from the
Austrian Government contained in your telegram of to-day.*
They have, however, through the Servian Minister here, given
similar advice to Servia as was contained in your telegram
to Belgrade of yesterday.f
* See No. 14. f See No a 12.


No. 16.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.™( Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
Paris, July 25, 1914.
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs has no suggestions
to make except that moderating advice might be given at
Vienna as well as at Belgrade. He hopes that the Servian
Government's answer to the Austrian ultimatum will be suffi-
ciently favourable to obviate extreme measures being taken
by the Austrian Government. He says, however, that there
would be a revolution in Servia if she were to accept the
Austrian demands in their entirety.
No. 17.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey .—(Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 25, 1914
I saw the Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning, and
communicated to his Excellency the substance of your tele-
gram of to-day to Paris,* and this afternoon I discussed with
him the communication which the French Ambassador sug-
gested should be made to the Servian Government, as recorded
in your telegram of yesterday to Belgrade.f
The Minister for Foreign Affairs said, as regards the
former, that the explanations of the Austrian Ambassador did
not quite correspond with the informatioin which had reached
hirn from German quarters. As regards the latter, both his
Excellency and the French Ambassador agreed that it is too
late to make such a communication, as the time limit expires
this evening.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Servia was
quite ready to do as you had suggested and to punish those
proved to be guilty, but that no independent State could be


expected to accept the political demands which had been put
forward. The Minister for Foreign Affairs thought, from a
conversation which he had with the Servian Minister yester-
day, that, in the event of the Austrians attacking Servia, the
Servian Government would abandon Belgrade, and withdraw
their forces into the interior, while they would at the same
time appeal to the Powers to help them. His Excellency was
in favour of their making this appeal. He would like to see
the question placed on an international footing, as the obliga-
tions taken by Servia in 1908, to which reference is made in
the Austrian ultimatum, were given, not to Austria, but to the
Powers,
If Servia should appeal to the Powers, Russia would be
quite ready to stand aside and leave the question in the hands
of England, France, Germany, and Italy. It was possible,
in his opinion, that Servia might propose to submit the ques-
tion to arbitration.
On my expressing the earnest hope that Russia would not
precipitate war by mobolizing until you had had time to use
your influence in favour of peace, His Excellency assured me
that Russia had no aggressive she would take
no action until it was forced on her. Austria's action was
in reality directed against Russia. She aimed at overthrow-
ing the present status quo in the Balkans, and establishing her
own hegemony there. He did not believe that Germany really
wanted war, but her attitude was decided by ours. If we
took our stand firmly with France and Russia there would
be no war. If we failed them now, rivers of blood would flow,
and we would in the end be dragged into war.
I said that England could play the role of mediator at
Berlin and Vienna to better purpose as friend who, if her
counsels of moderation were disregarded, might one day be
converted into an ally, than if she were to declare herself
Russia's ally at once. His Excellency said that, unfortunately,
Germany was convinced that she could count upon our
neutrality.
I said all I could to impress prudence on the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and warned him that if Russia mobolized,
Germany would not be content with mere mobilisation, or
give Russia time to carry out hers, but would probably declare
war at once. His Excellency replied that Russia could not
allow Austria to crush Servia and become the predominant
Power in the Balkans, and, if she feels secure of the support
of France, she will face all the risks of war. He assured me
once more that he did not wish to precipitate a conflict, but
that unless Germany could restrain Austria I could regard the
situation as desperate.
* See No, 14. f See No. 12.


No. 18.
Sir H. Rumbold to Sir Edward Grey.-—(Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 25, 1914.
Your telegram of the 24th July* acted on.
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs says that on receipt
of a telegram at 10 this morning from German Ambassador
at London, he immediately instructed German Ambassador
at Vienna to pass on to Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
your suggestion for an extension of time limit, and to speak
to His Excellency about it. Unfortunately it appeared from
press that Count Berchtold is at Ischl, and Secretary of State
thought that in these circumstances there would be delay and
difficulty in getting time limit extended. Secretary of State
said that he did not know what Austria-Hungary had ready
on the spot, but he admitted quite freely that Austro-Hun-
garian Government wished to give the Servians a lesson, and
that they meant to take military action. He also admitted
that Servian Government could not swallow certain of the
Austro-Hungarian demands.
Secretary of State said that a reassuring feature of situa-
tion was that Count Berchtold had sent for Russian represen-
tative at Vienna and had told him that Austria-Flungary had
no intention of seizing Servian territory. This step should,
in his opinion, exercise a calming influence at St. Petersburgh.
I asked whether it was not to be feared that, in taking mili-
tary action against Servia, Austria would dangerously excite
public opinion in Russia. He said he thought not. He
remained of opinion that crisis could be localised. I said that
telegrams from Russia in this morning's papers did not look
very reassuring, but he maintained his optimistic view with
regard to Russia. He said that he had given the Russian
Government to understand that last thing Germany wanted
was a general war, and he would do all in his power to prevent
such a calamity. If the relations between Austria and Russia
became threatening, he was quite ready to fall in with your
suggestion as to the four Powers working in favour of modera-
tion at Vienna and St. Petersburgh.
Secretary of State confessed privately that he thought
the note left much to be desired as a diplomatic document.
He repeated very earnestly that, though he had been accused
of knowing all about the contents of that note, he had in fact
had no such knowledge.


No. 19.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 25, 1914.
I saw the Secretary-General this morning and found that
he knew of the suggestion that France, Italy, Germany, and
ourselves should work at Vienna and St. Petersburg h in
favour of moderation, if the relations between Austria and.
Servia become menacing.
In his opinion Austria will only be restrained by the
unconditional acceptance by the Servian Government of her
note. There is reliable information that Austria intends to
seize the Salonica Railway.
* See No. 11.
No. 20.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—-(Received July 25.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 25, 1914.
Language of press this morning leaves the impression that
the surrender of Servia is neither expected nor really desired.
It is officially announced that the Austrian Minister is
instructed to leave Belgrade with staff of legation failing
unconditional acceptance of note at 6 p.m. to-day.
Minister for Foreign Affairs goes to Ischl to-day to
communicate personally to the Emperor Servian reply when it
comes.
No. 21.
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
25.) (Telegraphic.)
Belgrade, July 25, 1914.
The Council of Ministers is now drawing up their reply
to the Austrian note. lam informed by the Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs that it will be most conciliatory,
and will meet the Austrian demands in as large a measure as
is possible.


The following is a brief summary of the projected reply :■ —
The Servian Government consent to the publication of a
declaration in the Official Gazette. The ten points are accepted
with reservations. Servian Government declare themselves
ready to agree to a mixed commission of inquiry so long as
the appointment of the commission can be shown to be in
accordance with international usage. They consent to dismiss
and prosecute those officers who can be clearly proved to be
guilty, and they have already arrested the officer referred to
in the Austrian note. They are prepared to suppress the
Narodna Odbbrana.
The Servian Government consider that, unless the Aus-
trian Government want war at any cost, they cannot but be
content with the full satisfaction offered in the Servian reply.
No. 22,
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
25.) (Telegraphic.)
Belgrade, July 25, 1914.
I have seen the new French Minister, who has just arrived
from Constantinople, and my Russian colleague, and informed
them of your views.
They have not yet received your instructions from their
Governments, and in view of this and of the proposed con-
ciliatory terms of the .Servian reply, I have up to now abstained
from offering advice to the Servian Goverment.
I think it is highly probable that the Russian Government
have already urged the utmost moderation on the Servian
Government.
No. 23.
Mr. Crackanthorpe t® Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
25.) (Telegraphic.)
Belgrade, July 25, 1914.
The Austrian Minister left at 8.30.
The Government has left for Nisch, where the Skuptchina
will meet on Monday. lam leaving with my other colleagues,
but the vice-consul is remaining in charge of the archives.


No. 24.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
You spoke quite rightly in very difficult circumstances
as to the attitude of His Majesty's Government. I entirely
approve what you said, as reported in your telegram of yes-
terday,* and I cannot promise more on behalf of the Govern-
ment.
I do not consider that public opinion here would or ought
to sanction our going to war over a Servian quarrel. If,
however, war does take place, the development of other issues
may draw us into it, and I am therefore anxious to prevent it.
The sudden, brusque, and peremptory character of the
Austrian dhuavche makes it almost inevitable that in
short time both Russia and Austria will have mobilized
against each other. In this event, the only chance of peace,
in my opinion, is for the other four Powers to join in asking
the Austrian and Russian Governments not to cross the
frontier, and to give time for the four Powers acting at Vienna
and St. Petersburgh to try and arrange matters. If Germany
will adopt this view, I feel strongly that France and our-
selves should act upon it. Italy would no doubt gladly
co-operate.
No diplomatic intervention or mediation would be
tolerated by either Russia or Austria unless it was clearly
impartial and included the allies or friends of both. The co-
operation of Germany would, therefore, be essential.
* See No. 6.
No. 25.
Sir Sdward Grey to Sir H. Rumbold. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
The Austrian Ambassador has been authorized to inform
me that the Austrian method of procedure on expiry of the
time limit would be to break oft diplomatic relations and
commence military preparations, but not military operations.
In informing the German Ambassador of this, I said that it
interposed a stage of mobilization before the frontier was
actually crossed, which I had urged yesterday should be
delayed.


Apparently we should now soon be face to face with the
mobilization of Austria and Russia. The only chance of
peace, if this did happen, would be for Germany, France,
Russia, and ourselves to keep together, and to join in asking-
Austria and Russia not to cross the frontier till we had had
time to try and arrange matters between them.
The German Ambassador read me a telegram from the
German Foreign Office saying that his Government had not
known beforehand, and had had no more than other Powers
to do with the stiff terms of the Austrian note to Servia, but
that once she had launched that note, Austria could not draw
back. Prince Lichnowsky said, however, that if what I con-
templated, was mediation between Austria and Russia, Austria
might be able with dignity to accept it. He expressed himself
as personally favourable to this suggestion.
I concurred in his observation, and said that I felt I had
no title to intervene between Austria and Servia, but as soon
as the question became one as between Austria and Russia,
the peace of Europe was affected, in which we must all take
a hand.
I impressed upon the Ambassador that, in the event of
Russian and Austrian mobilization, the participation of Ger-
\ahy would be essential to any diplomatic action for peace.
* Jone we could do nothing. The French Government were
travelling at the moment, and I had had no time to consult
them, and could not therefore be sure of their views, but 1
was prepared, if the German Government agreed with my
suggestion, to tell the French Government that I thought it
the right thing to act upon it.
No. 26.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
The Russian Ambassador has communicated to me the
following telegram which his Government have sent to the
Russian Ambassador at Vienna, with instructions to communi-
cate it to the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs:—
" The delay given to Servia for a reply is so limited that
the Powers are prevented from taking any steps to avert the


V <v •
complications which are threatening. The Russian Govern-
ment trust that the Austrian Government will prolong the
time limit, and as the latter have declared their willingness to
inform the Powers of the data on which they have based their
demands on Servia, the Russian Government hope that these
particulars will be furnished in order that the Powers may
examine the matter. If they found that some of the Austrian
requests were well founded, they would be in a position to
advise the Servian Government accordingly. If the Austrian
Government were indisposed to prolong the time limit, not
only would they be acting against international ethics, but
they would deprive their communication to the Powers of any
practical meaning."
■ i:
You may support in general terms the step taken by your
Russian colleague.
Since the telegram to the Russian xAmbassador at Vienna
was sent, it has been a relief to hear that the steps which
the Austrian Government were taking were to be limited for
the moment to the rupture of relations and to military prepara-
tions, and not operations. I trust, therefore, that if the Austro-
Plungarian Government consider it too late to prolong the
time limit, they will at any rate give time in the sense and
for the reasons desired by Russia before taking any irre-
trievable steps.
■ '!
No. 27.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie, Sir H. Rumbold, and Sir
G. * B uchanan. (Telegraph ic.)
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
I have communicated to German Ambassador the fore-
cast of the Servian reply contained in Mr. Crackanthorpe's
telegram of to-day.* I have said that, if Servian reply, when
received at Vienna, corresponds to this forecast, I hope the
German Government will feel able to influence the Austrian
Government to take a favourable view of it.
(* See No. 21.)
No. 28
[Nil.]


No. 29.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir R. Rodd.
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
Sir,
The Italian Ambassador came to see. me to-day. I told
him in general terms what I had said to the German Ambassa-
dor this morning.
The Italian Ambassador cordially approved of this. He
made no secret of the fact that Italy was most desirous to see
war avoided.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 30.
Sir Edward Grey to Mr. Cragkanthorpe.
Foreign Office, July 25, 1914.
Sir > . ,
The Servian Minister called on the 23rd instant and spoke
to Sir A. Nicolson on the present strained relations between
Servia and Austria-Hungary.
Fie said that his Government were most anxious and dis-
quieted. They were perfectly ready to meet any reasonable
demands of Austria-Hungary so long as such demands were
kept on the " terrain juridique." If the results of the inquiry
at Sarajevo —an inquiry conducted with so much mystery and
secrecy—disclosed the fact that there were any individuals
conspiring or organizing plots on Servian territory, the
Servian Government would be quite ready to take the neces-
sary steps to give satisfaction; but if Austria transported
the question on to the political ground, and said that Servian
policy, being inconvenient to her, must undergo a radical
change, and that Servia must abandon certain political ideals,
no independent State would, or could, submit to such dictation.
He mentioned that both the assassins of the Archduke
were Austrian subjects —Bosniaks; that one of them had been
in Servia, and that the Servian authorities, considering hinr
suspect and dangerous, had desired to expel him, but on
ing to the Austrian authorities found that the latter protected
him, and said that he was an innocent and harmless individual.
Sir A. Nicolson, on being asked by M. Boschkovitch his
opinion on the whole question, observed that there were no
data on which to base one, though it was to be hoped that
the Servian Government would endeavour to meet the Aus-
trian demands in a conciliatory and moderate spirit.
1 am, &c.,
E. GREY.


No. 31.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 26.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 25, 1914.
Servian reply to the Austro-Hungarian demands is not
considered satisfactory, and the Austro-Hungarian Minister
has left Belgrade. War is thought to be imminent.
No. 32.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 26.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 26, 1914.
According to confident belief of German Ambassador,
Russia will keep quiet during chastisement of Servia, which
Austria-Hungary is resolved to inflict, having received assur-
ances that no Servian territory will be annexed by Austria-
Hungary. In reply to my question whether Russian Govern-
ment might not be compelled by public opinion to intervene
on behalf of kindred nationality, he said that everything
depended on the personality of the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who could resist easily, if he chose, the pres-
sure of a few newspapers. Tie pointed out that the days of
Pan-Slav agitation in Russia were over, and that Moscow
was perfectly quiet. The Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs
would not, his Excellency thought, be so imprudent as to
take a step which would probably result in many frontier ques-
tions in which Russia is interested, such as Swedish, Polish,
Ruthene, Roumanian, and Persian questions being brought
into the melting-pot. France, too, was not at all in a condi-
tion for facing a war.
X replied that matters had, I thought, been made a little
difficult for other Powers by the tone of Austro-Hungarian
Government's ultimatum to Servia. One naturally sym-
pathised with many of the requirements of the ultimatum,
if only the manner of expressing them had been more tem-
perate. It was, however, impossible, according to the German
Ambassador, to speak effectively in any other way to Servia.
Servia was about to receive a lesson which she required; the
quarrel, however, ought not to be extended in any way to
foreign countries. He doubted Russia, who had no right to
assume a protectorate over Servia, acting as if she made any
such claim. As for Germany, she knew very well what she
was about in backing up Austria-Hungary in this matter.


The German Ambassador had heard of a letter addressed
by you yesterday to the German Ambassador in London in
which you expressed the hope that the Servian concessions
would be regarded as satisfactory. He asked whether I had
been informed that a pretence of giving way at the last
moment had been made by the Servian Government. I had, I
said, heard that on practically every point Servia had been
willing to give in. His Excellency replied that Servian con-
cessions were all a sham. Senvia proved that she well knew
that they were insufficient to satisfy the legitimate demands
of Austria-Hungary by the fact that before making her offer
she had ordered mobilization and retirement of Government
from Belgrade.
No. 33.
Sir H. Rumbold to Sir Edward Grey.—-(Received July 26.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 26, 1914.
Emperor returns suddenly to-night, and Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs says that Foreign Office regret
this step, which was taken on His Majesty's own initiative.
They fear that His Majesty's sudden return may cause specu-
lation and excitement. Under-Secretary of State likewise told
me that German Ambassador at St. Petersburgh had reported
that, in conversation with Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, latter had said that if Austria annexed bits of Servian
territory, Russia would not remain indifferent. Under-Secre-
tary of State drew conclusion that Russia would not act if
Austria did not annex territory.
No. M.
Sir H. Rumbold to Sir Edward Grey,—(Received July 26.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 26, 1914.
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has just
telephoned to me to say that German Ambassador at Vienna
has been instructed to pass on to Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment your hopes that they may take a favourable view of
Servian reply if it corresponds to the forecast contained in
Belgrade telegram No. 52 of 25th July.


Under-Secretary of State considers very fact of their
making,this communication to Austro-Plungarian Government
implies that they associate themselves to a certain extent with
your hope. German Government do not see their way to
going beyond this.
No. 35.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 26.)
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 26, 1914.
Minister for Foreign Affairs welcomes your proposal for
a conference, and will instruct Italian Ambassador to-night
accordingly.
Austrian Ambassador has informed Italian Government
this evening that Minister in Belgrade had been recalled, but
that this did not imply declaration of war.
No. 36.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie, Sir H. Rumbold, and Sir
R. Rodd. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 26, 1914.
Would Minister for Foreign Affairs be disposed to
instruct Ambassador her.e to join with representatives of
France, Italy, and Germany, and myself to meet here in con-
ference immediately for the purpose of discovering an issue
which would prevent complications? You should ask Minister
for Foreign Affairs whether he would do this. If so, when
bringing the above suggestion to the notice of the Govern-
ments to which they are accredited, representatives at Bel-
grade, Vienna, and St. Petersburgh should be authorized to
request that all active military operations should be suspended
pending results of conference.
No.-37.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie. (Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 26, 1914.
Berlin telegram of 25th July A'
It is important to know if France will agree to suggested
action by the four Powers if necessary.
* See No. 18.


No. 38.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey. (Received July 27.)
Rome, July 23, 1914.
Sir,
I gather that the Italian Government have been made
cognisant of the terms of the communication which will be
addressed to Servia. Secretary-General, whom I saw this
morning at the Italian Foreign Office, took the view that the
gravity of the situation lay in the conviction of the Austro-
I-lungarian_ Government that it was absolutely necessary for
their prestige, after the many disillusions which the turn of
events in the Balkans has occasioned, to score a definite
success.
I have, &c.,
RENNELL RODD.
Reply of Servian Government to Austro-Hungarian Note.
(Communicated by the Servian Minister, July 27.) (Transla-
tion.) '
Ihe Royal Servian Government have received the com-
munication of the Imperial and Royal Government of the 10th
instant, and are convinced that their reply will remove any
misuudei standing which may threaten to impair the p'ood
neighbourly relations between the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy and the Kingdom of Servia.
Conscious of the fact that the protests which were made
both from the tribune of the national Skuptchina and in the
declarations and actions of the responsible representatives of
the State—protests which were cut short by the declarations
made by the Servian Government on the 18th March, 1909.
have not been renewed on any occasion as regards the great
neighbouring Monarchy, and that no attempt has been made
sinee that time, either by the successive Royal Governments
or by their organs, to change the political and legal state of
affairs created in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Royal Govern-
ment draw attention to the fact that in this connexion the
Imperial and Royal Government have made no representation
except one concerning a school book, and that on that occasion
the Imperial and Royal Government received an entirely satis-
factory explanation. Servia has several times given proofs of
her pacific and moderate policy during the Balkan crisis, and
it is thanks to Servia and to the sacrifice that she has made
in the exclusive interest of European peace that that peace


has been preserved. The Royal Government cannot be held
responsible for manifestations of a private character, such as
articles in the press and the peaceable work of societies —
manifestations which take place in nearly all countries in the
ordinary course of events, and which as a general rule escape,
official control. The Royal Government are all the less
responsible in view of the fact that at the time of the solution
of a series of questions which arose between Servia and
Austria-Hungary they gave proof of a great readiness to
oblige, and thus succeeded in settling the majority of these
questions to the advantage of the two neighbouring countries.
For these reasons the Royal Government have been
pained and surprised at the statements according to which
members of the Kingdom of Servia are supposed to have
participated in the preparations for the crime committed at
Serajevo; the Royal Government expected to be invited to
collaborate in an investigation of all that concerns this crime,
and they were ready, in order to prove the entire correctness
of their attitude, to take measures against any persons con-
cerning whom representations were made to them. Falling
in, therefore, with the desire of the Imperial and Royal
Government, they are prepared to hand over for trial any
Servian subject, without regard to his situation or rank, of
whose complicity in the crime of Serajevo proofs are forth-
coming, and more especially they undertake to cause to be
published on the first page of the Journal on the date
of the 13th (26th) July, the following declaration:—
"The Royal Government of Servia condemn all propa-
ganda which may be directed against Austria-Hungary, that
is to say, all such tendencies as aim at ultimately detaching
from the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy territories which form
part thereof, and they sincerely deplore the baneful conse-
quences of these criminal movements. The Royal Govern-
ment regret that, according to the communication from the
Imperial and Royal Government, certain Servian officers and
officials should have taken part in the above-mentioned propa-
ganda, and thus compromised the good neighbourly relations
to which the Royal Servian Government was solemnly
engaged by the declaration of the 31st IMarch, 1909, which
declaration disapproves and repudiates all idea or attempt at
interference with the destiny of the inhabitants any part
whatsoever of Austria-Hungary, and they considei it their
duty formally to warn the officers, officials, and entire popu-
lation of the kingdom that henceforth they will take the most
rigorous steps against all such persons as are guilty of such
acts, to prevent and to repress which they will use their utmost
endeavour."
This declaration will be brought to the knowledge of the
Royal Army in an order of the day, in the name of His


Majesty the King, by His Royal Highness the Crown Prince
Alexander, and will be published in the next official armv
bulletin.
The Royal Government further undertake—
T ) o introduce at the first regular convocation of the
okuptchma a provision into the press law providing for the
most severe punishment of incitement to hatred or contempt
GJ. the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and for taking - action
against any publication the general tendency of which is
directed against the territorial integrity of Austria-Hungary,
the Government eng'ag'e at the approaching revision of the
Constitution cause an amendment to be introduced into
article 22 of the Constitution of such a nature that such publi-
cation may be confiscated, a proceeding at present impossible
under the categorical terms of article 22 of the Constitution.
2. The Government possess no proof, nor does the note
ot the Imperial and Royal Government furnish them with
any, that the Narodna Odbrana" and other similar societies
have committed up to the present any criminal act of this
nature through the proceedings of any of their members.
Nevertheless, the Royal Government will accept the demand
of the Imperial and Royal Government, and will dissolve the
N arodna Odbrana Society and every other society which
may be directing its efforts against Austria-Hungary.
• Ihe Royal Servian Government undertake to remove
without delay from their public educational establishments in
oeivia all that serves or could serve to foment propaganda
against Austria-Hungary, whenever the Imperial and Royal
Government furnish them with facts and proofs of this propa-
ganda. *
_... 4 - The , R °y al Government also agree to remove from
military service all such persons as the judicial inquiry may
lave proved to be g'uilty of acts directed against the integrity
ot the territory of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and they
expect the Imperial and the Royal Government to communi-
cate to them at a later date the names and the acts of these
officers and officials for the purposes of the proceedings which
are to be taken against them.
5. The Royal Government must confess that they do not
clearly giasp the meaning - or the scope of the demand made
by the Imperial and Royal Government that Servia shall
undertake to accept the collaboration of the organs of the
Imperial and Royal Government upon their territory, but they
declare that they will admit such collaboration as agrees with
the principle of international law, with criminal procedure,
and with good neighbourly relations.
6 It goes without saying that the Royal Government
consider it their duty to open an inquiry against all such per-
sons as are, or eventually may be, implicated in the plot


of the 15th June, and who happen to be within the territory
of the kingdom. As regards the participation in this inquiry
of Austro-Hungarian agents or authorities appointed for this
purpose by the Imperial and Royal Government, the Royal
Government cannot accept such an arrangement, as it would
be a violation of the Constitution and of the law of criminal
procedure; nevertheless, in concrete cases communications as
to the results of the investigation in question might be given
to the Austro-Hungarian agents.
7. The Royal Government proceeded on the very even-
ing of the delivery of the note, to arrest Commandant Vioslav
Tankossitch. As regards Milan Ziganovitch, who is a sub-
ject of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and who up to the
15th June was employed (on probation) by the directorate of
railways, it has not yet been possible to arrest him.
The Austro-Hungarian Government are requested to be
so good as to supply as soon as possible in the customary
form, the presumptive evidence of guilt, as well as the even-
tual proofs of guilt which have been collected up to the
present, at the inquiry at Serajevo for the purposes of the
later inquiry.
8. The Servian Government will reinforce and extend the
measures which have been taken for preventing the illicit
traffic of arms and explosives across the frontier. It goes
without saying that they will immediately order an inquiry
and will severely punish the frontier officials on the Schabatz-
Loznitza line who have failed in their duty and allowed the
authors of the crime of Serajevo to pass.
9. The Royal Government will gladly give explanations
of the remarks made by their officials, whether in Servia or
abroad, in interviews after the crime and which according to
the statement of the Imperial and Royal Government were
hostile towards the Monarchy, as soon as the Imperial and
Royal Government have communicated to them the passages
in question in these remarks, and as soon as they have shown
that the remarks were actually made by the said officials,
although the Royal Government will itself take steps to collect
evidence and proofs.
10. The Royal Government will inform the Imperial and
Royal Government of the execution of the measures com-
prised under the above heads, in so far as this has not already
been done by the present note, as soon as each measure has
been ordered and carried out.
If the Imperial and Royal Government are not satisfied
with this reply, the Servian Government, considering that it
is not to the common interest to precipitate the solution of
this question, are ready, as always, to accept a pacific under-
standing either by referring this question to the decision of


the International Tribunal of The Hague, or to the Great
Powers which took part in the drawing up of the declaration
made by the Servian Government on the 18th (31st) March,
1909.
Belgrade, July 12 (25), 1914.
No. 40.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 17.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 26, 1914.
Russian Ambassador just returned from leave thinks that
Austro-Hungarian Government are determined on war, and
that it is impossible for Russia to remain indifferent. He does
not propose to press for more time in the sense of your tele-
gram of the 25th instant* (last paragraph).
When the repetition of your telegram of the 26th instant
Lo Parisf arrived, I had the French and Russian Ambassadors
both with me. They expressed great satisfaction with its con-
tents, which I communicated to them. They doubted, how-
ever, whether the principle of Russia being an interested party
entitled to have a say in the settlement of a purely Austro-
Servian dispute would be accepted by either the Austro-
Hungarian or the German Government.
Instructions were also given to the Italian Ambassador
to support the request of the Russian Government that the
time limit jsjiould be postponed. They arrived, however, too
late for any useful action to be taken.
* See No. 26. f See No. 36.
No. 41.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 27.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 27, 1914.
I have had conversations with all my colleagues repre-
senting the Great Powers. The impression left on my mind
is that the Austro-Hungarian note was so drawn up as to
make war inevitable; that the Austro-Hungarian Government
are fully resolved to have war with Servia; that they consider
their position as a Great Power to be at stake; and that until
punishment has been administered to Servia it is unlikely that


they will listen to proposals of mediation. This country has
gone wild with joy at the prospect of war with Servia, and
its postponement or prevention would undoubtedly be a great
disappointment.
I propose, subject to any special directions you desire to
send me, to express to the Austrian- Minister for Foreign
Affairs the hope of His Majesty's Government that it may
yet be possible to avoid war, and to ask His Excellency
whether he cannot suggest a way out even now.
No. 42.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 27.)
(Telegraphic.)
Paris, July 27, 1914.
Your proposal, as stated in two telegrams of yes-
terday* is accepted by the French Government. French
Ambassador in London, who returns there this evening, has
been instructed accordingly. Instructions have been sent to
the French Ambassador at Berlin to concert with his British
colleague as to the advisability of their speaking jointly to the
German- Government. Necessary instructions have also been
sent to the French representatives at Belgrade, Vienna, and
St. Petersburgh, but until it is known that the Germans have
spoken at Vienna with some success, it would, in the opinion
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be dangerous for the
French, Russian, and British Ambassadors to do so.
* No. 36 and 37.
No. 43.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 27.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 27, 1914.
Your telegram of 26th July*
Secretary of State sa} r s that conference you suggest would
practically amount to a court of arbitration, and could not, in
his opinion, be called together except at the request of Austria
and Russia. He could not therefore fall in with your sugges-
tion, desirous though he was to co-operate for the maintenance


of peace. I said I was sure that your idea had nothing to do
with arbitration, but meant that representatives of the four
nations not directly interested should discuss and suggest
means for avoiding a dangerous situation. He maintained,
however, that such a conference as you proposed was not prac-
ticable. He added that news he had just received from St.
Petersburgh showed that there was an intention on the part of
M. de Sazonof to exchange views with Count Berchtold. He
thought that this method of procedure might lead to a satis-
factory result, and that it would be best, before doing any-
thing else, to await outcome of the exchange of views between
the Austrian and Russian Governments.
In the course of a short conversation Secretary of State
said that as yet Austria was only partially mobilising, but that
if Russia mobilised against Germany latter would have to
follow suit. I asked him what he meant by " mobilising
against Germany." He said that if Russia only mobilised in
South, Germany would not mobilise, but if she mobilised in
north, Germany would have to do so too, and Russian system
of mobilisation was so complicated that it might be difficult
exactly to locate her mobilisation. Germany would therefore
have to be very careful not to be taken by surprise.
Finally, Secretary of State said that news from St. Peters-
burgh had caused him to take more hopeful view of the general
situation.
*See No. 36.
No. 44.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 27.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 27, 1914.
Austrian Ambassador tried, in a long conversation which
he had yesterday with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
explain away objectionable features of the recent action taken
by the Austro-Hungarian Government. Minister for Foreign
Affairs pointed out that, although he perfectly understood
Austria's motives, the ultimatum had been so drafted that it
could not possibly be accepted as a whole by the Servian
Government. Although the demands were reasonable enough
in some cases, others not only could not possibly be put into
immediate execution, seeing that they entailed revision of
existing Servian laws, but were, moreover, incompatible with


Servia's dignity as an independent State. It would be useless
for Russia to offer her good offices at Belgrade, in view of the
fact that she was the object of such suspicion in Austria. In
order, however, to put an end to the present tension, he
thought that England and Italy might be willing to collabo-
rate with Austria. The Austrian Ambassador undertook to
communicate His Excellency's remarks to his Government.
On the Minister for Foreign Affairs questioning me, I told
him that I had correctly defined the attitude of His Majesty's
Government in my conversation with him, which I reported
in my telegram of the 24th instant.* I added that you could
not promise to do anything more, that His Excellency
was mistaken if he believed that the cause of peace could
be promoted by your telling the German Government that
they would have to deal with us as well as with Russia
and France if they supported Austria by force of arms. Their
attitude would merely be stiffened by such a menace, and we
could only induce her to use her influence at Vienna to avert
war by approaching her in the capacity of a friend who was
anxious to preserve peace. His Excellency must not, if our
efforts were to be successful, do anything to precipitate a con-
flict. In these circumstances, I trusted that the, Russian
Government would defer mobilisation ukase for as long as
possible, and that troops would not be allowed to cross the
frontier even when it was issued.
In reply, the Minister for Foreign Affairs told me that
until the issue of the Imperial ukase no effective steps towards
mobilisation could be taken, and the Austro-Hungarian
Government would profit by delay in order to complete her
military preparations if it was deferred too long.
*See No. 6.
No. 45.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 27.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 27, 1914-.
Since my conversation with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, as reported in my telegram of to-day,* I understand
that His Excellency has proposed that the modifications to be
introduced into Austrian demands should be the subject of
direct conversation between Vienna and St. Petersburgh.
*See No. 44.


No. 46.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 27, 1914.
German Ambassador has informed me that German
Government accept in principle mediation between Austria
and Russia by the four Powers, reserving, of course, their
right as an ally to help Austria if attacked. He has also been
instructed to request me to use influence in St. Petersburg!!
to localise the war and to keep up the peace of Europe.
I have replied that the Servian reply went farther than
could have been expected to meet the Austrian demands. Ger-
man Secretary of State has himself said that there were some
things in the Austrian note that Servia could hardly be ex-
pected to accept. I assumed that Servian reply could not have
gone as far as it did unless Russia had exercised conciliatory
influence at Belgrade, and it was really at Vienna that mode-
rating influence was now required. If Austria put the Servian
reply aside as being worth nothing, and marched into Servia,
it meant that she was determined to crush Servia at all costs,
being reckless of the consequences that might be involved.
Servian reply should at least be treated as a basis for discus-
sion and pause. I said German Government should urge this
at Vienna.
I recalled what German Government had said as to the
gravity of the situation if the war could not be localised, and
observed that if Germany assisted Austria against Russia, it
would be because, without any reference to the merits of the
dispute, Germany could not afford to see Austria crushed.
Just as other issues might be raised that would supersede the
dispute between Austria and Servia, and would bring other
Powers in, and the war would be the biggest ever known; but
as long as Germany would work to keep the peace I would
keep closely in touch. I repeated that after the Servian reply
it was at Vienna that some moderation must be urged.
No. 47
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 27, 1914.
See my telegram of to-day to Sir E. Goschen.*
I have been told by the Russian Ambassador that in
German and Austrian circles impression prevails that in any


event we stand aside. His Excellency deplored the effect that
such an impression must produce.
This impression ought, as I have pointed out, to be
dispelled by the orders we have given to the First Fleet, which
is concentrated, as it happens, at Portland, not to disperse for
manoeuvre leave. But I explained to the Russian Ambassa-
dor that my reference to it must not be taken to mean that
anything more than diplomatic action was promised.
We hear from German and Austrian sources that they
believe Russia will take no action so long as Austria agrees
not to take Servian territory. I pointed this out, and added
that it would be absurd if we were to appear more Servian
than the Russians in our dealings with the German and
Austrian Governments.
♦See No. 37.
No 48.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen.
Foreign Office, July 27, 1914.
SIR,
Count Mensdorff told me by instruction to-day that the
Servian Government had not accepted the demands which
the Austrian Government were obliged to address to them in
order to secure permanently the most vital Austrian interests.
Servia showed that she did not intend to abandon her subver-
sive aims, tending towards continuous disorder in the Austrian
frontier territories and their final disruption from the Aus-
trian Monarchy. Very reluctantly, and against their wish, the
Austrian Government were compelled to take more severe
measures to enforce a fundamental change of the attitude of
enmity pursued up to now by Servia. As the British Govern-
ment knew, the Austrian Government had for many years
endeavoured to find a way to get on with their turbulent
neighbour, though this had been made very difficult for them
by the continuous provocations of Servia. The Serajevo
murder had made clear to everyone what appalling conse-
quences the Servian propaganda had already produced, and
what a permanent threat to Austria it involved. We would
understand that the Austrian Government must consider that
the moment had arrived to obtain, by means of the strongest
pressure, guarantees for the definite suppression of the Servian
aspirations and for the security of peace and order on the
south-eastern frontier of Austria. As the peaceable means to
this effect were exhausted, the Austrian Government must at


last appeal to force. They had not taken this decision with-
out reluctance. I heir action, which had no sort of aggressive
tendency, could not be represented otherwise than as an act of
self-defence. Also they thought that they would serve a Euro-
pean interest if they prevented Servia from being henceforth an
element of general unrest such as she had been for the last ten
years. The high sense of justice of the British nation and of
British statesmen could not blame the Austrian Government if
the latter defended by the sword what was theirs, and cleared
up their position with a country whose hostile policy had
forced upon them for years measures so costly as to have
gravely injured Austrian national prosperity. Finally, the
Austrian Government, confiding in their amicable relations
with us, felt that they could count on our sympathy in a fight
that was forced on them, and on our assistance in localising
the fight, if necessary.
Count Mensdorff added on his own account that, as long
as Servia was confronted with Turkey, Austria never took
very severe measures, because of her adherence to the policy
of the free development of the Balkan States. Now that Servia
had doubled her territory and population without any Austrian
interference, the repression of Servian subversive aims was a
matter of self-defence and self-preservation on Austria's part.
He reiterated that Austria had no intention of taking Servian
territory or aggressive designs against Servian territory.
I said that I could not understand the construction put
by the Austrian Government upon the Servian reply, and I
told Count Mensdorff the substance of the conversation that
I had had with the German Ambassador this morning about
that reply.
Count Mensdorff admitted that, on paper, the Servian
reply might seem to be satisfactory; but the Servians had
refused the one thing—the co-operation of Austrian officials
and police—which would be a real guarantee that in practice
the Servians would not carry on their subversive campaign
against Austria.
I said that it seemed to me as if the Austrian Govern-
ment believed that, even after the Servian reply, they could
make war upon Servia anyhow, without risk of bringing
Russia into the dispute. If they could make war on Servia and
at the same time satisfy Russia, well and good, but if not, the
consequences would be incalculable. I pointed out to him that
I quoted this phrase from an expression of the views of the
German Government. I feared that it would be expected in
St. Petersburgh that the Servian reply would diminish the
tension, and now, when Russia found that there was increased
tension, the situation would become increasingly serious. Al-
ready the effect on Europe was one of anxiety. I pointed out


that our fleet was to have dispersed to-day, but we had felt
unable to let it disperse. We should not think of calling up
reserves at this moment, and there was no menace in what
we had done about our fleet; but, owing to the possibility of a
European conflagration, it was impossible for us to disperse
our forces at this moment. I gave this as an illustration of the
anxiety that w r as felt. It seemed to me that the Servian rttplj
already involved the greatest humiliation to Servia that I had
ever seen a country undergo, and it was very disappointing to
me that the reply was treated by the Austrian Government as
if it were as unsatisfactory as a blank negative.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 49.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir R. Rodd.
Foreign Office, July 27, 1914.
Sir,
The Italian Ambassador informed Sir A. Nicholson to-day
that the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed entirely
with my proposal for a conference of four to be held in
London.
As regards the question of asking Russia, Austria-Hun-
gary and Servia to suspend military operations pending the
result of the conference, the Marquis di San Guiliano would
recommend the suggestion warmly to the German Govern-
ment, and would inquire what procedure they would propose
should be followed at Vienna.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 50.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 31.)
Vienna, July 28, 1914.
Sir,
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of
the Austro-Hungarian note announcing the declaration of war
against Servia.
I have, etc..
MAURICE DE BUNSEN,


Enclosure in No. 50.
Copy of Note verbale, dated Vienna, July 28, 1914.
(Translation.)
In order to bring to an end the subversive intrigues ori-
ginating from Belgrade and aimed at the territorial integrity
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, the Imperial and Royal
Government has delivered to the Royal Servian Government
a note in which a series of demands were formulated, for the
acceptance of which a delay of forty-eight hours has been
granted to the Royal Government. The Royal Servian Govern-
ment not having answered this note in a satisfactory manner,
the Imperial and Royal Government are themselves compelled
to see to the safeguarding of their rights and interests, and,
with this object, to have recourse to force of arms.
Austria-Hungary, who has just addressed to Servia a for-
mal declaration, in conformity with article 1 of the convention
of the 18th October, 1907, relative to the opening of hostilities,
considers herself henceforward in a state of war with Servia.
In bringing the above to notice of His Britannic Majesty's
Embassy, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs has the honour to
declare that Austria-Hungary will act during the hostilities
in conformity with the terms of the Conventions of The Hague
of the 18th October, 1907, as also with those of the Declaration
of London of the 28th February, 1909, provided an analogous
procedure is adopted by Servia.
The Embassy is requested to be so good as to communi-
cate the present notification as soon as possible to the British
Government.
No. 51.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
Paris, July 27, 1914.
Sir,
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a copy of
a memorandum from the acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
as to the steps to be taken to prevent an outbreak of hosti-
lities between Austria-Hungary and Servia.
I have, etc.,
FRANCIS BERTIE.


Enclosure in No. 51.
Note communicated to Sir F. Bertie by M. Bienvenu-
Martin.
(Translation.)
In a note of the 25th of this month, His Excellency the
British Ambassador informed the Government of the Republic
that, in Sir E. Grey's opinion, the only possible way of assur-
ing the maintenance of peace in case of the relations between
Russia and Austria becoming more strained, would be if the
representatives of Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy
in Austria and Russia were to take joint action; and he ex-
pressed the wish to know if the Government of the Republic
were disposed to welcome such a suggestion.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim has the honour
to inform His Excellency Sir F. Bertie that he has requested
M. Jules Cambon to concert with the British Ambassador in
Germany, and to support any representation which they may
consider it advisable to make to the Berlin Cabinet.
In accordance with the desire expressed by the British
Government, and conveyed to them by Sir F. Bertie in his
note of the 26th of this month, the Government of the Re-
public have also authorised M. Paul Cambon to take part in
the conference which Sir E. Grey has proposed with a view to
discovering a means of settling the present difficulties.
The Government of the Republic is likewise ready to in-
struct the representatives at St. Petersburgh, Vienna and
Belgrade to induce the Russian, Austrian, and Servian Govern-
ments to abstain from all active military operations pending
the results of this conference. He considers, however, that
the chance of Sir E. Grey's proposal being successful depends
essentially on the action which the Berlin Government would
be willing to take at Vienna. Representations made to the
Austrian-Hungarian Government for the purpose of bringing
about a suspension of military operations would seem bound
to fail unlqss the German Government do not beforehand
exercise their influence on the Vienna Cabinet.
The President of the Council ad interim takes the oppor-
tunity, etc.
Paris, July 27, 1914.
No. 52.
Note communicated by French Embassy, July 28, 1914.
(Translation.)
The Government of the Republic accepts Sir Edward
Grey's proposal in regard to intervention by Great Britain,


France, Germany, and Italy, with a view to avoiding active
military operations on the frontiers of Austria, Russia and
Servia, and they have authorised M. 13.I 3 . Cambon to take part
in the deliberations of the four representatives at the meet-
ing whicjh is to be held in London.
The French Ambassador in Berlin has received instruc-
tions to consult first the British Ambassador in Berlin, and
then to support the action taken by the latter in such manner
and degree as may .be considered appropriate.
M. Vivian is ready to send to the representatives of France
in Vienna, St. Petersburg!!, and Belgrade instructions in the
sense suggested by the British Government.
No. 53.
M. Sazonof to Count Benckendorff.—(Communicated by
Count Benckendorff, July 28.)
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburg!!, July 27, 1914
The British Ambassador came to ascertain whether we
think it desirable that Great Britain should take the initiative
ki convoking a conference in London of the representatives
of England, France, Germany, and Italy to examine the possi-
bility of a way .out of the present situation.
I replied to the Ambassador that I have begun conversa-
tions with the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador under condi-
tions which, I hope, may be favourable. I have not, however,
received as yet any reply to the proposal made by me for revis-
ing the note between the two Cabinets.
If direct explanations with the Vienna Cabinet were to
prove impossible, I am ready to accept the British proposal,
or any other proposal of a kind that would bring about a
favourable solution of the conflict.
I wish, however, to put an end from this day forth to a
misunderstanding which might arise from the answer given
by the French Minister of Justice to the German Ambassador,
regarding counsels of moderation to be given to the Imperial
Cabinet.


No. 54.
M. Sazonof to Count Benckendorff.—(Communicated by
Count Benckendorff, July 28, 1914 )
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 15 (28), 1914.
My interviews with the German Ambassador confirm my
impression that. Germany is, if anything, in favour of the un-
compromising attitude adopted by Austria.
1 he Berlin Cabinet, who could have prevented the whole
of this crisis developing, appear to be exerting no influence on
their ally.
The Ambassador considers that the Servian reply is in-
sufficient.
This attitude of the German Government is most alarm-
ing.
It seems to me that England is in a better position than
any other Power to make another attempt at Berlin to induce
the German Government to take the necessary action. There
is no doubt that the key of the situation is to be found at
Berlin.
No. 55.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 27, 1914.
With reference to my telegram of yesterday,* I saw the
Minister for Foreign Affairs this afternoon, and found him
very conciliatory and more optimistic.
He would, he said, use all his influence at Belgrade to
induce the Servian Government to go as far as possible in
giving satisfaction to Austria, but her territorial integrity must
be guaranteed and her rights as a sovereign State respected,
so that she should not become Austria's vassal. He did not
know whether Austria would accept friendly exchange of
views which he had proposed, but, if she did, he wished to
keep in close contact with the other Powers throughout the
conversations that would ensue.
He again referred to the fact that the obligations under-
taken by Servia in 1908, alluded to in the Austrian ultimatum,
were given to the Powers.
I asked if he had heard of your proposal with regard to
conference of the four Powers, and on his replying in the


affirmative, I told him confidentially of your instructions to
me, and inquired whether, instead of such a conference, he
would prefer a direct exchange of views, which he had pro-
posed. The German Ambassador, to whom I had just spoken,
had expressed his personal opinion that a direct exchange of
views would be more agreeable to Austria-Hungary.
His Excellency said he was perfectly ready to stand aside
if the Powers accepted the proposal for a conference, but he
trusted that you would keep in touch with the Russian Am-
bassador in the event of its taking place.
*See No. 44.
No. 56.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
{Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 27, 1914.
The Russian Ambassador had to-day a long and earnest
conversation with Baron Macchio, the Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs. He told him that, having just come
back from St. Petersburgh, he was well acquainted with the
views of the Russian Government, and the state of Russian
public opinion. He could assure him that if actual war
broke out with Servia, it would be impossible to localize it,
for Russia was not prepared to give way again, as she had
done on previous occasions, and especially during the annexa-
tion crisis of 1909. He earnestly hoped that something would
be done before Servia was actually invaded. Baron Macchio
replied that this would now be difficult, as a skirmish had
already taken place on the Danube, in which the Servians had
been the aggressors. The Russian Ambassador said that he
would do all he could to keep the Servians quiet, pending any
discussions that might yet take place, and he told me that he
would advise his Government to induce the Servian Govern-
ment to avoid any conflict as long as possible, and to fall back
before an Austrian advance. Time so gained should suffice
to enable a settlement to be reached. He had just heard of a
satisfactory conversation which the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs had yesterday with Austrian Ambassador at
St. Petersburgh. The former had agreed that much of the
Austro-Hungarian note to Servia had been perfectly reason-
able, and in fact they had practically reached an understand-
ing as to the guarantees which Servia might reasonably be
asked to give to Austria-Hungary for her future good beha-


viour. The Russian Ambassador urged that the Austrian Am-
bassador at St. Petersburgh should be furnished with full
powers to continue discussion with the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who was very willing to advise Servia to
yield all that could be fairly asked of her as an independent
Power. Baron Macchio promised to submit this suggestion
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
No. 57
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 27, 1914.
Minister for Foreign Affairs greatly doubts whether Ger-
many will be willing to invitfe Austria to suspend military
action pending the conierence, but he had hopes that military
action may be practically deferred by the fact of the confer-
ence meeting at once, As at present informed, he sees no
possibility of Austria receding from any point laid down in her
note to Servia, but he believes that if Servia will even now
accept it Austria will be satisfied, and if she had reason to
think that such will be the advice of the Powers, Austria may
defer action. Servia may be induced to accept note in its
entirety on the advice of the four Powers invited to the con-
ference, and this would enable her to say that she had yielded
to Europe and not to Austria-Plungary alone.
Telegrams from Vienna to the press here stating that
Austria is favourably impressed with the declarations of the
Italian Government have, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
assures me, no foundation. He said he has expressed no
opinion to Austria with regard to the note. He assured me
both before and after communication of the note, and again
to-day, that Austrian Government have given him assurances
that they demand no territorial sacrifices from Servia.
No. 58.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
Paris, July 28, 1914.
I communicated to the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs this afternoon the substance of your conversation with
the German Ambassador, recorded in your telegram* to Berlin
of the 27th July.


His .Excellency is grateful for thfe communication. He
saicl that it confirms what he had heard of your attitude, and
he feels confident that your observations to the German Am-
bassador will have a good effect in the interest of peace..
*See No. 46.
No. 59.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—-(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
Paris, July 28, 1914.
. I informed the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs to-
day of your conversation with the Russian Ambassador, as
recorded in your telegram of yesterday* to St. Petersburgh.
He is grateful for the communication, and quite appre-
ciates the impossibility for His Majesty's Government to de-
clare themselves " solidaires " with Russia on a question be-
tween Austria and Servia, which in its present condition is
not one affecting' England. He also sees that you cannot
take up an attitude at Berlin and Vienna more Servian than
that attributed in German and Austrian sources to the Rus-
sian Government.
German Ambassador has stated that Austria would re-
spect- the integrity of Servia, but when asked - whether her
independence also would be respectd he-gave no assurance.
*See No, 47.
No. 60.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.™( Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.).
Berlin, July 28, 1914,
Secretary of State spoke yesterday in the same sense as
that reported in my telegram of yesterday* to my French and
Italian colleagues respecting your proposal. I discussed with
my two colleagues this morning his reply, and we found that,
while' refusing the proposed conference, he had said to all of
us that nevertheless he desired to work with us for the main-
tenance of general: peace. We therefore deduced that if he is
sincere in this wish he.can only be objecting to the form of
your proposal. Perhaps he himself could be induced to sug-
gest lines on which he would find it possible to. work with us,
*See No. 43.


No. 61,
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 28, 1914.
1 saw Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning.
; His 1 Excellency declared that Austria-Hungary cannot
delay warlike proceedings against Senna, and would have to
decline any suggestion of negotiations on basis of Servian
reply. .-.
Prestige of Dual Monarchy was engaged, and nothing
could now prevent conflict.
No. 62.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward. Grey.—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.);
Vienna, July 28, 1914.
I spoke to Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day in the sense
of your telegram of 27th July* to Berlin. 1 avoided the word
" mediation," but said that, as mentioned in your speech,f
which he had just read to me, you had hopes that conversa-
tions in London between the four Powers less interested might
yet lead to an arrangement which Austro-ldungarian Govern-
ment would accept as satisfactory and as rendering actual
hostilities unnecessary. I added that- you had regarded Ser-
vian reply as having gone far to meet just demands of Austria-
Hungary; that you thought it constituted a fair basis of dis-
cussion during which warlike operations might remain in
abeyance, and that Austrian Ambassador in Berlin was speak-
ing in this sense. Minister for Foreign Affairs said quietly,
but firmly, that no discussion could be accepted on basis of
Servian note; that war would be declared to-day, and that
well-known pacific character of Emperor, as well as, he might
add, his own, might be accepted as a guarantee that war was
both just and inevitable. This was a matter that must be
settled directly between the two parties immediately con-
cerned. I said that you would hear with regret that hostilities
could not now be arrested, as you feared that they might lead
to complications threatening the peace of Europe.
In taking leave of His Excellency, I begged him to believe
that, if in the course of present grave crisis our point of view
should sometimes differ from his, this would arise, not from
want of sympathy with the many just complaints which


Austria-Hungary had against Servia, but from the fact that r
whereas Austria-Hungary put first her quarrel with Servia r
you were anxious in the first instance for peace of Europe. I
trusted this larger aspect of the question would appeal with
equal force to His Excellency. He said he had it also in mind,
but thought that Russia ought not to oppose operations like
those impending, which did not aim at territorial aggrandise-
ment, and which could no longer be postponed.
*See No. 46.
f" Hansard," Vol. 65, No. 107, columns 931, 932, 933.
No. 63.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
\■ # ' :
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July .28, 1914.
Your telegram of 25th July to Paris.*
I have communicated substance to Minister for Foreign
Affairs, who immediately telegraphed in precisely similar
terms to Berlin and Vienna,
*See No. 27.
No. 64
Sir R. Rodd to Sir 'Edward Grey.—(Received July 28.)
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 28, 1914.
At the request of the Minister for Foreign Affairs I sub-
mit the following to you
In a long conversation this morning Servian Charge
d'Affaires had said he thought that if some explanations were
given regarding mode in which Austrian agents would require
to intervene under article 5 and article 6, Servia might still
accept the whole Austrian note.
As it was not to be anticipated that Austria would give
such explanations to Servia, they might be given to Powers
engaged in discussions, who might then advise Servia to accept
without conditions.


The Austro-Hungarian Government had in the meantime
published a long official explanation of grounds on which Ser-
vian reply was considered inadequate. Minister for Foreign
Affairs considered many points besides explanation—such as
slight verbal difference in sentence regarding renunciation of
propaganda—quite childish, but there was a passage which
might prove useful in facilitating such a course as was con-
sidered practicable by the Servian Charge cf Affaires. It was
stated that co-operation of Austrian agents in Servia was to
be only in investigation, not in judicial or administrative mea-
sures. Servia was said to have wilfully misinterpreted this.
He thought, therefore, that ground might be cleared here.
I only reproduce from memory, as I had not yet received
text of Austrian declaration.
Minister impressed upon me, above all, his anxiety for
the immediate beginning of discussion. A wide general lati-
tude to accept at once every point or suggestion on which he
could be in agreement with ourselves and Germany had been
given to Italian Ambassador.
No. 65.
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
28.) (Telegraphic.)
Nish, July 28, 1914.
I have urged on the Servian Government the greatest
moderation pending efforts being made towards a peaceful
solution.
Two-Servian steamers fired on and damaged, and two.Ser-
vian merchant-vessels have been captured by a Hungarian
monitor at O.rsova,
No. 66.
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received- July
28.) (Telegraphic.)
Nish, July 28, 1914.
Telegram received here that war declared by Austria,


No. 67.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 28,1914.
Explanation given in your telegram of the 27th.-July*' of
what was my idea in proposing a conference is quite right. It
would not be an arbitration, but a private and informal dis-
cussion to ascertain what suggestion could be made for a
settlement. No suggestion would be put forward that had not
previously been ascertained to be acceptable to Austria ■ and
Russia, with whom the mediating Powers could easily keep in
touch through their respective allies.
But as long as there is a prospect of a direct exchange of
views, between Austria and Russia, I would suspend, every
other suggestion, as I entirely agree that it is the most pre-
ferable ' method of , all.
I understand that the Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs has proposed a friendly exchange of views to the Aus-
trian Government, and, if the latter accepts, it will no doubt
relieve the tension and make the situation less critical.
It is very satisfactory to hear from the German Ambas-
sador here that the German Government have taken action at
Vienna in the sense of the conversation recorded, in my tele-
gram of yesterday to you.f
•*See No. 43.
fSee No. 46.
No. 68,
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 28, 1914.
German. Government, having accepted principle of media-
tion between Austria and Russia by the four Powers, if neces-
sary, I am ready to propose that the German Secretary of
State should suggest the lines on which this principle should
be applied. I will, however, keep the idea in reserve until we
see how the conversations between Austria and Russia, pro-
gress. v:


No. 69.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 28, 1914.
It is most satisfactory that there is a prospect of direct
exchange of views between the Russian and Austrian Govern-
ments, as reported in your telegram of the 27th July.*
I am ready to put forward any practical proposal that
would facilitate this, but I am not quite clear as to what the
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs proposes the Ministers
at Belgrade should do. Could he not first mention in an ex-
change of views with Austria his willingness to co-operate
in some such scheme? It might then take more concrete
shape.
*See No. 55.
No. 70.
Telegrams -communicated by Count Benckendorff, July. 29,
1914.
(1) Telegram from M. Sazonof to Russian Ambassador at
Berlin, dated July 28, 1914.
In consequence of the declaration of war by Austria
against Servia, the Imperial Government will announce to-
morrow (29th) the mobilisation in the military circonscrip-
tions of Odessa, Kieff, Moscow, and Kazan. Please inform
German Government, confirming the absence in Russia of any
aggressive intention against Germany.
The Russian Ambassador at Vienna has not been recalled
from. his post.
(2). Telegram to Count BenckendorfL
The Austrian declaration of war'clearly puts an end to
the idea of direct communications between Austria and
Russia. Action by London Cabinet in order to set on foot
mediation with a view to suspension of military operations of
Austria against Servia is now most urgent.
Unless military operations.- are stopped, mediation, would
only allow, matters to drag on and give Austria time to crush
Servia.


No. 71.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 29.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 28, 1914.
At invitation of Imperial Chancellor, I called upon his
Excellency this evening. He said that he wished me to tell
you that he was most anxious that Germany should work
together with England for maintenance of general peace, as
they had done successfully in the last European crisis. He
had not been able to accept your proposal for a conference of
representatives of the Great Powers, because he did not think
that would be effective, and because such a conference
would in his opinion have had appearance of an "Areopagus"
consisting of two Powers of each group sitting in judgment
upon the two remaining Powers but his inability to accept
proposed conference must not be regarded' as militating
against his strong desire for effective co-operation. You
could be assured that he was doing his very best both at
Vienna and St. Petersburgh to get the two Governments to
discuss the situation;/ directly with each other and in a
friendly way. Pie had great hopes that such discussions
would take place and lead to a satisfactory result, but if the
news were true which he had just read in the papers, that
Russia had mobilised fourteen army corps in the south, he
thought situation was very serious, and he himself would be
in a very difficult position, as in these circumstances it would
be out of his power to continue to preach moderation at
Vienna. He added that Austria, who as yet was onh
partially mobilising, would have to take similar measures,
and if war were to result, Russia would be entirely respon-
sible. I ventured to say that if Austria refused to take any
notice of Servian note, which, to my mind, gave way in nearly
every point demanded by Austria, and which in any case
offered a basis for discussion, surely a certain portion' of re-
sponsibility would rest with her. His Excellency said that he
did not wish to discuss Servian note/but that Austria's stand-
point, and in this he agreed, was that her quarrel with Servia
was a purely Austrian concern, with which Russia had
nothing to do. He reiterated his desire to co-operate with
England and his intention to do his utmost to maintain
general peace. -"A war between the Great Powers must be
avoided" were his last words.
Austrian colleague said to me to-day that a general war
was most unlikely, as Russia neither wanted nor was in a
position to make war. I think that that opinion is shared by-
many people here.


No. 72.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey—(Received July
29.) —-(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 28, 1914.
Minister for Foreign Affairs begged me to thank you for
the language you had held to the German Ambassador, as re-
ported in your telegram* to Berlin, substance of which I
communicated to His Excellency. He took a pessimistic
view of the situation, having received the same disquieting
news from Vienna as had reached His Majesty's Govern-
ment. I said it was important that we should know the real
intentions of the Imperial Government, and asked him
whether he would be satisfied with the assurance which the
Austrian Ambassador had, I understood, been instructed to
give in respect to Servia's integrity and independence. I
added that I was sure any arrangement tor averting a
European war would be welcomed by His Majesty's Govern-
ment. In reply His Excellency stated that if Servia were
attacked Russia would not be satisfied with any engagement
which Austria might take on these two points, and that order
for mobilisation against Austria would be issued on the day
that Austria crossed Servian frontier.
I told the German Ambassador, who appealed to me to
give moderating counsels-to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
that from the beginning I had not ceased to do so, and that
the German Ambassador at Vienna should now in his turn
use his restraining influence. I made it clear to His Excel-
lency that, Russia being thoroughly in earnest, a general
war could not be averted if Servia were attacked by Austria.
As regards the suggestion of conference, the Ambassador
had received no instructions, and before acting with me the
French and Italian Ambassadors are still waiting for their
final instructions.
*See No. 46.
No. 73.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
29.)— (Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July 28, 1914.
T have received a note verbalc from Ministry for Foreign
Affairs stating that, the Servian Government not having re-
plied to note of 23rd July* in a satisfactory manner. Imperial
and Royal Government is compelled itself to provide toi pro-


tection of its rights, and to have recourse for that object "to
force of arms. Austria-Hungary has addressed to Servia
formal declaration according to; Article 1 of Convention of
18th October, 1907, relative to opening of hostilities, and con-
siders herself from- to-day in state of war with Servia.
Austria-Hungary will conform, provided Servia does . so. to
stipulations of Hague Conventions of 18th October. 1907, and
to Declaration of London of 26th February, 1909.
*See No. 4.
No, 74.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
29.)—( Telegraphic.) "
Vienna, July 28, 1914.
I arn - informed by the Russian Ambassador that the
Russian Government's suggestion has been declined by the
Austro-Hungarian Government. The suggestion was to the
effect that the means of settling the Austro-Servian conflict
should be discussed directly between Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Austrian Ambassador at St. Peters-
burgh, who should be authorised accordingly.
The Russian Ambassador thinks that a conference in
London of the less interested Powers, such as you have pro-
posed, offers now the only prospect of preserving peace of
Europe, and he is sure that the Russian Government will
acquiesce willingly in your proposal. So long as opposing
armies have not actually come in all hope need not
be abandoned.
No. 75.
'Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
29.) —(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 29, 1914
I was sent for again to-day by the Imperial Chancellor,
who told me that he regretted to state that the Austro-
Hungarian. Government, to whom, he had at once com-
municated your opinion, had answered that events had
marched too rapidly and that it was therefore too late to act
upon your suggestion that the Servian reply might form: the
basis of discussion. His Excellency had, on receiving their
reply, despatched a message to Vienna in which he explained


that, although a certain desire had, in his opinion, been shown
in the Servian reply to meet the demands of Austria, he
understood entirely that, without some sure guarantees that
Servia would carry out in their entirety the demands , made
upon her, the Austro-Hungarian Government could not rest
satisfied in view of their past experience. He had then-gone
on to say that the hostilities which were about to be under-
taken against Servia had presumably the exclusive object of
securing such guarantees, seeing that the Austrian Govern-
ment; already assured the Russian Government that they had
no territorial designs.
He advised the Austro-Hungarian Government, should
this view be correct, to speak openly in this sense. The
holding of such language would, he hoped, eliminate all
possible misunderstandings.
As yet, he told me, he had not received a reply from
Vienna.
From the fact that he had gone so far in the matter of
giving advice at 'Vienna, His; Excellency hoped that you
would realise that he was sincerely doing all in his power to
prevent danger of European complications.
The fact of his communicating this information to .you
was a proof of the confidence which he felt in you and evi-
dence of his anxiety that you should know he was doing His
best to support your efforts in the cause of general peace,
efforts which' he sincerely, appreciated.
No. 76.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey. —(Received July
29.) —(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 29, 1914,
I found Secretary of State very depressed to-day. He re-
minded me that he had told me the other day that he had to
be very careful in giving advice to Austria, as any idea thai
they were being pressed would be likely to _ cause them to
precipitate matters and present a fait accompli. This had, in
fact, now happened, and lie was not sure that his communi-
cation of your suggestion that Senna's. reply offered a basis
for discussion had not hastened of war. He was
much troubled by reports of mobilisation in Russia, and
certain military measures, which he did not specify, being
taken in France. He subsequently spoke of these measures to
my French colleague, who informed him that French Govern-


ment had done nothing more than the German Government
done, namely, recalled officers on leave. His Excellency
denied German Government had done this, but as a matter of
fact, it is true. My French colleague said to Under-Secretary
of State, in course of conversation, that it seemed to him that
when Austria had entered Servia, and so satisfied her military
prestige, the moment might then be favorable for four disin-
terested Powers to discuss .situation and come forward with
suggestions for preventing graver complications. Under-Sec-
retary of State seemed to think idea worthy of consideration,
as he replied that would be a different matter from conference
proposed by you.
Russian Ambassador returned to-day. and has informed
Imperial Government that Russia is mobilising in four
southern governments.
No. 77.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.—(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
I much appreciate the language of Chancellor, as reported
in your telegram of to-day.* His Excellency may rely upon it
that this country will continue/as heretofore, to strain every
effort to secure peace and to avert the calamity we all fear.
If he can induce Austria to satisfy Russia and to abstain from
going so far as to come into collision with her, we shall all
join in deep gratitude to his Excellency for having saved the
peace of Europe.
*See No. 75.
No, 78..
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.-—-(Received July
■29.) (Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburg!!, July 29, 1914.
Partial mobilisation was ordered to-day.
I communicated the substance of your telegram of the
28th instant* to Berlin to the, Minister for Foreign Affairs in
accordance with your in structions, and informed him con-
fidentially of remarks as to mobilisation which the German
.Secretary of. State had made to the British Ambassador at
Berlin. This had already reached His Excellency from


another kource. The mobilisation, he explained, would only
be directed against Austria.
Austrian Government had now definitely declined direct
conversation between Vienna and St. Petersburgh. Tae
Minister for Foreign Affairs said he had proposed such an
exchange of views on advice of German Ambassador. Pie
proposed, when informing German Ambassador of this re-
fusal of Austria's, to urge that a return should be made to
your proposal for a conference of four Ambassadors, or, at all
events, for an exchange of views between the three Am-
bassadors less directly interested, yourself, and also the Aus-
trian Ambassador if you thought it advisable. . Any arrange-
ment approved by France and England would be acceptable
to him, and he did not care what form such conversations
took. No time was to be lost, and the only way to avert war
was for you to succeed in arriving, by means of conversations
with Ambassadors, either collectively or individually, at some
formula which Austria could be induced to accept. Through-
out Russian Government had been perfectly frank and con-
ciliatory, and had done all in their power to maintain peace.
If their efforts to maintain peace failed, he trusted that it
would be realised by the British public that it was not the
fault of the Russian Government.
I asked him whether he would raise objections if the sug-
gestion made in Rome telegram of the 27th July,t which I
mentioned to him, were carried out. In reply His Excel-
lency said that he would agree to anything arranged by the
four Powers provided it was acceptable to Servia; he could
not, he said, be more Servian than Servia. Some supplemen-
tary statement or explanations would, however, have to be
made in order to tone down the sharpness of the ultimatum.
Minister for Foreign Affairs said that proposal referred
to in your telegram of 28th instantj was one of secondary
importance. Under altered circumstances of situation he did
not attach weigh to it. Further, the German Am-
bassador had informed His Excellency, so the latter told me,
that his Government were continuing at Vienna to exert
friendly influence. I fear that the German Ambassador will
not help to smooth matters over, if he uses to his own Govern-
ment the same language as he did to me to-day. He accused
the 1 Russian Government of endangering the peace of Europe
by their mobilisation, and said, when I referred to all that had
been recently done by Austria, that he could not discuss such
matters. I called his attention to the fact that Austrian con-
suls had warned all Austrian subjects liable to military service
to join the colors, that Austria had already partially mobilised,
and had now declared war on Servia. From what had passed
during the Balkan crisis she knew that this act was one which


is was impossible without humiliation for Russia to submit
to. Had not Russia by mobilising shown that she was in
earnest, Austria would have traded on Russia's desire for
peace, and would have believed that she could, go to any
lengths. Minister for Foreign Affairs had given me to under-
stand that Russia would not precipitate war by crossing
frontier immediately, and a week or more would, in any case,
elapse before mobilisation was completed. In order to find
an issue out of a dangerous situation it was necessary that we
should in the. meanwhile all work together.
*See No. 67. fSee No. 57.' |See No. 59.
No. 79.
Sir M. de Bun sen- to ■ Sir Edward Grey.—(Received - July
29.)—( Telegraphic.)
Vienna, July: 29, 1914.
■ There is at present no step which we could usefully take
to stop war with Servia, to which Austria-Hungarian Govern-
ment are now fully committed by the Emperor's appeal to his
people which has been published this morning, and by the de-
claration.of war. French and Italian Ambassadors agree with
me in this view. If the Austro-Hungarian Government would
convert into a binding engagement to .Europe the declaration
which has been made at St. Petersburgh to the effect that
she desires neither to destroy the independence of Servia nor
to acquire Servian territory, the Italian Ambassador thinks
that Russia might be induced to remain quiet. This, however,
the Italian Ambassador is convinced the Austrian, Govern-
ment would refuse to do.
No. 80
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 29.J
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 29, 1914,
In your telegram of the 27th instant* to Berlin, German
Ambassador was reported to have accepted in principle the


idea of a conference. This is in contradiction with the tele-
gram of the 27th instantf from Berlin.
Information received b}' the Italian Government from
Berlin, shows that German view is* correctly represented in
Sir E. Goschen's telegram of the 27th July,f but what creates
difficulty is rather the "conference/I so the Minister for
Foreign Affairs understands, than the principle. - He is going
to urge, in a telegram which he is sending to Berlin to-night;
adherence to the idea of an exchange of views in London.
He' suggests that the German Secretary of State might pro-
pose a formula acceptable to his Government. Minister for
Foreign Affairs is of opinion that this exchange of views
would keep the door open if direct communication between
Vienna and St. Petersburg!! fails to have any result. He
thinks that this exchange of views might be concomitant'
with such direct communication.
The German Government are also being informed that
the Italian Government would not be pardoned by public
opinion here unless they had taken every possible - step so as
to avoid war. He is urging that the German Government
must lend their co-operation in this.
He added that there seemed to be a difficulty" in making
Germany believe that Russia was in earnest. As Germany,
however, was really anxious for good relations with ourselves,
if she believed that Great Britain-would act with Russia and
France he thought it'would have a great effect.
Even should it prove impossible to induce Germany to
take part, he would still advocate that England and Italy,
each as representing one group, should continue to exchange
views.
*See No. 46. fSee No. 43.
No. 81.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir R. Rodd.—(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
With reference to your telegram of yesterday.*
It is impossible for me to initiate discussions with Am-
bassadors here, as I understand from Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs that Austria will not accept any discussion oxt
basis' of Servian note; and the' inference- of all I have' heard


from Vienna and Berlin is that Austria will not accept any
forrn of mediation by the Powers as between Austria ani
Servia. Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs must therefore
speak at Berlin and Vienna. I shall be glad if a favorable
reception is given to any suggestions he can make there.
*'See'No. 64.
No. 82.
Mr. Beaumont to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 29.)™
(Telegraphic.)
Constantinople, July 29, 1914.
I understand that the designs of Austria may extend con-
siderably beyond the Sanjak and a punitive occupation of
Servian territory. I gathered this from a remark let fall by
the Austrian Ambassador here, who spoke of the deplorable
economic situation of Salonica under Greek administration
and of the assistance on which the Austrian army could count
from* Mussulman population discontented with Servian rule.
No. 83.
Mr. Crackanthorpe to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July
29.) (Telegraphic.)
Nish, July 29, 1914.
I have been requested by Prime Minister to convey to
you expression of his deep gratitude for the statement which
you made on the 27th instant in the House of Commons.
No. 84.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E, Goschen.—(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
The German Ambassador has been instructed by the Ger-
man Chancellor to. inform me that he- is endeavoring to*


mediate between Vienna and St. Petersburg*!, and he hopes
with good success. Austria and Russia seem to be in con-
stant touch, and he is endeavoring to make Vienna explain
in a satisfactory form at St. Petersburgh the scope and ex-
tension of Austrian proceedings in Servia. I told the German
Ambassador that an agreement arrived at between Austria
and Russia would be the best possible solution. I would press
no proposal as long as there was a prospect of that, but ray
information this morning was that the Austrian Government
have declined the suggestion of the Russian Government that
e Ausuian Ambassador at St. Petersburgh should be
authorised to discuss directly with the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs the means of settling the Austro-Servian
conflict The press correspondents at St. Petersburgh had
been told that Russian Government would mobilise. The
German Government had said that they were favorable in
principle to mediation betwteen Russia and Austria if neces-
sary. They seemed to think the particular method of con-
leience, consultation, or discussion, or even conversations
qaatre in London too formal a method. I urged that the
German Government should suggest any method by which the
influence of the four Powers could be used together to prevent
war between Austria and Russia. France agreed, Italy
agreed. The whole idea of mediation or mediating influence
was ready to be put into operation by any method that Ger-
many could suggest if mine was not acceptable. In fact,
mediation was ready to come mto operation by any method
that Germany thought possible if only Germany would "press
the button" in the interests of peace.
No. 85.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.-—(Received July
29.)—( Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 29, 1914.
I was : asked to call upon the Chancellor to-night. His
Excellency had just returned from Potsdam.
Pie said that should Austria be attacked by Russia a
European conflagration might, he feared, become inevitable,
owing to Germany's obligations as Austria's ally, in spite
of his continued efforts to maintain peace. He then proceeded
to make the following strong bid for British neutrality. He
said, that it was clear, .so far as he was able to judge the


main principle which governed British policy, that Great Bri-
tain would never stand by and allow France to be crushed in
any conflict there might- be. That, however, was- not the
object at which Germany aimed. Provided that neutrality
of Great Britain were certain, every assurance would be given
to the British Government that the Imperial Government
aimed at no territorial acquisitions at the expense of France
should they prove victorious in any war that might ensue.
I questioned Flis Excellency about the French colonies,
and he said that he was unable to give a similar undertaking
in that respect. As regards Holland, however, His Excel-
lency said that, so long as Germany's adversaries respected
the integrity and neutrality of the Netherlands, Germany was
ready to give His Majesty's Government an assurance thai
she would do likewise. It depended upon the action of France
what operations Germany might be forced to enter upon in
Belgium, but when the war was over, Belgian integrity would
be respected if she had not sided against Germany.
His Excellency ended by saying that ever since he had
been Chancellor the object of his policy had been, as you were
aware, to bring about an understanding with England; he
trusted that these assurances might form the basis of th it
understanding which he so much desired. He had in mind a
general neutrality agreement between England and Germany,
though it was of course at the present moment too early to
discuss, details, and an assurance of British neutrality in the
conflict which present . crisis might possibly produce, would
enable him to look forward to realisation of his desire.
In reply to Flis Excellency's inquiry how X thought his
request would appeal to you, I said that I did not think it
probable-that at this stage-of events, you would care to bind
yourself to any course of action and that I was of opinion that
you would desire to retain full. liberty.
Our conversation upon this subject having come 'to an
end, I communicated the contents of your telegram of to-day*
to His Excellency, who expressed his best thanks to you.
*See No. 77


No. 86.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 29.)
(Telegraphic.) Rome, July 29. 1914.
Minister for Foreign Affairs thinks that moment is past for
any further discussions on basis of Servian note, in view of
communication made to-day by Russia at, Berlin regarding par-
tial mobilisation. The utmost he now hopes for is that Germany
may use her influence at Vienna to prevent or moderate any fur-
ther demands on Servia.
No. 87.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
Sir,— Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
After telling M. Cambon to-day how grave the situation
seemed to be, I told him that I meant to tell the German Ambas-
sador to-day that he must not be misled by the friendly tone of
our conversations into any sense of false security that we should
stand aside if all the efforts to preserve the peace, which we were
now making in common with Germany, failed. But I went on
to say to M. Cambon that I thought it necessary to tell him also
that public opinion here approached the present difficulty from
a quite different point of view from that taken during the diffi-
culty as to Morocco a few years ago. In the case of Morocco the
dispute was one in which France was primarily interested, and
in which it appeared that Germany, in an attempt to crush France,
was fastening a quarrel on France on a question that was the
subject of a special agreement between France and us. In the
present case the dispute between Austria and Servia was not one
in which we felt called to take a hand. Even if the question
became one between Austria and Russia we should not feel called
upon to take a hand in it. It would then be a question of the
supremacy of Teuton or Slav—a struggle for supremacy in the
Balkans; and our idea had always been to avoid being drawn
into a war over a Balkan question. If Germany become involved,
and France became involved, we had not made up our minds
what we should do; it was a case that we should have to con-
sider. France would then have been drawn into a quarrel which
was not hers, but in which, owing to her alliance, her honour and
interest obliged her to engage. We were free from engagements,
and we should have to decide what British interests required us
to do. I thought it necessary to say that, because, as he knew,


was about to warn Prince Lichnowsky not to count on our stand-
ing aside, but it would not be fair that I should let M. Cambon
be misled into supposing that this meant that we had decided
what to do in a contingency that I still hoped might not arise.
M. Cambon said that I had explained the situation very
clearly. He understood it to be that in a Balkan quarrel, and in
a struggle for supremacy between Teuton and Slav, we should
not feel called to intervene; should other issues be raised, and
Germany and France become involved, so that the- question
became one of the hegemony of Europe, we should then decide
what it was necessary for us to do. He seemed quite prepared
for this announcement, and made no criticism, upon it.
He said French opinion was calm, but decided. He antici-
pated a demand from Germany that France would be neutral
while Germany attacked Russia. This assurance France, of
course, could not give; she was bound to help Russia if Russia
was attacked.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 88.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
Sir, . Foreign Office, July 29, 19x4.
I told the German Ambassador this afternoon of the infor-
mation that I had received, that Russia had informed Germany
respecting her mobilisation. I also told him of the communica-
tion made by Count Benckendorff, that the Austrian declaration
of war manifestly rendered vain any direct conversations between
Russia and Austria. I said that the hope built upon those direct
conversations by the German Government yesterday had disap-
peared to-day. To-day the German Chancellor was working in
the interest of mediation in Vienna and St. Petersburgh. If he
succeeded/well and good. If not, it was more important than
ever that Germany should take up what I had suggested to the
German Ambassador this morning, and propose some method by
which the four Powers should be able to work together to keep
the peace of Europe. I pointed out, however, that the Russian
Government, while desirous of mediation, regarded it as a condi-
tion that the military operations against Servia should be sus-
pended, as otherwise a mediation would only drag on matters,'
and give Austria time to crush Servia. It was, of course, too
late for all military operations against Servia to be suspended.
In a short time, I supposed, the Austrian forces would be in
Belgrade, and in occupation of some Servian territory. But even


then it might be possible to bring some mediation into existence,
if Austria, while saying that she must hold the occupied territory
until she had complete satisfaction from Servia, stated that she
would not advance further, pending an effort of the Powers to
mediate between her and Russia.
The German Ambassador said that he had already tele-
graphed to Berlin what I had said to him this morning.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 89.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
After speaking to the German Ambassador this afternoon
about the European situation, I said that I wished to say to him,
in a quite and friendly way, something that was on my
mind. The situation was very grave. While it was restricted to
the issues at present actually involved we had no thought of
interfering in it. But if Germany became involved in it, and then
France, the issue might be so great that it would involve all
European interests; and I did not wish him to be misled by the
friendly tone of our conversation—which I hoped would con-
tinue—into thinking that we should stand aside.
He said that he quite understood this, but he asked whether
I meant that we should, under certain circumstances, intervene.
I replied that I did not wish to say that, or to use anything
that was like a threat or an attempt to apply pressure by saying
that, if things became worse, we should intervene. There would
be no question of our intervening if Germany was not involved,
or even if France was not involved. But we knew very well
that, if the issue did become such that we thought British inte-
rests required us to intervene, we must intervene at once, and
the decision would have to be very rapid, just as the decisions
of other Powers had to be. I hoped that the friendly tone of our
conversations would continue as at present/ and that I should be
able to keep as closely in touch with the German Government
in working for peace. But if we failed in our efforts to keep the
peace, and if the issue spread so that it involved practically every
European interest, I did not wish to be open to any reproach from
him that the friendly tone of all our conversations had misled
him or his Government into supposing that we should not take
action, and to the reproach that, if they had not been so misled,
the course of things might have been different.


The German Ambassador took no exception to what I had
said; indeed, he told me that it accorded with what he had already
given in Berlin as his view of the situation.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
gj r Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
In addition to what passed with the German Ambassador this
morning, as recorded in my telegram of the 29th July* to Your
Excellency, I gave the Ambassador a copy of Sir Rennell Rodd's
telegram of the 28th Julyt and of my reply to it.t I said I had
begun to doubt whether even a complete acceptance of the Aus-
trian demands by Servia would now satisfy Austria. But there
appeared, from what the Marquis di San Giuliano had said, to
be a method by which, if the Powers were allowed to have any
say in the matter, they might bring about complete satisfaction
for Austria, if only the latter would give them an opportunity.
I could, however, make no proposal, for the reasons I have given
in my telegram to you, and could only give what the Italian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, had said to the German Ambassador
for information, as long as it was understood that Austria would
accept no discussion with the Powers over her dispute with
Servia. As to mediation between Austria and Russia, I said it
could not take the form simply of urging Russia to stand on one
side while Austria had a free hand to go to any length she pleased.
That would not be mediation; it would simply be putting pressure
upon Russia in the interests of Austria. The German Ambassa-
dor said tbe view of the German Government was that Austria
could not by force be humiliated, and could not abdicate her posi-
tion as a Great Power. I said I entirely agreed, but it was not
a question of humiliating Austria; it was a question of how far
Austria meant to push the humiliation of others. There must,
of course, be some humiliation of Servia, but Austria might press
things so far as to involve the humiliation of Russia.
The German Ambassador said that Austria would not take
Servian territory, as to which I observed that, by taking territory,
while leaving nominal Servian independence. Austria might turn
Servia practically into a vassal State, and this would affect the
whole position of Russia in the Balkans.
♦See Fo. 84. fSee No. 64. JSee No. 81.


I observed that when there was danger of European conflict
it was impossible to say who would not be drawn into it. Even
the Netherlands apparently were taking precautions.
The German Ambassador said, emphatically that some means
must be found of preserving the peace of Europe.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY:
No. 91.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen.
Sir, —
Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
The Austrian Ambassador told me to-day he had ready a
long memorandum, which he proposed to leave, and which he
said gave an account of the conduct of Servia towards Austria,
and an explanation of how necessary the Austrian action was.
I said that I did not wish to discuss the merits of the question
between Austria and Servia. The news to-day seemed to me very
bad for the peace of Europe. The Powers were not allowed to
help in getting satisfaction for Austria, which they might get if
they were given an opportunity, and European peace was at stake.
Count Mensdorff said that the war with Servia must proceed.
Austria could not continue to be exposed to the necessity of
mobilising again and again, as she had been obliged to do in recent
years. She had no idea of territorial aggrandisement, and all
she wished was to make sure that her interests were safeguarded.
I said that it would be quite possible, without nominally inter-
fering with the independence of Servia or taking away any of
her territory, to turn her into a sort of vassal State.
Count Mensdorff deprecated this.
In reply to some further remarks of mire, as to the effect
that the Austrian action might have upon the Russian position
in the Balkans, he said that, before the Balkan war, Servia had
always been -regarded as being in the Austrian sphere of influence.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY;


No. 92.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir R. Rodd.
Sir, — , ' Foreign Office, July 29, 1914.
- The Italian Ambassador made to me to-day a communication
from the Marquis di San Giuliano, suggesting that the German
objections to the mediation of the four Powers, a mediation that
was strongly favoured by Italy, might be removed by some change
in the form of procedure.
I said that I had already anticipated this by asking the Ger-
man Government to suggest any form of procedure under which
the idea of mediation between Austria and Russia, already ac-
cepted by the German Government in principle, could be applied.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 93.
Telegrams coipmunicated by Count Benckendorff, July 30,
1914.
(1.)
Russian Ambassador at Vienna to M. Sazonof. (Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) . Vienna, July 15 (28), 1914
I spoke to Count Berchtold to-day in the sense of Your
Excellency's instructions. I brought to his notice, in the most
friendly manner, how desirable it was to find a solution which,
while consolidating good relations between Austria-Hungary
and Russia, would give to the Austro-Hungarian 'Monarchy
genuine guarantees for its future relations with Servia.
I drew Count Berchtold's attention to all the dangers to
the peace of Europe which would be involved, by an armed
conflict between Austria-Hungary and' Servia.
Count Berchtold replied that he was well aware.' of the
gravity of the situation and' of the advantages of a frank ex-
planation with the St. Petersburgh Cabinet. He told me that,
011 the other hand, the Austro-Hungarian Government/who
had only decided, much against her will, on the energetic
measures which they had taken against Servia, could no longer
recede, nor enter into any discussion about the terms of the
Austro-Hungarian note.


Count Berchtold added that the crisis had become so
acute, and that public opinion had risen to such a pitch of
excitement, that the Government, even if they wished it, could
no longer consent to such a course. This was all the more
impossible, he said, inasmuch as the Servian reply itself fur-
nished proof of the insincerity of Servia's promises for the
future.
(2.)
M. Sazonof to Count Benckendorff.
(Telegraphic.) St. Petersburg]!, July 16 (29), 1914.
The German Ambassador informs me, in the name of the
Chancellor, that Germany has not ceased to exercise a mode-
rating influence at Vienna, and that she will continue to do
so even after the declaration of . war. Up to this morning
there has been no news that the Austrian army has crossed the
Servian frontier. I have begged the Ambassador to express
my thanks to the Chancellor for the friendly tenour of this
communication. 1 have informed him of the military measures
taken by Russia, none of which, I told him, were directed
against Germany; I added that neither should they be taken
as aggressive measures against Austria-Hungary, their ex-
planation being the mobilisation of the greater part of the
Austro-Hungarian army.
The Ambassador said that he was in favour of direct
explanations between the Austrian Government and ourselves,
and I replied that I, too, was quite willing, provided that the
advice of the German Government, to which he had referred,
found an echo at Vienna.
I said at the same time that we were quite ready to accept
the proposal for a conference of the four Powers, a proposal
with which, apparently, Germany was not in entire sympathy.
I told him that, in my opinion, the best manner of turning
to account the most suitable methods of finding a peaceful
solution would be by arranging for parallel discussions to be
carried on by a conference of the four Powers—Germany,
France, England, and Italy—and by a direct exchange of views
between Austria-Hungary and Russia on much the same lines
as occurred during the most critical moments of last year's
crisis.


I told the Ambassador that, after the concessions which
had been made by Servia, it should not be very difficult to find
a compromise to settle the other questions which remained
outstanding, provided that Austria showed some good-will and
thai: all the Powers used their entire influence'in the direction
of conciliation.
(3.)
M. Sazonof to Count Bencken'dorff.
(Telegraphic.) ■ St Petersburg!!, July 16 (29), 1914.
At the time of my interview with the German Ambassador,
dealt with in my preceding telegram, I had not yet received
M» Schebeko's telegram of the 15th (28th) July.
This telegram reports the refusal of the Vienna Cabinet
to agree to a direct exchange of views with' the Imperial
Government.
From now' on nothing remains for us to do but to rely
entirely on the British Government to take the initiative. in
the steps which they may consider advisable.
No. 94.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, July 29, 1914.
I learn that mobilisation of Russian corps destined to carry
out operations on Austrian frontier has been ordered. • My
informant is Russian Ambassador. Ministry for Foreign
Affairs here has realised, though somewhat late in the day,
that Russia will not remain indifferent in present crisis. I
believe that the news of Russian mobilisation will not be a sur-
prise to the Ministry, but so far it is not generally known in
Vienna this evening. Unless mediation, which German
Government declared themselves ready to offer in concert
with three other Great Powers not immediately interested in
the Austro-Servian dispute, be brought to bear forthwith,
irrevocable steps may be taken in present temper of this


country. German Ambassador feigns surprise that Servian
affairs should be of such interest to Russia. Roth my Russian
and French colleagues have spoken to him to-day. Russian
Ambassador expressed the hope-that it might still be possible
to arrange matters, and explained that it was impossible for
Russia to do otherwise than take an interest in the present
dispute. Russia, he said, had done what she could already at
Belgrade to induce Servian -Government to meet principal
Austrian demands in a favourable spirit; if approached in a
proper manner, he thought she would probably go still further
in this direction. But she was justly offended at having been
completely ignored, and she could not consent to be excluded
"from, the settlement. German Ambassador said that if pro-
posals were put forward which opened any prospect of pos-
sible acceptance by both sides,- he personally thought that
Germany might consent to act as mediator in concert with the
•three other Powers.
1 gather from what Russian Ambassador said to me that
he is much afraid of the effect that any serious engagement
may have upon, Russian public opinion. 1 gathered, however,
that. Russia would go a long way to meet Austrian -demands on
Servia.
No. 95.
Sir M. de Bun sen to Sir Edward Grey.-—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, July 30, 1914.
Russian Ambassador hopes that Russian mobilisation will
be regarded by Austria as what it is, viz., a clear intimation
that Russia must be consulted regarding the fate of Servia,
but he does not know how the Austrian Government are taking
it. He says that Russia must have an assurance that Servia
will not be crushed, but she would understand that Austria-
Hungary is compelled, to exact from Servia measures which
will secure her Slav provinces from the continuance of hostile
propaganda from Servian territory.
The French Ambassador hears from Berlin that the Ger-
man Ambassador at Vienna is instructed to speak, seriously
to the Austro-Hungarian Government against acting in a
manner calculated to provoked a'European war. .
Unfortunately the German Ambassador is himself so
identified with extreme anti-Russian and anti-Servian feeling
prevalent in Vienna that "he is unlikely to plead the cause of
peace with entire sincerity. ■'


Although I am not able to verify it, I have private infor-
mation that the German Ambassador knew the text of the
Austrian ultimatum to Servia before it was despatched, and
telegraphed it to the German Emperor. I know from the
German Ambassador himself that he endorses every line of it.
No. 96.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, July 30, 1914.
The Russian Ambassador gave the French Ambassador
and myself, this afternoon at the French Embassy, where I
happened to be, an account of his interview with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, which he said was quite friendly. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs had told him that, as Russia had
mobilised, Austria must, of course, do the same. This, how-
ever, should not be regarded as a threat, but merely as the
adoption of military precautions similar to those which had
been taken across the frontier. He said he had no objection
to the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Austrian
Ambassador at St. Petersburgh continuing their conversations,
although he did not say that they could be resumed on the
basis of the Servian reply.
On the whole, the Russian Ambassador is not dissatisfied.
He had begun to make his preparations for his departure on
the strength of a rumour that Austria would declare war in
reply to mobilisation. He now hopes that something may yet
be done to prevent war with Austria.
No. 97.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30).
(Telegraphic.) St. Petersburgh, July 30, 1914.
French Ambassador and I visited Minister for Foreign
Affairs this morning. His Excellency said that German Am-
bassador had told him yesterday afternoon that German
Government were willing to guarantee that Servian integrity
would be respected by Austria. To this he had replied that
this might be so, but nevertheless Servia would become an


Austrian vassal, just as, in similar circumstances, Bokhara had
become a Russian vassal. There would be a revolution in
Russia if she were to tolerate such a state of affairs.
... Sazonof told us that absolute proof was in possession
of Russian Government that Germany was making military
and naval preparations against Russia; —more particularly in
the direction of the Gulf of Finland.
German Ambassador had a second interview with Minis-
ter for boreign Affairs at 2 a.m., when former completely
broke down on seeing that war was inevitable. He appealed
to M. Sazonof to make some suggestion which he could tele-
graph to German Government as a last hope. M. Sazonof
accordingly drew up and handed to German Ambassador a
formula in French, of which following is translation: —
" If Austria, recognising that her conflict with Servia has
assumed character of question of European interest, declares
herself ready to eliminate from her ultimatum points which
violate principle of sovereignty of Servia, Russia engages to
stop all military preparations."
Preparations for general mobilisation will be proceeded
with if this proposal is rejected by Austria, and inevitable
result will be a European war. Excitement here has reached
such a pitch that, if Austria refuses to make a concession,
Russia cannot hold back, and, now that she knows that Ger-
many is arming, she can hardly postpone, for strategical
reasons, converting partial into general mobilisation.
No. 98.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 30, 1914.
Secretary of State informs me that immediately on receipt
of Prince Lichnowsky's telegram recording his last conversa-
tion with you he asked Austro-Hungarian Government
whether they would be willing to accept mediation on basis
of occupation by Austrian troops of Belgrade or some other
point and issue their conditions from there. He has up till
now received no reply, but he fears Russian mobilisation
against Austria will have increased difficulties, as Austria-
Hungary, who has as yet only mobilised against Servia, will
probably find it necessary also against Russia. Secretary of


State says if you can succeed in getting Russia to agree to
above basis for an arrangement and in persuading her in the
meantime to take no steps which might be regarded as an act
of aggression against Austria, he still sees some chance that
European peace may be preserved.
He begged me to impress on you difficulty of Germany's
position in view of Russian mobilisation and military
measures which he hears are being taken in France. Beyond
recall of officers on leave—a measure which had been officially
taken after, and not before, visit of French Ambassador yester-
day—lmperial Government had done nothing special in way
of military preparations. Something, however, would have
soon to be done, for it might be too late, and when they mobil-
ised they would have to mobilise on three sides. He re-
gretted this, as he knew T France did not desire war, but it
would be a military necessity.
His Excellency added that telegram received from Prince
Lichnowsky last night contains matter which he had heard with
iegret, but not exactly with surprise, and at all events he
thoroughly appreciated frankness and loyalty with which you had
spoken.
He also told me that this telegram had only reached Berlin
very late last night; had it been received earlier Chancellor would,
of course, not have, spoken to me in way he had done.
No. 99.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, July 30, 1914.
President of the Republic tells me that the Russian Govern-
ment have been informed by the German Government that, unless
Russia stopped her mobilisation, Germany would mobilise. But a
further report, since received from St. Petersburgh, states that
the German communication had been modified, and was now a
request to be informed on what conditions Russia would consent
to demobilisation. The answer given is that she agrees to do so
on condition that Austria-Hungary gives an assurance that she
will respect the sovereignty of Servia, and submit certain of the
demands of the Austrian note, which Servia has not accepted, to
an international discussion.


President thinks that these conditions will not be accepted
by Austria. He is convinced that peace between the Powers is
in the hands of Great Britain. If His Majesty's Government
announced that England would come to the aid of France in the
event of a conflict between France and Germany as a result of
the present differences between Austria and Servia, there would
tie no war, for Germany would at once modify her attitude
I explained to him how difficult it would be for His Majesty's
Government to make such an announcement, but he said that he
must maintain that it would be in the interests of peace. France
he said, is pacific. She does not desire war, and all that she has
done at present is to make preparations for mobilisation so as not
o be taken unawares. The French Government will keep His
Majesty s Government informed of everything that may be done
m that way. 'I hev have reliable information that the German
troops are concentrated round Thionville and Metz ready for
war. if there vvere a general war on the Continent it would
inevitably draw England into it for the protection of her vital
interests. A declaration now of her intention to support France
whose desire it is that peace should be maintained, would almost
certainly prevent Germany from going to war.
No. 100.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 30.)
(Telegraphic.)
Rome, July 30, 1914.
German Ambassador told me last night that he thought that
Germany would be able to prevent Austria from making any
exorbitant demands if Servia could be induced to submit and to
ask for peace early, say, as soon as the occupation of Belgrade
had been accomplished. s
I made to His Excellency the personal suggestion that some
toimula might be devised by Germany which might be acceptable
for an exchange of views.
tion See ' k° wever > that you have already made this sugges-


No. xoi.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
Foreign Office, July 30, 1914-
(Telegraphic.)
Your telegram of 29th July*
His Majesty's Government cannot for a moment entertain
the Chancellor's proposal that they should bind themselves
neutrality on such terms.
What he asks us in effect is to engage to stand by while
French colonies are taken and France is beaten, so lon &
many does not take French territory as distinct from the colonies.
From the material point of view such a proposal is unaccep-
table, for France, without further territory in Europe being taken
from her, could be so crushed as to lose her position as a Great
Power, and become subordinate to German policy.
Altogether, apart from that, it would be a disgrace for us
to make this bargain with Germany at the expense of France,
a disgrace from which the good name of this country wou neve
recover.
The Chancellor also in effect asks us to bargain away what-
ever obligation or interest we have as regards the neutrali.y o
Belgium We could not entertain that bargain either.
Having said so much, it is unnecessary to examine whether
the prospect of a future general neutrality agreement between
England and Germany offered positive advantages sufficient to
compensate us for tying our hands now. We must preserve our
full freedom to act as circumstances may seem to us to require in
any such unfavourable and regrettable development of the present
crisis as the Chancellor contemplates.
You should speak to the Chancellor in the above sense, and
add most earnestly that the one way of maintaining the good rela-
tions between England and Germany is that they should continue
to work together to preserve the peace of Europe; if we succee
in this object, the mutual relations of Germany and England will,
I believe, be ipso facto improved and strengthened. For that
object His Majesty's Government will work in that way with
all sincerity and goodwill.


And I will say this: If the peace of Europe can be preserved,
and the present crisis safely passed, my own endeavour will be to
promote some arrangement to which Germany could be a party,
by which she could be assured that no aggressive or hostile policy
would be pursued against her or her allies by France, Russia, and
ourselves, jointly or separately. I have desired this and worked
for it, as far as I could; through the last Balkan crisis, and, Ger-
many having a corresponding object, our relations sensibly im-
proved. The idea has hitherto been too Utopian to form the
subject of definite proposals, but if this present crisis, so much
more acute than any that Europe has gone through for genera-
tions, be safely passed, I am hopeful that the relief and reaction
which will follow may make possible some more definite rap-
prochement between the Powers than has been possible
hitherto.
*See No. 85.
No. 102.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 30, 19 14.
I have warned Prince Lichnowsky that Germany must not
count upon our standing aside in all circumstances. This is doubt-
less the substance of the telegram from Prince Lichnowsky to
German Chancellor, to which reference is made in the last two
paragraphs of your telegram of 30th July.*
*See No. 98.
No. 103.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 30, 19x4.
German Ambassador informs me that German Government
would endeavour to influence Austria, after taking Belgrade and
Servian territory in region of frontier, to promise not to advance
further, while Powers endeavoured to arrange that Servia should


give satisfaction sufficient to pacify Austria. Territory occupied
would, of course, be evacuated when Austria was satisfied. I
suggested this yesterday as a possible relief to the situation, and,
if it can be obtained, I would earnestly hope that it might be
agreed to suspend further military preparations on all sides.
Russian Ambassador has told me of condition laid down by
M. Sazonof, as quoted in your telegram of the 30th July,* and
fears it cannot be modified; but if Austrian advance were stopped
after occupation of Belgrade, I think Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs' formula might be changed to read that the
Powers would examine how Servia could fully satisfy Austria
without impairing Servian sovereign rights or independence.
If Austria, having occupied Belgrade and neighbouring Ser-
vian territory, declares herself ready, in the interests of European
peace, to cease her advance and to discuss how a complete settle-
ment can be arrived at, I hope that Russia would also consent to
discussion and suspension of further military preparations, pro-
vided that other Powers did the same.
It is a slender chance of preserving peace, but the only one*
I can suggest if Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs can come
to no agreement at Berlin. You should inform Minister for
Foreign Affairs.
*See No. 97.
No. 104.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, July 30, 1914.
You should inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my
telegram to Sir G. Buchanan of to-day,* and say that I know that
he has been urging Russia not to precipitate a crisis. I hope h$
may be able to support this last suggestion at St. Petersburgh.
*See No. 103.


No. 105.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office,-July 30, 19x4.
Sir,—
M. Cambon reminded me to-day of the letter I had written
to him two years ago, in which we agreed that, if the peace of
Europe was seriously threatened, we would discuss what we were
prepared to do. I enclose for convenience of reference copies
of the letter in question and of M. Cambon's reply. He said that
the peace of Europe was never more seriously threatened than
it was now. He did not wish to ask me to say directly that we
would intervene, but he would like me to say what we should
do if certain circumstances arose. The particular hypothesis he
had in mind was an aggression by Germany on France. Fie gave
me a of which a copy is also enclosed, showing that the
German military preparations were more advanced and more on
the offensive upon the frontier than anything France had yet
done. He anticipated that the aggression would take the form of
either a demand that France should cease her preparations, or
a demand that she should engage to remain neutral if there was
war between Germany and Russia. Neither of these things could
France admit.
I said that the Cabinet was to meet to-morrow morning, and
I would see him again to-morrow afternoon.
I remain, etc.,
E. GREY.
Enclosure 1 in No. 105.
Sir Edward Grey to M. Cambon.
Foreign Office, November 22, 19 12.
My Dear Ambassador,—
From time to time in recent years the French and British
naval and military experts have consulted together. It has always
been understood that such consultation does not restrict the free-
dom of either Government to decide at any future time whether
or not to assist the other by armed force. We have agreed that


consultation between experts is not, and ought not to be regarded
as an engagement that commits either Government to action in
a contingency that has not arisen and may never arise. The dis-
position, for instance, of the French and British fleets respec-
tively at the present moment is not based upon an engagement
to co-operate in war.
You have, however, pointed out that, if either Government
had grave reason to expect an unprovoked attack by a third
Power, it might become essential to know whether it could in that
event depend upon the armed assistance of the other.
I agree that if either Government had grave reason to expect
an unprovoked attack by a third Power, or something that threat-
ened the general peace, it should immediately discuss with the
other whether both Governments should act together to prevent
aggression and to preserve peace, and, if so, what measures they
would be prepared to take in common. If these measures involved
action, the plans of the General Staffs would at once be taken
into consideration, and the Governments would then decide what
effect should be given to them.
Yours, etc.,
E. GREY.
Enclosure 2 in No. 105.
M. Cambon to Sir Edward Grey.
(Translation.)
French Embassy, London, November 23, 1912.
Dear Sir Edward, —
You reminded me in your letter of yesterday, November 22,
that during the last few years the military and naval authorities
of France and Great Britain had consulted with each other from
time to time; that it had always been understood that these con-
sultations should not restrict the liberty of either Government to
decide in the future whether they should lend each other the sup-
port of their armed forces; that, on either side, these consulta-
tions between experts were not and should not be considered as
engagements binding our Governments to take action in certain
eventualities; that, however, I had remarked to you that, if one
or other of the two Governments had grave reasons to fear an
unprovoked attack on the part of a third Power, it would become
essential to know whether it could count on the armed support of
the other,


Your letter answers that point, and I am authorised to state
that, m the event of one of our two Governments having grave
reasons to fear either an attack from a third Power, or some
event threatening the general peace, that Government would
immediately examine with the other the question whether
both Governments should act together in order to prevent
aggression °r preserve peace. If so, the two Governments
would deliberate as to the measures which they would be pre-
pared to take in common; if those measures involved action,
the two Governments would take into immediate considera-
tion the plans of their general staffs and would then decide
as to the effect to be given to those plans.
Yours, etc..
PAUL CAMBON.
Enclosure 3 in No. 105.
French Minister for Foreign Affairs to M. Cambon.
(Translation.)
The German army had its advance-posts on our frontiers
yesterday (Friday). German patrols twice penetrated on to
° c Ur i^", tory ' c advance-posts are withdrawn to a distance
of 10 kilom. from the frontier. The local population is pro-
testing against being thus abandoned to the attack of the
enemy s army, but the Government wishes to make it clear
to public opinion and to the British Government that in no
case will France be the aggressor. The whole 16th corps from
Metz, reinforced by a part of the Bth from Treves and Cologne
is occupying the frontier at Metz on the Luxemburg side. The
loth army corps from Strassburg has closed up on the fron-
t i Cr ° of Alsace-Lorraine are prevented bv
the threat of being shot from crossing the frontier. Reser-
vists have been called back to Germany by tens of thousands.
I his is the last stage before mobilisation, whereas we have
not called out a single reservist.
As you see, Germany has done it. I would add that all
my information goes to show that the German preparations
began on Saturday, the very day on which the Austrian note
was handed in.


These facts, added to those contained in my telegram of
yesterday, will enable you to prove to the British Govern-
ment the pacific intentions of the one party and the aggressive
intentions of the other.
Paris, July 31, 1914.
No. 106.
Sir R. Rodd to Sir Edward Grey.-—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.) Rome, July 30, 1914.
I learnt from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who sent for
me this evening, that the Austrian Government had declined
to continue the direct exchange of views with the Russian
Government. But he had reason to believe that Germany
was now disposed to give more conciliatory advice to Austria,
as she seemed convinced that we should act with France and
Russia, and was most anxious to avoid issue with us.
He said he was telegraphing to the Italian Ambassador
at Berlin to ask the German Government to suggest that the
idea of an exchange of views between the four Powers should
be resumed in any form which Austria would consider
acceptable. It seemed to him that Germany might invite
Austria to state exactly the terms which she would demand
from Servia, and give a guarantee that she would neither
deprive her of independence nor annex territory. It would
be useless to ask for anything less than was contained in the
Austrian ultimatum, and Germany would support no proposal
that did not imply non-success for Austria. We might, on the
other hand, ascertain from Russia what she would accept,
and, once we knew the standpoints of these two countries,
discussions could be commenced at once. There was still
time so long as Austria had received no check. He in apy case
was in favour of continuing an exchange of views with His
Majesty's Government if the idea of discussions between the
four Powers was impossible.
No. 107.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey .—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, July 30, 1914.
I do not know whether you have received a reply from
the German Government to the communication* which you


made to them through the German Ambassador in London
asking whether they could suggest any method by which the
four Powers could use their mediating influence between
Russia and Austria. I was informed last night that they had
not had time to send an answer yet. To-day in reply to an
inquiry from the French Ambassador as to whether the Im-
perial Government had proposed any course of action, the
Secretary of State said that he had felt that time would be
saved by communicating with Vienna direct, and that he had
asked the Austro-Hungarian Government what would satisfy
them. No answer had, however, yet been returned.
The Chancellor told me last night that he was " pressing
the button " as hard as he could, and that he was not sure
whether he had not gone so far in urging moderation at Vienna
that matters had been precipitated rather than otherwise.
♦See No. 84.
No. 108.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.)
Berlin, July 31, 1914.
Chancellor informs me that his efforts to preach peace
and moderation at Vienna have been seriously handicapped
t)j the Russian mobilisation against Austria. He has done
everything possible to attain his object at Vienna, perhaps
even rather more than was altogether palatable at the Ball-
platz. He could not, however, leave his country defenceless
while time was being utilised by other Powers; and if, as he
learns is the case, military measures are now being taken by
Russia against Germany also, it would be impossible for him
to remain quiet. He wished to tell me that it was quite pos-
sible that in a very short time, to-day perhaps, the German
Government would take some very serious step; he was, in
fact, just on the point of going to have an audience with the
Emperor.
His Excellency added that the news of the active prepara-
tions on the Russo-German frontier had reached him just when
the Czar had appealed to the Emperor, in the name of their
old friendship, to mediate at Vienna, and when the Emperor
was actually conforming to that request.


No. 109.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey .—(Received July 31.)
Berlin, July 31, 1914.
(Telegraphic.)
I read to the Chancellor this morning your answer to his
appeal for British neutrality in the event of war, as contained
in your telegram of yesterday. 55 ' His Excellency was so taken
up with the news of the Russian measures along the frontier,
referred to in my immediately preceding telegram, that he
received your communication without comment. He asked
me to let him have the message that I had just read to him
as a memorandum, as he would like to reflect upon it before
giving an answer, and his mind was so full of grave matters
that he could not be certain of remembering all its points. I
therefore handed to him the text of your message, on the
understanding that it should be regarded merely as a record
of conversation, and not as an official document.
His Excellency agreed.
* See No. 101.
No. 110.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 31, 1914.
I learn from the German Ambassador that, as a result of
suggestions by the German Government, a conversation has
taken place at Vienna between the Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Russian Ambassador. The Austrian
Ambassador at St. has also been instructed that
he may converse with the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
and that he should give explanations about the Austrian ulti-
matum to Servia, and discuss suggestions and any questions
directly affecting Austro-Russian relations. If the Russian
Government object to the Austrians mobilising eight army
corps, it might be pointed out that this is not too great a
number against 400,000 Servians.
The German Ambassador asked me to urge the Russian
Government to show goodwill in the discussions and to sus-
pend their military preparations.


It is with great satisfaction that I have learnt that discus-
sions are being resumed between Austria and Russia, and you
should express this to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
tell him that I earnestly hope he will encourage them.
I informed the German Ambassador that, as regards mili-
tary preparations, I did not see how Russia could be urged to
suspend them unless some limit were put by Austria to the
advance of her troops into Servia.
No. 111.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 31, 1914 #
I hope that the conversations which are now proceeding
between Austria and Russia may lead to a satisfactory result.
The stumbling-block hitherto has been Austrian mistrust of
Servian assurances, and Russian mistrust of Austrian inten-
tions with regard to the independence and integrity of Servia.
It has occurred to me that, in the event of this mistrust pre-
venting a solution being found by Vienna and St. Petersburgh,
Germany might sound Vienna, and I would undertake to
sound St. Petersburgh, whether it would be possible for the
four disinterested Powers to offer to Austria that they would
undertake to see that she obtained full satisfaction of her
on Servia, provided that they did not impair Servian
sovereignty and the integrity of Servian territory. As Your
Excellency is aware, Austria has already declared her willing-
ness to respect them. Russia might be informed by the four
Powers that they would undertake to prevent Austrian
demands going the length of impairing Servian sovereignty
and integrity. All Powers would, of course, suspend further
military operations or preparations.
You may sound the Secretary of State about this pro-
posal.
I said to German Ambassador this morning that if Ger-
many could get any reasonable proposal put forward which
made it clear that Germany and Austria were striving to pre-
serve European peace, and that Russia and France would be
unreasonable if they rejected it, I would support it at St.
Petersburgh and Paris, and go the length of saying that if
Russia and France would not accept it His Majesty's Govern-
ment would have nothing more to do with the consequences;
but, otherwise, I told German Ambassador that if France
became involved we should be drawn in.
You can add this when sounding Chancellor Secre-
tary of State as to proposal above.


No. 112.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 31.)
Berlin, July 31, 1914.
(Telegraphic.)
According to information just received by German
Government from their Ambassador at St. Petersburgh, whole
Russian army and fleet are being mobilised. Chancellor tells
me that " Kriegsgefahr " will be proclaimed at once by Ger-
man Government, as it can only be against Germany that
Russian general mobilisation is directed. Mobilisation would
follow almost immediately. His Excellency added in explana-
tion that " Kriegsgefahr " signified the taking of certain pre-
cautionary measures consequent strained relations with
a foreign country.
This news from St. Petersburgh, added His Excellency,
seemed to him to put an end to all hope of a peaceful solution
of the crisis. Germany must certainly prepare for all emer-
gencies.
I asked him whether he could not still put pressure on
the authorities at Vienna to do something in general interests
to reassure Russia and to show themselves disposed to con-
tinue discussions on a friendly basis. He replied that last
night he had begged Austria to reply to your last proposal,
and that he had received a reply to the effect that Austrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs would take wishes of the
Emperor this morning in the matter. f
No. 113.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grev.-—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.)
St. Petersburgh, July 31, 1914.
It has been decided to issue orders for general mobili-
sation.
This decision was taken in consequence of report received
from Russian Ambassador in Vienna to the effect that Austria
is determined not to yield to intervention of Powers, and that
she is moving troops against Russia as well as against Servia.
Russia has also reason to believe that Germany is making
active military preparations, and she cannot afford to let her
get a start.


No. 11l
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie and Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 31, 1914.
I still trust that situation is not irretrievable, but in view
of prospect of mobilisation in Germany it becomes essential
to His Majesty's Government, in view of existing treaties, to
ask whether French (German) Government is prepared to
engage to respect neutrality of Belgium so long as no other
Power violates it.
A similar request is being addressed to German (French)
Government. It is important to have an early answer.
No. 115.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Villiers.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 31, 1914.
In view of existing treaties, you should inform Minister
for Foreign Affairs that, in consideration of the possibility
of a European war, I have asked French and German Govern-
ments whether each is prepared to respect the neutrality of
Belgium provided it is violated by no other Power.
You should say that I assume that the Belgian Govern-
ment will maintain to the utmost of her power her neutrality,
which I desire and expect other Powers to uphold and observe.
You should inform the Belgian Government that an early
reply is desired.
No. 116.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, July 31, 1914.
I have received your telegram of yesterday's date.*
Nobody here feels that in this dispute, so far as it has
yet gone, British treaties or obligations are involved. Feeling
is quite different from what it was during the Morocco ques-
tion. That crisis involved a dispute directly involving France,
whereas in this case France is being drawn into a dispute
which is not hers.


1 believe it to be quite untrue that our attitude has been a
decisive factor in the situation. German Government do not
expect our neutrality.
We cannot undertake a definite pledge to intervene in a
war. I have so old the French Ambassador, who has urged
His Majesty's Government to reconsider this decision.
I have told him that we should not be justified in giving
any pledge at the present moment, but that we will certainly
consider the situation again directly there is a new develop-
ment.
*See No. 99.
No. 117.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, July 31, 1914.
At 7 o'clock this evening I was sent for by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs. When I arrived the German Ambassador
was leaving His Excellency.
German Ambassador had informed His Excellency that,
in view of the fact that orders had been given for the total
mobilisation of Russian army and fleet, German Government
have, in an ultimatum which they have addressed to the Rus-
sian Government, required that Russian forces should be
demobilised.
The German Government will consider it necessary to
order the total mobilisation of the German army on the Rus-
sian and French frontiers if within twelve hours the Russian
Government do not give an undertaking to comply with Ger-
man demand.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs asks me Jo communi-
cate this to you, and inquires what, in these circumstances,
will be the attitude of England.
German Ambassador could not say when the twelve hours
terminates. He is going to call at the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs to-morrow (Saturday) at 1 p.m., in order to receive
the French Government's answer as to the attitude they will
adopt in the circumstances.
Fie intimated the possibility of his requiring his passports.
I am informed by the Russian Ambassador that he is not
aware of any general mobilisation of the Russian forces having
taken place.


No. 118.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received July 31.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, July 31, 1914.
Vienna, July 31, 1914.
I am informed by Count Forgach, Under-Secretary of
State, that although Austria was compelled to respond to
Russian mobilisation, which he deplored, the Austrian Am-
bassador in London has received instructions to inform you
that mobilisation was not to be regarded as a necessarily
hostile act on either side. Telegrams were being exchanged
between the Emperor of Russia and the German Emperor, and
conversations were proceeding between Austrian Ambassador
at St. Petersburgh and Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
A general war might, he seriously hoped, be staved off by
these efforts. On my expressing my fear that Germany would
mobilise, he said that Germany must do something, in his
opinion, to secure her position. As regards Russian interven-
tion on behalf of Servia, Austria-Hungary found it difficult
to recognise such a claim. I called his attention to the fact
that during the discussion of the Albanian frontier at the
London Conference of Ambassadors the Russian Government
had stood behind Servia, and that a compromise between the
views of Russia and Austria-Hungary resulted with accepted
frontier line. Although he spoke in a conciliatory tone, and
did not regard the situation as desperate, I could not get from
him any suggestion for a similar compromise in the present
case. Count Forgach is going this afternoon to see the Rus-
sian Ambassador, whom I have informed of the above con-
versation.
The Russian Ambassador has explained that Russia has
no desire to interfere unduly with Servia; that, as compared
with the late Russian Minister, the present Minister at Bel-
grade is a man of very moderate views; and that, as regards
Austrian demands, Russia had counselled Servia to yield to
them as far as she possibly could without sacrificing her inde-
pendence. His Excellency is exerting himself strongly in the
interests of peace.
No. 119.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 31, ? Q l<4.
M. Cambon referred A o-day to a telegram that had been
shown to Sir Arthur Nicolson this morning from the French
Ambassador in Berlin, saying that it was the uncertainty with
regard to whether we would intervene which was the encou-


raging element in Berlin, and that, if we would only declare
definitely on the side of Russia and France, it would decide
the German attitude in favour of peace.
I said that it was quite wrong to suppose that we had
left Germany under the impression that we would not inter-
vene. I had refused overtures to promise that we should
remain neutral. I had not only definitely declined to say that
we would remain neutral; I had even gone so far this morning
as to say to the German Ambassador that, if France and Ger-
many became involved in war, we should be drawn into it.
That, of course, was not the same thing as taking an engage-
ment to France, and I told M. Cambon of it only to show that
we had not left Germany under the impression that we would
stand aside.
M. Cambon then asked me for my reply to what he had
said yesterday.
I said that we had come to the conclusion, in the Cabinet
to-day, that we could not give any pledge at the present time.
Though we should have to put our policy before Parliament,
we could not pledge Parliament in advance. Up to the present
moment we did not feel, and public opinion did not feel, that
any treaties or obligations of this country were involved.
Further developments might alter this situation and cause the
Government and Parliament to take the view that intervention
was justified. The preservation of the neutrality of Belgium
might be, I would not say a decisive, but an important factor,
in determining our attitude. Whether we proposed to Parlia-
ment to intervene or not to intervene in a war, Parliament
would wish to know how we stood with regard to the
neutrality of Belgium, and it might be that I should ask both
France and Germany whether each was prepared to under-
take an engagement that she would not be the first to violate
the neutrality of Belgium.
M. Cambon repeated his question whether we would help
France if Germany made an attack on her.
I said that I could only adhere to the answer that, as far
as things had gone at present, we could not take any engage-
ment.
M. Cambon urged that Germany had from the beginning-
rejected proposals that might have made for peace. It could
not be to England's interest that France should be crushed
by Germany. We should then be in a very diminished position
with regard to Germany. In 1870 we had made a great mis-
take in allowing an enormous increase of German strength,
and we should now be repeating the mistake. He_ asked me
whether I could not submit his question to the Cabinet again.
I said that the Cabinet would certainly be summoned


as soon as there was some new development, but at the present
moment the only answer I could give was that we could not
undertake any definite engagement.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 120.
Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) St. Petersburgh,, July 31, 1914.
Minister for Foreign Affairs sent for me and French Am-
bassador, and asked us to telegraph to our respective Govern-
ments subjoined formula as best calculated to amalgamate
proposal made by you in your telegram of 30th July* with
formula recorded in my telegram of 30th July.f He trusted
it would meet with your approval:—
"Si l'Autriche consentira a arreter marche de ses troupes
sur le territoire serbe, si, reconnaissant que le conflit a.ustro-
serbe a assume le caractere d'une question d'interet europeen,
eile admet quo les Grandes Puissances examinent la satisfac-
tion que la Serbie pourrait accorder au Gouvernement
d'Autriche-Hongrie sans laisser porter atteinte a ses droits
d'Etat souverain et a son independance, la Russie s'engage a
conserver son attitude expectante.'T
His Excellency then alluded to the telegram sent to
German Emperor by Emperor of Russia in reply to the for-
mer's telegram. Fie said that Emperor Nicholas had begun
by thanking Emperor William for his telegram and for the
hopes of peaceful solution which it held out. His Majesty
had then proceeded to assure Emperor William that no inten-
tion whatever of an aggressive character was concealed behind
Russian military preparations. So long as conversation with
Austria continued, His Imperial Majesty undertook that not
a single man should be moved across the frontier; it was,
however, of course impossible, for reasons explained, to stop
a mobilisation which was already in progress.
M. Sazanof said that undoubtedly there would be bettei
prospect of a peaceful solution if the suggested conversation
were to take place in London, where the atmosphere was far
more favourable, and he therefore hoped that you would see
your way to agreeing to this.
Flis Excellency ended by expressing deep gratitude
to His Majesty's Government, who had done so much to save
the situation. " It would be largely due to them if war were
prevented. The Emperor, the Russian Government, and the


Russian people would never forget the firm attitude adopted
bv Great Britain.
*See No. 103. tSee No. 97.
—" If Austria will agree to check the advance of
her troops on Servian territory; if, recognising that the dispute
between Austria and Servia has assumed a character of European
interest, she will allow the Great Powers to look into the matter
and determine whether Servia could satisfy , the Austro-Hungarian
Government without impairing her rights as a sovereign State or her
independence, Russia will undertake to maintain her waiting atti-
tude."
No. 121
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, July 31, 1914.
Your telegram of 31st July.*
I spent an hour with Secretary of State urging him most
earnestly to accept your proposal and make another effort to
prevent terrible catastrophe of a European war.
He expressed himself very sympathetically towards your
proposal, and appreciated your continued efforts to maintain
peace, but said it was impossible for the Imperial Government
to consider any proposal until they had received an answer
from Russia to their communication of to-day; this communi-
cation, which he admitted had the form of an ultimatum,
being that, unless Russia could inform the Imperial Govern-
ment within twelve hours that she would immediately coun-
termand her mobilisation against Germany and Austria,
Germany would be obliged on her side to mobilise at once.
I asked His Excellency why they had made their demand
even more difficult for Russia to accept by asking them to
demobilise in south as well. He replied that it was in order
to prevent Russia from saying all her mobilisation was only
directed against Austria.
His Excellency said that if the answer from Russia was
satisfactory he thought personally that your proposal merited
favourable consideration, and in any case he would lay it
before the Emperor and Chancellor, but he repeated that it
was no use discussing it until the Russian Government had
sent in their answer to the German demand.
He again assured me that both the Emperor at
the request of the Emperor of Russia, and the German Foreign
Office had even up till last, night been urging Austria to show
willingness to continue discussions—and telegraphic and tele-
phonic communications from Vienna had been of a promising
nature—but Russia's mobilisation had spoilt everything.
"See No. 111.


No. 122.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
Telegraphic.) Berlin, July 31, 1914.
toSSEM.iSSj' reter " d 10 in your ° f
I have seen Secretary of State, who informs me that he
must consult the Emperor and the Chancellor before he could
possibly answer I gathered from what he said that he
thought any reply they might give could not but disclose a
certain amount of their plan of campaign in the event of war
ensuing, and he was therefore very doubtful whether they
would return any answer at all. His Excellency, nevertheless
took note of your request. 1
It appears from what he said that German Government
consider that certain hostile acts have already been committed
by Belgium. As an instance of this, he alleged that a con-
signment oi corn for Germany has been placed under an
embargo already.
I hope to see His Excellency to-morrow again to discuss
the matter further, but the prospect of obtaining a definite
answer seems to me remote.
In speaking to me to-day the Chancellor made it clear
that Germany would in any case desire to know the replv
returned to you by the French Government.
fSee No. 114.
No. 123.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
Sir > Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
I told the German Ambassador to-day that the reply* of
the German Government with regard to the neutrality of
Belgium was a matter of very great regret, because the neu-
trality of Belgium affected feeling in this country. If
Germany could see her way to give the same assurance as
that which had been given by France it would materially
contribute to relieve anxiety and tension here. On the other
hand, if there were a violation of the neutrality of Belgium
by one combatant while the other respected it, it would be
extremely difficult to restrain public feeling in this country.
I said that we had been discussing this question at a Cabinet
meeting, and as I was authorised to tell him this I gave him a
memorandum of it


« He asked me whether, if Germany gave a promise not to
violate Belgium neutrality, we would engage to remain
neutral.
I replied that I could not say that; our hands were still
free, and we were considering what our attitude should be.
All I could say was that our attitude would be determined
largely by public opinion here, and that the neutrality of
Belgium would appeal very strongly to public opinion here.
I did not think that we could give a promise of neutrality on
that condition alone.
The Ambassador pressed me as to whether I could not
formulate conditions on which we would remain neutral. He
even suggested that the integrity of France and her colonies
might be guaranteed.
I said that I felt obliged to refuse definitely any promise
to remain neutral on similar terms, and I could only say that
we must keep our hands free.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
*See No. 122.
No. 124.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, July 31, 1914.
On the receipt at 8.30 to-night of your telegram of this
afternoon,* I sent a message to Minister for Foreign Affairs
requesting to see him. He received me at 10.30 to-night at
the Elysee, where a Cabinet Council was being held. He
took a note of the inquiry as to the respecting by France of
the neutrality of Belgium which you instructed me to make.
He told me that a communication had been made to you
by the German Ambassador in London of the intention of
Germany to order a general mobilisation of her army if Russia
do not demobilise at once. He is urgently anxious as to what
the attitude of England will be in the circumstances, and begs
an answer may be made by His Majesty's Government at the
earliest moment possible.
Minister for Foreign Affairs also told me that the Ger-
man Embassy is packing up.
*See No. 114.


No. 125.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, July 31, 1914.
My immediately preceding telegram.*
Political Director has brought me the reply of the Minis-
ter for Foreign Affairs to your inquiry respecting the
neutrality of Belgium. It is as follows:
French Government are resolved to respect the neutrality
of Belgium, and it would only be in the event of some other
Power violating that neutrality that France might find her-
self under the necessity in order to assure defence of her own
security, to act otherwise. This assurance has been given
several times. President of the Republic spoke of it to the
King of the Belgians, and the French Minister at Brussels
has spontaneously renewed the assurance to the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day.
*See No. 124.
No. 126.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey .—-(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, August 1, 1914.
I have had conversation with the Political Director, who
states that the German Ambassador was informed, on calling
at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs this morning, that the
French Government failed to comprehend the reason which
prompted his communication of yesterday evening. It was
pointed out to His Excellency that general mobilisation in
Russia had not been ordered until after Austria had decreed
a general mobilisation, and that the Russian Government were
ready to demobilise if all the Powers did likewise. It seemed
strange to the French Government that in view of this and
of the fact that Russia and Austria were ready to converse,
the German Government should have at that moment pre-
sented an ultimatum at St. Petersburgh requiring immediate
demobilisation by Russia. There were no differences at issue
between France and Germany, but the German Ambassador
had made a menacing communication to the French Govern-
ment and had requested an answer the next day, intimating
that he would have to break off relations and leave Paris if
the reply were not satisfactory. The Ambassador was in-


formed that the French Government considered that this was
an extraordinary proceeding.
The German Ambassador, who is to see the Minister for
Foreign Affairs again this evening, said nothing about
demanding his passports, but he stated that he had packed up.
No. 127.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, August 1, 1911
General mobilisation of army and fleet.
No. 128.
Sir F. Villiers to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Brussels, August 1, 1914.
Belgian neutrality.
The instructions conveyed in your telegram of yesterday sll
have been acted upon.
Belgium expects and desires that other Powers will
observe and uphold her neutrality, which she intends to main-
tain to the utmost of her power. In so informing me, Minister
for Foreign Affairs said that, in the event of the violation of
the neutrality of their territory, they believed that they were
in a position to defend themselves against intrusion. The
relations between Belgium and her neighbours were excellent,
and there was no reason to suspect their intentions; but he
thought it well, nevertheless, to be prepared against emer-
gencies.
♦See No. 115.
No. 129.
Minister of State, Luxemburg, to Sir Edward Grey.—
(Received August 2.)
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) Luxemburg, August 2, 1914.
The Luxemburg Minister of State has just received
through the German Minister in Luxemburg, M. de Buch, a
telegram from the Chancellor of the German Empire, Beth-


mann-Hollweg, to the effect that the military measures taken
m Luxemburg do not constitute a hostile act against Luxem-
burg, but are only intended to insure against a possible attack
of a French army. Full compensation will be paid to Luxem-
burg for any damage caused by using the railways which are
leased to the Empire.
No. 130.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
We are informed that authorities at Hamburg have for-
cibly detained steamers belonging to the Great Central
Company and other British merchant-ships.
I cannot ascertain on what grounds the detention of
British ships has been ordered.
You should request German Government to send imme-
diate orders that they should be allowed to proceed without
delay. The effect on public opinion here will be deplorable
unless this is done. His Majesty's Government, on their side,
are most anxious to avoid any incident of an aggressive nature,
and the German Government will, I hope, be equally careful
not to take any step which would make the situation between
us impossible.
No. 131.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
I still believe that it might be possible to secure peace if
only a little respite in time can be gained before any Great
Power begins war.
The Russian Government has communicated to me the
readiness of Austria to discuss with Russia and the readiness
of Austria to accept a basis of mediation which is not open
to the objections raised in regard to the formula which Russia
originally suggested.
Things ought not to be hopeless so long as Austria and
Russia are ready to converse, and I hope that German Govern-
ment may be able to make use of the Russian communications
referred to above, in order to avoid tension. His Majesty's
Government are carefully abstaining from any act which may
precipitate matters.


No. 132.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
Following telegram from M. Sazanof to Count Bencken-
dorff of the 31st July communicated to me to-day:—
" (Urgent.) ,
" Formule amendee conformement a la proposition ang-
laise: 'Si Autriche consent a arreter la marche de
ses troupes sur le territoire et si, reconnais-
sant que le conflit austro-serbe a assume le carac-
tere d'une question d'interet europeen, elle admet
que les Grandes Puissances examinent la satis-
faction que la Serbie pourrait accorder an
Gouvernement austro-hongrois sans laisser porter
atteinte a ses droits d'Etat souverain et a son inde-
pendance, la Russie s'engage a conserver son
attitude expectante/ "
(Above communicated to all the Powers.)
Translation. —" Formula amended in accordance with the
English proposal: 'lf Austria consents to stay the march of
her'troops on Servian territory, and if, recognising that the
Austro-Servian conflict has assumed the character of a ques-
tion of European interest, she admits that the Great Powers
may examine the satisfaction which Servia can accot d to the
Austro-Hungarian Government without injury to her sove-
reign rights as a State and to her independence, Russia
undertakes to preserve her waiting attitude.'"
No. 133.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
M de Etter came to-day to communicate the contents of
a telegram from M. Sazanof, dated the 31st July, which are
as follows: —
" The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador declared the readi-
ness of his Government to discuss the substance of the
Austrian ultimatum to Servia. M. Sazanof replied by express-
ing his satisfaction, and said it was desirable that the LlS-
cussions should take place in London with the participation of
the Great-Powers.


' M. Sazanof hoped that the British Government would
assume the direction of these discussions. The whole of
Europe would be thankful to them. It would be very impor-
tant that Austria should meanwhile put a stop provisionally to
her military action on Servian territory."
(The above has been communicated to the six Powers.)
No. 134.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, August 1, 1914.
President of the Republic has informed me that German
Government were trying to saddle Russia with the responsi-
bility ; that it was only after a decree of general mobilisation
had been issued in Austria that the Emperor of Russia ordered
a general mobilisation; that, although the measures which the
German Government have already taken are in effect a general
mobilisation, they are not so designated; that a French general
mobilisation will become necessary in self-defence, and that
France is already forty-eight hours behind Germany as
regards German military preparations; that the French troops
have orders not to go nearer to the German frontier than a
distance of 10 kilom., so as to avoid any grounds for accusa-
tions of provocation to Germany, whereas the German troops,
on the other hand, are actually on the French frontier and
have made incursions on it; that, notwithstanding mobilisa-
tions,. the Emperor of Russia has expressed himself ready to
continue conversations with the German Ambassador with a
view to preserving the peace; that French, Government, whose
wishes are markedly pacific, sincerely desire the preservation
of peace and do not quite despair, even now, of its being pos-
sible to avoid war.
No. 135.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir G. Buchanan.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
Information reaches me from a most reliable source that
Austrian Government have informed German Government
that though the situation has been changed by the mobilisa-
tion of Russia they would, in full appreciation of the efforts
of England for the preservation of peace, be ready to consider
favourably my proposal for mediation between Austria and


Servia. The understanding of this acceptance would naturally
be that the Austrian military action against Servia would con-
tinue for the present, and that the British Government would
urge upon Russian Government to stop the mobilisation of
troops directed against Austria, in which case Austria would
naturally cancel those defensive military counter-measures in
Galacia, which have been forced upon Austria by Russian
mobilisation.
You should inform Minister for Foreign Affairs and say
that if, in the consideration of the acceptance of mediation
by Austria, Russia can agree to stop mobilisation, it appears
still to be possible to preserve peace. Presu nably the
matter should be discussed with German Government, also
by Russian Government.
No. 136.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Paris, August 1, 1914.
Minister of War informed military attache this afternoon
that orders had been given at 3.40 for a general mobilisation
of the French army. This became necessary because the
Minister of War knows that, under the system of " Kriegs-
zustand," the Germans have called up six classes. Three
classes are sufficient to bring their covering troops up to war
strength, the remaining three being the reserve. This, he
says, being tantamount to mobilisation, is mobilisation under
another name.
The French forces on the frontier have opposed to them
eight army corps on a war footing, and an attack is expected
at any moment. It is therefore of the utmost importance
to guard against this. A zone of 10 kiiom. has been left
between the French troops and the German frontier. The
French troops will not attack, and the Minister of War is
anxious that it should be explained that this act of mobilisa-
tion is one for purely defensive purposes.
No. 137.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir M. de Bunsen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 1, 1914.
I saw the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador this morning.
He supplied me with the substance of a telegram which the
Austro-Hungarian Minister for Foreign Affairs had sent to
the Austrian Ambassador in Paris. In this telegram His Excel-


lency was given instructions to assure the French Minister
for Foreign Affairs that there was no intention in the minds
of the Austro-Hungarian Government to impair the sovereign
rights of Servia or to obtain territorial aggrandisement. The
Ambassador added that he was further instructed to inform
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs that there was no
truth in the report which had been published in Paris to the
effect that Austria-Hungary intended to occupy the sanjak.
Count Mensdorff called again later at the Foreign Office.
He informed me of a telegram sent yesterday to the Austro-
Hungarian Ambassador at St. Petersburgh by Count Berch-
told, and gave me the substance.
It states that Count Berchtold begged the Russian Am-
bassador, whom he sent for yesterday, to do his best to
remove the wholly erroneous impression in St. Petersburgh
that the " door had been banged " by Austria-Hungary on all
further conversations. The Russian Ambassadoi promised to
do this. Count Berchtold repeated on this occasion to the
Russian Ambassador the assurance which had already been
given at St. Petersburgh, to the effect that neither an infrac-
tion of Servian sovereign rights nor the acquisition of Servian
territory was being contemplated by Austria-Hungary.
Special attention was called by Count Mensdorff to the
fact that this telegram contains a statement to the effect that
conversations at St. Petersburgh had not been broken off by
Austria-Hungary.
No. 138.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 1, 1914.
Your telegram of to-day. ssl
I have communicated the substance of the above telegram
to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and spent a long
time arguing with him that the chief dispute was between
Austria and Russia, and that Germany was only drawn in as
Austria's ally. If, therefore, Austria and Russia were, as was
evident, ready to discuss matters, and Germany did not desire
war on her own account, it seemed to me only logical that
Germany should hold her hand and continue to work for a
peaceful settlement. Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
said that Austria's readiness to discuss was the result of
German influence at Vienna, and, had not Russia mobilised
Germany, all would have been well. But Russia, by
abstaining from answering Germany's demand that she should
demobilise, had caused Germany to mobilise also. Russia


had said that her mobilisation did not necessarily imply war,
and that she could perfectly well remain mobilised for months
without making war. This was not the case with Germany.
She had the speed and Russia had the numbers, and the safety
of the German Empire forbade that Germany should allow
Russia time to bring up masses of troops from all parts of
her wide dominions. The situation now was that, though the
Imperial Government had allowed her several hours beyond
the specified time, Russia had sent no answer. Germany had
therefore ordered mobilisation, and the German representative
at St. Petersburgh had been instructed within a certain time
to inform the Russian Government that the Imperial Govern-
ment must regard their refusal to answer as creating a state
of war.
♦See No. 131.
No. 139.
Sir (?. Buchanan to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) St. Petersburgh, August 1, 1914.
My telegram of 31st July.*
The Emperor of Russia read his telegram to the German
Emperor to the German Ambassador at the audience given
to His Excellency yesterday. No progress whatever was
made.
In the evening M. Sazanof had an interview with the
Austrian Ambassador, who, not being definitely instructed by
his Government, did his best to deflect the conversation to-
wards a general discussion of the relations between Austria-
Hungary and Russia, instead of keeping to the question of
Servia. In reply the Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed
his desire that these relations should remain friendly, and said
that, taken in general, they were perfectly satisfactory; but
the real question which they had to solve at this moment was
whether Austria was to crush Servia and to reduce her to
the status of a vassal, or wdiether she was to leave Servia a
free and independent State. In these circumstances, while
the Servian question was unsolved, the abstract discussion of
the relations between Austria-Hungary and Russia was a
waste of time. The only place where a successful discussion
of this question could be expected was London, and any such
discussion was being made impossible by the action of Austria-
Hungary in subjecting Belgrade, a virtually unfortified town,
to bombardment.


M. Sazanof informed the French Ambassador and myself
this morning of his conversation with the Austrian Ambas-
sador. He went on to say that during the Balkan crisis he
had made it clear to the Austrian Government that war with
Russia must inevitably follow an Austrian attack on Servia.
It was clear-that Austrian domination of Servia was as intoler-
able for Russia as the dependence of the Netherlands on
Germany would be to Great Britain. It was, in fact, for
Russia a question of life and death. The policy of Austria
had throughout been both tortuous and immoral, and she
thought that she could treat Russia with defiance, secure in
the support of her German ally. Similarly the policy of Ger-
many had been an equivocal and double-faced policy, and it
mattered little whether the German Government knew or did
not know the terms of the Austrian ultimatum; what mat-
tered was that her intervention with the Austrian Govern-
ment had been postponed until the moment had passed when
its influence would have been felt. Germany was unfortunate
in her representatives in Vienna and St. Petersburgh: the
former was a violent Russophobe who had urged Austria on;
the latter had reported to his Government that Russia would
never go to war. M. Sazanof was completely weary of the
ceaseless endeavours he had made to avoid a war. No sug-
gestion held out to him had been refused. He had accepted
the proposal for a conference of four, for mediation by Great
Britain and Italy, for direct conversation between Austria
and Russia; but Germany and Austria-Hungary had either
rendered these attempts for peace ineffective by evasive
replies or had refused them altogether. The action of the
Austro-Hungarian Government and the German preparations
had forced the Russian Government to order mobilisation, and
the mobilisation of Germany had created a desperate situa-
tion.
M. Sazanof added that the formula, of which the text is
contained in my telegram of 31st July,* had been forwarded
by the Russian Government to Vienna, and he would adhere
to it if you could obtain its acceptance before the frontier
was crossed by German troops. In no case would Russia
begin hostilities first.
I now see no possibility of a general war being avoided
unless the agreement of France and Germany can be obtained
to keep their armies mobilised on their own side of the frontier,
as Russia has expressed her readiness to do, pending a last
attempt to reach a settlement of the present crisis.
*See No. 120.


No. 140.
Sir F. Bertie to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 1.)
(Telegraphic.) p aris> August 1, 1914.
1 he Minister of War again sent for the military attache
tnis evening, as he said he wished to keep him informed of
He laid great stress on the fact that the zone
of 10 knom. which he had arranged between the French
troops and the German frontier, and which was still occupied
by peasants, was a proof of the French endeavours to commit
no provocative act.
No. 141.
Sir M. de Bunsen to Sir Edward Grey—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Vienna, August 1, 1914.
I am to be received to-morrow by Minister for Foreign
Affairs. I his afternoon he is to §ee the French and Russian
Ambassadors. I have just been informed by the Russian
iVmbassador of German ultimatum requiring that Russia
should demobilise within twelve hours. On being asked by
the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the inevit-
able refusal of Russia to yield to this curt summons meant
war, the German Ambassador replied that Germany would
be forced to mobilise if Russia refused. Russian Ambassador
at Vienna thinks that war is almost inevitable, and that mobili-
sation is too expensive to be kept for long; Germany will
attack Russia at once. He says that the so-called mobilisa-
tion of Russia amounted to nothing more than that Russia
had taken military measures corresponding to those taken by
Germany. There seems to be even greater tension between
Germany and Russia than there is between Austria and Rus-
sia. Russia would, according to the Russian Ambassador,
be satisfied even now with assurance respecting Servian integ-
rity and independence. He says that Russia had no intention
to attack Austria. He is going again to-day to point out to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs that most terrific conse-
quences must ensue from refusal to make this slight con-
cession. This time Russia would fight to the last extremity.
I agree with His Excellency that the German Ambassador at
Vienna desired war from the first, and that his strong per-
sonal bias probably coloured his action here. The Russian
Ambassador is convinced that .the German Government also
desired war from the first


It is the intention of the French Ambassador to speak
earnestly to the Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day 011 the
extreme danger of the situation, and to ask whether pro-
posals to serve as a basis of mediation from any quarter are
being considered. There is great anxiety to know what Eng-
land will do. I fear that nothing can alter the determination
of Austro-Hungarian Government to proceed on their present
course, if they have made up their mind with the approval of
Germany.
No. 142.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 1, 1914.
Orders have just been issued for the general mobilisation
of the navy and army, the first day of mobilisation to be the
2nd August.
No. 143.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey. —(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 1, 1914.
Detention of British merchant ship at Hamburg.
Your telegram of Ist August* acted on.
Secretary of State, who expressed the greatest surprise
and annoyance, has promised to send orders at once to allow
steamers to proceed without delay.
*See No. 130.
No. 144.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 2, 1914.
Secretary of State has just informed me that, owing to
certain Russian troops having crossed frontier, Germany and
Russia are now in a state of war.


No. 145.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 2, 1914.
My telegram of Ist August.*
Secretary of State informs me that orders were sent last
night to allow British ships in Hamburg to proceed on their
way._ He says that this must be regarded as a special favour
to His Majesty's Government, as no other foreign ships have
been allowed to leave. Reason of detention was that mines
weer being laid and other precautions being taken.
*See No. 143.
No. 146.
Sir F. Villiers to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 2.)
(Telegraphic.) Brussels, August 2, 1914.
The news that a German force has entered Grand Duchy of
Luxemburg has been officially confirmed to the Belgian Govern-
ment.
No. 147.
Minister of State, Luxemburg, to Sir Edward Grey.
—(Received August 2.)
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) Luxemburg, August 2, 1914.
I have the honour to bring to your Excellency's notice
the following facts:—
On Sunday, the 2nd August, very early, the German
troops, according to the information which has up to now
reached the Grand Ducal Government, penetrated into Luxem-
burg territory by the bridges of Wasserbillig and Remich, and
proceeded particularly towards the south and in the direction
of Luxemburg, the capital of the Grand Duchy. A certain
number or armoured trains with troops and ammunition have
been sent along the railway line from Wasserbillig to Luxem-
burg, where their arrival is expected. These occurrences con-
stitute acts which are manifestly contrary to the neutrality
of the Grand Duchy as guaranteed by the' Treaty of London
of 1867. The Luxemburg Government has not failed to
address an energetic protest against this aggression to the
representatives of His Majesty the German Emperor at
Luxemburg. An identical protest will be sent by telegraph
to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs at Berlin.


No. 148.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie
(Telegraphic.) . Foreig „ office _
lowing' memSaSm'd hiS ' S3Ve M ' Ca °> b °" «* «•*
fleet comes into Channel 3 or tbe erman
undertake hostile operations again<J°F North Sea to
His Majesty s Government o fVl ° £
by the German fleet takes p, ace VC of action
ditSc'lfiSS < "" S "'r, S and "» st
could not bind themseNe to dJI Govern ™nt felt that they
SSJ. s
her s s s' c l ,he iv
say about the violation of tie neutrality of Bd&,Z° f °"! d
in effect ™h<*v. , , ir i to-morrow—
neutrality t! t S t declare violation of Belgian
tofhe'grra^AmSr-on l tad b ' e " !aid
No. 149.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 2,1914.
Your telegram of Ist August.*
1 *j re ?r et t0 j earn f^ at fOO tons of sugar was compulsorily
unloaded from the British steamship Sappho at Hamburg and
detained. Similar action appears to have been taken with
regard to other British vessels loaded with sugar.


You should inform Secretary of State that, for reasons
stated in my telegram of Ist August,! I most earnestly trust
that the orders already sent to Hamburg to allow the clear-
ance of British ships covers also the release of their cargoes,
the detention of which cannot be justified.
*See No. 143. tSee No. 130.
No. 150.
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 3.)
{Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 3, 1914.
Your telegram of 2nd August*: Detention of British ships
at Hamburg.
No information available.
*See No. 149.
No. 151.
Sir F. Villiers to Sir Edward Grey.— (Received August 3.)
(Telegraphic.) Brussels, August 3, 1914.
French Government have offered, through their military
attache, the support of five French army corps to the Belgian
Government. Following reply has been received to-day:
" We are sincerely grateful to the French Government
for offering eventual support. In the actual circumstances,
however, we do not propose to appeal to the guarantee of the
Powers. Belgian Government will decide later on the action
which they may think it necessary to take."
No. 152.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie.
gj r Foreign Office, August 3, 1914.
On the Ist instant the French Ambassador made the fol-
lowing communication: — . ,
" In reply to the German Government s intimation of the
fact that ultimatums had been presented to France and Russia,.


u- u "^,^ e war undertaken by Austria, and the consequences
™dor Ssel/T' had ' the , words of the German Ambas-
sador himself, an aggressive object. Both were therefore in
conflict with the purely defensive character of the Triple
neutml"' SUCh clrcumstances Italy would remain
In making this communication M. Cambon was instructed
was a no S t fd f P °" th t ltaHan declarat ion that the present war
was not a defensive but an aggressive war, and that, for this
Sd no't the tCrms of the Tri P le Allian "
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 153.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Te'egraphic.) Foreign Office, August 4, 1914.
M • tJ ? e Bel gians has made an appeal to His
° f
f lie" p 1 our "fTeTTeisor- n
tude of England in 1870, and the proof of friendship you have
J st given us again, I make a supreme appeal to the diplomatic
ment a note proposing friendly neutrality entailing free
passage through Belgian territory, and promising to main-
tain the independence and integrity of the kingdom and its
possessions at the conclusion of peace, threatening in case of
refusal to treat Belgium as an enemy. An answer waS re-
quested within twelve hours.
We also understand that Belgium has categorically re-
fused this as a flagrant violation of the law of nations
His Majesty's Government are bound to protest against
this violation of a treaty to which Germany is a party in com-
mon with themselves, and must request an assurance that the
demand made upon Belgium will not be proceeded with and
that her neutrality will be respected by Germany. You should
ask for an immediate reply.


No. 154.
Sir F. Villiers to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 4.)
(Telegraphic.) Brussels, August 4, 1914.
German Minister has this morning addressed note to
Minister for Foreign. Affairs stating that as Belgian Govern-
ment have declined the well-intentioned proposals submitted
to them by the Imperial Government, the latter will, deeply
to their regret, be compelled to carry out, if necessary by
force of arms, the measures considered indispensable in view
of the French menaces.
No. 155.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Villiers.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 4, 1914.
You should inform Belgian Government that if pressure
is applied to them by Germany to induce them to depart from
neutrality, His Majesty's Government expect that they will
resist by any means in their power, and that His Majesty s
Government will support them in offering such resistance, and
that His Majesty's Government in this event are prepared to
join Russia and France, if desired, in offering to the Belgian
Government at once common action for the purpose of resist-
ing use of force by Germany against them, and a guarantee
to maintain their independence and integrity in future years.
No. 156.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign Office, August 4, 1914.
I continue to receive numerous complaints from British
firms as to the detention of their ships at Hamburg, Cuxhaven
and other German ports. This .action on the part of the
German authorities is totally unjustifiable. It is in direct
contravention of international law and of the assurances
to your Excellency by the Imperial Chancellor. You should
demand the immediate release of all British ships if such
release has not yet been given.


No. 157.
German Foreign Secretary to Prince Lichnowsky.—(Commu»
nicated by German Embassy, August 4.)
(Telegraphic.) Berlin, August 4, 1914.
Se ,^isP e l any mistrust that may subsist on the part
of the British Government with regard to our intentions, by
repeating most positively formal assurance that, even in the
case of armed conflict with Belgium, Germany will, under no
pretence whatever, annex Belgian territory. Sincerity of this
declaration is borne out by the fact that we solemnly pledged
our word to Holland strictly to respect her neutrality. It is
obvious that we could not profitably annex Belgian territory
without making at the same time territorial acquisitions at
expense of Holland. Please impress upon Sir E. Grey that
German army could not be exposed to French attack across
Belgium, which was planned according to absolutely unim-
peachable information. Germany had consequently to dis-
regard Belgian neutrality, it being for her a question of life
or death to prevent French advance.
No. 158.
Sir F. Villiers to Sir Edward Grey.—(Received August 4.)
(Telegraphic.) Brussels, August 4, 1914.
Military attache has been informed at War Office that
German troops have entered Belgian territory, and that Liege
has been summoned to surrender by a small party of Germans,
who, however, were repulsed.
No. 159.
Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.)
Foreign Office, August 4, 1914.
We hear that Germany has addressed note to Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs stating that German Govern-
ment will be compelled to carry out, if necessary by force
of arms, the measures considered indispensable.
We are also informed that Belgian territory has been
violated at Gemmenich.
In these circumstances, and in view of the fact that Ger-
many declined to give the same assurance respecting Belgium
as France gave last week in reply to our request made simul-


taneously at Berlin and Paris, we must repeat that request
and ask that a satisfactory reply to it and to my telegram of
this morning* be received here by 12 o'clock to-night. If not,
you are instructed to ask for your passports, and to say that
His Majesty's Government feel bound to take all steps in
their power to uphold the neutrality of Belgium and the obser-
vance of a treaty to which Germany is as much a party as
ourselves.
*See No. 153.
Despatch from His Majesty's Ambassador at Berlin respecting the
rupture of diplomatic relations with the German Government
Sir E. Goschen to Sir Edward Grey
Sir, — London, August 8, 1914.
In accordance with the instructions contained in your
telegram of the 4th instant* I called upon the Secretary of
State that afternoon and inquired, in the name of His Majesty's
Government, whether the Imperial Government would refrain
from violating Belgian neutrality. Herr von Jagow at once
replied that he was sorry to say that his answer must be
" No," as, in consequence of the German troops having crossed
the frontier that morning, Belgian neutrality had been already
violated. Herr von Jagow again went into the reasons why
the Imperial Government, had been obliged to take this step,
namely, that they had to advance into France by the quickest
and easiest way, so as to be able to get well ahead with their
operations and endeavour to strike some decisive blow as
early as possible. It was a matter of life and death for them,
as if they had gone by the more southern route they could
not have hoped, in view of the paucity of roads and the
strength of the fortresses, to have got through without for-
midable opposition entailing great loss of time. This loss of
time would have meant time gained by the Russians for bring-
ing up their troops to the German frontier. Rapidity of
action was the great German asset, while that of Russia was
an inexhaustible supply of troops. I pointed out to Herr von
Jagow that this fait accompli of the violation of the Belgian
frontier rendered, as he would readily understand, the situa-
tion exceedingly grave, and I asked him whether there was
not still time to draw back and avoid possible consequences,
which both he and I would deplore. He replied that, for the
reasons he had given me, it was now impossible for them to
draw back.


During the afternoon I received your further telegram nf
£rjr c LZ'pi rias &JB&S
that nigh, that they would prfceed noS 'Ailr viojt
tion of the Belgian frontier and stop their advance 1 hnd KP,
instructed to demand my passports and inform the Imperial
?Z TT' ' hat Ma i est /s Government would have to
take all steps in their power to uphold the neufralhv of r i
gium and the observance of a treLy to which g 'matw was
as much a party as themselves. y was
. Herr y on Jagow replied that to his great regret he could
give no other answer than that which he I had meea S
namel y> the safety of the Empire rendered it
thrn! U Jh P necessary tha t the Imperial troops should advance
t rough Belgium. I gave His Excellency a written summary
of your telegram, and, pointing , h J you
12 o clock as the time when His Majesty's Government would
expect an answer, asked him whether, in view of the terrible
consequences which would necessarily ensue, it were not pos-
sible even at the last moment that their answer should be
reconsidered He replied that if the time given were even
twenty-four hours or more, his answer must be the same I
said that in that case I should have to demand my passports.
This interview took place at about 7 o'clock. In a short con-
S t r !° n which ensued Herr von Jagow expressed his poig-
-ICCh g] if of his entire policy and that of
the Chancellor which had been to make friends with Great
ritam, and then through Great Britain, to get closer to
I ranee. I said that this sudden end to my work in Berlin
was to me also a matter of deep regret and disappointment but
that he must understand that under the circumstances and
in view of our engagements, His Majesty's Government could
not possibly have acted otherwise than they had done.
. then said that I should like to go and see the Chancellor,
as it might be perhaps the last time I should have an oppor-
tunity of seeing him. He begged me to do so. I found the
Chancellor very agitated. His Excellency at once began a
harangue, which lasted for about twenty minutes. He said
that the &tep taken by His Majesty's Government was terrible
to a degree, just for a word—"neutrality," a word which in
war time had so often been disregarded—just for a scrap of
paper Great Britain was going to make war on a kindred
nation who desired nothing better than to be friends with her.
*See "Miscellaneous, No. 6 (1914)," No. 153.
tSee " Miscellaneous, No. 6 (1914)," No. 159.


All his efforts in that direction had been rendered useless by
this last terrible step, and the policy to which, as I knew, he
had devoted himself since his accession to office had tumbled
down like a house of cards. What we had done was unthink-
able; it was like striking a man from behind whilst he was
fighting for his life against two assailants. He held Great
Britain responsible for all the terrible events that might hap-
pen. I protested strongly against that statement, and said
that, in the same way as he and Herr von Jagow wished me
to understand that for strategical reasons it was a matter of
iife and death for Germany to advance through Belgium and
violate the latter's neutrality, so I would wish him to under-
stand that it was, so to speak, a matter of " life and death "
for the honour of Great Britain that she should keep her
solemn engagement to do her utmost to defend Belgium's
neutrality if attacked. That solemn compact simply had to
be kept, or what confidence could anyone have in engage-
ments given by Great Britain in the future? The Chancellor
said, " But at what price will that compact have been kept.
Has the British Government thought of that?" I hinted to
His Excellency as plainly as I could that fear of consequences
could hardly be regarded as an excuse for breaking solemn
engagements; but His Excellency was so excited, so evidently
overcome by the news of our action, and so little disposed to hear
reason that I refrained from adding fuel to the flame by fur-
ther argument. As I was leaving he said that the blow of
Great Britain joining Germany's enemies was all the greater
that almost up to the last moment he and his Government had
been working with us and supporting our efforts to maintain
peace between Austria and Russia. I said that this was part
of the tragedy which saw the two nations fall apart just at
the moment when the relations between them had been more
friendly and cordial than they had been for years. Unfortu-
nately, notwithstanding our efforts to maintain peace between
Russia and Austria, the war had spread, and had brought us face
to face with a situation which, if we held to our engagements,
we could not possibly avoid, and which unfortunately entailed
our separation from our late fellow-workers. He would
readily understand that no one regretted this more than I.
After this somewhat painful interview I returned to the
embassy and drew up a telegraphic report of what had passed.
This telegram was handed in at the Central Telegraph Office
a little before 9 p.m. It was accepted by that office, but appa-
rently never despatched.*
At about 9.30 Herr von Zimmerman, the Under Secretary
of State, came to see me. After expressing his deep regret
that the very friendly official and personal relations between
us were about to cease, he asked me casually whether a de-
*This telegram never reached the Foreign Office.


rnand for passports was equivalent to a declaration of war. I
said that such an authority on international law as he was
known to be must know as well or better than I what was
usual in such cases. I added that there were many cases
where diplomatic relations had been broken off, and, never-
theless, war had not ensued; but that in this case he would
have seen from my instructions, of which I had given Herr
von Jagow a written summary, that His Majesty's Govern-
ment expected an answer to a definite question by 12 o'clock
that night, and that in default of a satisfactory answer they
would be forced to take such steps as their engagements
required. Herr Zimmerman said that that was, in fact, a
declaration of war, as the Imperial Government could not
possibly give the assurance required either that night or any
other night.
In the meantime, after Herr Zimmerman left me, a flying
sheet, issued by the " Berliner Tageblatt," was circulated
stating that Great Britain had declared war against Germany.
The immediate result of this news was the of an
exceedingly excited and unruly mob before His Majesty's
embassy. The small force of police which had been sent to
guard the embassy was soon overpowered, and the attitude
of the mob became more threatening. We took no notice of
this demonstration as long as it was confined to noise, but
when the crash of glass and the landing of cobble stones in
the drawing-room, where we were all sitting, warned us that
the situation was getting unpleasant, I telephoned to the
Foreign Office an account of what was happening. Herr von
Jagow at once informed the Chief of Police, and an adequate
force of mounted police, sent with great promptness, very
soon cleared the street. From that moment on we were well
guarded, and no more direct unpleasantness occurred.
After order ha 1 been restored Herr von Jagow came to
see me, and expressed his most heartfelt regrets at what had
occurred. He said that the behaviour of his countrymen had
made him feel more ashamed than he had words to express
It was an indelible stain on the reputation of Berlin. He said
that the flying sheet circulated in the streets had not been
authorised by the Government; in fact, the Chancellor had
asked him by telephone whether he thought that such a state-
ment should be issued, and he had replied, " Certainly not,
until the morning." It was in consequence of his decision to
that effect that only a small f'oice of police had been sent to
the neighbourhood of the embassy, as he had thought that
the presence of a large force would inevitably attract atten-
tion and perhaps lead to disturbances. It was the pestilen-
tial ' Tageblatt,'" which had somehow got hold of the news,
that had upset his calculations. He had heard rumours that
the mob had been excited to violence by gestures made and


missiles thrown from the embassy, but he felt sure that that
was not was able soon to assure him that the report
had no foundation whatever) —and, even if it was, it was no
excuse for the disgraceful scenes which had taken place. He
feared that I would take home with me a sorry impression
of Berlin manners in moments of excitement. In fact, no
apology could have been more full and complete.
On the following morning, the sth August, the Emperor
sent one of His Majesty's aides-de-camp to me with the fol-
lowing message:—
" The Emperor has charged me to express to your Excel-
lency his regret for the occurrences of last night, but
to tell you at the same time that you will gather from
those occurrences an idea of the feelings of his people
respecting the action of Great Britain in joining with
other nations against her old allies of Waterloo. His
Majesty also begs that you will tell the King that he
has been proud of the titles of British Field Marshal
and British Admiral, but that in consequence of what
has occurred he must now at once divest himself of those
titles."
I would add that the above message lost none of its acer-
bity by the manner of its delivery.
On the other hand, I should like to state that I received
all through this trying time nothing but courtesy at the hands
of Herr von Jagow and the officials of the Imperial Foreign
Office. At about 11 o'clock on the same morning Count
Wedel handed me my passports —which I had earlier in the day
demanded in writing—and told me that he had been instructed
to confer with me as to the route which I should follow for
my return to England. He said that he had understood that
I preferred the route via the Hook of Holland to that via
Copenhagen; they had therefore arranged that I should go
by the former route, only I should have to wait till the fol-
lowing morning. I agreed to this, and he said that I might
be quite assured that there would be no repetition of the dis-
graceful scenes of the preceding night, as full precautions
would be taken. He added that they were doing all in their
power to have a restaurant car attached to the train, but it
was rather a difficult matter. He also brought me a charming
letter from Herr von Jagow couched in the most friendly
terms. The day was passed in packing up such articles as
the time allowed.
The night passed quietly without any incident. In the
morning a strong force of police was posted along the usual


route to the Lehrter station, while the embassy was smuggled
away in taxicabs to the station by side streets. We there
suffered no molestation whatever, and avoided the treatment
meted out by the crowd to my Russian and French colleagues.
Count Wedel met us at the station to say good-bye on behalf of
Herr von Jagow, and to see that all the arrangements ordered
for our comfort had been properly carried out. A retired
colonel of the Guards accompanied the train to the Dutch
frontier, and was exceedingly kind in his efforts to prevent
the crowds which thronged the platforms at every station
where we stopped from insulting us; but beyond the yelling
of patriotic songs and a few jeers and insulting gestures we
had really nothing to complain of during our tedious journey
to the Dutch frontier.
Before closing this long account of our last days in Berlin
I should like to place on record and bring to your notice the
quite admirable behaviour of my staff under the most trying
circumstances possible. One and all, they worked night and
day with scarcely any rest, and I cannot praise too highly the
cheerful zeal with which counsellor, naval and military
attaches, secretaries, and the two young attaches buckled to
their work and kept their nerve with often a yelling mob out-
side and inside hundreds of British subjects clamouring for
advice and assistance. I was proud to have such a staff to
work with, and feel most grateful to them all for the invalu-
able assistance and support, often exposing them to consider-
able personal risk, which they so readily and cheerfully gave
to me.
I should also like to mention the great assistance rendered
to us all by my American colleague, Mr. Gerard, and his staff.
Undeterred by the hooting and hisses with which he was often
greeted by the mob on entering and leaving the embassy, His
Excellency came repeatedly to see me to ask how he
help us and to make arrangements for the safety of stranded
British subjects. He extricated many of those from extremely
difficult situations at some personal risk to himself, and his
calmness and savoir faire and his firmness in dealing with the
Imperial authorities gave full assurance that the protection
of British subjects and interests could not have been left in
more efficient and able hands.
I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEN.


«
IwI
*
.


klliv"" **
-
■
*
*
! ' f
»
..
- •
4 A
#
*
.
* ■ . 3
*
1
V
-
i
Sfe''.V : ' • • V ' - :
VN
- •
. .
> .
% t - ' ■
' '
* •#
* *
. , •,.%• . ; ;
• jfll'. **
-f #
: * ' - i •
f
.
■
<■
'
,
&•'■!'■ ' *, ■
'
1
*
»
■' i
1
! ' • 4
"-4 : UU2
:
*. ■■ - f :
'■ 1
W ' :
' •• • ' , /. - : .
7 ' ' S • '
1 * .
*
I \
g ' »
** *
' *. • *> ' v ' ' i
- ■' ■ ■ , .* -- . ' .
— ' , J
•*" J:
■ ♦ • -S
■ ■
* • * : . J
,
tfo'-, <>.■■■' , . .* T • ■ ■
jy*. - 1
■i - .■*
♦ . -*u # ♦
r
* • , "'t - ,
■J .
•" " # ' * "* - ' ! i
■-
*v,
■ . ' ,: 1
• - . ■ . . ,
