





SIR W. F. D. JERVOIS, G.C.M.G., C.B.


THE
REPRESENTATIVE MEN
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY GEORGE E. LOYAU
(Author of “Australasian Sketches and Reminiscences,” “History of
G-awler,” “Personal Adventures in Pour Colonies,”
“Tales in Yerses, Essays, &c.”)
IcMraLtr bir to
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR ¥. E. D. JERYOIS, G.C.M.G., C. 8., R.E.
Webb, Vardon, & Pritchard, Pri>tebs, G-resham-street.
sMaik:
GEOEGE HOWELL.
1883.


COPYRIGHT, 1882,
BY GEORGE HOWELL,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


Dedicated
BY PERMISSION TO
His Excellency Sir W. E. D. Jeryois, G.C.M.G., C. 8.,
E.E., Governor oe South Australia,
WITH THE MOST PROFOUND RESPECT FOR HIS EXALTED
AND STERLING CHARACTER AND HIS ABILITY AS
A STATESMAN AND RULER OF THIS PORTION
OF HER MAJESTY’S DOMINIONS,
BY
The Author.


PREFATORIAL.
It has not heen inaptly said that men should learn the
history of the country in which they reside, and a similar
remark might he truly applied to the biography of the
same. Of South Australia, notwithstanding its history
has been undertaken by willing hands, and by those who
devoted much time to the construction of its records,
only imperfect chronicles have appeared, so that to the
historian of the future we must look for something more
elaborate and voluminous —a something of the Macaulay
type, which shall do justice to all entitled to the name of
“ Representative Men.” Were it otherwise, there would
have been no necessity for the present volume, which it is
hoped will prove a useful adjunct to current literature.
Uncompelled to follow in the wake of others, or act the role
of copyist from books extant on the subject, the author s
task has not been easy, or his self-imposed labours light.
Totally unaware at the outset that South Australia had
produced so many really eminent men, he thought that
250 pages would be ample to record all that could be said
of them, but as biography after biography crowded in
thick and fast with an importance beyond dispute, it was
too palpable the whole could not be compressed into a
single volume. A selection was therefore made for the
present publication, and those excluded therefrom by
want of space will be found in the supplementary work
on which the author is now engaged, and which will
appear in due course. Valuable assistance was rendered
him in compilation by Messrs. J. P. Stow, J.P., J. B.


Austin, J. W. Bull, and others, and to these he returns
sincere thanks, and to Mr. Bull especially, as he, being-
one of our oldest living colonists, was enabled to speak
authoritatively on facts and data connected with the
early colonists. It is not, however, to be expected, even
with such boundless stores of information, that the book
will be perfection ; indeed, no such standard is claimed
for it; errors must and do creep into all first literary
productions, no matter how strict the supervision, and
how carefully read the proof-sheets. Still, the author is
content in the knowledge that by these humble efforts he
has succeeded in rescuing from oblivion the memory of
many colonists who have passed away, and who, by
reason of their virtues, were worthy of something better
as an obituary than a newspaper paragraph.
G. E. LOYAU.
Adelaide, S.A., January, 1883.
II
PEEFATOETAL.


REPRESENTATIVE MEN
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
SIR WILLIAM FRANCIS DRUMMOND JERVOIS, G.C.M.G.,
C.B ., R.E.,
Is the eldest son of the late General Jervois, Colonel of
the 76th Regiment, and was horn in 1821. He passed his
examination at Woolwich, and entered the Royal Engi-
neers in 1839. After completing the usual course of
study at Chatham, he was ordered to the Cape of Good
Hope in 1841, where he w x as actively employed for up-
wards of seven years in various capacities. In 1842 he
was Brigade Major in an expedition against the Boers,
and in the three following years professionally engaged
at various frontier stations making roads, building
bridges, and establishing military posts. In 1845, having
been appointed Acting-Adjutant to the Royal Engineers,
he accompanied the Chief Engineer over the whole
frontier of Cape Colony, and the settlement of Natal;
and in the early part of 1846 was Major of Brigade to
the garrison of Cape Town, till the arrival of Sir H.
Pottinger as Governor, and Sir J. Berkeley as Com-
mander-in-Chief, with whom he proceeded to the frontier
against the Kafirs. During the Kafir war he made a
military survey and map of Kaffraria, 2,000 miles of
country, a work of great difficulty, and ably executed,
although the major portion of it was done during the


continuance of hostilities. From 1848 to 1852 he com-
manded a company of Sappers at Woolwich and Chatham,
and in the latter year was ordered to the Island of
Alderney for the purpose of designing plans for the
fortifications, and superintendence of their execution;
and in 1854 was promoted to the rank of Major. In 1855
he was transferred to the London district as Commanding
Loyal Engineer, and nominated bv Lord Panmure a
member of the Committee on Barrack Accommodation,
whose labours contributed much to the improvements
which of late years have taken place in the construction
of barracks, as well as in the sanitary condition of our
troops. In 1856 he was appointed to the post of Assistant
Inspector-General of Fortifications, under Sir John
Burgoyne; and on the appointment of a Loyal Commis-
sion to report upon the defences of the country, he was
selected by the Government to be Secretary. He was a
member of the Select Committee on the application of
iron to ships and fortifications. In 1861 he attained the
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel. In 1862 was appointed
Deputy-Director of Fortifications under Sir John Bur-
goyne. In 1863 he was sent on a special mission to
report upon the defences of Canada, Nova Scotia, and
New Brunswick, when he visited the fortifications at the
chief ports on the sea-boards of the United States. In
1864 he was again dispatched on a special mission to
Canada to confer with the Government there on the
defences of that province ; and on his return to England
his report was laid before the Imperial Government, who
undertook to carry out the defences of Quebec on the
plan recommended by him. In addition to his post at the
War Office, Colonel Jervois was Secretary to the Perma-
nent Defence Commission, under Presidency of the Duke
of Cambridge.
The Government of India commissioned him to report


upon the fortifications of Aden, Bombay, and the
Hooghly, and he also advised upon the best methods of
fortifying Rangoon and Moulmein. Such a record of
continuous and important service stamps Sir William as
a man of great activity, high intelligence, and extensive
resource. His varied and useful military labours have
t/
ensured for him honourable recognition apart from the
promotions here enumerated and the more responsible
duties he has since been called upon to fulfil. On his
return to England from Canada, in 1868, he was nomi-
nated a Civil C. 8., and in 187-1 the title of Knight Com-
mander of St. Michael and St. George was conferred on
him as an acknowledgment of his colonial services. In
1875 he entered upon a new field, having in that year
been appointed Governor of the Straits Settlement. This
position he filled for two years with conspicuous ability.
On his arrival portions of the country were in a state of
serious disquietude, but by mingled firmness and concilia-
tion he succeeded in restoring tranquillity. His recom-
mendation of the proper treatment of the Perak chiefs
received the endorsement of Earl Carnarvon, and has
produced generally very happy results. During the two
years’ residence of Sir William Jervois at Singapore he
secured in a high degree the goodwill of the people. The
reasons for his leaving are so well known as to require
no lengthened reference. He was appointed by the
Home Government to visit the Australian Colonies and
report upon the means of defence best suited to their
circumstances, and, so far as his labours have extended,
he has proved himself eminently qualified for the mission.
His reports on the defences of New South Wales, Vic-
toria, Queensland, Tasmania, and South Australia bespeak
a mastery of the subject in all its bearings, and we may
especially congratulate ourselves that he holds the impor-
tant position of Governor of South Australia.


The appointment of Sir W. D. F. Jervois dates from
October 2nd, 1877. The services of Sir William were
greatly in request at that time, in consequence of the
superior knowledge he displayed in fortifications and the
like. Owing to these circumstances he was obliged to
absent himself from the colony for a time. Early in
1878 he proceeded to England for a few months, and at
this time was created a Grand Cross of the Order of St.
Michael and St. George. Accompanied by Lady Jervois
and family, he returned hither August 15, 1878, and both
he and they received the warmest welcome from the
people. It may interest many to know that Sir William
descended from a very old Irish family, and that Lady
Jervois is the daughter of the late W. iSTosworthy, Esq.,
of England. His Excellency’s son, Lieut. J. Jervois,
E.E., was appointed to the post of Deputy-Assistant
Adjutant-General of the Volunteer Military Force of
South Australia in 1882, in succession to Major J. A.
Fergusson.
Sir William Jervois is undoubtedly one of the most
active Governors that South Australia has ever possessed,
and from the day of his landing to the present time has
been fully occupied either in visiting the country districts,
making himself thoroughly conversant with the wants
and requirements of the people, or in receiving deputa-
tions, laying foundation-stones, presiding at inauguration
ceremonials, at railway extensions, mechanics’ institutes,
public banquets, and the like. His speeches are remark-
able for the soundness of logic, and for the able manner
in which their subjects are handled. The Governor
always speaks his mind, even at the risk of offending
those who do not agree with him, but who are ultimately
led by reason of the soundness of his arguments to alter
preconceived opinions. He is evidently fully impressed
with the brilliant prospects of the colony, interested in


its resources and their development, and has a keen eye
to improvements wherever necessary. Under his juris-
diction the people enjoy many rights and privileges, and
may well congratulate themselves that he is the respon-
sible head o£ South Australian affairs. As evidence of
the popularity in which Sir William is held, on it being
understood that he wished to possess a residence at
Marble Hill on the Mount Lofty range, 18 miles from
Adelaide, the money for its erection (viz., £21,300) was
voted without opposition by the Parliament, so that in
addition to occupying the most exalted position in one
way, he occupies a lofty position in another. The building
at Marble Hill is unequalled in the colonies for magni-
tude and excellence. It stands in ornamental grounds,
400 acres in extent, contains tw r o stories with a tower 75
feet high, and has 26 rooms. It is 2,100 feet above sea
level, and commands on all sides views of the most
charming description, whilst ranges fully 60 miles distant
and the waters of the Gulf are clearly visible. The
intelligence that His Excellency will probably remove
from South Australia ere long will be heard with regret,
and the popular voice is unanimously in favour of his
term of office here being extended.
Eear-Ahmiral Sir Hindmarsh, E.N., K.H.,
The first Governor of South Australia. He arrived in
the Buffalo, landed at Glenelg December 28, 1836,
and read the proclamation creating South Australia a
British colony under an old gum tree still shown at that
thriving watering place. The dual Government and its
affairs, vested in the Governor and Eesident Commis-
sioner, did not work well, and, in consequence of this, he
was, after about fourteen months, recalled, and the sole
authority given to Governor Gawler, who took office
July 16, 1838. Governor Hindmarsh’s career can hardly
11
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


"be regarded as satisfactory. During Iris rule the colony
was divided into two noisy factions, one of which sided
with the Governor, and the other with the Commissioner,
With such a state of affairs it could not he expected that
prosperity would ensue, and it remained for other
Governors and pioneer colonists to inaugurate that
system of progress which has since been so thoroughly
assured in modern times. He completed his public career
as Governor of Heligoland—an important English naval
station in time of war. This position he held for upwards
of seventeen years, when he returned to England, where
he died in 1859, leaving a widow, one son, and three
daughters. Captain Hindmarsh was born in 1786, and
entered the navy at a very early age. He was present at
many engagements, the most notable being at the battle
of the Nile; the capture of the ports at Naples and
Gaeta ; the battle of Trafalgar, in 1805 ; the reduction
of Flushing, the Isle of France ; the fall of Java, and
other great actions—seven in all —and in over one
hundred fights with the enemy. The honours conferred
on him were manifold—a war medal, seven clasps, a sword
from Lord Nelson, knighthood from Her Majesty the
Queen, the “ Good Service Pension,” the rank of Fear-
Admiral, and a gold goblet from King Frederick YI. of
Denmark.
There is little doubt that the real cause of Governor
Hindmarsh’s unpopularity was occasioned by his being a
strong advocate for the opening up of and the navigation
of the Fiver Murray—our great transpontine highway.
Like his successors —Governors Gawler and Young—he
foresaw that South Australia was likely in the future to
become a rich and prosperous country, and his legislation
was of a character calculated to develop its latent
resources ; and it is somewhat remarkable, too, that our
present Governor (Sir W. F. D. Jervois) holds similar


opinions, which he has aptly expressed in his speeches on
more than one occasion.
GEO. MILNER STEPHEN, ESQ.,
Was Attorney-General at the time of Capt. Hindmarsh’s
government, and filled the office of Administrator of the
Government from July 16, 1838, to October 17, 1888,
when Lieut.-Col. Geo. Gawler, K.H., arrived. During
his short term of office he conducted the Government in
an efficient manner, but as to private matters did nob
escape censure. He embarked in a land speculation at
Port Gawler, which brought him into great trouble. Out
of this land transaction two criminal charges were pre-
ferred against him, from which, however, he got clear.
In consequence of comments unfavourable to his conduct
appearing in the Register , Mr. Stephen brought a libel
action against that journal, but lost the day. The par-
ticulars of this case —“Stephen v. Stevenson” —will
doubtless be familiar to most old colonists. Mr. Stephen
at present resides in Melbourne, Victoria.
LIEUT.-COL. GEORGE GAWLER, K.H.,
Was born in England in 1796, and was tbe only son of
Captain Samuel Gawler, of 7Brd Regiment, who led one
of the storming parties at the siege of Seringapatam, and
died in India shortly after that event at the early age of
25. An uncle of the Colonel’s was killed at the siege of
Quebec under General Wolfe. Colonel Gawler was edu-
cated at the Military College, Great Marlow, and joined
the 52nd Light Infantry in November, 1811, and served to
the end of the Peninsula War in 1814. As an ensign he
led the folorn hope at the storming of Badajoz, during
which he was struck with grape shot in the right knee,
and fell from the parapet into a ditch below. He lay
there until next morning, when he was saved by a private
13
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


soldier, who performed this act at the expense of his own
life. Colonel Gawler commanded the right company of
the 52nd at Waterloo during the great charge on the Im-
perial Guards, and received the war medal with seven
clasps. He was appointed Governor of South Australia
in 1838, and arrived in the ship Pestonjee Bomanjee on
the 12th October in that year. The town of Gawler
derives its name from him, his portrait is still to be seen
in its Institute, and the Corporation have adopted his
coat-of-arms as their insigna. Colonel Gawler’s portrait
also hangs in the Council Chamber of the Adelaide Cor-
poration, with that of Colonel Light and John Macdou-
gall Stuart. Prom his acquaintance with the mechanical
and physical sciences, and the attention he gave to the
principles of government and political economy, he seemed
peculiarly fitted to call forth the resources of a new
colony, while his character for calm determination and
temperate vigour appeared especially adapted to extin-
guish dissensions of party feuds and bring all colonists
to act together under the banner of mutual confidence.
Colonel Gawler was recalled by Lord John Eussell in
1841, during his term of office.
Governor Gawler found on arrival many settlers realty
destitute, and to relieve these he commenced a number of
Government works. He constructed a good road between
Adelaide and Port Adelaide, formed wharves, built a
Custom House, warehouses, and the present Government
House. The latter building cost £20,000. To benefit
the colony, Colonel Gawler spent his own private fortune
in paying the wages of those employed, and tried to
persuade English merchants to send out provisions and
clothing for the famished people. The only means he
had of payment for these was by drafts on the British
Treasury amounting to about £300,000, which were dis-
honoured by the Government, and the colony thus


became insolvent, with a national debt of £400,000. His
summary dismissal from office was anything but creditable
to the British Government. He left for England in
May, 1841, and died at Southsea in May, 1869, aged 73
years.
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.B.,
Assumed the reins of government May 10, 1841, and left
the colony October 25, 1845. Prior to his arrival here
he had been engaged in exploring in Western Australia.
His character was marked by prudence, firmness, and
decision —traits which he subsequently exhibited when at
the Cape and in New Zealand. On taking office he at
once began the policy of retrenchment, cut down the
wages of the Government labourers, and pursued a course
entirely different to his predecessor. An improvement
was speedily shown in various directions, more especially
in the cultivation of land for wheat; natural resources
were rapidly developed, and the basis of that prosperity
since assured founded. During the administration of
Captain Grey the Burra Burra, Kapunda, and other rich
copper mines were opened. The unjust treatment of
Governor Gawler by the British Government, and his
displacement by Captain Grey, are matters of history so
familiar to every colonist as to require no record here.
Those, however, interested in such will find them referred
to very voluminously in Sutherland’s “ History of Aus-
tralia,” in “ Bull’s Early Recollections and Experience of
South Australian Life,” and in “ Foster’s South Aus-
tralia.” The author’s object is merely to treat of the
biography of those mentioned in this work, and not to
enter into lengthy particulars of topics which do not
intimately bear upon such. Captain Grey was appointed
Governor of New Zealand in 1845, and had the proud
satisfaction of leaving the colony of South Australia in a


more prosperous state than he found it. He was knighted
in 1848, and also made a D.C.L. of the Oxford University.
In 1854 he left New Zealand for Cape Colony, of which
settlement he had been appointed Governor. He held
office there for seven years, when, on the Maori war
taking place, he was, in consequence of his thorough
knowledge of the language and manners of the native
races in New Zealand, again re-appointed as Governor to
that province. His administration being found fault
with, he went to England in 1867 to vindicate it, but
returned to the colony as a private gentleman to reside
there. His next public appearance was as member for
Auckland in the Legislature. On October, 1877, he
became Premier, and the doings of the Grey Ministry,
which he was instrumental in forming, will long be
remembered. Sir George was the son of Colonel Grey,
who fell at Waterloo, and was born at Lisbon, Portugal,
in 1812 ; entered the army in 1829, retired from it in
1837, and devoted many years to exploration in Western
Australia. He was a somewhat prolific writer, and his
“ Journals of Discovery in Western Australia” is a very
creditable work.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL FREDERICK HOLT ROBE.
Was Governor from October 25, 1845, to August 2, 1848.
He was a military man of the old school; an honourable
s
and upright English Tory. The most important events
of his administration were an unsuccessful attempt he
made without the sanction of the Legislative Council to
impose a royalty on copper, and the granting of State-aid
to religious bodies, this last innovation upon the prin-
ciples on which the colony was founded arousing great
opposition, which lasted till the system was abolished in
1851 by the newly-created mixed nominee and elective
Legislative Council in its first session.


THE RIGHT HON. SIR JAS. FERGUSSON. BART., K.C.M.G.
Page 19.


The Town of Eobe was so named in honour of this
Governor.
SIR HENRY EDWARD FOX YOUNG, KT., C.B.,
Was the third son of the late Col. A. W. Young, who
was for some time Governor of Prince Edward’s Island.
He was horn in 1810, and held office in the West Indies
appointed Lieut.-Governor of the Eastern Province, Cape
of Good Hope, from which he was transferred in August,
1848, to South Australia. One of the most important
events of his time was the passing of the Bullion Act,
establishing a new currency consisting of gold cast into
small bars, or ingots. This step was necessitated in
consequence of the great rush of South Australians to the
Victorian gold-fields, as they took with them nearly all
the coin of the colony. Although the Home Government
considered Sir Henry had exceeded his powers, they
admitted he had acted rightly. The Eiver Murray, which
till this period had not been turned to useful account, is
now navigable tor nearly 2,000 miles, though the outlet
to the Southern Ocean is dangerous and impracticable to
large vessels. Sir Henry tried hard to establish a port
at Port Elliot, near the entrance of this river, and
expen4ed over £20,000 on what proved a fruitless
attempt and waste of capital. He married the sister of
Archdeacon Marryat, niece of the late Captain Marryat,
the celebrated novelist. On leaving the colony, Dec. 20,
1854, he succeeded Sir Win. Denison as Governor of
Tasmania, entered on his duties there Jan. 8, 1855, and
held this position until Dec., 1861, when he retired.
SIR RICHARD GRAVES MACDONNELL, KT., C.B.,
Assumed office June 8, 1855, to March. 4, 1862 ; died in
England Eebruary 6, 1881. Sir Eichard was considered
by the colonists —whose confidence he enjoyed in the
B


highest degree—one of the best of South Australian
Governors. He possessed considerable ability and
energy of character, which, added to a pleasant and
genial manner, made him exceedingly popular. The most
important events of his administration were—The estab-
lishment of Constitutional Government with two
branches of Legislature, both elective ; the extension of
railways and telegraph communication ; the opening up
of valuable copper mines on Yorke’s Peninsula ; the
steady progress of agricultural and pastoral pursuits;
and, in short, of everything calculated to advance the
colony. The administration of Governor Mac Donnell
may certainly be regarded as one of the most successful.
Port Mac Donnell received its name in honour of this
popular Governor. Sir Richard’s career is thus sum-
marised : Educated at Trinity College, Dublin;
graduated B.A. in 1835 ; M.A., 1838; LL.D., 1811;
called to the Irish Bar 1838, and of England in 1840;
Chief Justice of the Gambia from 1843 to 1847, and
Governor till 1851; appointed Governor of St. Lucia
1852, and transferred to St. Vincent the same vear. On
quitting South Australia he was appointed Governor of
Vova Scotia, and in 1865 of Hongkong. Retired on a
pension in 1872.
SIR DOMINICK DALY, KNIGHT,
The seventh Governor of South Australia. He possessed
great official experience, and was an excellent man and
very popular. Though a Roman Catholic he kept his
religious views to himself, and never intruded them in
political matters. He was accessible to all classes, and
identified himself with everything calculated to promote
the welfare of the colony. During his administration,
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh visited Adelaide, and
formed a high opinion of this kind-hearted and cheery


old gentleman. Sir Dominick died on February 19th, 1868,
and was deeply regretted by those whose loving esteem
he had won by his urbanity and quiet hospitality. During
the interregnum between his decease and the arrival of
his successor, the administration of the Government de-
volved on Lieut.-Col. Hamley, then senior officer in Her
Majesty’s forces. Sir Dominick’s history may be briefly
summarised as follows: —Born at Ardfry, Galway, Ire-
land, in 1798, and educated at Oscott College, Birming-
ham. Was Chief Secretary of Canada from 1825 to 1845,
when he was appointed Commissioner of Woods and
Forests, and in 1851 received the honour of appointment
as Lieut.-Governor of Tobago, W.I. This position he
shortly after resigned for that of the Lieutenant-Governor-
ship of Prince Edward’s Island, where he remained until
1859, much liked by the colonists. He left for South
Australia to take the Governorship in March, 1862, and
was most enthusiastically received here. After his death
on the 19th of February, 1868, Lady Daly spent four
years in comparative seclusion at Glenelg, where she died
July 16, 1872, aged 71 years.
THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR. JAS. FERGUSSON, BERT.,
K.C.M.G.,
Was Governor from February 16, 1869, to April 18,1873,
out of which time he was away on leave of absence from
December 6, 1872, to April 18, 1873. Sir James was
appointed by the Conservative Government, in whose
ranks he held office as Under Secretary for India and the
Home Department. He is the son of Sir C. D. Fergusson,
and was born at Edinburgh in 1832, succeeded to the
baronetcy in 1819, entered the Grenadier Guards in 1850,
went to the Crimea in 1854, and saw active service at
Inkerman, where he was wounded. Eeturning to England,
he retired from the army, was elected member for Ayr


shire. He represented Ayrshire for several years in the
House of Commons, and was a clear and effective speaker.
During his term of office in South Australia he was free
and open-handed in his expenditure, and liberal in his
personal dealings with the colony. He possessed con-
siderable ability, was a profound thinker, and an intelli-
gent and high-minded gentleman, who maintained the
dignity of his responsible position, and creditably repre-
sented Her Majesty. During his administration, tele-
graphic communication between Australia and Europe
was established. His efforts in the accomplishment of
this great work were fully recognised, and he was, shortly
after its completion, promoted by Mr. Gladstone to the
governorship of Hew Zealand. While in Adelaide, Sir
James experienced a serious family affliction in the death
of his wife, Lady Edith Eamsay, daughter of the late
Marquis Dalhousie, who had by her many virtues and
thorough goodness of heart endeared herself to the
citizens. Sir James left for Hew Zealand in 1873, and
administered affairs there for several years. The Presi-
dency of Bombay was the next scene of Sir James’s
labours, and he is regarded as one of the most popular
Governors it has had.
In December, 1881, Her Majesty the Queen conferred
the decoration of the Imperial Order of the Crown of
India on Olive, Lady Eergusson, Sir James’s second wife.
She did not, however, live long to enjoy this honour, as
her death occurred in January, 1882, somewhat suddenly,
at Bombay. During the absence of Sir James Eergusson
at Baroda to witness the installation of the new Gaikwar
Prince, she was attacked by English cholera, and died
before her husband’s return. The deceased lady was the
youngest daughter of the late Mr. J. H. Eichman, of
Wambanga, previously of Adelaide, solicitor, and the
neice of Sir W. W. Hughes. She was married to Sir


James Eergusson in 1873, and accompanied him to Eng-
land, afterwards to Kew Zealand and India. Unaffected,
and of kind and amiable disposition, Lady Eergusson
was much liked, and the tidings of her death at an early
age were heard with universal regret.
HON. SIR R. D. HANSON, KT., C.I.,
Administrator of Government from December 7, 1872,
to June 8, 1873. He was the second son of a fruit mer-
chant and importer, and born in St. Botolph’s Lane,
London, December 6, 1805. His father was a Xoncon-
formist. He received his education in Melbourne, Cam
bridgeshire, at a private school, and was admitted to
practice as an attorney in 1828, when he took an active
part with Mr. G. S. Kingston, Mr. John Morphett, John
Brown, and others in pushing on Mr. E. G. Wakefield’s
scheme for the colonization of South Australia, and
addressed meetings to popularise the matter when the
Duke of Wellington was opposed to it. The Bill passed,
however, and the colony was formed. Mr. Hanson next
figured as a reporter and writer for the London Press,
and was chosen as Assistant-Commissioner to inquire
into Canadian Crown Lands and immigration matters
under Lord Durham, their special appointed Commis-
sioner, and held office with great ability notwithstanding
his duties were very difficult. He then visited Canada
to further these objects, but did not remain long. Erom
thence he went to Kew Zealand, where he stayed till
184 G, in which year he sailed for South Australia.
Politics had a great attraction for him, and he was greatly
interested in the abolition of State-aid to religion. In
1851 he was elected member for Yatala at the first elec-
tions to the mixed Legislative Council, of which one-third
was composed of nominees. Before taking his seat he
was appointed Advocate-General and nominee Councillor


by Sir Henry Young, Mr. William Giles succeeding him as
member for Yatala. From 1851 to 1856 Mr. Hanson was
the chief legal adviser of the Government, and among
important measures prepared the first Education Act
and District Councils Act. In 1857 he was appointed
Attorney-General under the present Constitution, and
elected member for Adelaide. During the next few years
many changes occurred. The first Real Property Act
was passed, and many useful amendments made In 1862
Sir Charles Cooper, then Chief Justice, retired, and Mr.
Hanson became his successor. In 1869 he went to Europe
on leave of absence, and whilst there received the honour
of Knighthood at the hands of the Queen. A similar
distinction was at the same time conferred on Sir John
Morphett and Sir George Kingston, both of whom were
his most intimate friends. During the interregnum
between the departure of Sir James Fergusson and the
arrival of Sir Anthony Musgrave, Sir Richard Hanson
assumed the role of Acting-Governor, and impressed the
colonists favourably by his judicious management. He
was an able politician as well as a prolific writer, and
published several letters and books which exhibit marked
ability. His death took place at his residence, near
Mount Lofty, March 4, 1875, in his 71st year, and a
public funeral was accorded to his remains. Sir Richard
Hanson was an able advocate, a just and painstaking
Judge, a profound thinker, a theologian, and a writer of
no mean order, and he will long be regarded by the
South Australian nation as one of the brightest orna-
ments in his day and generation.
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE. K.C.M.G.,
7 7
Governor from June 9, 1873, to January 29, 1877, may
be considered as having been very popular with the
colonists. In 1850 was Private Secretary to the Governor


of the Leeward Islands; next appointed Treasury Ac-
countant in Antigua, and afterwards Colonial Secretary;
Governor of St. Nevis in 1860, and of St. Vincent in
1861; removed to Newfoundland in 1864, and in 1869
made Governor of British Columbia; was then appointed
Governor of Natal, and on Sir James Eergusson being
removed to New Zealand in 1873, was made Governor of
South Australia. The incidents in his administration do
not call for special comment, although he did everything
in his power to advance the interests of the colony. He
left South Australia to assume the important post of
Governor of Jamaica.
SIR WILLIAM WELLINGTON CAIRNS, K.C.M.G.
He was born in 1828, and was tbe second son of the
late William Cairns, Esq., J P., of Parkmount, County
Antrim, Ireland, and of Cultra, County Down. William
Cairns, Esq., father of Sir William, was formerly in the
army, and served as a Captain in the 47 th Foot. Lord
Cairns is an elder brother. Sir William Cairns com-
menced life as a writer in the Civil Service of Ceylon in
1848, and was rapidly promoted till he became Post-
master - General. In 1867 he was made Lieutenant-
Governor of Malacca, Straits Settlement, and was
appointed in 1878 Lieutenant-Governor of St. Chris-
topher, Nevis, Anguilla, W.I. He remained in the ad-
ministration of these islands till 1870, when he was
promoted by Earl Granville to the British Honduras,
Central America. His career there was very creditable,
and met the approval of the successive Secretaries of
State. Earl Kimberley in 1874 offered him the Governor-
ship of Trinidad, and as a further mark of Eoyal favour
the rank of Companion of the Order of St. Michael and
St. George was conferred on him. He accepted the
Government of Trinidad, but ill-health caused his early


return. He w~as very popular there, and his departure
was much regretted. He received the honour of Knight-
hood in 1877. He w r ent te Queensland in January, 1875,
and administered Government affairs there till March
21th, 1877, when he took office in South Australia, a
position he held till May 17, 1877, when in consequence
of ill-health he resigned, and returned to England. Sir
W. W. Cairns is a well-read and very intelligent gentle-
man, but his career in South Australia was too brief to
have much influence on its prosperity or otherwise. He
did not take any very active part in public affairs, and
the only event of consequence in which he prominently
figured during his administration the opening of a
bridge over the Torrens, April 26, 1877.
ALCOCK, RIGHT REV. LORD ABBOT, O.S.B.,
Was born in Lancashire, in 1881. Educated at Ample-
forth College, a scholastic institution of the Benedictine
Order in Yorkshire. Having completed his collegiate
course, he went to Italy, and took his monastic vows at
the monastery of St. Scholastics, Subiaco, near Home —
the proto-monastery of the Benedictine Order —where he
spent ten years. He there studied philosophy and
divinity, eventually receiving holy orders from M. Hicei,
Bishop of Segni. He was then appointed Superior of
the Hamsgate Mission, and while there founded a College,
and became its President. He was entrusted with the
charge of the Catholic Mission of Oawder, South Aus-
tralia, and the surrounding districts, and entered on his
duties on October 5, 1877, and laboured in that neigh-
bourhood up till 1881, when he was transferred to Auck-
land, New Zealand, where he died August 11, 1882, in
his 51st year. The author of this work was personally
acquainted with the deceased prelate, and can but add
his testimony to the high esteem in w r hich he was held in


Gawler, where he delivered many lectures to admiring
audiences. He was a trenchant speaker, with a consider-
able fund of humour, and at the same time his discourses
were full of interesting information imparted in graceful
language. In Gawler, Virginia, Smithfield, and other
places his death was heard of with regret not only among
those of his own denomination, but of other creeds.
Abbot Alcock possessed a genial character, and that real
kindness of heart which so thoroughly permeates the
nature of the true Christian.
ALFORD, HENRY, SERGEANT-MAJOR,
Born February 12, 1816, at Acton, Middlesex, England.
Arrived in South Australia in 1836, and was soon after
enrolled in the police force of the colony under Inspector
Tolmer. From the first he exhibited great zeal and
activity in the maintenance of law and order, and for
his courageous conduct in capturing several outlaws (fifty-
four in three years) gained rapid promotion, and in 1849,
on the death of Inspector Gordon, he attained the rank
of Inspector. He was also connected with the gold
escort, and in his official capacity made one or two trips
overland to Melbourne. He resigned his place in the
police force in 1853, and settled in Adelaide, where he
still resides. He has been very successful in business
pursuits.
ALLEN, CAPTIAN WILLIAM,
Arrived in Adelaide by the Buckinghamshire, March,
1839. His previous history was of the most varied kind,
as will he seen from the following summary of it: —
Captain Allen entered the H.E.I. Company’s service at
an early age, and went into what is termed the “ country
trade.” He was 25 years on the Indian Station, and
considered one of the smartest commanders in the
merchant service. When in command of the Ann, home


ward bound from China to Bombay, in 183 d, with a crew
of 150 men (Lascars), the greater part of them rose in
mutiny. Having murdered twenty of the crew who
remained faithful to the Captain, they would soon have
made short work of him also, but his coolness and cour-
age prevailed, and almost alone he quelled the mutiny.
He then took the ship safe to Singapore where the
offenders were tried and executed. He continued his
voyage to Bombay, where the merchants and underwriters
presented him with a handsome service of plate in com-
memoration of this gallant exploit. He next went to
England, where he remained three years, when he sailed
for Adelaide. On arrival in that city he purchased
conjointly with his friend Mr. Jno. Ellis, two-thirds of the
“ Milner Estate,” comprising 4,000 acres of land, at Port
G-awler. It was this transaction which led to the trial
tff Mr. Gr. M. Stephens, and formed the subject of criminal
proceedings. Mr. Ellis purchased Capt. Allen’s interest
in this property in 1855. In 1845 Capt. Allen joined
other capitalists in the purchase of the Burra Mine, and
assisted in the formation of the S.A. Mining Association,
of which he was afterwards Chairman. At the time of
his death he was one of the Directors and holder of 228
shares, being the largest colonial proprietor. In July,
1853, he paid a visit to England in the Charlotte Jane,
and returned to Adelaide in the Circassian in 1855. His
generosity was of the most Catholic kind, preferring
indeed his own Church (Church of England), but aiding
every other sect with liberal donations. He assisted
largely in the establishment of the Collegiate School of
St. Peters, of which he was one of the original promoters
in 1849, and to which at various times since he has
presented no less than £7,000. His private charity was
extensively and judiciously exercised. He died Oct. 17,
1856. The bulk of his large property was left to his


relatives in England, and £5,000 for pastoral aid pur-
poses placed at the sole disposal of the Bishop of Ade-
laide as trustee.
ANGAS, GEORGE FIFE.
Note. —From various sources, and from those who had
been intimately associated with Mr. Angas, the author
received the fullest information respecting him, and the
same would undoubtedly have been utilised for this work
had it not been for the very complete biography which
appeared in the S.A. Register of May 24, 1879. In
justice to his memory as one of the founders of the
colony, and the prominent part he played in its settle-
ment and colonization, it is therefore considered advisable
to give this extract in full from that paper in lieu of
one compiled by the author:—
Angas, George Fife, who ranks among the founders of
South Australia, and has been resident in the colony for
more than a quarter of a century, was born on May 1,
1789, so that he had just completed his 90th year at the
time of his death, which took place at Lindsay House,
Angaston, on May 15, 1879. Although of late years he
led a retired life, his career has been an eminently
active and useful one. Possessing a thoroughly practical
mind, great energy of character and business capacity,
strong religious sentiments, and a hearty desire to pro-
mote the public welfare, he exercised a wide-spread influ-
ence in philanthropic enterprises, and won for himself
an honourable position both in England and in this
country. The deceased gentleman’s early years were
spent at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, where his father carried
on an extensive business as coach manufacturer, mer-
chant, and shipowner. Upon the completion of his
education it was proposed that he should follow the
legal profession; but recognising that his powers were


Letter adapted for a commercial career, Le entered Lis
father’s establishment as an apprentice, and ultimately
succeeded to the business in partnership with his brother.
Several years afterwards a dissolution was agreed upon,
and Mr. G-. U. Angas then set up as a merchant and
shipowner at London and Newcastle, in which enter-
prises he rapidly achieved substantial prosperity. While
still residing in his native town he began to display the
active interest in movements for ameliorating the social
and moral condition of those about him, which grew
into a distinguishing feature of his life. Thus, in 1807,
while he was still an apprentice, he was the means of
establishing a Benevolent Society for helping the aged
and distressed coachmakers of the town; and after-
wards, with the view of encouraging provident habits in
the workpeople, a Savings Bank opened under the
auspices of the Society. He very early became a
Sunday-school teacher, and w r as also instrumental, with
other persons, in forming the Newcastle Sunday-school
Union in 1816. So permanent w r as his interest in this
organization that in 1869, three years after the celebra-
tion of its jubilee, he bore the expense of publishing a
history of the Association.
Upon removing to London his plans of usefulness
assumed a wider range, and he speedily determined to
aim at promoting the extension of Christian civilization
in some of the distant countries w r ith which he traded.
An important part of his business consisted in importing
mahogany, dyew r oods, and other products from Honduras
• —a trade w T hich had been opened up by his father. The
inhabitants there w r ere a wild race, and w ith a view to
their benefit he sent out as agent in 1819 a gentleman
who was instructed to devote himself specially to their
moral and spiritual improvement. Three years later he
forw r arded in one of his vessels a minister, w T hom upon his


representations the Baptist Missionary Society provided
for Belize, on his undertaking to contribute towards the
support of the Mission ; and through the labours of this
gentleman a place of worship was in 1824 opened in the
capital. Besides largely supporting the Mission Mr.
Angas still further assisted it by granting free passages
in his ships for the missionaries sent out —a privilege
which he constantly extended to other missions also. At
the same time he exerted himself to bring about the
abolition of slavery in the Mosquito Coast territory, and
to obtain other desirable advantages for the aborigines;
and besides carrying on a correspondence upon the
subject with Colonel Gleorge Arthur, the Governor, he
enlisted the co-operation of Messrs. J. Butterworth,
Fowell Buxton, W. Wilberforce, and other anti-slavery
champions, until the liberation of the Indians was accom-
plished. A full account of these efforts, together with a
cordial acknowledgment of the good they accomplished, is
contained in a work written by the Bev. F. Crowe
describing the history of missions in Central America.
The results thus obtained confirmed Mr. Angas in his
principles of action, and induced him to endeavour to
form an Association of merchants and others for the
promotion of Christianity and civilization through com-
mercial and professional agency. That the world would
be none the worse if the pioneers of commerce were to
pay greater regard to commending by their actions and
precepts the blessings of civilization to the inhabitants of
the new countries they trade with will be generally con-
ceded. Mr. Angas’s scheme, however, for an organised
movement in this direction, although warmly encouraged
by Dr. Chalmers and others, elicited very little active
support, and consequently failed of success. Besides
endeavouring to promote the spread of Christianity in
Central America and actively supporting more than one


Indian Mission, Mr. Angas did not neglect tlie welfare of
the poor and ignorant among his own countrymen. In
1827 he was elected a member of the Committee of the
British and Foreign School Society, and long took an
active part in the promotion of its valuable objects. He
was a warm supporter of a mission to the sailors in the
Port of London, and in 1831 assisted in founding the
British and Foreign Sailors’ Society. Of this mission he
and Mr. (afterwards Sir John) Pirie were from the first
joint Treasurers, and it is recorded in a memoir of the
pioneer missionary they engaged that the whole cost of
his first year’s labours were borne by Mr. Angas.
To trace the connection of Mr. Angas with this colony
requires that we should go back to the very earliest
pages of South Australian history. It was in 1831 that
the suitability of the country west of the Murray for
settlement was made known by the discoveries of Captain
Sturt. At that time a number of gentlemen in England,
among whom was Mr. Angas, were anxious to put what
is now known as the Wakefield principle of colonization
to the test, and the newly-found territory was considered
to present the looked-for opportunity. The following
year, therefore, saw Mr. Angas associated with the Com-
mittee who sought to obtain a charter from the Crown
for the establishment of a colony on the southern shores
of Australia. For a couple of years negotiations were
carried on with the Imperial Government without success,
upon which Mr. Angas withdrew from the movement,
intending to take no further part in the proposed settle-
ment. To this determination, however, he did not
adhere. In 1834, through the efforts of the gentlemen
who composed the South Australian Association, an Act
of Parliament was obtained authorising the formation of
the colony, and Mr. A ngas then accepted an appointment
on the first Board of Commissioners, to whom the task


was committed of carrying the Act into operation. Prom
that moment he devoted himself energetically to ren-
dering the enterprise successful, one of the most impor-
tant of his services being the organization of the South
Australian Company, but for whose help the establish-
ment, or at any rate the vigorous development of the
colony, must have been indefinitely delayed. The Act
required that before the Commissioners entered upon the
exercise of their general powers £35,000 worth of land
must be sold; but several months after the land had
been offered at £1 per acre only a portion of the stipu-
lated quantity had been applied for. At this juncture
Mr. Angas and two other gentlemen stepped in, and upon
the Commissioners agreeing to reduce the price to twelve
shillings per acre advanced the money to buy the
remainder of the sections. These they handed over to
the South Australian Company at cost price immediately
that the arrangements for its formation were completed.
In this way the Commissioners were helped out of a diffi-
culty w r hich seriously impeded them, nor can there be a
doubt that the subsequent action of the Company, which
raised a capital of £200,000 to be employed not only in
the purchase of land, but also in forwarding settlers to
the colony, establishing whale fisheries, introducing pas-
toral and agricultural pursuits, and in many other ways
providing employment and stimulating production in the
new settlement, helped materially to give it the start
which was essential to its ultimate prosperity. Of equal
moment to the young community from a commercial
point of view was its first Bank, which Mr. Angas
induced the South Australian Company to establish.
Tor this branch of financing the deceased gentleman had
considerable aptitude, which was greatly developed by
his connection with his cousin, Mr. Joplin, the founder
of Joint-Stock Banks in England, whom he assisted in


1838 in establishing the National Provincial Bank of
England, of which he was for several years a Director.
Recognising the desirability of providing banking facili-
ties for the early settlers, he urged the Bank of Austral-
asia to open a branch in South Australia, and this
application failing, he proposed to the South Australian
Company to take the matter up. The shareholders fell
in with his views, and as the result all the machinery of
a Bank, including notes representing an aggregate of
£IO,OOO in sums varying from 10s. to £lO, was forwarded
to South Australia in charge of Mr. Edward Stephens,
and arrived within a few days of the colony being pro-
claimed. This was the origin of the present Bank of
South Australia, which was afterwards transferred to a
separate proprietary.
Reverting to the history of the South Australian
' ■> •j
Company, it should be stated that on its formation Mr.
Angas, at the urgent solicitation of the shareholders,
accepted the office of Chairman; but feeling that the
duties of the two positions were likely to clash, he there-
upon gave up his seat as a Commissioner. It may be
mentioned, however, as an illustration of the esteem in
which his services were held, that at the request of Lord
Glenelg, who was then Secretary of State for the
Colonies, he continued to attend the meetings of the
Board for three mouths after his resignation had been
sent in. In various ways beyond those already men-
tioned Mr. Angas both in his official and private capa-
cities was untiring in promoting the interests of the
young colony. In order that the early settlers might be
provided with educational advantages for their families
he joined, in 1836, in establishing in England the South
Australian School Society, and, besides acting as Treasurer,
contributed liberally to its funds. By disseminating in-
formation respecting the resources of the country he


GEORGE FIFE ANGAS.
Page 32.


endeavoured to encourage persons to emigrate, his zeal
in this respect leading him on one occasion to deliver a
series of lectures as he travelled through England for the
benefit of his health. At the same time he devoted a
large part of his fortune to investments in South Aus-
tralia, one of his most important purchases being what
was then known as the Barossa Special Survey, a beauti-
ful district, in the midst of which he has for many vears
past made his home. In 1837 he laid the foundation of
German emigration to South Australia by helping out
under Pastor Kavel some hundreds of Lutherans, who, in
consequence of their opposition to the Government
scheme for uniting the Eeformed and Lutheran Churches,
were suffering a religious persecution in Prussia. He also
interested himself warmly in the welfare of the natives,
co-operating actively with the Aborigines’ Protection
Society, and in 1838 assisting the Dresden Missionary
Society to forward the Eevs. Teichelmann and Schur-
mann to labour as missionaries among them. In the same
year he supported Mr. John Stephens in writing a history
of South Australia, and in refuting certain calumnies
which had been published respecting the colony. Still
later he bore the greater part of the expense of publish-
ing in England a newspaper advocating South Australian
interests, and furnishing information respecting the
colony. When the costliness of the experiment led to
its abandonment he continued to circulate leaflets con-
taining statistical and other intelligence calculated to
popularise the colony with intending emigrants, while his
office in the City was made a centre at which information
could always be obtained. At this time South Australia
was in the midst of the financial difficulties which culmi-
nated in the Imperial Government dishonouring the bills
that were drawn upon Her Majesty’s Treasury by Go-
vernor Gawler; and when in 1811 the House of Common*


appointed a Select Committee of Inquiry, Mr. Angas was
one of the witnesses who were examined at length res-
pecting the state of affairs. His evidence as to the
progress and resources of the province strongly favoured
the view that its financial success under proper manage-
ment was only a question of time. As his statements
were supported by elaborate statistical data they produced
a favourable impression upon the Committee, and no
doubt assisted in disposing them to recommend the
measures of relief, the adoption of which started the
colony upon the career of prosperity it has ever since
with but slight deviations pursued.
While Mr. Angas thus devoted a large portion of his
time during this period to the affairs of South Australia
his active habits led him to find leisure for many other
important engagements. Thus in 1837 he was principally
instrumental in founding the Union Bank of Australia,
which came into existence through the Tamar Bank of
Tasmania being placed in the London market for sale
wdth a view to the extension of its operations. Mr.
Angas at first took the matter up under the conviction
that it offered the South Australian Company an oppor-
tunity of establishing means for transacting its banking
business in the neighbouring colonies. The Directors,
however, declined to have anything to do with the pro-
posal, upon which Mr. Angas succeeded in getting several
capitalists to join him in forming an independent Com-
pany for the purpose. In this way the Union Bank, of
which Mr. Angas was appointed the first Chairman, was
founded. To prevent injurious rivalry a clause was in-
serted in the deed of settlement prohibiting the estab-
lishing of a branch in South Australia until the consent
of the Directors of the South Australian Company was
obtained. That permission had to be gained before the
existing branch of the L T nion Bank was opened in Ade


laide. A little later Mr. Angas was busily moving for
the formal occupation of Xew Zealand by the Imperial
Government, and it was largely owing to his patriotic
exertions that one if not the whole of those important
islands was prevented from passing into the hands of the
French. The history of this transaction it may be desir-
able to recall. In 1838 it came to the knowledge of Mr.
Angas, through Baron Thiery, that the French Govern-
ment were arranging to send out an expedition to Xew
Zealand to appropriate the islands in order to their
colonization. He at once made the matter known to
Lord Glenelg in a letter in which the injury that would
be done to British interests in these seas if a foreign
power were allowed to establish itself in Xew Zealand
was forcibly pointed out. Interviews with His Lordship
followed, and as the result Captain Hobson was sent out
in H.M.S. Druid to enter into a treaty with the native
chiefs for the cession of the islands to Great Britain.
The negotiations were concluded on August 10, 1810,
when the raising of the royal standard at Akaroa com-
pleted the annexation of the group. Five days later the
French frigate L’Aube, followed by the Count de Paris
arrived in the port, only to find that they had been fore-
stalled in their plans, and that the French colonists,
instead of taking up their residence in Xew Zealand as
lords of the soil, could only remain as British subjects.
Another instance of the deceased gentleman’s colonizing
sympathies is afforded in the circumstance that in 1810
he added to his already numerous engagements that of
Director of the Xorth American Colonial Association of
Ireland. The concerns of this Society, however, required
but a small share of his attention.
Notwithstanding the large stake Mr. Angas had in this
colony, ho did not adopt South Australia as his home
until 1851. Several members of his family had previously


come out here, and in January of the year mentioned he
arrived in the Ascendant, by which vessel the official copy
of the Constitution Act, establishing a partially-repre-
sentative Government, reached the colony. It will he
remembered that Mr. Angas was expected to have this
important document in his charge. This would have been
a graceful compliment to his labours on behalf of the
colony, but it was contrary to precedent, and the Colonial
Office preferred another, and, as it proved, a decidedly
less successful medium for the transmission of its des-
patches. To the no small perplexity of the colonists the
documents were missing for several days after the
arrival of the ship, and rumour said at the time that it
was ultimately found at the bottom of the Captain’s
dirty clothes bag. A few days after he had landed Mr.
Angas was entertained at a public dinner, at which
cordial acknowledgment was made by the Chairman (the
late Sir J. H. Fisher) and other prominent colonists of
the services he had rendered to the province. At this
time Mr. Angas had reached the age when men usually
prefer a quiet life, but his active disposition forbade his
withdrawal from public duties. His entrance upon
political life occurred in August, 1851, when, at the
request of the electors of Barossa, he offered himself as a
candidate for election to the Legislative Council, and had
the honour of being returned unopposed. One of his
earliest votes was against the continuance of the State
grant in aid of religion, which was finally abolished by
the votes of thirteen out of the sixteen representative
members. Four years later he contested the same
district against Captain Eodda, whom he defeated by a
majority of 257 votes, and was thus one of those who
assisted in framing our present Constitution Act. In
the warm contest in the Council between the advocates
of a nominee and an elective L T pper House he strongly


supported the latter, although his views were not nearty
so democratic as those of some of his colleagues. In
1857 he entered the first Parliament under the new
Constitution as a member of the Upper House, and was
allowed to retain his seat on leave when during the two
following years he was absent on a visit to Europe. He
took an active part in the proceedings of the Council,
where his speeches were marked by a plain business-like
character, which, combined with clearness of statement,
gave them considerable weight with his brother members.
In the long and painful discussion connected with the
administration of the Supreme Court, Mr. An gas was one
of the small minority who took the unpopular side, and
his speeches in defence of Mr. Justice Boothby showed
great tact as well as vigour. An instance of his shrewd-
ness and foresight is afforded by his speeches on the
original Bill for colonizing the Northern Territory. He
opposed the measure as being beyond the capacity of the
colony at that time, and pointed out that selling the land
without making any provision for the introduction of
labour would not lead to the settlement of the country.
He urged instead that large inducements should be
offered to squatters to take up the land, and that a
Company should be encouraged to attempt the growth of
tropical products. Mr. Angas retired by rotation in 1865,
and was immediately re-elected ; but in the following
year ill-health compelled him to close his parliamentary
career of fifteen years by resignation. A few days after
his resignation was received, the Hon. J. Baker took an
opportunity of referring to that and other vacancies in
the Council which had recently occurred. In the course
of his speech he said:—“ Mr. Angas, in consequence of
his early connection with the colony, his position in
society, his experience, his knowledge of mercantile
affairs, and everything connected with colonization, was


eminently entitled to their gratitude, and lie ought not
to be allowed to retire into private life without some
recognition of his services.” Several members of the
Council, including the Hon. Mr. (now Sir H.) Ayers,
Captain Bagot, Mr. Magarey, and others, also bore warm
testimony to his valuable services to the colony.
Although Mr. Angas was not what is known as a
popular politician, he nevertheless won general esteem
by the independence, integrity, and painstaking industry
with which his duties as a member were discharged. No
review of the deceased gentleman’s life would be com-
plete without a reference to the liberality with which he
has contributed to the support of Christian and benevo-
lent movements of all descriptions. As the colony pro-
gressed and prospered his investments in it made him a
very wealthy man ; but the increase of riches did not
induce him, as it has induced so many others, to turn his
back upon the land which had added so much to his
prosperity, nor did it narrow his sympathies for the poor
and suffering. On the contrary, he systematically de-
voted a portion of his income to charitable purposes. In
his religious convictions he was identified more particu-
larly with the Baptist denomination, but his giving was
not restrained by sectarian preferences. He assisted in
the erection of churches throughout the colony, and was a
generous contributor to Bible, Missionary, and all kin-
dred Societies not only in South Australia, but also in
other parts of the world. He also gave considerable
sums towards the building of schools—the Norwood and
Bowden public schools in particular being largely assisted
by him in their foundation —and such institutions as the
Bushmen’s Club and the Sailors’ Home found in him a
munificent helper. In addition his private benefactions
to poor but deserving families were extensive ; the poor
of Bowden more particularly will lose in him a valuable
38
REPRESENTATIVE MEN OF


friend. Enough has been said to show that by the death
of Mr. George Fife Angas South Australia is deprived
of one of her foremost colonists. It may be safely said
that for his labours in connection with the foundation of the
colony, and for his consistent promotion of the best interests
of the country ever since, he deserves and will always hold
an honourable place in the history of South Australia.
Mr. Angas, whose wife died a few years ago, left a
family of six children. His second son, Mr. John [H.
Angas, is well known as an extensive South Australian
sheepfarmer. His two other sons, Mr. George French
Angas, now residing in London, who has achieved an
honourable reputation in connection with literary and
scientific pursuits, and whose beautiful illustrations of
South Australian and jNTew Zealand scenery are well
known, and Mr. William H. Angas, who died in 1879. Of
his daughters, Mrs. Hannay, the wife of theEev. J. Hannay,
of Angaston, and Mrs. Evans, the widow of the late Mr.
Henry Evans, of Evandale, have for many years lived in
the colony. The youngest daughter, Mrs. Wm. Johnson,
is resident in England.
ANGAS, JOHN HOWARD,
Is the second son of the late George Fife Angas, Esq., and a
native of Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he was horn October 5>
1823. He came to Adelaide in 1848, and although
then but twenty years of age, proved himself an active
and judicious mauager of his father’s property, which had
prior to his arrival suffered greatly from the imprudence
of colonial agents. After his father’s arrival in the colony
in 1851, he still continued the management of his affairs
until 1854, when Mr. J. H. Angas went to England. In 1855
he married Miss Susanne Collins, of Bowdon, near Man-
chester, and the same year returned to settle in South
Australia.


His attention was now more particularly directed to
stock farming and the purchase of high-class Merino sheep,
cattle, and horses, which, with a portion of the landed
property leased from his father on favourable terms, gave
him a good start.
The experience of former years and his partiality for
country pursuits favoured his success, and by careful se-
lection and frequent importations of stud stock from Great
Britain and elsewhere, he acquired a position as a breeder
which not only proved lucrative to himself, but beneficial
to the colony at large.
Few men have done more to improve the breed of farm
stock, or taken a greater interest in the progress of
agriculture in this country, than Mr. J. H. Angas, while
his success as a prize-taker at the various agricultural
shows testifies to his enterprise and judgment.
Collingrove Estate, near Angastou, where the family
reside during the summer months, is a beautiful spot?
possessing those adornments so characteristic of taste and
culture. Blessed with an ample fortune, Mr. Angas is
enabled to do much good, and his name is associated with
many charities. It was by his forethought and assistance
in connection with Mr. W. M. Hugo (now its superin-
tendent) that the Bushmen’s Club, an institution deservedly
popular, was established in Adelaide, as also the Inebriates’
Betreat at Belair ; whilst in connection with the Adelaide
University, he founded the “ Angas Engineering Scholar-
ship.”
Mr. J. H. Angas was elected a member for the District
of Barossa, in December, 1871, and ably represented its
interests in Parliament until May, 1875, when he resigned
in consequence of ill-health.
At the close of 1882 Mr. Angas determined to give up
squatting and limit his business operations. He shortly
after disposed of his runs and stock in the JNArth, together


JOHN HOWARD ANGAS.
Page 40.


with the freehold estates at Mount Remarkable, retaining
Hill River and Collingwood stud farms and choice stock,
in the management of which he still takes an active
interest.
ANDERSON, ROBERT,
Died at Mount Gambier May 8, 1881, aged 52. The
deceased gentleman was one of the most energetic of
men, and it was due to his exertions that the town of
Mount Gambier (where he resided for twenty-two years)
was incorporated. He was a member of the Town Council
from the commencement, and as one of the District
Council of Mount Gambier West he for years did great
service. At the time of his death he was in the second
year of office as Mayor.
ANDREWS, EDWARD WILLIAM,
The senior partner of the late firm of Andrews, Thomas,
and Clark (all old colonists, and all now deceased) ; born
at Walworth, Surrey, England, in 1813, and was the son
of the Rev. Dr. Andrews, of the Congregational Church
in that town. Arrived in Adelaide in September, 1839;
engaged in mercantile pursuits until 1850, when he turned
his attention to literature, and in 1853 became one of the
proprietors of the S.A. Register , which position he occu-
pied until his death, which occurred February 23, 1877.
Mr. Andrews was elected to the Civic Chair at Glenelg
in 1867, and during his Mayoralty had the honour of re-
ceiving H.R.H. Prince Alfred on his arrival. He was an
energetic, active business man; a prominent member of
the Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and interested
in all movements tor the public good.
ANDREWS, H. J.,
An old and well-known member of the S.A. Civil Service.
He entered it in 1852 as Assistant in the Assay Office;
appointed 1853 cashier and accountant, and Secretary to


the Central Road Board. In 1871 he held the position
of Secretary to the Commissioner of Public Works, and
in 1875 Secretary to the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
In February, 1882, he received the appointment of Under-
secretary, a vacancy which had for some time been open
by the resignation of Mr. Josiah Boothby.
ANDREWS, RICHARD BULLOCK,
For many years one of the leading men among the legal
profession of the colony; called to the Bar in 1855; en-
tered Parliament in 1857, and became very popular with
his constituents. He held office as Attorney-General
from March, 1865 —in the Ayers’ Ministry —until
November, 1868. In consequence of receiving the ap-
pointment of Crown Solicitor and Public Prosecutor in
1870, he retired from Parliament. In 1881 he attained
the honourable position of Judge, and still fills that
place in a creditable manner.
ANTHONY, JOHN,
Was born at Rowden Farm, near Ply month, Devonshire,
on November 14, 1811, and educated in Plymouth, where
he learnt the rudiments of navigation. He embraced
the profession of a sailor, which he continued to follow
until 27 years of age. During the early part of his
career he made frequent voyages to and from Canada, the
United States, Mexico, Texas, West Indies, &c., and
many were the amusing and sensational incidents he
could relate of his adventures. On the announcement of
the Wakefield scheme, Mr. Anthony offered his services
to the S.A. Company, who accepted them, and he was
appointed chief officer of the barque South Australian,
under Captain Allen, a thorough whaling adept. On
arrival at ICingscote, April 22, 1837, the new comers were
met and welcomed by Mr. Bates (the veteran pioneer of


the island), Mr. Samuel Stephens, and other notables.
It is impossible in a work like this, where certain limits
cannot be exceeded, to do justice to Mr. Anthony’s early
career, or relate all that occurred to him there and else-
where ; suffice it to state that whilst at Kingscote he
married Miss E. S. Leddon, daughter o£ Dr. Leddon, of
Dawlish, Devonshire (an army surgeon under George
III.) E rom that time until his death, Mr. Anthony had
a loving partner to share his joys and sorrows, and it was,
perhaps, fortunate he had, as but a few weeks after his
marriage a terrible accident befel him. The method of
signalling passing vessels at that time was by means
of gunpowder explosions, and whilst superintending one
of these Mr. Anthony was very seriously injured. He
was laid up for about six weeks, during part of which
time he was in a very dangerous state. Although he got
better eventually, his face was disfigured and his eyesight
weakened for life. After this episode Mr. Anthony left
Kangaroo Island and came to Glenelg, where he was
appointed Custom-house officer under Captain Lipson.
After being in the Government service for a few years,
during which time he received several tributes as to the
faithful way in which he performed his duties, he entered
the service of the South Australian Company at Port
Adelaide. Erom a comparatively inferior position he
then rose to the now important post of chief wharfinger,
which position he continued to occupy till his death, to
the great satisfaction both of his employers and the
shipping community. Mr. Anthony was highly respected
at Port Adelaide and by shipmasters trading there.
Though rather quiet and reserved he was always affable
and courteous to all with whom he had to deal. His
intimate acquaintance with everything connected
with the wharfs and the harbour made him peculiarly
liable to be asked for information about them, and this
43
S OUT II AUSTRALIA.


he never failed to give. He was thus of great service to
the Government on several occasions, particularly when
the proposal to purchase the wharfs was under considera-
tion. His death took place Nov. 26, 1881, at Port Ade-
laide, in his 70th year, and he left behind him a widow,
five sons and three daughters, and several grandchildren.
In August, 1882, the Directors of the S.A. Company,
by whom his loss was severely felt, voted the sum of
£SOO to his widow and family, as “a mark of their ap-
preciation of his devotion to the Company’s interests and
faithful discharge of his duties.”
AUSTIN, REV. JOHN BAPTIST,
Was born at Hertford, England, December 25tli, 1799,
and was tbe eldest son of Jobn Baptist Austin, surgeon.
He was educated at Merchant Taylors’ School, London,
where he made great progress in his studies, though he
left before he was fourteen years of age. He was shortly
afterwards apprenticed to Mr. Scott, of Bromley, a
surgeon of some note in the early part of the century.
While with Mr. Scott he rapidly acquired a knowledge of
his profession, and displayed considerable surgical skill,
and his knowledge of medicine enabled him subsequently
to do a great deal of good where there was no resident
medical man. Soon after he commenced business on his
own account in London, he was fortunate enough to
attract the notice of the celebrated Dr. Birkbeck, who
was at the time engaged in founding the London Institu-
tion. The doctor soon perceived that young Austin
possessed superior qualifications, and associated him with
himself in the work in which he was engaged. Under
Dr. Birkbeck’s training Mr. Austin soon developed into
a popular lecturer, when only twenty-four years of age,
on chemistry, anatomy, geology, astronomy, &c. In the
year 1826 Mr. Austin married Margaret, daughter of


Mr. Edward Young; and lie removed to Hastings, Sussex,
about the year 1827, where he commenced a first-class
school. The first two pupils he had were Isaac Todhunter
and John Eyre Ashby, two distinguished scholars, and
others of his pupils filled important positions. While at
Hastings Mr. Austin commenced preaching at Gesling, a
little village four miles distant. After about three years
he removed to Peckham, near London, whither many of
his old pupils accompanied him. Here his school in-
creased, and in a few years Isaac Todhunter, who re-
mained with him until he left for Cambridge University,
was engaged as assistant. About the year 1835-6 a move-
ment was set on foot for providing religious instruction
in some of the villages around London. This led to the
formation of the Christian Instruction Society, in connec-
tion with which Mr. Austin became a regular preacher,
and to the erection of a chapel at Yun Green, four and
a-half miles from London, where Mr. Austin was
ordained about 1836-7.
In the year 1813 Mr. Austin’s attention was directed
to South Australia, as offering a better field than the old
country for the settlement of a large family ; and, having
eight children, he decided on coming to Adelaide. Before
leaving London he purchased from Mr. Eoger Cunliffe,
the banker, 500 acres of land near the township of
Macclesfield, and was fortunate in securing a valuable
property. He sailed in September in the barque Augustus,
commanded by the late Hon. John Hart, and arrived
in the colony at the end of December, 1813, where
he met with a very cordial welcome from the Eev.
T. Q. Stow, at whose church in Ereeman-street the family
worshipped on the first Sunday in 1811. But no time
was lost in Adelaide, and they removed to Macclesfield
with sufficient household goods for their immediate
requirements —such a journey being no trifling under


taking in tliose days of bush roads and bullock drays.
Here they were very kindly received by Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Davenport, with whom friendly relations were
maintained to the last. Mr. Austin commenced public
worship on Sunday in the largest room in the house,
kindly placed at his disposal for a time by Mr. Davenport;
but finding that the people appeared shy of assembling in
a dwelling-house, he used to pitch a tent, brought with
him from London, early every Sunday morning, to serve
as a place of worship for the day. It was unsafe to erect
it overnight, as the cattle chewed the ropes ; it therefore
had to be pitched in the morning, and taken down at
night. Mr. Austin and his son did this work for many
weeks before assistance was offered by the neighbours.
After a time the services were better attended, and the
tent being found too small, and too cold as the winter
came on, a place of worship was erected of gum slabs,
and roofed with shingles. In this for years was divine
worship carried on, until the present neat little stone
church was built. Early in the year 1844 Mr. Austin
established preaching stations at Echunga, in Mr. Duf-
field’s house; at Mount Barker, in Mr. Duncan McEarlane’s
barn ; at Strathalbyn, in a room ; and a year or two later
at another place on the Bugle Ranges, three or four miles
from Mount Barker. He frequently preached at Maccles-
field in the morning, and after a very slight refreshment
rode through the summer heat or winter rain several
miles, and held two other services at one or two of the
above-named places. Binding the congregation at Strath-
albyn increasing, he recommended them to write home to
Scotland for a Presbyterian minister; and having interested
his son-in-law (Mr. A. L. Elder), the Messrs. Stirling, Dr.
Rankine, and others in the matter, his suggestion was
carried out, and resulted in the engagement of the Rev.
J, Anderson, and the erection of the beautiful church
46
REPRESENTATIVE MEN OF


which is so prominent an object in Strathalbyn at present.
The cause at Mount Barker continued to flourish for
some years, when Mr. Austin had to give it up, and
devote his attention more especially to the increasing
population of Macclesfield. On the Bugle Ranges a little
chapel was built, and still exists (Zion’s Hill). At
Echunga, after Mr. Austin discontinued his services, a
Church of England place of worship was built. About
six years ago the infirmities of age rendered it desirable
that Mr. Austin should retire from the active work of
the ministry, and the congregation was for some time
most efficiently supplied by friends from Adelaide, until
the Rev. J. C. McMichael accepted the pastorate in
September, 1878.
Mr. Austin’s medical knowledge was frequently called
into requisition in the neighbourhood in which he lived,
and for many miles around, especially in the early days
when a doctor who had to live by his profession, could
hardly find work enough in the country districts to
support him. He not only gave advice, but medicine
gratis to those who could not afford to pay, and fre-
quently took long rides to attend the sick, paying them
as much attention as if he were to receive regular fees.
He was a great reader, keeping himself abreast of the
times by taking in a number of the best scientific,
literary, and religious periodicals. He read to some
purpose, and had a peculiar faculty of grasping the
meaning of an author and following his line of argument,
in many cases by what might be thought a very cursory
style of reading.
He w ; as an enthusiastic microscopist, and being an old
and intimate friend of Hr. Jackson, of the London
Microscopic Society, frequently compared notes and
exchanged objects with him. In this way he received
the first microscopic photograph that came to the colony


representing a meeting of the Society. He imported the
first binocular microscope into the colony, and took great
delight in preparing objects and examining them by means
of its powerful lenses.
Though taking little active part in public affairs, except
in his own neighbourhood, his life was an active and
useful one. He was an intimate friend and fellow-worker
with the late Eevs. T. Q. Stow and E. W. Newland, and
united with them and other Nonconformists in resisting
the attempt to force State aid to religion upon the
colonists in the year 1848. He died January 81st, 1882,
at Unley, leaving a widow, a daughter of the late Eev.
John Howard Hinton, and six children by former mar-
riages.
AYERS, SIR HENRY, K.C.M.G.,
President of the Legislative Council; born at Portsea,
May 1, 1821, and received his education in England.
Arrived in South Australia in 1840, and engaged in legal
pursuits up to 1845, when he became manager of the
Burra Mines. In 1857 gave his attention to legislative
business, and was elected to the Legislative Council; was
Chief Secretary and Premier in July, 1862. Since that period
he has been associated with various Ministries in office,
and never out of Parliament. As a politician Sir Henry
Ayers is one of the most prominent of our Parliamentary
men, and he has throughout bis career endeavoured to do
much for the public good. The Ayers’ Ministry, of
which he was head, was in power from March 4, 1872, to
July 21, 1873. He is now a member of the Upper House.
BAGOT, CAPTAIN CHARLES HARVEY,
Arrived in South Australia when Colonel Crawler was
Governor, and for over forty years exercised a powerful
influence on matters connected with the well-being of the


SIR HENRY AYERS, K.C.M.G.
Page 48.


colony. He first engaged in pastoral pursuits at Kapunda,
and to himself and son is due the honour of discovering
the extensive copper mines in that locality, and the
founding of the town. He was appointed member of the
nominee Legislative Council in 1842, and was afterwards
representative for the Light District. He was also again
one of the Legislative Council when Responsible Govern-
ment was established. He was born in Ireland, entered
the army at an early age, worked his way to promotion
as Captain, and saw active service in the East. He was
a lucid and able writer on most topics, and his contribu-
tions to the Press will not be speedily forgotten. He died
in Adelaide July 28, 1880, aged 92 years. The first dray
road between the Kapunda Mines and Port Adelaide, a
distance of forty-two miles, was marked out by Captain
Bagot. He was a firm opponent to the establishment of
State aid to religion in Governor Kobe’s time. During
that Governor’s rule he, with the other non-official
nominees, successfully resisted the imposition of a
royalty on minerals. The Council consisted of eight
nominees, half of whom were officials, and the Governor,
but five of the nominees were needed to form a quorum.
On this memorable occasion the Government and the
independent members were opposed to each other, and
the Governor’s casting vote would have carried the
royalty, when the non-official members walked out of the
Chamber, and left His Excellency without a quorum! so
defeating the attempt to levy a tax simply at the behest
of officials.
BAKER, HON. JOHN, M.L.C.,
One of the pioneers of South Australia, who for many
years took a prominent part in the public affairs of the
colony. He was born in December, 18.13, near Ilminster,
in Somersetshire, and whilst a young man left England
n
49
SOUTH AUSTEALIA.


for Tasmania, where lie resided many years and married
Miss Allen, the sister of Mr. John Allen, who during the
early days was a merchant in Adelaide. His connection
with South Australia began in October, IS3B, at which
period he arrived from Launceston in the Elizabeth,
leaving his wife in Tasmania. One of his first recorded
public acts was the forming one of a deputation to
present to Mr. G. M. Stephen, the temporary Adminis-
trator of the Government, a complimentary address on
his retiring from that position, Governor Gawler having
just landed in the province. Mr. Baker’s stay in Ade-
laide was brief, and he left for Tasmania. About a year
after he returned, and this time to become a permanent
settler. Those were the days when a mud cottage with
one door and a heavy rent was not to be despised, and
the settler had to chop wood and groom his own horse,
all of which fell to Mr. Baker’s lot. Soon after arrival
he entered into a contract with the South Australian
Company to import 10,000 sheep from Tasmania, they
providing the vessel, and he the cargo. The sheep were
introduced, and with them horses and other stock. This
was Mr. Baker’s first connection with pastoral pursuits,
and ever since till his death he held a leading position
among the squatters of Australia, interesting himself in
exploration, devoting time and spending money in the
arduous work of occupying new country, and doing every-
thing in his power to promote the importation and
improvement of stock. He was also concerned in form-
ing a Company for the introduction of cart horses from
England, which undertaking proved very beneficial. He
did much to promote the interests of the turf ; bred and
trained many noted “ cracks,” including Abd-el-Kader,
Jupiter, and others. On November 6, 1840, the Auction
Company, one of the most notable institutions of the
early times, was formed, and Mr. Baker held the position


of Chairman, and Mr. J. B. Neales auctioneer. In 1840
he was nominated a Justice of the Peace of the province,
and shortly after a special magistrate. About this date
he became a Director of the Bank of Australasia, having
for his colleague Mr. J. A. Jackson, Colonial Treasurer.
In 1841 he was appointed to the Directorate of the
Savings Bank, and of the S. A. Mining Association, and
being interested in the development of the mineral
resources of the colony, he laid out a considerable sum
on the Montacute Mine. In 1846 he protested vigor-
ously against the imposition of a royalty on minerals,
and between that time and 1850 he took a prominent
part in most movements of a public character, such as
the Chamber of Commerce, which was established in the
last-named year. Mr. Baker was its first Chairman.
He was associated with Messrs. Stevenson and Bailey in
establishing a Botanical Garden for Adelaide, and was
appointed one of the trustees. His other appointments
and offices may be thus briefly summarised : —Appointed
President of the Horticultural and Agricultural Society
in 1856, and held the same office three times; created a
life member of the Eeyal Agricultural Society, the
Boyal Geographical Society of England, the British As-
sociation, and other learned Societies in Europe. In
1854 was instrumental in organizing a company of
mounted rifles, in which he held the commission of
Lieutenant. He was always a steadfast supporter of the
volunteer movement, and was Major of infantry in May
1867, when he was entertained by the members of the
West Adelaide Bides at a banquet. Erom 1868 up till
the disbandment of the force, he held the position of
Lieut.-Colonel. In July, 1851, and in 1855, was elected
M.P. for Mount Barker. He possessed great ability,
was a powerful and subtle debater, and a Conservative,
and had not been long in Parliament ere he showed the


material he was made of. Frequently in opposition to
the opinions of the day, he was never deterred from
giving expression to his views. He was opposed to the
abolition of Church grants ; was in favor of nomineeism,
and adhered to his text in spite of the overwhelming
strength of feeling throughout the country on the oppo-
site side. Among the many useful measures he was in-
strumental in passing was the Bullion Act. In 1857 he
w'as elected to the Upper House, and held office as Chief
Secretary for a short period. In September, 1858, he was
commissioned by the colonists to present an address to
Her Majesty the Queen. Before leaving for England he
was entertained at a public banquet. He duly presented
the address at a levee at St. James’s in March, 1859, and
then returned to the colony. In 1865 he distinguished
himself by opposing Gloyder’s valuations, and later on
w r as conspicuous by protesting against the removal of
Mr. Justice Boothby. In 1869, his seat in the Council
became vacant through the effluxion of time, but he was
re-elected and continued his duties till laid aside by his
last illness. Mr. Baker was favourable to the federation
of the colonies, and often privately enlarged on the ad-
vantages to Australia from a union under the rule of a
member of the Eoyal Family. His death took place at
Morialta, on May 18, 1872, in his 58th year. He left a
widow, and seven children. His eldest son is the Hon.
E. C. Baker, M.L.C., formerly member of the Assembly
and Attorney-General.
BALK, CARL GEORGE, J.P.,
Born at Syke, near Bremen, Hanover. Arrived in South.
Australia in 1854. Was partner in the mercantile firm
of Wills & Co , of Adelaide, and occupied a prominent
position in various social organizations, especially in
[Freemasonry. He was an active member of society, and


greatly appreciated. After his death, which occurred in
his 42nd year, on July 23rd, 1875, his funeral was
attended by the leading colonists, including representa-
tives of every nationality, and extended fully a mile.
BALL, ADAM GUSTAVUS, C.E.,
A well-known amateur artist of somewhat nomadic pro-
clivities, whose pencil sketches of stirring bush and camp
scenes, such as kangaroo hunting, cattle mustering, &c.,
rendered him worthy to occupy a foremost place among
the few really good artists South Australia possesses.
He was by profession a civil engineer, but most of his
early life was occupied in exploring, till he unfortunately
met with an accident which prevented his taking further
parts in those pursuits congenial to his tastes. His pro-
ductions are still to be seen in many directions, and
highly prized by those who possess these souvenirs of
departed genius. He expired at his residence, Childers-
street, Horth Adelaide, on August 22, 1882, aged 61
years. Among his most noted productions was an elegant
design for the McKinlay monument erected at Gawler,
and which it is regretted was not selected by the Com-
mittee appointed to carry out that work.
BARKER, COLLETT, CAPTIAN
0£ the 39th Foot Begiment, and brother officer of Captain
Sturt. He received orders from Governor Darling, of Hew
South Wales, where the regiment was stationed, to visit and
inspect Gulf St. Vincent, Encounter Bay, and various locali-
ties on land, notably the country adjacent to the Murray,
previously explored by Captain Sturt. The party which
accompanied him left their ship at (it is supposed) Hold-
fast Bay, and travelled on foot to the summit of Mount
Lofty, and thence to Mount Barker (so named in his
honour), to Lake Alexandrina and the Lower Murray.


In order to obtain a good view of the outlet to the sea he
quitted the party, and with a compass fastened to his
head swam across one of the channels. On leaving the
water he was seen to ascend a high sand hummock and
disappear. Erom that period (April 30, 1831) a mystery
surrounds his fate, which will probably never be thoroughly
cleared up, though in the search afterwards made for his
remains certain statements were elicited from the natives
which wore an aspect of truth. They stated that he had
been killed, and his body thrown into the water, and
carried out to sea. Captain Barker was mild, affable,
and attentive, zealous in the discharge of his duties,
honourable and just in private life, a lover and follower
of science, indefatigable and dauntless in his pursuits, a
steady friend and entertaining companion. Such was the
testimony recorded of him after his death by one inti-
mately associated with him —his brother officer, Captain
Sturt.
BARROW, HON JOHN M.P.,
Born in England in 1817, and died at Wakefield-street,
Adelaide, August 22, 1874, aged 57 years. He was for
many years known in England as an able political writer
connected with the staff of the Bradford Observer and
other leading journals. He arrived in South Australia
in 1852, and shortly after became connected with the
commercial, and subsequently the literary, department of
the Register and Observer newspapers. On the removal
of Mr. (now Dr.) G-arran to Sydney he succeeded him as
principal leader writer, and acted in this capacity until
1858, when he retired and started the South Australian
Advertiser and Chronicle , and later on the Express. With
these he was connected as editor and part proprietor up
to the time of his death. In addition to his literary
duties he filled the role of an able and striking preacher,
54
EEPEESENTATIVE MEN OF


and was pastor of Clayton Church, Norwood, until
August, 1858, when he resigned his congregational
duties and entered the House of Assembly as a member
for East Torrens. He was also returned in March, 1861,
as member for the Legislative Council, and in 1869, in
consequence of his seat being vacant through effluxion of
time, quitted the scene of his Parliamentary labours until
1870, when he was re-elected, and selected by the
Government to represent the Upper House in the Inter-
colonial Conference in Melbourne. In 1871 he resigned
his seat in the Council, but ultimately offered himself for
election, and was returned as member for Sturt —an
electorate he represented for three years. His other
appointments were Treasurer in February, 1872 ;
delegate to the Intercolonial Conference, Sydney; first
Mayor of the Unley Corporation, in June, 1871; member
of Board of Education and Central Koad Board in 1872.
For some time he was one of the Lands Titles Commis-
sioners. He took a keen interest in the volunteer move-
ment, and was for some time a member of the Free Eifle
Corps. In every sense he may be considered a public
man, and one of the most able and popular of South
Australian colonists. He rendered good service to the
colony as Chairman of the Commission appointed to
report on the diseases of cereals. Mr. Barrow was twice
married, and left a family by his first wife and one son
by his widow.
BARTLEY, WILLIAM,
A native of Liverpool, England, where he was born of
good parents, January 4, 1801. Admitted an attorney of
the King’s Bench in 1820; arrived in Adelaide July,
1839. He entered at once upon the practice of his pro-
fession, and was for some time in partnership with the
late Mr. Charles Maun and Mr. Edward Castres (late


Judge) Gwynne. Afterwards he was head of the firm
of Bartley and Bakewell, which subsequently received
Mr. Randolph (afterwards Judge) Stow, into partnership.
During the existence of the firm of Bartley, Bakewell,
and Stow, Mr. Bartley appeared in the Supreme Court as
counsel for the Anglican Bishop in the suit between His
Lordship and the Corporation of Adelaide, in which it
w r as unsuccessfully sought to establish for the Church of
England a claim to a portion of Victoria-square on which
to erect a Cathedral. When the Real Property Act was
passed in 1857 Mr. Bartley was appointed Senior Solicitor
to the Lands Titles Office, a position which he held until
the year 1881, wdien owing to the infirmities of age he
retired.
BASEDOW, MARTIN PETER FRIEDRICH, J.P.,
Born and educated at Hanover, Germany. Entered the
South Australian Parliament in 1876 as one of the
members for the Barossa District. Though not a fluent
speaker, he is forcible in argument, and logical in every
respect. Mr. Basedow occupied the position of Minister
of Education in the Morgan Ministry in 1880. He is
identified with the Zeitung , the only German newspaper
in the colony, and is extremely popular with all classes
for his urbanity and affable manners.
BASTARD, THOMAS,
Is a native of London, a humorist, and a professor of the
art of natation. He is the ninth son of humble parents,
and after a number of ups and downs of no ordinary
character, “ Cockney Tom” —as he not inaptly terms him-
self —turned up in Adelaide in 1853, in which city for
some time his vicissitudes and adventures were as re-
markable as those he encountered in the home country.
•/
However, by perseverance he eventually achieved success.


HON. SIR ARTHUR BLYTH. C.M.G.
Page 62.


The Turkish baths were established by him, and since
then Mr. Bastard has been the recognised master of the
art of swimming in Adelaide, and the means of doing
good to thousands of afflicted persons who have used the
Turkish baths. He was instructor in natation to the
family of Sir James Eergusson, and has taught thousands
of persons the way to use their limbs to advantage in the
water. In 1861 he established swimming matches, and
these he has continued annually up to the present time.
On March 24, 1874, he was appointed swimming master
to the Government Model Schools, and has ever since
enjoyed the distinguished title of “ Professor.” Mr.
Bastard is one of the best known men in Adelaide, and
universally liked for his affable and genial manners. He
was born September 22, 1818, and though advanced in
years, is a living type of that class of genuine “Cockneys”
fast becoming defunct. He has written a small and un-
pretentious work, in which his history is narrated in
plain language, and in an unvarnished style. It is
entitled “Cockney Tom,” and will well repay perusal.
BENSON, DR.,
A well-known and popular surgeon, who for many years
resided in the vicinity of Norwood and Kensington, near
Adelaide. He was much liked by all who knew him. He
died July G, 1877, aged 39 years. After his decease it
was considered some tribute to his memory should be
erected, and accordingly E. T. Smith, Escp, Mayor of
Adelaide, with other influential citizens, interested them-
selves in the matter, the result being that a memorial
fountain was placed on ground given by the Homan
Catholics of Norwood and Kensington, and was unveiled
in July, 1879, by Mrs. E. T. Smith. The following “In
Memoriam” on Dr. Benson was written by the author of
this work :


Another bark launched on an unknown sea,
Another star obscured in life’s bright sky,
Another soul gone to eternity—
A noble mind whose influence cannot die!
True sympathy within his tender heart arose
When he beheld some sufferer poor and lone ;
He shrank not at the sight of others’ woes,
But felt such sorrows as they were his own.
All that in man is truly great and good,
All that is God-like in a human form,
Were his by nature, and affection warm
Rear’d her high temple in his honest soul.
Friends he had many in our Southern sphere,
And these by tender memories imbued
With silent sadness gather’d round his bier ;
His mourning orphans’ grief they’d fain console,
Though all their hearts could offer was a tear !
He loved the beautiful where’er ’twas found,
The outspread sea, whether in storm or rest,
Nature’s vast meadows were as hallow’d ground
To him; all things in Nature had a zest
Which nought in Art’s domain could ever yield.
With books he was familiar, and with men;
He loved the poets, and each lofty page ;
True genius in him met the ready friend,
The noble patron and the critic sage;
His generous hand was free to give or lend
To all in need, to aid with purse or pen
Each new-formed plan by merit well design’d.
A benefactor he of sterling kind !
Some may forget him—unlike such my heart
Utters his name with a regretful sigh ;
His memory causes bitter tears to start
From tender founts wherein deep sorrows lie.
Benson ! to me still dear as aye thou art,
Let the cold world thy lonely grave pass by
Without a thought; whate’er my fate may be
I’ll not forget thou wast a friend to me.
BE NSON, J., REV., O.S.B.
Appointed by the Vicar-Apostolic in Sydney, in February,
1841, to succeed the Eev. W. B. Ullathorne in South Aus-
tralia. He arrived by the brig Dorset in March, 1811, and
was favourably received by the colonists. His demeanour
was quiet and unassuming, and he was much liked not
only by members of the Eoman Catholic body, but by
those of other persuasions. As a contrast to the “ purple
58
REPRESENTATIVE MEN OF


and fine linen ” style of many clerics of the present day,
it may be mentioned that Father Benson dressed very
plainly, and his mode of living was of the most frugal
kind. He hired a wooden building at the corner of
Topham and AVaymouth streets for a chapel, and lived in
s slab hut at the rear of it. During the summer of 1843
his health, under the excessive heat, gave way, and a
change to a milder clime was necessary. He left the
colony in April, 1843, for England, and died at AVolver-
hampton, March 20, 1868, aged 73.
BICKFORD, REV. JAMES,
President of the South Australian Wesleyan Conference.
Born in 1816, at Edmeston Barton, Modbury, Devon,
England. Educated at Plymouth, and joined the Wes-
leyan body at the age of sixteen. Pursued his theological
studies under the Bev. T. W. Smith, of Ilminster, Somer-
setshire. Appointed in 1838 by the British Conference
to the West Indies, and was instrumental in doing much
good among the coloured population of the Islands of
Trinidad, St. Vincent, Grenada, British Guiana, &c.,
until March, 1853, when he returned to England. In
1852 a dreadful epidemic —yellow fever—broke out in
Demerara, and he was quite prostrated with an attack,
but providentially recovered. He was appointed to the
Melbourne Circuit, Victoria, and arrived in May, 1854.
His labours in the Brighton, Ballarat, Sandhurst, Gee-
long, and other Wesleyan Church Circuits extended over
nineteen years. In 1873 the Sydney Conference appointed
him to the Pirie-street Circuit, Adelaide, and in this he
has not only since been actively engaged, but has done
much to advance the interests of the Wesleyan body else-
where. Mr. Bickford is an earnest preacher, a diligent
pastor, and an able administrator of Church law and
discipline. His sympathies are broad and strong, his


theological creed conservative; his political principles
those of the old Whigs, in which he delights. He is an
able and fluent writer, and for years a contributor to the
daily Press. In 1865 and 1868 he was elected President
of the S.A. Conference, a position he filled with credit to
himself and all concerned.
SINKS, REV. W. L.,
Ex-President of the South Australian Wesleyan Confer-
ence, was born in 1819, at Richmond, Yorkshire, and
trained at the Theological Institution in Richmond,
Surrey. Spent two years practising in English Circuits,
when he was appointed by the British Conference of
1813 as missionary to British Guiana, and laboured there
for ten years, principally in Trinidad and St. Vincent’s,
Demerara. In 1853, as the health of his wife and family
suffered, he returned to England, and was then appointed
to the Melbourne Circuit. He remained in Victoria for
about twelve years —seven as Circuit preacher and five as
Superintendent and Chairman on the Geelong and Balla-
rat Circuits. He was the first Principal of the Prince
Alfred College, where his urbanity, ability, and diligence
raised the College to its present high position. In 1869
and 1871, he was President of the S. A. Conference, but
retired from active Circuit work in 1875 and became a
supernumerary minister. Mr. Binks is universally liked,
and regarded as an ornament to the ministry. As a
preacher he is eloquent, and by his lucid method of pro-
pounding great truths, has effected much good.
BIS WINCKEL, F.
An old and popular German colonist, for many years
member of the Central Board of Main Roads, Chairman
of the Mudla District Council, member of the
Gawler Board of Advice, Returning-Officer for Yatala,


and Justice of the Peace. In the early days of the
Gawler Institute Mr. bis Winckel, besides giving many
presents to it, acted as Honorary Curator to the Museum.
He was a prominent member of the Masonic body, and
well liked by his brother craftsmen. He settled on his
estate, Buchsfelde (formerly owned by Dr. Schomburgk),
in 1866, and turned his attention to agricultural and
horticultural pursuits; he was also a patron of the
Gawler Agricultural Society, and used his endeavours to
facilitate its progress. By his death, which occurred
December 30, 1879, from heart disease, the people of the
Barossa District lost one who might truly be considered
an ornament to society, and was universally esteemed for
his large-heartedness and sterling qualities.
BLACKMORE, JAMES NEWNHAM, J.P.,
Was one o£ the most painstaking and industrious officers
in the service of the South Australian Government. In
1854, when but 18 years of age, he was employed in the
Chief Secretary’s office, and remained there until 1857,
when his superior ability gained for him promotion to
the post of Assistant Clerk and Sergeant-at-Arms in the
House of Assembly. He occupied this for upwards of
nine years, when he was further promoted to the Secre-
taryship of the Commissioner of Crown Lands. In 1870
he was created Under-Treasurer, and held this office up
till the time of his death, which took place in Adelaide,
on April 7, 1875, in his 39th year. Shortly before his
decease, Mr. Blackmore obtained a year’s leave of absence,
and intended visiting Europe to recruit his health. The
end came, however, too suddenly to permit his carrying
out his plans, and he passed away universally regretted.
He was unmarried, and left two brothers, one of whom,
Mr. E. G. Blackmore, still holds the position of Clerk in
the Legislative Assembly.


BLYTH, HON. SIR ARTHUR, C.M.G.,
A gent-General for South Australia, born March 21,
1823, and received his education at the King Edward VI.
Grammar School, Birmingham, under Dr. Jeune (late
Bishop of Peterborough) and Dr. J. P. Lee (late Bishop
of Manchester). Mr. Blyth arrived in this colony by
the Ariadne, in 1839, w r ith his parents, and settled in
Adelaide, where his father was appointed a Justice of the
Peace for the province, and elected a Councillor of the
City Corporation of 1810, and afterwards one of the City
Commissioners. He was actively engaged in trade pur-
suits up to 1865, and devoted a considerable portion of
his time to public affairs. In 1851-5 he was Captain of
Volunteers in the force formed during the Eussian War ;
appointed Eeturing-Officer for the Electoral District of
East Torrens in 1851, Chairman of Mitcham District
Council, and Assessor of the City Corporation during the
same year. He was also a member of the Central Eoad
Board, an active and assiduous member of the Chamber
of Commerce, and an industrious magistrate. Elected in
1855 member for the District of Yatala, and in that
capacity was one of the framers of the Constitution of
the province. On the inauguration of the new system of
two branches of the Legislature, in 1857, the District of
Yatala was divided into two parts, and Mr. Blyth was
chosen one of the members for Gumeracha —a position
he held, excepting a brief interval between 1868-9, until
the general election of 1875, when he was elected for
Korth Adelaide. During the latter year he paid a visit
to England, returning in 1870 to the colony and his Par-
liamentary duties. He held at different periods the
offices of Chief Secretary, Treasurer, Commissioner of
Public Works, and Commissioner of Crown Lands, and
was at all times a staunch supporter of the principles of
the Eeal Property Act, and one of the original counsel


lors of Mr. (now Sir) R. R. Torrens when that measure
was introduced. He was a Director of the National
Bank and of the South Australian Company, one of the
Council of the University, member of the Synod of the
Church of England, and a Governor of St. Peter’s Col-
legiate School. His appointment as Agent-General took
place on the death of Mr. E. S. Dutton, in February,
1877, and in that position he has done much to advance
the interests of South Australia. By his instrumentality
some valuable additions to its population have been made,
and he is ever ready to place before intending emigrants
such information as they require, and which is the more
acceptable as it has been acquired by practical experience.
Mr. Blyth received the honour of knighthood from Her
Majesty Queen Victoria in 1878.
BLYTH, NEVILLE,
Born in England in 1828, arrived in South Australia in
1839, and entered Parliament March, 1860, at the
general election of that year, as colleague of the late
Hon. H. Mildred, as representative of East Torrens, and
continued to represent that district for that and two
successive Parliaments till about the middle of 1867,
seven years and a half. He also represented Encounter
Bay in the sessions of 1868-9, as colleague of the Hon.
William Everard. It was during the first of these years
that the first step was taken, under the Government of
the Hon. H. B. T. Strangways, in what is generally known
as Land Reform, in the debates on which subject Mr.
Blyth took a part. He was in office for about a week,
from 21th Sept, to 12th Oct., in the former of these years
as the Treasurer in the Government formed by the late
Captain Hart during the crisis that preceded the forma-
tion of Mr. Strangways’ Government just referred to.
He sat in Parliament nearly the whole of the session of


1871, as representative of the district of Victoria, and
colleague of Mr. Park Laurie. This Parliament was dis-
solved at the close of that year, and Mr, Blyth having
unsuccessfully contested the district of Encounter Bay,
visited England and the Continent of Europe during
1873-4-5. Was elected member for North Adelaide in
March, 1880, to fill the vacancy caused by the acceptance
of the office of Agent-Greneral by his brother, the Hon.
Arthur (now Sir Arthur) Blyth. He held a portfolio as
Minister of Education in the Boucaut Ministry.
BOOTHBY, HON. BENJAMIN,
Was born at Doncaster, Yorkshire, on February 5, 1808.
He was called to the Bar in London, in 1825, and shortly
afterwards appointed Devising Barrister for the West
Hiding of Yorkshire, and Decorder of Pontefract. In
1853 he arrived in the colony with his family, having been
appointed Second Judge of the Supreme Court of South
Australia. He was not, however, regarded as a high
authority on legal matters, and in consequence of being
opposed to the Torrens Act —a measure popular with the
masses —-regarded in a far from favourable light*. On ac-
count of persistent opposition to the laws of the colony,
and innumerable unseemly squabbles with the other
Judges and counsel,he wasremovedfromthe Bench in July,
1867. His death took place in June in the following
year, at the age of 64 years, and though he was far from
popular, it is widely admitted that his errors were rather
those of the head than the heart.
BOOTHBY, JOSIAH, C.M.G.,
Eifth son o£ the late Mr. Justice Boothby, born at Not-
tingham April 8, 1887, entered the Civil Service of South
Australia in 1854, as clerk in the Audit Office, and was
rapidly promoted in various departments till in 1859 he


HON. JAMES PENN BOUCAUT.
Page 66.


reached the position of Chief Clerk and Government
Statist in the Chief Secretary’s Office. Appointed Under-
secretary in 1868. He held the somewhat difficult post
of Executive Commissioner for South Australia at the
Paris Exhibition, 1878, with credit to the colony. Mr.
Boothby is a Corresponding Member of the Statistical
Society of London, and considered one of the ablest
statisticians of the day, and he annually issues a statis-
tical directory for South Australia. In 1881 he resigned
the Under-Secretaryship, and entered into business on
his own account in Adelaide. He received the order of
C.MG. in 1878, and was also invested during the same
year with the Cross of the Legion of Honour of France.
Mr. Boothby and his brothers were the first to make
successful attempts to induce private enterprise to take
up remunerative public works, as instanced in the success
of the Adelaide and Glenelg railway.
BOOTHBY, WILLIAM ROBINSON,
Born in England September 26, 1829 ; educated at the
London University, where he took his B.A. degree; ar-
rived in Adelaide with his father, Mr. Justice Boothby,
in 1858 ; appointed Sheriff and Returning Officer in 1854;
Marshal of the Vice-Admiralty Court in 1862, and
Comptroller of H.M. Gaols and Stockade in 1868. Mr.
Boothby is greatly interested in olive cultivation, and has
not only published an excellent treatise on it, but has
succeeded in giving an impetus to its manufacture by
utilising prison labour at the Adelaide Gaol. Samples of
olive oil made there were sent to several Exhibitions,
both at home and abroad, and secured first prizes for
purity and quality. Mr. Boothby is one of the Council
of the Senate of the S.A. University, and may be regarded
as a most energetic colonist in every sense of the word.
E


BOSWORTH, JOHN, J.P.,
Born in London, May, 1836, and arrived in Adelaide at
an early age. Educated at St. Peter’s College, and entered
Parliament in 1875. He resides near Eiverton, and com-
bines the agricultural with the pastoral interest at his
homestead. He was one of the early pioneers in the Far
North, and did then, as he is still doing, much to develop
the latent mineral resources of the land of his adoption.
Mr. Bosworth represents Wooroora with Mr. H. E.
Bright in the Assembly, and is liberal in his views.
BOUCAUT, CAPT. RAY,
Father of Mr. Justice J. P. Boncant, of the H.E.I.C.S.
Arrived with his family in South Australia in 1846. He
was a most energetic and popular man, and greatly
interested in all that concerned the welfare of the colony.
He died suddenly of apoplexy January 29, 1872, univer-
sally respected.
BOUCAUT, THE HON. JAMES PENN,
Born at Falmouth, Cornwall, October 29, 1889; arrived
in South Australia in 1846 with his father, the date
Captain Boucaut, H.E.1.C.5., and was for a few years in
the bush, which he left afterwards to study the law with
the late C. Fenn, Esq. Mr. Boncant was first returned
to Parliament in November, 1861, for the City of Ade-
laide, vice Mr. Hanson, made Chief Justice. In 1863
Mr. Boncant was defeated in East Adelaide by the late
Mr. Bakewell; but early in 1865, at the general election,
he was returned at the head of the poll for West Ade-
laide, being one of a very few candidates who refused to
pledge himself to support Groyder’s valuations —then the
great cry. On the day after his return he refused to join
Mr. Ayers’ Grovernment as Attorney-General, vice Mr,
Stow, defeated for Victoria, on the ground that he had


attacked Mr. Ayers’ policy on the hustings, and conse-
quently that Government, as then constituted, broke up.
In October, 1865, in conjunction with the late Hon. J.
Baker, Mr. Boucaut negotiated an alliance between the
late Mr. Hart and several gentlemen who joined the
latter’s Government formed by him on the defeat of Mr.
Ayers’ Government; and in March, 1866, on Mr. Hart’s
departure from the colony for England, Mr. Boucaut
formed a Government consisting of himself, Sir A. Blyth
Sir William Milne, Mr. Duffield, and Mr. English. This
Government broke up on Mr. Boucaut’s retirement in
April, 1867. Mr. Boucaut, on his retirement, had a
Q.C.-ship pressed upon him by the Chief Justice and by
Governor Sir H. Daly, but he declined it. He afterwards
had several offers of office from time to time, but felt
unable to accept them; and although occasionally in
Parliament, and frequently prominent, was not again in
office till 1872, when he joined Mr. Hughes’ short-lived
Ministry, principally to establish a maxim he laid down,
and then fought for with great energy, viz., that the
Governor was not entitled, under all circumstances, at
all times, in South Australia, absolutely to say that the
former of the Government should be necessarily the head
of the Government. Mr. Boucaut was out of office till
June, 1875, when he formed the Boucaut Ministry, to
carry out the celebrated “ policy,” so much talked of in
this and other colonies, and which made his name and
that of South Australia very prominent. The Ministry
was reconstituted by him on the appointment of Mr.
Way to be Chief Justice, and the retirement of Mr.
Morgan and Mr. Colton, the latter of whom was anxious
to attend more closely to his business for a time. The re-
constituted Ministry consisted of Mr. Hawker, Mr.
Mann, Mr. Blyth, Mr. Everard, and Mr. Playford, which
was defeated on the meeting of Parliament in June,


1876, on the ground that Mr. Boucaut had joined some of
his opponents, which was strengthened by a smouldering
opposition in certain quarters to his proposed taxation.
Mr. Boucaut’s defence was that his policy required very
hard work to be properly carried out, and that some able
men in the House of Assembly had no experience, and
some experienced men were deficient in ability, whereas
hard work and both considerable ability and experience
were required at that juncture. The succeeding Ministry
under Mr. Colton, whose conduct in attacking Mr.
Boucaut was strongly reprobated, adopted Mr. Boucaut’s
policy of works without his policy of increasing the
revenue and immigration. Mr. Colton’s Grovernment was
driven, however, from office by reason of an attempt un-
constitutionally to coerce the Upper House; and Mr.
Boucaut in October, 1877, formed a stable Ministry. In
1878 he accepted a Puisne Judgeship of the Supreme
Court of South Australia. As a politician Mr. Boucaut
is an able man, though his policy has at times ap-
peared tortuous and uncertain. He has always been, and
still is, to the front in all measures calculated to benefit
this the land of his adoption, and few men have done
more to advance its interests. To no man as much as to
him do we owe the great strides the colony has made
since 1874 in wealth and prosperity.
BOWDEN, JOHN,
For many years a member o£ the Upper Wakefield Dis-
trict Council, and portion o£ time its Chairman; also
an indefatigable member of the Northern Agricultural
Society, and one of the first in its establishment. He
took an active part in all public movements, and was
greatly respected. Died October 24, 1881, at Auburn —-
a town in which he had resided for many years.


BOWER, DAVID, J.P.,
Was born of respectable parents, at a manufacturing
village (Upper Mill), Sacldlewortb, Yorkshire, April 11,
1819, and was the eldest of seven children. Educated in
his native place, and at the age of 15 was bound appren-
tice to the building trade. On attaining his majority
Mr. Bower resolved to see the world, and accordingly
embarked on board the ship England at Liverpool, in
April, 1811, and sailed for Port Phillip, where he arrived
in the following July. In December, in the same year
he sailed for Yew Zealand, in the Minerva, and remained
in various parts of that colony till October, 1816, when he
sailed for Sydney in his own vessel. Having disposed of
this craft, became to Port Adelaide, S.A., and arrived here
in January, 1817, where he speedily established his busi-
ness as a timber merchant, and was very successful. In
1855 the people of the Port being desirous to have the
place declared a Corporate Town, Mr. Bower was, with
the late Capt. Scott and others, appointed one of a depu-
tation to wait on the Governor, Sir Eichard Mac Donnell,
on the matter. The boon was granted, and on Council-
lors being elected Mr. Bower was among them, and re-
tained that position until 1858, when he paid a visit to
England and returned to the colony in 1861 to settle at
Wallaroo, where he resided for about ten years. Mr.
Bower’s Parliamentary career dates back to 1865, when
Wallaroo and Port Adelaide were a combined electorate,
and he was returned as one of the members for that
constituency. He was re-elected member for Port Ade-
laide in 1875, and still occupies the same position. He
was elected Mayor of that town in 1877, and was instru-
mental in effecting much improvement in its aspect.
Mr. Bower has done much good with the wealth he
has acquired during a prosperous career, and whilst his
public acts are matters of history, his private beneficence


is not likely to be speedily forgotten by recipients of
it. During his residence at Wallaroo he presented the
Moonta and Wallaroo people with blocks of land to
build Institutes on, and laid the foundation stone of the
former building ; he also gave £SOO towards establishing
an Institute at Port Adelaide, and the foundation stone
of the present building was laid by him.
BEAY, HON. JOHN COX, J.P.,
A native of Adelaide, where he was born in 1812, and
educated at St. Peter’s College. Entered Parliament in
1871, and has since that time been a prominent politician.
He has been a member of several Ministries, and repre-
sents East Adelaide in the Assembly. He has done good
service to that constituency; whilst as Chief Secretary
and leader of the Ministry he has secured the confidence
of the existing House and the country.
BROWN, JOHN,
One of South Australia’s most prominent colonists. He
arrived in the colony in 1837, and took an active part in
public affairs for years. He will long be remembered as
the first Immigration Agent, and was for some time as-
sociated with the Adelaide Times as editor. He died in
August, 1879, deeply regretted by a wide circle of
friends. In consequence of conscientious scruples, and a
refusal to act in concert with a Committee of Investiga-
tion appointed to inquire into the death of a shepherd
killed by blacks at Mr. Osmond Gilles’s station, he was
censured by the Governor, and dismissed from office. He
for over thirty years held the appointment of Secretary
to the Adelaide Guarantee Society, and other important
positions of a similar character.
BULL, JOHN WRATHALL,
Is the son of the late Eey. Jno. Bull, M.A., incumbent of
St. John’s, Walthamston, Essex, England. He was born


at St. Paul’s, Cray, Kent, June 28, 1804, and at an early
age evinced great interest in agricultural pursuits. He
followed dairy farming near Macclesfield, Cheshire, until
1838, when attracted by the advantages offered to colonists
in the new settlement of South Australia, and impressed
with the excellence of Mr. E. G. Wakefield’s scheme of
colonization, he left his native land by the ship Canton, and
reached the colony in May, 1838. On arrival, he at once
started into business as a land agent and purchaser of
cattle and sheep, and was with Mr. Stephen Hack at that
period the only stock-buyer in the colony. He also acted
as agent for English absentee landed proprietors, and
shortly after followed farming and stock pursuits near
Mount Barker, and for a time he was very prosperous ;
in fact, at the present day he would have been in a
thoroughly independent position, but for the crisis caused
by the dishonouring of Governor Gawler’s drafts, and
other events which brought ruin to the early settlers.
At that period cattle which he had purchased at £l3 10s.
were, after being fattened, sold for £4, and sheep bought
at 38s. disposed of at ss. per head. Mr. (now Sir) W.
W. Hughes was a buyer of some of the latter at that
figure, and had to sell them at 2s. 6d. each, sharing alike
in a calamity which unforeseen and unpropitious cir-
cumstances had brought about. These were the days
when wheat fetched no more than 2s. 6d. per bushel, and
the farmer saw but small return for his money. The
Victorian goldfields proved a great attraction, and Mr.
Bull, like many of his neighbours, left South Australia
for the new El Dorado in 1852. He was fairly successful,
and returned to Adelaide in 1853, still impressed with
the belief that this colony would eventually become pros-
perous again. Soon after his return he undertook the
management of the property of the late Osmond Gillies,
Esq., at Glen Osmond, and established a vineyard there.


To Mr. Bull belongs tbe honour of being one of tbe first
vignerons in tbe colony, and he also had a depot in
Adelaide for the sale of colonial wines. In 1869,
Volunteer Companies were formed in various localities,
and when those at Gflen Osmond and Mitcham were
elected, Mr. Bull was appointed Lieutenant in command,
and for six years proved an active and zealous officer.
Among the disadvantages felt by the early settlers, the
want of proper harvesting machinery may be mentioned ;
reaping was done by hand, and what now can be effected
in a single day by a man and a boy then occupied one
man for about a week. This does not fully represent the
saving, as it only relates to reaping, and under the old
system the thrashing would have taken one man two or
three weeks more. As a husbandman, Mr. Bull had often
considered the desirability of some better method of
garnering the crops than had hitherto obtained, but until
1812 no plan by which such could be effected had entered
his mind. However, in December, the possibility of
thrashing a standing crop of wheat, and the outline of a
machine which he could invent for that purpose, loomed
before him, and he at once set to work to make a drawing
of his discovery of a locomotive thrasher. In 1843, the
Adelaide Corn Exchange Committee having offered a
reward for the best contrivance to aid farmers in
harvesting, Mr. Bull exhibited a working model of his
principle to the Committee. This principle was shortly
after adopted by Mr. J. Eidley, who now claims the
honour of inventing a machine introduced by Mr. Bull.
Comment thereon is needless. Suffice it to state that
during the session of 1882 the Parliament voted Mr.
Bull a sum of £250 for improvements in agricultural
machinery. On Eebruary 25, 1881, Mr. Bull experienced
a severe bereavement by the death of his wife, a most
amiable lady, who had been associated with him long


J. W. BULL.
Page 70.


before his arrival in South Australia, and had proved a
helpmate and guide in many trying positions. The
deceased was widely known and respected for her
numerous virtues. Mr. Bull still resides near Adelaide,
and notwithstanding he is in his 79th year, is hale and
hearty. In the evening of his life, it is to be regretted
that he has to labour for the bread that perisheth in lieu
of passing his days in affluence and comfort.
BURRELL, W. H.,
Arrived in South Australia about tlie year 1856, and was
soon afterwards associated with Mr. James Macgeorge,
who constructed the first electric telegraph line in the
colony —a private line running between Adelaide and the
Port. In November, 1860, he entered the Government
service, and his aptitude for business as an accountant
having attracted the attention of the Superintendent of
Telegraphs and Postmaster-General, Mr. C. Todd, he was
placed in a position wherein he made himself almost
invaluable. Upon the opportunity of the transfer of the
then Postal Accountant, Mr. Gray, to Gawler, Mr. Todd
amalgamated the two offices of Post and Telegraph
Accountant, and gave them to Mr Burrell, who speedily
proved that the confidence of his chief was admirably
bestowed. He rendered good service as accountant and
correspondence clerk in connection with the construction
of the overland telegraph. In this capacity he applied
himself to his duties then and since so closely that his
health suffered, and as he was always a man who never
spared himself when engaged in the service of others, he
found it necessary to apply for several months’ leave of
absence and take a voyage to England, which he did in
the early part of 1881. He Avas an enthusiast in musical
matters, and was for years Secretary of the Adelaide
Philharmonic Societv. He also took a great deal of
%j O


interest in the Musical Union. He was one of the finest
penmen in the colony, and justly prided himself upon his
skill in that direction. His death took place in London
October 9, 1881, and was lamented by many colonists,
especially those who had been associated with him in the
Government service.
CADELL, FRANCIS, CAPTAIN,
The son of H. E. Cadell, Esq., of Haddonshire, England;
born in 1822, and educated in Scotland and Germany. He
early evinced a love for an active life, and as midshipman
on board an East Indiaman took part in the first China
war, and was present at the siege of Canton and the
capture of several forts. At the age of twenty-two he
was raised to the rank of Commander, and in the in-
tervals between his voyages spent his time in the ship-
yards of the Tyne and Clyde, where he gained great
practical knowledge of naval architecture. He arrived in
Australia in 1818, and his name will ever be associated
with the navigation of the Murray Elver, as he first
exerted himself to place steamers on that magnificent
stream; and althongh Mr. William Eandall preceded him
in actual steam navigation, it was with a very small craft.
Captain Cadell got the promised Government bonus for
taking the first steamboat of any size up the Murray and
Darling waters. Honours of various kinds were be-
stowed on the Captain, one of the most important being
that the British Government had a gold medal struck to
commemorate his numerous exploits. The fate of Captain
Cadell is involved in mystery, and in the face of conflict-
ing and unreliable reports it is needless to speculate as to
what it may or may not have been.
CARR, HON. JOHN, J.P.,
A veteran South. Australian politician, having entered
Parliament in March, 1861, and, with the exception of a


brief interval of retirement, connected with it ever
since. Eor the first fifteen or sixteen years he was
member for Noarlunga, but at the last general elections
was returned for Onkaparinga. Mr. Carr is a native of
Conisborough, Yorkshire, England, where he was born
September 21, 1819. He received his education at Tick-
hill, Yorkshire; and arrived in the colony in 1862. He
has been in several Ministries, and was Commissioner of
Public Works in the last Colton Government, having re-
signed the office of Chairman of Committees in order to
occupy that position. His length of service entitles him
to the prefix of “ Honorable.”
CATT, HON. ALFRED,
Born December 19, 1833, at Newington, Kent, England,
and educated at Brompton. Arrived in South Australia
by the ship Posthumous in May, 1849. Elected to the
Assembly in 1879 as one of the members for the Stanley
District. Since his arrival in the colony he has been in
business at Strathalbyn and Gladstone, at which places
he is very popular. He was selected by Mr. Bray for
the office of Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigra-
tion, an appointment he still holds.
CHAMBERS, JAMES,
Born at Ponder’s End, London, September 21, 1811.
Arrived in South Australia in December, 1836, and was
one of the first persons who drove a team of bullocks
from Adelaide to Port Adelaide, marking out the track
thither as a pioneer. He was afterwards engaged in
pastoral pursuits, and for some years conjointly with his
brother assisted John McDougall Stuart, the explorer,
with the necessary funds to carry on the work of explora-
tion. He was the second mail contractor for the
Government. He died in August, 1862.


CHAMBERS, JOHN,
Born in Middlesex, England; came to South Australia
in February, 1837. He was associated with his brother
James in business, and together they share the credit of
opening up a large extent of country in the interior by
means of the explorer, Jno. McD. Stuart, whom they
assisted. He still resides near Adelaide, where he is
engaged in business pursuits.
CHEETHAMT, REV. HENRY.
This much esteemed minister, who for many years was
associated with the Congregational Church, Kensington,
and later with the church at Milang, expired in that town
September 1, 1881, in his 81st year. He was born at
Kochdale, Lancashire, England, March 5, 1801, and in
the early part of 1815 enlisted in the 51st Kegiment
Light Infantry, and was present at the battle of Waterloo,
receiving a medal for active service. He remained in the
army twelve years, and on leaving it kept a school for a
few years near Kochdale. After due preparation he
entered the ministry in 1880, and was in 1838 ordained
to the pastorate of Sunsmit, where he preached until
1848, when he left England for South Australia, and
located at the Burra, where he laboured for five years.
His next sphere of action was at Kensington, in which
place he preached for nineteen years, after which he went
to Milang, where his long and useful life was brought to
a close by an attack of bronchitis. In accordance with
his desire he was interred in the old Congregational
Cemetery, Kensington.
CLARK, JOHN HOWARD.
Few so well earned the right to he considered among
South Australian “ representative men” as John Howard
Clark, whose death at the early age of 49 years, at Port
Willunga, May 20, 1879, was heard with regret, as it left


a gap among literary men even yet unfilled. Mr. Clark
was born in Birmingham, at that period the great centre
of political influence, Jan. 15, 1830, and arrived at Ade-
laide in June, 1850. He became associated with the
Register proprietorship in 1865, and until the day of his
death, was interested in its progress and the colony of
his adoption. He had been suffering for some years
from consumption, and at times was laid aside by severe
attacks of illness which incapacitated him from work.
In the intervals, however, he undertook the active
editorial management of the firms’ three newspapers—
the Register , Observer , and Journal , besides carrying out
to a conscientious degree the obligations cast on him by
people who had learnt to regard him as their guide,
philosopher, and friend. Pew men have within the last
decade exercised an influence more widely felt, or who
have been so universally esteemed. His witty and sar-
castic contributions to the press under the nom de plume
of “ Geoffrey Crab thorn,” were widely read and much
liked. He was, indeed, a prolific writer. The author of
this work was intimately acquainted with him, and re-
members somewhat regretfully how much poor Mr.
Clark was annoyed, during those hours when he should
have had leisure, by persons who forced their way to his
presence with a variety of importunate demands on his
time and patience. But he was always accessible, and
pleased to be able to use his influence for all who deserved
it. To Mr. Clark is due in a great measure the credit
of placing on a firm footing the South Australian Insti-
tute, and the formation of the Philosophical Society, of
which he was secretary.
CLARK, JOHN,
“ Tailor and politician,” was born in the year 1818, at
Peterhead, north of Scotland, and he arrived in the


colony in 1850. Since 1856 lie had been an active member
of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, and continuously
a member of the District up to the date of his death. He
was a leading spirit in connection with the Order, and it
was principally through his exertions that the Act under
which the proceedings of the body are now conducted was
passed. Mr. Clark, however, was better known to colo-
nists as a politician and platform orator. He has always
been identified with the various Protectionist movements
that have at intervals occurred in the city. He was the
life and soul of the Political Association which existed
about twenty years ago, having for its programme the
encouragement of works in the colony and the stoppage
of immigration, and it was through that Association, and
principally by Mr. Clark’s exertions, that Judge Poucaut
was first returned to Parliament. Later on Mr. Clark
and Mr. Skelton were united as the leading spirits of a
body which had similar objects to that of the Political
Association, and up to the time of his death he was an
active member of the Colonial Industries Defence As-
sociation which now exists in the city. Mr. Clark had a
very declamatory and fiery style of oratory, and nothing
delighted him so much as to have the opportunity of at-
tacking or exposing the w r eak points in an opponent’s
address. His activity in political matters induced him
about nine years ago to contest the district of West
Adelaide against the late Mr. J. M. Solomon, Mr. P. B.
Coglin, and several other candidates ; but he did not suc-
ceed in wooing the favour of the electors. Mr. Clark’s
active spirit induced him to join the ranks of the former
Volunteer Force, and when the Duke of Edinburgh
visited the colony he held a prominent position in the
Highland Brigade. Municipal matters also had his
attention, and he occupied the position of a Councillor of
the Corporation of Adelaide during the years 1856-7,
78
eepeesentatiye men oe


1857-8, 1859-60, 1860-1. The cause of death was a
cancer, from which Mr. Clark has been suffering for a
considerable time past, and he expired at his residence,
Unley, on September 11, 1882, aged 64.
COLMAN, W., J.P.,
Brother of the Messrs. Colman, the well-known manu-
facturers, of London. He arrived in the colony by the
ship Posthumous, in the year 1849, when he settled in
North Adelaide, shortly after leaving for Balhannah,
where he took the flour mill, but went to Strathalbyn in
1850, and took the old Angas Mill, to which he soon
after added very considerably. Mr. Col man’s debut as a
public man was made soon after his arrival at Strathalbyn,
when he was elected member of the District Council, an
office he held for a number of years, and in which he
worked hard for the interests of the town and neighbour-
hood. He was one of the first to stir in the matter of
having Strathalbyn raised to a municipality, and his own
personal exertions went a very long way towards the
securing of the desired end. In 1873-4 and 1874-5 Mr.
Colman was elected to the civic chair, and this honour-
able position he held with the highest credit, the bur-
gesses re-electing him at the end of his first municipal
year for a second term. In 1867 he took a trip to the
old country, remaining nearly a year away. Up to within
the past six or eight years Mr. Colman carried out a
number of private building works, but unfortunately at
such losses that their erection involved him in pecuniary
difficulties. He was an enthusiastic rifleman and cricketer,
and in the respective local clubs held prominent positions,
On the cricket field he was a formidable opponent, and
ranked as one of the crack players of the colony, whilst
his prowess with the rifle was far-famed, and he won
several gold and silver trophies. In 1881, Mr. Colman


was unfortunately prostrated by paralysis, and from that
period to the time of his death, which took place January
19, 1882, suffered greatly.
COLTON, HON. JOHN, J.P.,
Born September 20, 1823, at Devonshire, England;
arrived in the colony by the Duchess of Northumberland
in 1839. He first entered public life as an Alderman for
Grey Ward in 1860, and was elected member of Parlia-
ment for Noarlunga in 1865. He was Commissioner of
Public Works in Mr. Strangways’ Ministry in 1868, but
retired from office and from Parliament in 1870. He was
again elected for Noarlunga in 1872, and joined Mr.
Boucaut’s Ministry as Treasurer in 1875, remaining until
June, 1876, when he formed a Ministry, which continued
in office until October, 1877. In 1874 he was elected
Mayor of Adelaide, and filled this important position to
the satisfaction of the citizens. He received from Her
Majesty the Queen the prefix of “ Honorable,” a title
which he will hold permanently. Mr. Colton is an inde-
pendent, outspoken man, and a staunch Liberal, possessed
of great administrative ability, and has also proved he
has courage to maintain opinions he believed to be right,
even in the face of strong opposition, and the risk of
losing public favour. In the commercial world the firm
of Colton & Co., of which Mr. Colton is the responsible
head, occupy a foremost place, and their business ramifi-
cations extend all over the colonies. In private life Mr.
Colton’s worth is acknowledged by a large circle of
friends ; he is an active member of the Wesleyan body,
and universally esteemed for his conscientious principles.
COOPER, SIR CHARLES,
Arrived in South Australia iu December, 1889. He is
thus mentioned in “ Bull’s Experiences of Colonial
Life”: —“A more upright and just Judge never occupied


JOHN HOWARD CLARK,
Page 76,


the highly responsible seat of judgment in this or any
other country. His conscientious dread of erring in
judgment caused him, through the invariable caution he
exercised before giving his decisions, to subject himself
on some occasions to impatient remarks from the
advocates who pleaded in the courts. He was for some
time the only Judge in all the three courts (civil,
criminal, and insolvency), and he filled this onerous
duty in an unexceptionable manner. In private life he set
a bright example as a consistent and liberal Christian.”
Sir Charles was born at Henley, England, in 1795, called
to the Bar in 1827, was on the Oxford Circuit until 1838,
shortly after which time he sailed for South Australia.
He remained in the colony till 1862, when he resigned in
consequence of ill-health, and returned to England, where
he still resides. He was knighted in 1858. The now
famous Cooper’s Creek was named after him by Sturt,
the explorer. ’Well versed in the law, he was instru-
mental in framing one or two judicious measures, among
them notably the first Insolvent Law.
COPPIN, GEORGE, M.P.,
The father of the Australian drama; arrived in Victoria
1845, and entered on the management of the Queen’s
Theatre. In 1848 Mr. Coppin came to South Australia,
and erected a theatre at Port Adelaide. He was a
favourite actor there and in this city in comedy. He
realised a fortune in this colony, but lost it in copper-
mining speculations, and was obliged to file his schedule.
In 1852 he returned to Victoria, where he was once more
successful; and in 1854 he visited England, where he
played starring engagements; and then returned to the
colonies with Mr. G. V. Brooke, whom he introduced to
the Australian public. Mr. Coppin is well and favour-
ably remembered in Adelaide, and no one has ever been
p


more popular on the colonial stage. He has now retired
from the practice of his profession, and is comfortably
settled near Melbourne, Victoria.
COTTER, THOS. YOUNG, L.S.A.,
Was a native of Ireland, and born at Bantry, near Cork,
in 1805, He was descended from a Danish family which
had settled in that neighbourhood many centuries before,
and the Danish Cotters intermarried with the natives of
the soil, and soon became as good Irishmen as the original
inhabitants. Richard Cotter, the father of the subject
of this memoir, was a purser in Lord Exmouth’s squadron,
and served in that capacity several years, receiving in
the end a well-earned pension, which was afterwards con-
tinued to his widow. On leaving school at the age of
fourteen, young Cotter went to his father, who was then
with the squadron on the West Indian Station. He
served some time as a naval cadet, and was placed in
charge of Government stores at the Depot, Bermuda, but
having decided to relinquish his idea of entering the
naval service, he proceeded to London and entered upon
a course of medical studies. After having served his
time as medical student and assistant to a surgeon in a
large practice, and having attended the lectures of some
of the most eminent men of that age in the profession,
he obtained his certificate, and commenced the practice
of his profession in London in 1832. In 1838 he was
married to the late Mrs. Cotter, who died in Port
Augusta about six years ago. In 1835 his first connection
with the affairs of South Australia began, as in December
of that year he was appointed by the Colonization Com-
missioners of South Australia as surgeon to the infant
colony. He arrived in August, 1836, by the Coromandel,
and took up his position here as Colonial Surgeon. Dr.
Cotter took much interest in every movement of the


time, and through his instrumentality the nucleus of a
public library was formed. After resignation of the
office of Colonial Surgeon he practised his profession in
Adelaide, Mount Barker, Queenstown, Robe, and Angas-
ton, and in 1864 he settled in the North, having been
appointed surgeon to the Great Northern Mining Com-
pany, whose chief operations were carried on at Nucca-
leena. In 1870, Dr. Cotter established himself at Port
Augusta, and from that period till his death was asso-
ciated with the town. He was one of the editors of the
S.A. Magazine , founder of the Adelaide Institute, member
of the Oddfellows and Foresters Societies, member of the
Adelaide Corporation 1852, the founder of the Masonic
Lodge at Port Augusta, President of the local Literary
Society and Chess Club and other kindred institutions.
But, better than all, he was a true and firm friend, a
genial companion, and to the poor and distressed a kind
and considerate benefactor. In common with all who
are mortal he had his faults, but they were more than
balanced by his many virtues. He died at Port Augusta
January 9, 1882.
CRANZ, AUGUST GEORGE,
Born in Germany in 1844, arrived in South Australia
with his parents in the ship Pauline, 1849. Received his
education under Dr. Muecke and Mr. F. Basedow, M.P.
Entered the service of the Bank of South Australia,
Gawler, in 1866, and ultimately appointed manager of
the Commercial Bank in the same town, a position he
filled at the time of his death, which occurred March 7,
1881, at the early age of 38. Mr. Cranz was an ener-
getic and painstaking man, and greatly interested in all
things calculated to benefit the place of his adoption
(Gawler), in which he resided for upwards of 16 years.
He was long connected with the Institute, as Committee


man, President, and Vice-President. Through his exer-
tions, a new grand piano vras placed in the hall of that
building free of all expense to the Committee. He did
much to cultivate the love of music, of which he was a
powerful exponent, and proved himself a skilful teacher
of juveniles in that delightful art, and in singing. He
left a widow and two children.
CUSTANCE, PROFESSOR JOHN D.
It has long been admitted, even by those who have had
no practical experience in the matter, that the growing
capabilities of South Australian soils have never been
properly developed. There has always been a tendency
on the part of our farmers to devote time and attention
to wheat culture, whilst other crops, which might have
yielded equally good results, were neglected. In this
manner the land has in some districts been thoroughly
exhausted, rendered almost valueless, and has only re-
covered a portion of its pristine vigour by remaining in
a fallow state for years. It may well be imagined that
the importance of employing the services of a thoroughly
scientific, practical, and experienced agriculturalist to
remedy this unsatisfactory state of matters should
ultimately have forced itself on the minds of the S.A.
Government. The following brief outline of the history
of Professor John D. Custance will be perused with
interest, and is given as supplied by him to the author:—
After a thoroughly practical training as a farmer and
land agent in England, he accepted the appointment of
Assistant-Professor of Agriculture, in the Royal Agricul-
tural College, Cirencester, and was soon promoted to the
honourable position of Resident Professor of Agricul-
ture. "Whilst occupying this position he was offered a
lucrative appointment by the Imperial Government of
Japan, and went lo that country as the adviser of the


Government on agricultural subjects, and Professor of
Agriculture, Koomba, near Tokio. In consequence of the
establishment of that college, and the experimental farm
in connection therewith, many valuable improvements
were introduced into the Japanese system of agriculture,
including the cultivation of many plants (before unknown
to Japanese farmers), machinery, implements, Ac. The
students, after finishing their college course, are at once
engaged in the work of teaching agriculture in the various
districts of the empire. The Emperor took great interest
in the college, attending lectures and visiting it.
Professor J. D. Custance has received many honours,
and the highest encomiums the Press can bestow. He is
a Pellow of the Chemical Society, life member of the
Eoyal Agricultural Society of England, member of the
Mineralogical Society of Great Britain and Ireland,
member of the College of Preceptors, London; and at
present is the Government Professor of Agriculture and
Superintendent of the Experimental Farm at Eoseworthy.
He is very desirous to have a college established here for
the education of students in scientific and practical
farming; and rapid progress is being made with the land,
which comprises an area of seven hundred and twenty-
eight acres.
DALY, DOMINICK DANIEL,
Son of Sir D. Daly, Knight, appointed aide-de-camp to
Sir Dominick in 1865, and surveyor under the S. A.
Government in 1866. He took part in the Northern
Territory expedition as surveyor from 1868 to 1870.
Prom 1874 to 1875 he was in the Engineer-in-Chief’s
department, when he was appointed surveyor for the
Native States in the Malayan Peninsula.
%
DARE, REV. JOSEPH, D.D.,
Was identified with the Wesleyan Methodist body since


1849, at which period he arrived in Victoria, but shortly
after went as probationer to Adelaide. His first appoint-
ment was under the Eev. D. J. Draper and T. W. Hill
in the Adelaide Circuit, on quitting which he went to
Mount Barker, where he remained three years, and then
removed to Victoria, where he took charge of the Sand-
hurst Circuit. After a lengthy stay, finding his health
failing, he took a well-earned year’s leave of absence, and
visited the Lnited States of America. He was much
liked, and received from the University of jSTew Orleans
the title of D.D. He travelled over the greater part of
Europe and the Holy Land, and returned to Victoria in
1878, when he was appointed President of the Conference.
He died at Brunswick, near Melbourne, March 28th, 1880,
leaving a wife, four daughters, and a wide circle of friends
to lament him. As a preacher he was eloquent and
effective, and much admired by all who listened to his
excellent exhortations.
DAVENPORT, SAMUEL,
Born at Shirburn, Oxfordshire, in 1818. His father came
of a branch of the Cheshire Bramkill Davenports, long
settled at Great Wigston, Leicestershire, within the
walls of which church is a monument to his memory,
with others of his predecessors. Mr. Davenport came to
South Australia in 1842, following an elder brother—
George Francis Davenport, who in 1840 took out the
Macclesfield Special Survey. He first entered public life
in 1846, having been appointed by the Governor of the
colony (Colonel Kobe) to one of the four nominee seats
in the Legislative Council. At this duty he not unfre-
quently rode from Macclesfield into Adelaide, sat through
the Council* meetings, and returned the same day —a dis-
tance of 54 miles. In the session of 1855-6, when on
the 2nd January, 1856, the Constitution Act was passed,


Mr. Davenport was a non-official member o£ tbe enlarged
Legislative Council as established under Ordinance 1851,
but in August of that year he resigned. Under the Con-
stitution Act he, in March, 1857, was elected as member
of the Legislative Council, and sat four years, during
which period he was instrumental in passing several
beneficial measures. He was again elected in March,
1861, and sat up to August, 1866. During this interval
he twice held the post of Commissioner of Public Works,
and was the first independent Minister conducting
Government business in the Legislative Council of the
Constitution Act. In a less public character Mr. Daven-
port acted for many years as a member of the Central
Eoad Board, and was one of the first Trustees of the
Savings Bank. As Commissioner for Adelaide he had
the making of the first contract for damming the Torrens
Gorge, and for conveying pipes thence to the city. Of late,
for seven years consecutively, he was elected President
of the Eoyal Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and
since its foundation —thirteen years ago —has held the
like relationship to the Chamber of Manufactures. He
has further acquired special merit for gratuitous services
to the colony at international exhibitions, including that
of London, in 1851, and downwards to those of Phila-
delphia, Sydney, and Melbourne. Irrespective of these
public duties, Mr. Davenport has led an active pioneer
bush life, has ever been fond of exploring and occupying
new country, as the records on our maps testify. He first
took up land around the Eivoli Bay District in 1815, and
subsequently has had his full share of losses which are
oft attached to the early occupation of Par Xorth country
and the devastating influence of drought. He has done
much to promote industrial pursuits adapted to the
climate of South Australia, collecting and publishing
practical knowledge affecting agriculture, the vine, olive,


sericulture, and scent manufacture, &c. Prior to his
departure to the Philadelphia Exhibition, in January,
1876, Mr. Davenport was entertained at a public banquet
at the Town Hall, Adelaide, at which the then Chief
Justice, Sir E. D. Hanson, presided. He has also since
been the recipient of a public testimonial from the
citizens of Adelaide, who are fully impressed with his
inestimable worth.
DAVIDSON, PROFESSOR,
Who has for the past eleven years been identified with
theological matters in this colony, passed from the scene
of his earthly labours in the 47th year of his age, on the
22nd July, 1881. He was born at Burntisland, near the
Birth of Forth, Scotland, in 1834, and for many years
prosecuted the study of theology and moral philosophy
at the Universities of his native land. Having gained
much celebrity as a preacher, he, at the request of the
congregation of Chalmer’s Church, Adelaide, arrived
here in June, 1870, to take charge of this pastorate, a
position he held till 1877, when he quitted it for the
Union College. On the founding of the Adelaide
University, Professor Davidson became the first Hughes
Professor of English Language and Literature, and con-
ducted classes for students in mental and moral philoso-
phy and other subjects. As a writer and lecturer, he ex-
celled, and his sermons were masterpieces of eloquence
and logic. Those who were j>orsonally acquainted with
him testify to his kindliness of heart and amiable dispo-
sition. He left a widow —the daughter of the late Hugh
Miller, the geologist—and a young family.
DAWSON, JAMES, J.P.,
Was born at Knowefauld, near Alloa, Clackmannanshire,
Scotland, in 1826. His parents were highly respected,


HON. JOHN COLTON, M.P.
Page 80.


and occupied good positions. His father was a farmer,
but the subject of our notice was apprenticed to an iron-
monger and seed merchant in the town of Alloa. After
serving his time he commenced business on his own ac-
count at the same place, and was highly successful; but
being subject to asthma, was advised to try the Australian
colonies; and he arrived in South Australia in 1863. He
went direct to Crawler, and stayed for some time; when,
as his health improved somewhat, he took a tour through
Victoria, New South Wales, and New Zealand, but finding
neither colony suited his particular complaint—asthma—
so well as this, returned to South Australia, intending to
make it his home. He went to Kapunda, and was at con-
siderable expense in sinking for water, with the idea of
starting a mill; but finding it unsuitable, took the Stock-
well mill on a four years’ lease, though he only resided
in Stockwell one year. He then built a store at Bassett
Town, and commenced business as a wheat merchant.
Three years after arrival in Gawler he built the Albion
mills at the north end of Murray-street; four years after
purchased the Greenock mill, doing a good trade there;
but business increased so rapidly at Gawler that he found
it required all his energies, so he sold the Greenock mill.
On January 14, 1877, the Albion mills w T ere burned down
—(a strange coincidence, his death occurring on the same
date exactly five years after) —and he had them entirely
rebuilt on the most improved principle. The mills are
fireproof, and the arrangements throughout are excellent
—in fact, they may correctly be termed model mills. He
was for several years a Director of the Commercial
Marine Insurance Company; for three years a Councillor,
and Mayor of the town for a short time, but resigned in
consequence of the fire at his mills, which necessitated a
large amount of extra labour on his part. He was a
member of the Institute Committee, and took great inte


rest in Institute affairs; was a Justice of the Peace, and
one of the mainstays of the Presbyterian Church. He
was also engaged in pastoral pursuits in conjunction with
Mr. J. Alexander, at Gawler Park. Por seventeen years
Mr. George Hilfers has been his managing man and
partner. Whilst he did not largely interfere with public
affairs, still in his own quiet methodical manner he was
invariably present at public meetings watching the course
of events, and nothing that was about to transpire which
would be for the benefit of the town was ever carried
through without hearing from him his opinions. What
he said always carried weight, and his good practical
common-sense has oftentimes been of great service. As
a gentleman, his upright actions, sterling character, and
honesty of purpose, yet unassuming manner, won for him
the respect of all who knew him. As a companion, he
was jovial, hearty, and free, having a large fund of
humour, and for telling in his own peculiar style Scotch
stories he had few equals. As a citizen, he was one whose
place will not easily be filled, and Gawler has lost a
valued and honoured friend. He played a large part in
the horticultural ornamentation of the town. His charity
•j
was of the kind that “his left hand knew not what his
right hand did;” he gave away in an unostentatious
manner, and the poor will sadly miss his open-hearted
bounty. He married one of the daughters of Mr. John
Murray, of Murray Vale, in 1867, by whom he had two
children (a son and daughter); but his wife died about
four years ago. His death took place at Gawler, on
January 14, 1882, in his fifty-fifth year; and his remains
were placed in the Mount Crawford Cemetery beside his
wife. A monument to his memory has recently been
erected by his numerous friends in Gawler and the
vicinity.


DIXSON, ROBERT,
Born May 16, 1843, at Sydney, New South Wales, and
educated at the University in that city. Is one of the
leading South Australian protectionists, and greatly
interested in colonial industries. He is a large employer
of labour in conjunction with the manufacture of tobacco
in Adelaide, where he has established extensive works.
Mr. Dixson is one of the representatives for Light in the
Assembly, is a thorough Liberal, and may be regarded as
a popular man.
DOWNER, HENRY E., J.P.,
Held office for about fifteen years as Stipendiary Magis-
trate and Commissioner of Insolvency, during which
period he carried out his duties to the universal satisfac-
tion of the public. He is a colleague of Mr. S. Newland
in the representation of the Encounter Bay electorate,
and is associated with his brother, Mr. J. W. Downer, in
the legal profession. The Messrs. Downer have an
extensive practice, and are regarded as among the most
prominent of Adelaide citizens and truly representative
men of South Australia.
DOWNER, HON. JOHN WILLIAM, Q.C.,
Is a native of South Australia, and a most prominent man
in his profession —law. He was horn in Adelaide, July
5, 1844, educated at St. Peter’s College, and entered
Parliament in 1878 as one of the members for Barossa.
When the Bray Ministry came into office Mr. Downer
was offered and accepted the Attorney-Generalship, a
position he was admirably fitted for, having for years
studied the intricacies of law, and having a thorough
knowledge of legal difficulties, and matters needing
reform. He is a fluent and forcible speaker, his utter-
ances characterized by ability, and he has introduced


several good measures, the most notable being those
relative to law reform. It may not be out of place to
add that Mr. Downer enjoys the confidence of his con-
stituents, and is regarded as a rising and popular man.
He took the principal part in the compiling of the South
Australian law reports for years.
DRAPER, REV. JAS. DANIEL,
A native of Hampshire, England, born in August, 1810.
Became a local preacher of the Methodist persuasion at
the age of 20, and entered the ministry in 1834. His
earliest years were spent in Wales, and at the District
Meeting held at Swansea, he was recommended by the
Conference, by whom he was received as a probationer.
He shortly after proceeded as a missionary to New South
Wales, and reached Sydney in 1885, where he endeared
himself to all who came within the sphere of his influence.
In 1846 Mr. Draper removed to Adelaide, where he
remained till 1855. During the year 1851, Mr. Draper
projected a scheme of Church extension which embraced
the erection of a number of chapels, ministers’ residences,
&c., and the people entered most heartily into this work.
Of those undertakings, the noble edifice in Pirie-street
was the chief, as well as the last. It was a great under-
taking, but was conducted to a successful issue. In
1855 Mr. Draper was appointed to Victoria, where, until
1865 he occupied the position of the “ Head of the Wes-
leyan Denomination,” though his office was really that
of bishop. He left for England, March 14th, 1865, to
recruit his health, intending to return by the steamship
London, which sailed from Plymouth on the sth January,
1866. This unfortunate vessel foundered in the Bay of
Biscay, when 220 out of 239 souls went down in her, in-
cluding Mr. and Mrs. Draper. Mr. Draper was only 55
years of age at the time of the sad catastrophe. Although


not an eloquent preacher his discourses were very effec-
tive. The people of Adelaide, in appreciation of his
sterling qualities, erected a handsome “ Draper Memorial
Church,” and it will be many years ere the remembrance
of this very worthy man will fade from the recollection
of our colonists. Of him how appropriate is the follow-
ing “In Memoriam,” on one who perished in a similar
manner: —
Brother, how may we best a tribute pay ?
Where shall thy martyr-frame be laid to sleep?
Where wilt thou wait the Eesurrection Day?
W T e give thee to the deep—the God-like deep !
’Tis in the God-like deep—fit resting-place
For one to whom earth’s pageant had no charms.
Let the great sea with infinite embrace
Clasp him as in the “everlasting arms.”
No trappings need we—no unsightly bier,
No tossing plumes to mock our secret woe ;
One broken-hearted sob, one burning tear,
Speaks more than all the pomp of empty show.
No stone need grace that sacred spot of rest;
The heavens that day by day God’s love declare,
Mirrored in ocean’s ever-changing breast,
Will trace as by his hand a tablet there !
The tender flush of dawn, the blaze of noon,
The dusk of eventide, the starlit night,
The dimpled gleamings of the lustrous moon—
All will in turn some new memorial write.
And ever and anon with sad refrain,
The plaintive waves their votive hymns will raise—
Strange undertones of almost human pain,
Swelling to bursts of joyous Easter praise.
DRUMMOND, REV. RALPH,
The first minister of the United Presbyterian Church in
South Australia, arrived by the ship Sir Charles Forbes,
June, 1839. He was educated under Dr. Lawson, of
Selkirk, Scotland, and passed a successful examination at
the Divinity Hall, Glasgow. His maiden services were
held at Crail, in Fifeshire, and were very successful. On
reaching Adelaide he commenced services in a small


chapel in Angas-street, and in the performance of his
duties to scattered members of his Church he had to take
many long and toilsome journeys on foot to the Pinnis,
Strathalbyn, and Mount Barker districts. In the year
1871, having completed the fiftieth year of his ministry,
he was, on his retiring from active service, in consequence
of failing health, presented with an address on behalf of
the Presbytery expressing cordial congratulations on his
having attained his jubilee as a minister of the gospel.
Mr. Drummond died at Mitcham, April 26, 1872, aged 80,
and his many eminent good qualities and amiable dispo-
sition will long be remembered by all who were brought
into his society, or attended his ministrations. The
Presbyterian Church this veteran founded is now presided
over by the Rev. James Lyall.
DUNN, JOHN, SEN.
Among those who have risen to opulence and prosperity
this gentleman may fairly claim a first place. He came
to South Australia a comparatively poor man in 1810,
and worked as a carpenter. He next commenced opera-
tions at Hay Yalley, where he started a mill, and after-
wards built one at Cox’s Creek, which is still working.
7 o
His first steam-mill was erected at Mount Barker in
1811, and ever since he has had a prosperous career; in
fact, the name of the firm (John Dunn & Co.) of which
he is the head, is now known not only all over the colo-
nies, but in every part of the world, as one of the most
important on this side the equator. They have eight
mills in regular work, viz., at Port Adelaide, Quorn,
Mount Barker, Bridgewater, Nairne, Port Augusta, Wil-
mington, and Port Pirie, and do an immense trade in
purchases of grain and the shipment of flour to other
countries. Mr. Dunn resides at Mount Barker, and
though his advanced age prevents his taking active part
94
REPRESENTATIVE MEN OE


in business, he still supervises the whole. Eecently, on
reaching his 80th year, his birthday was celebrated among
his employes by a jubilee, and the proceedings were of a
highly interesting character, affording palpable evidence
how much good fellowship sometimes prevails among
employer and employed in this colony. Mr. Dunn bears
the reputation of being a kind-hearted and generous old
gentleman—one who has been instrumental in doing
much good in this the land of his adoption. Well may
he congratulate himself that his industry has enabled
him to ascend the ladder of Fortune to the comfortable
position he now enjoys.
DUTTON, F. S., C.M.G.
Late Agent-General for South Australia, was a man of
undoubted ability; possessed of good commercial know-
ledge, gained mainly during five years’ residence in Brazil
and Bio Janeiro, where he was chief clerk in a mercantile
firm from the time he went there in 1833, at the age of
seventeen, till he was twenty-two or twenty-three. He
was born at Cuxhaven, in 1816; educated at Hofwyl,
near Berne, Switzerland; and acquired considerable pro-
ficiency in languages. After leaving South America he
went to New South Wales, in 1839, where he joined his
elder brothers—William Pelham and Frederick. After
some months he travelled overland to Melbourne, and
was engaged in commercial enterprises in Victoria for
two years. In 1841 Mr. Dutton went to South Australia,
to which colony Frederick Dutton had preceded him.
Four years afterwards he secured an interest in the
Kapunda copper mine, and acquired considerable means
from that mine, and other properties of a similar
character. In 1845 Mr. Dutton made a trip to England,
and made arrangements with the East India House of
Cockerall, Larpert, & Co., for working the Kapunda


copper mine; and they bought his interest in the mine.
He returned to Adelaide in 1865. He was three times in
the Ministry, viz., Commissioner of Crown Lands and
Immigration in 1857, in Mr. E. D. Hanson’s Ministry;
Commissioner of Crown Lands in 1868, and Commis-
sioner of Public Works in 1863. In the same year he
was appointed Agent-General, and discharged his
onerous duties with zeal and intelligence up to the time
of his death, which took place in January, 1877, in
London, from erysipelas. Mr. Dutton was an Associate
of the Institute of Civil Engineers, a Fellow of the
Eoyal Geographical Society, a member of the Eoyal
Institute of Great Britain, and a member of several
notable Clubs, viz., the Eeform, Pall Mall, and Gresham.
In 1849 Mr. Dutton was appointed one of the Board of
City Commissioners, and was re-elected in 1851. What-
ever matter he embarked in, he appeared to view his
duties in a conscientious and liberal spirit, throwing his
best energies into what he undertook ; and having a
determined will, he achieved success in private as well as
public work. Mr. Dutton was a gentleman of varied
attainments, a clear thinker, and had considerable literary
ability. He contributed largely to the Press at various
times, and invariably wrote upon matters tending to
affect the well-being and future prosperity of the colony.
He was succeeded in the Agent-Generalship by the Hon.
(now Sir) Arthur Blyth,
DYKE, JNO. THOMAS,
A colonist of 41 years’ standing, died August 25, 1881,
aged 66. He arrived in the colony by the Lalla Eookh
in 1840, and formerly kept the Freemasons’ and Eoyal
Admiral Hotels, but for the last twenty-two years was in
the service of the telegraph department. For twelve
years he held the position of telegraph stationmaster at


SAMUEL DAVENPORT.
Page 86.


Victor Harbor. Mr. Dyke was one of the founders of
the Druids’ Lodge and also a prominent Ereemason,
Forester, and Oddfellow.
EGGRES, WILLIAM,
A well-known South Australian journalist, was born at
Brunswick, Hanover, in 1815. His father was a medical
practitioner of some repute, and was enabled to give him a
University education. Shortly after quitting scholastic
pursuits he went to London, where he was engaged in the
establishment of Messrs. Clowes, Gilbert, and Eivington.
He eventually came to Adelaide in 1848, and was employed
in the mechanical department of the Register and Ob-
server, remaining there till he started the Australische
Deutsche Zeitung , the first German newspaper in the
colony. He subsequently retired from this position, but
continued to interest himself in matters calculated to
benefit his German fellow-colonists. He was a voluminous
contributor to the colonial and English Press, and his
writings bore the stamp of originality and genius. He
was greatly esteemed by all who knew him for his
honourable and genuine character. His death, caused by
an attack of paralysis, took place January 30, 1882, in
his 66th year.
ELCUM, REV. C. C., M.A.,
Is o£ English parentage, and was educated at the Sydney
Sussex College, Cambridge. He commenced his clerical
career as curate of Sopley, Hants, and afterwards held a
similar position in conjunction with the Church at Monks
Eisborough, Bucks. He was ordained a deacon in 1873,
and a priest in 1871, by the Bishop of Winchester. He
left England for South Australia in November, 1878, per
s.s. Lusitania, and arrived in Adelaide January 16, 1879,
where he officiated as Bishop’s Domestic Chaplain at St.
Peter’s Cathedral, and Missionary Chaplain in connec-
u


tion with the Church of England body. Grood results
attended his ministrations in town and country, especi-
ally the latter, where he was much liked by a wide circle
of friends. Few preachers in this colony were more
popular ; forcible in argument, gifted with fluent delivery
and plain in doctrine, his actions and private life were
sterling examples of the genuineness of his professions.
Important matters of a private nature called him to Eng-
land in the latter part of 1881, hence he was reluctantly
compelled to relinquish a work the interests of which he
had so closely at heart.
ELDER, SIR THOMAS,
Born at Kirkcaldy, Scotland. For some time engaged in
mercantile pursuits. Arrived in South Australia in 1854,
as partner in the firm of A. L. Elder & Co., of which he
is now the head. He was very successful in his business
undertakings, and by perseverance and upright conduct
amassed a competency. To Sir Thomas Elder our colonists
are indebted for the opening up of many parts of the
country by exploration parties, fitted out at his expense,
and Major Warburton’s expedition and others of a like
character are doubtless familiar to our readers. He was
instrumental in starting the Wallaroo and Moonta Mines,
in the introduction of 121 camels for exploratory purposes
in 1866, and in bringing our latent water resources to
light by artesian wells. A donation of £20,000 to the
Adelaide University and large sums to prominent charities
are notable instances of his liberality, and many private
acts of generosity to the needy and deserving might also
be recorded. He was elected member of the Legislative
Council in 1869, occupying the position with credit to
himself and the colony at large till 1878, when he
resigned and went as Honorary Commissioner for South
Australia to the Paris Exhibition. In this year he


received the honour of knighthood, and it is certain a
title never fell on one more deserving of it. Sir Thomas
Elder is largely interested in the breeding of first-class
stock, has imported some splendid horses from England,
44 Gang Forward,” one of the noblest of its kind, being
valued at over 1,000 guineas. Many of his well-known
racers have won prizes on colonial courses, where they
are mostly favourites. During the present year Sir
Thomas Elder has presented a rotunda or band stand to
the Adelaide Corporation for erection on the banks of
the Torrens Lake. This gift was the more acceptable, as
it met a want which would otherwise have had to be
provided for at Corporation expense. Sir Thomas Elder
is a strong supporter of manly sports, and particularly
encouraged yachting. He holds the post of Commodore
of the Glenelg Yacht Club.
ELDER, WILLIAM,
The eldest son of Mr. Geo. Elder, of Kirkcaldy, and
brother of Sir Thomas Elder and Mr. A. L. Elder. He
came to South Australia in 1836 as commander of the
ship Malcolm, and was until the year 1851 a member of
the firm of Elder & Co., now known as Elder, Smith, and
Co., when he severed his connection with the firm, and
returned to Scotland. In consequence of ill-health,
acting on the advice of his physician he went to Cannes,
where he died, in April, 1882, aged seventy-eight years.
ELDER, ALEX. LANG,
Brother of the above, and founder of the mercantile
house of Elder & Co. Born at Kirkcaldy, Scotland, April,
1815; arrived in Adelaide, S.A., in 1839. Elected one of
the first representatives under the new Constitution Act,
1856. Returned to England, and at present carries on an
extensive business in London.


EYRE, EDWARD JOHN,
Born August, 1815, in Yorkshire. Left England for
Yew South Wales in 1833, and commenced life in that
colony as a sheepfarmer on the Lower Murray. He was
also appointed to the Commission of Peace, and was Pro-
tector of Aborigines. In 1840, he turned his attention
to exploration, and, cheered by the hearty support of
G-overnor Gawler and South Australians generally, after
a long and perilous journey he succeeded in crossing the
coast line from Adelaide to Western Australia. The
narrative of that journey stamps Eyre as a man possessed
of wonderful fortitude and perseverance, both of which
traits of his character were then tried to their utmost.
Hunger, thirst, and fatigue were not the greatest of the
hardships encountered by that intrepid explorer, whose
escape from the death which befell others of his com-
panions was most marvellous. History has on record no
more direful tale of suffering than that endured by
Eyre and his party, and I can but regret that want of
space alone prevents the reproduction in full of its de-
tails. Eyre returned to England in 1845, and was shortly
after appointed Lieut.-Governor of Yew Zealand, a posi-
tion he occupied for six years. In 1854 he was appointed
Governor of St. Vincent, and in 1862 Governor of
Jamaica. During his administration a dangerous insur-
rection occurred, and but for the decisive steps he took
to quell it, would have resulted in a great loss of life.
Opponents, however, were not wanting to find fault with
his conduct, and he was, in consequence of their repre-
sentations, recalled by the Government. After his
return to England he was the victim of much persecu-
tion, and for some years subjected to legal proceedings.
It seems hard that one who did so much to benefit
society should towards the close of his life suffer from
the annoyances referred to.


Take, Eev. Archdeacon George Henry, 8.A., M.A.,
Is a native of England, and was educated at Pembroke
College, Cambridge, where be took bis B.A. degree in
1843. He was ordained a deacon by tbe Bisbop of Ely
in 1844, and a priest by tbe Bisbop of Exeter in 1845.
Obtained bis M.A. degree in 1853. He arrived in tbe
colony in 1854, in wbicb year he was appointed bead
master of St. Peter’s Collegiate School, where be
remained until July 21, 1879. His other appointments
date as follows: —Canon of tbe Cathedral Church of
Adelaide in 1857, Archdeacon of Missionary Districts in
tbe Diocese of Adelaide, and Warden of the Senate of
tbe University of Adelaide, in 1880. On bis retirement
from the position of bead master of St. Peter’s College
be was presented with a gold casket full of sovereigns by
tbe members of the St. Peter’s Collegiate Association as
a token of their esteem for bis numerous excellencies.
Archdeacon Parr is universally respected by tbe com-
munity in which be has so long and zealously laboured,
and although at present visiting England, cherishes the
highest regard for his adopted land—South Australia.
FARRELL, VERY REV. JAMES, M.A.,
The second Colonial Chaplain, and first Incumbent and
Dean of St. John’s Church, Adelaide. He was born in
Ireland, November 26th, 1803, and educated at Trinity
College, Dublin, where he took an M.A. degree. After
completing his studies, he went to Paris in 1826, and re-
sided there for some time as a private gentleman. He
arrived in the colony by the Lysander, from London,
September 6, 1840, and shared the ministrations of the
Eev. C. B. Howard, at Trinity Church. From 1843 to
1846 he had the sole charge of the Episcopal communion
in Adelaide, when he was relieved by the arrival of Arch-
deacon Woodcock and the Eev. James Pollitt. At that


period the Protestant Episcopal communion amounted to
nearly 12,000. On Bishop Short’s arrival in Adelaide,
December 29, 1847, the Eev. ,Tas. Earrell was created
Dean of Trinity Church, which then constituted the
Cathedral of the Diocese. On November 12, 1845, he
married Mrs. Howard, relict of the Eev. C. B. Howard,
and to whom, with her three daughters, he was warmly
attached until the end of his life. It may not he out of
place here to remark that one of these ladies is now Mrs.
Marryat, the wife of the Venerable Archdeacon Marryat.
He visited England in 1854, and prior to departure re-
ceived two farewell addresses from the laity and his
fellow clergy. He journeyed by the overland route, and
saw the Holy Land, Jerusalem, and the Crimea. In 1856
he returned to South Australia, where he was welcomed
by all classes; and remained an active and zealous worker
in the cause of religion until December 29, 1868, when
he left for England with a view of recruiting his health.
In May of the following year the welcome tidings were
received by the colonists that he was progressing favour-
ably, but the mail-ship of the next month brought the sad
intelligence of his death at Malvern, England, April 26,
1869. Dean Earrell was in his sixty-sixth year, and by
his decease the last relic of Church Establishment in
South Australia became extinct. In addition to various
benevolent bequests, he left four scholarships of fifty
pounds each to the Collegiate School of St. Peter. Eew
ministers were more highly esteemed, or more universally
beloved, and when the news of his death arrived most of
the churches in the metropolis were draped in black,
whilst out of respect to his sterling character as a man
and a Christian a memorial-window has since been placed
in Trinity Church. Though not an orator, he possessed
great common-sense, remarkable shrewdness, and know-
ledge of the world; and as one of the pioneers of this


the land of his adoption he helped to train the thoughts
and tastes of the little band of settlers whom he found
living in tents, into a prosperous Church-loving indepen-
dent society. As one of the Governors of the S.A.
Institute, he was always at his post; and besides his
duties as Colonial Chaplain, three institutions engaged
his interest, viz., Trinity Sunday-school, Collegiate
School, and Synod; and he was very active in promoting
the cause of education and morality. The Rev. 31. Reid
was appointed his successor July 9, 1869.
FERGUSSON, MAJOR ADAM,
Is Captain of the Prince Consort’s Own (Rifle Brigade)
and local Major and Deputy-Assistant Adjutant-General
of the Local Rorces, South Australia. He is the third
son of the late Sir Charles Dairymple Rergusson, Bart.,
by Helen, second daughter of the Right Honourable
David Boyle and Lord Justice-General of Scotland. He
was born 7th May, 1845, and educated at the Edinburgh
Academy and Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Passed
first for a direct commission in the army in 1865, obtain-
ing 9,045 marks, or nearly 3,000 more than the second
on the list. Appointed to the Rifle Brigade 1865 ; served
in India 1866-7 ; and in South Australia as Private Secre-
tary and Clerk of Executive Council 1870-3. Passed
Staff College 1878 ; served on the staff of the Intelligence
Branch of the Horse Guards 1879 ; Garrison Instructor
Korth Britain 1879-80. Major Rergusson is held in high
esteem not only by those intimately associated with him,
but colonists generally. He will shortly leave the
colony, and when he does so will carry with him the
abiding regards of South Australians. He is a strong
advocate for the reading of the Bible in public schools,
and thoroughly conscientious in his opinions on religious
as well as other matters. He has delivered many excel


lent lectures on popular subjects, all of a more or less
elevating tendency, and exhibiting striking evidences of
true genius. That on “ Lord Beaconsfield,” which was
delivered at the Town Hall, Adelaide, on August 18,
1881, was considered by those who heard it vastly
superior to anything of the kind with which South Aus-
tralia had previously been treated. During 1881 Major
Pergusson was commissioned to visit India with a view to
making arrangements for the introduction of coolie
labour into the Northern Territory. He fulfilled his
mission satisfactorily, and in so short a period as to
evoke general surprise, whilst the efficient manner in
which he carried out the desires of the Government was
to them particularly gratifying.
FINNIS, HON. LIEUT.-COLONEL BOYLE TRAVERS,
Born at sea, August 18, 1807, and educated in England,
where he came early to the front by receiving an ap-
pointment as ensign in the 56th Horse Guards in 1825,
and being promoted to a Lieutenancy in the same regi-
ment in 1827. He sold his commission in 1835, and came
to South Australia in the same year. He was appointed
Deputy Surveyor-General in 1840 and 1843, and also
gazetted as Commissioner of Police and Police Magis-
trate. In 1846 he received the appointment of Colonial
Treasurer and Registrar-General; and in 1848 was
Colonial Secretary and member of the Executive and
Legislative Councils, and in connection with the latter
he carried the new Parliament Bill in 1853. He was
shortly after at the head of the Ministry, and instru-
mental in passing the Waterworks Act, and the Gawler
Railway Act. He raised the volunteer body known as
“The Adelaide Marksmen,” consisting of 2,000 men, and
was also Lieut.-Colonel of the Adelaide Volunteers. He
was Administrator of Government from December 20,


HENRY E. DOWNER. J.P.
Page 91.


1854, to June 8, 1855. Appointed Government Resident
at the Northern Territory, April, 1864, and dispatched
thither with an expedition to form a new settlement. In
consequence of his having large public experience, and
being an old colonist and connected with the Parliament,
it was thought he was well suited to the position, but —
whether from want of tact and judgment on his part it
is impossible to say —the expedition was not successful,
lie selected a site for the new town at Escape Cliffs,
which was evidently unsuitable, and some of his party,
as described elsewhere (vide J. P. Stow), left him and
made the return voyage partly in a boat called the
Eorlorn Hope. Lieut.-Colonel Einnis was an intimate
friend of Colonel Light, and a surveyor by profession.
He was recalled by the Government in 1868, and in the
following year Mr. G. W. Goyder, the Surveyor-General,
went out with a survey party, and accomplished the task
of selecting the site of Port Darwin (of which Captain
Douglas was the first Government Resident). In May,
1874, Mr. Einnis returned to Adelaide, where he still
resides, as active as ever, and with a memory unimpaired
by time as to dates and facts relative to the land in which
he has spent so many years. In 1866 he received un-
equivocal marks of his Sovereign’s favour by being
honoured with the prefix of “ Honourable” to his name.
He was appointed member of the Eorest Board in 1875,
and resigned in 1881.
FISHER, SIR JAMES HURTLE,
May be considered one of the pioneers of South Australia,
having been connected with the colony from its founda-
tion. He was appointed Resident Commissioner of Crown
Lands and of the Commissariat by the British Govern-
ment in 1836, sailed from England with Captain Hind-
marsh in the ship Buffalo, and was among those present


who stood round the veteran captain when he proclaimed
the colony, and read his commission as its first ruler.
The office held by Sir James (then Mr.) Eisher was
abolished when Colonel Gawler arrived, and he shortly
afterwards commenced the practice of his profession as a
barrister, continuing for many years the successful leader
of the Bar, till the present Chief Justice and Mr. Justice
Gwynne attained their position as counsel and kept it
till raised to the Bench. About 1860 he retired from
practice, and devoted his attention to legislative matters.
He was conservative in politics, but highly consistent and
kind even to opponents, and very popular with all classes.
He entered the Legislature as a nominee, and was
unanimously chosen by the House as Speaker. At the
first election under the Constitution he was returned as
member of the Upper House, and elected by that body as
their President, which position he held for eight years,
when on his retiring by rotation from the Council, he did
not offer himself for re-election. Sir James was the first
Mayor of the Adelaide Corporation elected in 1810, and
was five times re-elected. During the rule of Sir E.
Mac Donnell, in 1860, he received the honour of knight-
hood from the Queen. He was a lover and patron of
every description of sports, and a warm supporter of
them. Those acquainted with him intimately state that
he was an English gentleman of the old school, possessed
of ready wit, courteous, and winning in manner, and
equally at home on the hustings, in the drawing-room, or
presiding at a public dinner. His death took place at
his residence in Adelaide, January 28, 1875, in his 85th
year. He left four sons and three daughters, one of
whom is Lady Morphett, and the sons are respected
useful colonists.


FLETCHER, THE REV. WILLIAM ROBY, M.A.,
Minister of* the Stow Memorial Congregational Church,
and acting Hughes Professor of English and Philosophy
in the Adelaide University, was born in Manchester,
April 6, 1833. His father was the Eev. Eichard Eletcher,
a well-known Congregational minister of that city, who
subsequently removed to Melbourne, where he died in
1861. Mr. Eletcher was educated at Tilcoste’s School,
in Yorkshire. In the year 1819 he was entered as a
student of the University of Bonn, where he attended
the lectures of Professors Eitschl, Eitter, and Delius.
On his return from Germany, after passing two semestres
there, he became a student of the Lancashire Independent
College. Owen’s College, Manchester, which has since
developed into the Victoria University, was then recently
founded, and Mr. Eletcher was one of its first students
when the late Professor A. J. Scott was the principal.
In 1851 Mr. Eletcher matriculated at the London Uni-
versity ; in 1853 he took the B.A. degree ; the following
year he obtained the London University prize for the
“ Scripture examination in 1856 he went in for the
M.A. degree, div. 111., and obtained the gold medal.
Shortly afterwards he joined his family in Victoria, and
after the exercise of his calling as a minister, first as an
assistant to his father in St. Kilda, and then at Sand-
hurst, removed to Eichmond in 1866, and was appointed
one of the Professors of the Congregational College of
Victoria. In 1871 he went on a tour round the world,
visiting America, England, the Continent, and the Holy
Land. In 1876 he was invited to become the pastor of
the Stow Memorial Church in this city, and arrived here
with his familv on March 2. In 1878 he was elected a
member of the L T niversity Council, and when, in 1879,
the late Professor Davidson was laid aside by temporary
illness, he was asked to undertake the duties of his chair.


He lias frequently assisted in tlie wort of the University
as an examiner, and when, in 1880, Professor Davidson
suddenly died Mr. Uletcher was requested to fill the
vacant chair till the end of the year. This appointment
w r as subsequently extended to embrace the current year,
1882. As a preacher Mr. Fletcher is eloquent, and com-
bines therewith an earnestness which shows his heart is
in the work he has undertaken. He is a theologian of
no mean repute, and the training he has received enables
him to thoroughly compass every subject, no matter
how difficult or obtuse.
FLINDERS, MATTHEW,
Born in Lincolnshire, March 16, 1771. The discoveries
made by him on the South Australian coast well warrant
his name being added to our representative men. The
first mention we have of him is in 1790, when he accom-
panied Captain Bligh in a voyage to the South Pacific in
the Providence. In 1795 he was a midshipman on board
the Reliance, which arrived that year at Sydney, N.S.W.
With a companion named Bass (from whom Bass’ Straits
are named), a surgeon (to whom he was much attached),
actuated by a love for adventure he set out to explore the
coast of New South Wales; and notwithstanding his
slender equipment, and the perils himself and comrade
encountered, was very successful, and materially aided
the geographical knowledge of that period. From Sydney
he went to Norfolk Island and Furneaux Island, and
made surveys of many islands and straits in the vicinity
of Van Dieman’s Land, which he sailed round in 1798.
Till then Bass had been his inseparable companion, but
after returning to Sydney, Bass, having joined in a
smuggling speculation for the introduction of contraband
goods into South America, was with his comrades captured
by the Spaniards and sent to the silver mines. He was seen


no more alive, and liis fate is involved in mystery. The
charts made by Flinders were found so reliable that on his
arrival in England in 1800 they were published by the
British Government, and he was placed at the head of an
expedition which they dispatched to make a thorough
survey of the Australian coasts. The ship he commanded
was called the Investigator, and as England and France
were then at war, a passport was given him by the French
Government, so that he might not be molested by their
men-of-war. The researches of Flinders during this ex-
pedition resulted in many interesting and valuable dis-
coveries, and among them those on our coast of Kangaroo
Island and Spencer’s Gulf. Lady Franklin visited South
Australia in the Abeona, from Hobart Town, and landed
at Port Lincoln, where she laid the foundation-stone of a
monument to Flinders.* This monument was completed
by Mr. Kellett, contractor, Adelaide. Whilst Flinders
was busy adding to geographical knowledge of Australia
in one direction, a Captain Baudin, who had gone out
under the auspices of the French Government, got hold
of Flinders’ charts, sailed into the same bays and inlets
he had done, called them by French names, and declared
himself their discoverer! Baudin’s treatment of Flinders
is now a matter of history, and would occuppy too much
space to detail fully; suffice it that Flinders, having
landed at the Mauritius, when that island belonged to
France, was imprisoned by the Governor, and his charts
and journals taken from him. Just about this time
Baudin called at the Mauritius and was allowed by the
Governor to copy Flinders’ charts, and having got a
quantity of new and useful information, went to France,
published a book of his discoveries, and took all the
credit of discoveries to which he was not entitled.
*The Flinders’ monument is still to be seen at Port Lincoln. Its
site is on Stamford Hill.


Naturally, knowing nothing of Flinders, they believed
Bandin’s assertions, and the poor exile spent seven weary
years in captivity. On his release he went to England,
where the truth was revealed to him, and he found he had
been forestalled by a mere adventurer. For years he
laboured indefatigably to write the history of his disco-
veries. The work took six years to compose, and when
it was done he died on the very eve of its publication,
July 14, 1814. The name of Baudin may be honoured in
France, but that of Flinders will live in the hearts of
Australians for all time. It is gratifying to record that
the Governments of New South Wales and Victoria in
1852 granted a pension of £2OO per annum to his
daughter, his sole surviving relative.
FORREST, JOHN, F.R.G.S.,
Deputy Surveyor-General of Western Australia. From
1870 he has been the leader of several exploratory expedi-
tions, all of which have been more or less eminently
successful. The most notable of these were that in 1870
from Perth to Adelaide, and in 1874 from Champion Bay
to Port Darwin. Mr. Forrest was awarded the gold
medal of the Boyal Geographical Society in 1876, with a
grant of 5,000 acres of land as a reward for the valuable
services he had rendered. In November, 1874, during
Mr. Forrest’s visit to South Australia, a pleasing duty
devolved on him, viz., the performance of the ceremonial
of laying the foundation-stone of the McKinlay monu-
ment, at Gawler. The work of this monument was com-
pleted in September, 1875, the cost amounting to £650,
and Mr. Forrest w r as among the most liberal donors to
the fund. Those who were present on his arrival with
the exploring party at Adelaide on November 3, 1874,
will not speedily forget his reception by the public, the


general procession witnessed by 20,000 spectators, and
the banquet in his honour afterwards at the Town Hall.
FORREST, ALEXANDER, EXPLORER,
Associated with his brother John in the work of Austra-
lasian exploration, and has done good service to South
Australia. His last expedition was from Perth, AV.A., to
Port Darwin, N.T. The party left Perth in January,
1879, and proceeded about 150 miles of the course
travelled by Major Warburtou. Notwithstanding the
hardships and difficulties encountered, including the
hostility of the aborigines, Eorrest and his men reached
their destination safely. They were out nine months,
and the result of their labour is shown in the knowledge
O
we now possess of over twenty millions of acres of new 7
pastoral country discovered by them, and towards which
already pioneer settlers are hasting with their flocks and
herds.
FOWLER, DAVID,
One of South Australia’s successful merchants, wffio by
perseverance, industry, and integrity acquired a com-
petency. He was born near Anstruther, in 1826, edu-
cated in his native town; arrived in Adelaide in 1852, and
started a retail grocery business in the same year. The
present firm of D. & J. Powder, of which the deceased
gentleman was the senior partner, is wddely known, and
its commercial relationships extend all over the colonies.
It is now one of the largest wdiolesale grocery and in-
denting houses in South Australia. Mr. Powder was one
of the founders of the Baptist Church in Adelaide, and
contributed largely to its support. He was of liberal
principles, advocated free-trade, but took no very active
part in public matters. He quitted Adelaide for Eng-
land in 1873 to superintend the London branch of the
111
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


firm, and resided at Norwood, near London, till the time
of his death, which occurred November 11, 1881.
FRANCIS, GEORGE W., F.H.S.,
First Director of the Adelaide Botanic Garden. Born
in England in 1799, and arrived in the colony by the
Louisa Baillie with his wife and children September 2,
1819. Soon after his arrival he took the old Botanic
Garden north of the Torrens on a lease, and was subse-
quently appointed to the Directorship, an office he held
up to his decease. Mr. Francis was the author of several
works, an experienced botanist, and amusing lecturer,
and his affability and cheerful deportment endeared him
to all who knew him. He died of dropsy August 9,1865,
aged 66 years, and left a wife and ten children. It was
at one time thought that his widow would receive some
small pension from the Government, but such has not
been the case. It is not too late now, however, to per-
form an act of justice, and I trust the declining days of
Mrs. Francis will be cheered by some substantial recog-
nition of the valuable services her husband rendered to
the Government.
FROME, CAPTAIN,
Acting Surveyor-General under Governor Gawler, after
Sir G. Kingston. His commission bore date March 9,
1836, three months after which he arrived in the colony
with a party of Sappers and Miners as a staff of sur-
veyors. Captain Frome belonged to the Koyal Engineers,
and was a thoroughly practical man. Under his super-
vision the surveys were rapidly pushed forward, though
some fault was found by the settlers on the score of their
inaccuracy. Captain Frome was an energetic gentle-
manly man, and much liked. He filled the office also of
Engineer-in-Chief efficiently. The chief works under-


SIR THOMAS ELDER.
Page 98.


taken by him were two bridges over tbe Torrens within
city bounds, but which were carried away by high floods.
FIELD, LIEUT., R.N.,
One of the Survey staff under Colonel Light, with whom
he arrived in South Australia in 1836. Took an active
part in Major O’Halloran’s first expedition against the
Eufus blacks for outrages committed in April, 1811, and
also led a party of volunteers at a later date (May, 1811,)
on a similar expedition against the aborigines, who were
then blood-thirsty and treacherous. They were with
difficulty subdued. Lieut. Field was slightly wounded
by a spear in the fray, and his horse killed under him.
GAWLER, HENRY,
Born near Derby, in 1827; educated at Rugby, and at
King’s College, London ; arrived in Adelaide in 1838 with
his father, Colonel Crawler, the second Governor of South
Australia. He returned soon after to England, studied
law, was called to the Bar in 1852, and returned to South
Australia in 1858. Mr. Torrens’s land scheme was then
just initiated, and Mr. Crawler was appointed as a solicitor
under the famous Torrens’ Act. He gave great satisfac-
tion, and still holds the position with credit. Though
nnelected as member of the Legislature, he (under certain
provisions of the Act) has on three occasions held the
office of Attorney-General. In 1870 the New Zealand
Government selected him to introduce the Torrens’
system into that colony, and when his labours were
brought to a close they expressed in a marked degree
their satisfaction at the manner in which he had performed
them. Mr. Gawler is regarded as an authority on the
theory and practice of the South Australian Real Pro_
perty Act, and his reports thereon have had the effect of
simplifying much which at one period appeared abstruse
and difficult.
ii


Geoghegan, Eev. Patrick Bonayenture, D.D.,
Born at Dublin, Ireland, in 1811, educated at Edgeworth,
and at Lisbon, entered the Eranciscan order at Coimbra,
in which he was ordained a priest. First officiated in
Dublin. He was the first resident priest at Port Phillip,
where he arrived in 1889, and was, on the appointment of
Archbishop Goold to that see, made Vicar-General. On
the death of Bishop Murphy he was appointed to the
vacancy in Adelaide, and entered on his duties November
Ist, 1859. Though hardly as popular as his predecessor,
he was nevertheless universally respected. He left the
colony for his native land after a residence in it of about
five years. His death took place at Kingston, near
Dublin, in May, 1865.
GILBERT, JOSEPH,
One of the pioneer settlers of the Barossa district, in
which he resided for upwards of forty years. He paid
great attention to sheep breeding, and w r ool of his sheep
long occupied a leading position in the English market.
Some years ago Mr. Gilbert was the owner of a large
racing stud, and his horses were frequently successful as
winners on the Old Adelaide and Thebarton courses. He
was also a wine-grower of great repute, and his wines
were in great demand by the public. His estate at
Pewsey Vale, near Angaston, is one of the finest in the
colony, and there he was very successful in acclimatizing
English deer and other animals.
GILES, ERNEST,
One of the most noted of explorers. He was born at
Bristol, educated in London, England, and arrived in
Adelaide in 1850. In 1852 he accompanied his parents
to Victoria, where he held the office of clerk in the Mel-
bourne Post Office. He retained this position for about


two years, when he resigned and went to Queensland,
where his endeavours in the cause of exploration were
crowned with success. From 1872 he has been associated
with many expeditions, having for their object the open-
ing up of new country, and there is little doubt a great
deal of information has been gained relative to the once
unknown interior through his efforts. His most notice-
able feat was the crossing of the Continent from Queens-
land to Western Australia, and the return journey. In
this he, with his party, encountered serious privations,
but accomplished the undertaking in a manner which
earned universal approbation. Mr. Giles is still, as
heretofore, interested in the work of exploration, and is
always ready to give his services in furthering its objects
by every means in his power.
GILLES, OSMOND,
Born in 1797 in England. In his youth he travelled exten-
sively on the Continent, and visited Germany, France,
and the Peninsula. He finally embarked in the mercan-
tile profession in Hamburg, and remained there fourteen
years. Though not directly associated with the South
Australian Company, he took an active part in preliminary
arrangements which preceded its formation, and arrived
in the colony in December, 1836, being present on the
memorable 28th of that month when the proclamation of
South Australia as one of the dependencies of Great
Britain was read by Captain Hindmarsh. He was the
first Colonial Treasurer, and held office for two years,
when he retired into private life, and never afterwards
wholly emerged from it. He invested a large amount of
capital in the new city, initiated many industrial enter-
prises, and was one of the largest purchasers of land in
town and country. Some of the streets of Adelaide are
named after him, either by his Christian or surname, thus


indicating that he held no small number of the original
town acres. The Glen Osmond silver-lead mines, about
four miles south-east from Adelaide, were opened on his
property, and leased on royalty by English capitalists,
under the superintendence of Mr. Lewis Gilles, his
relative.* He was one of the subscribers to the Associa-
tion authorised to take up the special survey on Mount
Barker, Yorke’s Peninsula, and did good service to the
colony generally by introducing Saxony and Merino
sheep, his experience on the Continent being very valuable
to the colonists in connection with sheep-farming. One
of the most notable acts in his career was his association
with the Eev. C. B. Howard in the erection of Trinity
Church, and his paying off the greater part of the
liabilities incurred for its building. Mr. Gilles was
highly benevolent, and gave many sites eligible for
Church purposes to various denominations. He was also
warmly attached to the German fraternity, as the German
Hospital and similar charities testify, and the German
Eifle Club always held their meetings on his grounds.
He died at Glen Osmond September 2d, 1876, aged 79
years, and of him it may truly be said, he was in his day
and generation one of the most useful of South Australian
colonists.
GILLES, WILLIAM,
Born at Great Staughton, Huntingdonshire, December
27, 1791, died in Adelaide, 1861, aged 70. Appointed
under the South Australian Company in 1836, and arrived
at Kangaroo Island in 1837 by the barque Hartley. His
advent made a large addition to the population of the
infant settlement, as he brought his wife and eleven
*Note.— From this mine several tons of silver-lead ore were
obtained, and there is little doubt, now that a stimulus has been
given to mining operations in South Australia, that a mine so prolific
as this will not be long permitted to remain idle.


children with him. He was shortly after appointed
Stipendiary Magistrate by Governor Hindmarsh, and ulti-
mately succeeded Mr. McLaren as manager of the S.A.
Company’s affairs, holding the office very creditably for
many years. In 1851 he was returned member for Yatala,
and was instrumental in framing the new Constitution
Act, by the passing of which universal suffrage and other
benefits were conferred on society. He was connected
with the Congregationalists, and a useful lay preacher.
State aid to religion found in him a bitter opponent, as
did many other schemes too popular with those who had
not the welfare of the colony at heart. Eminently
respected and admired for his sterling worth, he passed
away full of years and honours, leaving numberless
descendents to “ keep his memory green.”
GLYDE, HON. LAVINGTON, J.P.,
Born at Exeter, England, in 1825, and educated in his
native city and in London. Arrived in Adelaide in 1817,
elected to Parliament as member for East Torrens in
1857, and now represents the Victoria electorate with
Mr. G. C. Hawker. Appointed Treasurer in the Bray
administration, which office he now holds. Mr. Glyde is
an energetic and popular legislator, and has in his time
done good service to the State. He exhibits a great deal
of originality in his statesmanship, and is interested in
all that concerns the welfare of South Australia. He is
also a clever, caustic writer.
GORDON, INSPECTOR,
One of the most energetic officers in the Adelaide Police
Eorce in 1817. He was gentlemanly and affable, well
connected by birth, and universally esteemed. Prior to
his arrival in the colony he held the position of non-
commissioned officer in the Indian Army, and saw active


service in the East. His death took place from consump-
tion in 1819, and he was buried with military honours,
and a handsome monument erected to his memory shortly
after by those members of the police force who had been
associated with him.
GOSSE, WILLIAM CHRISTIE,
Born at Hoddesdon, Herts, 1812; arrived in Adelaide
with his father, Dr. Gosse, in 1850; died August 12,
1881. He was educated by the late Mr. J. L. Young, and
on leaving his scholastic studies, in 1859, was enrolled
cadet on the Surveyor-General’s staff for a trigonome-
trical survey at the Ear North. His ability and intelli-
gence caused him to be selected as leader of an exploring
expedition to the central part of the continent. In April,
1873, the party set out, and after enduring many priva-
tions returned to Adelaide in December of the same year.
The results of the trip were satisfactory, practical infor-
mation being obtained relative to upwards of 60,000
miles of hitherto unknown country, whilst the now
famous “Ayers’ Eock” —an immense mass of honey-
combed granite about two miles long by a mile in width,
rising about 1,100 feet above the surrounding country
(lat. 25° 21' 28 7 S., long. 131° 4/ 30 7 E.) —was discovered.
He was appointed Deputy Surveyor-General in 1875, and
held the office satisfactorily till the time of his death,
which occurred at the early age of thirty-nine. He was
greatly respected, not only by the members of the de-
partment with which he was associated, but by the public
generally.
GOSSE, GEOTGE WOODRUFFE,
Surveyor-General of the colony —a position he has credit-
ably filled for many years. His appointment to the public
service dates back to June, 1851, when he was employed


in the Colonial Engineer’s Office. His talents and energy-
secured him rapid promotion, and he was in 1853 appoin-
ted Chief Clerk in the Lands Office, and in 1848 Deputy-
Surveyor- General. On the retirement of Colonel Eree-
ling, in 1861, the vacancy of Surveyor-General was
offered and accepted by him. Mr. Goyder has been a
most useful man in his department, and to him is due the
credit of adding greatly to the knowledge we now possess
of our waste lands. He has on several occasions been
out with exploring parties, and the surveyors who laid
out the sections in the Northern Territory were under
his guidance and control. He still resides in South
Australia, where he enjoys the confidence of the public,
and the esteem and regard of a wide circle of friends.
Mr. Goyder is a native of England, and was born in
1824.
GRUNDY, EDWARD LINDLEY.
Eew colonists in South Australia have exercised a
greater influence on their fellow-men than Mr. E. L.
Grundy. To quote from the Bunyip in its remarks as to
one who was a power in the modern Athens, and who for
years contributed in a marked degree to the mental enjoy-
ment of its people: —“ His knowledge of the world was
deep and varied, gained in a chequered life. He was
blessed with a keen perception of affairs such as is seldom
found, full of kindly courtesy, always accessible and
ready to aid by his help and advocacy the widow, the
orphan, the wronged and oppressed of every grade. Eew,
if any, would be more missed from innumerable homes,
*/ ' J
or lamented with the honest and hearty tribute of general
regret than was accorded his memory. He was a plea-
sant, genial, gentlemanly old man; the friend of the
little child, and the most scholarly in the land. Alas !
we shall see him, hear him, meet him no more ! The hand


that so long wielded the pen with such peculiar force and
ability, and if need be on an occasion, with such scathing
power, is now powerless in the chill hand of death. We
give this humble and imperfect offering to the memory of
the gifted dead, but no words of ours could render more
sacred the memory of Edward Lindley Grundy in the
minds and hearts of his townsmen.” Mr. Grundy was
born in Nottingham, England, in the year 1795, of which
town he was a burgess. Entering the Collegiate Institute
of his birthplace, he exhibited an aptitude for classics
and antiquarian lore, which he retained till the close of
his life. At the age of twenty-three he embarked in
mercantile pursuits as a shipper and broker, and carried
on for many years an extensive business with South
America and the Brazils. He relinquished this for
scholastic pursuits, and for some time conducted an
academy in Manchester. During his residence in that
city he was identified with many philanthropic move-
ments, and in conjunction with other gentlemen was suc-
cessful in getting Peel Park opened on Sunday for
recreation purposes for the poor Lancashire operatives.
He was the originator of infant-schools in Manchester;
also of the Christian Institute, and an Agricultural
Drainage Association. As an authority and essayist on
agriculture he was awarded a silver medal. Misfortunes
in railway speculations induced him to turn his attention
to the colonies, and South Australia was selected as his
future home; and as Mrs. Grundy a lady of high
cultivated tastes —was not in good health, he thought it
best to postpone her leaving England till a future period,
and took with him his youngest son (E. E. Grundy) in-
stead. Shortly after his arrival the intelligence of his
wife’s death came, and until the end of his useful life he
remained a widower, mourning the loss of a worthy and
affectionate partner.


REV. WILLIAM ROBY FLETCHER. M.A.
Page 107.


He began business in Adelaide as a broker, and subse-
quently started the Standard newspaper, which for a
while had a prosperous career, but ultimately succumbed
to the commercial depression w r hich then prevailed. In
1849 he acted as Secretary to a Company formed to con-
struct a railway to Port Adelaide. Having quitted the
editorial sphere, he established a school at Brighton,
which was w r ell patronised. In 1859 he quitted Adelaide,
and removed to Crawler, wFere he commenced business as
an auctioneer, commission agent, and accountant. He
also conducted the Bunyip with great ability, and the
paper enjoyed a high reputation under his management,
and his career w-as most successful. He was much liked
by the people of the Barossa district, and by their influ-
ence w r as returned to Parliament in 1860 as member for
that constituency. His death took place at Gawder w r hilst
Editor of the Bunyip , on January 21st, 1875, and his
remains w 7 ere interred in the West-terrace Cemetery,
Adelaide. He was in his eightieth year, and of him it
might be truly said, “He did his duty, and he did it
w r ell.”
GWYNNE, EDWARD CASTRES,
Born in 1811, and educated at Lew r es, Sussex. He w r as
early called to the Bar, and practised his profession in
England. Arrived in South Australia in 1839, appointed
nominee member of the first Legislative Council, a posi-
tion he held for five years. In 1845 he became Attorney-
General, but was ultimately appointed (February, 1859,)
to the post of Second Judge and Primary Judge in
Equity of the Supreme Court, a position he has recently
resigned in consequence of his advanced years.
HACK, JOHN BARTON,
Born at Chichester, Sussex, England, in July, 1805,
educated at Southgate, Middlesex, and arrived wdth his


family in South Australia in February, 1837, by the ship
Isabella. He brought with him a quantity of stock which
he had purchased in Tasmania, and with his brother,
Stephen Hack, formed a station about ten miles from
Glenelg, but was not as successful with them as could
have been wished. He was the first contractor for any
public work under the Government, and undertook the
cutting of a canal near Port Adelaide with a view to
afford a better landing-place for merchandise. In 1812,
a crisis long impending took place ; Governor Gawler’s
drafts were dishonoured, and Mr. Hack, in common with
other colonists, was a heavy loser in consequence of
property depreciating in value. He next turned his
attention to the whale fishery, but the vessel engaged in
it was unfortunately wrecked on the Australian coast.
The first special surveys of country townships in the
colony were made by him, notably those at the Little
Para and Echunga. He was one of the Committee who
named the streets of Adelaide, and at the Government
land sale of city lots was a purchaser of upwards of
sixty-four acres in positions which have since realised
thousands of pounds for a small block. But they passed
from his possession, and Mr. Hack at present, instead of
being one of the most wealthy of men, occupies the post
of accountant in the South Australian Railway Goods
Department. Truly hisjlife has been an adventurous one,
and its record would, if published in an extended form,
prove an acceptable addition to the libraries of those
interested in the experiences of the early colonists of
South Australia.
HAINING, REV. ROBERT,
A native of Roxburghshire, where he was born August
11, 1802. Educated at the Edinburgh University, or-
dained in 1880; appointed minister of the Presbyterian


Church, Adelaide, in 1841; first preached in Trinity
Church, North-terrace, and afterwards at St. Andrew’s,
Wakefiel d-street; occupied this position for nearly 30
years, when he resigned. His death took place at his
residence, at Glenelg, in April, 1874. Like most early
colonists, Mr. Haining had to “ rough it ” considerably,
and the narrative of his adventures and those of his horse
Badger over the unmade and rude tracks of primitive
bush districts when en route to Mount Barker, Strathal-
byn, and other places to hold services, would make a
most interesting volume. He frequently preached under
the shade of gum trees to congregations composed of
those who had come many miles in bullock drays to hear
him. Por some years after his arrival in the colony he
received an addition to his slender income by an
allowance from the Presbyterian Eoreign Mission Bund.
Had it been otherwise he would hardly have had the
wherewith to pay his way.
HALE, RIGHT REV. MATTHEW BLAGDEN, D.D.,
The first Archdeacon of Adelaide, which appointment he
received in 1847. He was horn in 1811, and is said to he
a descendant of Sir Matthew Hale, the well-known
Judge. He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge,
and was for some years Vicar of Stroud. During his
stay in South Australia he established an Aboriginal
Mission station at Poonindie, which was by his efforts
eminently successful. In 1856 he left the colony for
Perth, W.A., where he was appointed bishop. In 1875
he was transferred to Brisbane, Queensland, of which he
is now the Church of England bishop.
HAMILTON, GEORGE,
Arrived in Adelaide October 1, 1839, with cattle from
Port Phillip. Appointed to the Civil Service in the
Colonial Treasury in 1848 as second clerk, and afterwards


Lad tLe management of the Bullion Office. Entered the
police force in December, 1853, and was appointed Com-
missioner of Police in 1867. He retired from this
position in 1882. To Mr. Hamilton is due the establish-
ment of the Adelaide Club, an institution which has done
much to impress visitors to our shores as to the impor-
tance of South Australia. He is an authority on matters
relating to the horse and its management, and has con-
tributed much to the literature of the colony on this and
other kindred subjects. He is also something of an
amateur artist, and an excellent art critic.
HAMLEY, LIEUT.-COL. E. G.,
Was Acting-Governor of South Australia from February
20, 1868, to February 15, 1869. But little is known of
his previous history, and his administration was not
characterised by any startling events. He died in London
January 14, 1876, aged 56.
HARCUS, W., JP,
Died August 10, 1876, in the 56th year of his age. He
was an Independent Minister in England, and arrived in
Adelaide in the ship Lord Eaglan in 1866. First
preached at Clayton Church, Norwood, but afterwards
left the work of the ministry to join the literary staff of
the S. A. Register. He remained there for a short time
and then identified himself with the Advertiser , of which
he was soon after the editor. He may be considered to
have died in harness, having laboured indefatigably till
the day of his death. Mr. Harcus was a prolific and
versatile writer, and his productions are very readable.
The most notable of these are “ Laconic Leaders,” said
to have been written by certain public men; letters
signed “ Onkaparinga,” and a work on South Australia
compiled to the order of the S.A. Government. He


resided at Hackney and was buried at his request in
Clayton Churchyard.
HARE, CHARLES SIMEON.
The history o£ this gentleman is so intimately bound
up with that of the colony that a more than usually ex-
tended notice of him is necessary in this work, and the
author, in order to do that jusiice to his memory which
he so justly deserved, prefers therefore to give extracts
from an already published and reliable biography of him
rather than trust to information received at random. His
biographer says: —“ He arrived in South Australia in
September, 1836, being then twenty-eight years of age,
acting as Secretary to Sir John Morphett, who came with
him. In a short time after his arrival he left Sir John’s
employ, and entered that of the South Australian Com-
pany. When the preliminaries for the settlement of the
colony were being arranged, it was imagined there would
not be found on the mainland any harbour suitable for
the discharge of vessels, and that all goods would have
to be lightered from Kangaroo Island. Under this im-
pression the South Australian Company established a
settlement on the island, first forming a township, called
Kingscote, after one of their Directors. It was in a res-
ponsible official capacity in connection with this settle-
ment that Mr. Hare served the Company. When it was
found by Colonel Light that there was good holding
ground at Holdfast Bay (from whence it derived its
name), and the Port Creek discovered, the Company
abandoned the island and constructed the Maclaren
Wharf. In consequence of this alteration in their plans
Mr. Hare’s services were dispensed with. Afterwards he
settled in Port Adelaide, carrying on business as a con-
tractor, amongst other work undertaking the driving of
the piles for the Queen’s Wharf. Amongst a score of


other 4 smatterings’ he had obtained somehow a slight
knowledge of medicine, and he turned it to account at
the Port by good - naturedly physicing whomsoever
asked for the privilege of being treated; and his grateful
patients rewarded him by prefixing “ Doctor” to his
name, and the title stuck to him for years. Prom con-
tracting he went into farming, though it is not clear when
his connection with the one occupation ceased and that
with the other began. At any rate he was a good deal
about town, and took a prominent part in the discussion
of the various c burning questions’ which agitated the
city’s fathers in those comparatively far-away times. He
was one of the strongest opponents to State aid to re-
ligion; and in August, 1849, he delivered a stirring
address at a public meeting held to consider the question.
Years later, also, in Parliament he opposed the Bill which
was brought in having reference to the subject. He was
a sturdy supporter of Mr. John Stephens, the then pro-
prietor of the Register , in the strong opposition which
that gentleman had to contend with on account of his
taking the side of the men who struck work at the Burra
Mine. "When Mr. Stephens was beset with libel actions,
and when public meetings were held to consider his posi-
tion, Mr. Hare was one of his foremost helpers. In 1851
he was to the fore again in his opposition to transporta-
tion proposals; and in July of that year he was elected
for West Torrens as a member of the Legislative Council
under the old system of voting. His opponent was the
late Mr. Abraham Hopkins Davis, and the voting place
was Unley. Some peculiar circumstances in connection
with that election will no doubt occur to old colonists.
It was declared, they will remember, that, both candidates
having tied, Mr. Hare gave in his own behalf a vote,
which secured the election for him. The Register contained
at the time the following reference to the election, in


which one of the deceased gentleman’s peculiarities is
hit off:— ‘ When the poll closed the friends of Mr. Hare
claimed the field as indubitably won, and insisted upon
bearing that gentleman upon their shoulders to the
hustings. Arrived there, he paused to assure himself of
the reality of his success, and, being only partially con-
vinced, each of his pithy and laconic sentences was begun
with the conjunction described by a learned lexicographer
as a “ hypothetical particle,” and the result showed that
his caution was not uncalled for.’ In the official declara-
tion of the poll Mr. Hare was credited with two votes
ahead of his opponent. He resigned his seat in June,
1854, and was succeeded by the late Hon. T. Reynolds. In
January, 1855, he was appointed with Mr. A. H. Ereeling,
R.E., and Mr. Charles Bonney, a Commissioner for
4 carrying into execution the wish of the Parliament as
expressed in the Adelaide and Crawler Town Railway
Bill.’ In March, 1857, he was elected for Yatala. He did
not keep his seat long, however, for in May of the same
year he accepted an appointment which the Government
of the day—in whose fiesh he was somewhat of a thorn—
offered him as Superintendent of the Stockade, and of
course had to resign his seat in the House. In about two
years he gave up this new position also; and in July of
1860 he obtained the position, in succession to Mr. Peake,
of Manager of Railways. In connection with his duties
in that capacity he performed a feat which he was wont
to make merry over of late years, his joke being that,
‘though he never held office in a Ministry, he upset a
Ministry and a Governor on top of them!’ It was on
April 13, 1865, His Excellency Sir Dominick Daly, the
Chief Secretary (Sir Henry Ayers), and several other
Ministers forming part of a select party were being con-
veyed by express train from Adelaide, on a visit to
H.M.S. sloop-of-war Falcon. Mr. Hare was in charge of


the train, and lie gave instructions to the engine-driver
to put the engine at top-speed. The result was that two
of the carriages were overturned, though the passengers
escaped uninjured, on account of the chain connecting the
engine with the train having broken at the instant of the
overturning of the carriages. A Commission of Inquiry
appointed to consider the cause of the accident found,
after a seven days’ sitting, that Mr. Hare was primarily
to blame, and they recommended that his services should
be dispensed with. This was adopted, and on May 8,
1865, he was removed from office with compensation.
From that time he was lost to South Australia for years.
In the interval he was occupied mostly in the Fiji Islands.
He started a plantation there, and those who attended
the meetings he addressed in the Wallaroo electorate in
1875 will recall the humorous, yet doleful, description he
gave of his reverses there; how loss followed loss ; and
how he returned to South Australia at last more like ‘ a
shirt hung on a handspike’ than an able-bodied man. On
his return he entered energetically into mining specula-
tion, and prior to and after the great Moonta strike in
April, 1874, might have been found living in solitude as
manager of a little mine some miles from Moonta Mines.
Though near to his seventieth year, his restless spirit im-
pelled him to take a prominent part in the controversy
waged between the miners and the Directors. He wrote
trenchantly time after time to the local paper, generally
opposing the stand the miners had taken. He was
vigorously criticised by the Miners’ Union representative
in answering letters, and even denounced in the ‘ ring’
meetings. Notwithstanding this, with characteristic
pluck and pertinacity he offered his services to those very
miners in the following year as one of their representa-
tives in the Assembly. The reception he met with those
who took part in pelting pebbles at the old gentleman at


GEORGE WOODRUFFE GOYDER.
Page 118.


his first meeting at Hall’s Shaft are best able to speak
about. It is not surprising under the circumstances that
he was unsuccessful. Nothing daunted, he tried again at
the next general election three years later. By that time
the good folks of Moonta Mines had forgotten their dis-
putes, and there was no more pebble-throwing. Mr. Hare
had a shrewd knowledge of the men he was dealing with,
and when at the first of the election meetings he took off
his coat, turned down his shirt-sleeves, ran lightly up the
ladder leading from the ground to the top of the scaffold
by the Moonta Mines School (which was then being built),
and when fairly at the top began with— ‘ Fellow- work-
men, speaking as a workman to workmen, I always take
my coat off’ —he appealed in a way which was irresistible
to the susceptibilities of his audience. And he kept up
the flow of good spirits by all sorts of antics, not the
least of which was a way of marking off his periods by
puffing at the cigar-stump, which one would almost have
thought was his inseparable companion. He was elected,
and sat till the dissolution of the House in 1880. He did
not seek re-election, but took a trip to England for the
benefit of his health.” He returned in April, 1881, and
died July 22, 1882. His decease probably caused little
surprise, since he had reached an age long past the pro-
verbial threescore-and-ten years allotted to man —seventy-
four. To the last, however, his spirits were exuberant,
and his conversation relative to adventures of which ho
was the hero, or the sights he had seen, entertaining and
sprightly. Though properly characterised as eccentric,
there was in his composition those excellencies and
virtues so oft sought, but seldom found. He was asso-
ciated with most movements for the welfare of the colony,
and “whilst he spared no antagonism in the conflict of
opinion, on the other hand he never shrank from cham-
pioning the cause of the weak.” Beneath a rugged
i


exterior lie had a warm and generous heart. He it was
who originated the Indian Belief Fund and other charit-
able objects for the alleviation of distress. Mr. Hare
was born in America in 1808, but of his early history,
parentage, and education there is no certain information.
The above facts as to his eventful career are quite suf-
ficient, however, to show he w~as one of South Australia’s
representative men.
HART, HON. JOHN, C.M.G.,
Better known to old colonists as “ Captain Hart,” was
born in England in 1809. Followed the sea for many
years, and engaged in whaling—a pursuit in which he
took great delight. He established a whaling station at
Encounter Bay in 1835, and made several short trading
voyages between this colony, Van Pieman’s Land, and
England in 1837-8. In 1816 he finally gave up the sea,
and settled at Port Adelaide, where he embarked in mer-
cantile pursuits, and was very successful. His flour mill
at the Port was then one of the most complete in the
colonies. It was chiefly through his exertions that the
water supply for the town was obtained from the hills.
He was elected to Parliament in 1857, was an active
member in several Ministries, and took a leading part in
politics. He was also connected with numerous public
companies, and among them the Mercantile Marine In-
surance Company, at a meeting of which, on January 28,
1873, whilst about to speak, he dropped dead. Few men
were more respected, few have done so much to render
their memory worthy to be revered and treasured after
their decease.
HAWKER, THE HON. GEORGE COLLINS,
Is the second son of Eear-Admiral Hawker, born at
Titchfield, Hants, in 1821, and educated chiefly on the
Continent and at Trinity College, Cambridge, of which


University lie is an M.A. He arrived in the colony in
October, 1840, and at once embarked in pastoral pursuits,
which he has followed ever since with success. He first
entered Parliament in 1858, being returned unopposed
for the District of Victoria, on the resignation of the
sitting member, Mr. E. Leake. On its dissolution, he
again stood for this district, and was returned by a large
majority over his opponent, Mr. J. Umpherstone. When
the Parliament met on April 27, 1860, he was elected
Speaker, defeating Mr. B. T. Pinniss (the Treasurer) and
the late Mr. Francis Dutton ; and during the time he
held this office gave general satisfaction for his courtesy
and strict impartiality, and for the able manner in which
he conducted the business of the House. Up to this time
the District of Victoria only returned one member, but
by the amendment of the Electoral Act this number was
increased to two. On the election of a new Parliament
in 1862, he was returned for the third time for the same
district, with Mr. Justice Stow as his colleague, there
being no opposition. On the meeting of Parliament on
February 27, 1863, he was proposed as Speaker, and
unanimously elected; and he held this office until the
House was dissolved at the end of the second session in
1865. Mr. Hawker then took leave of his constituents
for a time, and left with his family for England. He
paid a short visit to the colony in 1868, and returned to
reside in March, 1874. During his absence, the district
he had so long represented was divided into two, and on
the elections taking place in 1876, he received a numer-
ously-signed requisition to stand for the Southern Division
of Victoria, to which he consented, and after a contest was
returned by a large majority head of the poll. Shortly
after the House met, the Hon. L. (Hyde, the Treasurer,
failed to be returned for Yatala, and resigned, and Mr.
Hawker consented to accept office in Mr. Blyth’s Ministry


in his place. This Government was defeated on May 28,
on a vote of want of confidence, and resigned. In Oppo-
sition, he supported all the measures brought forward by
Mr. Boucaut for the advancement of the colony, especially
turning his attention to the construction and management
of railways, and during the session gave the Government
an independent support, generally voting with them. In
March, 1876, the Attorney-General, Mr. Way, having
accepted the office of Chief Justice, vacant by the death
of Sir E. Hanson, and the Hon. W. Morgan and Mr.
Colton having resigned, Mr. Boucaut was entrusted by
the Governor, Sir A. Musgrave, with the formation of a
new Cabinet. In the arrangement that followed, Mr.
Hawker accepted the office of Chief Secretary; but the
combination formed was unsatisfactory to the House,
and when it met, the Ministry were defeated on personal
and not political considerations, and resigned. Their
successors, however, taking up their measures and policy
generally, were assisted by the Opposition in carrying
them into law, Mr. Hawker, as on the former occasion,
giving them a general and independent support. On the
defeat of the Colton Ministry in October, 1881, Mr.
Boucaut, when he formed the Government, offered Mr.
Hawker the portfolio of Public Works, which he accepted
and held until the present Ministry came into office.
HAWKER, J. C.,
Served as volunteer in Major O’Halloran’s expeditions
after blacks who had been guilty of outrages, was connected
with Sturt’s exploring party in 1844, was Measuring Board
Surveyor for the Board of Trade in 1873, and Comptroller
and Landing Surveyor in 1872.
HAWKER, GEORGE W.,
May truly be considered one of South Australia’s “ rep-
resentative men,” since he has done so much to advance


the interests of the colony at large and the people among
whom he has had abiding during the greater part of his
life. He was born in England, and arrived in the colony
in January, 1847, and shortly after entered the Govern-
ment service. In 1852 he was appointed Chief Clerk in
the Treasury, and when the Constitution was altered to
Responsible Government he was appointed Assistant
Treasurer. In October, 1860, he was appointed Stipendiary
Magistrate for Port Adelaide, and to the Gawler District
in February, 1870 ; so that he was over 20 years a Special
Magistrate. During the many years Mr. Hawkes held
that position there was not a single appeal against
decisions —conclusive evidence certainly of his judgment
and ability. His kind and jovial disposition made him
friends wherever he went. From the time of his arrival
in South Australia he has been intimately associated with
literary and charitable institutions, among which the
Belair Inebriates’ Retreat, the Home for Incurables, and
others are prominent. In September, 1881, Mr. Hawkes
sought a well-earned relaxation from his arduous duties
by a trip to Europe, and before leaving the colony was
presented by his numerous friends and well-wishers
(among whom were some of our most prominent colo-
nists), with a handsome illuminated album and address.
He is now in England, but intends to return ere long, to
end his useful life in South Australia. It will be within
the recollection of many that three of the beautiful
stained-glass windows in the Cathedral were given by
Mr. Hawkes to that edifice, viz., one in memory of the
late Dean Farrell, the second in memory of the 25th an-
niversary of the Bishop’s Episcopate, and the third in
remembrance of the late Lady Edith Fergusson. Mr.
Hawkes has always been a firm friend to the native races,
and has done much to ameliorate their condition. He is
one of the Trustees of the Point McLeay Mission.


HAWSO N, CAPTAIN,
One of the early pioneers. He arrived and settled in the
colony in March, 1839, at Boston Harbour, Happy
Yalley. His family were among the first settlers at Port
Lincoln, where one of his brothers (Frank) fell a victim
to savage aborigines. He was the leader of an exploring
party of nine persons who went out to view the country
and report on its capabilities, and was instrumental in
forming an association for laying out the town of Port
Lincoln and the surrounding country.
HEMMINGWAY, JOHN,
Arrived in South Australia by the ship Harpley in 1848,
and for many years resided at Thebartou, where he was
in business. He was an active member of the West Tor-
rens District Council, and also held the position of Cap-
tain in the first South Australian Cavalry. In addition
to these, as Secretary of the Court Foresters 1.0. F.,
and in connection with the National Temperance League,
he played a prominent part. He died at Thebartou in
October, 1881, aged 66 years.
HEYNE, E. B.,
An authority on South Australian floriculture, and a
well-known Press contributor on the subject. He died
at Norwood October 16, 1881, aged 56 years. In the
early part of his life he was connected with the Melbourne
Botanic Gardens. “ The Amateur Gardener,” of which
he was the author, is considered a reliable work, and has
passed through several editions.
HODGKINSON, WILLIAM OSWALD,
For some years connected with journalism in various
parts of the Australian colonies, but in consequence of
his love of a nomadic life and adventure, was never so
much “at home” as when associated with a party on


exploring intent. He accompanied McKinlay on more
than one occasion during his exploratory tours, and has
in Queensland, where he now resides, rendered good
service to the Government in opening up large tracts o£
fine pastoral country, which would otherwise have re-
mained for years unknown.
HOLLAND, RICHARD,
An eminent stock-breeder and supporter of the turf.
He resided at Turretfield, near Gawler, many years, and
devoted much attention to the improvement in the breed
of South Australian horses and cattle. Some of his
blood stock won races in this and the neighbouring colo-
nies. Mr. Holland was born at Windsor, near Sydney,
New South Wales, in 1805, and died November 25, 1881,
aged 76.
HORROCKS, ARTHUR AND T. A.,
Early pioneer settlers of South Australia. The former
died in Adelaide July 7, 1872, and the latter was killed
by the explosion of a gun he was carrying whilst explor-
ing at the head of Spencer’s Gulf in 1846.
HOWARD, REV. CHARLES B.,
The first Colonial Chaplain. Appointed by the Home
Government for the infant settlement of South Australia,
and arrived with Captain Hindmarsh in the Buffalo,
December 28, 1836. He was specially adapted for the
important post he had to fill as missionary priest, and no
sooner was the site of the city fixed by Colonel Light,
and the small population concentrated, than “he com-
menced his duties. His first services were,” records Mr.
J. W. Bull, “ carried out at a disadvantage, and, in the
absence of a building in which such could be held, he
borrowed a large sail from a captain in port, to be used


till a temporary room could be provided. Having pro-
gressed so far, the next difficulty to be overcome was how
to get the sail conveyed to the proposed city, and other
means failing, he applied to his friend and fellow-passenger,
Mr. Osmond Gilles, the Colonial Treasurer, who had a
truck at the old Port, for the use of it.” This was
granted, but there was still a difficulty in the way, “ a
want of hands to drag the load seven miles along a dusty
track in blazing hot weather.” There being no alterna-
tive, the two enthusiasts had to put themselves in harness
to drag the load. “ Let those who knew the stout Trea-
surer,” says Mr. Bull, “ imagine him at the pole, and the
rev. chaplain in the lead with a rope over his shoulder,
and then fancy them having toiled so far crossing the
gullies, as they were at Hindmarsh, and they will be
able to realise the figure they cut at the bottom of the
first gully, with the stout Treasurer sprawling on the
ground, unable to hold back or steady the pace.” But
such were the rude experiences of early life in South
Australia, and the Colonial Chaplain and his fellow
voyageur made the best of the situation, and by their
united efforts the temporary sanctuary was got into
position, and services held therein until a more preten-
tious structure was erected. No more zealous or amiable
ecclesiastic could possibly have been found to minister to
the religious wants of the settlers than Mr. Howard.
His was that broad and truly catholic principle which
does good to all men without distinction as to caste, class,
or creed, and whilst true philanthropy, Christian charity
kindness, and all those virtues which adorn humanity are
regarded with favour, so long will his memory live in the
hearts of South Australians. Actuated by a desire to
erect a substantial church in lieu of the small wooden
building which had been sent out from England, induced
him, with the Treasurer, to become responsible to the


JOHN BARTON HACK.
Page 121.


contractor, in the sum of £I,OOO, for the stone structure
now known as Trinity Church. In consequence of this,
and being unable to meet the amount for which he had,
with Mr. Gilles, become responsible, he was, whilst in a
prostrate condition from ill-health, served with a writ
from the builder of the church. Sad to relate, “ his death
followed within a few days, hastened, as it was feared,
by the shock received from the service of the writ. The
lamentation and grief at his loss was universal, and he
was followed to the grave by the inhabitants en masse”
The claim for the debt on the church was afterwards
cleared off, chiefly by the Treasurer.
HUGHES, SIR WALTER WATSON,
Was born at Pittenween, a village in Pife, Scotland,
August 22, 1803, and educated at Crail, in which town he
served his apprenticeship as a cooper. Followed the sea
for some years, and when about 26 went as chief officer
in a vessel bound for Calcutta. In this place he settled
for a time, and being successful purchased a ship called
the Hero, in which he traded for eight years between
China and Calcutta. In this vessel he made his first
visit to South Australia, where he arrived in 1812, and
took up his abode in Adelaide. The narrative of his
fortunes and reverses reads more like romance than
reality, and it was somewhat remarkable that he, in com-
mon with most early settlers, was a sufferer in the ruin
which overwhelmed the colony in Governor Gawler’s
time. To him belongs the honour of discovering and de-
veloping the latent copper mines of Moonta, Wallaroo,
and Yorke’s Peninsula, which have proved a source of
immense wealth to South Australia. But the action
which redounds most to his credit, and which will ever
be remembered with gratitude by the people of this
colony, is his munificent donation of the sum of £20,000


for the purpose of establishing our University, a building
in which many of tbe generation of tbe future will re-
ceive that education wbicb shall fit them to occupy the
highest places in the land. An Act was passsd by the
Parliament for its incorporation, and a grant of 50,000
acres of land made for its support, with a building site
of five acres on North Terrace, Adelaide, and an annual
grant of 5 per cent, from the public funds on all sums
contributed for the University. Mr. (now Sir) W. W.
Hughes —for he has received the right to prefix this title
to his name from the Queen —resides near Bayswater,
London, and although distant from South Australia, he
as heretofore takes interest in all that concerns the
welfare of this, the future empire of the South Pacific.
His handsome gift in December, 1872, was speedily fol-
lowed by a like donation from Sir Thomas Elder ; and
other colonists also evinced their desire to contribute to
the funds of the University. As when the hot iron on
the anvil is struck, at first a few sparks issue, and are
increased by continued blows from the smith’s hammer,
so is this fund, which is being augmented year by year by
well-wishers to the cause of education in South Aus-
tralia.
HUGO, WILLIAM M.,
May be regarded as one who has devoted his life to the
work of philanthropy, and it is pleasing to know that
success has crowned his endeavours. His history is
somewhat romantic, as will be seen by the following brief
outline of it:—Eor many years a bush missionary, of
whom nothing was known, save that he was engaged in
evangelistic work, travelled from station to station all
over the Australian colonies, depending for food entirely
upon the hospitality of those he visited, declining all
pecuniary aid, and doing many kindly acts of charity for


the lonely shepherd with whom he came in contact. He
called himself “ William,” and was known by no other
name. In 1866, while in South Australia, viewing with
pain the debaucheries of bushmen when making their
periodical visits to the city after shearing time, he con-
ceived the idea of establishing a retreat for them similar
to the Sailors’ Home. He accordingly named his project
to Mr. J. H. Angas, J.P., who, with his father, the late
Mr. G. P. Angas, and several other friends, took up the
matter warmly, and became large contributors to a fund
for the establishment of a Bushmen’s Club. The house
and grounds formerly occupied by Sir Charles Cooper
(one of the early Judges of the colony), in Whitmore-
square, Adelaide, were secured, and on May 20, 1870,
the Bushmen’s Home, with “ William ” as Hon. Superin-
tendent, was formally opened by His Excellency Sir Jas.
Eergusson. Since then the original premises have received
extensive additions and alterations, and there can be
little doubt but that this institution is one of the most
popular in the city, especially with the class for whom it
was intended. Mr. William M. Hugo (who is a relative of
that well-known author, Victor Hugo) is still the Hon.
Besident Superintendent.
HURST, HENRY LAUGHTON,
Late Superintendent of the Letter Branch of the General
Post-office, Adelaide. Born in 1827; died July 23, 1882,
aged fifty-five years. Mr. Hurst first entered the Govern-
ment service as a letter-carrier August 1, 1852, but on
the 24th of the same month was promoted to sub-sorter
of stamps. After wmrking his way through the different
grades in connection with the office, he was appointed
accountant; and on August 10, 1866, received the ap-
pointment of corresponding clerk. In March, 1871, he
was gazetted as officer of Customs for the prevention of


the introduction into South Australia of jewellery and
other dutiable goods through the medium of the Post-
office without payment of duty. On the reorganization
of the Post-office after the robbery which took place some
years ago, Mr. Hurst was appointed Superintendent of
the Letter Branch, and Inspector of Stamps on February
1, 1875, which office he held up to the time of his death.
He was an energetic, painstaking, and hard-working
officer; civil and courteous towards all with w r hom he
came in contact. His death was totally unlooked for, as
he had always enjoyed good health, and during the thirty
years he had been in the General Post-office had never
been absent on account of illness.
INGLEBY, EUPERT, Q.C.
This gentleman, who may certainly be considered an
old colonist, died at his residence, Hurtle-square, Ade-
laide, December 6th, 1881. He had been precluded from
taking prominent part in public affairs for some time in
consequence of a complication of disorders from which
he suffered. Acting under the advice of Dr. Thomas, his
medical attendant, he left for England, but returned to
South Australia in a low state of health, and quite un-
able to engage in the business of the firm of which he
was a member The J Register has the following biogra-
phical account of the deceased, of which the author avails
himself: —“ He served articles as a solicitor in Man-
chester, and his name appears in the Gazette list of legal
practitioners of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
1851. He was associated with Mr. G. Milner Stephen,
who began to practise here shortly afterwards. He re-
sided in Adelaide for a long period, and during the last
generation has taken a rather prominent part in public
matters. On April 16, 1866, he succeeded Dr. Woodforde,
on that gentleman’s death, as City Coroner, and retained


the position for some time. Later on—the office being
abolished in the meantime—the dignity of Queen’s
Counsel was conferred upon him (at the same time that
Mr. Justice Boucaut received the like honour) on June 9,
1875; he had previously been a Justice of the Peace, and
on the 29th December, 1875, he received, with Mr. W.
E. Wigley, a Special Magistrate’s Commission. He acted
for some months as Crown Solicitor whilst Mr. Justice
Andrews, who then filled that office, was absent in Eng-
land. In 1879 —when his health began to fail—he was
joined in business partnership by Mr. Grrundy, on the
death of his former partner, Mr. Eobinson; and on his
leaving for England Mr. Nesbit was also admitted as a
member of the firm. Practically Mr. Ingleby has been
unable to take any part in the business since. On Sep-
tember 10, 1878, he was a candidate for the Legislative
Council; but was not returned, though he polled 2,154
votes. In March, 1877, he was an unsuccessful candidate
for the Legislative Council; and on May 17 of the same
year contested as representative in the Assembly for Vic-
toria, but was beaten by one vote by the Hon. L. (Hyde.
In his profession he was so prominent as to have been
generally considered one of the most able leaders before
the new Judicature Act came into force. He was not an
orator, nor a very fluent speaker, but he was acknow-
ledged to be one of the most profound students of the
law at the Bar; and his * opinions’ on legal matters were
always held in high regard. Outside his profession his prin-
cipal hobby was floriculture, which he had studied scientifi-
cally, and in which he was almost an enthusiast. He was one
of the founders of the Hardeners’ Society, and both as Pre-
sident and private member worked hard to advance its in-
terests. He also took great interest in mining matters, and
testified by liberal expenditure in prospecting ventures to
his firm faith in the mineral resources of the colony.”


INMAN, HENRY,
The first Superintendent of the Police Force, appointed
by Captain Hindmarsh on its formation in 1837. After
leaving that position he became a stockholder, and whilst
in charge of an overland party travelling with sheep
received severe wounds in an encounter with blacks about
forty miles on the other side of Lake Bonney. Retribu-
tion for this and other outrages was taken on the abori-
ginals by police and volunteers, under Major O’Halloran,
shortly after. Mr. Inman eventually returned to Eng-
land, and finding religious matters congenial to his tastes,
entered the ministry, and became an able Church of Eng-
land pastor in the town of Derby, where, it is said, he
still resides.
ISAACS, GEORGE,
A well-known South Australian celebritv, who flourished
at Gawler in 1859, and created some stir in that community
by the pungency of his satirical articles in the local paper
(Bunyip), and by his exertionsin inaugurating that remark-
able institution the “ Humbug Society,” in which he held
an office known as “ The Surprising Sham.” Those ac-
quainted intimately with the subject of this notice state
that “ Pendragon,” as he liked to be styled, “ could turn
a pathetic page in a manner worthy the genius of Tom
Hood,” and describe him, “though somewhat Bohemian
in tastes, as genial, humourous, vivacious, and versatile.”
A want of application and an abnormal incapacity to
appreciate the value of time and money, marred what
might have been a brilliant and useful career, and he
died in Adelaide at an earlier age than perhaps would
have been the case had he attended more strictly to rules
adopted by those who reach the proverbial threescore and
ten allotted to man. On his arrival in South Australia
Isaacs brought with him excellent letters of introduction,


and lie had evidently been on terms o£ correspondence
with the late Douglas Jerrold, Bulwer Lytton, and other
eminent literary men. After his decease, at the sale of
his effects by Mr. Townsend, “ Pendragon’s ” letters were
offered, and £lO was the highest bid for them. In 1862
Mr. Isaacs endeavoured to establish a comic paper in
Adelaide called The Critic , but, notwithstanding the
excellence of its matter, it had only an ephemeral
existence.
JAVIS, ARTHUR HARWOOD,
A rising South Australian cricketer, who, though he has
but recently attained his majority, has made his mark in
the cricketing world. Pew, even among those who have
practised for years, have shown more brilliant play, or
evinced such natural aptitude for understanding the
points of the game, and the best method of achieving a
victory. Mr. Jarvis is the third son of Mr. B. Jarvis, of
Tunbridge Wells, Kent, England. His parents arrived
in South Australia in 1856, and settled at Hindmarsh,
where he was born, October 18, 1860. Prom an early
age he took such a delight in cricket, and became such a
master of the game, as to rank with the best of South
Australian players. Batting and wicket-keeping are his
specialities, and in these he has few equals. He made his
debut on the Adelaide Oval, January 6, 1877, and was
top scorer the first season he joined the first eleven, his
average being 19 runs, and aggregate 155. He has since
then played in a number of matches with great success,
whilst in the match against the Parrell’s Plat Eighteen
his 189 was the highest individual score ever made on the
Oval. He is par excellence the wicket-keeper of the
colony, and as an all-round cricketer its best member.
In hitting he has shown science which has astonished
veterans in the cricket field. In 1881 he accompanied


the Australian Eleven as the South Australian represen-
tative, and his feats in England were the admiration of
all who beheld them. Jarvis is a fine specimen of the
South Australian native, standing about six feet high,
and weighing nearly 12 stone.
JEFFCOTT, SIR JOHN,
The first South Australian Judge. He arrived in the
colony in 1836, shortly after Captain Hindmarsh. He
was a man of great ability and learning, as is evidenced
by his speech or charge to the Grand Jury at his maiden
session in 1837, which was afterwards published and re-
published. It bears unmistakable proofs of being the
production of an able man. His was a sad ending to a
life of great promise, and it will long be remembered
with regret that Sir John met a watery grave at the
Murray mouth, near Lake Alexandrina, in 1837, only a
year after his arrival in the land of his adoption, by the
swamping of a boat, in which were Captain Blenkinsop
and some of his crew. All the party were drowned.
JEFFERIS, JAMES, LL.B.,
An eminent Congregational preacher. Born at Bristol
in 1833, studied at the new College, St. John’s Wood,
London, and with the Independents. Settled first at
Saltaire, near Bradford, Yorkshire, and laboured there
as a minister for some years with success. In conse-
quence of his health not being good he was induced to
come to Adelaide, and arrived in South Australia in 1859.
He commenced services in the Temperance Hall, Yorth
Adelaide ; but very soon crowds came to hear him, and
his merits as a preacher being recognised, a block of land
in Brougham-place was selected as an eligible site for a
Congregational Church. Erom the date of his arrival
until his departure eighteen years after, Mr. Jefferis
exercised remarkable power as a preacher and public


GEORGE HAMILTON.
Page 123.


man, that his fame extended far beyond Adelaide, and to
all the other cities of Australia. Whilst in Adelaide he
received many calls or invitations to settle in Sydney
and Melbourne, all of which he declined. Many of the
social reforms effected in South Australia owe their suc-
cess greatly to the help contributed by Mr. Jefferis, and
he was one of the moving spirits in giving a start to the
University of Adelaide. The manner in which he helped
the movement is worth recording, as characteristic of his
free and generous heart. At Adelaide there is an insti-
tution known as Union College, where students of various
denominations are trained for the ministry, and with this
institution Mr. Jefferis was connected for several years.
To mark his appreciation of the work done by Mr. Jefferis
at the Union College, which, be it understood, was more
of an honorary than an emolumentary character, his
friend, Sir W. W. Hughes, made an offer of £20,000 to
the College, to be used as an endowment, by which Mr.
Jefferis, being one of the professors, would, as a matter
of course, be benefited. Sir W. W. Hughes meant the
splendid gift to be accepted by Mr. Jefferis as a personal
compliment to himself, but the latter thought that the
establishment of a national institution, available for the
higher education of the youth of the whole community,
was preferable to the endowment of a denominational
institution whose services were necessarily confined to a
section only of the community ; and, accordingly, instead
of applying his wealthy friend’s generous gift to the
endowment of Union College, he nobly and most disin-
terestedly suggested that it should be accepted, but on
the sole condition of its being regarded as the nucleus of
a fund for the establishment of a University. A fine
instance this of a man surrendering a pecuniary benefit
and personal glorification for the sake of advancing the
best and highest interests of all classes of the community.
j


He left Adelaide for Sydney in 1877 to accept the pas-
torate of the Congregational Church in Pitt-street —a
position he still retains. Since his removal from Adelaide
his fame has been steadily increasing, and his influence
extending far and wide. He has unusual intellectual
power, an overflowing fulness of public spirit, combined
with much readiness of tongue and pen. He is also
interested in all the great questions of the day —religious,
social, and political —and keenly sympathises with the
progress of thought in every direction, as ardently loving
truth in science as he reverently loves truth in theology.
Mr. Jefferis is a firm believer and advocate of the con-
federation of the colonies, and his lectures thereon show
him to be in earnest in his views.
JOHNSON, THOS., J.P.,
A recognised champion of protection in South Australia,
and a leading Adelaide manufacturer. He entered Par-
liament in 1875, as member for West Adelaide, and has,
since that period, taken an active part in political
matters. He is the present colleague of the Hon. J. C.
Bray in the representation of East Adelaide in the
Assembly. Mr. Johnson possesses a considerable amount
of business tact, energy, and determination.
JOLLY, JAMES,
For forty years a teacher under the Education Board,
but when the new Education Act came into force he
retired from the service. Mr. Jolly was a well-read
man, and a voluminous contributor to the press. He
wrote some very readable and excellent papers on
various topics, all of which show a cultivated mind.
He died at Port Victor, November 24th, 1881, aged 71
years. In the early days, there being no newspaper,
Mr. Jolly started a small news sheet, written, and


circulated weekly. He was a most successful teacher,
and beloved by all who knew him. His old pupils still
revere his memory as they would do an affectionate
parent, and testify that he studied the tastes and inclina-
tions of those under his care. He was a most conversible
and cultured person, and the time spent in his company
will ever stand out as a bright spot in the lives of those
who were so favoured.
JONES, T. O., J.P.,
A native of Hayle, Cornwall, and now a well-known
South Australian colonist. He arrived in South Australia
in 1849, and was a member of the first Gawler Council
for eight years. In 1867, 1869-70 he was elected Mayor
of Gawler, and during his mayoralty had the honour of
receiving H.B.H. the Duke of Edinburgh. Mr. Jones
has been identified with many movements likely to ad-
vance the interests of the locality in which he resides.
He has been for twenty-five years Superintendent to St.
George’s Sunday-school, and represented the congrega-
tion as Synodsman; for twelve years Treasurer and
Sick-pay officer to the Loyal Gawler Lodge; for three
years a Volunteer officer, and for many years a Committee
member of the Gawler Institute. He has also filled the
office of J.P. very creditably since 1868. A few years
back he paid a visit to Europe, and wffiilst there delivered
several interesting lectures on South Australia and its
adaptability for immigration and settlement. By perse-
verance and attention to business he has amassed a
competency, which has enabled him to retire from active
life; and the example he has set might be advantageously
imitated by many of our young men who are toiling on
the upward path to fame.
JOUBERT, JULES,
A native of Clarente, France. Born in 1824, arrived in


Sydney, New South Wales, in 1841; appointed Chance-
lier to the French Consul in Sydney, and held that office
for seven years, when he resigned and visited South Aus-
tralia. He reached Adelaide during the latter part of
1848, and remained there until 1851, when he took charge
of Government Works at Mount Alexander, Victoria.
But he is best known to our colonists as the energetic
Secretary of the Agricultural Society of New South
Wales, and by the active part he (in conjunction with
Mr. Twopeny) took in establishing the first International
Exhibition in August, 1881, the success of which was so
great as to astonish the people of the rest of the colonies.
Mr. Joubert was, for his services at the Paris Exhibition
in 1878, invested with the ribbon of the Legion of
Honour, and he has since added new laurels thereto by
his energy and perseverance in other directions.
KAVEL, PASTOR,
Arrived in South Australia in December, 1838, with a
number of families of German Evangelical Lutherans,
who formed a valuable addition to the new colony. He
not only administered to their spiritual wants, but acted
as over-looker to a great extent to their temporal affairs.
This community of useful colonists were assisted to a
great extent by Mr. G. E. Angas, then of London,
England. Shortly after Pastor Kavel’s arrival the
German settlements of Klemsig and Hahndorf—the
latter so named in honour of Captain Hahn, of the brig
Zebra —were formed. In the former place Pastor Kavel
resided many years, universally beloved; his personal
exertions on behalf of his countrymen were untiring,
and with a perfect forgetfulness of self, so that he could
not fail in establishing a community remarkable for
probity and respect for our laws. Pew men have been
more interested in the progress and advancement of


South Australia than he, and in order to give his
countrymen at a distance his impressions in print, he
published a neat pamphlet containing statistical informa-
tion relative to the country of his adoption, embellished
with a lithographed view of the city and map of the
colony. This work was extensively circulated in Ger-
many, and doubtless had the effect of inducing many
persons to leave their native land for the new world at
the antipodes.
KING, STEPHEN,
Born at Kelby, Lincolnshire, England, in 1805, died at
Kensington-terrace, Kensington, January 15, 1881. He
may justly be considered an old colonist, and one of the
pioneers of the district of Crawler. He arrived here in
the ship Oleana, January 15, 1839, and [expired on the
same day just forty-two years afterwards. After a few'
weeks’ sojourn in Adelaide, Mr. King, with Messrs. Heed,
W. D. Murray, Stubbs, and others, applied for the
Crawler special survey of 20,000 acres, which having been
obtained, Mr. King settled on his allotted portion on the
North Para, and commenced squatting, at Kingsford, and
he had also runs at the Wakefield. Mr. King built the
first steam flourmill (the Victoria) at Crawler, but this
was not a fortunate speculation. When the land he had
chosen was required for farmers he was obliged to push
out north with his stock to Baldina, and thence to the
North-Eastern Plains and Outalpa, where he had a large
extent of country. The dreadful droughts caused him
many losses, and obliged him to sell his large squatting
properties, and finally his estate at Kingsford. Mr.
King was afterwards one of the officers in the Einniss
Administration at Escape Cliffs, Northern Territory, till
failing health from privations there caused his return
home. He was next appointed S.M. at Port Augusta,


but after a few years there, retrenchment being the order
of the day, he became one of the victims. He was a
staunch supporter of his Church, and did much towards
the erection of St. George’s, Gawler. His last appoint-
ment was “ Inspector of Timber” for the South Australian
Government, which he carried out for several years at
Fremantle, Western Australia. Mr. King was in all
respects a thorough “ old English gentleman,” and well
known to old colonists. He left one son and several
daughters, and his remains rest in the North Adelaide
cemetery. His age at death was 76 years.
KINGSTON, SIR GEORGE STRICKLAND, KT.,
Was born in England in 1808, and arrived in South Aus-
tralia with Capt. Hindmarsh, in 1836. He may be justly
regarded as one of its celebrities, having been identified
with every movement to advance colonial interests ; a
politician and reformer of the highest school. He was to
this colony what Lord Palmerston was to England, and
his advice in the Councils of the nation had just as great
weight as had that of the veteran statesman in the old
country. On Colonel Light resigning in March, 1837,
Mr. Kingston assumed the position of Acting Surveyor-
General, and though he did not long occupy it, most of
the early surveys were supervised by him. In 1838 he
was appointed Deputy-Surveyor, but the staff at his
command was very small, comprising merely a draftsman
and one assistant. In 1839 he was Inspector of Public
Works, and in 1840 Town Surveyor In common with
every other intelligent man he was a strong opponent to
the agitation in favour of introducing the convict element
into South Australia in 1845, and opposed State aid to
religion. Sir George was a Freemason, and occupied the
highest position in Freemasonry, and in 1837 opened the
first Lodge in the colony. Of this he was at once elected


R.W.M. In 1819 he did good service in advancing the
establishment of Responsible G-overnment, and in 1851
was elected M.P. for the Burra under the old partially
nominee and partially elective system. He was unani-
mously selected as Speaker of the House of Assembly in
1857, and held that office till 1860, when he was out of
Parliament for two years. In 1865 he was again elected
for the Burra, and at once re-elected Speaker, a position
he held until a short period before his death. In that
capacity he was always dignified and firm, exhibiting
great tact when turbulent spirits were disposed to rise
in opposition to his ruling, whilst his personal worth and
the general esteem in which he was held gave his utter-
ances additional weight. Had it been otherwise, he
would not for so many years have been Speaker of
the House of Assembly ; and always unanimously
selected to occupy that important post. Sir G-eorge was
a careful observer of meteorology, and compiled some
valuable and reliable weather tables and statistics on
that subject. These date back from the foundation of
the colony, clearly showing how keen an observer he was
of nature and its surroundings. The flourishing town of
Kingston was founded by him; he was the original owner,
and laid the land out in allotments about fifteen years
ago. Then settlers were few and far ; now there are 600
inhabitants in the town, and two banks, hotels, stores
and Government buildings, and a jetty a mile long. In
1870, on account of his valuable services, Mr. Kingston
was created a Knight. He died at sea, November 26,
1881, whilst on a voyage to India, which he had taken
to benefit his health. The two sons of Sir George Kings-
ton are members of the legal profession in the me-
tropolis.


Krichauff, Friedrich Eduard Heinrich Wulf, J.P.,
Is a native of Schleswig, in the Duchy of that name,
Prussia; was horn December 15, 1821, and educated at
the Colleges of Schleswig and Husum, and the Berlin
University. Elected to the South Australian Parliament
in 1857 as member for Mount Barker, and has since then
been always connected with the Assembly. He at present
represents the Onkaparinga electorate as a colleague of
the Hon. Jno. Carr. Mr. Krichauff holds liberal views,
and is considered a logical, clear-headed politician. His
speeches have the merit of brevity, besides being gener-
ally logical and to the point.
LEE, PHILIP.
Philip and Mrs. Lee left London June 30, 1836. After
five months on sea landed at Glenelg in ship Tam
O’Shanter (Captain Ereeman) November 20,1836. Never
went into public life. Died at Grlenelg January 21,1861,
aged 51. The ship Buffalo, with Governor Hindmarsh,
arrived ten weeks after; Colonel Light and survey party
were lying off Kangaroo Island in ship Rapid. Mrs. Lee
is still living, age 70 years.
LEICHARDT, LUDWIG,
One of the most famous though unfortunate of Australian
explorers. He is entitled to mention in this work, as his
exploratory researches extended over a great portion of
South Australia, and he passed over country in 1816
afterwards visited by Stuart, McKinlay, and others,
notably the Roper and Flinders Rivers, Van Dieman’s
Gulf, the South and East Alligator Rivers, &c. Dr.
Leichardt was a native of Germany, and an ardent
botanical student. In 1844 he set out with a small party
from Sydney, New South Wales, and made his way to
the Gulf of Carpentaria and Port Essington. Shortly
after returning to Sydney he undertook further explora-


HON. GEORGE COLLINS HAWKER.
Page 130.


tions in Queensland, but was not so successful as before.
A third expedition, having for its object the crossing of
the continent from Queensland to Swan River, was
organised in 1848, and on this trip poor Leichardt and
party perished, and no trace of their remains has yet
been discovered. Conflicting rumours have, however,
prevailed as to the finding of “ relics ” said to belong to
the missing explorer, but the reports require confirma-
tion. Leichardt was too great an enthusiast in his
favourite study, botany, ever to make a successful ex-
plorer, and it is a pity that he should have been permitted
to sacrifice himself at the shrine of patriotism for his
adopted country by undertaking his last and fatal
journey.
LEMAR, THOMAS,
One of the early South Australian pioneers. He arrived
by the ship Resource in 1837, and was one of the first
settlers at the Black Forest, and afterwards of Maccles-
field, where he resided till the time of his death, which
occurred January, 1882, in his eighty-second year. Mr.
Lemar may be regarded as a very successful cultivator
and horticulturist, and he for many years in succession
carried off prizes at the Mount Barker and Strathalbyn
Shows.
LEONARD, M. J.,
One of the foremost of South Australian riflemen. He
was one of the originators of the South Australian Rifle
Association, and at the time of his death hon. secretary
to the South Australian Rifle Club, and member of the
C Company of Rifles. He was highly respected, and
military honours were accorded at his funeral. He died
April 19, 1882.
LEWIS, J. W.,
A Grovernment Surveyor, who accompanied Messrs. Elder


and Hughes’ exploring party, under command of Colonel
Warburton, in 1873. On that occasion, after travelling
from Alice Springs westerly to reach the coast, the
provisions of the party ran short, and Mr. Lewis went
ahead of his companions, and succeeded in bringing back
to them such relief as enabled the party to end their
long journey successfully. Mr. Lewis was sent out by
the South Australian Government in charge of a survey
party to map out the northern portion of Lake Eyre, a
work which was accomplished with success. He died at
Cossack, Western Australia, in December, 1881.
LEWIS, DR. W. H., M.R.C.S.,
Born at Cork, Ireland, in 1806, died at Gawler, South
Australia, June 1, 1875. Erom an early age he evinced
an ardent desire to study medicine, and every encourage-
ment was given to aid the development of his ambition.
His studies were principally conducted in Dublin, but,
anticipating his knowledge would be enlarged by investi-
gating the various modes of treatment current between
the schools of London and Dublin, he determined to
complete his curriculum in the former city, and obtained
his diploma from the Eoyal College of Surgeons in 1836.
His delicate health induced him to resign a prosperous
practice in the old country for the purpose of farming,
and, acting on the advice of his brother, a South Austra-
lian settler, he came to try his fortune in this colony.
He settled near Gawler, and devoted a portion of his
time to the pursuit of agriculture, varying it with the
practice of his profession. Unfortunately, his health
was of such a precarious nature that he could not always
answer the numerous calls made upon him, and this was
much regretted, as his knowledge of human ailments and
the proper method of treatment was very extensive. He
was of an exceedingly cheerful disposition, endowed with


ready repartee and humour, combined with an active
temperament and mental force. As a medical man he
was justly famed for his skill, whilst as a magistrate and
public man he was highly esteemed, and exercised a
powerful influence in the furtherance of every object
likely to benefit his adopted country. He was an active
member of the Church of England, whilst as one of the
Building Committee of St. George’s Church, Gawler, he
did much to facilitate its erection. He occupied the
office of Warden several times, and represented the
congregation in the Synod from its starting point. He
was also W.M. of the Masons, and highly esteemed by the
brethren of the Order. Eew old residents of Gawler are
mentioned with more feelings of respect than the late
Dr. Lewis, few less likely to be forgotten than he.
LANDSEER, ALBERT HENRY, J.P.,
Son of Henry Landseer, Esq., and first cousin to the late
Sir Edwin Landseer, the famous painter. Born in London
in 1829; arrived in the colony in 1848, and entered Par-
liament in 1874. Mr. Landseer is a staunch Conserva-
tive, and much respected in the House for his fearless
advocacy of what he considers just. He is a colleague of
Mr. J. L. Stirling in the representation of the Mount
Barker District.
LIGHT, COLONEL WILLIAM,
The first Surveyor-General of South Australia, and
founder of the City of Adelaide; was born in 1784, at
Malacca. He was of mixed race —half European, half
Malay —his father, the captain of a freetrader to India,
having married the daughter of the sovereign of the
Malacca Territory —King Quedah —who afterwards gave
as dowry to her the island of Penang, or Prince of Wales
Island (so called in honour of George Prince of Wales,


when the sovereignty of the island was handed over to
the British Crown at the instance of Mr. Light). A large
income devolved by inheritance on him, derived from the
revenues of the island, and this income was managed by
the mercantile house of Messrs. Jardine. Young Light
received the best education, and living in England was
supplied by his guardians with ample means to gratify all
his desires. He was often guest at Carlton House, and
made many distinguished friends. He entered the
military service as a cavalry officer, and served in the
Peninsular war as Lieutenant of the 4th Light Dragoons.
He spoke several languages fluently, especially French
and Spanish; and was employed in the Intelligence De-
partment of the army, mixing with Spanish families and
obtaining valuable information of the movements of the
French, which on several occasions was of great service
to Lord Wellesley. It is mentioned in Napier’s “ Penin-
sula War” that he had on one occasion undertaken to
ascertain the strength of a column of the French army,
the head of which was just appearing in the distance.
He galloped to the front within one hundred yards of the
line, and was fired at. Being a superior horseman and
well mounted he pretended to be wounded, and cantered
wildly along the line from flank to flank, counting the
regiments as he passed, his body swaying about on his
horse as if he were mortally wounded, and thus escaped
further attack. When he had obtained all the requisite
information (being near enough to read the number of
some of the regiments on their caps), he gradually in-
creased his distance until beyond reach of fire, and then
resumed his erect position, put spurs to his steed, and
safely reached the British lines. This adventure he re-
lated himself, with others of equal gallantry and import-
ance. He was at one time the means of saving an English
division from capture, by timely warning given to Sir


Willoughby Gordon that the village allotted for canton-
ments of that division lay at a distance from the main
body, and its communication would be intercepted by the
march of the French army, whose line of advance, cross-
ing the Fiver Douro at a ford known to Lieut. Light,
would cut off the division, being between it and the main
body. The division was recalled, and retraced its steps
just in time to escape an encounter with the enemy. After
the peace Lieut. Light returned to England, and when
news arrived of the escape of Napoleon from Elba was
appointed Brigade-Major to the Heavy Brigade, and at
Dover got news of the battle of Waterloo. He left the
army shortly after, and married the natural daughter of
the Duke of Eichmond—(Sir Charles Napier, afterwards
Governor of the Cape Colony, married the other sister).
Captain Light then had difficulties with his agents at
Penang in obtaining a settlement of the vast property
left by his father, and he engaged in legal proceedings
with the Messrs. Jardine; but gave up the contest, finding
it too costly, and accepted a compromise, by which he
only recovered £20,000. His wife also had £20.000
settled on herself; but living unhappily, they soon
separated.
Captain Light next accompanied Sir Eobert Wilton to
Spain, to aid in the Spanish Eevolutionary War, and
received the rank of Colonel in the Spanish forces. The
expedition proved unsuccessful, and he was wounded for
the first time during the whole of his military service,
and returned to England. Later on he accepted service
in the navy of the Pasha of Egypt, where he became
acquainted with Captain Hindmarsh, also in the Pasha’s
service, and negotiating to obtain command of the
Egyptian fleet. Captain Hindmarsh then accepted the
Governorship of South Australia, and Colonel Light was
appointed Surveyor-General. South Australia was then


under a form of Government differing from other Crown
colonies in respect of the management of its waste lands,
which were vested in Commissioners, deriving their power
under the Act of Parliament hv which South Australia
•j
was constituted. The Commissioners claimed the res-
ponsibility of selecting the site for the capital, and
Colonel Light was entrusted with full authority by them
to select and survey the site for the City of Adelaide.
Early in 1837 these duties were completed, and the first
selection and sale of lands took place in March in that
year. Delays occurred in the survey of the country
lands owing to various unenumerated causes, and the
result was that the Commissioner endeavoured to effect
the survey under special agreement, the terms of which
were distasteful to Colonel Light, and led to his resigna-
tion of the office of Surveyor-General. He allowed his
name to be associated as head of a land-agency firm under
the style of Light, Einnis, & Co.; and undertook the
survey of Port Adelaide, the brig Sapid —in which he
had arrived in the colony —being placed at his disposal by
the authorities for that purpose. Being a thorough sea-
man he sailed in the brig Sapid from England. The crew
signed articles for him as their master, and he had as
chief officer Lieutenant Eield, of the Soyal Navy, who
had volunteered to serve in this capacity before the de-
parture of the first expedition from England. Colonel
Light’s health had been for some time failing, and under
the irritation of what he felt to be unrequited public
services in the colony, his malady—consumption —soon
became fatal, and he died shortly after Governor Gawler’s
arrival.*
Capt. E. P. Doughty, S.N., states that Colonel Light
lived for some time with his grandfather, Sev. G. C.
*Note.— The above is kindly supplied by the Hon. B. T. Finniss,
who was intimately associated with Colonel Light.


Doughty, of Hoxne, Suffolk; after the death of the
latter, his widow sent Colonel Light fifty pounds when
he was a prisoner in Spain, to assist him in escaping.
Colonel Light’s letter requesting assistance from this
source had been smuggled through Spain. In 1889 a
journal consisting of notes of the earlier parts of his
proceedings as Surveyor - General was published by
Colonel Light. During his last illness he expressed a
desire that he should be regarded as the founder of the
City of Adelaide, and a copper plate with an inscription
to that effect w r as placed inside the coffin. He was buried
in Light-square, Adelaide, and the inscription on his
monument is as follows:
ERECTED BY
The Pioneers of South Australia
IN MEMORY OF
COLONEL WILLIAM LIGHT,
First Surveyor-General,
AND BY WHOM
The Site of Adelaide was fixed
on the 29th December, 1836.
Died sth October, 1889,
Aged 54 Years.
Buried under this Monument 10th October, 1839.
LINKLATER, THOMAS,
The second son of J. M. Linklater, Esq., one of our
pioneer colonists. He was for many years accountant
for the South Australian Insurance Company, and took
an active part in fostering and inaugurating manly sports,
such as rowing, pedestrianism, rifle matches, &c. On
completion of the Torrens Dam he was instrumental in
getting the first Bowing Club formed, but was unable, in
consequence of failing health, to participate in its con-
tests. He died at North Adelaide February 2,1882, aged
38 years.


LIPSON, CAPT. THOMAS, R.N.,
Born in England in 1788 ; entered the navy as first-class
volunteer in 1791, and served under Capt. Sir T. Byard,
at Corsica, and subsequently under other captains in
various ships of war. His promotion was very rapid.
He was made Acting-Lieutenant of the Sabina January
24, 1808, officially promoted June 2, 1809, and in 1810
Senior Lieutenant of a corvette on the South American
station. He was in several engagements, and received a
medal and two clasps for his bravery. In 1836 he came
to South Australia as Naval Officer for the colony —a
position to which he had been elevated by the Admiralty
—and was soon after appointed Collector of Customs and
Harbour Master at Port Adelaide. He resigned the
Collectorship in 1840, but retained his other offices until
1855, when a life pension was granted him, and he retired
from active life. On the occasion of his doing so he was
presented with a handsome silver tea service by the resi-
dents of the Port, most of whom had been brought into
contact with him in his official capacity, and regarded him
with the most profound respect and esteem. In 1856
Captain Lipson was promoted to a Post-Captaincy on the
Eetired List. During his long residence in the colony
he made surveys of many parts of the coast, and the
information conveyed in his charts has always been con-
sidered very reliable.
LONGBOTTOM, REV. WILLIAM,
Was born at Bingley, Yorkshire, December 10, 1799,
went to India in 1827, and laboured there many years.
He was dispatched by the heads of the Wesleyan body in
Tasmania to fill a vacancy in Western Australia. On
the way thither on board the barque Eanny, he was
wrecked on the coast to the east of the mouth of the
Elver Murray, but with his wife and son landed safe


SIR GEORGE STRICKLAND KINGSTON, KT.
Page 150.


on the mainland. Under the circumstances, he decided
to remain in Adelaide, and, having been received with
much enthusiasm by the inhabitants, a subscription was
started to recoup him for some of his losses. He may be
regarded as the founder of the Wesleyan Church in this
colony, and did much to enhance its interests. The Eev.
D. Draper was his successor in ministerial work, and
these two eminent Christians effected much good to
society at large. Mr. Longbottom resided in Adelaide
eight years, when, in consequence of failing health,
impaired by labouring as a missionary in India, together
with his shipwreck and other privations, compelled his
removal to the milder climate of Tasmania, where he
remained until 1844, when he returned to the colony and
occupied his former position. His health, never very
good, at last failed so much that his congregation, in
1846, out of pure respect and gratitude to him, consented
to his retirement, and made such provision as enabled
him to pass his declining years in comfort. His death
took place in Adelaide on July 31, 1849, in his 50th year.
MACDONALD, JAMES WILLIAM,
Died in London on December 1, 1881. He was the son
of the late Captain Archibald Macdonald, of the 10th
Hussars, and grandson of Lord Macdonald, who was
made an Irish peer in the reign of William the Fourth.
He was born in the year 1811, and came out to South
Australia in 1839, when he settled at the Sturt, but two
years later he was appointed Commissioner of Crown
Lands, and subsequently held the office of Treasurer at
the time the Burra Mine was sold. Mr. Macdonald, after
acting as Visiting Magistrate in the North, was appointed
Magist rate at the Burra, which office he held for many
years ;i e was then elected to the office of Commissioner
of Insolvency, which duties he discharged for four years,.


when he resigned, and lived at the Sturt on his retiring
allowance. He resided there till 1880, when his friends
advised him to go home, and he lived in the suburbs of
London till the time of his death. Mr. Macdonald had
an eminently judicial mind; he was logical, keen in per-
ception, rapid in reasoning, and grasped the merits of a
case with wonderful ease and thoroughness. To these
qualities he added a cultured intellect, dignity of manner,
and a lofty independence of character, so that no one in
a responsible position was ever held in higher respect in
this colony. In private he was greatly esteemed. In
conversation he was original, fertile, humorous, and
witty, and his power of sarcasm, when he saw occasion to
exercise it, was tremendous, as some of our great men
have had cause to remember. He had some facility in
humorous verse, of which, perhaps, the specimen best
recollected by old colonists is the song on a journey
taken by several of the leading colonists in connection
with the opening of the Burra Mine. Mr. Macdonald
was a high-minded gentleman, and a man of remarkable
gifts, and though there is a whole generation of South
Australians who know little or nothing of him, many of
their fathers will long cherish his memory.
MAIS, HENRY C.,
Is a native of Bristol, England, where he received his
education. He entered the office of a civil engineer in
1811, and gained therein, by close application, that know-
ledge of railway construction which he has since turned
to good account. He left England in 1850 for Sydney,
New South Wales, under engagement as acting-engineer
to the Bailway Company, but resigned that position after
eighteen months’ service to enter the service of the City
Commissioners. After several years spent in their employ
he engaged with the contractors of the Melbourne and


Sandhurst Railway to superintend operations, and re-
mained with them until 1862, when he was appointed
manager of the Melbourne and Suburban Railway Com-
pany, who thoroughly appreciated his value. The offer
of advancement to a higher position in another colony
was too tempting to refuse, and accordingly, in 1867, we
find Mr. Mais accepting the post of Engineer-in-Chief
and Manager of Railways for South Australia, a position
he still creditably occupies.
MANN, CHARLES,
One of the earliest of South Australian colonists, and
father of the Hon. Chas. Mann, the present Crown
Solicitor. He was born in 1800, and appointed Advocate-
General for South Australia in 1887, in which year he
arrived in the barque Coromandel. Being unable to
conform to certain opinions held by Governor Hindmarsh,
he, after about twelve months’ active service, resigned his
office. In 1814 he received the appointment of Master of the
Supreme Court, and in 1849 that of Acting Judge. From
this period his appointments to vacant offices were numer-
ous, viz., Crown Solicitor in January, 1850, Police Magis-
trate and Supreme Court Insolvency Commissioner in 1856,
and Commissioner of the Insolvency Court and Stipendiary
Magistrate in 1858. Mr. Mann will long be remembered
as a useful and able pioneer colonist, one who did much
to elevate and improve society in the new settlement of
wffiich he was a popular leader. He was a most voluminous
contributor to the newspaper press, choosing for his
subjects those in which the welfare of his adopted land
formed a prominent part. His death took place May 24,
1860, and he maybe considered to have “ died in harness,”
as he held the office of Commissioner of Insolvency at
that time.


MANN, HON. CHARLES,
Is the eldest son of the late Charles Mann, Esq., one of
the first South Australian pioneer colonists. He was
horn in Adelaide, April 8, 1888, and has resided in the
land of his birth ever since. Every great cause has its
champion. Charles Mann stands forth pre-eminently
amongst native South Australians, by whom he is justly
regarded “as their ornament and pride.” He received
his education at St. Peter’s College, and early showed
signs of an active mind and resolute character, so his
father destined him for the law, and articled him with
the firm of Messrs. Bagot & Labatt. Admitted in 1860,
he joined the late Mr. Parker, and has, since the sever-
ance of that connection been associated successively with
Messrs. Belt, Bundey, and his present partner, Mr.
Poster. Aspiring to Parliamentary honours, he was in
1870 elected member for the Burra as the colleague of
the late Hon. John Hart, C.M.G., the two candidates
defeating among an unusually large number his late
colleague and Premier (Hon. J. P. Boucaut, Q.C., M.P.,)
the late Mr. J. B. Neales, and Mr. J. M. Solomon. He
entered the Assembly in the 32nd year of his age, where
he soon displayed the qualities of a ripe politician, and
was Attorney-General of the Hart Ministry, July 21,
1871, succeeding the Hon. E. C. Baker, M.L.C., on his
retirement. He also filled the same office in the two
Ministries of Mr. (now Sir) Arthur Blyth, Mr. Boucaut’s
reconstructed Ministry, and another Ministry of which
Mr. Boucaut was head. In 1875, on the special recom-
mendation of the late Sir E. D. Hanson, C.J., he was
made a Q.C. One intimately acquainted with him thus
writes: —“ As a politician he takes high rank. Discard-
ing empty declamation and useless repetition, his speeches
always command a full Plouse ; they are simple, terse,
and perspicuous, always clear and condensed; whilst


his light skirmishing and playful raillery almost amount-
ing to sarcasm, lend a charming grace to his efforts in-
finitely amusing, but never wounding, and perfectly free
from affectation and display. As a lawyer he occupies a
leading position. With an accurate, if not profound
knowledge of law, he brings to bear on cases entrusted to
him an acute and logical mind, whilst his rare common-
sense enables him to form a decision where greater sub-
tlety might cause him to commit errors of judgment.
Fond of genial society, and sought after, his conversation
displays an intimate knowledge both of men and things,
and his playful humour enlivens every society; but the
one quality which ensures his success is his nice sense of
honour and duty.”
MARTIN, JAMES,
The founder of one of the largest engineering and agri-
cultural implement works in the Australian colonies, is
a native of Cornwall where he was born in 1822. He
early commenced to fight the battle of life, and to rely
wholly on his own responsibilities. He left England in
1817, and landed in Adelaide on July Ist in that year.
After working at his trade in the metropolis for about
seven months he went to Gfawler, and hired a blacksmith’s
shop. There was then but one blacksmith’s shop there,
owned by Mr. Johnson, who on hearing of Mr. Martin’s
arrival advised him to leave the town at once, as there
was not employment for two of his trade. Nothing
daunted, however, at his reception, Mr. Martin pro-
ceeded promptly to business and though he had uphill
work at first, having but little cash or credit, ultimately
succeeded in placing himself in a good position. First
difficulties surmounted he became prosperous, and in 1851
was able to employ about 30 men. A rush to the dig-
gings took place during that year, and as money got


scarce and work slack, Mr. Martin determined to follow
the example set bj others who were off post haste to try
their luck in mining. He was not very successful, so re-
turned to his old stand at Crawler, and resumed opera-
tions with greater energy than ever, working early and
late, or as he himself quaintly says, “ from 6 a.m. until 12
o’clock at night.” In 1852 he commenced the manufac-
ture of reaping machines, and the advantages they con-
ferred in enabling farmers to get their crops off the land
marked a new era in agriculture, and conferred one of
the greatest boons on the colonists generally. In 1851
Mr. Martin secured the assistance of his nephew (Mr.
J. Ik Martin) and Mr. F. May (the eminent engineer of
the Moonta Mines) as partners, and the consolidation of
the new firm has been followed by a large increase of
business since that date. In 1871 the hands employed
were 95, against 300 at the present time. The plant alone
is worth over £30,000, whilst the stock in timber, iron, and
other material necessary for carrying out their business
is probably worth double that sum. The work turned
out at Martin’s foundry is often of a most stupendous
character, comprising iron bridges of various kinds and
sizes intended to span deep gullies or rivers in this and
the neighbouring colonies ; flour mills, impervious to fire,
complete ; engines of all sorts ; reapers, winnowers, chaff-
cutters and other agricultural appliances. Mr. Martin
has long been connected with and a strong supporter of
Friendly and Benefit Societies ; was the founder of the
Gawler Institute, and associated with the Corporation
from its commencement, either as Councillor or Mayor,
until 1879, when he paid a visit to the old country. He
did not remain long, but returned to Gawler, where he
still resides, interested as ever in the progress of the
town, and though leading a somewhat retired life, is a
living example of -what activity and perseverance when


combined with industry and honesty can accomplish.
The history of the numerous vicissitudes and changes he
has encountered would form a very good text book for
many of the rising generation of the colony, and certainly
bear favorable comparison with those biographies so often
quoted of men who have risen by their own exertions to
prosperity and affluence.
MARRYAT, VERY REV. ARCHDEACON CHARLES,
Graduated at Queen’s College, Oxford, England, where
he took his B.A. degree in 1851, and M.A. degree in 1854.
He was ordained a deacon in 1850, and priest in 1851, by
the Archbishop of Canterbury. He arrived in Adelaide
in 1858, since which period he has been intimately con-
nected with the cause of religion, and regarded as a
popular and earnest minister. In 1868 he was appointed
Archdeacon of Adelaide, an office he still holds. Arch-
deacon Marryat comes of a somewhat celebrated family,
and is a nephew of the well-known novelist, Captain
Marryat, nephew of Bishop Short, and brother to Admiral
J. H. Marryat, C. 8., recently deceased.
MCCALMAN, REV. DUGALD,
A prominent and popular preacher of the Presbyterian
Church, who died at Narracoorte on December 16, 1881,
of pleurisy, leaving a widow, who still resides near Mel-
bourne, Victoria. He arrived at Tsarracoorte, or, as it
was then termed, Kincraig. in 1857. He was much liked
by all who knew him, and few ministers in the South-East
were more highly respected. He was an arduous and
indefatigable worker in the cause of religion, and by his
aid the handsome sacred edifice devoted to the worship of
God in Narracoorte was erected. He was a brother and
Chaplain of the Order of Freemasons, and buried with
the usual honours by that body.


MCELLISTER, HON. EDWARD, M.L.C.,
Arrived in South Australia in 1889, and was shortly after
connected with the mounted police, in which he held the
position of sergeant. He was for some time stationed at
Port Lincoln, and afterwards engaged in business in
Hun die-street, Adelaide. From the earliest period of our
constitutional history he took an active part in politics,
and sat in the House of Assembly as member for Tatala.
He was subsequently elected to the Legislative Council,
and retained a seat therein until the time of his death,
which took place May 13, 1865, in his 58th year.
MCKINLAY, JOHN,
Amongst the noble and brave men who have done much
to make known the resources of the interior of our vast
continent, and of the few who have left behind “ foot-
prints on the sands of time,” none are more worthy of
being held in loving remembrance than the subject of
this memoir. His skill on his exploratory tours and the
many discoveries he made have been of inestimable value
to science and to the colonists of South Australia. His
intrepidity and courage, his cool, patient perseverance
under circumstances of personal danger, were marked
characteristics in his career, and these enabled him to
surmount obstacles where others would have failed.
John McKinlay was born at Sandbank, on the Clyde,
Scotland, in 1819, and left his home for Kew South
Wales, to join his uncle —a prosperous squatter in that
colony—when but seventeen years of age. The embryo
explorer soon developed those traits which afterwards
rendered him so famous. He quickly found his way from
station to station—and they were then remote and far
apart —becoming in time a most skilful bushman, and
equal to all shifts and emergencies. McKinlay’s ambition
for exploration ultimately found scope, and his first trips


HON. CHARLES MANN.
Page 164.


were to and from an extensive tract of unsettled country
lying between the Darling and Lake Torrens. Finding
it suited for pastoral pursuits, be took up several runs
in that neighbourhood, and being located near the South
Australian boundary, became more identified with this
colony than with New South Wales. In 1850 he formed
the acquaintance of Mr. Jas. Pile, of Crawler, for whom
to the end of his useful life he cherished the most sincere
regard. Enforced idleness was to him a relegation to
purgatory, for his great physical powers seemed incapable
of exhaustion, and nothing fretted him more than a life
of inactivity ; it is not remarkable, therefore, that he
should again return to his favourite pursuit —exploring.
Passing by the details of his successful endeavours to
induce the Government to recognise the Elver Murray as
an important highway of trade, his promptitude in check-
ing the outbreak of blacks on the Darling, and saving
life, his kindly disposition and influence over the abo-
rigines, we reach the year 1861, at which period his
renown as a bushman and explorer led the South Austra-
lian Government to appoint him the leader of an expe-
dition to search for the Burke and Wills party, respecting
whose fate the greatest anxiety was then felt. Among
the members of the expedition was Mr. John Davis, a
volunteer, afterwards favourably known as the author of
“ Tracks of McKinlay Across Australia.” At the period
his aid was solicited McKinlay was in Melbourne, but
entered heart and soul into the work he was expected to
perform, and lost no time in coming to Adelaide, from
which city he set out August 16, 1861, with a team of
bullocks, 70 sheep, two packhorses, and four camels.
The chief object of the expedition was the discovery and
relief of Burke’s party, to acquire a knowledge of the
country between Eyre’s Creek and central Mount Stuart,
and lastly, to visit the western shores of Lake Eyre. On


arriving at Cooper’s Creek McKinlay was conducted by
the natives to the grave of Gray, one of Burke’s party,
who had died on their return from Carpentaria, and con-
cluding that the whole of them had been killed by
aborigines, he forwarded the mournful intelligence to
Mr. Baker’s Station, Blanchewater, whence it was sent to
the Government. Shortly after he learned the fate of
Burke and Wills, whose remains were found at Cooper’s
Creek. The main objects of his mission accomplished,
he proceeded to explore towards Central Mount Stuart,
and crossed the Stony Desert, which he described as “ a
succession of bronzed undulations.” At this juncture,
in consequence of heavy tropical rains, the country was
much flooded, and the inundation continuing to increase
at a rapid rate, the party had to retreat with all speed to
save their lives. Traces of camels and the saddle and
remains of the horse once owned by Burke were found
about 100 miles to the north-west of Cooper’s Creek.
After numberless vicissitudes and hardships the party
reached the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria on May 3,
1862, but found no vessel there, as expected, to replenish
his food supplies. There was nothing left but to retrace
his steps or try to reach the settled districts of Queens-
land. The situation of the party was most critical —the
sheep were nearly all consumed, the packhorses slaugh-
tered, and only a few jaded camels, whose flesh was of
the consistency of leather, left to appease the cravings of
hunger. Under such circumstances some men would have
succumbed; but McKinlay’s motto was “ Nil Desperan-
dum,” and he was equal to the occasion. Camel-beef was
prepared for the return journey, and fowling-pieces sup-
plied an occasional meal. Two months on such fare
would have been sufficient to have daunted the hearts of
any party, but those led by McKinlay were evidently of
sterner stuff than ordinary, and they safely reached the


valley of the Burdekin, and the station of Messrs. Harvey
and Somers, about 70 miles from Port Denison, where
they received great hospitality and kindness. On arrival
at Port Denison they appeared none the worse for their
privations, and they were feted and honoured by the resi-
dents of that town. Melbourne was reached on September
25, 1862, or a little over thirteen months from the time
of their departure from Adelaide. Here they were during
their stay the leading attraction, and received the con-
gratulations of both Press and Parliament for the suc-
cessful result of their undertaking.
The Boyal Geographical Society of England were
prompt to recognise McKinlay’s valuable contributions to
science, and Sir Roderick Murchison, the President, in
May, 1863, transmitted a complimentary letter to him,
accompanied by a handsome gold watch bearing a suitable
inscription. On his return to Adelaide Sir Dominick
Daly also presented him, on behalf of the Parliament,
with the substantial aw r ard of £I,OOO, whilst at a public
banquet at "White’s Booms, Adelaide, he was the recipient
of a handsome tea and coffee service. In September,
1865, McKinlay was sent to explore the Northern Terri-
tory and report as to the best site for a settlement. The
season was one of the most rainy ever experienced ; tra-
velling by land was entirely prevented, and at length, on
the Alligator Biver, the party became completely en-
vironed by water, with the prospect of a lingering death
by starvation before them. It was then that the indomi-
table courage of McKinlay was shown, and the stratagem
to wffiich he resorted saved all their lives. Most of the
horses had been killed to sustain life, and provisions of
this sort were running short. As a last resource they
killed the remainder, and with the hides of these animals
stretched on a framework of saplings constructed a raft
of sufficient capacity to hold them all and their scanty


store of dried horseflesh. In this unique and strange
ark they voyaged down the river, along the coast, and
through the open sea to Adam’s Bay, which they safely
reached. It was certainly one of the most remarkable
voyages on record, and unparalleled in the annals of
exploration. On McKinlay’s return he took up residence
with his father-in-law for a time, but ultimately engaged
in pastoral pursuits. A complication of ailments brought
About by past exposure and hardships brought about his
death on December 31, 1872, at the age of 53. His re-
mains rest in the quiet cemetery at Willaston, and his
widow still resides at Crawler, where she is eminently
respected. A suitable monument to commemorate the
worth of the departed explorer was erected by the resi-
dents of Crawler in a prominent part of their town in
September, 1855, at a cost of over £6OO.
MCLAREN, DAVID,
Born at Perth, Scotland, in 1786; educated at a private
school, and at the Glasgow University; appointed
manager to the South Australian Company, Adelaide, in
1837 —and arrived in the colony during that year by the
barque South Australia—a position he held till 1840,
when he resigned the management. A wharf at Port
Adelaide, which was the first made there, was commenced
by him, and still is called by his name.
MCLEAN, CAPT. WM.,
-Formerly commander of the s.s. Victorian, and for many
years in the employ of the Adelaide Steamship Company.
He was one of the most skilful navigators on our coasts,
and highly res]3ected by all who had the honour of his
acquaintance. His death occurred in a somewhat remark-
able manner. On the night of October 19th, 1881, he
had attended with some friends to witness a perform


ance at the Theatre Eoyal, Adelaide, when he was
suddenly seized with an apoplectic fit, and died shortly
afterwards. In June, 1878, the passengers who sailed
with him from Melbourne, presented him with an
address, a gold medal, and a walking-stick as a token
of their appreciation of his able seamanship during a
severe gale. In addition to this he was entertained at a
public dinner to commemorate the event.
MENGE, PROFESSOR,
Aiv eminent geologist, linguist, and mineralogist, who
arrived in South Australia in 1837 as geologist and
mineral agent for the S.A. Company. His services were
not appreciated by the resident manager, so he threw up
his appointment and commenced exploration on his own
account, and was absent from the settlement for many
months, existing in the most primitive manner. On his
return from this his first trip he repeated his assertions
of the existence of unbounded mineral wealth; but deal-
ing only in generalities, throwing a little mystery round
his revelations, and delivering them in too enthusiastic
terms, few felt disposed to place reliance on his reports.
He subsequently acquired a considerable amount of
money by showing good well-watered country he had dis-
covered, and a large portion of this was taken up in
extensive blocks under the survey regulations. Prom the
agents of one London gentleman (Mr. Angas) he was
remunerated in the large sum of £6OO. When he received
this amount he was living on an island in Eobinson-
Crusoe style, and at this retreat had delivered to him in
part payment among other stores cigars in profuse
quantities, which he shared with all who chose to impose
on his good nature. Professor Menge was undoubtedly
one of the greatest of mineralogists, and unlike many
geologists who merely sit at home at ease and gain the


ideas they promulgate from the works of others, was a
thoroughly practical man. In the pursuit of his favourite
study he travelled all over Europe, Siberia, a great part
of Northern Asia, Iceland, and North America, and then
came to Australia to close his life whilst still diligently
seeking, ever seeking “fresh fields and pastures new.”
Truly he was no ordinary man, for he had been retained
by princes and learned Societies to collect and arrange,
and had charge of, their mineral specimens. At times he
acquired large sums of money by such work, which were
lost to him almost as soon as acquired. One who knew
him well remarks: —“He has all the guileless innocence
and merriment of a child; never perhaps was seen a man
more entirely divested of all unworthy selfishness, more
simple in his wants, more primitive in his desires, more
indifferent to the possession, or more ignorant or care-
less, of the value of money. He carried his contempt
of gain so far as to decline to give lessons in Hebrew
to Governor Sir George Grey and his lady, because
His Excellency would not consent to his proposal to
found a school of mining. This was a crowning disap-
pointment to our talented professor of mineralogy.”
Opponents of Mr. Menge, or those envious of his well-
earned fame, will probably assert he was unable to impart
the necessary information to the Governor, and that such
was his sole reason for declining to give instruction; but
as a contradiction to this it may be mentioned that ere
the gold diggings of Bendigo broke out he was engaged
in giving lessons to a class of ladies and gentlemen in the
Hebrew language, in which considerable progress was
made; and on one of the lady-pupils requesting him to
write something in her album, he wrote a text in Hebrew,
and repeated the same in several languages, ancient and
modern. The authority from whom I quoted above says
on this matter: —“ It appears indifferent to him whether


lie converses in German —his native tongue —French,
English, Russian, Dutch, Hebrew, and a score o£ other
languages dead or modern. All the living languages he
has acquired in the respective countries which he traversed
or lived in whilst pursuing his favourite hobby—
mineralogy. He holds mere book-learning in very light
esteem, and having acquired by force of observation alone
a great amount of information, propounds most original
theories of his own.”
In October, 1815, Mr. Menge set out on a journey for
the Flinders Range, a place he had previously visited,
but now with the object of proving by practical illustra-
tion the truth of his assertions as to the existence of
large deposits of copper in Mount Remarkable, the boldest
and highest point of the range. With a companion who
had joined him en route he made a thorough investigation
of the mount, and expressed his belief that it contained
immense loads of copper ore. ]Nht only has copper been
discovered in the Flinders range, but a variety of other
metals—gold, silver, lead, tin, &c., and precious stones.
At Blinman, 358 miles north of Adelaide, extensive lodes
of copper have been worked; and the geological forma-
tion of the whole of the Flinders district is indicative of
the existence of minerals of all kinds. Attention to Mr.
Menge’s advice and reports on many parts of the colony
he traversed would have resulted in the latent mines of
South Australia being developed at a period anterior to
that when the Victorian diggings were established. During
his several excursions he made a large and invaluable col-
lection of specimens of rocks, ores, and precious stones;
and deposited the same at his central depot —as he called
it —at Dr. Moorhouse’s residence, Xorth Adelaide. Mr.
Menge’s researches and ardent love for geology were un-
doubtedly the means of bringing to light the mineral
resources of this and a neighbouring colony; for there


are few spots in which the precious metal has been found
but were visited by him. The closing scene in the life of
this remarkable man is reported to have taken place in a
miserable tent on the Bendigo diggings, Victoria, in 1852.
Here he lived by himself, “ a solitary and alone,” and no
friend was nigh to hear his last words or close his eyes.
His death under such painful circumstances was a shock
and grief to all who knew him, but it was no more than
probably might have been expected from the erratic life
he led. Little is known of his early career beyond what
he occasionally told. From this fragmentary evidence it
appeared that he was a native of Germany, had been
married, and had two sons —Church of England mission-
aries in India —and for these it was his intention to send
to abide with him. His age at the time of his death was
about eighty. Mr. Menge’s theory as to mining in South
Australia will form a fitting close to this memoir; it was
as follows : —“ That alluvial gold would be the exception,
and not the rule, as the caps of the gold-reefs had not
been carried away by a great sea wash. Gold in large
deposits could only be obtained by regular mining— i.e .,
reefing and deep sinking.” And to this man of men no
monument is accorded —not even a stone to mark his last
resting-place ! Would it not be well for South Australians
in lieu of erecting statues of royalty in their high places
to perpetuate Professor Menge’s memory, as well as
others of a like character, by establishing some memorial
of their genius in the City of Adelaide P
MILNE, SIR WILLIAM,
A well-known South Australian politician, who has, with
slight intermissions, been connected with the Parliament
of the colony since 1857. He was returned member for
Onkaparinga in the first House of Assembly, and con-
tinued to represent that constituency until 1868. In


SIR WILLIAM MILNE.
Page 176.


1860, lie was elected to the Upper House, and succeeded
Sir John Morphett as President of the Council. Sir
William has held office in eight different administrations,
twice as Chief Secretary, four times as Commissioner of
Crown Lands, and twice as Commissioner of Public
Works. He is at present out of office, but there is
little doubt he will again come to the front to take part
in the councils of his adopted land, whenever time and
opportunity offer.
MITFORD, EUSTACE REVELEY,
Better known as “ Pasquin,” under which title he con-
tributed largely to the South Australian press. He was
witty and satirical, and endeavoured by his cutting
sarcasms to reform and improve society. He died October
24, 1869, aged 58 years. His writings have been collected
and published for the benefit of his widow, who resides in
Adelaide. His remains rest in the cemetery of the
Church of St. Mary’s, Sturt, and his friends have erected
thereon a monument to his memory. Mr. Mitford was a
near relative of the celebrated authoress of that name.
MOORE, MAJOR,
The first Commandant of the Volunteer Forces in South
Australia. His system of instruction was very effective,
and although it has been superseded by others in con-
formity with the progress of the times, the principles he
inculcated therein are even applicable now. He was very
popular with those under him, and many who took part
in the initial volunteer movement of 1854 still revert
with satisfaction to pleasant hours spent in company with
Major Moore. A manual of such portions of drill as he
held to be essential to the local Volunteer Force was
prepared by him, but it is now, I believe, hard to obtain.
L


MOORHOUSE, DR.,
An eminent physician, and once resident of Melrose,
where he died in April, 1876. He arrived in the colony
in 1840, as Protector of Aborigines, and was instrumental
in establishing the first mission station in Adelaide. He
held that office many years, and was present at a great
slaughter of natives on the Eufus in 1841, but could not
prevent it, as the blacks were closing in on the police and
volunteers. This matter is more intimately referred to
in the biography of Major O’Halloran, in another part
of this work. Dr. Moorhouse was one of the Commission
of the Peace, and highly respected. He was an intimate
friend of the late Professor Menge, whose tastes and
opinions relative to metallurgy were strongly in accord
with his own.
MORGAN, THE HON. WILLIAM, M.L.C.,
Arrived in South Australia in February, 1849, since which
time he has been principally engaged in mercantile pursuits.
He was first elected to the Legislative Council in 1867,
being second on the poll. He has taken an active part
in the deliberations of that body, and has had consider-
able influence in its conduct of business. In 1871, he
was appointed by the Government of the day one of the
members of the Conference to represent South Australia
in Melbourne, the object of the Conference being to
agree amongst the various Australian colonies on some
united plan for mail service with Great Britain, and to
agree to a treaty between New South Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia on the subject of the Murray duties.
On the defeat of the Blyth Ministry, in June, 1875,
joined Mr. Boucaut as Chief Secretary, and took an
active part in propounding the public works policy of
that gentleman —a policy which has been, and is still
being carried out, it is believed to the great advantage of


the colony. In consequence o£ the demands at that time
on his private business, Mr. Morgan resigned as Chief
Secretary in March, 1876, at which time the first Boucaut
Ministry broke up. Mr. Morgan’s term as a member of
the Legislative Council expired in the beginning of 1877.
He had intimated both publicly and privately that he did
not intend to again offer himself for re-election; but at
the request of one of the most influential deputations
that ever assembled in the City of Adelaide which waited
upon him, he was induced again to become a candidate.
Mr. Morgan addressed a large representative meeting at
the Town Hall Exchange Boom, at considerable length ;
and a few days later attended one other meeting at the Town
Hall, at which nearly all the other candidates attended,
but at which he only spoke for a few minutes. He had no
committee in any part of the colony, and was absent from
South Australia w r hen the election took place. He was,
however, returned at the head of the poll by a large
majority of 700 votes over and above the next highest
candidate, having polled by far the largest number of
votes ever recorded for any previous candidate for the
Legislative Council. During the dispute between the
late Chief Secretary, Sir Henry Ayers, and the Legislative
Council, Mr. Morgan was appointed by the members
leader of the House, and on the resignation of the Colton
Ministry in consequence of an adverse vote in the House
of Assembly, Mr. Morgan, after some deliberation, joined
Mr. Boucaut as Chief Secretary in the Ministry. On
September 27, 1878, Mr. Boucaut resigned, having ac-
cepted the office of second Judge, and the Ministry was
re-constructed, Mr. Morgan becoming Premier, and
retaining the Chief Secretaryship.
MORPHETT, SIR JOHN, KT.,
Was born in London, May 4, 1809. Left England for


Soutli Australia in 1836, and landed at Kangaroo Island
from the barque Cygnet, on September 11, of that year.
In 1837 the Government and the S.A. Company estab-
lished new encampments at Holdfast Bay and Port Ade-
laide, and thither Mr. Morphett removed. As showing
the somewhat primitive state of matters at that period, it
may be mentioned that there were then but two horses in
the colony —the one belonging to the Company and the
other to Mr. Morphett; now the horse stock of South
Australia can be counted by thousands, and among them
many valuable animals. On the passing of an Imperial
Act to repeal former Acts regulating the Government
of the colony, in June, 1813, the first Legislative Council
was appointed, and Mr. John Morphett was elected one
of its seven members. In 1851, when the Constitution
was changed and the Council was partly formed of elec-
tive members, he became nominee of the Grown, and was
also elected Speaker. He was returned a member for the
Upper House in 1857, and occupied that position for the
full term (eight years). On the retirement of Sir J. H.
Pisher, in 1865, he was appointed President of the Coun-
cil, and held that office till 1873, when he retired. He
was knighted in 1870. During a residence of over forty
years in South Australia, Sir John has taken great
interest in all that concerns the welfare of the colony.
Many charitable and deserving objects have been materi-
ally aided by his beneficence, and his kindness of heart
and sterling qualities have caused him always to be
regarded as a popular man. He has done much to make
racing what it should be, and his patronage is always
largely accorded to manly sports.
MORRIS, HENRY THOMAS, J.P.,
Was born in 1823, at Gravesend, England. Arrived in
South Australia in the Buffalo, with his uncle (Captain


Hindmarsh), December 28, 1886. He was one of those
present when the colony was proclaimed. His education
commenced in bis native town, was completed here under
the tuition of the Eev. T. Q. Stow. In 1843 be entered
into pastoral pursuits, and established stations at Encoun-
ter Bay and Guichen Bay. In 1850, attracted by reports
from California, be visited the diggings in that locality,
but returned to the colony in 1853. Shortly after bis
arrival be was appointed Government Sheep Inspector,
and two years later promoted to the Chief Inspectorship.
He retained this office for upwards of 13 years, and by
bis skilful management succeeded in entirely freeing the
flocks of the settlers from scab and other complaints.
Eor these services he was presented with an elegant
watch and purse of sovereigns by the principal squatters
of the colony. He was also appointed to make a valua-
tion of all runs under lease, and notwithstanding the
arduous nature of the undertaking, it was performed in a
little over a year. He was then awarded the sum of
£4OO by the Government. Mr. Morris has held and
continues to hold many important offices. He is at pre-
sent Chairman of the Midland District of Main Hoads,
Chairman of the Hamilton and Julia District Councils,
member of the Board of Advice, and President of the
Kapunda and Light Agricultural Society. Since 1865
Mr. Morris has resided at Anlaby, an extensive sheep
and cattle station near Kapunda.
MURPHY, RIGHT REV. FRANCIS, D.D.,
Born at Kavan, County Meath, Ireland, in 1796. Edu-
cated at the Diocesan Seminary, Navan, and at St.
Patrick’s College, Maynooth. Held office as Prefect of
Studies, and was ordained a priest by Archbishop Murray
in 1826. After labouring in ministerial work for some
time in Yorkshire and Liverpool, in 1838 he arrived in


New South Wales to take part in mission work. On the
establishment of the suffragan sees of Adelaide, Perth,
and Hobart Town, the Rev. Francis Murphy was conse-
crated in Sydney as Bishop of Adelaide, and took up his
residence in that city in November, 1811. He brought
with him Father Michael Ryan, who was subsequently
appointed Yicar-General. The history of Bishop Murphy
is in reality the history of the Roman Catholic Church in
South Australia, since it was not till his advent that
there was any proper organization of that body. All that
had been done by the Rev. Fathers Benson and O’Mahony
were mere preliminaries to pave the way for something
more systematic. The first Roman Catholic Church
erected in the colony was St. Mary’s, Morphett Yale, and
it was solemnly dedicated by Bishop Murphy on December
8, 1811. St. Patrick’s, West-terrace, was erected shortly
after, and the foundation-stone of the building was laid
by Bishop Murphy December 12, 1811. For fourteen
years his ministrations were continued in various parts of
South Australia, and were productive of great good. His
liberal views gained him the friendship even of oppo-
nents, and he was highly esteemed by all who knew him.
His death took place on April 26, 1858, at West-terrace,
Adelaide, at the age of sixty-two.
MURRAY, ALEX., J.P.,
An old and respected colonist. Arrived in South Aus-
tralia in 1810. Died April, 1880, aged 77 years. Was
greatly interested in the progress of South Australia,
and did much to advance its interests. He resided for
many years at Coromandel Yalley.
NEALES, HON. JOHN BENTHAM, M.L.C.
Few South Australians have been more intimately con-
nected with our public affairs, few more closely associated


in men’s memories with numberless incidents of varied
importance interwoven with the early history of the colony,
than the subject of this memoir. He arrived in South
Australia by the ship Eden, in June, 1838, and soon after
landing turned his attention to auctioneering, the profes-
sion by which he established his position in the Adelaide
community. To avoid confusion he described himself as
Neales Bentham, by which name he was known until the
other Neales, who were no relations of his, left the
colony, when he resumed his proper designation. Mr.
Bobt. Cock, the Government auctioneer, retiring from
that office, Mr. Neales obtained the appointment and kept
it for many years, or until he retired from business. He
started selling in Hindley-street, where he made it at once
apparent that he was a born auctioneer. In addition to
his business aptitude he possessed rough and ready wit,
grotesque humour, and imperturbable good temper, that
proved highly attractive, and of an evening his auction-
room was a favourite resort with the public, who there
found amusement at a time when amusements were not so
liberally provided as now. These qualities distinguished
him throughout his whole career. Mr. Neales took an
active part with Messrs. Abraham Scott, the late Hon.
Jno. Hart, Hon. John Baker, and others in the formation
of the Auction Company, and was appointed auctioneer to
that association. His intimate knowledge of mercantile
affairs led to his being frequently consulted on the com-
mercial and financial operations of the period. Mr.
Neales’ progress was alwaj r s upwards. He purchased one
business, amalgamated others, and continued to prosper
Until he finally retired, leaving the firm of Townsend,
Botting, & Co. In 1851 he entered political life, and after
an exciting contest was returned for North Adelaide as a
member of the Legislative Council, under the old mixed
Constitution. He was elected as a liberal, and was one of


the members who helped to extinguish the system of State
aid to religion. At the next election he was again suc-
cessful, and satin the Legislative Council until Responsible
Government was established. On March 9, 1857, he was
elected to the first Parliament under the Constitution Act,
as one of the members allotted to Adelaide. Prom
that period till his death he was always intimately asso-
ciated with the Legislative Council or Assembly. In the
latter, during 1865 and 1868, he represented the Burra
district, and was on several occasions a member of the
Ministry, each time taking the portfolio of Commissioner
of Crown Lands. In 1859 he held that office for a month,
in Mr. Tounghusband’s Ministry, and in Nov., 1865, suc-
ceeded Mr. Glyde in that office in Mr. Hart’s Government.
He retained that position until the next year, when there
was a reconstruction of the Cabinet. In 1871 he was
elected member of the Upper House, and seldom absent till
failing health indicated his approaching end. He died at
Glenelg, July 31, 1873, aged 67 years. The special in-
terest Mr. Neales took in the development of the
mineral wealth of the colony made him an authority on
the subject of mining legislation, and many measures
relating to mining and mineral leases were improved
by the wise counsels he gave on those subjects. Though
no orator he could speak effectively, and his quaint
earnestness, flashes of genuine humour, and lively repartee
always assured him a patient hearing. On the hustings
or public platform he never made a failure, and whether
on the popular or unpopular side he invariably won
laughter and applause. He was far from being a mere
jester, for his undoubted ability, varied experience, and
close observations made his counsels of great importance
on a wide range of questions. In private life he had many
warm friends, whilst as a public man he will not be readily
forgotten by our colonists.


HON. JOHN BENTHAM NEALES, M.L.C.
Page 182.


NEWLAND, REV. WILLIAM EIDGWAY,
A pioneer colonist, member of the Independent body, one
of the earliest settlers of Encounter Bay, arrived in South
Australia per ship Sir Chas. Eorbes, in 1839, and com-
bined the labours of preaching with agriculture for many
years. It is recorded of him that “he has walked the en-
tire distance from Encounter Bay to Adelaide, 56 miles,
in a day, swimming two rivers on the journey. His death
was occasioned by an accident to the mail coach in which
he was riding. Mr. Simpson Newland, J.P., a colleague
of Mr. H. E. Downer in the representation of the En-
counter Bay electorate, is a son of the above, and a liberal
and conscientious member.
NEWMAN, THOS.,
Arrived in South Australia in 1810, and resided up to the
time of his death at Thebarton. Though he did not take
a prominent part in public matters he was, nevertheless,
active during some political struggles, especially at the
framing of the present Constitution. In District Council
matters he took great interest, and worked hard for the
benefit of the district. Mr. Newman was a member of
the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows from the commence-
ment of the Order in the colony. One of his sons is the
Eev. C. T. Newman, of Ivadina. His death occurred in
September, 1881.
NOTT, GEORGE, M.D.,
A literary genius of high order, who for many years exer-
cised great influence in moulding the tastes and character
of residents of “Modern Athens,” as Gawler is termed.
He was born in England, May 3,1820, and having devoted
some time to the study and practice of medicine and
surgery left his native land for South Australia, where he
arrived in May, 1852, and shortly after located at Gawler.


Here he speedily became a favorite with the public, for
he was possessed of all those rare excellencies which adorn
mankind, and ever ready to aid the needy and do all in his
power to ameliorate the condition of suffering humanity.
In 1859 that remarkable society which was started to ex-
pose “ humbug” wherever existing, attracted great atten-
tion, and Dr. Xott was made honorary member thereof.
He was naturally such an inveterate hater of shams and
hypocrisy that he was a valuable acquisition to the society,
whilst his caustic and smart style of writing to the press
was the theme of general admiration. In October, 1863,
he started the JBunyip , a journal still in existence and en-
joying large patronage. The Humbug Society s Chronicle ,
as it was then termed, was filled with so much of an
original and racy kind that every copy was sold as soon as
printed, and many residents of Gawler yet delight to
relate the numberless “sayings and doings” of the worthy
doctor in conjunction with that broadsheet. The great
trial at law, “ Popham v. Barnet,” for an alleged libel
said to have been committed in some advertisements, and
in which damages were laid at £SOO, was one of the most
humorous cases ever brought before the law courts. It
was the talk of the colony for years after, especially as
the plaintiff only obtained a verdict for one shilling. It
would be impossible in the limits of this work to do jus-
tice to the character of Dr. Nott, of whose remarkable
and brilliant career sufficient might be said to fill several
volumes. His tastes were botanical, and as an artist he
excelled. He never descended to personalities, nor in-
dulged in attacking private individuals. His lectures
were of an interesting and instructive kind, and he was a
fluent speaker. The appeal he made for funds in favour
of a search party for the purpose of finding poor Leichardt,
the lost explorer, will not readily be forgotten, and the
eloquence of that peroration left a deep impression on


those who heard it delivered at the local Oddfellows’ Hall,
on July 15, 1865. He died somewhat suddenly at the
Semaphore, on December 9, 1872, aged 51 years, leaving
a wife and a family of seven children. He was connected
with most of the Friendly Societies, and as a token of the
services rendered by him they presented his portrait to
the G-awler Institute, of which he was so long an active
and zealous member. His widow was also accorded a life
membership of this institution, one of the highest of
public honours. Full of philanthropy and love for all
mankind —forbearing to the erring, generous and sympa-
thising with the afflicted —and instrumental in reforming
abuses, he quitted the sphere in which he had laboured
wisely and well for twenty-one years. The memorials of
his genius remain, and his memory will long abide, not
merely in the portrait at the Institute, or the “In
Memoriam” on the handsome monument which covers his
grave in the Willaston cemetery, but in the hearts of the
people of Gawler and colonists generally.
O’HALLORAN, MAJOR THOMAS SHULDAM,
Second son of Major-General Sir J. O’Halloran, G.C.8.,
born October 25, 1797, at Berhampore, E. 1.; cadet at the
Eoyal Military College, Marlow, in 1808 ; ensign in the
E.W.M. Militia in 1809 ; gazetted ensign in 17th Foot
Eegiment in 1814 ; served in the Nepaul War during 1814,
1815, and 1816 ; appointed lieutenant in June, 1817 ; saw
service in the Deccan, India, in that and the following
year ; joined the 44th Eegiment, into which he had ex-
changed at Calcutta, in 1823; appointed interpreter,
quartermaster, and paymaster to the regiment at Chitta-
gong in 1824, and during the same year was raised to the
rank of Brigade-Major. He was also connected, by various
exchanges, with the 6th, 56th, and 99th Eegiments ; was
A.D.C. to his father, General Sir Joseph O’Halloran, in


Central India. Retired in 1834 on half-pay, hut in 1887
received full-pay as captain in the 97th Regiment, with
which company and a troop of Dragoons he assisted in
putting down the riots in Yorkshire ; sold his commission
and retired from the army in 1838. Arrived with his
family in South Australia in November, 1839, and settled
at the spot now known as O’Halloran Hill. His career
in this colony was a most active one, and his adventures
and exploits as Commissioner of Police —an office he held
from June, 1840, till his resignation in April, 1843 —would
form a good-sized volume. To Major O’Halloran is due
the credit of founding Christ Church, O’Halloran Hill,
and he was one of the original governors of St. Peter’s
School. In June, 1843, he was elected member of the
existing Nominee Council, and held that position until
1851; he was also a member of the Legislative Council
from 1857 to 1863, when he resigned. Major O’Halloran
wtis appointed Commissioner of Police and Police Magis-
trate by Governor Gawler in 1838, when he was gazetted
colonel. In the early times he was somewhat actively en-
gaged in leading armed parties against hostile aborigines,
who had killed many of the settlers. The most notable
of these expeditions were to Encounter Bay in July, 1840,
when the crew and passengers of the brig Maria were
killed by the Melemnura tribe, a first and second expe-
ditions against the Rufus blacks in May, 1841. Major
O’Halloran quitted the Government services on April 15,
1843, after a lengthy association with it. His reasons for
so doing were a refusal on his part to fulfil in addition to
the office of Commissioner of Police that of Police Magis-
trate. On his taking farewell of the force he was pre-
sented by the officers and men with a valuable silver snuff-
box. On his retirement Capt. B. T. Pinniss was appointed
by Capt. Grey to the amalgamated offices, and for some
time fulfilled the duties of the same. On the opening of


the Northern Territory, Major O’Halloran was the first
[Resident Administrator. He was always popular in Ade-
laide, and is still frequently reverted to by those who
formerly were brought in contact with him.
O’MAHONY, REV. EDMUND,
Was sent to Adelaide from New South Wales in 1842, to
prepare for the coming of Dr. Murphy, the first Eoman
Catholic Bishop of Adelaide. Eather O’Mahony was a
most estimable man, and though of delicate constitution,
was most energetic in the discharge of his duties. He
visited every district in which Eoman Catholics resided.
After the arrival of the Bishop in 1844, he was
with Eather Eyan, to visit Catholic families on the
Gilbert, the Light, and the Hutt Eiver Special Survey.
Eather O’Mahony left Adelaide for his pastorate in New
South Wales in 1845, and before leaving made a census
of the Catholics in South Australia, who then numbered
but 1,273, out of a population of 19,317. He died at
Maitland, New South Wales, April 24, 1846, from
rupture of a blood-vessel. A handsome marble monu-
ment has since been erected on his resting place by his
admirers and friends.
PALMER, LIEUTENANT-COLONEL,
Of Nazing Park, Herts, England, may be considered to
have been connected with South Australia since its foun-
dation. In 1835, at the urgent request of the Duke of
Wellington, he accepted office as one of the Commis-
sioners for the colonization of this portion of His
Majesty’s dominions, and after five years that object was
effected, and without cost to the British Government.
Lieut.-Col. Palmer is the eldest son of the late George
Palmer, Esq., who represented South Essex in three Par-
liaments, and was one of the founders of the Eoyal


National Lifeboat Institution of 1824, and tbe inventor
of tbe first lifeboat used by that institution, wbicb he
assisted to preside over till his death in 1858. Colonel
Palmer enlisted in the London and Westminster Light
Horse Volunteers as a private in 1819, and remained in that
corps till it was disbanded in 1828. During the political
agitation of 1880 Colonel Palmer raised the Essex Yeo-
manry Cavalry at the request of Lord Melbourne, chiefly
for the protection of the Government establishments of
Waltham Abbey and Enfield Lock. In 1888 Lord John
Russell attempted to disband this corps, but on the
urgent suggestions of the Duke of Wellington Colonel
Palmer was induced to volunteer the gratuitous services
of the corps to the Queen, which were accepted, and the
corps maintained at Colonel Palmer’s entire charge for
five years, till 1848, when it was replaced upon the estab-
lishment as formerly. In 1842 he was elected by the
freeholders of Essex as a verderer of Epping Eorest.
The colonel has always taken a lively interest in the
prosperity of the colonies, and the manly generous
manner in which he speaks of his fellow-Commissioners
(and others who had taken part in the colonization
scheme) in a letter which he addressed in 1872 to the
Neto Zealand Gazette is very creditable, and show his dis-
interestedness. The letter referred to was written on
the occasion of the celebration of the opening of the
telegraph line to Port Darwin, and therein the Colonel
pays a handsome tribute to the memory of some who
were instrumental in establishing the colony of South
Australia, and who have passed away, as well as some
still permitted to continue their ministration. Among
those men particularly named are Messrs. Edward Gibbon
Wakefield, Robert Gouger, Samuel Mills, John Wright,
G. E. Angas, Jas. Freshfield, Hon. John Hart, Colonel
Light, Captain Hindmarsh, Lord Glenelg, and others.


Palmer-place, North Adelaide, derives its name from
Colonel Palmer, who is annually brought to remembrance
by the use of a silver cup presented by him to the Cor-
poration of the City of Adelaide, from which, on the
election of the Mayor, is drunk in South Australian wine
a toast to the memory of Colonel Light. Another hand-
some and appropriate present was also made by Colonel
Palmer to the City Corporation, viz., portraits in oil of
Governor Gawler and Colonel Light. Colonel Palmer’s
eldest son visited Adelaide about twenty-six years ago,
and was one of the party on board the Lady Augusta
when Captain Cadell made his first steam trip up the
River Murray for 2,000 miles with His Excellency Sir
Henry Young as passenger. Eor gallant services during
the Indian Mutiny Colonel Palmer’s son George was
presented with the military medal of India, with a clasp
for Delhi, the thanks of the Governor-General of India,
and a special letter from the Queen. Colonel Palmer,
though well advanced in years, still enjoys good health,
and his interest in the welfare of South Australia is as
strong as ever. May he be spared many years to witness
the growing prosperity of a colony with w r hich his name
is so intimately associated.
PARKIN, WILLIAM, J.P.,
Porn August 24, 1801, and educated in England. “ The
Parkin Trust ” is an institution founded by Mr. Parkin
in 1876, to provide for the training and maintenance of
students for the Congregational ministry, by a gift of
money and land estimated at £IO,OO0 —£8,000 cash, and
£2,000 estimated value of land in the Northern Territory,
wnth reversionary interests in his estate of a valuable
nature. This fund has been gradually accumulating, and
the princely donation of Mr. Parkin to the Congrega-
tional body of South Australia, of which he is a member,


is appreciated as such a boon ought to be. On August
24, 1881, on Mr. Parkin attaining his 80th year, the
governors of the “ Trust ” before mentioned, presented
him with an address of congratulation on this interesting
epoch in his history. Mr. Parkin was elected a member
of the Upper House, in South Australia, on November
26, 1866, and served the full term, when he resigned.
PARSONS, HON. J. LANGDON,
Minister of Education. He has always taken a leading
part in the educational progress of the colony, and his
appointment to the office he holds in the Pray Ministry
was regarded by the public with satisfaction. He formerly
represented the Encounter Bay electorate, but is now
member for North Adelaide. Mr. Parsons, accompanied
by other members, recently visited the Northern Terri-
tory, in order to gain by personal experience an insight
into its resources, &c. The result proved highly satisfac-
tory, especially to the inhabitants of the Territory, who
are likely in the future to be the recipients of many
benefits and favours from the Government, to which they
j
have long been strangers. Mr. Parsons is a logical and
straightforward politician, and whilst having the interests
of the constituency he represents thoroughly at heart, he
never appears to forget the duty he owes to the country
at large.
PEACOCK, CALEB,
Mayor of Adelaide in 1876, and the first native of South
Australia raised to the civic chair. He is the eon of the
late Hon. W. Peacock, who arrived in the colony in 1839,
and took an active part in the public events of the day.
Was for sometime an energetic member of the Legislative
Council, and of the Adelaide Corporation. Mr. Peacock
may be considered one of our most successful and able


HON. THOMAS PLAYFORD.
Page 195.


public men. He is a fluent, polished speaker, and clear
thinker.
PEACOCK, HON. WILLIAM, M.L.C,
One o£ the early South Australian pioneers. He arrived
in the colony per ship Glenaloon, December 28, 1838, and
from the first was identified with public affairs. He took
part in an important meeting held in April, 1841, to con-
sider the best position for the province, and in other
equally prominent topics. In 1842 he served in the
City Council as Alderman and Councillor. He always
advocated the voluntary system in religious matters, and
was ever to the fore in meetings on the subject in 1846.
In 1848 and following year, Mr. Peacock was associated
with the movement for the introduction of Responsible
Government, and in 1851 was returned as member for
Xoarlunga. Pour years afterwards he was re-elected for
the same constituency, and retained this position until
1856, when he quitted the political arena for a time, re-
turning to it again in 1861, when he took his seat in the
Legislative Council. He retired by effluxion of time in
1869. As a politician Mr. Peacock was a decided Liberal.
He will be well remembered in commercial circles as the
founder and leader of the well-known tanning and wool-
scouring firm of W. Peacock & Son. He was a large
holder of real property. With what is now known as
the Hindmarsh-square Congregational Church he was
long identified as a deacon, and later on was a wor-
shipper at the Stow Memorial Church. He died January
21st, 1874, aged 84 years, and left a widow, one son
(Caleb Peacock, Esq., J.P.,) and a daughter.
PHIPSON JOHN BOND,
One of the most eccentric and remarkable men of genius
ever known in South Australia. Possessed of the necessary
M


qualifications to achieve success, with bright talents, and
ability of no common order, his life was blighted by
intemperance; and, instead of passing its closing scenes
in affluence and comfort, he died, the victim of indiscre-
tions, at the Adelaide Hospital, May 5, 1880, at the
comparatively early age of 59 years. He was born at
Norfolk, England, and educated there ; left for South
Australia in 1838, when but 17 years of age, and was,
shortly after landing in Adelaide, installed as clerk in
the Judicial Department, over which Mr. H. E. Wigley,
S.M., presided. In 1850, his father’s death caused his
return to England, where he received a small legacy,
with the capital of which he endeavoured to start a
newspaper at Port Natal, South Africa. He took a
press and type from England, but found on arrival at the
scene of his projected labours that two other journals
had possession of the field, and that there was no opening
for his endeavours. Prom this period he dated his mis-
fortunes, and in a letter to the author of this work
bewailed his non-success. In 1853 he landed in Mel-
bourne, Victoria, but was for some time a mere Bohemian,
living on his wits. His ability as a writer, however, at
last led to his being engaged as law reporter for the
Argus , and but for his failing, he would have continued
in that position for years. In 1862 he returned to
Adelaide, in which city, up to the time of his death, he
w r as mixed up with all sorts of movements, suggesting
much but accomplishing little. Intemperance always
seemed to blast his fondest hopes, and his promises of
amendment were as evanescent as the vapours which float
along an evening sky. Notwithstanding his backsliding
from promises so oft made, he numbered many influential
persons among his friends, and they constantly regretted
that his indiscretions prevented the exercise of their
influence on his behalf. Among these, Sir Thomas Elder,


with his usual beneficence, did much to cheer the lot of
this unfortunate man, who passed days, weeks, and
months at the Inebriate Retreat, Belair, a prey to ennui ,
and the recollection of what might have been. Mr.
Phipson was a prolific contributor to the daily and weekly
press of Adelaide, and his recollections of the early
times were written with much zest and pungency. He
left a wife (since deceased), and four daughters, married
and in fair circumstances. His remains rest in the AVest-
terrace Cemetery, in a peaceful nook, a strange contrast
to the turmoil which usually prevailed in his wavering
mind. Of him we may truly say —
Whate’er his faults, we should forget them now,
Kemembering only good in his career ;
Sweet Pity near his resting place may bow,
And there bestow the tribute of a tear.
PLAYFORD, REV. THOMAS,
One of the early colonial ministers, and an active member
of the Christian Society. He was born in Yorkshire,
June, 1795, entered the army when quite young, and was
present with his regiment, the Life Guards, at the battle
of Waterloo. Arrived in Adelaide in 1844, and for some
time preached in a chapel in Hindley-street, near where
the Theatre Royal now stands. In 1848 a new chapel
was specially erected for him, and he here continued his
ministrations till September, 1873, when he died at the
age of 79. Mr. Playford was highly esteemed for his
many excellent qualities and unassuming demeanour.
He left a large family, the eldest of whom, the Hon.
Thos. Playford, M.P., has been for many years one of
the leading members of the South Australian Legislature.,
PLAYFORD, HON. THOMAS,
Is the eldest son of the late Lev. Thomas Playford, of
Bentham-street Chapel, Adelaide. He first entered the


House o£ Assembly in 1868, as member for tbe District of
Onkaparinga, and was one of tbe liberal land reformers of
that period. He took an active part in assisting Mr.
Strangways in passing tbe first Land Bill that gave the
farmer tbe opportunity of taking up land on deferred
payments. In 1870 be was again returned for tbe
District of Onkaparinga. In 1872 he lost bis election
for that district; but at the next general election, in
1875, was returned for the District of East Torrens.
On tbe retirement of Mr. W. A. E. West-Erskine,
M.A., from Mr. Boucaut’s Ministry, Mr. Playford took
the position of Commissioner of Crown Lands. On
the death of tbe late Chief Justice, and tbe subsequent
break-up of tbe Boucaut Ministry, be held office; and
was re-appointed to bis position of Commissioner of
Crown Lands upon Mr. Boucaut forming bis second
Ministry. He went out with that Ministry soon after it
met Parliament; but upon tbe defeat of tbe Colton
Ministry he was offered and accepted bis old position of
Commissioner of Crown Lands, a position he held with
marked ability and satisfaction until he, with other mem-
bers of tbe Morgan Grovernment, resigned. Mr. Playford
has always given bis best attention to tbe work of bis
department, and no one has ever filled the office so credit-
ably and with such good results as be.
POLLITT, REV. JAMES.
This most popular and eloquent preacher was born at
Worsley, Lancashire, England, in 1818, and from an
early age engaged in mission work. In 1831 he left bis
native land for Jamaica, under appointment, but in con-
sequence of ill-health was compelled to return in 1841.
After successful ministrations in Demerara and among
tbe Carib Indians, be sailed for Adelaide, and landed
here in May, 1846. Tbe first sphere of bis labours was


at Mount Barker, from which he ultimately removed to
Kooringa, remaining there till 1855, when he was elected
incumbent of St. Luke’s, Adelaide. In 1877 Mrs. Pollitt
died, and he remained a widower till 1880, when he again
married. In June, 1881, his health entirely gave way,
and he was quite incapacitated for duty, and retired from
the ministry. His death took place September 15, 1881,
and he bore the long and serious illness with great forti-
tude. He left a widow, and three sons and daughters by
his former marriage.
PULLEN, LIEUT. J. S., R.N.,
One of the early colonists in S.A. He arrived with
Colonel Light in the brig Rapid, August 18, 1886, and
was on the survey staff of that gentleman. Shortly
after his arrival he was, with the Surveyor-General, dis-
patched by Captain Sturt to explore and survey the mouth
of the Murray; and he may be thoroughly accredited
with the discovery of Port Adelaide, into which he sailed
on September 28, 1886. Whilst fitting out at Encounter
Bay to survey Lake Alexandrina he was burned out, and
what money he had, with all else he possessed, was des-
troyed, even to his instruments. To replenish everything
he was compelled to walk the whole way to Adelaide,
over eighty miles. He surveyed Port Elliot, and did
much to make known the geography of our coasts. On
returning to England Lieut. Pullen found scope for his
ability in many capacities. In June, 1849, he sailed in a
brig for the northern arctic coast of America in search
of Sir Jno. Eranklin, and wintered two years and a-half
with the fur-traders of the Hudson’s Bay Company, re-
turning home via Northern America in October, 1851.
The next year he went to Davis’ Straits, Lancaster
Sound, and Beachy Isle, and was shut up in the ice for
two years. Port Pullen (now the Goolwa) was called


after Admiral Pullen, and most people are at a loss to
understand why the name was not retained. Admiral
Pullen resides in England, and is as heretofore interested
in the progress of South Australia, for which he predicts
a great future.
PATZELL, GOTLEIB,
An old and respected [resident near Mount Gamhier.
Died May 18, 1881. He served under Blucher at
Waterloo, and was fond of relating the stirring events of
that memorable battle, in which he had fought.
EAMSAY, HON. J. G.,
Commissioner of Public Works. Occupied the Treasury
Benches for the first time in the Ayers Ministry in 1872,
when he represented the Mount Barker electorate. Mr.
Eamsay was elected to the Legislative Council in 1880,
and accepted the office he now holds in the Bray Ministry
with the entire approbation of the public.
RANDELL, WILLIAM RICHARD,
Born at Sidbury, Devon, May, 1824, and received his
education partly in England and partly in Adelaide.
He arrived with his parents in South Australia, when
but seventeen years of age, on October 10, 1887, and was
until 1853 engaged in pastoral pursuits. In that year
he built a steamer, the first on the Murray Eiver, with a
view to its being employed in navigating that great
maritime highway. To him is due the honour of opening
up the Murray trade, for notwithstanding that to Cap-
tain Cadell much praise must be accorded, it is certain
Mr. Eandell was in the field before him. As a reward
for the energy he had displayed he was awarded £3OO by
the Government, and a purse of sovereigns with an ac-
companying testimonial from the public.


RANKINE, W., SEN.,
A well-known resident o£ Grlenbarr, near Strathalbyn,
where he lived many years. He was born in Scotland in
1799, and came to South Australia by the Fairfield in the
early part o£ 1839 with a numerous young family, of
whom there are now six surviving sons. He was one of
the original proprietors of the Angas special surveys, to
which the purchasers, being chiefly Scotchmen, gave the
characteristic and now well-known name of Strathalbyn,
and with the late Mr. James Dawson acted as trustee in
the interests of purchasers of the town lands. He first
settled in the district in 1810, prior to the completion of
the survey and the allotment of the land, and, with the
exception of a few years spent in his native country,
resided in it till his death, which occurred September 5,
1882, at the good round age of 83 years. His brother,
Dr. Rankine, was a member of the old legislature before
the introduction of the present elective system, but he
himself did not enter the political arena, being of a quiet
unobtrusive character. He was for a long time a Justice
of the Peace, and for years held the position of Chairman
of the Strathalbyn District Council. Of him it is re-
corded that “ during his life he made many friends, and no
enemies, and was held in the highest esteem by all.”
READ, REV. H., M.A., F.R.A.S.,
Born at Worthing, England, educated at Manchester and
St. John’s College, Cambridge. Seven times prizeman in
addition to other honours. Took a BA. degree, and in
1855 was appointed classical tutor of Bishop’s College,
Demerara. Took M.A. degree in 1859 at Cambridge.
Appointed H.M. Inspector of Schools, West Indies ;
served in connection with the Colonial Office under Lord
Stanley, Duke of Newcastle, and the Earl of Carnarvon.
In consequence of failing health he returned to England


in 1866. Arrived in Adelaide May, 1867, having been
nominated by Sir W. W. Hughes to the Hughes Profes-
sorship of Classics, Adelaide University. Incumbent of
Mitcham Church, June, 1875; has since resigned, and at
present resides in Melbourne, Victoria.
REYNOYLDS, HON. THOMAS,
A leading politician of the province of South Australia,
and one of the most talented men of his day. Perished
in the wreck of the Gothenburg at Barrier Beef, Torres
Straits, Pebruary 24, 1875. He held the Treasurership
in the first Parliament in this colony, and discharged his
duties in that office with great ability. He gave much
practical attention to fostering the fruit-growing and
jam-manufacturing industry.
RICHARDS, RICHARD HENRY,
A highly-gifted artist, who was born in Adelaide Pebruary
10, 1856 ; died August 15, 1876. He was the son of Mr.
J. L. Richards, of this city, and educated at Prince Alfred
College. Entered H.M. Civil Service, Survey Department,
in 1872, where his pen-and-ink drawings were held in
high estimation. On his resignation in consequence of
ill-health a letter from the Surveyor-General was sent
him, from which the following extract may not be inap-
propriate : —“ I exceedingly regret that through illness
you have been compelled to leave the department, and
the loss of such an efficient and promising draftsman will
be much felt by the office.” Prom the dawn of his life,
which was exemplary, he exhibited an ambition to attain
excellence in the highest department of his art, and soon
attracted notice by the remarkable character of his
earliest efforts. He was self-taught, and the bent of his
genius was wonderful. Several of his works in pen-and-
ink still exist, and must be seen to be appreciated. They


WILLIAM B. ROUNSEVELL, J.P.
Page 205.


are so finely constructed as to be often mistaken for steel
engravings. His most pretentious works were “ The
Pawn,” “ London in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,”
a facsimile of a map by Aggas; and a large por-
trait, done in different thicknesses of German writing,
of the Emperor William of Prussia, to whom Richards
sent it framed and nicely enclosed in 1876 as a present.
His Majesty much appreciated the gift, and sent a reward
to the donor, who, alas! had quitted the scene of his
earthly labours before its arrival. As a work of art
probably this portrait, formed entirely of writing, and
descriptive of incidents in the life of the Emperor Wil-
liam, is unsurpassed in the world, and it is to be regretted
that such a memorial of the genius of Richards, and a
triumph in the caligrapher’s art. should be lost to South
Australia. Some relics of his extraordinary ability are,
however, yet to be seen in Adelaide in the possession of
his parents, who may well mourn the loss of one who, a
votary to art, sacrificed health, and even life, at its shrine.
Of him it may be truly said, “ His star went down ere it
was yet day.” Like Henry Ivirke White, he was in-
fatuated with his self-imposed task, and succumbed to
his fate,
Just as life wore its brightest hue,
And the world was fairest to his view.
ROBERTS, REV. JAMES,
Born in England in 1810, and at an early age gave evi-
dences of religious tendencies. He became a local
preacher in 1826, when he was but sixteen years old, and
gave his first sermon in a farm-house. After labouring
for six years as a local preacher, he was, in 1832, ordained
as a minister in the Bible Christian Church, and appointed
to the Circuit of Hilston, Yorkshire. For twenty-three
years his ministrations in England were productive of
much good, and he then came to South Australia. His


first sermon in this colony was preached at Bowden, and
shortly after his arrival the Rev. J. Way, who had sole
charge of the Circuit, gave him that portion in which
Maclaren Yale, Yankalilla, and Willunga are situated,
and he had to occupy the pulpits at these places every
Sunday with Mrs. Roberts (who proved an able co-
adjutor), as they had only one local preacher to aid them.
During his twenty-seven years’ ministry in South Aus-
tralia he was twice in the Willunga and Clarendon Cir-
cuits, three times in the Kapunda Circuit, and twice
appointed by the Conference. On the fiftieth anniversary
of Mr. Roberts’ ministrations he was presented with an
illuminated address by his admirers, as a token of their
esteem for his unselfish character and perseverance in the
cause of goodness and truth.
ROBERTSSON, JOHN,
Born in Inverness-shire in 1809, and left for Australia in
1838, going first to New South Wales. In 1843 he took
up the Plains Station, on which he lived the remainder of
his life, carefully adding to its area whenever oppor-
tunity offered, till it became one of the most magnificent
station properties in South Australia. In this colony he
owned 96,000 acres of freehold land, besides a large area
across the border in Victoria. In 1875, he erected a
palatial residence on the banks of Mosquito Creek, 12
miles from Narracoorte, which he named “ Straun House,”
and where he dispensed his hospitality to travellers with
no niggard hand. The year before his death among his
guests were His Excellency Sir W. E. D. Jervois, and
others. He died March 31, 1881, at the age of 71 years,
and his remains were interred on his own estate.
ROBERTSON, ROBERT, M.D., F.P.S., Edin., M.C.S., Glas.,
M.A.
Dr. E. Eobertson, who occupies the position of Health


Officer of the city of Adelaide, is the third son of the
late Mr. Mure Robertson, coalmaster, Ayrshire, Scotland.
He was born December 26, 1829, and educated at Paisley
and Glasgow, in the University of which city he attended
medical classes. He took his diploma from the Paculty
of Physicians and Surgeons, Glasgow, when resident
surgeon at the Royal Infirmary in 1852. He made two
voyages to the United States, and six voyages to the
Australian colonies under the Emigration Commission.
Settled at Mount Barker in 1860, where he carried on an
extensive practice until 1870, when he went to the
Wallaroo Mines, where he remained until 1873, when he
took up his residence in Adelaide, and practised his
profession. Visited Scotland in 1878-9, as Inspector of
Immigrants for the Government, and successfully for-
warded about 1,500 immigrants to the colony. In 1878, Dr.
Robertson was elected a Bellow of the Faculty of
Physicians and Surgeons, Edinburgh, a member of the
Medical Chirurgical Society, Glasgow, and the British
Medical Association. He received the appointment of
Health Officer for Adelaide in January, 1882, and it was
universally admitted no more competent gentleman could
be found to occupy that position, as Dr. Robertson’s
practical experience in the diagnosis of diseases arising
from malarial causes was very great. In addition to his
known skill in treating ordinary complaints, as an
authority on “ midwifery” he stands pre-eminent, and by
constant and unwearying study of intricate cases, has been
able to effectively treat many which have defied the best
members of the faculty. He has delivered two series of
lectures on the subject to midwives and nurses, and there
is little doubt the instruction imparted by this means has
been invaluable to them. He has also given lectures on
the “Laws of Health,” “The Causes and History of
Diphtheria and Typhoid Eever,” “ The Principles of


Disinfection,” and other kindred matters. These lectures
have been published, and are invaluable from the reliable
information they contain. Too often the great mass of
those who inhabit cities and towns are totally unacquainted
with the bare rudiments of health ; thus Dr. Eobertson’s
pamphlets are likely to do much good, more especially as
they contain simple rules for its preservation, in simple
language. Dr. Eobertson was appointed to the Commis-
sion of the Peace in 1872.
ROCK, REV. JOSEPH,
An eminent Bible Christian minister; born in Stafford-
shire, England, in 1821, and came to the colony in 1853.
Prior to his arrival he was connected with the Methodist
New Connexion Church, and was at the early age of
sixteen a local preacher of that body. After his arrival
in South Australia he joined the Bible Christians, and
was appointed to take charge of the Port Elliot Circuit,
where he laboured successfully for three yesrs, and after-
wards at Kapunda for two years. During his pastorate
at the latter town by his exertions a new church was
erected, and he was universally beloved by all who knew
him. Since that period he has been stationed at the
Burra, on the Gawler and Kadina Circuits, and again on
the Kapunda Circuit, the pastorate of wdiich he held at
the time of his death —February 1, 1882. As a preacher
Mr. Eock was noted for earnestness and enthusiasm, and
not unfrequently his zeal carried him beyond his strength.
He left a widow and two sons, and his funeral was the
largest ever seen on the Peninsula, where he was interred,
attended as it was by ministers of every denomination,
and upwards of 800 of the general public.
ROSS, HON. E. D., J.P.,
Speaker of the House of Assembly, to which position he


was elected on the resignation of Sir Gr. S. Kingston. He
has been twice member for Wallaroo, and still represents
that electorate. Mr. Eoss has filled some important
offices in connection with the Parliament, and his ability
as a financer was shown when he was Treasurer in Mr.
Colton’s Ministry, from June 6,1876, to October, 1877. He
is President of the Eoyal Agricultural Society of South
Australia, and has given valuable assistance at various
times in its operations. A thorough practical fruit-
grower and cultivator generally, his intelligence and
great experience have ever been placed at the service of
all who required information of him.
ROUNSEVELL, WILLIAM BENJAMIN, J.P.,
A native of South Australia, and the second son of the
late William Eounsevell, Esq., who, during a long and
successful career as coach proprietor was known as the
“ Cobb & Co.” of South Australia (this business is still
carried on by a Company under the name of John Hill
and Co.). On the death of his father Mr. Eounsevell,
with his brother, came into possession of a large fortune,
which enabled him to gratify those liberal instincts of
his generous nature, and perform many public and private
actions which redound to his credit. He was elected
member for the Burra in 1875, and, with Mr. E. Ward,
still represents that constituency in Parliament in a
creditable manner. In December, 1881, he was returned
unopposed as Mayor of Glenelg, the interests of which
town he has at heart, and endeavours to his utmost to
promote its welfare. When the Hon. G-. S. Eowler
resigned his position in Parliament through ill-health
Mr. Eounsevell was appointed Treasurer, but only occu-
pied the office a few weeks, in consequence of the resig-
nation of the Morgan Ministry.


ROWLAND, WALTER,
An old and much esteemed Government servant, who for
five years occupied the position of clerk to the Adelaide
Local Court. At the time of his decease, which took
place January 27, 1882, he was on a visit to Port Victor,
with a view to recruit his health, which had for some
months been in a very indifferent state. Mr. Rowland
was a thorough man of business, unswerving in his duty,
and though many may remember him as one who acted
inimical to their interests, his many friends will regret
his death at the early age of 43 years.
RUSSELL, THE VERY REV. DEAN, D.D.,
Was born in 1825, and educated at the High School o£
Edinburgh and the Edinburgh University. Prizeman in
logic, metaphysics, rhetoric, and belles-lettres. Spent two
years at Trinity College, Dublin. Entered the Church of
England at the age of twenty-one, and was ordained by
the Bishop of Winchester. Was ordained deacon in
1850, priest in 1851; curate of Emsworth, Hants, in
1850; Tunbridge Wells, Kent, 1852; Westmoneux,
Sussex, 1853; incumbent of St. John, Adelaide, S.A.,
1855, and of St. Paul’s in the same city in I 860; Canon
of Adelaide, 1867; Dean of Adelaide, 1869; Yicar-
General, 1878. Appointed Administrator of the Diocese
of Adelaide on the vacancy of the see, 1882. Received
from the Archbishop of Canterbury the degree of 8.D.,
1878.
In Adelaide the work of the Dean has not been wholly
confined to clerical duty; he has taken an active part in
all social movements, especially those relating to the
working classes and the promotion of temperance. He
for some time edited the Education Journal , and has
written occasionally for the Press. He has published the
following works, all of which show striking evidences of


originality and true genius, stamping their author as no
ordinary man. They comprise:—Several discourses, a
volume of sermons; “ The Light which Lighteth Every
Man” (Hope & Co., London, 1854); “ Charge to the
Synod of Adelaide, 1878;” “ Memorial of Professor F.
D. Maurice” (1870); and “The Seeker and other Poems.”
The last-mentioned is a powerfully written work, full of
aspirations after the good and true, and calculated to
elevate all who peruse it.
SAKDERSON, FREDERICK JAMES,
Collector of Customs. Born at ISTewcastle-on-Tyne, July
4, 1834, arrived in Adelaide in 1852, and received the
appointment as clerk in the Treasury June 26, 1854.
Was further appointed December 1, 1862, Secretary to
the Lands Titles Commissioners, and in 1870 Secretary to
the Attorney-General. During the absence of Mr.
Boothby, the Government Statist, at the Paris Exhibition,
Mr. Sanderson performed the duties of his office with
satisfaction.
SCHOMBURGK, RICHARD VON, DR. PHIL.,
Born at Fribault, Saxony, in 1811. His father (theEev.
J. F. L. Schomburgk) was a Lutheran ecclesiastic at
Thuringia, and his brother, Sir Eobert Schomburgk, Con-
sul at Bankok, was distinguished for his knowledge of
geography and natural history and for his travels and
scientific researches in South America in conjunction
with that greatest of scientific travellers, Baron von
Humboldt. After studying botany at Berlin, and in the
Eoyal Gardens at Potsdam, the subject of this memoir
accompanied his brother Eobert on several of his expedi-
tions, the most notable being that to British Guiana, in
1840, when the latter was appointed Commissioner for
surveying and marking out its boundaries. On returning


to Germany, Richard von Schomburgk having taken a
part in the political disturbances of the day, was com-
pelled to leave his native land somewhat hurriedly, and
with his brother Otto came to South Australia. Shortly
after arrival they purchased land on the Gawler River,
and engaged in farming and vine culture. They resided
there for about ten years, and made their names famous
as vignerons; even yet, the wine made on their former
estate, Buchsfelde, is in good repute. Some time after
the decease of his brother, who died in December, 1865,
Dr. Schomburgk, then Curator of the local Museum, who
was much liked by the people of Gawler, to their great
regret, but to his own advantage, accepted the Director-
ship of the Botanic Gardens, Adelaide, rendered vacant
by the death of Mr. Francis, its Superintendent. On his
departure from Gawler he was the recipient of a superb
silver goblet of elaborate workmanship, suitably in-
scribed, as a testimonial of the respect in which he was
held by its residents. At the time he entered on his new
sphere of duty the Botanic Gardens were hardly worthy
the name, now they stand pre-eminent as the birthplace
of costly floral gems and rare plants. The wilderness
touched by the fairy wand (to use a metaphor) of an
artist in his profession, has been transformed into a store-
house of beauty, and one of the most charming spots to wile
away a leisure hour in the Southern hemisphere. Here
the veteran botanist resides in the midst of the miniature
world of exotics he has created, and here he passes his
spare time in writing on topics which may interest and
benefit the florist, farmer, or agriculturist. It is not to
be wondered at that from many lands honours pour in
on him thick and fast, or that South Australians should
rejoice that he is located in their midst. The Emperor
of Germany has sent this worthy man an Order and medals,
and an Order of Merit has also reached him from the


VERY REV. DEAN RUSSELL, D.D.
Page 206.


Duke of Hesse. In addition thereto, he has received the
following honours: —Knight of the Imp. Order of the
Crown, the Order of Merit of Phillip the Magnanimous,
and the Order of the Grown of Italy ; Memb. Imp. Carol.
Leopold. Academy ; Cor. Memb. Academy of Nat. Science,.
Philadelphia, IT. St.; Memb. Imp. Soc. Caesaria,
Moscow ; Hon. Mem and Master of Fr. Deut. Hoch-
t-ift, Frankfurt, O.V Cor. Memb. Zool. Soc., London ;
or. Memb. Eoyal Bot. Soc., London ; Cor. Memb. Hort.
>c., London ; Cor. Memb. Bot. Soc., 'Edinburgh ; Hon.
Member Geogr. Soc., Berlin and Dresden; Cor. Memb.
Geogr. Soc., Vienna; Cor. Memb. Geogr. Soc., Halle ;
Cor. Memb. Soc. Rationale, Cherbourg, France ; Cor.
Memb. Anthropol. Soc., Berlin ; Cor. Memb. Hort. Soc.,.
Berlin ; Cor. Memb. Hort. Soc., Frankfurt O.M. ; Cor..
Memb. Soc. Physica. Medica., Erlangen; Cor. Memb.
Soc. Yaterl. Culture of Silesia; Hon. Memb. Bot. Soc.,,
Magdeburg; Hon. Memb. Hort. Soc., Victoria; Hon.
Memb. Eoyal Soc., Sydney; Cor. Memb. Eoyal Soc.,.
Tasmania ; Cor. Memb. State Hort. Soc., San Francisco,
California, and many others. In short, hardly a month
passes without some new testimony to his worth being
added to the list. Yet with all these the Doctor is one
of the most unassuming of individuals, and ever ready to
impart the information he has gained by years of study
and research to all.
SCHRADER, HEINRICH L.,
Born at Brunswick, Germany, February 4, 1832, died in
Adelaide February 21, 1880. The following particulars
as to his history are contributed by one who was per-
sonally acquainted with him: —“ He was nurtured in
music, for his first instructors w r ere the natural guardians
of his infancy —his parents —and the art was his pleasure
and pursuit in life. We do not know if he was a juvenile-
jsr


prodigy; but bis father, believing there was dormant
talent, endeavoured to develop it by placing him under
severe and methodical contrapundists, and nature, zeal,
and practice made him the accomplished master he even-
tually became. At sixteen years of age he joined the
military artillery band, and was known by his seniors as
* the young trumpeter.’ Love of country made the
4 glorious boy’ a patriot, and he cast his life on the decree
of fate. He soon commenced active service by taking
part in the war with Denmark. In the German army,
where promotion rests chiefly on merit, a spirit like
Schrader’s was bound to be requited; hence he rose
rapidly in the ranks. One, two, three stripes soon
adorned the young soldier’s arm ; yet there was no fickle
envy, for his unassuming bearing—which he retained
through life—also enhanced his favouritism with the
whole band. About four years later the second war with
Denmark took place, after which Heinrich was gazetted
sergeant, followed by the appointment of bandmaster, a
responsibility he did not accept. When the news of the
Victorian goldfields crazed the brain of Teutons, like the
English people, our late friend caught the infection, was
fortunate to get his engagements cancelled, and sailed in
the ship Peter Goderffroy, with Herren Heydecke, Eritz
Heydecke, Schoff, Lindow, Gerke, and Oelmann; the
latter is the only one remaining in the colony, and whose
sister (a passenger in the same ship) Mr. Schrader married
four months after arriving in this colony. To disembark
passengers the vessel put in at the Port, and the whole
party through hearing bad news from the goldfields
resolved to make Adelaide their future home. Mr.
Schrader’s first musical engagement was at the Blenheim,
a three months’ engagement; but his greatest friend was
Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, and during the Gover-
nor’s long term of office no party was scarcely given at


the Yice-Regal residence hut what the once hoy trumpeter
assisted. To give Mr. Schrader’s career from this time
would he to give the progess of music in this city for the
last twenty-three years. The profession always accepted
him as a sound practical performer. As a soloist he
seldom operated, except in the theatre ; in the orchestra
he always held a conspicuous position ; and as an obligate
accompanyist he never was excelled.” His widow still
resides in Adelaide, and his eldest son appears to have
inherited the musical tastes of his father, and is in good
repute as a talented musician.
SCOTT, HENRY, ESQ.,
Mayor of Adelaide 1878. Henry Scott, son of Thomas
Scott, of Boode House, near Braunton, Devon, was horn
29th May, 1836 ; arrived in Adelaide 28th December,
1854. Employed in the office of his brother, Mr. Abraham
Scott, until March, 1866, when he took the business off
Mr. A. Scott’s hands. His ancestors were Scotch, having
come to Devonshire as followers of King Charles, 1645.
The family remained in Devonshire until 1845, when they
removed to Bristol, where Mr. Scott was educated. He
has been interested in sheepfarming for many years, and
an active supporter of the National Bank of Australasia,
of which he is a director. He is deputy-chairman of the
Chamber of Commerce, and in addition to shipping and
general mercantile business, represents the Cornwall
Eire and Marine and Eagle Insurance Companies. He
owns the fine pile of buildings known as Eagle Chambers,
adjoining the Town Hall, and has an interest in two
warehouses in Blyth-street. His private residences are
Benacre, at Grlen Osmond, and Boode House, Mount
Lofty. Although he has never taken any prominent
position in public life, he has carefully studied passing
events, and occasionally expressed his opinions on political


matters in the newspapers. He was elected to Parliament
on the Ist of December, 1878. Mr. Scott left Adelaide
for England in 1881, but did not resign the position he
held in Parliament. As a Mayor he w r as very popular
with the people, and highly respected by all who were
favoured with his acquaintance.
SHIEL, RIGHT REV. LAURENCE BONAVENTURE, D.D.,
Born at Wexford, Ireland, December 24, 1815. He
received the greater portion of his education at Eome,
and applied himself whilst there closely to his theological
studies. On the completion of the prescribed course, he
was, in 1837, simultaneously elected to the chairs of
theology and philosophy at St. Isodore’s Franciscan
Convent, Eome, and declared in favour of the latter.
For two years he discharged the duties of this important
post, when enfeebled health led to his removal to Ireland,
where he was created Superior of the Franciscan order.
His ability, learning, and devotedness to the Church
attracted the notice of Dr. Groold, Bishop 'of Melbourne,
and in 1852 he accompanied that right rev. prelate to
Victoria, with a view of assuming the presidencv of a
College then forming. From that period up to his
decease he was identified with Australia, and for six
years Professor of Theology and Philosophy in Mel-
bourne. He was ultimately elevated to the Presidential
chair of St. Patrick’s College. He had here under his
care many of the younger members of the jmiesthood, all
of whom bore testimony that “his gentle demeanour
endeared him to those who were brought in contact with
him, and rendered him one of the most popular and
respected of the Eoman Catholic clergy in Victoria.”
In 1859, he was appointed to the Archdeaconate of
Ballarat, and laboured there for seven years, at the close
of which period he was nominated to the Bishopric of


Adelaide, in succession to the Eight Eev. Dr. Geoghegan,
and deputations of all classes bade him farewell with
regret. Dr. Shiel arrived in Adelaide in September,
1866, when he was enthusiastically welcomed by both
clergy and laity. Up to that period Catholicism here
was at a very low ebb, and to his advent is due that
revival which then set in, and has since continued ; many
churches were erected, and arrangements made for the
introduction of new priests. His ministrations were
crowned with success, and among other important orders
instituted by him was that of the Sisters of St. Joseph.
In 1867 and in 1869 he went to Home ; on the first-
named date with the object of being present at the
centenary, March, 1867. Shortly afterwards he went to
Ireland, and procured priests and nuns for the purpose
of imparting a superior education to the youth of his
diocese ; and on the second occasion, when he attended
the (Ecumenical Council convened by the Pope. Dr.
Shiel died March Ist, 1872, aged 57 years. He was much
admired for his sterling qualities, not only in his own
Church, but by members of other denominations. As
showing his energy in the cause of Homan Catholicism, it
may be mentioned that he introduced into South Australia
eighteen priests and seven nuns, built sixteen churches
and five schoolhouses, established St. Prancis Xavier’s
Hall and St. Xavier’s College, and the Dominican Con-
vent, Orphanage, Pemale Eefuge, and other institutions
of a popular and charitable character.
SHORT, RIGHT REV. AUGUSTUS, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Adelaide, comes of an old English county
family. The Shorts of Bickham, Devon, are collaterally
descended from the Shorts of Edlington Grove, Lincoln,
to one of whom, Prebendary Short, of Canterbury, the
family crest was granted in 1579. The son of John


Short, of Bickham, parish of Kenn, near Exeter, Avas
Archdeacon ¥m, Short, father of Thomas Yowler Short,
the well-known bishop, first of Sodor and Man, and then
of St. Asaph, was cousin to the Bishop of Adelaide. The
father of the Bishop of Adelaide was a London barrister,
and his brother, Colonel Short, served as an ensign at
"Waterloo. His sister married a brother of the celebrated
novelist, Captain Marryat, and the present Archdeacon
of Adelaide is her son. Archdeacon Marryat’s sister
married Sir Henry E. E. Young, once Governor of South
Australia, and whose son is now a member of the legal
profession in this colony. Directly and indirectly, there-
fore, the Bishop is closely identified with the province in
which for such a lengthened period he has held a promi-
nent position. Augustus Short was born June 11, 1802,
and entered Westminster School when seven years old.
In due course he passed on to Oxford, where he graduated
first class in 1824, proceeded in regular order to his M.A.
degree, and became a student and censor of Christ Church
College. He Avas ordained a deacon in 1826, and a priest
in the following year ; subsequently he became a tutor
and public examiner at his University. In 1835 the
Bishop accepted from his college the position of Vicar of
Eavensthorpe, Northamptonshire. On the occasion of
the presentation of a piece of plate to him in January,
1877, the Bishop referred to this period of his life and a
coincidence of two interesting facts. “It w r as,” said His
Lordship, “ a singular thing that Avhen the Buffalo cast
anchor in Holdfast Bay I cast anchor in my living in
Northamptonshire, and eleA r en years after that on the
anniA r ersary of the colony, I landed here, and was present
at the celebration of its foundation.” The living Avas no
great prize, but in a feAv years the vicar was preferred to
a rural deanery, and in 1846 appeared in Oxford as the
Bampton lecturer, a post filled at various times by promi


nent bishops and theologians of the English Church.
About eight years after this the attention of the Anglican
communion, possibly stirred up by the great Oxford
revival then at its height, turned to the missionary and
colonial work of the Church. It supplies an interesting
and striking contrast to recall that whereas in 1833 there
were only five Anglican bishops in the colonies, and
£IOO,OOO spent on missions, there are now sixty-one
colonial prelates, and the missionary expenditure exceeds
£400,000 per annum. The Baroness (then Miss) Burdett-
Coutts offered an endowment to the extent of £BOO a
year each for the foundations of several colonial dioceses,
that of Adelaide being among the number. The prefer-
ment to the see of Adelaide fell to the Rev. Augustus
Short, who was with other ministers appointed to colonial
bishoprics, consecrated on June 29, 1847, and, having
been admitted to the degree of D.D., he shortly after
left England for South Australia. Before His Lordship’s
arrival the State-aid-to-religion question had arisen, and
the Bishop had to face the formidable difficulty of building
a Church bound up with State traditions and always sup-
ported by State funds Upon a purely voluntary basis.
The jealousy with which the undenominational character
of our colonial system was guarded soon came promi-
nently to the front in the celebrated cathedral acre case.
Acting upon verbal and other testimony supplied to him
before leaving England, and armed with a formal land
grant under the hand and seal of the Governor, Dr. Short
claimed an acre in Victoria-square as the designated site
for the Church of England Cathedral. The grant pre-
sented by the Bishop met with a prompt declaration from
the local authorities that the document was ultra vires ,
and after protracted legal proceedings the Supreme Court
of the province decreed in 1855 that Dr. Short could not
enforce his claims, it being held that though the Governor


could grant waste lands, he could not interfere with the
public reserves, of which Yictoria-sqnare was one.
Having obtained a grant of £2,000 from the venerable
Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, His Lordship
applied it towards founding an institution upon the lines
of the grammar schools of England. Private munificence
supplemented the help given from other quarters, and
the Bishop has lived to see St. Peter’s Collegiate School
become a wealthy corporation and take a leading place
amongst the public schools of the colony. When our
local University was founded Hr. Short filled the post of
the first Vice-Chancellor; his ripe scholarship, and the
interest he had always shown in educational affairs, called
him to the still higher dignity of Chancellor upon the
decease of Chief Justice Sir K. H. Hanson. The ex-
haustive inaugural address delivered by the Bishop at the
first University commencement did honour both to the
author and to the occasion.
The Bishop had not been many years settled in his
diocese before the whole subject of the colonial episcopate
passed under a most searching review, on appeal to the
Privy Council. The result revealed the startling fact
that letters patent from the English Crown to colonial
bishops carried no territorial jurisdiction with them, and
were in truth of little, if any, practical effect. Dr. Short
at once saw the gravity of the situation, and set himself
earnestly to work to find a satisfactory basis for the
administration of his diocese.
Bishop Short visited England in 1866, and the Church-
men of the colony, to mark their appreciation of his
conduct in the past, requested him to sit to one of the
English portrait painters for a picture that might be pre-
served as a memorial of the first prelate of the diocese.
He complied, and the artist produced a fine three-quarter
figure portrait, which now hangs in the library of the


RICHARD VON SCHOMBURGK, DR. PHIL.
Page 207.


Church Offices. At various times, when some anniversary
of the Bishop’s advent at the episcopate has arrived, the
clergy and laity have taken the occasion to present him
with some tangible mark of their esteem. But the sub-
ject which he always had nearest at heart was the building
of a new cathedral, and it was not till June 29, 1869 —
twenty-two years after his arrival—that the foundation-
stone was laid by Sir James Eergusson. On New Year’s
Day, 1878, a portion of the structure was formally opened
and consecrated. Shortly after this he went to England,
and on his return interested himself in the formation and
maintenance of a School of Theology, which is known
as St. Barnabas Theological College, and which is now
completed.
At the last session of the Synod, towards the close of
1881, the question of Dr. Short’s contemplated retirement
was discussed, and the salary of the incoming bishop fixed
at £1,200 per annum, with residence. The surplus
income—at present about £3O0 —was reserved as retiring
allowance to Dr. Short for life. His Lordship left Ade-
laide by the R.M.S. Carthage for England on January 6,
1882, to seek a well-earned rest and retirement, and his
departure was a source of sorrow not alone to members
of his own communion, but those of the Churches gene-
rally. During the time the Bishop has resided in South
Australia he has witnessed the establishment of no less
than ninety-one churches, the erection of a cathedral, and
a number of other things indicative of the progressive
age we live in.
SINNETT, FREDERICK,
A native of Hamburg, where he was born March, 1831.
His mother possessed great literary ability, which was
probably an incentive to his turning attention to literature
as a means of livelihood. When but fifteen years of age,


lie entered the service of the proprietors of the Globe in
London as reporter, and was even then a liberal contri-
butor to their columns. In consequence of close appli-
cation to study, his health became impaired, so that his
medical man advised a voyage to Australia. Acting on
his recommendation, and being under engagement to the
Adelaide and Port Railway Company for the survey of
their projected line, he sailed for South Australia in
1849, and reached Adelaide the same year. He had been
intended for the profession of engineer and surveyor,
and had made himself thoroughly conversant with all
pertaining to it. Shortly after arrival in Adelaide, on
completing the work for which he was engaged, he joined
Mr. Burr, once Deputy Surveyor-General of South Aus-
tralia, but was not long connected with him. His stay in
South Australia extended over two years, at the end of
which period, attracted by the new gold-fields opened in
Victoria, he left the colony. Prom the time of arrival
until his departure he was a constant writer for the
press, and his racy contributions will be long remembered
by those who perused them. Mr. Sinnett was absent from
the colony in Victoria until 1859, when he returned to Ade-
laide to manage some ice- works, which ultimately proved
a failure, and involved him in ruin. His love of literature
continuing, he became Parliamentary reporter for u Han-
sard,” and editor of the Daily Telegraph. In 1865, he
left South Australia never to return, and his death was
recorded in about a year after his departure. He died
at Kew, near Melbourne, November 23, 1866. During
his residence in Victoria, he was editor of the Melbourne
Argus , Geelong Daily JVeivs , and Melbourne Dunch , and to
the columns of each he was a most voluminous and bril-
liant contributor. He was engaged by the Government
to write a “ Handbook of South Australia” for the
Exhibition at Sydenham in 1856. His son Percy, known


to the literary world as “ Per se,” a young man o£ con-
siderable promise as a writer, died in May, 1882. Like
his father, he was a voluminous contributor to several
South Australian newspapers.
SKIPPER, JOHN MICHAEL,
Is the son of the late Mr. J. Skipper, a lawyer of high
standing in Norfolk, England. He was born in Norwich,
and educated at the Grrammar School in that town. He
adopted the legal profession, and studied languages, be-
coming in a very brief time an excellent linguist and
high-class scholar. He entered the Hon. East India
Company’s service as an officer on board the Sherbourne,
and a “ Sea Journal,” admirably illustrated, testifies to
his powers of observation and extraordinary talent as an
artist. In 1836 he left his native land for South Australia,
and arrived in this colony by the Africaine, on November
Bth in that year. He married a daughter of Mr. Robert
Thomas, founder of the Press in South Australia. On arriv-
ing in South Australia he further studied law under Mr.
(now Judge) Grwynne, but as in the early days of the
colony litigation did not offer a fair field for the legal
profession, he accepted a position in the Civil Service,
and remained in it for over twenty years, his knowledge
of law proving of great advantage. He retired from the
Civil Service on his means, and occupied himself with
literary and artistic pursuits. As an amateur artist he
was always recognised as a man of extraordinary ability,
and he possessed an inexhaustible fund of refined caustic
wit, as his contributions to colonial literature in the past
testify. His sketches of Australian scenery in oils and
water colours are very valuable now, not only for their
artistic merits, but for the fidelity with which they depict
scenes of a by-gone day. As a caricaturist he was un-
equalled, and had he taken up art as a profession he


would have ranked amongst the most noted, especially as
a landscape, marine, and animal painter. He is a nephew
of Stark, the famous landscape painter.
SMART, SAMUEL,
An eminent member of the legal profession, and once
resident in Tasmania, from which v place he received the
appointment of Sheriff of Adelaide. He arrived in South
Australia in 1838, and was very popular with the colo-
nists. The object of his appointment was to facilitate the
arrest of several Yandemonian convicts who had
escaped to this colony and committed outrages, and who
were known to Mr. Smart. He had not been long in
Adelaide before his whereabouts was found by these men,
and an attempt was made on his life one night in a hut
by three of them. One of the ruffians fired at him, but
fortunately with no bad results. Two of the men were
afterwards captured and executed, these being the first
executions in the colony. The scene at one of them was
of the most barbarous and cruel description, and cannot
be mentioned without exciting feelings of the most
profound disgust. Mr. Smart was co-trustee with Mr.
Phillips in the G-awler Special Survey, but left this colony
for Victoria in 1860 to settle in Melbourne, where he
died, March, 1865.
SMITH, EDWIN THOMAS, J.P., MAYOR OF ADELAIDE,
"Was born at Walsall, Staffordshire, in 1831, and is of an
old and mncb-respected family. He was educated first
at Queen Mary’s Grammar School, and afterwards at a
private school, thus receiving a first-class English educa-
tion. The various branches of the family took a deep
interest in political questions, especially when the agita-
tion for the repeal of the Corn Laws caused such excite-
ment, and this doubtless inspired Mr. E. T. Smith with


an early love for political life. At twenty years of age
lie was appointed Chairman of the Non-Electors Commit-
tee, w r hen Sir Chas. Eorster, Bart., was first elected in the
Liberal interest for South Staffordshire, and delivered his
maiden speech in the presence of Gobden, Bright, Yilliers,
and others, in response to the toast of the “ The Non-
Electors Committee,” at the banquet given to celebrate
the great Liberal victory. Two years later, in 1853, lie
arrived in South Australia, and commenced business in
Blyth-street as importer in the South Staffordshire
general ironmongery line. Shortly after questions of an
important and momentous character were agitating the
public mind, viz., manhood suffrage, the ballot, abolition
of State aid to religion, &c., and Mr. Smith threw his
whole heart and soul into these matters, as will be re-
membered by observers of the active part he took in
them during the years 1853-4-5. In 1860 he joined
the late Mr. E. Logue, at the old Kent Town Brewery,
and on that gentleman’s decease two years afterwards the
whole business fell into Mr. Smith’s hands. He exhibited
a commendable spirit of enterprise in 1875 in building the
extensive and commodious premises known as the present
Kent Town Brewery. He was elected Mayor of Kensing-
ton and Norwood without opposition during the several
municipal years of 1867-8-9, and largely contributed to
the advancement of those rising suburbs. In 1870 he
paid a visit to England, but was on his return to the
colony in 1872 again elected unopposed Mayor of Nor-
wood and Kensington. In the same year he entered
Parliament as member for East Torrens, and has since
continued to represent that constituency. Mr. Smith
has refused many offices and appointments offered him
during his Parliamentary career, the most notable being
that of the Chairmanship of Committees under the Blyth
administration, and a seat on the Ministerial benches.


He has done so in the full belief that he could best serve
his constituents as an independent member of the House
of Assembly, and he has generally been found a consis-
tent supporter of the Government of the day. As a
mark of respect both Houses of the Legislature united in
giving him a banquet on his leaving the colony for Europe
in 1877. Many of our local institutions owe their exis-
tence to his instrumentality, and he may be truly desig-
nated the “father of South Australian tramways.”- He
is a staunch supporter of all manly sports, and connected
either as Patron, President, or Vice-President with no
less than twelve Associations and Clubs in and round
the city. He has rendered valuable services on the
Hospital, Savings Bank, Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Asylum,
and other Boards; and shown his readiness on all occa-
sions to assist religious and charitable objects requiring
his aid. Those honoured with his friendship speak of his
private character as possessing those excellent traits
which denote the true gentleman. Mr. Smith was elected
by the citizens to fill the civic chair on the Ist December,
1879, by a majority of 1,328 votes over Mr. Colton, his
opponent. He was re-elected to the office in 1880-1
without opposition. Promises made on the hustings he
has faithfully fulfilled. The Torrens Dam has been com-
pleted, and the city adorned by a fine sheet of water;
the Park Lands beautified by tree-planting ; the streets
improved by asphalting; gas has been substituted for the
miserable kerosine lamps once forced on the citizens;
deep drainage is an accomplished fact; public baths
worthy the name are in hand; the squares ornamented
with iron railings; and a thousand-and-one other things
achieved and carried out under his auspices.
SOLOMON, EMANUEL,
One of South Australia’s most successful merchants, who


from the year 1837 was instrumental in largely advancing
its interests. Mr. Solomon had, prior to his arrival in
Adelaide at the period above mentioned, been engaged in
mercantile pursuits in Sydney, New South Wales, but
having heard favourable reports of the newly-settled
colony of South Australia, he, with his brother, was
induced to establish a branch of business here He
arrived in the ship Lady Wellington, which, after a
passage of eight weeks and two days, unfortunately came
to grief on the bar at the entrance of Light’s Passage.
During the period of depression, or the crisis as it was
not inaptly termed, when Governor Gawler’s drafts were
of no more value than waste paper, Mr. Solomon and his
firm suffered heavily, as did all the early settlers who
had expended their means in an endeavour to advance
the cause of civilization in the land of their adoption.
Unlike many wealthy men who keep their money locked
up in Banks where the highest percentage is to be
obtained, Mr. Solomon invested his capital where it
would do most good, not merely to himself, but to his
fellow colonists. His speculating tendencies found
abundant scope in the sphere in which his lot was cast,
for houses of all kinds were few and far between, and
the style of architecture was of the most primitive kind,
more worthy the aboriginal designers of wurleys than of
builders acquainted with the Tuscan, Doric, lonic, or
Corinthian orders. By Mr. Solomon’s spirited endeavours
respectable and commodious blocks of city residences
were erected, and a theatre, which rose on the ruins of
the first wooden structure devoted to Momus, was estab-
lished by him in what was then, and is still known to
colonists as “ Gilles’ Arcade.” Though a liberal sup-
porter of his own Church, Mr. Solomon was never back-
ward in donations to those of other denominations, and
many a languishing charity has been galvanized into new


life by bis liberality. He died in Adelaide, on October
3, 1878, leaving many to regret the departure from the
scene of his earthly labours of one who had done so much
good in his day and generation. On the thirty-fifth
anniversary of the colony, December 28, 1871, a banquet
was given by Mr. Emanuel Solomon, in the Town Hall,
to 520 old colonists, and at which he presided. Their
photographs were afterwards taken by Mr. Jones, the
whole forming a pleasing souvenir of an occasion as rare
as it was acceptable.
SOLOMON, JUDAH MOSS, J.P.,
Arrived in Adelaide in 1838, but did not settle in the
metropolis till 1847, when he became the partner of his
uncle Mr. E. Solomon ; and afterwards established busi-
ness on his own account. He was associated with many
movements for the public weal, and took an active
interest in Municipal and Legislative matters. He was
elected an Alderman in 1852, and Mayor of Adelaide in
18G9, holding the latter position for two years, and was
much esteemed by the citizens. In July, 1858, he was
elected for the city in the Assembly, vice Mr. E. E.
Torrens resigned, and was in turn a member of the
Legislative Council and a colleague of Mr. Simms in the
representation of West Adelaide in the Lower House.
At the time of his death (August 29th, 1880,) he was
Chairman of the Destitute Board, of which he had been
an active member for several years. His large family of
six sons and a daughter are still living, and are regarded
as among the most respected and influential of South
Australian colonists.
STEPHENS, EDWARD,
One of the early South Australian colonists, to whose
endeavours the establishment of the South Australian


EDWIN THOMAS SMITH, J.P.
Page 220.


Bank in Adelaide was due. He left the colony about
1850, and resided near London up till the time of his
death. His brother John was the founder and editor of
the Observer newspaper, and afterwards editor of the
Register. A bold and vigorous writer, “ with a libel
action always on hand,” just the sort of man, in fact, for
a quiet community such as the first settlers were.
STEPHENS, SAMUEL,
The first Manager of the South Australian Company.
Appointed to that office in England, and arrived in the
Duke of York, barque, Capt. Morgan, at Nepean Bay
July 27, 1836. Shortly before his arrival he married
Miss C. H. Beare, a fellow-passenger and daughter of
Mr. T. H. Beare, second in command under the Company.
Mr. Stephens made an excellent and efficient manager,
and his courteous and affable demeanour caused him to
be much liked by the colonists. His untimely death in
the prime of life will not speedily be forgotten. It oc-
curred shortly after the S.A. Company had abandoned
Kangaroo Island, and he had selected portions of the
main land for town and country lots. Whilst riding
down to the plains by one of the Glen Osmond spurs,
known as the Main Beaumont spur, Mr. Stephens evi-
dently met with an accident, as his lifeless body, with the
neck broken, was shortly after discovered by some
travellers. His horse had fallen, and the rider being
thrown on his head death must have been instantaneous.
By his decease the people of the province lost a faithful
friend, and the Company an excellent and zealous
servant.
STEVENSON, GEORGE, J P.,
Born at Berwick-on-Tweed April 13, 1799. His father,
a gentleman farmer, died when Gr. Stevenson was twelve
o


years o£ age, and tie shortly after went to sea with his
uncle, the Captain of an East Indiaman. Sickening of
sea life, he returned to Scotland and studied medicine,
but did not obtain more than its rudiments. He next ac-
companied his brother to Canada, and became a back-
woodsman. The death of his brother left him free to
follow the bent of his inclinations, and George wandered
through Central America and the West Indies, narrowly
escaping death by yellow fever at Mexico. It was sbout
this period he became connected with the Press, and his
first contributions to journalism appeared in the London
Globe and Examiner , for which he was correspondent.
Eeturning to England in the year 1830 he jointly with
Sir Henry Bulwer wrote and published a work entitled
“ France,” which received favourable notice. In 1835
John Gorton, Editor of the London Globe, died, and Geo.
Stevenson succeeded him. The Wakefield scheme of
colonization had just then been originated, and Mr.
Stevenson entered heart and soul into the movement,
and became one of its most active supporters. His belief
in its success led him to resign his editorship and join
the Government staff as Private Secretary to the Go-
vernor of the new settlement of South Australia. He
left England in the Buffalo with Captain Hindmarsh, in
June, 1836, and landed at Glenelg in December of the
same year. Just before quitting his native land he
married Margaret Gorton, a lady relative, who with
Eichard Barham, of the “ Ingoldsby Legends” celebrity,
had mainly compiled the biographical and topographical
dictionary known as “Gorton’s.” In common with the
early colonists Mr. Stevenson experienced the various
ups and downs incidental to settlement in a new colony,
in which he resolved to carve his fortunes, and where his
fame as a journalist will be long remembered. Prior to
his departure from England he entered into partnership


with Mr. Robert Thomas, for the purpose of establishing
a newspaper in this his adopted country, and in pursu-
ance of that arrangement the first number was issued in
London on the 18th June, 1836, and was edited by Mr.
Stevenson. The newspaper was called the S.A. Gazette
and Colonial Register , and contained all the official no-
tices of the South Australian Government under the
head of the Gazette , the rest of the space being occupied
with the ordinary newspaper contents. Mr. Stevenson’s
name appears among the first appointments (June 2,1887)
of Justice of Peace for the province, and he also held
the office of Clerk of Council. The second number of
the Gazette and Register appeared June 3, 1837, shortly
after the laying out of the new city, and continued under
the same management until the disastrous year, 1842,
when the journal passed into other hands. During all
this period Mr. Stevenson took active part in public
affairs, and edited the Register with great ability; indeed,
he was more generally known from his long and able
connection with the Press than in any other capacity.
Shortly after the assumption of the Government by
Colonel Gawler, Mr. Stevenson had resigned all his
official appointments, and the Governor took an early
opportunity of separating the Government Gazette from
the newspaper, which occasioned the alteration of the
title to the S.A. Register. Although the Gazette and the
Government printing continued to be executed for some
time by Mr. Stevenson and his partner (Mr. Thomas),
the removal of the profitable branch of business, in con-
junction with this embarrassing times referred to, occa-
sioned a change in the proprietorship of the paper. Mr.
Stevenson subsequently established the S.A. Gazette and
Mining Journal , and conducted it until the gold diggings
in Victoria broke out, when several other journals, with
this also, had to succumb to the pressure of the times.


Mr. Stevenson rendered great service to the colony in
horticulture, of which he was an earnest student. Shortly
after Adelaide was laid out he enclosed four town acres,
and on these built his residence; and at great expense
and trouble procured every variety of vines, fruit trees,
and shrubs, with a view to acclimatise them. He did
more to foster a regard for gardens than any other colo-
nist, and he may be looked upon as the father of horticul-
ture in South Australia. For many years he held the
position of Coroner to the city and suburbs. His death
took place at North Adelaide, October 18, 1856, in his
fifty-seventh year. It may not be out of place here to
mention that when Captain Hindmarsh left the colony,
Mr. G. M. Stephen, the Attorney-General, became the
Acting-Governor; and for some private land transactions
in which he embarked at Port Gawler evoked severe cen-
sures from the Press and the public. Mr. Stevenson’s
strictures on this matter formed the groundwork of a
libel action, in which, however, Mr. Stephen, the plaintiff,
was unsuccessful. After leaving the Register , Mr. Ste-
venson was at different times the editor of other papers
that had their day, and captivated the multitude; the
latter doubtless being attracted by the keen argument,
scathing sarcasm, and versatility of this able man, who
spared neither friend nor foe when exposing glaring
abuses, or propounding important truths. He left one
daughter, who is married to Mr. E. Y. DeMole, and re-
sides at Glenelg.
STEWART, INSPECTOR C. W.,
A well-known celebrity in the early times. In company
with Mr. Ashton, Governor of the Gaol in Governor
Gawler’s day, he arrived in the colony; both had served
in the London detective force with such credit that they
had as rewards received these appointments from the


Home Government. Inspector Stewart was instrumental
in capturing Bell Chambers, an escaped convict, and in
doing good service to the colony in other ways.
STIRLING, JOHN LANCELOT, B.A., LL.B., J.P.,
Born at Strathalbyn in 1819, and educated partly at St.
Peter’s College and partly at Trinity College, Cambridge,
England, w r here he received his degrees. He was elected
to Parliament in 1881, and now represents the Mount
Barker electorate with Mr. Landseer. He is a Liberal,
a fluent speaker, and a popular man. Some of Mr.
Stirling’s speeches exhibit traces of a highly-cultured
mind, and great things are predicted in the future for
this native-born South Australian.
STOCK, W. F., J.P.,
One of the most prominent members of the South Aus-
tralian legal profession, arrived with his parents in
Adelaide in 1850, and was educated partly at St. Peter’s
College and partly in England. He was admitted to the
Bar in June, 1871, since which period he has worked up
a large and successful practice. Mr. Stock has always
taken great interest in municipal and political matters,
and in many ways contributed to their successful issues.
In December, 1878, he w r as elected Mayor of Glenelg, held
the position with credit, and was re-elected to the same
office in the following year.
STOCKDALE, ROBERT, J.P., ROBE,
Died at the residence of B. Taylor, Esq., Hindmarsh,
near Adelaide, December 15, 1881, in his 47th year. He
was one of the oldest residents of the Eobe district, and
a large dealer in stock, as well as a considerable grazier.
His occupation brought him in contact with the majority
of stockowners, by whom he was much esteemed. He


was an excellent judge of horses, and his services at
local Shows were in great requisition. Tor years he
was an unfailing judge at the Shows of the Mount
Gambier Society, and he was the life and soul of the
Kobe Pastoral and Horticultural Society, of which he was
one of the Vice-Presidents, and always an exhibitor at its
Shows. Mr. Stockdale took great interest in St. Peter’s
Church, of which he was Sunday School Superintendent ;
a member of the Board of Advice, and always to the front
when any movement for the good of the town or district
was contemplated. His character for integrity, con-
scientiousness, and those virtues which combine in the true
gentleman, were all inherent in Mr. Stockdale, who will
long be regretted by all who knew him.
STONEHOUSE, REV. GEORGE,
Born in Kent, July 1, 1808. Educated for the Baptist
ministry at the Newport Pagnell Theological Institution,
ordained pastor of a church in Northamptonshire in 1833,
and to Chipping Norton in 1838. In consequence of
failing health he was advised by his medical attendant to
visit a more genial climate, and sailed for South Australia
with his family in 1845, arriving that year. Mr. G. E.
Angas was at first desirous of founding a Baptist College
in Adelaide, of which Mr. Stonehouse was to be Presi-
dent, but as the plan was not carried out he merely
gained his livelihood as a teacher. Eventually he was
established as pastor of the first Baptist Church, in which
he held regular services for eighteen years. His death
took place in Adelaide on July 24, 1871 ; prior to which
he held the position of President to a new Baptist College
founded in that city.
STOW, RANDOLPH ISHAM,
Eldest son of the late Eev. T. Q. Stow, born in Suffolk,
England, on the 17th December, 1828, accompanied his


parents to Adelaide in 1837, and was educated by bis
father and afterwards at Mr. "Wylie’s school. In 1819
he was articled to Messrs. Bartley & Bakewell, and
shortly after the expiry of his term was taken into
partnership. In 1859 he commenced practice on his own
account. He first made his mark as a public man on the
hustings at Kensington, in 1851, when he proposed the
late Mr. Charles Eenn as representative for East Torrens
in the Assembly in opposition to Dr. Wark. Mr. Eenn
was in favour of a nominee Upper House, and in principle
not opposed to State aid to religion. He was, ‘however,
supported by many Liberals, on the ground that these
questions would not come before the House till after the
next dissolution. Mr. E. I. Stow’s speech created a great
impression, and gave promise of his future achievements.
The bulk of the Liberals of East Torrens would give no
quarter to a Conservative candidate, and urged that if
Mr. Eenn were elected he would occupy a stronger posi-
tion at a future election. Mr. J. P. Stow, as one of the
party, seconded the nomination of Dr. Wark. This was
the time of open voting, when there were processions a mile
long, bands playing, and plenty of excitement, and there
was then one Chamber, called the Legislative Council, com-
posed of one-third nominees and two-thirds elected
members, and the principles upon which the new Consti-
tution was based were under discussion. In 1855, Mr.
E. I. Stow distinguished himself again on the hustings of
West Adelaide, when he proposed as member for that
district the Liberal candidate, Mr. Anthony Eorster
(editor of the Register ), in opposition to Mr. (afterwards
Sir) J. H. Eisher, who was defeated. In 1861, he was
elected member for West Torrens, and held the office of
Attorney-General. On Eeb. 24, 1875, he was appointed
Third Judge of the Supreme Court, a position he occupied
with credit till his death, which took place September 17,


1878, in his 50th year. His public career, though short,
was brilliant, and throughout his life he made many
friends and few enemies.
STOW, JEFFERSON PICKMAN, J.P.,
Is a native of Buntingford, Herts, where he was born
September 1, 1830. When but seven years of age he
arrived in South Australia with his parents, and the rest
of the family, and was educated partly by his father
and partly by Mr. Wylie. He engaged in farming
till 1856, when he went to Victoria. After his re-
turn he started business as a commission agent in
Gawler, and the “ Humbug Society,” which he, in com-
pany with Messrs. E. L. Grundy, Geo. Isaacs, and
Dr. Nott, was instrumental in establishing, is still oft
reverted to, with feelings of gratification, by residents of
the “ Modern Athens.” In 1861 he went to the Northern
Territory, and was one of the party in the memorable
“Forlorn Hope Voyage,” of which so much has been said
and written. It was truly a plucky though perilous
undertaking, easier imagined than described, as will be
understood when it is stated that in a small ship’s boat
named the Forlorn Hope, Mr. Stow and six companions
started from Adam Bay, on the 7th May, 1865, and accom-
plished the voyage to Champion Bay, 300 miles from
Fremantle, the chief port of Western Australia, in
all about 2,600 miles. Mr. Stow’s first public ap-
pearance was at Kensington in 1853, when a meeting
relative to the proposed new Constitution was held,
and he seconded a resolution moved by the late Mr.
Nathaniel Hailes against having any second Chamber.
This resolution was carried by a large majority, and his
maiden effort received considerable commendation. At
the time of the contest between Dr. Wark and Mr.
Charles Fenn, in 1854, Mr. Stow worked hard to secure


REV. THOMAS QUENTIN STOW.
Page 233.


the return of the non-Conservative member (Dr. Wark),
who was defeated. In 1855, he spoke at several East
Torrens meetings against Mr. (afterwards Justice)
Gwynne, who appeared in the field as a convert to
advanced Liberalism. Though personally popular, Mr.
Gwynne was defeated by an overwhelming majority in
favour of Mr. Hughes, whose Liberal principles were not
quite so newly born. In 1862, he wrote a series of leaders
for the Critic , a journal that, during its somewhat
ephemeral existence under the editorship of Mr. Geo.
Isaacs, created great stir in Adelaide. Mr. Stow had been
for many years known as a scathing and versatile
writer, and his appointment to the editorship of the
South Australian Advertiser , of which he had previously
been reporter (rendered vacant by the death of Mr.
Harcus), in 1876, took few persons by surprise. He soon
showed he was “ the right man in the right place,” and
since the day his first article appeared up till the present
his opinions (expressed as they always are in masterly
and telling language) have found favour with the public.
As an authority on South Australian matters he occupies
a prominent position, for practical experience in lieu of
book lore has rendered him conversant with much that
has transpired in the land of his adoption. Mr. Stow is
the second son of the late Lev. T. Q. Stow, the first
Congregational minister in South Australia, and brother
of the late Justice Stow.
STOW, REV. THOMAS QUENTIN,
The first Congregational Church in this colony was built
about the end of 1837 or early in the following year, and
occupied a prominent site on North-terrace, to the west
of Morphett-street. The officiating minister was the
Eev. T. Q. Stow, the father of Congregationalism in South
Australia, and the first regular clergyman of any denomi


nation, excepting the Bev. C. B. Howard, the Colonial
Chaplain. The church was built of pines and reeds, and
in the erection Mr. Stow assisted with his own hands,
w r orking with the labourers and the carter in cutting
reeds and pines and loading them. Mr. Stow w r as born
at Hadleigh, Suffolk, England, on the 7th July, 1801,
and died on the 19th July, 1862, at the residence of the
late Mr. John Eairfax, near Sydney, New r South Wales,
whilst on a visit to that colony for the purpose of occu-
pying the leading Congregational pulpit for a month.
His first ministrations as regular pastor were at Eramling-
ham, Suffolk, and he afterwards preached for several years
at Buntingford, Herefordshire, and subsequently at Hal-
stead, in Essex. He left the latter place for this colony
under the auspices of the Colonial Missionary Society, and
arrived here on the 16th October, 1837. In the following
month he commenced services in a large marquee or field
officers’ tent, w r hich he had brought with him, and which
w r as generally w r ell attended, till the rude tabernacle
before mentioned w r as raised. He afterwards occupied
the pulpit of Ereeman-street Church, and gained many
friends and adherents. Besides his reputation as a
preacher and an earnest missionary, Mr. Stow w r as dis-
tinguished for his able and successful resistance to the
introduction of State aid to religion in 1816 and till
1851, when the system was for ever abolished. After his
decease a handsome and costly monument was erected to
his memory by the citizens of Adelaide and colonists
generally, though probably a more lasting tribute of the
respect and esteem in wdiich he held w r as showm in
the building of the Stow Memorial Church, Elinders-
street, wdnch forms so prominent and attractive an object
in that busy thoroughfare.


STRANGWAYS, HON. HENRY B. T.,
Was Attorney-General in the Reynolds Ministry from
May 9, 1860, to May 20, 1861; and Commissioner of
Crown Lands and Immigration in the same Ministry from
May 20 to October 8, 1861. He was also Commissioner
of Crown Lands and Immigration in the Waterhouse
Ministry from October 17, 1861, to July 4, 1868; and
held the same office in the Dutton Ministry from March
22 to September 20, 1865; and in the Ayers Ministry
from September 20 to October 28, 1865. He was
Attorney-General in May, 1870, but the Ministry was
not long in office, and he resigned. He is at present in
England, and a prominent member of the Colonial Insti-
tute. Mr. Strangways is still interested in the well-being
of South Australia, the land of his adoption, and is al-
ways endeavouring to advance it by every means in his
power. Prior to his departure from the colony a public
dinner was given him at Hindmarsh, Eebruary 9, 1871.
STROTHER, CHAS. HENRY,
Captain of the S.A. National Rifle Association, and a
member of the Civil Service. He w r as an artist of no
mean order, and his oil paintings and pencil sketches
were universally admired. He was a native of the colony.
Born in 1887, and died at North Adelaide, November 26,
1861, in his twenty-fourth year.
STUART, CHARLES W.,
A native of London, where he was born in 1812; educated
at the Merchant Tailors’ School, and subsequently at a
private school. Left England in 1832 for Sydney,
N.S.W., where he arrived early in 1838, and joined a
relative —Captain Caswell, R.N. —who was engaged in
pastoral pursuits at Port Stephens. Landed at Kangaroo
Island, S.A., November 18, 1886, and filled the position
235
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


of manager of stock for the S.A. Company. Appointed
Inspector of the Adelaide Metropolitan Police in 1850,
and Senior-Inspector of Mounted Police and Gold Escort
in 1852. In 1853 received the appointment of Commis-
sioner of Police and Police Magistrate for the colony.
STUART, JOHN MCDOUGALL,
Undoubtedly one of the greatest of South Australian ex-
plorers. He was a draughtsman in the expedition under
Capt. Sturt, and there gained considerable experience in
traversing unknown districts. In 1859 he commenced a
series of explorations in the Ear ISTorth and discovered a
passage between Lake Eyre and Lake Torrens and found
beyond the desert country which Eyre had failed to
penetrate, a splendid pastoral territory. In 1860, incited
probably by the reward of £2,000 offered by the South
Australian Government to the person who first crossed
the continent from north to south, he set out. With
but two men he travelled to within 400 miles of Van
Dieman’s Gulf, but was forced by hostile natives to re-
turn. As a memorial of his success in penetrating to the
very centre of the continent on April 22, 1862, he
planted a flag on a large and remarkable hill of sand
which he named “ Central Mount Stuart.” In 1861 he
again started, followed the same route, and reached within
250 miles of the sea coast, when he had to return in con-
sequence of provisions being short. In 1862, this in-
trepid explorer again made the attempt, and this time
successfully. Although Burke and Wills had succeeded
in crossing the continent before him (they having
reached the Gulf of Carpentaria in 1861), the South
Australian Government, as a token of their appreciation
of his courage and perseverance, awarded him the reward
they had promised of £2,000, and 1,000 square miles of
grazing country in the interior, free of rent for seven


years. Stuart’s discoveries led to tlie Northern Terri-
tory being granted to South Australia by the Home Go-
vernment, so that our colony, which now stretches from
the Southern to the Indian Ocean, comprises an area of
914,730 square miles, or 585,427,200 acres. The overland
telegraph line is one of the most important results of
Stuart’s explorations, and has led to the settlement of
many thousands of square miles in the interior previously
unknown to be adapted for grazing purposes.
Suart did not live long to enjoy his honours and
rewards. He returned to England, and died soon after
(June 16, 1869,) among his relations and friends, a fitting
place for the closing scene in the life of a man who had
done so much to benefit his fellow-mortals. Of the
party that accompanied him when he crossed the Austra-
lian continent, the leader, Messrs. Kekwick, Stephen
King, and James Frew are dead, Messrs. Waterhouse and
Kash are in England, andF. W. Thring, W. P. Auld, J.
W. Billiatt, and J. McGorrey are believed to be in the
colonies. It has been suggested that a monument in
memory of Stuart should be erected on the 21st anniver-
sary of his arrival on the opposite shore of Australia,
viz., July 24, 1883, but the most eligible site for such has
not yet been selected.
STURT, CHARLES, CAPTAIN.
This dauntless explorer, whose memory will ever live in
the recollections of Australians, may fairly claim the
title of one of our representative men, as by his energy
and enterprise the first steps were taken in the work of
making known large portions of South Australian terri-
tory. In 1829, after a series of successes previously
achieved in Kew South Wales, he, with a naturalist
named Macleay and a party of eight convicts, was sent


by Governor Darling to explore the interior. They
embarked on tbe Murrnmbidgee in portable boats, and
eventually reached the Murray at fully 150 miles below
where it had been crossed by Howell and Hume in 1824.
It was during this trip, which will long be memorable in
the annals of exploration, that the mouth of the Eiver
Darling and Lake Alexandrina were discovered. Sturt
named the latter after the Princess Alexandrina Victoria,
now the Queen of England. Their further advance to
the ocean was barred by sand, and they were forced to
retrace their steps, and undertake a journey of over a
thousand miles before they could reach home. All had
to toil at the oars from daylight to dark, and the work of
pulling against the stream proved no easy task. How-
ever, after enduring many hardships, they ultimately
terminated satisfactorily one of the most remarkable
expeditions ever yet on record, and of which the results
have since been so highly important.
Now, to any ordinary man such an achievement as this
would have been sufficient, and he would probably have
settled down quietly and content with laurels won. But
Sturt was no ordinary individual, and his restless spirit
and ardent love of adventure caused him again to enter
the field as an explorer. This time his object was to
conduct a party to the centre of Australia, and in May,
1844, his expedition, numbering in all sixteen souls as
enthusiastic as himself, set out from the Darling. Among
the party were Mr. (now known as Dr.) Brown, surgeon;
Mr. Poole, surveyor; and John McD. Stuart, draughts-
man, whose discoveries are recorded elsewhere. Having
reached Lake Cawndilla, they struck boldly out to the
north, passing for miles over country which bore the
aspect of a desert, and ultimately, during the fierce
summer months, arriving at a spot now called Poole’s
Creek, where they were compelled to remain for some


time, as all the water in the courses they had passed was
dried. The record of the sufferings endured by explorers
generally is oft appalling in the extreme, but to my
mind Sturt’s diary indicates that his party bore such
suffering that it may more readily be imagined than
described, and of which even South Australians, who can
stand heat well, can have small conception. With the
thermometer at 180 degrees in the shade, and that for
months together, it is a wonder that one of the party
returned alive to tell the tale. Poor Poole, however, of
all these succumbed to his fate in the distant wilderness.
The results of this expedition, though obtained in a more
hazardous way than the previous one, were hardly as
important to our colonists. Among the chief discoveries
were those of Lake Torrens, Strezelecki Creek, the Stony
Desert, and Cooper’s Creek. On Sturt’s return to the
settled districts his sight failed him, and he was totally
blind to the end of his useful life.
Captain Sturt was born in 1805, and died at Cheltenham,
England, in 1869, aged 61 years. He arrived in Adelaide
in August, 1838, and when Surveyor-General of the pro-
vince delivered a lecture on the prospects of agriculture
and horticulture in South Australia. It was not largely
attended, but those present were delighted with a subject
so ably handled by an intelligent man. Sturt’s theory
might not have worked well in practice, and he would
doubtless have been more en rapport with an audience in
recounting his adventures or detailing some of the stirring
scenes he had passed through. Indeed, from the time he
entered the 39th Regiment, at an early age, and landed
with it in New South Wales, to that period when he
departed for ever from the scene of his earthly labours,
his career was of the most adventurous kind. Even the
voyage in a whaleboat down the Murray to Lake Alexan-
dria, and his return trip, referred to previously, are
239
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


matters of history which read more like romance than
reality.
TAPLEY, CAPT. D.,
Warden nnder the Marine Board. Died February 26,
1881, aged sixty-six. He was a genial, active gentleman;
an authority in nautical matters, and an enthusiastic
yachtsman. He was Eear-Commodore of the S.A. Yacht
Club.
TAPLEY, R. E.,
An early colonist, and one of the founders of the South
Australian Insurance Company, of which he is still
Secretary. On attaining his 70th birthday, Mr. Tapley
was presented by the Directors and shareholders of the
Company with a fine oil-painting of himself, and a com-
plimentary address. Mr. Tapley in early life was asso-
ciated with the seafaring profession, and the science of
navigation, on which he has delivered some excellent
lectures, is his favourite study. The South Australian
Insurance Company, with which he has been connected
from its commencement, has ever since been one of the
most prosperous Societies in the colony.
TAPLIN, REV. GEO.,
Late Superintendent of the Aboriginal Farm and Mis-
sion Station at Point Macleay, Lake Alexandrina. He
occupied the position for over twenty years, or until his
death, which occurred in June, 1879. Mr. Taplin was well
qualified for the post he so long held; he had a good know-
ledge of medicine; acted as doctor and surgeon in cases
of sickness or accident; was an excellent mechanic, and
able to superintend all the departments of the farm and
station; and, to crown all, was a philologist of no mean
repute, his works on the language and habits of the


native tribes being greatly appreciated by the learned
Societies of London.
TAPPEINER, LATHER.
The Eev. Dr. Joseph Tappeiner, S.J., Superior of the
Maurese residence, Norwood, South Australia, was born
on December 18, 1820, in the Austrian Tyrol. At an
early age he evinced so strong a desire to enter holy
orders that his parents, who were of good family and
possessed of considerable means, bestowed great care on
his education. He entered the Society of Jesus on August
11, 1841, and pursued his studies in the colleges of the
order with such diligence that at the expiration of five
years he passed his examination in philosophy and theology
cum eminent la , and was duly ordained a priest. In 1846,
the year of his ordination, he was sent by the superior of
his district to Sevenhills, South Australia, as missionary
priest, where he laboured so successfully that in the course
of a few years he received from the Society at home sufficient
funds to enable him to erect the Jesuits’ College there.
On the 2nd of February, 1859, he received the degree of
Doctor of Divinity, which the rules of the order precluded
him from obtaining ou passing his examination on account
of his connection wnth it not being at that time of
sufficient duration. In 1870, twenty-four years after
landing in Australia, he was translated from Sevenhills
to the Jesuit mission at Norwood, where by his abilities
and piety he speedily won the respect and affection of all
with w r hom he came in contact, and maintained his claim
to their regard up to the day of his death. Father
Tappeiner, by his various qualities, was eminently fitted
for the task which he so efficiently performed in South
Australia. He was in every sense a hard worker. Besides
discharging the religious duties of his office while superior
at Norwood, he became a teacher at the Children’s
p


Orphanages at Norwood and Magill. The Doctor was
regarded as one of the most learned men in South Aus-
tralia, being well versed in ancient and modern languages,
especially in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, besides possess-
ing a profound knowledge of theology and philosophy.
He was too learned to be a pedant, and was above creed
and party. His chief characteristic was humility, which,
combined with a sympathetic disposition, rendered his
presence and conversation charming to those personally
acquainted with him. He was noted for his kindness to
the poor, whom he was ever ready to assist, and who
looked up to him as their faithful and disinterested
adviser. As a preacher he was eloquent and impressive-
His death occurred at Norwood February 10, 1882, and
was occasioned by an affection of the lungs, from which
he had suffered for three years. His remains rest in the
quiet cemetery of the Jesuit Fathers at Sevenhills.
TAYLOR, HENRY,
Is a native of Luton, Bedfordshire, where he was born in
August, 18M, and brought up to the trade of a carpenter
and joiner. In 1872, whilst he was residing in Leaming-
ton, the farm labourers of England revolted, and de-
manded better pay and certain other privileges. The
movement originated in a village near Leamington, and
Mr. Taylor, fired with zeal for its success, at once lent
his aid, for some time gratuitously, still continuing his
trade, until he was appointed “ General Secretary of the
National Agricultural Labourers’ Union.” The move-
ment —which was very successful, notwithstanding bitter
opposition —adopted emigration as one of its planks,
largely through the influence of Mr. Taylor, who plainly
saw that in the natural order of things a less crowded
labour market would assist their cause in securing better
wages. At the invitation of the Ontario (Canada) Go


vernment lie took out a shipload of immigrants to that
province, and travelled through the country to form his
own opinion of the suitability of Canada as a field for
emigration. He forwarded a series of letters to the
London Times , which, whilst plainly setting forth the
advantages to be gained by energetic labourers, were not
such as to give great encouragement to emigration thither
on a large scale, climatic difficulties being apparently his
greatest difficulty. In 1876, at the invitation of the then
Agent-General (Mr. Dutton), Mr. Taylor undertook to
visit this colony, which he did, corresponding —as in his
tour through Canada —with the Times. His letters were
well written, and very favourable, always avoiding ex-
treme and gushing praise. The letters were considered
on the whole a correct estimate, viewing the question of
emigration from the English agricultural labourers’
stand-point. The South Australian Government ap-
pointed him on his return to England as an agent, in
which capacity he worked very successfully for upwards
of three years, visiting the various industrial centres, and
sending out a better class of emigrants than we had for
years been favoured with. Eree emigration being sus-
pended, Mr. Taylor next induced a considerable number
of persons to emigrate under the land-order-warrant
system, they paying their own passages. About two years
since the Government discontinued his services, and he
at once returned to South Australia, and after trying a
venture in an agricultural implement business at Clare,
sold out, and is now the proprietor of the Sturt Hotel,
Adelaide. During Mr. Taylor’s former visit to this
colony, he lectured in various places, made a great impres-
sion, and secured many friends by his able, though
moderate, advocacy of Trade Unionism. He was drawn
into this in consequence of a strike at the foundry of
Messrs. Martin & Co., Gawler; and it is thought that his


counsels to both parties, as well as his fervent appeals to
them in a lecture he delivered at the G-awler Institute,
did much to avert ill-feeling, and the more speedily to
end the dispute. It must be palpable to all that South
Australia has need of such a man as Henry Taylor in the
home country. His dismissal from an office in which he
had not only done much good, but was likely to do more,
cannot but be regretted; and some of the best interests
of South Australia are certainly neglected whilst the
vacancy he left is unfilled by the Government.
TETHERINGTON, REV. J. B.,
Arrived in 1848, having been assisted out from England
by the late Mr. Gr. E. Angas with a view to establish a
Baptist College in Adelaide. Mr. Tetherington ulti-
mately, acting on the advice of the Lord Bishop, was
induced to enter the Anglican Church, and continued a
staunch adherent to it till the time of his death, which
occurred in consequence of his mistaking a road leading
to a ford on the Eiver Light, instead of going by the
bridge. The river was flooded at the time, and both he
and his horse were drowned. The reverend gentleman
was a popular and pleasing preacher, and thoroughly
original in the treatment of his subjects, which he handled
with great ability.
THOMAS, WILLIAM KYFFIN,
Born in London, Tsiovember, 1821, and educated at Eick-
mansworth. Arrived in South Australia at an early age
with his parents, and was for a brief period engaged in
agriculture. The S.A. Register was established by his
father, and on the decease of the latter, Mr. Thomas be-
came the leading proprietor in the firm of
Thomas, & Clark. Among public matters with which he
was identified, the Bushman’s Club, Mission to Abo


rigines, and the Yolunteer movement were most promi-
nent. His death occurred at Glenelg,’ duly 4, 1878.
THOMAS, ROBERT,
Father of the above, and a native of Wales, where he was
born iSTovember, 1781. On reaching his twenty-first year
he established himself in London as a law stationer. He
landed in Adelaide in 1839, with his family, and took
great interest in the colonization and settlement of the
colony. To him is justly due the credit of establishing
the first South Australian newspaper —the S.A. Gazette
and Colonial Register. The first issue was printed in
London, and the second in Adelaide in June, 1837. His
partner in this venture was Mr. George Stevenson, of
whom a notice appears elsewhere. He died July 1, 1860,
aged 78 years.
THOMSON, REV. E. W.,
Died at Belair, near Adelaide, August, 1881. The
reverend gentleman belonged to the United Presbyterian
Church, and, although he led a secluded life, was admired
by many for his rare talents and good qualities, which
gained him warm friends wherever he was known. He
was a vigorous and elegant writer, and a contributor to
several British and colonial publications. As a preacher
Mr. Thomson was of a very high order, and his sermons
were filled with sound logical reasoning. He was born
at Kirn, on the Clyde, Scotland, in which town he
preached for some time. His ministrations were also
extended to other Churches. He was educated at the
Edinburgh University, where he was distinguished as a
prizeman, and was afterwards assistant to Dr. King, of
London. v At the time of his death he was in his 45th
year.


TODD, CHARLES, C.M.G.,
Born in London in 1826, and educated at a private school.
At an early age lie was engaged at the Greenwich Obser-
vatory as assistant and calculator. Hardly had he reached
his majority ere he received the appointment of Assistant
Astronomer at the Cambridge Observatory, and held that
position until 1854, when the galvanic department of the
Eoyal Observatory was placed under his charge, and he
was appointed as one of the astronomers. His appoint-
ment to his present position in Adelaide as Superintendent
of Telegraphs and Astronomer dates back to 1855, and in
1870, when the telegraph and postal departments of the
colony were amalgamated by the Government, he became
Postmaster-General. With Mr. Todd originated that
complete system of telegraphy which has made South
Australia so notable, for to his endeavours are mainly
due the construction of that vast work, the intercolonial
telegraph line, which now stretches across this vast con-
tinent to the Northern Territory, a distance of nearlv
2,000 miles. This gigantic undertaking was completed
on August 22, 1872, and Mr, Todd received the congratu-
lations of our colonists and the several Governments of
the sister colonies, and the C.M.G. honour from Her
Majesty the Queen. Since that time Mr. Todd has suc-
cessfully projected other telegraph lines, and that to
Eucla, which forms the connecting link between Western
Australia and this colony, extending over 1,100 miles, is
another triumph of his skill and indomitable perseverance
under difficulties. Mr. Todd is regarded as an authority
on scientific and astronomical matters, and he has, by his
researches, made several important discoveries in meteor-
ology. He is a member of the Eoyal Astronomical
Society, the British Meteorological Society, and other
kindred associations.


TOLMER, ALEXANDER,
Appointed Captain and Adjutant of Cavalry by Governor
Gawler in October, 1888, and was also Inspector of
Police, in which latter capacity he did good service. His
numerous exploits and adventures have recently been
compiled, and form an interesting volume, which he is on
the eve of publishing. He was instrumental in capturing
some of the bushrangers of the early times, and of assist-
ing in inflicting summary justice on the aboriginal mur-
derers of the crew and passengers of the wrecked brig
Maria, at Encounter Bay. He retired from the police
force, but some time after entered the Government
Service as Inspector of Credit Selections, and threw his
wonted energies into the duties.
TOMKINSON, SAMUEL, J.P.,
An active politician, and one who has been instrumental
in effecting reforms in social and political matters. He
was for many years manager of the Bank of Australasia
in Adelaide, and discharged the duties of that position
satisfactorily. He at present represents Gumeracha
with Mr. Haines in the Assembly, and is considered to
have done much good for the electorate.
TORRENS, SIR ROBERT RICHARD, K.C.M.G., M.P.,
Whose name is familiar te every colonist in consequence
of the excellent system he originated relative to the
land laws of South Australia, now known as the “Torrens
Act,” is a native of Cork, Ireland, where he was born in
1814. He received his education at Trinity College,
Dublin, where he obtained the M.A. degree. He was ap-
pointed Collector of Customs at Port Adelaide, South
Australia, in 1841, in the exercise of which capacity he
became familiar with the laws relating to shipping; and
also drafted his famous Bill, which is of so complete a


character that it has been adopted by more than one Go-
vernment. He was elected to Parliament ; had a seat in
the Legislative Council; was M.P. for Adelaide, and held
office as Treasurer and Registrar-General. The Torrens
Act, on which his fame rests, passed into law in January,
1858; and shortly after this he resigned his seat in order
the more effectually to carry out the measure. He quitted
the colony in 1863, and-returned to England, where he
received the honour of knighthood, and was elected M.P.
for Cambridge, of which he is still the representative.
TOWNSEND, WILLIAM, M.P.,
Born in 1821, in London, died at Lower Mitcham, South
Australia, October 25, 1882, aged 61 years. In the
political as in the commercial world he has for years
filled a very prominent position, and may altogether be
regarded as a most remarkable man. Whilst he was
approaching manhood the Chartist movement was gaining
strength, and although he was never really a Chartist
himself, he was a spirited and even influential advocate
of Chartism in its milder form. In 1815 Mr. Townsend
was a resident of the Borough of Southwark, in which
also resided his brother, a potato salesman, who had in
the market a stall in which he received consignments
from the country. Mr. Townsend was his assistant, and
quite a character even then by the wonderful manner in
which he was able to deal with the political questions of
the day.
Upon leaving the potato-selling business Mr. Townsend
took a clerkship in a hop warehouse. This position he held
up to the time of his departure for South Australia, and
about a year before he started hither he was married to
his first wife. To them was born one son. Some time
after he came here his wife died, and he married the lady
who survives him. The family by this second marriage


SAMUEL TOMKINSON, J.P.
Page 247.


consists of three sons and four daughters. Mr. Town-
send arrived here in 1853, in the old Dutch ship Top
Smit, of which many earlier colonists cherish pleasant
recollections in connection with the hospitality of its
commander, the redoubtable Swart. These were the days
' *
of slow passages and big profits —the days when the
arrival of a ship from the old country was an event to be
duly honoured. The Fop Smit came on August 2, 1853,
after a passage lasting from April 20. Besides the names
of Mr. Townsend and his wife and child, the passenger-
list contained those of other colonists —Mr. Johnson,
M.P., and Mr. Sharland amongst them —who have taken
a prominent part in public matters in the colony. In
April, 1854 —or just a year from his leaving London —we
find Mr. Towmsend lecturing on the labour question in
the Freemasons’ Tavern, and amusing a big audience with
one of his characteristic speeches. One of the first
acquaintances Mr. Tow r nsend made in South Australia
was Mr. F. J. Lotting, who, driving him to town from
the ship, was struck with his smartness and ready wit,
and advised him to become an auctioneer. This advice
he decided to act upon, and, naturally enough, was never
sparing of praise to Mr. Botting for giving it. Just
after his arrival he entered the employ of Mr. Johnson,
who had opened a bootshop in Bundle-street, near the
York Hotel. After remaining there as salesman for a
short time he went into the same business for himself,
taking a little shop further down the street, near the
Exeter Hotel. He did not stay there long, but, following
up Mr. Botting’s recommendation, began to qualify him-
self for the business of an auctioneer. He left his little
bootshop and entered the service of Messrs. J. M.
Solomon & Co,, who had an auctioneering establishment
in Hindley-street. Soon afterwards he joined Mr.
Botting in an auctioneering firm, occupying premises in


Bundle-street. As their business grew rapidly they left
the little place, and took a larger at the corner of Peel
and Hindley streets. In a short time they had worked
up a big concern, Mr. Townsend’s great fitness for his
business becoming so widely known that he received
numerous offers, particularly one of £B,OOO a year from
Melbourne to mount the rostrum there. One of the
oldest firms in Adelaide at that time was that of Messrs.
Neales, Wicksteed, & Co., the partners in which were
getting “ into the sere and yellow leaf.” They made
overtures which eventually led to the merging of the
young firm and theirs. Soon after the combined partner-
ship Messrs. Neales and Wicksteed retired, leaving the
field to the young partners. By-and-by they admitted
Mr. W. Kay (afterwards a member in the Assembly for
East Adelaide). In a few years, however, he went out of
the firm, which remained as Townsend, Botting, & Co. till
two years ago, when the partners divided, Mr. Townsend
going his way, and Mr. Botting his. Since then he has,
with his son, Mr. E. P. Townsend, carried on business as
Townsend & Son.
Shortly after his arrival he became, for a short period,
a lay preacher in connection with the Congregational
Church, and proved a very effective and earnest pastor.
He entered Parliament at the end of 1857 under the new
Constitution as member for Onkaparinga, at a time when
he was partner in the firm of Wicksteed, Botting, Town-
send, & Co., and continued to hold that position until
1871, when he was elected for the Sturt with Mr. John
Lindsay at the beginning, and with various other mem-
bers afterwards, representing it up to the time of his
death. In 1863 he joined the Dutton Ministry, and held
the portfolio of the Commissioner of Public Works ; held
the position of Commissioner of Crown Lands in the
Hart Ministry in 1868, and a similar office in Mr. Blyth’s


Ministry in 1871-2. He was elected Chairman of Com-
mittees in succession to the Hon. J. Carr in June, 1876,
and held that position up till his death. Mr. Townsend
took an active part in municipal matters. In 1854 he
was elected Mayor of the city, and at the expiration of
the first term was chosen for a second. He was very
energetic and exceedingly fortunate in connection with
his occupancy of the Mayoral chair, and was open-handed
to the last degree in his expenditure for charitable pur-
poses. Many public events marked his Mayoralty, the
most prominent of which was the opening of the Town
Hall on June 20, 1866, by His Excellency Sir H. Daly in
the presence of 800 guests, and a banquet, the most pre-
tentious ever given in the colonies. In May, 1867, Mr.
Townsend was presented by the citizens, “ in recognition
of his services as Mayor of the city,” with a handsome
silver tea and coffee service, a claret jug, a gold watch
and chain, and a purse containing 350 sovereigns. In
June, 1878, Mr. Townsend had the satisfaction of seeing
the Deaf and Dumb and Blind Institution at Brighton
established. Eor years it had been his most earnest
desire to see this most excellent charity an accomplished
fact, and it is gratifying to know that he was spared to
behold it not only founded, but to realise the great good
effected thereby. In 1878 he was elected Mayor of
Unley, and held that position until December, 1881. To
enumerate all the good that Mr. Townsend was instru-
mental in effecting would occupy more space than can be
here spared. By lecturing alone —that inimitable lecture
of his, familiar as a “household word,” “Lights and
Shadows of London Life,” thousands of pounds were
raised for charitable purposes, and many worthy objects
assisted. His philanthropy was limitless, and there are
many private acts of his in this direction of which no
chronicle has been written. He had unbounded faith in


South Australia and its future, and though stern moralists
may shake their heads over his failings now he is gone,
many might feel proud to leave behind them a record so
full of proofs of public spiritedness, liberality, and love
to his fellow-man as he has done.
TWOPENY, RICHARD ERNEST NOWELL,
Is the son of the late Archdeacon Nowell Twopeny, o
Adelaide, and was born at Little Casterton Eectory, Eut-
land, August Ist, 1857. He was educated at Marlborough
College, and at the University of Heidelberg. Thence
he came back to Adelaide, in 1876, and became Private
Secretary to the late Mr. John Howard Clark, then Editor
of the Register. He was the promoter of the first Inter-
colonial Football Match, in which he captained the Ade-
laide team; and in December, 1878, was appointed
Secretary to the South Australian Commissioners at the
Paris Universal Exhibition. In recognition of the value
of a pamphlet which he wrote in French on South Aus-
tralia, the Minister of Public Instruction in France con-
ferred upon him the distinction of “ Officier de
FAcademic.” On returning to South Australia he was
appointed Clerk of the Local Court at Orroroo, but never
assumed that post, the Commissioners for the Sydney and
Melbourne Exhibitions having requested the Government
to lend them his services as Secretary again. For the
Melbourne Exhibition he wrote the official “ Sketch of
South Australia in 1881,” and he has also been a frequent
contributor of the Press in Sydney, Melbourne, and Ade-
laide. With Mr Jules Joubert he shares the honour of
making the first Adelaide Exhibition, held in July,
August, and September, 1881, a success, as well as those
Exhibitions of a similar character afterwards held at
Perth, W.A., and New Zealand.


ULLATHORNE, REV. WILLIAM BERNARD, D.D.,
One of the first Roman Catholic priests in South Aus-
tralia. In answer to a petition sent by the Roman
Catholics to Archbishop Folding, of Sydney, N.S.W., the
Rev. W. B. Ullathorne was deputed to visit this colony,
and arrived here in June, 1840. For some time services
were conducted in a somewhat primitive manner, and
there was no regular place of worship. After organising
the Catholics to collect the means to erect a Church, and
pay the passage of a priest, he returned to Sydney the
same year, and sent the Rev. Mr. Benson to take charge
of the South Australian mission. The Rev. W. B. Ulla-
thorne was born at Pocklington, Yorkshire, May, 1806.
He became a priest at an early age, and was recommended
for mission work in New South Wales in 1832. Soon
after his arrival, he received the appointment of Vicar-
General. He will long be favourably remembered by
the early colonists of that settlement as one who did
much to advance its interests, whilst to his exertions on
returning to England in 1838 are due in a great measure
the cessation of transportation of criminals to Australia.
In 1846 he was consecrated a Bishop. He wrote and
published several works, all of which bear the stamp of
a cultivated and enlightened mind, and “ The Horrors of
Transportation,” and “ The Australian Mission,” which
appeared in 1838, were eagerly sought after and perused
by colonists.
WAKEFIELD, EDWARD GIBBON.
The first mention of this celebrated man was in 1834,
when he propounded the system of colonization which
bears his name, and which was instrumental in the found-
ing of the colony of South Australia. His system was
based upon two principles —in all cases to sell the land
for a fair and reasonable value, and to devote the proceeds


to the introduction of labour from Great Britain, or the
combination of capital with labour. In June, 1834, a
meeting was held at Exeter Hall, at which Colonel
Torrens, who was among the speakers, defended and
expounded the Wakefield system, and in the same year
an Act was passed to legalise an Association of gentlemen
calling themselves u The South Australian Association.”
It is unnecessary to enter into full particulars here of
this body, as some of its members with the principles
they advocated are mentioned further on in this work.
Suffice it to state that the three guiding rules on which
the colony was established were —“ That there wtis never
to be any charge on the mother country, that no State
Church should be recognised, and that transported
criminals from Great Britain were never to be admitted
to its shores.” All these principles have been fully
carried out. As opposition invariably occurs to any new
scheme, it could not but be expected that Mr. Wakefield
would find many opposed to his views, and it was even
rumoured that the Duke of Wellington had expressed his
determined hostility to the Wakefield system, but this
was found incorrect, as testified by Colonel Palmer in an
interesting communication sent to Mr. T. Worsnop, of
Adelaide, dated September 20, 1870, and which runs as
follows: —“The Duke stated to me that he was much
pleased with Mr. Gibbon Wakefield’s idea, and should
like to see the experiment tried, and requested me to
undertake the office of a gratuitous Commissioner, and to
see that the experiment had a fair trial, and that the
emigrants should be properly provided for and sent out
in sound and well-appointed ships. He originally took
no interest in Mr. Gibbon Wakefield’s scheme for Aus-
tralian colonization. It was got up by Lord Grey, John
Bussell, Chas. Buller, and other Whigs, who passed the
Bill through the House of Commons and then abandoned


it. In July, 1834, His Majesty William tlie Fourth found
that his Ministers were intriguing against him, and even
Queen Adelaide, and withholding the presents and corres-
pondence of the King of Oude from himself and Queen
Adelaide, thereby partially occasioning the Indian mutiny.
Therefore he dismissed them all suddenly, and requested
the Duke of Wellington to hold the seals of office until
Sir Eobert Peel arrived from Italy, which he did. The
day before the Australian Colonization Bill was to come
on for hearing in the House of Lords, Mr. Eobert
Gouger, then a stranger to the Duke, called upon him,
and asked him to grant an interview the following morn-
ing, which he did for two hours, when he explained the
objects of Mr. Wakefield’s Bill, when the Duke said, “I
like the idea, and should wish to see it tried. Send me
your Bill, and I will take care of it in the House of Lords ,
which he did, saying, send me all your papers.’ I acci-
dentally met Mr. Gouger a few minutes subsequently,
who communicated to me the result of his interview.
The Duke, as Colonial Minister, from the papers in the
office, found that Lord Glenelg was favourable to Edwd.
Gibbon Wakefield’s plan; but, as all the gentlemen who
were to have assisted him as Colonization Commissioners
had resigned, excepting one —Colonel Torrens —the Duke
said he would find some others, and then asked me to be
one, expressing a hope that I would see the experiment
had fair play, or, should say, a fair trial, and that the
emigrants were properly provided for, which I promised
His Grace I would do, he affording every assistance in
his power to the last hour of his life, and taking the
greatest interest in the colony. —George Palmer, Lieut.-
Colonel.”
Of Mr. Wakefield’s birth and parentage there are no
certain accounts, but for some years he resided in London,
practising as a barrister, in wTdch profession he was


eminently successful. Remarkable to state, be did not
visit South Australia, a land in which bis scheme of
colonization was first adopted, but went to New Zealand
in 1889 to engage in a similar work, and in which he had
the assistance of Mr. Chas. Buller, Sir William Hutt,
M.P., described as “ one of the Commissioners for planting
South Australia,” and of his relative, Colonel Wakefield,
who had command of the original expedition sent out to
Wellington in the ship Tory. The jealousy existing even
at the present day between Wellington and Auckland,
and which has distinguished them from the time the
Wakefield principle was applied to the former, was
founded in consequence of the Government dispatching
Capt. Hobson in a man-of-war with authority to proclaim
British sovereignty in the North Island, which he did at
Auckland. During the short career of the New Zealand
Company, the two regarded each other as rival settle-
ments, and though the cause of their rivalry has long
since been removed, traces of it still linger among their
friends.
WARBURTON, MAJOR PETER EGERTON,
Born August 15, 1813, at Northwich, Cheshire, and edu-
cated in Prance. Entered the navy in 1825, on board the
Windsor Castle. Pour years after received instruction
at the H.E.I.C.’s Military College; sailed for India in
1831; appointed Adjutant of Marine Battalion, Bombay,
and was rapidly promoted till he reached the rank of
Acting-Deputy-Adjutant-General. Having attained the
rank of Major, he retired in March, 1853, on a Captain’s
pension ; and in September of the same year arrived in
Adelaide. He was here appointed Commissioner of
Police, and held office till 1867, when he became Colonel-
Commandant of the S.A. Volunteer Porce, an office he
held very creditably from 1869 to 1877. Major Warbur-


SAMUEL J. WAY. CHIEF JUSTICE.
Page 257.


ton’s name will always be mentioned with profound res-
pect by those colonists who are acquainted with his
heroism and perseverance when out with exploring par-
ties; and it is certain that he was instrumental in adding
to the somewhat meagre intelligence they possess of those
desert tracts of country which lie between Western Aus-
tralia and this colony. He still resides near Adelaide.
WAY, REV. JAMES,
Is a native of Newchard Bishop, North Devon, where he
was born June 17, 1801; ordained a minister in the Bible
Christian Church, in May, 1826 ; elected President of the
Conference in 1817, and arrived in Adelaide November
18, 1850. Prom that date to the present time he has
interested himself in all that concerns the spiritual wel-
fare of the colony, and has been instrumental in doing
much good. Outside his own Church he is regarded as a
zealous, pure-minded ecclesiastic, one whom it is a plea-
sure to know. His eldest son is Chief Justice of South
Australia, and his second son one of our leading medical
men. He still resides in Adelaide full of years and
honours, and notwithstanding his advanced age is as
active in mind as ever. Por many years he has been the
General Superintendent of the Bible Christian Societies
in Australia.
WAY, SAMUEL JAMES,
Born at Portsmouth, England, April, 1836. Educated at
Chatham, and at Maidstone. Arrived in the colony in
March, 1853, and was called to the Bar in March, 1861.
He was appointed Q.C. in September, 1871, and elected a
member of the Education Board in Eebruary, 1874; and
a member of* the Council of the Adelaide University in
November of the same year, and Vice-Chancellor in
1876. On February 10th, 1875, Mr. Way offered himself
Q


for election for the Sturt, and was successful. He gave
great satisfaction to that constituency. Became Attorney-
General in June, 1875, and Chief Justice in March, 1876.
During the interregnum between the departure and ar-
rival of several Governors, he was the Administrator of
Government, and acted in this capacity from May 7,
1877, to October 2 in the same year; from February 14,
1878, to August 13 ; and from September 8, 1879, to
October 2in that year. He possesses highly argumenta-
tive powers, combined with great logical force. As a
Judge, he is the terror of evil-doers ; as a private gentle-
man, the friend of virtue, and the patron and admirer of
all that is excellent and good in mankind. On the resig-
nation of Mr. H. E. Downer as Commissioner of Insol-
vency in 1881, Mr. Way undertook the duties in
conjunction with his judicial work.
WEARING, HIS HONOR JUDGE.
The wreck of the Gothenburg on Flinders or Barrier
Beef, Torres Straits, on the night of February 24, 1875,
is an event even yet deplored in many a South Australian
home, since thereby this colony was deprived of some of
its brightest ornaments. Out of 125 souls only 28 were
saved, and Mr. Justice Wearing with his Associate (Mr.
Pelham), Mr. Whitby (Acting Crown Prosecutor), and the
Hon. T. Eeynolds perished there. The subject of
this notice was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge,
obtained his B.A. degree and was called to the Bar in
Lincoln’s Inn, in 1847. Arrived in Adelaide, S.A., in
1848, and entered partnership with Mr. C. Fenn, solicitor.
In 1865 he was appointed Crown Solicitor and Q.C., and
in 1867 made Third Judge of the Supreme Court. At the
time of his death he was on his return from Palmerston,
N.T., where he had held the first Circuit Court. Judge
Wearing was unassuming and kind, much liked in every


respect, and a true gentleman. He left a widow, two sons,
and three daughters.
WICKHAM, BENJAMIN,
Arrived in South Australia per ship Africaine, in 1836.
He was an old army veteran, having fought under the
Duke of Wellington at the storming of Badajos, and
other notable battles. He received several wounds, and
secured a pension. Mr. Wickham was born in 1786, and
died at Wickham Park, near Adelaide, in January, 1876,
aged ninety years. He left five children, thirty grand-
children, and forty-five great-grandchildren.
WICKSTEED, FREDK.,
One of the early colonists, for many years a member of
the firm of Neales & Wicksteed, and Secretary to the
Church of England Synod. Died May 14, 1877. He left
a large family, some of whom occupy important positions
in Adelaide.
WIGLEY, HENRY RUDOLPH, S.M.,
Born in 1794; died at Grunthall, October 19, 1876, aged
eighty-two years. Admitted solicitor in the High Court
of Chancery in 1818, and as Attorney of the King’s
Bench and Exchequer on the 15th April in the same
year. Was appointed Public Prosecutor for South Aus-
tralia November 23, 1837 ; admitted practitioner of
the Supreme Court in December of the same year,
and shortly after appointed Police Magistrate, and to
discharge the duties now devolving on the Stipendiary
Magistrate, and as the colony increased in popula-
tion and wealth, so did the business of Mr. Wigley’s
Court increase, till at length its different branches had
to be divided, and Mr. (now the Hon.) B. T. Einniss, Mr.
Tolmer, and the late Captain Dashwood successively dis-
charged the duties of Police Magistrate until Mr.


Beddome was appointed. Mr. Wigley was the first Com-
missioner o£ Insolvency, and presiding Magistrate of the
Local Court, the duties of which office he discharged with
great ability until March, 1856, when he retired on a
pension. He received at that period a highly complimen-
tary letter from the Governor relative to the efficient
and impartial manner in which he had performed the
duties of his several offices.
WILKINSON, DR. W. H.,
Lor many years associated with the towns of Crawler,
Melrose, Moonta, Wallaroo, and Gumeracha, in all of
which he was highly respected by a wide circle of friends.
He was born in England, and apprenticed to a silversmith
there at the age of fifteen; but he never followed the
business, and enlisted in the 52nd Light Infantry, in
which he was promoted to the rank of Corporal, and
afterwards became Hospital Sergeant, serving in that
capacity fifteen years, and gaining a good knowledge of
surgery. He was appointed to the Commission of Peace
in S.A. in 1870, and filled the office with credit. He
identified himself with the Wesleyans, and was an ener-
getic and earnest local preacher, but liberal in his views,
and charitable to all denominations. He died at Gawler
November Ist, 1879.
WINGATE, WILLIAM,
A colonist of forty-two years. Arrived in S.A. in 1839.
Born at Chichester, Sussex, in 1813. Resided first in
Adelaide, then at Drv Creek, and last at Gawler River.
He took great interest in agricultural matters, was a
member of the Gawler Agricultural Society from its
commencement, and frequently called on to act as judge
at its exhibitions. He laid the foundation-stone of the
Stonehill Church over a quarter of a century ago, and


was till the time of Ms death one of its Trustees. His
death took place December 19, 1881, in his sixty-eighth
year.
WILLIAMS, THOMAS,
One of the earliest and most enterprising South Austra-
lian colonists. He was a native of Northampton, England,
and prior to his arrival engaged in hanking pursuits ; he
also filled the position of High Sheriff for that county,
and greatly assisted Lord John Russell, Mr. Gibbon
Wakefield, and Mr. G. E. Angas, and others in obtaining
the grant of the colony. Mr. Williams was one of the
largest shareholders in the South Australian Company.
Shortly after arrival in the Platina in 1838, he was
appointed by Colonel Gawler, then Resident Commis-
sioner and Governor, one of the members of the first
Legislative Council. He took the largest portion of the
Little Para Special Survey, which he and Colonel Gawler
called “ The Hermitage.” He was the first gentleman to
make a home in the country, formed the first garden and
vineyard, and one of the first sheep and dairy stations.
He farmed considerably during his stay here, but he
returned to England some years ago, where he died
December 2, 1881, at the advanced age of 87 years.
WOODFORDE, DR.,
Arrived in South Australia as a surgeon of the survey
party under Colonel Light, August 18, 1836. He prac-
tised his profession in Adelaide, and attained consider-
able eminence by his skilful treatment of difficult cases of
sickness and disease. On the death of Mr. George
Stevenson he was appointed City Coroner, and retained
that office till his decease, which occurred April 11, 1866,
in his 60th year. Dr. Woodforde’s name appears in one
or two places on the map of the colony, Stuart, the ex


plorer, having named some watercourses and mountains
in his honour.
WOOD, F. F.,
Died at Woodlands, near Angaston, July, 1865, in his
59th year. He was a native I and from an
early age evinced great liking for horticulture and flori-
culture. Mr. Wood will be remembered by many in
Gawler as having given some years ago a considerable
impulse to wine-making by his communications to the
press and by lectures on the subject, one of which he
delivered before the members of the Gawler Institute.
Mr. Wood was bred in one of the celebrated nurseries
near Nottingham, becoming in after life the conductor of
a popular horticultural periodical, and a Fellow of the
Horticultural Society. Shortly after emigrating to
South Australia, he became the manager of the extensive
vineyards and nurseries of Evansdale, the seat of Henry
Evans, Esq., the productions of which in wines and fruit
trees became, under Mr. Wood’s directing hand, deservedly
celebrated. For some years he was occupied with his
own nursery grounds at AFoodlands, North Ehine. In
early life Mr. Wood was conspicuous among the cricket
players of his native land, and in the indulgence of his
taste for that amusement unfortunately received a blow
from a cricket-ball under the ear, which caused such
serious injury to the part as to be followed by a large
permanent excrescence on the neck, and the sense of
hearing being affected. About a year before his death he
was engaged in his favourite game at Mount Pleasant,
and whilst so doing was again struck by a ball on the
injured part. From that period he was a most acute
sufferer,- and his useful life was brought to an early close.
WOODS, REV. JULIAN E. TEN ISON, F.L.S., F.G.S.,
One of the most celebrated of Australian representative


men. His voluminous works on geology, botany,
concbology, natural history, exploration,* and kindred
subjects show him to be a most ardent literary worker,
and as year by year passes new contributions from his
pen are produced, ■ ' n st hi addition thereto he is an
indefatigable student of nature. Mr. J. E. Tenison-
Woods was born near London in 1832, and received his
education at Newington, and Baliol College, Oxford.
Entered the Roman Catholic Church, and was ordained in
1856. He came to South Australia in 1857, and engaged
in travelling mission work for' some time, until he was
appointed Yicar-General in Adelaide. He was the origi-
nator of the Catholic school system, and established a
teaching order of the Sisters of St. Joseph. He has been
the recipient of many honours, and is at present asso-
ciated with the principal learned and scientific Societies
of the colonies. Among these may be mentioned the
Royal Societies of New South Wales, Victoria, and Tas-
mania ; the Adelaide and Queensland Philosophical
Societies, the Linnean Society of New South Wales, and
others. He is also honorary member of the New Zealand
Institute. As showing the bent of his versatile mind, it
maybe mentioned Mr. Tenison-Woods furnished the
geological plans and sections to the South Australian
Government engineers for railway purposes between
Adelaide and Victoria.
YOUNG, J. L.,
Was for upwards of thirty years associated with educa-
tional work in and near Adelaide, and a large majority
of our rising young colonists owe much to his teachings.
* Note.— “ The History of Australian Exploration,” by the Rev.
J. E. Tenison-Woods, in two volumes, published in 1860, is one of
the most comprehensive works of the kind, containing as it does the
history of the expeditions of Eyre, Gawler, Horrocks, Sturt, Babbage,
Goyder, McKinlay, Stuart, and other notable explorers.


He was educated at King’s College, and was from first to
last of his useful career a thorough student, not only of
hooks, but of nature. In 1880, having fairly earned the
rest he so earnestly desired, and having amassed a com-
fortable competence, he retired from active life, intending
to take a trip to England, whither his wife and family
had preceded him. With this object he sailed in the
John Elder, in June, 1881, being at the time in good
health and spirits; but he was doomed never to reach his
native shore, or see the loved ones who awaited his coming
there. He died in a fit of apoplexy during the voyage
through the Eed Sea, on the night of July 26, 1881.
Prior to his departure from the colony his old scholars
and friends presented him with a purse of 836 sovereigns
as a mark of their esteem and affection. To all he was
kindly disposed, whilst the weak and defenceless found
in him an able champion; and though he did not take an
active part in public affairs, he will nevertheless be long
remembered as one who had the interests of South Aus-
tralia at heart, and did his best for the advancement of
the land of his adoption.
Webb, Vardon, & Pritchard, Printers, Adelaide.


