

TKe
Referendum :
Being a Paper read before the
Royal Society of Tasmania,
August, 1897.
PROFESSOR JETHRO BROWN,
M.A., LL.D.
3£mtnc£eton:
Printed at “ The Daily Telegraph ” Office.




per
-4 *
THE REFERENDUM.
No patriot of our times, however ardent may be his faith
in democracy, or however optimistic may be his expectations
with regard to industrial progress, can fail to be deeply
impressed by the gravity of the problems which await
solution. The political atmosphere is charged with storm ;
the unprecedented and bewildering complexity of social
tendencies has given rise to a feeling of timorous unrest, at
times to a deep and desponding sense of inevitable conflict.
War and peace, democracy and autocracy, the syndicate and
the trades union, socialism and individualism, the regime of
competition and the cult of altruism ! The solution of these
contradictions, apparent or real, lies in the future; but in the
meantime the State is certain to take a leading hand in
attempted settlements, and the circumstance lends an alto-
gether exceptional interest to suggestions for constitutional
reform.
Now it is on a suggestion for constitutional reform that I
have the honor to address you this evening. If we survey
the course of English history for the last six hundred years,
we shall find that it has largely consisted in the gradual
elevation of the masses of the people to social and political
influence. In our own times the process has continued with
exceptional rapidity its latest development suggests an
ultimate application of democratic principle. I allude to the
proposal to shift the responsibility for legislation from the
legislature to the people. Though in actual application the
expedient for effecting this change has assumed various
forms, its principle is unvarying: in proportion to the
realisation of that principle, the judgment of the legislature
must be superseded by the judgment of the constituencies ;
democracy ceases to be representative and becomes direct.
I propose to discuss the merits of this general principle.
The questions which arise would seem to admit of treat-
ment in the following order : What precedents may we quote
in its favour? Is the principle itself, judged in the light of
reason and historical laws, one which may claim our support?
If not, may its application be justified as a remedy for


particular evils? Finally, do the arguments which may be
urged against it, apply in the case of certain suggested
modifications of its form?
Before following this outline, I should like to venture a
suggestion. It is not for me, on an occasion like the present,
to apologise for the difficulty of the subject, its want of
romance, or its call for sustained thought. Yet I should like
to embrace this opportunity of emphasising an aspect of
political studies which rarely receives practical recognition.
The chief obstacle to the solution of political problems con-
sists, not so much in the abstruseness of the arguments
involved, as in the prevalent disinclination to approach them
in a comprehensive and impartial spirit. The political
student, above all men, needs a fine sense of perspective, the
candour to admit the force of hostile arguments and the
capacity to weigh them in the balance. He must remember
that political questions are rarely decided by single argu-
ments. Most of us, I fear, are constantly acting under the
spell of some one aspect which strongly appeals to us. If we
escape from its tyranny, it is only to fall a prey to some
other aspect which, for the nonce, has more visibly impressed
us. It may not then be impertinent to remark that the
Referendum deserves and requires, in an unusual degree, a
candid and comprehensive treatment —a courageous pursuit
of truth though found in the form of common-place, and
though hostile to cherished convictions. You will, therefore,
bear with me if I venture to remind you of facts which are
familiar, or which do not favour approved conclusions. I
can only plead in self defence, that I have striven to confine
myself to arguments which, on whatever side they may
happen to be, are not unworthy of your closest attention.
The question of precedent necessarily appears in the
foreground of every argument for political reform. Has the
experiment been tried elsewhere ? If so, what were the
conditions under which it was applied? What were the
results of its application ? But such questions must be dis-
cussed in a definite order. It is futile to draw conclusions
from precedent where the conditions have been essentially
dissimilar. Since the uncertain light of a doubtful analogy is
almost inevitably misleading, it is better to undertake a frank
and independent inquiry of the question on its merits in all
cases where a similarity of conditions cannot be clearly
established. At the threshold of our subject, we are thus
compelled to examine three precedents which have largely


entered into discussion of the Referendum—the ancient Teu-
tonic policy, and the modern governments of Switzerland
and the United States.
The Referendum, it is plausibly argued, is but a return to
the custom of our primitive forefathers. In the free assembly
of the Teutonic tribe, the decision of all important questions
was referred to the popular vote. When the tribe developed
into the nation, the attempt to reconcile popular freedom
with the conditions of national organisation, ultimately led to
the makeshift of representative government. Under modern
conditions, though a mass vote of the people is still imprac-
ticable, it has become desirable to revert to the principle
underlying primitive practice. Once again the will of the
people is to be ascertained by direct reference to the popular
vote.
Such a line of argument suggests two objections equally
fatal to its validity. A form of government, which worked
successfully under simple conditions of life, may prove wholly
unfit for times full of new and difficult problems. The
application of an expedient to questions of administration in
a barbaric age forms no precedent for its application to
questions of legislation in modern times. Nor is represen-
tative government a makeshift; it is the rule of the people
by chosen deputies, whose control is tempered by a general
responsibility to those to whom they owe their elevation and
to whose opinion they must in the long run defer. It is thus
no mechanical device for securing the representation of votes.
Regarded critically its object is twofold : to avoid the evils of
injustice by securing the representation of all classes ; to
escape the imputation of incapacity by utilising the ability,
and accepting the guidance, of national leaders. Ido not ask
if these objects have been achieved. It is sufficient for my
present purpose that they exist.
But the Referendum has been applied under modem
conditions in the governments of Switzerland and the United
States. Yet, if we examine the conditions of its application
in these countries and consider attentively the politics of the
Australian colonies, we discover differences so serious as to
render the analogies untrustworthy. I am quite aware
that it is easy, in a spirit of uncritical scepticism, to
allude to conditions which involve no essential difference—to
mistake a merely negative for a positive significance. But
the inappropriateness of the suggested analogies appears
indisputable when once they have been subjected to the
5


limits of impartial analysis. Whether the Referendum be
good or bad, in the present condition of our politics, is
a question which must be discussed on its merits. It is idle
to attempt to justify or to condemn it on the support of
analogies which can suffer no investigation.
What are the conditions which deprive the Swiss
precedent of any conclusive or even any satisfactory value ?
Professor Dicey, in his able defence of the referendum, states
four reasons for doubting the utility of Swiss experience for
English politics, (i) Switzerland is the smallest of indepen-
dent states. (2) Federalism and localism of an extreme
type are natural to it. (3) The backbone of its political
organisation consists in cantons and communes. (4) Popular
education within its borders is unusually efficient. In the
transition from English to Australian politics, I should venture
to add as a fifth peculiarity, the continuity of the family in
Switzerland. The population is stationary, and the perma-
nence and stability of the family give a peculiarly conservative
tone, a measure of reliability, to expressions of popular
feeling.
If we turn to the United States, the difference of
conditions is even more clearly marked. In reviewing those
conditions it is necessary to direct our inquiry to State rather
than to Federal politics, since it is only in the case of the
former that the reform has any application. In the first
place there is the division between the Executive and the
Legislature. The founders of the American constitution, in
their deep distrust of uncontrolled democracy, strove to secure
stability of government by separating the organs for the
expression of public opinion. Power was divided between the
Federal and State governments ; in the Federal governments,
two checks were placed upon ill considered legislation —two
H ouses of the legislature, and, apart from and beyond these,
the Presidental veto. In the case of fundamental, or consti-
tutional laws, an additional check was provided in the form
of an elaborate machinery for amending the constitution. As
Professor Bryce points out, the ultimate result has been to
overshoot the mark. Each of the organs is too small to form
opinion, too narrow to express it, too weak to give effect to it.
Time has aggravated the defects incident to so elaborate a
system of restrictions and balances, and the increasing dis-
trust of the people has called for new and more effective
means of expressing the popular will. In the State govern-
ments, such means have been found in the Referendum.


In the second place, it is notorious that American politics
are characterised by an exceptional, absence of reliable men.
The most important reasons for this unfortunate circumstance
are not, in the opinion of the authority just quoted, the
democratic character of American institutions. They must
be sought in such relatively accidental circumstances as the
want of a social and commercial capital, the restriction of the
electors’ choice to candidates residing in their district, the
absence of the stimulus imparted to politics by questions of
foreign policy or constitutional change, and, finally, the num-'
ber of other and more attractive careers which are open to
the American citizen. #
In the third place, the dilemma of State politics is not
whether public opinion shall wholly or partially arbitrate on
political issues. As the independence of the Parliamentary
Representative has ceased to exist, the question of its preser-
vation does not arise. The Multitude pays no deference to
representatives who live in fear of it, “ who live,” to quote
from Bryce, “ in the breath of its favour, and hasten to fulfil
its behests almost before they are uttered. An impulse or
passion dominant among the citizens tells at once on the legis-
lature and finds expression in a law ; the only check being, not
the caution of that body and its willingness to debate at length,
but the incapacity it often shows to embody in a practical
form the wishes manifested by the people. Hence in the
American States representative government has by no means
that conservative quality which Europeans ascribe to it ;
whereas the direct vote of the people is the vote of men who
are generally better instructed than the European masses,
more experienced in politics, more sensible of their interests
in the stability of the country. If, therefore, we regard the
Referendum in its effect upon the state legislature, we shall
regard it as being rather a bit and bridle than a spur.” f
Finally, in causal connection with conditions just noted,
with the dominance of party and the prevalence of corrup-
tion, there is the attitude of despair with which Americans
regard their Representative institutions. As Professor Bryce
explains, the despair arises as much from the merit of the
citizens as from the weakness of the legislatures. “The
people are as likely to be right in their judgment as those
bodies ; and they are more honest and more independent.”
These are the four conditions which constitute the
historical and philosophical justification for the application
* American Commonwealth ; chap. XYIII.
f Bryce ; The American Commonwealth. 1-474.
7


of the principle of the Referendum to State politics. Can it
be maintained that any one of these conditions is present in
Australian politics? Is the expression of popular opinion
subject to the checks imposed by an independent executive ?
No. Have our best citizens ignored politics ? No. Does
public opinion so dominate the minds of our statesmen as to
destroy their independence ? No. Have the people despaired
of their legislative institutions ? Again, I answer, no. The
t time may arrive when these conditions, or at least some of
them, will appear in our midst. It will then be opportune to
examine the working of the American precedent for the
purpose of defending or opposing its application in our own
politics. In the meantime, it is for us to consider the question
on its merits, above all to refrain from quoting American
precedent to justify that form of the referendum which has
been proposed in these colonies. In America, though
attempts have been made to weaken or to abolish upper
chambers, their integrity appears now to be regarded as
axiomatic.
In despair of any real assistance from precedent, the
student naturally turns to consider whether the general
principle underlying the Referendum can be justified in the
light of reason and historical laws. Can we advocate the
principle for its own sake and apart from its potency to remedy
particular evils ? We cannot hope to answer this question
without an appreciation of the fundamental principles of
representative, as opposed to direct, democracy. The fact
that some of these principles are being persistently discredited
or ignored, must excuse a lengthier statement than would
otherwise be permissible.
The theory of representative government has undergone,
since its first realisation, a transformation which is still con-
tinuing and has already been accompanied by social changes
of great importance. The modern candidate for popular
support relies upon his political views rather than upon
general considerations of character. Representative govern-
ment is democratic ; it implies a confidence in the legislative
wisdom of persistent majorities of the people. The experi-
ence of our time has justified this confidence. We have
learned to see a real virtue in the popular majority, even when
opposed by an active and intelligent minority. Nor is it
difficult to discover a reason. Speaking generally, the en-
lightened few are those born to superior opportunities ; and
we know on good authority that it is not easy for a rich man


to enter into the Kingdom. When fidelity to the status quo
is justified by reasons so agreeable to our prejudices, the
emancipation is not easy. Motives o£ policy or philanthropy
may exercise a counteracting influence upon the minds of
isolated individuals, but the government of a class can hardly
be otherwise than unduly conservative. When a prophet
announces to men some new truth which is to affect their
conduct and to involve a departure from conventional
standards, he may well base his hopes for the future on
the relatively greater receptivity of the masses of the people.
“ And the common people heard Him gladly !”
The peculiarly conservative temper of the more intelli-
gent classes is but one aspect of a familiar truth : men look
first after their own interests. The recognition of this truth
in its relation to the proper object of state action, has
necessitated a profoundly important distinction between
industrial and political organisation. The State is not called
upon to discharge an ulterior function ; it is no mere
machine for the production of wealth, or the conquest of
foreign countries. Its function is the corporate good.
Thus, in the sphere of politics, sympathy is the first test of
administrative efficiency. The assurance of sympathy is the
most significant aspect of constitutional progress ; and the
recognition of its importance explains the great conclusion of
modern politics : the masses are, in the long run, better
judges of what is good for them than the classes who are
above them. It is easy to talk of the prejudices of ignorance;
but the prejudices of self-interest are apt to be more actively
dangerous and less amendable to reason.
The value of the judgment of persistent minorities of the
people would seem to be attested by the history of political
agitation in England. “ Not a measure,” writes May, the
Constitutional historian, “ has been forced upon Parliament,
which the calm judgment of a later time has not since
approved ; not an agitation has failed, which posterity has
not condemned.”
A difficult question arises when we attempt to apply the
foregoing creed to actual politics. Where the persistency is
sustained through long periods, few will dispute its authority.
But what length or what ardour of persistency is to be
deemed adequate ? As Sir Henry Maine so forcibly pointed
out, universal suffrage would have prohibited the spinning
jenny, the power loom, the threshing machine ; it would
have restored the Stuarts aud proscribed the Roman Catholic


and the Dissenter. Nor, in any one of these cases, could we
deny a respectable continuity of popular conviction. Such
facts are striking ; it is well to recognise them, but they do
not raise insuperable difficulties. In the first place no one
claims infallibility of judgment for human nature. Though
a Government commits serious blunders, this is no conclusive
proof of its unfitness. In the second place, no one claims
that universal suffrage is good for all time. Maine’s argu-
ment is based upon particular conditions of national char-
acter and suggests its own answer. The spread of education,
the increased facilities for publicity, the improved receptivity
of the masses, justify an increased confidence in the popular
judgment. That the definition of reasonable persistency
must vary with the age is a conclusion of common sense. It
is also a Law of Social Evolution.
But if representative government implies a belief in the
virtue of lasting majorities, it also implies a disbelief in the
judgment of momentary majorities. While admitting the
ultimate reliability of numbers, it denies their immediate
reliability. To put the matter from another point of view,
it implies that there are other elements than sympathy in the
definition of administrative efficiency. Clearly the rationale
of this belief must be impartially examined if we are to pass
judgment upon the Referendum.
If we compare the civilised with the uncivilised society,
the modern division of labour is the most striking of
the many differences which arrest our attention. The
simplicity of the tribal and industrial arrangements has
been superseded ; in its place we have the bewildering
complexity of the modern State. The constant differentia-
tion which has everywhere characterised progress may
be regarded from two points of view. It has rendered
progress possible in the past; it is essential to progress
in the future. Its vast importance must appear on the most
cursory inspection. The division of labour allows one man
to devote the whole of his time and energies to one particular
employment; the increased opportunities involve the culti-
vation of a special skill, and the acquirement of a special
information; finally, when once the system is established, a
selective process is constantly going on tending to draw into
any particular calling, those who display a preliminary fitness
for its exercise. Such differentiation is an inevitable element
in all industrial progress. The operation of the same law may
be traced within the sphere of politics. If the management


of a factory requires special time, information, and skill, it is
not easy to see how we can dispense'with such qualifications
in affairs of state. Clearly, if we take the average voter, with
his deficient knowledge, his deficient training, his want of
ability, of time, or of interest, we must be prepared for the
extreme fallibility of his political judgments, even though we
test him by the modest standard of his political representative.
When, however, a large number of these average voters agree,
and a conclusion has been endorsed by a majority of the
population, a too ardent democrat might contend, in apparent
reliance upon a sum in addition, that from the accumulation of
many small intelligences there results a mysterious supreme
intelligence whose voice is the voice of wisdom. Literally,
Vox Populi , Vox Dei.
A priori, one must condemn this belief as a curious
illusion ; yet it has grown with amazing force and casts a spell
over the popular imagination which may seem to augur ill for
the future. It is a blind appeal to mere numbers which
recalls to mind the profound remark of Aristotle—while the
error of oligarchy consists in assuming that those who are
unequal in some respects, are unequal in all, the error of
democracy consists in assuming that those who are equal in
some respects are equal in all. “ The pretension,” remarks
Amiel, “ that every man has the necessary qualities of a citizen
simply because he was born twenty-one years ago, is as much
as to say that labor, merit, virtue, character, and experience
are to count for nothing ; and we destroy humility when we
proclaim that a mambecomes the equal of all other men by the
mere mechanical and vegetative process of natural growth.” *
It is easy to verify by observation the extreme fallibility of
popular judgments which have not been subjected to the
ordeal of hostile criticism and the various tests which time
imposes. If we take the one great modern democracy where
the will of the momentary majority has exercised a real and
constant influence over the course of legislation, the limita-
tions of the average voter are clearly attested. The citizens
of the United States have displayed a commendable capacity
for dealing with political problems involving clear issues or
depending upon moral sentiment. But experience has proved
their inability to grapple with that increasingly large class of
questions which requires the display of exact knowledge or
sustained thought. Nothing can be more significant than the
admission of Professor Bryce, an author qualified to pass judg-
ment on the great questions of American politics both by the
Willoughby, “ Nature of the State,” p. 413.


breadth of his sympathy and the depth of his insight. “ The
European critic,” he writes, “ may say, ‘lf the mass of
mankind possess neither the knowledge, nor the leisure, nor
the skill to determine the legislation and policy of a great state,
will not the vigor of the Commonwealth decline and its
resources be squandered ? Will not a nation ruled by its men
in reliance on their own average wisdom be overtaken in the
race of prosperity or overpowered in a warlike struggle by a
nation of equal resources, which is guided by its most capable
minds ? ’ The answer to this criticism is that America has
hitherto been able to afford to squander her resources, and
that no other state threatens her. With her wealth, and in
her position, she can with impunity commit errors which
might be fatal to the nations of Western Europe.” *
In the preceding paragraphs I have ventured to remind
you of premises which seem indisputable. Popular interests
can only be guaranteed when the people exercise a definite
control over Government and legislation. On the other hand,
progress is only possible when there is ample scope for
utilising all the special capacity which the community affords.
To harmonise these principles is the great problem of demo-
cratic government. Yet there can be litttle doubt of the
general direction in which a solution is to be found. To
ignore the claims of permanent majorities, or to advocate the
claims of momentary majorities, is to sacrifice one or other of
the two great principles in question. The people must rule if
their interests are to be duly consulted ; but if the govern-
ment of the people is to attain its ends, there must be skilled
men to execute its decisions, and great men to stimulate the
direction of thought, and to fire the popular enthusiasm.
Though the multitude must not yield unquestioning obedience
to its leaders, it must defer to them. On the other hand, the
right of its leaders to anticipate or to delay its claims must
rest upon a capacity to interpret that reason which under-
lies momentary expressions of the popular will, but outlives
them, which is the will of the people, yet something above the
people. The Higher Self of the People ! Thus, for the
successful working of democracy, we need adequate means
for ensuring that the course of legislation shall be determined
by the matured and deliberate judgment of the people, rather
than by the opinions of fluctuating majorities. The ex-
pression of popular will must be subject to certain restraints
in the interests of fair discussion and the moderating counsels
* Bryce, “The American Commonwealth,” vol 1., p. 588.


of national leaders. In its power to achieve such an end rests
the most important justification of representative government.
But the expediency of restraints upon the popular will,
implied in the theory of representative government, can
be justified on other grounds than those which are suggested
by a review of the advantages involved in the division of labor.
If long experience of Governments of different ages and
climes proves one thing more clearly than another, it is the
moral degeneracy which waits upon the ruler who exercises a
despotic control. The law has the clearest demonstration in
private affairs. No one dreams of maintaining that it is desir-
able to have one’s inclinations granted with invariable
promptitude. The people, acting in a corporate capacity,
are not exempt from the frailties of the individual. Nor has
the fact b&en ignored in previous practice. If democracy
has been saved from the imputation of incapacity by the
institution of representation, it has been saved from the
evils of absolutism by the restraining influences of constitutional
government. The legislative, executive, and judicial functions
are distributed among organs which are more or less distinct,
and are constituted to exercise a reciprocal restraint. It is
idle to talk of the adequacy of the checks which a vigorous
minority may impose. When political supremacy is given to
the momentary majority, the vitality of minorities must
wither ; the despotism of numbers throws over the popular
imagination a spell which imperils the independence of the
most vigorous minds.
There can, I think, be no doubt that the supremacy of
momentary majorities prejudices stability of government. I
am quite aware that large masses of the people often move
slowly, are essentially conservative. But what provision can
be maintained in practice for securing that the majority of the
voters shall represent a majority of the electors ? Nor is it
possible to conceive of any device for ensuring the existence
of a respectable force of conviction or opinion among the
majority of actual voters. For both these reasons, among
others more obvious, while the people as a whole move
slowly, the judgments of majorities may fluctuate rapidly.
Under their absolute supremacy, the ship of state is all sail
and no keel.
The foregoing arguments, taken in combination, may be
said to constitute the justification of representative democracy.
When such a form of government is completely established,
tuture progress seems to consist in increasing, to a reasonable


extent, the effectiveness of the popular control. But a stage
may at last be reached when this control is so direct, constant
and omnipotent, that no scope whatever is afforded for the
display of superior capacity in the chosen representative.
Very similar results may be obtained in a formal manner by
referring all the more important questions to the popular vote.
In either case a great and momentous change has been
effected —a change so far-reaching in its effects, and so clearly
opposed to some of the lessons of history and everyday life,
that it can only be justified on the clearest demonstration of
necessity. The historical significance of the Referendum is
thus disclosed. Hitherto the democratisation of representative
institutions has proceeded without impairing the efficiency
of government. Indeed, if we attach due importance to con-
siderations of sympathy and the education of the voter, that
efficiency has steadily increased. But a new epoch has
arrived. An attempt is being made to give an ultimate
application to democratic principle, and the change cannot
be effected without sacrificing the various advantages which
the division of labor implies.' In other words while we may
appear to be following on the lines of the past in one respect,
we are neglecting its clearest teaching in another. Time has
not yet seriously affected the truth of Bagehot’s statements.
“ The feeling of a constituency is the feeling of a dominant
party, and that feeling is elicited, stimulated, sometimes even
manufactured, by the local political agent. Such an opinion
could not be moderate, could not be subject to effectual
discussion, could not be in close contact with pressing facts,
could not be framed under a chastening sense of near
responsibility, could not be formed as those form their
opinions who have to act upon them. Constituency govern-
ment is the precise opposite of Parliamentary government.
It is the government of immoderate persons far from the
scene of action, instead of the government of moderate
persons close to the scene of action ; it is the judgment of
persons judging in the last resort, and without a penalty, n
lieu of persons judging in fear of a dissolution, and ever
conscious that they are subject to an appeal.” *
I believe less support would have been given to the
proposal to substitute the direct and immediate consultation
of constituencies for the present system, if the significance of
the proposal had been more clearly grasped. The question
is not whether we can trust our own opinions, but whether
we can trust those of our neighbours. The answer to the
* Bagehot, “ English Constitution,” No. 5.


former question is commonly and naturally in the affirmative.
In the consideration of the latter we may more confidently
anticipate a wholesome scepticism.
Looking back for a moment, we have seen that precedent
does not warrant the application of the Referendum in
Australian politics ; that history and reason condemn the
principle which underlies it, as opposed to some of the
clearest lessons of experience ; that, as industrial progress is
only possible where full scope is given to the utilisation of
special ability and special information, so political progress,
while requiring a popular control of the rulers in order that
the interests of the many may be consulted, is subject to the
same law ; that the will of the people which has stood the
test of time, is therefore, in the long run, our safest standard
of legislation ; that the majority, like the individual, can
only lose by having its momentary inclinations gratified with
invariable promptitude ; that improvement in the race
necessarily lowers the degree of persistency we may justly
exact of the popular verdict, until, in a state where all men
were perfect or equal, the need or the occasion for restraint
must wholly vanish. But as yet we have not reached this
stage. For the successful working of democracy under
existing conditions we need great men to lead it, skilled
men to carry out its decisions, and, finally, effective means
for securing that its deliberate judgment shall be the
standard of legislation. To each of these three requisites,
the principle of the Referendum is directly and manifestly
opposed. By attributing ultimate authority to the fluc-
tuating majority, it must tend to drive strong and inde-
pendent men from politics, to lower the standard of
legislation, and to increase the sense of popular despotism.
It is an undue sacrifice of the qualities which go to
make efficiency of government to the considerations of a
slightly increased sympathy and a slightly increased educa-
tional influence. As such, its principles must be condemned.
It is a desperate remedy, which can only be justified by a
desperate disease.
I believe it will be generally admitted that such arguments
derive an added force from the character of the times
in which we live, and the kind of problems which await
solution. The intensification of the class element in politics
is a source of great danger. There can be no doubt that great
economic changes are immediately before us. I, for one, look
forward to their realisation with considerable confidence. At


the same time, their vast importance requires that they should
be carried into effect with the greatest care ; that the
majority which decides their character and the time for their
practical application, must be one whose mind is thoroughly
made up, and whose opinions have passed through the
ordeal of hostile criticism—in a word, the chastened majority
whose will is the controlling power under representative
democracy. Now, even more than formerly, the enormous
variety of conflicting interests demands increased oppor-
tunities for influencing the formation of public opinion by
judgment, by research, and by the moderating counsels of an
enlightened patriotism.
I have endeavored to prove that an ideal democratic policy
for our times would not include the Referendum. In the
form in which that expedient has ordinarily assumed, it is a
revolutionary measure undesirable in itself and only to be jus-
tified as a remedy for evils which we cannot hope to redress
under the present Constitution, and which imply a manifest
and incurable inadequacy of the means for expressing the
popular will. Such an inadequacy might arise from a general
degradation of politics clue to the operation of causes acting
outside of the constitutional machinery of the country ; or it
might be the result of defects in the machinery itself. On the
first of these two alternatives I wish to make two remarks.
The degradation must be marked if such a revolutionary
change is to be justified. It is clearly a policy of despair to
introduce into the Constitution an expedient which must
aggravate the very cause of the disease whose effects it
is designed to correct. You cannot lessen the responsibility
of Parliament wathout impairing the integrity and efficiency
of the Parliamentary representative. Again, since the people
will have leaders, a vital question forces itself upon our
attention. Who are to lead under the new regime ? When one
reflects upon the vast powers of the Press, it is not reassuring
to be told that the introduction of the Referendum into
Switzerland has been accompanied by a constantly increasing
influence of the morning paper. The degradation of politics
must have proceeded far, 1 venture to repeat, if we are to
justify revolutionary change in the direction suggested. Has
it proceeded far ? I am quite aware of the disfavor with
which many profess to regard the politician ; yet there is one
fact which I believe few impartial minds will question. If
you take the average representative, you will find that he is
fully equal to the average voter in morals, and very much his
superior in ability and in information. The contrary belief


evidences a failure to recognise that the severity of our
criticism is in proportion to the elevation of the person who
is subject to it.
But, though there be no general degradation of politics, it
may still be argued that there are defects in our constitutional
machinery which argue a fatal inadequacy of the means
for expressing the popular will. By those who, like myself,
assume the necessity of securing a popular supremacy,
the strength of this argument will be admitted. Certain
parts of the machinery of our Constitutions may be
regarded as so many ingenious devices for securing
that the people shall be flattered with the agreeable
illusion of absolute power, while practically denied its
exercise. One is reminded of the story of the American
lawyer. When he was young he lost many cases that he
should have won ; when he was old he won many cases that
he should have lost; u so in the long run justice was done.”
Under the present system of representation, momentary
expressions of popular feeling sometimes receive less
attention than they deserve, sometimes more. Justice is not
done under such an arrangement. Nor should it be forgotten
that an important justification of representative government is
the function it serves in anticipating popular judgments. The
history of constitutional reform in the present century is a
remarkable illustration of the reality of this justification in the
past. Though in the present its importance is declining, it is
still one of the many aspects of the subject which deserve
attention. If, therefore, we wish to test the value of the
existing system of checks and balances, we have to consider
such questions as the following : Are the restraints upon the
popular will so strong as to impose insurmountable obstacles
to reform ? When the Government acts without popular
support or in reliance upon momentary majorities, does later
experience tend to justify or condemn its action ? Do the
representative institutions perform their functions in guiding
and informing the popular intelligence ? Finally, does the
constitution clearly recognise that the definition of desirable
restraint must be determined by reference to the character of
suggested legislation, as well as by reference to the character
of the popular intelligence ?
Such questions deserve the closest attention and suggest
considerations by no means agreeable to the present form of
Representative Government. When we turn our attention
to the present machinery for giving effect to the popular
will, we discern certain very serious defects for which the


Referendum wonld seem to be a most efficient corrective.
There is, for example, the failure to distinguish between the
more and the less important changes in legislation. Nothing
can be clearer than the desirability of an increased restraint
in the case of changes known to be of a far-reaching character.
It may be desirable to prohibit juvenile smoking ; it may be
desirable to extend the franchise. Common sense, forcibly
supported by recent experience, dictates the expediency of
requiring a more deliberate judgement in the one case than in
the other. As Dicey remarks, it would be easier to abolish
the House of Lords to-day than to have disfranchised the
borough of old Sarum a century ago. The Referendum, in the
modified form of a reference to the people from both Houses,
would naturally be confined to specified classes of legislation
of the more important character.
The dominance of party is another of the circumstances
opposed to popular supremacy. The party is not the nation;
its programme often finds little sincere support among its own
members. True, effectual penalties wait upon unpopular
proposals. But the unpopularity must be general or intense ;
failing this, much may be done in the way of legislation which
enjoys neither a popular sanction nor a reasonable prospect
of obtaining it. A Cabinet, engaged in fixing the date when
its policy is to be submitted to the country, neglects no
adventitious aid to popular support. The date for a general
election is fixed with a prudent regard to the desirability of
prejudicing the opposing party. A want of tact on the part of
the Leader of the Opposition, a false step or an unfortunate
speech, possibly some happy conquest of a Cabinet Minister
enhancing the momentary popularity of the party in power—
nothing is to be lost if the country is to be saved ; z>., if the
party is to remain in power. If aught were wanting to impart
a stimulus to their ingenuity, it must be found in the
circumstance of an Opposition ardently pursuing similar
tactics. But suppose the Cabinet to have fixed upon a con-
venient time for holding an election, they have yet to
discuss the party platform. What a mosaic it may be ? A
violent or active minority, even a single Minister, may succeed
in introducing elements which have no approval from the
majority of the Cabinet. There may be thrust upon the
country a comparatively new measure, of which the majority
of the party and of its leaders do not approve, but which is
submitted to the nation associated with the prestige of that
party and supported by its adherents under penalties
sufficiently effectual to secure their adherence. Such things


may be defensible ; but they seriously interfere with the true
expression of the popular will. The Referendum, in the
opinion of Professor Dicey, places parties and factions under
the control of the national majority.
Quite apart from the rigors of party discipline, we have to
consider a class of evils which result from the inadequacy
of the representative system. Under the present mode of
conducting elections, the minority of a constituency are
unrepresented ; and experience has proved the futility of
relying upon chance to secure fairness throughout the
country. The Referendum would test the numerical strength
of parties with an approach to ideal accuracy. The system
of representation in single districts is also responsible for a
far more extensive introduction of the personal elements into
an election than is desirable, or even than is required by the
conditions of representative government. If the people are
to exercise their political rights through chosen deputies, it is
inevitable that questions of the expediency of measures must
often be confused with considerations of the personal
character of the candidate ; under the present system, where
the electors’ choice is confined to two or three candidates, the
confusion assumes a most serious character. While there
would be far less occasion for complaint under a system
which offered a wider choice of candidates, a complete
dissociation of men and measures can only be obtained by
the Referendum.
To the system of elections in single districts, we may also
trace an evil which is more serious than either of those just
mentioned. I allude to the confusion of issues which
obscures the results of an election. The voter is perplexed ;
the popular verdict is equivocal. In the composition of an
election speech, the candidate for parliamentary honors
undertakes a task which offers a sufficient scope for the most
aspiring ingenuity. The party programme is the first
element of the dish which is to tempt the palate of the voter.
There are to be added the constituents upon which his
electors entertain pronounced opinions. The doubtful ele-
ments follow ; in the admixture of these, the candidate must
display the utmost tact, or the whole dish may be rejected.
He must strive to secure at least a qualified verdict from the
elector. “ I did not like the dish ; I did not like the
dressing. But the aroma was gratifying. On the whole, it
appeared less indigestible than the fare across the street.
So I swallowed it.” Such a mode of conducting elections


can hardly be said to give effect to the expression of popular
opinion. The Referendum would secure a popular verdict
on a single issue.
The reputed class character of Upper Houses is another
evil which impairs the present means for expressing the
popular will. Ido not ask if the reputation is deserved ; or
whether, if deserved, it is inevitable. I allude to the influence
of the fact on occasions where disputes arise between the two
Houses. A measure which has found little direct favor
with the people, but which has been endorsed by their
representatives in the Lower House, may suddenly acquire
widespread popularity from the mere fact of its identification
with the war cry of popular rights. It is unfortunate when
the institutions of a country so invite a display of class feeling;
when Radicalism is approved, not for what it is, but for what
it is reputed to be. If the Upper House were allowed to
appeal to the country by means of the Referendum, such an
evil would be less likely to occur ; at the same time, a remedy
would be provided for differences between the two Houses.
The reality of the foregoing evils is indisputable. Nor do I
propose to question the adequacy of the suggested remedy.
I prefer to adopt the position that the evils, though serious,
can be remedied in far safer ways ; that in any case they do
not warrant the application of so dangerous an expedient as
the Referendum. It is important to distinguish between
fundamental and non-fundamental laws ; but the distinction
can be easily effected without the aid of the Referendum, and
already exists in many constitutions to which that expedient
is unknown. The defects of the representative system, such
as the failure to represent minorities, the confusion of politi-
cal issues and the excess of the personal element in ordinary
elections, can be overcome by reformed methods of represen-
tation. By those who have taken the trouble to understand
the Hare system, its potency to remove such defects will
hardly be denied. The evils incidental to party government
may seem to be more obstinate. Yet there is reason to
doubt the adequacy of the Referendum to overcome them.
In any case, there are occasions wflien it is better to endure
the ills we have than fly to those we know not of.
But the failure to provide against deadlocks is the
characteristic of the present system which has attracted
most attention in Australian politics. In practice, the term
u deadlock ” would seem to apply to cases where a Lower
House is very anxious to get its own way but cannot


succeed in doing so. Speaking very generally, the theory of
deadlocks .involves a reflection on one or other of the Houses,
Clearly, if the Lower House is at fault the resistance to their
inclination is pre-eminently useful, and calls for no change in
the constitution. But if, as is believed by many, the Upper
H ouse is at fault, the remedy would seem to be found in its
reform. If it is unduly conservative and persistently opposes
useful measures, the most direct and natural remedy would
appear to be found in liberalising its franchise, in curtailing
the leisure of its members, or in lessening the effects of its
resistance. The last mentioned object could be achieved
by a provision to the following effect : Bills which the Lower
House supports by a majority of four-sevenths, and which it
persists in presenting after a dissolution, shall be deemed to
have passed the Upper House if supported by three-sevenths
of the members. This is the suggestion of the Attorney-General
of Tasmania, and, as compared with the Referendum, it has
great and obvious merits.
Even if it be admitted that such suggested remedies
are inadequate, my general conclusion as to the Referendum
is unaffected. I can see nothing in our present condition
which can justify the application of an expedient so opposed
to the clearest lessons of reason and history. The general
argument on this point derives an added force from the fact
that the machinery of the Referendum has peculiar difficulties
of its own. Each application must involve much of the
turmoil of a general election ; it is extremely difficult to
guarantee that u clear and simple issues ” shall be fairly put ;
if the expedient be applied at all frequently there must be
great difficulty in securing a large and fairly representative
vote ; in any case, a disproportionate influence is likely to
accrue to compact populations.
It remains to consider how far the foregoing arguments
apply to exceptional cases. Although the ordinary applications
of the Referendum cannot be justified by reference to general
principles, or the undoubted evils of present politics, it is still
possible that something may be said in behalf of applications
on a great occasion, or in certain modified forms. Few will
doubt the expediency of referring the question of federal
union to the decision of the popular vote. Apart from more
obvious reasons there is a clericalism about the politician
which impairs the value of his conclusions on such matters.
The attitude of the ecclesiastic bars the way to religious
unions ; if federation w r ere left to the politician we might
well despair of its future.


Even when the Referendum is employed as a part of
the constitutional machinery, its form may be so
modified as to seriously weaken and occasionally destroy, the
force of any arguments against it. Practicable modifications
involve three distinct principles of classification ; the Refer-
endum may be used as a veto upon the legislature, or as a
means of settling disputes between the separate parts of the
legislature ; it may be applied to ordinary legislation, or
confined to questions affecting the- Constitution ; finally,
whatever may be the purposes for which it is applied, it may
be compulsory, or optional on the demand of a certain
number of the voters. If we apply these principles we
arrive at the following classification :
I. As a veto upon bills that have passed both Houses.
{a) Constitutional laws.
1. Compulsory.
2. Optional.
(b) All legislation, in which case it can only be optional.
11. For settling disputes between the Houses.
( a ) Constitutional laws on appeal of
1. Lower House against Upper House.
2. Upper House against Lower House.
3. Either House.
4. Joint committee of both Houses.
(3) All legislation ; on appeal of, etc.
When the Referendum is employed as a means of vetoing
the legislature, and is confined to the approval or rejection of
constitutional laws, the force of certain objections is
materially lessened. In this form the expedient appears in
the Commonwealth Bill. Here, however, it can be justified
by an argument which only applies to Federal Constitutions.
I allude to the want of a power or organisation existing behind
the Federal and States Constitutions and capable of re-
presenting the dual aspects of the federal union. It is perhaps
difficult to predict the consequences of such a device if
applied to an ordinary state constitution. At first it is likely
to prove unduly conservative ; ultimately, the independence of
Parliament must be destroyed. It requires no vivid imagination
to picture the growing potency of the taunt, “ The Honourable
Member is afraid to let the Bill go to the country ! Like
effects might follow in a more direct manner ; channels might
wear their courses deeper; the Referendum, even in its most
modified form, might ultimately lead to the Initiative—an


expedient for securing legislation by the people without the
intervention of either House of Parliament. This has been
the experience of Switzerland, where the Initiative, though
absolutely fatal to all the principles on which sound legislation
is based, has been introduced into the constitution and appears
to be regarded as the logical counterpart of the Referendum.
It is well to fairly face this possibility, and to remind the
statesman who introduces an expedient of this kind into the
constitution, that he is putting a hook into his nose. Whatever
be the restraining influences by which he hopes to moderate
ics operation —limitations of time, of the class of laws, or of
preliminary procedure—are extremely likely to be swept
away in the course of time. At length, the innovation, which
in its modified form seemed so plausible, is worked out in
its logical completeness. What appeared so harmless in the
garb of innocence stands forth in all the potency of naked
simplicity.
It is idle to defend an experiment of this kind on the plea
that its ill success must secure its condemnation. Who is to
be Advocatus Diaboli ? Governments are proverbially blind
to their faults ; in the case of Democracies, the processes of
proof and persuasion are attended with peculiar difficulties.
Even in private affairs it is very difficult to know exactly
where you have gone astray, whether it was the lobster or
the salad which caused the trouble. You may recognise an
evil without being in the least degree able to put your finger
upon the responsible conduct. In the case of a number
acting in concert there is an additional element—division of
responsibility. Where that number includes a majority of the
community there is yet another complication—the sanction
must be self-imposed. Unfortunately the conscience of
majorities is not hyper-sensitive. From such considerations a
certain conclusion follows. Even if the Referendum should
work badly, there would be great difficulty in securing its
condemnation. Indeed in the light of reason and
historical laws, there must be a strong tendency to extend
the sphere of its application. If we attach to these facts the
importance they deserve we are compelled to conclude that
even the more modified forms of the Referendum can only be
justified by the plea of a manifest and incurable inadequacy
of the present means for expressing the popular will.
But whatever may be isaid in behalf of the Referendum?
in its more modified forms, the objections I have stated
apply in their full force to suggestions to apply it as an


expedient for settling disputes between the two Houses.
Such an application is not justified by precedent, and is
opposed to the clear light of reason and history. By the
fundamental laws of progress, from which there is no escape,
we can only hope to survive the processes of natural selection
by utilising such special capacity as our community affords.
True the fact that government exists for the good of the
many, necessitates a popular control in the interests of the
many. But this is the very meaning of representative
government. The few rule, the well being of all is protected.
The responsiblity of the Parliamentary representative to his
electors assures the plenary control of the popular majority
on all subjects on which its will is clearly and deliberately
expressed. To substitute for this state of things, a political
machinery which is calculated to ensure that a momentary
majority of the population shall have the power of overriding
the influence of the Upper House, would be to venture upon a
drastic remedy, bad in itself and only capable of justification
on the plea of grave and ineradicable defects of the present
constitution. Whether such defects exist is a question upon
which there are those here more competent to speak than
myself. Still I have not hesitated to presume upon your
indulgence and to express an opinion. Holding as Ido
that the Referendum is opposed to the maintenance of the
conditions which are essential to the successful working of
democracy, compelled as I am to regard it as a policy of
despair, I can see in our present conditions nothing to justify
its application. I believe that whatever may happen in
the future, the present course of the true democrat lies in
the direction of reforming the present machinery of the
constitution, rather than in the direction of giving to
democratic principle, an extreme and revolutionary appli-
cation.
University,
Hobart.
Printed at “The Daily Telegraph” Office, Launceston.
