

The Relation of
Man to God
BY
A. SCHWARZ.
[Republished from "The Theosophist."]
Fourth Edition; Revised and Enlarged
MADRAS:
THE "THEOSOPHIST" OFFICE, ADYAR.
LONDON & BENARES:
THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY.
1906.


Jl-k-o-
- ( I 6
STUDY ON THE RELATION OF MAN
TO GOD.
fHE following study on the theosophical conception
of God, the Trinity, and man’s relation to God,
cannot inany way pretend to be original. It is meant
to be a resume of the fundamental teachings on these
ever recurring problems, compiled from our best theo-
sophical writers, and as such it should possess a certain
value and interest. Nothing but a mere outline is here
attempted, which, if successful, should render the sub-
sequent study of details all the more easy and instruc-
tive.
The Conception of God.
“ First let us take up the problem of problems, that
of the existence of God and the conceptions of divinity
formulated by man. There is one fundamental prin-
ciple that must be recognised in approaching this prob-
lem—the unity of existence. If God and man be re-
garded as basically different, a mighty unspanned gulf
stretching between them, then the problem of the divine
existence and of man’s relation thereto seems to frown
upon us as defying solution. But if God and man be
seen as of one essence, humanity as an offshoot of the
One Tree of Life, and as one of myriad offshoots, sub


human and superhuman—one radiant arch of beings,
each instinct with divine life—then the question as it
affects man appears by no means a hopeless one.
The West, tending to the former conception—that of
a fundamental difference of nature between the Creator
and the created—has swung between the unacceptable
■extremes of crude, anthropomorphic Monotheism and
philosophic Agnosticism. The East, founding its reli-
gion on the second conception, that of unity, has con-
tentedly accepted a religious Pantheism as intellectually
necessary and as emotionally satisfying. Pantheism in
the West has hitherto been an exotic and has appealed
strongly only to the highly intellectual; its God has re-
mained a cold abstraction, intellectually sublime, but
■emotionally chill. In the East the ‘ One Existence/
meeting all intellectual difficulties by the affirmation of
the universality of that Existence—God is everything
and everything is God —yet passed naturally into the
recognition of endless gradations of beings expressing
very various measures of the Divine Life, some so lofty
in their nature, so vast in their power, so far-reaching in
the range of their consciousness, that they include every
element that Christian Monotheism has found necessary
for the satisfaction alike of the intellect and of the heart.
The Eastern Pantheism recognises that the Divine
Life manifests itself in modes of existence which
bridge over the gulf between man, and God mani-
festing as God. It acknowledges mighty intelli-
gences who rule the invisible and visible worlds, the


presiding Gods who guide the order of Nature and
watch over the destinies of men, the Agents of the
supreme will in every department of life, the fitting ob-
jects of reverence and worship. Just in proportion as
the existence of these Great Beings is recognised and
•enters practically into human life—whatever may be the
name given to them—is religion strong against the at-
tacks of Agnosticism and unbelief. For these ranks of
spiritual Beings, rising in ascending hierarchies till they
culminate in the supreme God of the system to which
they belong, give to men intelligible ideals of Divinity,
■which rise as they rise, expand with the expansion of
their consciousness and meet at every stage of evolution
the craving of the human heart for some superior being
far above itself, whom it can love, trust, reverence,
worship, appeal to for aid when human help is far. As
men rise on the ladder of evolution, their ideal of' God
enlarges, deepens, expands; at each point of their
growth their ideal shines alluringly above them, narrow
enough at the lowest point to meet the needs of the most
limited intelligence, vast enough at a higher to task the
intellect of the profoundest thinker.
That “ One Universal Existence ” which is spoken of
in the above abstract from Mrs. Besant’s “ Some Pro-
blems of Life,” pp. 74—80, as the source of all mani-
festation and of all beings, is variously known in theo-
sophical literature under the names of Parabrahman,
That, Absoluteness, the Causeless Cause, the Rootless
!Root, The One Reality, the One without a Second, and


is symbolized in the archaic manuscript—on which
Mme. Blavatsky based her “ Secret Doctrine/’ by a
white disk within a dull back-ground—O.*
“ Parabrahman is an omnipresent, eternal, boundless
and immutable Principle, on which all speculation is
impossible, since it transcends the power of human con-
ception and can only be dwarfed by any human expres-
sion or similitude. It is beyond the range and reach of
thought; in the words of the Mandukya ' unthinkable
and unspeakable,’ This infinite and eternal Cause dimly
formulated in the ‘ Unconscious ’ and ‘ Unknowable’ of
current European philosophy, is the ‘ Rootless Root of
all that was, is, or ever shall be.’t
“ All fruitful study of the Divine Existence must start
from the affirmation that it is one. All the Sages have
thus proclaimed It; every religion has thus affirmed It;
every philosophy thus posits It— ‘ One only without a
Second.' t ‘ Hear, O Israel ! ’ cried Moses, ‘ The Lord
our God is one Lord.' § I To us there is but one God'
declares St. Paul. IT * There is no God but God,' affirms
the founder of Isl&m, and makes the phrase the symbol
of his faith. One Existence unbounded, known in its
fulness only to Itself—the word It seems more reverent
and inclusive than He, and is therefore used. That is
the eternal Darkness, out of which is born the Light. 0
“ But as the Manifested God, the One appears as
* “ Secret Doctrine,” Vol. 1., p. 31. f “Secret Doctrine,”
Vol. 1., p. 42. J Chhandogyopanishad, VI., ii,, i. § DeuL
VI., 4. % I. Cor. VIII., 6.


Three. A Trinity of Divine Beings, One as God,
Three as Manifested Powers. This also has ever been
declared, and the truth is so vital in its relation to man
and his evolution that it is one which ever forms an
•essential part of the Lesser Mysteries.”*
The Trinity.
It is important to note that all the great religions alike
have taught this manifestation of God as a Trinity, the
attributes given to each of the three aspects of the
Trinity being the same in all religions, and in this
universality we have, as pointed out by Mrs. Besant, a
lest of spiritual truths.
“ There is an ancient maxim, 1 that which has been
believed always in every place and by everybody, that is
catholic ’—not catholic in the narrower sense of the
term, but in its wide and rightful sense of universal, and
this universal nature of spiritual truth is, we may say,
one of the marks of its presence. Anything which is
unique, anything which is eccentric, anything which
■cannot show a past, and a widespread past is far more
likely to be some peculiarity developed by a particular
type, developed by a particular kind of civilization,
•developed by some habit of thought, than to be truly
part of the Universal Wisdom Religion.”
“Among the Hebrews the Rabbis studied and
worshipped the Ancient of Days, from whom came
forth the Wisdom, from whom the Understanding—
* “ Esoteric Christianity, ” by Mrs. Besant, pp. 253-4.


Kether, Chochmah, Binah—these formed the Supreme-
Trinity, x the shining forth in time of the One beyond
time. Among the Hindus, the philosophers speak of
the manifested Brahman as Sat-Chit-Ananda; Existence,
Intelligence, and Bliss. Popularly, the Manifested God
is a Trinity : Shiva, the Beginning and the End ; Vishnu,
the Preserver; Brahma, the creator of the Universe.
The Zoroastrian faith presents a similar Trinity : Ahura-
mazdao, the Great One, the First; then the “ Twins,”"
the dual Second Person—for the Second Person in a
Trinity is ever dual, deteriorated in modern days into
an opposing God and Devil—and the Universal Wisdom,
Armaiti. In Northern Buddhism we find Amitabha the,
boundless Light; Avalokiteshvara, the source of incarna-
tions, and the Universal Mind, Mandjusri. In Southern-
Buddhism the idea of God has faded away, but with-
significant tenacity the triplicity reappears as that in
which the Southern Buddhist takes his refuge —the
Buddha, the Dharma (the Doctrine) and the Sangha
(the order) and the Buddha himself is sometimes wor-
shipped as a Trinity. In Egypt the Trinity dominated
all religious worship. Ra, Osiris and Horus formed
on# widely worshipped Trinity ; Osiris, Isis and Horus
were worshipped at Abydos ; other names are given in
different cities, and the triangle is the frequently used
symbol of the Triune God. In Chaldaea, Anu, Ea, and
Bel were the Supreme Trinity, Anu being the origin
of all, Ea the Wisdom, and Bel the creative Spirit. In
ancient China the Emperors used to sacrifice every


third year to “ Him who is One and Three.” In the
lofty philosophical system known in China as Taoism
a Trinity also figures: “ Eternal Reason produced
One, One produced Two, Two produced Three and
Three produced all things.” In the Christian Doctrine
of the Trinity the Father is the Origin and End of all ;
the Son is dual in His nature and is the Word or Wis-
dom ; the Holy Spirit is the creative Intelligence.”*
In the “ Secret Doctrine ” Mme. Blavatsky speaks
of the Trinity as the first Logos, the ‘ Impersonal or
Unmanifested, the first cause ; then the second Logos,
Spirit-Matter, Purusha and Prakriti and, finally, the
third Logos, Cosmic Ideation, Mahat or Intelligence, the
Universal World-Soul, the Cosmic Noumenon of matter,
the basis of the intelligent operations in and of Nature.’f
“ The ‘ First Logos,' which stands next to the Abso-
lute, emanates the ( Second,' or ‘ Dual Logos,' from
which in turn comesdhe ‘ Third.’ From that Third
Logos come forth the Seven Great Logoi, called some-
times the ‘ Seven Spirits before the throne of God ;' and
as the Divine outbreaking pours itself ever further out-
ward and downward, from each of these we have upon
the next plane seven Logoi also, together making upon
that plane 49.”
“It will be observed that we have already passed
through many stages on the great downward sweep
* “Esoteric Christianity,” by Mrs. Besant, pp. 254—260.
f “ Secret Doctrine,” Vol. 1., p. 44.


DIAGRAM I.
PARABRAHMAM.


towards matter ; yet, omitting the details of intermediate
hierarchies, it is said that to each of these 49 belong
millions of solar systems, fach energised and controlled
by its own Solar Logos. Though, at levels so exalted
as these, differences in glory and power can mean but
little to us, we may yet to some extent realize how vast
is the distance between the three Great Logoi and the
Logos of a single system, and so avoid a mistake into
which careless students are constantly falling.”*
“ Looking from below, we see the worlds around us
at various stages of evolution and grouped in an ascend-
ing order. Our own planet is part of a group of planets,
having their common centre in the Sun; our solar
system is part of a group of systems having their com-
mon centre in a distant star ; probably that group of
systems again has a common centre with other similar
groups of systems and so on and on. Thus the Universe
is seen as made up of departments, each successive unit
forming a section in a wider department —graded hierar-
chies of forms. The analogy of nature thus leads us to
look for similarly graded hierarchies of living intelli-
gences guiding the forms, and we are thus brought face to
face with the Gods. Occultism teaches that over each
department of nature there presides a spiritual Intelli-
gence ; to put the matter in a more concrete form, over
our solar system presides a mighty Being, the Logos,
the manifested God of that system. He would be called
the Father by the Christian, I's’vara by the Hindu, Allah
*“ The Christian Creed,” by C. W. Leadbeater, p. 27.


T by the Mahomedan. His consciousness is active at every
point of His Kosmos, His life sustains it, His power guides
it ; everywhere within it He is present, strong to help,
mighty to save. Dimly we know that beyond Him
there are yet greater ones, but for us it is easier to conceive
■of the power that maintains our system, to whom we
are definitely related, than of the vaster consciousness
wdiich includes myriads of systems within His realm.
Each Logos is to His own universe the central object
of adoration and His radiant Ministers are rightly
worshipped by those who cannot rise to the conception
•of this central Deity.”*
Logos of our Solar System.
Having now gained some idea, however superficial,
• of the place which the Logos or God of our solar system
occupies in the whole Kosmos, and of the vast hosts of
Divine hierarchies that stretch above Him throughout the
•seven great Kosmic planes of matter, we narrow down
our attention to the evolution of our own solar system.
The Logos of our solar system, we are told, establishes
His realm on the lowest of the seven great Kosmic
-planes, sometimes called the “ Kosmic-prakritic.”t We
may think of Him as an eternal Centre of Self-conscious-
ness, able to merge in Super-consciousness and to again
limit Himself to Self-consciousness when a new universe
ustobe brought into existence. I’s'vara enveloped in
* “ Some Problems of Life,” by A. Besant, pp. 78-79.
f Compare “ The Christian Creed,” by C. W. Leadbeater, p. 28.


Mdyd, brings forth a universe and is enclosed, as it:
were, in the universe of which He is the light. Break-
ing the shade, the light shines forth in every direction.
Dissolving the universe, He still remains. The centre-
remains, but the circumference that circumscribed it is .
gone. The Mdyd in which He arises during manifes-
tation, is His own revivified memory, which can never
be separated from Himself. When a universe comes,
to its ending, plane after plane is dissolved, starting
with the lowest which merges in the one above it ;;
that in its turn merging into the one next above and so-
on until the whole manifested universe has disappeared..
All forms and vibrations disappear, but the conscious-
ness that ensouled these forms does not vanish. Modi-
fications in consciousness capable of giving rise to similar
vibrations remain, until finally, when I's'vara—whose-
consciousness was the one consciousness in the universe,,
whose life was the one life, who supported every form,,
who made the possibility of every separated existence-
—gathers up His universe into Himself ere He merges
in the One, every thing has vanished that we know as
form, but powers of vibrating in particular fashions-
remain in these subtle modifications, preserved in that
unchangeable Centre in the mightiness of the One Life..
When Isvara again limits Himself to Self-conscious-
ness, turning His attention to the contents of that Self-
consciousness, its powers start into activity, and that is-
Mdyd. *
* Mrs. Besant’s “ Evolution of Life and Form, ” pp. 19-20.


First Logos.
For the purpose of manifestation Is’vara unfolds as a.
Trinity, as we have already seen, the Ist, 2nd and 3rd
Logoi. The first Logos is symbolized by a point in the
immaculate disk which stands for Parabrahman O, “the-
point denoting the dawn of differentiation. It is the
point in the Mundane Egg, the germ within it which will
become the universe, the all, the boundless periodical
Kosmos, a germ'which is latent and active, periodically
and by turns.”*
“ The first Logos is the root of being, the source and r
as we shall see, the end of evolution ; the beginning as
regards the Divine Manifestation, the ending as regards-
the manifested Universe.” He is sometimes called the
Unmanifest, because so far as Kosmos is concerned the
first Logos is unmanifested, it can only become manifest
to the Spirit in man, which is one with itself, t
“ During the time of Mahapralaya —when all things-
visible and invisible will be reabsorbed into that from
which they came; when even the Second and Third
Logoi themselves, and all that is of their essence, must
for the time sink into sleep and disappear, even in that
period of universal rest there is one Entity who remains-
unaffected ; the First Logos, the Unmanifested Logos
rests still, as ever, in the bosom of the Infinite. And-
* “ Secret Doctrine, ” Vol. 1., p. 31.
f “ The Building of the Kosmos, ” by Mrs. Besant, p. 11, Indian,
edition.


■since the direct essence of this, the Divine Father of all,
-enters into the composition of the spirit of man, by that
almighty power his immortality is absolutely assured. ” *
Second Logos.
From the first Logos emanates the second, manifesting
the aspects of life and form, the primal duality, making
the two poles of nature between which the web of the
universe is to be woven, Life—Form ; Spirit—Matter ;
Positive—Negative; Active—Receptive; Father—Mother
of the worlds, f “ The Second Person is represented by
. a Line, a diameter across the circle Q, a single complete
vibration of the Point, and this Line is equally in every
direction within the sphere ; this Line dividing the circle
in twain signifies also His duality, that in Him Matter
and Spirit—a unity in the First Person—are visibly two,
though in union.J
“ In the Christian Creed (Niccean Creed) this second
aspect of the Logos is referred to as the ‘ only begotten
Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds ;
begotten, not made, being of one substance with the
Father by whom all things were made.’ Great stress is
there laid upon the fact that nought else in the universe
•comes into existence in the same way as does the Second
Logos, called into being as He is by the mere action of
the will of the First, working without intermediary.
* “ The Christian Creed,” by C. W. Leadbeater, p. 36.
f “ Ancient Wisdom,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 52.
X Esoteric Christianity,” by Mrs, Besant, p. 267.


According to Mr. Mead,* ‘there is no longer any
doubt, however, that the term invariably translated as
only begotten,’ means nothing of the kind, but ‘ created
alone,’ that is to say, ‘ created from one pnhciple and;
not from a syzygy or pair, ’ a title which can bp truly
given only to the Second Logos, for the manner in
which He is emanated from the First must evidently
differ from all other and later processes of generation,,
which are invariably the result of interaction. ” f
In the “ Self audits Sheaths ” Mrs. Besantshows how
a germ cell of a plant or an animal gives a most marvel-
lous picture in the concrete, of the differentiation in the
Supreme; how under a microscope one could see a tiny
speck of matter and in that speck a single spot, in which
gradually and imperceptibly a separation takes place, till
when this change is complete, instead of one spot there
are two and these two apart at the poles—as they are
called—of this little mass of matter. Out of the same
substance—for there was only one—two separate and
yet not separated ■ bodies have formed, the one positive
and the other negative, and by the interaction between
the two everything formative occurs and there is built
up the coming plant. Thus between the two poles a
universe is builded, and out of duality the whole variety
comes forth ; therefore it is that we read, that after the
“ One ” has given birth to the Two, after the Life has
become Name and Form, Spirit and Matter, then comes-
* Theosophical Review, Vol. XXL, p. 141,
f “ The Christian Creed, ” by C. W. Leadbeater, pp. 39-40,


■the Third Logos, the mind, Ideation, Divine Thought,
the picture of all that shall be and the image of the
■universe that not yet has come to birth.*
. Third Logos.
“ The Third Logos is symbolized by a cross within the
•circle 0, the cross standing for the life which, flashing
from the centre outwards makes two diameters, gives
active life within this circle of the universe and makes
possible the evolution which from the centre is gradually
to proceed.! He is the Universal Mind, that in which
all archetypically exists, the source of beings, the fount
■of fashioning energies, the treasure-house in which are
stored up all the archetypal forms which are to be
brought forth and elaborated in lower kinds of matter
•during the evolution of the universe. These are the
fruits of past universes, brought over as seeds for the
present!
The Sacred Quaternary.
“There is one other point that must be remembered
that in connection with the Trinity there is a fourth
fundamental manifestation, the Power of the God, and
"this has always a feminine form. In Hinduism each
person in the Trinity has His manifested power, the One
and these six aspects making up the seven. With many
of the Trinities one feminine form appears, then ever
* Compare “ Self and its Sheaths, ” by Mrs. Besant, pp, 9 —ll,
Indian edition.
t ,# The Building of the Kosmos,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 77, Indian edition,
J u Ancient Wisdom, ” by Mrs, Besant, p. 52,


•specially connected with the Second Person and then
there is the sacred Quaternary. ...” “This Fourth
Person or Second Trinity " is that which makes mani-
festation possible, that which eternally in the One is the
root of limitation and division, and which, when mani-
fested, is called Matter. This is the Divine Not-Self, the
Divine Matter, the manifested Nature. Regarded as one,
;she is the Fourth, making possible the activity of the
Three, the field of their operations by virtue of Her infi-
nite divisibility. Regarded carefully she is seen to be
triple also, existing in three inseparable aspects, without
which she could not be. These are Stability—lnertia or
Resistance—Motion, and Rhythm. They alone render
spirit effective and have therefore been regarded as the
manifested powers of the Trinity. Stability or Inertia
affords a basis, the fulcrum for the lever ; Motion is then
rendered manifest, but could make only chaos ; Rhythm
is imposed, and there is Matter in vibration, then capable
•of being shaped and moulded. When the three qualities
are in equilibrium, there is the one, the Virgin Matter,
unproductive. When the power of the Highest over-
shadows Her, and the breath of the spirit comes upon
Her, the qualities are throw nout of equilibrium, and
she becomes the divine Mother of the worlds.”*
Our Solar System.
From the manifested Trinity proceeds our Solar
System, the manifold forms that make up our universe.
* “ Esoteric Christianity,” by Mrs. Besant, pp. 261—265.


and the vast host of’entities, sub-human, human and.
superhuman that ensoul these forms and that are brought
over from past universes to continue their own evolution
and to help in the evolution of the new universe. Highest
among the Spiritual Intelligences are the seven secondary”
Logoi, each of whom is the centre of a distinct depart-
ment in our Solar System, as the Logos is the centre of
the whole and has the sun as His physical body.* The
seven secondary Logoi are the centres of the seven
Planetary chains ,t each consisting of seven globes—
partly physical and therefore visible and partly super-
physical (built of astral and manasic matter) and conse-
quently invisible to physical sight—which circle round
the sun. Naming these planetary chains after their
physical globes they are :
(1) The Neptune chain with 3 physical planets.
(2) „ Uranus „ „ 1 „ planet.
(3) „ Saturn „ „ 1 „
(4) „ Jupiter „ „ 1
(5) „ Earth „ „ Mars and Mercury
belonging to it.
(6) „ Venus „ „ 1 physical planet.
(7) ~ Vulcan „ ~ 1 „ ~
* Compare “ Ancient Wisdom,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 413 et seq. and
the “ Growth of the Soul,” by A. P. Sinnett, p. 277.
f “ Mr. Sinnett’s enumeration of the 7 Planetary chains is not:
quite in accordance with Mme. Blavatsky’s 1 Secret Doctrine,’
which speaks of the apparent connection of Neptune with our sun>
and our system as M&yAvic and does not admit that Mars and
Mercury belong to our earth chain,” “ Secret Doctrine,” Vol. 1.,
pp. 129 and 188.


Under each of these secondary Logoi come the descend-
ing hierarchies of Intelligences that form the govern-
ing body of His kingdom. Among these we hear of
the Lipika , who are the recorders of Karma (the great
law of causation under which rebirths are carried on)
of that kingdom and of all the entities therein; the
Maharajas or Devardjas, who superintend the working
out of Karmic law ; and then the vast hosts of the
Builders who shape and fashion all forms after the ideas
that dwell in the treasure-house of the Logos, in the
Universal Mind, and that pass from Him to the Seven,
each of whom plans out His own realm under that
supreme direction and all-inspiring life,”* giving to it,
at the same time, His own individual coloring. At this
point we leave kosmic evolution which for the sake of
clearness of outline we have briefly sketched, and turn
our attention to the human evolution with which we
are more immediately concerned.
The Monad.
The Monads or Units of consciousness originate in
the first Logos, a Monad being “a fragment of the
Divine Life, separated off as an individual enlity by
rarest film of matter, matter so rare that, while it gives
a separate form to each,, it offers no obstacle to the
free intercommunication of a life thus encased with the
surrounding similar lives.”
The Monad, a Unit of the substance of the First
Logos, sent forth on the sixth plane as a separate.
* “ Ancient Wisdom," by Mrs. Besant, p. 414.
2


Being, is to become from a static Logos enfolding all
divine potentialities, a dynamic Logos unfolding all
divine powers, omniscient, omnipresent on His own
Sixth Plane, but unconscious, senseless on all others,
He is to veil His glory in matter that blinds Him, in
order that He may become omniscient, omnipresent on
all planes, able to answer to all divine vibrations in the
universe instead of to those on the highest only.*
“The human Spirit (Monad) is the outpoured divine
Life of the Father (P'irst Logos), poured into the vessel
prepared by the Son (Second Logos), out of the
materials vivified by the Spirit (Third Logos).” t
In this graphic description we have in brief the re-
lation of the human Spirit to the great Trinity. A
Unity like the First Logos from whom He comes, the
activity of the Monad is conditioned and preceded by the
two great outpourings of life (life-waves) from the Third
Logos, preparing the matter of the universe, and from
the second Logos, building this matter into forms through
which the Monad can evolve and unfold his powers.
While these preparations through the medium of the
Third and Second Logoi are going on, the Monad
passes, as it were, through his ante-natal life, to be
born as an infant Ego when the evolution of forms
—after working through the elemental, mineral, vege-
table and animal stages—culminates in the human stage
* “ Evolution of Consciousness,” by Mrs. Besant, Theos. Review ,
Vol. 30, pp. 451 and 530.
-j- “ Esoteric Christianity,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 271.


ready for the outpouring of the Third life-wave from
the First Logos.
Before we consider in detail the three great life-
waves we have to complete our sketch of the Monad
by noting a similarity between the triple cosmic pro-
cess and the human evolution. “As above, so below. - '
The Spirit in man, being a Unity like the First
Logos, with the three aspects in One, “ must show
out the divine characteristics, and we thus find in
Him Power (the aspect of the First Logos) which
whether in its higher form of Will or its lower form
of Desire, gives the impulse to His evolution. We
find also in Him Wisdom (the aspect of the Second
Logos), the Pure Reason, which has Love as its
expression in the world of forms, and lastly Intel-
ligence or Mind (the aspect of the Third Logos),
the active shaping energy. And in man also we
find that the manifestation of these in his evolution
is from the third to the second, and from the second to
the first. The mass of humanity is unfolding the mind,
evolving the intelligence.... .....whilein a small minority
the second aspect is appearing, spoken of in Christen-
dom as the Christ in man When man manifests
the third aspect, self-existeuce, the existence inherent in
his divine nature, unfolded from seed to flower, he
becomes a living self-conscious Centre in the Life
of God, a Centre able to exist as such, no longer
bound by the limitations of his earlier life, expanding to
divine consciousness, while keeping the identity of his


life unshaken, a living, fiery centre in the divine
Flame. *
Evolution of Matter. —First Life-wave.
We go back to Isvara, the Logos, who willing to
manifest and to bring forth a new universe, limits
Himself from Super-consciousness to Self-conscious-
ness ; then from the One Eternal comes the dual mani-
festation of Spirit and Matter ; matter not as we know it,,
not phenomenal matter, but the root of matter called
Mnlaprakriti.
“ The phenomenal spirit and matter of any universe-
are finite in their extent and transitory in their duration,
but the roots of spirit and matter are eternal. The root
of matter has been said by a profound writer to be
visible to the Logos as a veil thrown over the One
Existence, the Supreme Brahman (Parabrahman). It
is this veil which the Logos assumes for the purpose of
manifestation, using it for the selfdmposed limit which
makes activity possible. From this He elaborates the
matter of His universe, being Himself its informing,
guiding and controlling life.”!
“As the life-breath of the Third Logos with its
triple vibrating force falls on this root-matter, it
throws it into three modifications or attributes :
Tamas,” inertia, or better, stability; Rajas , activity
or vigour; Sattva, harmony. Without harmony no
pleasure can anywhere exist. All pleasure is due to
* “ Esoteric Christianity,’' by Mrs. Besant, pp. 271-273.
■j- “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 53.


DIAGRAM II.
EVOLUTION OF MATTER.


harmonious vibration, and that quality of harmonious
interrelated vibrations is the quality that Sattva gives to
matter. These three fundamental qualities of matter—
.answering to three fundamental modifications in the
consciousness of Isvara —inertia, activity and harmony,
these are the famous three gunas, without which Prakriti
■cannot manifest. Fundamental, essential and unchange-
able, they are present in every particle in the universe
and according to their combinations is the nature of each
particle. Then comes the seven-fold division of matter.
This root-matter with its three gunas is now ready to
receive a further impluse from the life-breath and that
breath comes forth from the third Logos in seven great
waves, each one modifying matter and evolving and
-ensouling those that follow it.”*
Of what occurs on the two higher planes of the
universe, the seventh and the sixth (or the Ist and 2nd,
■counting from above), we can form but the haziest
conception. Isvara as Brahma or the third Logos,
•sends forth a power, a vibration (everything depends on
vibration), called a Tanmdtrd, due to a modification of
His consciousness. This energy of the Logos *as whirl-
ing motion of inconceivable rapidity “ digs holes in
space ” in this root-matter, and this vortex of life, encased
in a film of the root of matter, is the primary atom,
known in the Hindu Scriptures as “ Aditattva." These
and their aggregations, spread throughout the universe
and form all the sub-divisions of spirit-matter of the
* “ Evolution of Life and Form,” by Mrs, Besant, pp. 23 and 24


highest plane of our solar system. Then a new power
or tanm&trfl, due to a modification of consciousness, is
sent forth by Isvara, causing some of the countless
myriads of these primary atoms to set up a vortex in the
coarsest aggregations of their own plane, and this primary
atom enwalled with spiral strands of the coarsest combi-
nations of the seventh plane becomes the finest unit of
spirit-matter or atom (called the Anupadakatattva) of the-
sixth plane. These sixth plane atoms and their endless
combinations form the sub-divisions of the spirit-matter
of the sixth plane. A third life-breath or tanrnatra from
Isvara, due to a modification of consciousness, causes
the primary atoms of the sixth plane to set up a vortex
among the coarsest aggregations of their own plane,
producing the primary atoms of the fifth plane. In this
way the Spirit-matter of plane after plane is formed,
until we have the seven planes of our solar system, each
plane with its tattva, primary atom ox primary element
and combinations of these primary atoms, forming the
sub-planes of each plane.*
The Third Logos divides matter into atoms in three
stages; Ist: fixing the limit of vibration, the Divine
Measure (tanmdti'i) which gives to the atoms of a plane
their distinctive peculiarity; 2nd: marking the lines which
determine the shape of the atom, the “ axes of growth,”"
collectively a tattva; 3rd : determining the wall of the
* Compiled from “ Ancient Wisdom,’’ pp. 53 and 54, and from
‘ Evolution of Life and Form,” pp. 25 and 26.


Plane.
Taiiva.
Primary.
Element.
7 th
or Maha Paranirvanic
A'ditattva.
6 th
„ Para Nirvanic
Anupadakatattva
5 th
,, Nirvanic
A'kasatattva.
Ether
4th
„ Buddhic
Vayutattva.
Air
3rd
„ Manasic (Mental)
Agnitattva.
Fire
2nd
„ Astral (Ketmic)
Apastattva.
Water
I St
„ Physical
Prithivitattva.
Earth.
atom by the measure of the vibration and the angular
relation of the axes of growth with each other. *
The following names have been given to the seven
planes, tattvas and primary elements :
This involution of the Life of the Logos as the ensoul-
ing force in every particle, and its successive enwrap-
pings in the Spirit-matter of every plane, so that
the materials of each plane have within them in a
hidden or latent condition all the form and force
possibilities of all the higher planes above them as well
as those of their own ; these - two facts make evolution
certain and give to the very lowest particle the hidden
potentialities which will render it fit—as they become
active powers —to enter into the form of the highest
beings. In fact evolution may be summed up in a phrase
—it is latent potentialites becoming active powers.!
In connection with this evolution of spirit-matter
we should remember the following facts :
(1) “ The word spirit-matter implies the fact that
* “ Evolution of Consciousness,” by Mrs. Besant, Theosofhicai
Review , Vol. 30, pp. 452-3.
t “Ancient Wisdom, by Mrs. Besant, pp. 55 and 56.


■there is no such thing as dead matter ; there is “no
matter without force and no force without matter;
they are wedded together in an indissoluble marriage
throughout the ages of the life of a universe, and
can wrench them apart. Matter is form and there
is no form which does not express a life ; spirit is life
and there is no life that is not limited by a form. Even
the Logos has, during manifestation, the Universe as
His form, and so down to the atom.”*
(2) Each of the seven planes of our Solar System
is divided into seven sub-planes and the matter of the
highest sub-plane in each may be regarded as atomic,
qua its particular plane, that is to say, its atoms cannot
be further sub-divided without passing from that plane
to the one next above.”t
To take the physical plane as an illustration,the high-
est or seventh sub-division of physical spirit-matter is
composed of homogeneous atoms, the Prithivitattva;
the sixth is composed of fairly simple heterogeneous
combinations of these, each combination behaving as a
unit; the fifth is composed of more complex combina-
tions, the fourth of still more complex ones, and so on,
but in all cases these combinations act as units.J
Thus the endless combinations of the primary
homogeneous physical atoms bring about the six
lower heterogeneous sub-divisions of the physical
* “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 55.
t 11 The Christian Creed,” by C. W. Leadbeater, p. 28.
% “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 58.


plane, ix., three kinds of ether, gas, liquids and solids.
In her article on u Occult Chemistry ”* Mrs. Besant
has shown how, through varied combinations of ulti-
mate physical atoms, different substances, such as
Hydrogen, Oxygen, Nitrogen, etc., are evolved. The
structure of the ultimate physical atom is the same for
all, and the variety of 1 elements ’ is due to the variety of
ways in which these ultimate physical atoms combine.
“ The physical plane may serve as a model from which
by analogy we may gain an idea of the subdivisions
of the spirit-matter of other planes. When a theosophist
speaks of a plane, he means a region throughout which
spirit-matter exists, all whose combinations are derived
from a particular set of atoms; these atoms, in turn, are
units possessing similar organizations, whose life is the life
of the Logos veiled in fewer or more coverings according
to the plane, and whose form consists of the solid, or
lowest subdivision of the plane immediately above/’t
(3) The seven life-wave's, due to modifications of
consciousness of the Logos, impart distinct qualities or
attributes to the seven planes of matter. Isvara
gives the power to matter to respond to particular
vibrations ; for instance, on the second or astral plane
He imparts to matter the quality of responding to
pleasure and pain and we give to these vibrations the
name of sensory ; on the third or Manasic plane
the vibrations with which that matter answers are
* Lucifer , Vol. XVII., p. 216.
f “ Ancient Wisdom,” pp. 59 and 60.


called mental or intelligent. Thus plane after plane*
has its own characteristic, the life is one, but showing a
different aspect according to tire kinds of matter in*
which it is clothed.*
(4) “Within the limits of our physical plane,
correspondences of all the higher six atomic forms are*
to be found. The subdivisions of the physical region,.
due to combinations of the Prithivitattva, show forth
the characteristics of the great regions which make up-
the Universe, so that we have in our solid, liquid, gas,,
three ethers and atoms, correspondences of the six
higher tattvas, but we have them all in their physical'
form, they are modifications of Prithivi, reproducing on-
a lower plane the great primary elements.”t
(5) “At the ending of a universe the tattvas
merge into each other by disintegration. Prithivitattva.
having disintegrated into atoms, these atoms are them-
selves broken up and the Tanm&hA that formed them,,
being no longer able to express itself, for lack of suit-
able material, ceases to be a power and remains only
represented by a modification in consciousness, a per-
manent possibility. Thus Apastattva becomes the
lowest manifestation and by a repetition of the above
process ceases to exist. In like fashion each plane-
successively vanishes and only modifications in conscious-
ness remain, expressing themselves as vibratory powers,.
* “ Evolution of Life and Form,’’ by Mrs. Besant, pp.
1 29—132.
■{ “ Evolution of Life and Form,” p. 29.


("Father,
Sat,
S'iva,
/\
1st Logos, The Unmanifest, Existence, Will.
1
-{ Son,
A'nauda,
Vishnu,
£
Fh
2nd Logos, Spirit-Matter, Bliss, Live, Wisdor
O.
tHoly Ghost.
Chit.
Brahmd.
\\ 3rd Logos. Creative Wisdom. Intelligence, Aetivi
*
r
ilium
Atomic Matter
=A'ditattva
\
„ in
IV
/ Mahd-
Para -
\
\
,
•••
8 ®
& / nirvdnic Is
Jp\
...
*•*
gas
Plane
liquid
solid
V *s
•a\
mum
A
tomic Matter
— Anupddaka-
tattva
.1
/ a
»\
b\
6 lower
sub-planes
h\
CT /
Plane
...
• ••
17
pA
as above
>
■f\
a
o\
E
////////
a
tomic Matter
= A-'kdsatatlva
corresponding
to
j
SI
©
oT
i
A'tman
g-|S i|“|
S m -S •& S S.
o
6 lower
a
Nirvdnic %
Plane
(Reflexion of
•^9
sab-planes
as above
£
£
A'tman 0
o
•te ul
*
•c
Ether,
1st Logos)
ftM
Sound
*+-i
©
W M S ”3 \
3
<8
3
J
Z3
3
(5
•2
*a .
////////
Atomic Matter
=V dyutattva
corresponding
to
2nd
03
tH
05
'm
Buddhi
(Reflexion of
v. 0
ns g O
o lower
Buddhic
Plane
§
sub-planes
as above
j Bliss-body |
iS
Air,
s
}
2nd Logos
OQ <5 Qj
Touch
\
W
s S #
\
o
o
8
mm
Atomic Matter
) 6 lower
Agniiattva
corresponding
1st Elemental
Kingdom
\
Arupa levels of
Mdnasic Plane «
>1
Causal body-
formed by union of the
2nd and 3rd Life-waves
Higher Mana s
(Reflexion of
3rd Logos)
1 A p-1
h 2 "
a
o
sub-planes
as above
Fire,
2nd Elemental
Kingdom
■\
Rupa levels of
1 Mental body (of human
» r“ O -S g
M
Light
Mdnasic /Tone / Kingdom ana gerrmuai
£ «W C 1
hH O 3 J
mammal Kingdom)
-*a (
a |
o I
ilium
Atomic matter
** Apastattva
corresponding
3rd Elemental
Kingdom
/ Astral body
S/ (of human kingdom,
„ a o
,gs g®a,
s-s-I S3 j
& I
d lower
to
\ Astral
Plane
KAma
(
sub-planes
as above
&/
, animal ao.
1
Water,
.<£yand g
erminal in vegetable
kingdom)
I
Taste
1
V/
f-i
ilium
Atomic Matter
= Prithivi-
Mineral Aingdom
(Turning point)
\Physical
Plane
£•/ Physical body
°*/ (of human, animal
/ and vegetable kingdoms)
_
>i~) s s
„ III
.. iv
corresponding
to
Earth,
Smell
•4| S* § 2
} Dense Physical
.* S X ® ‘3
O ® -2 >
8^5
liquids
solids
*
1 an
DIAGRAM 111.
LOGOS OF A SOLAR SYSTEM.


not vibrations but the power to vibrate in a particular
way, when the Logos wills to bring a new universe-
into existence.”*
Evolution of FoRMt —Second Life-wave.
Such is an outline of the evolution of matter, the
work of the first great life-wave coming from the 3 rd
Logos. We come now to the second great life-wave,
emanating from the Second Logos and giving the impulse
to the evolution of form, as soon as the evolution of
materials had reached a sufficiently advanced state.
“ Here, as elsewhere in evolution, we note the downward
and upward arc, the function of the three Logoi being
revealed in time, one after another, in a reverse order to
their manifestation as Deity. From the first Logos
unfolded the second and' from the second the third in
Divine manifestation, but to bring the universe into
manifestation, the third is first manifested (evolution of
matter), then the second (evolution of form), then the
first (outpouring of spirit), and therefore it is said that the
first Logos is the beginning and the ending.”
In considering the evolution of form we must premise
(1) that our present evolution is concerned with only five
planes out of the seven, our survey therefore beginning
with the third plane from above, the Nirvanic plane ; (2)
that the Manasic plane, which forms the central plane of
our five-fold evolution, has two great divisions, the arupa
level (formless level) and the rupa level (form level), the
* “Evolution of Life and Form,” pp. 29 and 30.
| Vide 3rd Diagram.


former occupying the three higher sub-planes, the latter
the four lower sub-planes of the Manasic plane ; and (3)
the evolution of forms is a gradual process through seven
kingdoms, i.e., three Elemental, the Mineral, Vegetable,
Animal and Human kingdoms, successively brought into
existence in the order named.
The groat stream of Logoic life (second life wave)
pours forth into the five-fold field of manifestation pre-
pared by the third Logos and brings with it into activity
the Monads ready to clothe themselves in matter. A
stream of the life of the Monad pours forth, taking as the
vessel to contain it an atom from each of the three higher
planes of the five-fold field, thus producing the “ Heav-
enly man,” the Pilgrim who is to evolve, Atma-Bucldhi-
Manas. We may regard the human Alma as the
will- aspect of the Monad ensouling an Ukashic atom ; the
human Bnddhi as the wisdom aspect ensouling an
.air atom; the human Manas as the activity aspect
ensouling a fiery atom.* The Monad has begun his
work ; in his own subtle nature he cannot as yet descend
below the Anupadaka plane, and he is therefore said to
be in silence and darkness, but he lives and works in
and by means of these appropriated atoms which form
the garment of his life on the plane nearest to his own.
The Spiritual Triad, At ma- Buddhi-Manas, is a seed,
a germ of the Divine life, unable to commence at
once any separate self-directed activity. The life of
the Second Logos is as its mother's womb to the.
*Sce ith Diagram.


embryo and within this , the building begins. We
may in very truth regard this stage of evolution, in which
the Logos shapes, nourishes and develops the germi-
nating life, as a period corresponding to the ante-natal
life of a human being, during which he is slowly obtain-
ing a body, which is nourished meanwhile by the life-
currents of the mother and formed out of her substance.
The Monad must await the building of his bodies on
the lower planes and he cannot emerge from this ante-
natal life and be born until there is a body builded on
the lower planes. Until then all is a preparation for
evolution rather than evolution itself and it is often
called involution.
Meanwhile the second life-wave, rolling through plane
after plane, imparts its own qualities to that seven-fold
proto-matter and carries with it the Spiritual Triads. On
the mental plane it floods the atom which each Triad
already has and the remaining atoms of the plane with
its life. All these atoms forming the whole atomic sub-
plane, whether free or attached to Monads, may rightly
be termed Monadic Essence, but term is usually
reserved for non-atiachcd atoms, while the attached are
called permanent atoms. Mgnadic essence, then, is
atomic matter ensouled by the life of the second Logos.
Further, the matter of the plane is thrown by the second
life-wave into combinations fit to express thoughts—
abstract in the subtler matter, concrete in the coarser.
The combinations of the three higher sub-planes of the
mental plane constitute the First Elemental Kingdoms.


The combinations of the four lower sub-planes constitute
the Second Elemental Kingdom. Matter belJPin such
combinations is called Elemental Essence and is sus-
ceptible of being shaped into thought forms.
When the life-wave reaches the 4th mental sub-plane
a single molecule or unit of this sub-plane is permanently
attached to the Spiritual Triad.
The second life-wave then rolls on into the astral
plane, links the Monad-ensouled or permanent atoms
■ of the 3rd plane to a corresponding number of atoms on
the 2nd plane, floods the remaining atoms with his own
life—these atoms thus becoming Monadic Essence— and
passes onwards, forming on each sub-plane the combi-
nations fit to express sensations. These combinations
constitute the Third Elemental Kingdom and the matter
held in such combinations is called Elemental Essence
as before, and is on this plane capable of being shaped
into desire-forms.
Then onward rolls the wave to the Physical Plane
where the same process is gone through, a physical atom
being attached to the permanent atoms belonging to the
Spiritual Triads, and combinations being formed on the
sub-planes to constitute physical bodies, the chemical
elements as they are called, on the three lower sub-
planes. *
“ This forms the turning point of the Monadic evolution
which has now reached in the Mineral Kingdom the
* Compiled from “ Evolution of Consciousness,” by Mrs. Besant,
Theosophical Review , Vol. 30, pp. 535 —541.


lowest point of its destined enmeshing in matter, and
.turns to begin, through the vegetable, animal and hum!#i
kingdoms, the grand upward sweep of evolution towards
divinity.”*
The following main principles are important in
•connection with this Monadic evolution ;
(1) "There is continuity of life as well as contin-
uity of form, and it is the continuing life (the Monad) —
with ever more and more of its latent energies rendered
.active by the stimuli received through successive forms
—which gathers into itself the experiences obtained by its
encasings in form; for when the form perishes, the life
-(the Monad) has the record of those experiences in the
increased energies aroused by them, and is ready to
pour itself into the new forms derived from the old,
■carrying with it this accumulated store.”t
(2) The Life of the Second Logos which flows
into matter manifests in seven streams and all forms
• are assignable to one or oflier of these seven streams
which are at the root of the different temperaments
of men and run as it were side by side across the seven
planes of matter. Countless Spiritual Triads belong to
each of these seven streams and each of the seven typi-
cal groups thus formed is separated, from the others
by a delicate wall of Monadic Essence, the wall of
the future group-soul which we must now consider.
We have already seen that when the second life-
* “ Christian Creed,” by C. W. Leadbeater, p. 30.
f “ Ancient Wisdom, 1 ' by Mrs. Besant, p. 239.


wave reaches the physical plane each Spiritual Triad,
has permanently attached to itself a mental unit, an
astral and a physical atom which form the connection
between the Jivatma and the lower places.
A group-soul is a collection of permanent Triads-
in a triple envelope (mansaic, astral, and physical) of
Monadic Essence. At the commencement
shaping of the etheric types on the physical plane,
seven group-souls are observable, which divide, and
subdivide rapidly. The laws of space, for instance,,
may lead to the division of a group-soul, as well as the
specialisation of its contents—the permanent Triads.
Thus a vein of gold in Australia may lead to the
inmineralisation of many such triads within a single
envelope, while the laying down of another vein in
the Rocky Mountains, may lead to the division of
this envelope and the transfer of part of its contents-
to America in their own envelope. The group-soul
and its contents divide by fission, one becoming two.
two four, and so on. When the permanent Triads,
lose their embodiment and remain fora while naked,,
as it were, in their group-soul, those which have
had similar experiences will be more strobgly affected by
each other than those whose experiences hhve been
very different and thus there will be a certain- segrega-
tion going on within the group-soul and presently a
filmy separating wall ’will grow inwards from the
envelope and divide these segregated groups from each
other. As the Monads pass through the vegetable


and animal kingdoms with their varied opportunities
for experience, the number of group-souls increases until
a group-soul contaAs but a single Triad Which is then
ready for the human evolution.
“ All Triads have to pass through the Mineral King-
dom, the habitat of the group-soul being that of its
densest envelope, the physical. As its contents pass
onwards into the Vegetable Kingdom, the physical
envelope slowly disappears, 'as though absorbed by
the contents for the strengthening of their own etheric
bodies, and its activity is transferred to the astral plane,
to the nourishing of the astral bodies of the contained
Triads. As these pass into the Animal Kingdom, the
astral envelope is absorbed and the activity of the
group-soul is transferred to the mental plane to nourish
the inchoate mental bodies. When the group-soul
contains but a single Triad and has nourished this into
readiness for the reception of the third outpouring; what
is left of it becomes a constituent part of the causal body,
formed by the downpouring from above meeting the
upward drawn column from below. Then is the
reincarnating Ego born, the guarded ante-natal ,Jifiris
over.”*
(3) We have already noted the difference between
Monadic essence and Elemental essence, both terms
that are frequently found in Theosophical literature.
When the second Life-wave, the Monad of form, in its
* Compiled from “ Evolution of Consciousness, ” by Mrs. Besant,
Theosophical Reyiew, Vol. XXXI, pp. 52-61.
3


■descent from plane to plane, clothes itself in the atomic
matter only of each plane, it is called Monadic essence;
but when it further gathers round itself Molecular matter
it is called Elemental essence.
“ This will become clearer still, if we note the manner
■of descent of the Monadic essence through the various
kingdoms. For example, after entering the third
elemental kingdom (which it does by veiling itself in the
atomic astral matter) it gradually presses downwards into
all the other sub-planes, until it ensouls forms of the
very lowest astral matter and is on the verge of physicality.
Yet it does not step from that lowest subdivision of the
astral into the highest of the physical, which seems to lie
so near; instead of that, it slowly draw r s back into the
astral atomic condition, bearing with it all experience
gained or quality developed, and then, from the highest
astral, it shoots straight down into the highest physical,
along another line of connection—as it were in another
dimension.”*
Therefore Monadic essence is the second Life-wave
■clothed in the atomic matter only of any one plane
and the planes above it. Thus the Monadic essence
of the physical plane will have as its outermost
garment the atomic matter only of the physical plane;
within that, its next sheath will be the atomic
matter of the astral plane, but it will not have in its
sheathing any of the various molecular pombinations
■of the astral plane, which constitute the various sub-
* TheosoJ>/iical-Keviem i X‘o\. XXIII, p. 555.


planes of the astral. The next inner sheath will be
composed of the highest order of matter belonging
to the uppermost of the four lower subdivisions of
the Manasic plane (since this Manasic plane em-
braces two distinct evolutionary kingdoms); then as
its next sheath it will have atoms of the highest of
the three arupa-levels of the Mental plane, then atoms
of the Buddhic plane, etc.*
On the other hand, Elemental essence is Monadic
essence + sheathing of molecular matter of the plane
= second life-wave + atomic matter of plane in question
and of all planes above it + molecular sheathing.
(4) There is a great difference between the downward
arc, the first half of the circle, and the upward arc, the
second half of the circle, of the evolution of form. In
the downward arc, matter takes up qualities and attri-
butes ; in the upward, matter is formed into vehicles, or
sheaths, or bodies, such a vehicle acting as an organis-
ed unity, to serve as a tabernacle for the Self.f
The Elemental essence, when unaffected by any
outside influence (a condition hardly ever realized), is
without any definite form of its own (in Mr. Lead-
beater’s “Devachanic Plane,” p. 80, it is described
in this condition as a formless conglomeration of
dancing, infinitesimal atoms, instinct with a marvellous
intensity of life); it is however wonderfully sensitive to
* The Vahan, Vol. IX., No. 1, p. 8, or Extracts from The Vahan
p. 709.
f Gf. “ Evolution of Life and Form,’’ by Mrs. Besant,p. 126.


the most fleeting thought-current (from the human mind
or from other intelligences—Devas—belonging to the
astral and M&nasic planes) and is constantly being
thrown into shapes of all kinds, which appear, change
form and disintegrate with the rapidity of thought.*
“In the first Elemental kingdom the Elemental
essence is thrown by thoughts into brilliant coruscations,
coloured streams and flashes of living fire, instead of
into definite shapes ; taking, as it were, its first lessons
in combined action, but not yet assuming the definite
limitations of forms.” t
“In the second and third Elemental kingdoms the.
effect of thought is to mould portions of the Elemental
essence into definite shapes, the color being determined
by the quality of thoughts (intellectual, devotional, pas-
sional), the shape itself by the nature of thoughts and.
the clearness of outline by the definiteness of thought.”J
These thought-forms, built of Elemental essence may
be very evanescent or endure for some time according to.
the strength of the thoughts which called them into
existence, but the general characteristic in the downward
arc through the three Elemental kingdoms is evanescence
of forms combined with plasticity.
“ When the Monad, evolved through these kingdoms,
in due course reached the physical plane, it began to
draw together the ethers and hold them in filmy shapes.
* Cf. “ The Astral Plane,” by C. W. Leadbeater, pp. 48, 49.
■j- “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 148.
J “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 77 and Lticifer, Vol. XIX., pp. 65-75,


into which the denser materials were built forming the
first minerals.” In the mineral kingdom the plasticity
and evanescence of forms noticed in the three Elemental
kingdoms, give place to rigidity and stability which lead
in the further evolution to plasticity and stability of forms,
first noticeable in the vegetable kingdom.” “ These
'characteristics find a yet more balanced expression in the
animal world and reach their culmination of equilibrium
in man, whose physical body is made up of constituents
of most unstable equilibrium, thus giving great adapta-
bility, and yet which is held together by a combining
central force which resists general disintegration even
under the most varied conditions.”*, •
(5) “ The descent of the Life-wave into denser and
denser matter through kingdom after kingdom, until at
fast it comes down to the mineral forms, where life is
most restricted in its operations, where consciousness is
most limited in its scope, is called the involution of life
in matter, the descending arc. From this lowest point
the life ascends, revealing more and more of its powers,
and ordinary Western evolution begins here. The life
•embedded in the rigid material of minerals learns slowly
and gradually to respond from within to heavy vibrations
and impacts from without (the whole working of the
life can be summed up as the receiving of vibrations
from matter without and the answering of vibration from
itself within), until the opposition from the rigid form is
lessened and a stage of plasticity is reached, at which
* “ Ancient Wisdom," pp. 61-G3.


the beginning of the vegetable world can be brought into
existence.” In the Vegetable kingdom the life (the
Monad) receives vibrations from without more easily
and responds more strongly, adding further the early
beginnings of a power of consciousness that in the
mineral was not present,* the power of feeling pleasure
and pain, the foreshadowings of desire and sensation,
evolving in the higher members of the vegetable king-
dom to what the western psychologist would term
' massive ’ sensations of pleasure and discomfort. Plants
dimly enjoy the air, the rain and the sunshine, and
gropingly seek them, while they shrink from noxious
conditions ; they answer to stimuli and adapt themselves
to external conditions, some showing plainly a sense of
touch.”t
This power of sensation is further developed in the
animal kingdom and is due to the awakening out of
latency of the astral matter involved in the structure of
the atomic and molecular constituents of the physical
bodies. “ When this astral matter began to thrill in*'a
very limited way in the minerals, the Monad of form,,
exercising his organizing power, drew in materials from
the astral world and these were built into a loosely
constituted mass, the mineral astral body. In the
vegetable world the astral bodies are a little morl
organised and their special characteristic of ‘ feeling ’
begins to appear. In the animal kingdom the astral
• “ Evolution of Life and Form,” by Mrs. Besant, pp. 58, 173.
f “ Ancient Wisdom,’' pp. 248 and 88.


body is still more developed, reaching ‘in the higher
members a sufficiently definite organization to cohere
for some time after the death of the physical body, and
to lead an independent existence on the astral plane.”*
“In the higher members of the animal kingdom we
further find that the mental matter brought down by the
Monad (involved in the structure of the astral body)
begins to be susceptible to impacts from the mental
plane, and, when the Monad has at the same time
reached the point of complete individualization, no longer
forming part of a group-soul, the animal is then ready to
receive the third great outpouring of the life of the Logos
—the tabernacle is ready for the reception of the hmnan
Monad.”!
Outpouring of Spirit—Third Life-wave.
The upward sweep of the Second Life-wave builds
the bodies—physical, astral and mental—which, when
perfected, are to form the mechanism of consciousness
<*
for man, as organs for willing, thinking and acting. In
the early stages of the human kingdom the astral and
mental vehicles are but little developed. “ Consciousness
does not do much building on the astral and mental
planes at this stage and works there in unorganised
sheaths. The organising is done on the physical plane,
slowly building up in animals and in the earlier human
races the nervous apparatus as the special mechanism of
* “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 88.
■f “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 252.


consciousness, and this work has to be completed to a
great extent, before the third Life-wave pours down.”
“ When the middle of the third Root race had been
reached the nervous apparatus of animal-man had
been built up to a point at which it needed for its further
improvement the more direct flow from the spiritual
Triad to which it was attached ; the group-soul had com-
pleted its work for these, the higher products of evolu-
tion, as the medium by which the life of the Second
Logos protected and nourished his infant children. It
was now to form the foundation of the causal body, the
vessel into which the down-pouring life was to be re-
ceived ; the term of the ante-natal life of the Monad was
touched, and the time was ripe for his birth in the lower
world. The Mother-life of the Logos had built for him
the bodies in which he could now live as a separate
entity in the world of forms, and he was to come into
direct possession of his bodies and take up his human
evolution.”
“ We have seen that the Monads derive their being
from the first Logos, and the downflow of their life into
the Spiritual Triads —causing the vortices of activity
which catch up into union with themselves the upward
reaching stream of life from the lower planes and form
in that union the causal bodies — is called the third Life-
wave, and is properly related to Him as its source."
“ The causal body once formed, the spiritual Triad
has a permanent vehicle for further evolution, and when
consciousness becomes able to function freely in this


vehicle, the Triad will be able to control and direct far
.more effectively than ever before the evolution of the
•lower vehicles.” .
“ The earlier efforts to control are not, however, of a
very intelligent description, any more than the first
movements of the body of the infant show they are
directed by an intelligence, although we know that an
intelligence is connected with it. The Monad is now,
in a very real sense, born on the physical plane, but
.still he must be regarded as a babe, and must pass
through an immense period of time before hfs power
■over the physical body will be anything but infantile.”*
With the descent of the third life-wave we have what
are known as the seven principles in man complete,
though not by any means fully developed. Atman,
the Spirit in man, is clothed during earth-life in a series
of sheaths or bodies built of the matter of the different
planes and enabling it to come into contact with, and
•gather experience on, all the planes from the physical up'
to the Nirv&nic, the plane of Atman.
These bodies are:
'On the Buddhic Plane ... Bliss-body.
„ Arupa levels of Manasic Plane Causal body.
„ Rupa „ „ ... Mental body.
„ Astral Plane ... Astral body.
Phvsical Plane / Etheric Double and
„ Physical \ Physical body.
* “ Evolution of Consciousness,” by Mrs. Besant, Theos. Review,
"Vol. XXXI., pp. 297-8.


They form the bridge of consciousness, along which
all impulses from the Ego may reach the physical plane,
all impacts from the outer world may reach him and it
is the purpose of evolution to develop each in turn to
serve as a distinct vehicle of consciousness, indepen-
dently of those below it,* until man can function in
unbroken consciousness on all the planes.
The use of the sheaths is to gather knowledge on
every plane, to “ learn the law of pleasure and pain, to-
get rid of desire, without which there can never be
peace and bliss unspeakable, and to learn sympathy by
suffering, so that, knowing what it is to be in anguish,,
we may carry help to our fellow who has not learned
the lesson.”!
This end is attained through a long series of incarna-
tions (earth lives), throughout which the Causal body
persists as the relatively permanent home of the Ego ;
the mental, astral and physical bodies disintegrating
after incarnation with the exception oj the permanent atoms■
which remain attached to the spiritual Triad throughout
the long series of incarnations and form at the time of
reincarnation the nuclei round which the new mental,
astral and physical bodies are builded. As each body
perishes in turn, it hands on its harvest ofexperiences to
'the one above it and thus all the harvests are finally
stored in the Causal body to act as causes for future-
* “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 288.
f “ Self and its Sheaths,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 83.


lives which are all linked together as cause and effect
and gradually lead man to perfection.*
The development of these bodies takes place from
below upwards. By means of pure living, pure think-
ing, the subjugation of our desire nature and the exercise
of our mental faculties, the three low’er bodies are
gradually, through many incarnations and experiences
both pleasurable and painful, developed and brought
under control, but it is not till man is fully conscious
in his Causal body, and his brain becomes able to vibrate
in answer to the swift and subtle vibrations sent down
by the Ego, that he Can impress the memory of his past
lives on his physical brain and thus review the whole
series of his past incarnations. The immortal Ego-
clothed in the permanent Causal body is called the
individuality, whereas the personality consists in the
transitory vehicles (mental, astral and physical bodies)
which the individuality sends out for the purpose of
gathering experience on the lower planes. Each per-
sonality is a new part for the immortal actor, and he
treads the stage of life over and over again, only in the
life-drama each character he assumes is the child of the
preceding ones and the father of those to come, so that
the life-drama is a continuous history, the history of the
actor who plays the successive parts.!
As the astral and mental bodies are being devel-
oped for independent functioning, new senses and
* “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 171.
f “ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 212.


of knowledge and usefulness are opened up
and the first steps are taken towards the realisation
-of the Brotherhood of man, the union of the Self in
man with all other Selves, the recognition of the one
.Self dwelling equally in all. “ Even on the astral plane ”
.matter is much less of a division than it is down here.
Travelling in the astral body the man passes through
space so rapidly that time is practically conquered and
space loses its power to divide friend from friend*
.Rising to the mental plane another power is his.
Thinking of a place, he is there; thinking of a friend,
the friend is before him ; all things are seen at once the
moment attention is turned towards them; all that is
.heard is heard at a single impression ; space, matter and
time as known in the lower worlds have disappeared;
sequence no longer exists in the eternal now. As he rises
yet higher, consciousness also fall away
—he knows himself to be one with other consciousness,
.other living things. He can think as they think, feel
as they feel, know as they know. He can make their
limitations his for the moment, in order that he may
understand exactly how they are thinking and yet have
his own consciousness. Within this circle of evolution
‘there is nothing that to him is veiled, when he turns his
attention to it; nothing he cannot understand and there-
-fore nothing he cannot help.”*
These last steps belong to the evolution of the three l
higher principles, the triple Self in man. As the Mani-
* “ Man and His Bodies," by Mrs. Besant, p. 112.


fested God has three aspects ( Existence, the fount and"
root of all being the aspect of the first Logos ; then Joy
or Bliss, manifested in Love, the aspect of the second
Logos; and lastly Intelligence, shown as creative Wisdom,,
the aspect of the third Logos), “ so the Self in man, a ray
from the Logos, partaking of His own essential Being,,
has the triple nature of the Logos Himself, and the
evolution of man consists in the gradual manifestation,
of these three aspects, their development from latency
into activity, man thus repeating in miniature the evolu-
tion of the universe.”*
The third Aspect, Intelligence, is first manifested, be-
ginning with the development, in the mental body, of
intellectual power, judgment, reasoning, comparison,,
memory, the drawing of conclusions, the logical facul-
ties. When this has gone on to a very great extent, the
higher faculties of the intelligence will begin to evolve on
the formless (arupa) mental planes ; the Ego will enter
on its own especial work of abstract thinking and the
highest intellectual faculties will then be evolved within
the Causal body.t The predominant element of con-
sciousness in this body is knowledge, and ultimately
wisdom, t thus showing forth the third aspect of the
Logos.
Then comes the second aspect, Bliss, Love, which marks
the development of the Bliss or Buddhic body, a stage
* “ Ancient Wisdom, ” p. 213.
f “ Emotion, Intellect and Spirituality, ”,by Mrs. Besant, p. 19..
J “ Ancient Wisdom,’’ p. 297.


which for the majority of mankind belongs to a future
period of our race. The only way in which the man
can contribute to the building of this glorious form is by
•cultivating pure, unselfish, all-embracing love, love that
'seeketh not its own' —that is, love that is neither partial,
nor seeks any return for its outflowing. This sponta-
neous outpouring of love is the most marked of the
divine attributes, the love that gives everything, that asks
nothing. When the Buddhic body is quickened as a
vehicle of consciousness, the man enters into the bliss of
non-separateness and knows in full and vivid realization
his unity with all that is.”*
We have seen that the mental plane is the centre of
our present five-fold evolution and we should now note
a definite relation that exists between the planes below
and the planes above, between the kamic or astral, and
the Buddhic, and between the physical, the lowest, and the
Nirvanic, the highest; there is no reflexion of intelli-
gence—the third aspect ©f the Self— because it is the
-central quality. The second manifestation, that which is
Love on the Buddhic plane, reflecting itself in the
astral plane takes on the aspect of desire and passion
and becomes k&ma. That which is Existence, the first
aspect of the Self belonging to the Nirvanic plane,
reflecting itself in the physical plane, shows forth what
we call objective reality. If we take the picture of a
mountain reflected in a lake, the shore is the dividing
line between object and image, and represents the
* 11 Ancient Wisdom,” p. 218.


intelligence; below that, half way down, will come
the reflection of' love showing itself as emotion and
desire ; then we see the highest peak reflected in the
deepest depth of .the lake ; the existence above, the
power of the Real Being, is reflected below in the plane
of physical matter as that illusory existence which man
calls real.*
“ Looking at the kamic and Buddhic planes we find
that in both cases the consciousness seeks expression by
unifying, but on the kamic plane it does this by taking
possession of an object as ‘ mine,’ by holding and
assimilating it, whereas on the Buddhic plane it pours
itself forth to include, and not feeling the sense of
difference of the ‘ I ’ and of the ‘ mine,’ it is conscious
of a unity which sees all that it touches as part of itself
and includes all within itself.”
“ If we can turn the great force in our desire-nature
that was being used for the sake of tSe personal self, to
the service of the common self of man, then emotional
love passes into the higher love which is devotion
passes from the astral plane to the Buddhic, where bliss
is the distinguishing characteristic, and we start within
the evolving Self a vibration on the Buddhic plane,
which helps forward the evolution of our spritual
nature.”f
The last stage is the development in the human Self
* “ Evolution of Life and Form,’’ by Mrs. Besant, p. 124.
t “ Emotion, Intellect and Spirituality,” by Mrs. Besant, pp. 20
and 23.


of the first aspect of Deity, Existence, implying the:
manifestation .of the divine powers, the power of the
Real being, which, as we have seen, is reflected below in
the plane of physical matter as that illusory existence
which manValls real.
“ When thrs first aspect is manifested, when to Wisdom
and Compassion the God-like and unruffled strength,
that marks the functioning of Atma is added, then
human evolution is finished, humanity is crowned with
divinity, and the God-man is manifest in all the plenitude,
of his power, his wisdom, his love.”*
With the attainment of the last two stages comes the
transcending of the Individuality.
Through countless incarnations the Self in man, which,,
emanating directly from the First Logos, had been
placed within the Causal body, has remained encased
therein, as within a protecting shell. It has been planted
there as a mere seed, not as a perfect Ego ; as a mere
seed with every divine power involved within it and
capable of development. It is the object of evolution
to make that centre the Image of the Logos, self-sustaining,
and enormous reaches of time are needed for the build-
ing. As the Causal body—the individuality—develops,,
this centre becomes strong and able to be self-existent,
but it is not till the Bliss body (in which the Ego al-
ready recognises his unity with all other Egos) is fully
developed, that Individuality is transcended and that the
Causal body, that most permanent of our bodies.
« ‘ Ancient Wisdom,” p. 297.


vanishes,'as no longer required for a protecting shell,
the life within having grown into a strong self-conscious
centre, able to expand into the consciousness of God,
and transcending finally also the Buddhic plane, to live
without limiting circumference in those ineffable vibrations
which, encountered to-day, would but paralyse and
make us unconscious.*
In considering “ Man’s Relation to God,” the union
of existence of all that lives is the fundamental principle
as stated in the beginning. All Selves are formed with-
in the Logos and are of the same divine essence,
destined to grow into the image of God, as the seed
grows into the likeness of the plant from which it came.
To attain this end a long process of evolution is needed,
through a great part of which this sense of union is
effaced and gives place to the sense of separateness, the
bodies in which the selves are clothed forming on the
lower planes dividing barriers between the individuals
and even placing them in conflict with each other.
Within these bodies the life-centre develops and evolves,
learning to control the forms, and finally to transcend
embodied existence, when it has grown strong enough
to hold its own without protecting circumference in the
illimitable life of the One. Then the aspect of separate-
ness, of diversity, in its turn has given place to union
amid the individualised units ; the self realizes in full
consciousness the union with all other selves, the human
* “ Evolution of Life and Form, ” p. 90, and“ by
}}rs. Besant, p. 22.
4


Evolution is completed. When the point has become
the sphere the sphere finds itself to be the point; each point
contains everything and knows itself one with every
other point; the outer is found to be only the reflection
of the inner; the Reality is the one Life, and the
difference an illusion that is overcome.*
Then will come the higher glory that shines beyond,
when those living centres in divinity can come forth
again when there is need for their aid, able in worlds
and in universes to be the manifested expression of the
divine love, the divine power and the divine perfection.
When this happens we speak of the appearing as God
made manifest in flesh ; then truly the Individuality has
vanished, then truly the limits have fallen away, but
that living, self-conscious Being, He perishes never.t
“ The life that has reached Self-existence is a being
that can garb itself in any form, by gathering the Akasa
around it. Thus it may develop vehicle after vehicle
until the whole of the human series is builded for use,
but none of them is a prison for limitation ; then we say
that the man is a Jivanmukta, a Master ; " He is free and
all matter has become His servant to use when He has
need of it, to cast aside when He needs it nott The
building of such self-conscious, eternal centres is a
purpose of life-evolution. It is a slow growth through
limitation and imperfection to perfection ; all manifest-
* “ Man and His Bodies,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 114.
f “ Individuality,” by Mrs. Besant, p. 22.
+ “ Evolution of Life and Form,” p. 152.


ation and multiplication must necessarily mean division
and therefore limitation, and that limitation neces-
sarily implies ■ imperfection.* Only the whole is
perfect and not till consciousness in the Self in man is
able to expand into the consciousness of the Logos, not
till he has become an expression of that highest life,
with nothing to gain, nothing to learn, nothing to take
that any world can give him, existing only as the chan-
nel of the life of God,”t can he be said to have attained
perfection.
Let us briefly recapitulate :
The Monad, the spirit in man, is a ray or germ of the
divine life, destined to grow into the likeness of his
Father, “to become from a static Logos enfolding all
divine potentialites, a dynamic Logos unfolding all
divine powers.”
His evolution, his pilgrimage through the manifested
Universe, is intimately connected with the work of the
Three Logoi, the great Trinity, of which the Monad is
a reflection :
The Third Logos prepares the matter of the Universe.
The Second Logos evolves the forms of the three
elemental, the mineral, animal and human kingdoms.
The First Logos sends forth the Monads into the
forms thus prepared for the Monadic evolution.
The Seven planes of our solar system are classified as
follows in relation to evolution :
* “ Evolution of Life and Form,” p. 88.
f 11 Evolution of Life and Form,” p. 152.


(1) The two Highest (Adi and Anup&daka) are the
field of Logoic manifestation.
(2) The Nirvanic and the Buddhic are the field of
supernormal human evolution.
(3) The three lowest (mental, astral and physical)
are the field of elemental, mineral, vegetable,
animal and normal human evolution,
The Monad dwells on the Anupadaka plane and be-
comes connected, on the downward arc of evolution,
with each of the five lower planes, through the perma-
nent atoms which remain attached to it throughout his
evolution. Round these permanent atoms the matter
of the planes gathers into at first loosely organised
sheaths, which are shaped on the upward arc of evolu-
tion into independent well-organised vehicles of con-
sciousness, enabling the Monad to function in full self-
consciousness on every plane.
Normal human evolution is at present and for ages
to come concerned with the development of the physi-
cal, astral and mental bodies.
The attainment of Divine Manhood is connected
with the development of the buddhic and tttmic sheaths
and belongs to super-normal human evolution, lying
beyond the first of the great initiations. Only a very
small minority (Adepts, Masters,) have completed this
stage or are on the path of discipleship leading up to it.
Beyond the human evolution when it is completed,
* “ Evolution of Consciousness,’’ by Mrs, Besant, Theos. Review ,
Vol. XXX, p. 449.


Planes of
Logoic
Manifestation.
.
-
A’di.
Anup&daka. p?
4 —
MONAD.
rr~
K i
\ »
\ \
\\
SPIRITUAL TRIAD.
Planes of
W jU F <• . . '4
Atmic or Nirvanic Plane.
supernormal <
human evolution.
1 r
Wyorij, R; 1
Buddhic Plane.
r n
L -
Reflection of Monad on Nirvanic, Buddhic
and Mental Planes.
Planes of
elemental, mineral
vegetable, animal
and normal
human evolution.
V N ■■ . ■ Jnidhyithrc j
Manasic or Mental Plane. o F
i
ermanent Mental Unit. "j
Attached to the
Spiritual Triad
ermanent Astral atom. J* and forming the
nuclei of the
mental, astral
Kamic or Astral Plane.
0 P
1
1
1
Physical Plane.
® Permanent Physical atom, J bodies.
DIAGRAM IY.
Combined from Mrs. Besant’s Diagrams in “ Evolution of Consciousness,” Theosophical
Review, vol. 30, pp. 449 and 537 and vol. 31, p. 58.
I. Will (i) A’tma ; 11. Wisdom (ii) Buddhi ; 111. Activity Jjiii) Manas.


lies the field of Logoic manifestation, with the mighty
Hierarchies that have liberated themselves from the
bonds of humanity, rising higher and higher till they
enter Isvara Himself. “ There is no end to the mani-
festation of the one Life, and just as we have our sun
and suns, many universes, each one part of a system
mightier than itself, so in the Spiritual Universe there
is Hierarchy beyond Hierarchy of spiritual intelligences
who are as the suns of the spiritual world. Our physical
system has as its centre the great spiritual Intelligence
manifested as a Trinity, the Isvara of that system. Then
beyond Him there is a mightier Isvara, round whom
those who are on the the Isvara of our system
circle, looking to Him as their central life. And beyond
Him yet another, and beyond Him others and others
yet, until as the physical universes are beyond our think-
ing, the spiritual Hierarchy stfctches also beyond our
thought, and dazzled and blinded by the splendour, our
thought fails to express itself the human faculty
sinks down unable to soar further.”*
The beginning and the ending, if we may use these
terms in speaking of the Infinite, are hidden from our
sight; only a tiny fragment of the great spiral of evolu-
tion has been revealed to us, sufficient, however, to give
us a glimpse of the limitless panorama of Divine unfold-
ing that stretches before our view, to show our place in
the Universe, our relation to the lower kingdoms of
nature, to our fellow-men and to God, and to give us the
• Avatiras by Mrs, Besant, p. 33,


courage and patience to proceed on our long pilgrimage
which only a right understanding can instil.
Long and difficult is the ascent from the undevelop-
ed man, the savage, to the Divine man. Pleasure
and pain, evil and good, failure and triumph alike must
be experienced, “ for the object, the goal which is to be
obtained, is not to make automata, who should blindly
follow a path sketched out for their treading, but to make
a reflection of the Logos Himself, to make a mighty
assemblage of wise and perfected men who should choose
the best because they know and understand it, who
should reject the worst because by experience they have
.learnt its inadequacy the sorrow to which it leads.
So that in the universe of the future, as amongst all the
Great Ones who are guiding Jlhe universe of to-day,
there should be unity gained by consensus of wills, which
have become one again by knowledge and by choice,
which move with a single purpose because they know
the whole, who choose to be one with the Law, not by
an outside compulsion but by an inner acquiescence.*
Thus are formed those who are the co-workers of Isvara
in the helping of humanity, who, having gone through
all suffering, throw everything they have gained at the
feet of the Lord, who turn back to the world never again
to be bound by it, but still responding to the compassion,
which is the very life of Isvara Himself.” f
There is nothing that the spirit in man cannot conquer;
• “ The Path of Discipleship,’’ by Mrs. Besant, p. 10.
■f “ Evolution of Life and Form,” by Mrs, Besant, p. 153,


all knowledge, all progress is open before us and will be
ours, for “ The soul of man is immortal and its future
is the future of a thing whose growth and splendour
has no limit.”*
* "The Idyll of the White Lotus.”
