

THE LAST
LEMURIAN
A
WESTRALIAN ROMANCE
G. FIRTH
SCOTT


THE LAST LEMURIAN
A WESTRALIAN ROMANCE


“I ran till my breath grew short, and my limbs ached and
trembled.” [Page 280.




THE LAST LEMURIAH
A WESTRALIAN ROMANCE .
BY
G. FIRTH SCOTT
AUTHOR OF " TH E TRACK OF MIDNIGHT."
LONDON
JAMES BOWDEN
*«. HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C.
1898


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAGE
THE ROUT OF CURRIEWILDIE . . . . I
CHAPTER 11.
A hatter’s MATE . . . . . . 7
CHAPTER 111.
WHEN WHITE MEETS BLACK . . , *l7
CHAPTER IV.
BLACK SUFFERS . . ... .2$
CHAPTER V.
A POOL OF MYSTERY 38
CHAPTER VI.
THE BUNYIP DIES $8


CHAPTER VII.
PAGE
THE CRY OF THE SOUTHERN LAND , . -73
CHAPTER VIII.
THROUGH THE MISTS OF TIME . . . .86
CHAPTER IX.
IN THE SOUTHERN LAND . . . . , 102
CHAPTER X.
THE HATTER'S YARN 11l
CHAPTER XI.
GUMTREE PHILOSOPHY . . . . .123
CHAPTER XII.
A FRESH INTEREST 142
CHAPTER XIIL
THE START FOR THE DESERT RANGE . . .-152
CHAPTER XIV.
THE RESULT OF EXPLORATION . . . . 1 63
VI
Contents.


CHAPTER XV.
PAGE
THE PIGMIES SWARM AGAIN . . . • I?S
CHAPTER XVI.
BEHIND THE BARRIER .... . 191
CHAPTER XVII.
THE CONQUEST OF THE QUEEN .... 206
CHAPTER XVIII.
A FLIGHT FOR LIFE . . . ... . 219
CHAPTER XIX.
A CRY FROM THE DARKNESS .... 232
CHAPTER XX.
THE LIVING DEAD 242
CHAPTER XXI.
TO DUST AND ASHES 258
CHAPTER XXII.
Theoretical history and tragic reality . 264
VII
Contents.


CHAPTER XXIIL
I PAGE
ACROSS THE DESERT 280
CHAPTER XXIV.
THE HATTER NAMED 2QO
CHAPTER XXV.
COVENTRY OF SAXTED 3©3
CHAPTER XXVI.
THE UNKNOWN PORTRAIT 318
CHAPTER XXVII.
THE LAST CALL . . . . . . 329
VIII
Contents .


THE LAST LEMURIAN.
CHAPTER I.
THE ROUT OF CURRIEWILDIE.
There had been three years of drought, more
or less severe, over that portion of South
Australia where Curriewildie Station was situ-
ated ; and what with the stock dying off in
thousands for want of food and water, and the
damage done to fences and such buildings as an
outlying station boasts by bush fires, the revenue
returns sent in by the manager to the owner
were not exhilarating reading. She, poor old
lady, was a resident in England, and had been
so during the ten years which had elapsed since
her husband, the original owner of the station,
had died. There had been some heavy amounts
sent home before the drought set in, and that,
perhaps, was the reason why she took it into
her head that we who were employed on the
property were robbing her. Any way, that is
I


what we thought, when one day, without a word
of warning, a young, fresh-faced Englishman
arrived at the head station with all the necessary
documentary evidence to prove to us—that is,
Tom Smiles, the manager, and myself, the
overseer—that he had been sent out by Mrs.
Halliday to take immediate possession from us
and send us about our business.
I was having a camp, as we term it in Aus-
tralia—siesta, I believe is the proper word, and
with my altered position, from that of a hard-
working and not too well paid overseer to a
millionaire, it behoves me to be careful and
guard against too free a use of the bush ver-
nacular. But that is rather anticipating, for at
present, so far as this story is concerned, I am
still the hard-working, ill-paid station overseer.
I was having a camp, as I have said, one
afternoon in my own quarters —a slab hut, with
a canvas “ stretcher ” as the chief article of
furniture—when Smiles disturbed me by burst-
ing into the place.
“ Hal wood! Here, wake up !” he exclaimed,
shaking me by the shoulder.
“ All right,” I answered. “ What is wrong
now ? ”
“Wrong? Why, everything’s wrong,” he
answered excitedly.
2
The Last Lemurtan.


I looked at him quietly as the thought flashed
through my mind, had sober, steady-going old
Smiles broken out and gone for the rum keg ?
—got a touch of the sun, as we should put it ?
“You’re sacked,” he added.
It was undoubtedly a case of the sun, I
thought, and to humour him I said, “ All right.
I suppose I can finish my camp before making
tracks ? ”
"You’re sacked,” he yelled. “D’ye hear?
Sacked! You, me, and the whole gang. Sacked
straight off the jigger.”
My reply was not perfectly polite, so I will
not repeat it. Suffice it to say that it was
expressive.
“Yes, young fellow; we’re sacked for robbing
and cheating that ” he referred to our
late esteemed employeress, but he did not use
her usual name.
I was too mystified to understand quite the
drift of his conversation and told him so. Then
he became more explicit, and after telling me
about the young Englishman’s arrival and the
purport of his mission, he dragged me out of
the hut and over to his quarters. There I
found the rosy-cheeked young Englishman
standing at the door, perspiring like a carcass
in a boiling-down vat, and staring across the
3
The Rout oj Curriewildie.


desolate stretch of drought-stricken country in
front of him.
“ Here’s the overseer. I've told him, but
you had better do it over again,” Smiles said
angrily to the new chum, as he pushed past him
through the doorway.
“ Smiles says I’m sacked,” I exclaimed, none
too pleasantly.
“ Well, I would like to —eh, that is ”
he began hesitatingly.
“ See here, boss,” I said, interrupting him ;
“we play square in these parts. Smiles says
I’m sacked for collaring the dibs the station
hasn’t earned. If that’s so, give it a name.”
“ I should like to explain,” he said, and, as
I stood silent, he did explain the whole situation
to me as politely as he could. But I was in
no mood for politeness. Like old Smiles, the
insinuations brought my blood up. After
struggling and fighting like heroes and working
like draught horses—yackering, we termed it—
for three solid years for a paltry pound a week
and rations, and saving every shred of wool we
could from the drought and the fires, it was
rather rough to be accused of swindling.
Looking back at it now, I must own it was
not very just to the new chum; but we were
mad at the time and cared for nothing save our


own wounded feelings. What men there were
on the place—there were only a cook and a
solitary shepherd—we told, and they, rather
glad, I fancy, to get away from the place,
marched up to the new chum and handed in
their checks on the moment. He tried his best
to square matters up, but it was no good, and
before the sun went down the four of us had
our swags rolled up and were a mile or so away
from him. Bushmen are more or less nomads,
and it does not take them very long to pack
and clear, as they put it. The new chum must
have had a rosy time of it as his first taste of
Colonial experience, for it was decidedly rough
upon him ; but, to lapse once more into the
expressive vernacular, “ our troubles about a
blooming jackeroo ! ”
Three days later and I was by myself riding
westward, for I had heard of the new finds of
gold out in Western Australia—Westralia, we
call it—and fancied working my way over and
trying my luck. There was a township a few
days’ ride ahead, and I was steering for it, so as
to get a pack horse and such things as I should
need for the journey, and perhaps a mate, if a
decent one were to be found. It was nearing
sunset, and I interrupted my thoughts, of
what a pile I might make if I struck it rich, to


look around for a good place to camp for the
night.
I espied a thin wisp of smoke on my right,
and riding towards it I saw the gleam of a fire,
with a man alongside boiling his billy (which, I
may explain, is a tin pail used in the bush for
many purposes, not the least of which in im-
portance is the making of the national beverage
—tea).
He saw me, and with the free hospitality of
the country called out an invitation to join him.
“ Don’t mind if I do,” I answered, and thus
begun a mateship that in the course of the next
few months was to yield to each of us a fairly
big experience of adventure, and, what was more
acceptable to me, a good round sum in cash.


CHAPTER II.
A HATTER’S MATE.
We had finished our meal, and were lolling
back on our blankets, smoking and “ swapping
yarns,” before I had an opportunity to have a
good square look at my companion.
He was a fine-built man, topping six feet,
and with a frame loosely hung and wiry, after
the fashion that comes to any one who has spent
many years in the hot air of the Australian
bush and engaged in the toil incidental to a life
of pastoral pursuits. His full beard, like his
hair, was tinged with grey, and I judged him to
be well over forty-five years of age. His nose
was straight and slender, but the most remark-
able feature of the face was the eyes. They
were of that peculiar blue which goes to a grey
in a strong light, or when their owner yields
himself to the seductions of a dolce far niente ,
and allows his mind to wander unchecked in
half-dreamy reveries, but which becomes dark


and flashing when he is aroused in temper or
uses his mental powers vigorously.
I was studying him closely, so closely, indeed,
that I had forgotten for the moment what I was
doing, when he interrupted me with the word
“ Satisfied ? ”
The remark nonplussed me for a moment,
and before I could find words for an answer he
went on with a smile :
“ You’re quite right, my lad ; always size up
a man when you have the chance, though for
my own part I prefer to do it directly I meet
him. I took your measure before you got oft
your horse.”
“ Well, I was a bit struck,” I began.
“ Yes, I know,” he interrupted. “ But I
was going to say something more. I took
your measure, and, if I am not mistaken—and
it isn’t often that I am—you are just the sort
that I want. I suppose you wouldn’t mind a
bit of rough mining, would you ? ”
“ I have half made up my mind to go and
have a look round Coolgardie,” I answered.
“ They say there’s a good show down that way
for any one who gets in ahead of the syndicators.”
“ Maybe there is, but I don’t think much of
that part myself. I’ve been over the country,
and—well, I may be wrong, but I reckon there’s


going to be a lot of money dropped there, if
people don’t mind and watch it. That isn’t my
lay, though. I’m after a bigger deal, I take it,
and if you care to chip in, why, I want a mate,
and for my part I’m on to take on with you.”
“ But what’s the swindle ? ”■ I asked.
“ Yes, I reckoned you were going to ask
that; it’s in your face and I’m glad it is. I
like a man to look before he leaps.”
He leaned forward to knock the ashes out
of his pipe.
“Just let me charge up again and I’ll tell
you the yarn, and then you can say whether
you’re on or not, and we can go into details.”
I waited while he cut up his tobacco, and,
filling his pipe, lit it with a glowing ember.
He lay back with his arms behind his head,
and his legs stretched out in front of him and
commenced his story, while I listened without
interrupting him.
“ I said I had been over the Coolgardie
country,” he began. “Well, so I was about a
year ago, but I found nothing more than colour
here and there, though I’m free to own I did
not stay long. I was making for a range that
I thought looked much more likely country,
when I fell in with a mob of blacks. I’ve
picked up a bit of their jabber in different parts.
9
A Hatter's Mate .


and although every tribe has its own version
of a language, I was able to get along fairly
well with them. My horses were a bit knocked
up, and as they told me there was good feed
at the place they were going to, I thought I
might as well go that way too. There was
good feed at their camping ground, and I gave
the horses a fortnight’s spell at it, and they
wanted it, I can tell you, for Westralia is rats
of a place to travel in generally.”
“ There was a rum old chap with the tribe,
and he was particularly scared of me, I bailed
him up one day and asked him what was wrong.
He wouldn’t speak for a time, but at last I got
it out of him. It was this way. Once, a long
time ago, when he was little more than a
piccaninny, he had been away to the north-east
from where we were camped, on some black
fellow’s trip or other. The party he was with
had struck a desert, and, if such a thing can
happen to a black, had got bushed. Anyway
they wandered and wandered till they were
nearly all dead, and only my old boy and two
others were left, when they saw, away on the
horizon, the blue shade of a range. They
made for it with all the life that was left in
them, and here comes the curious part of the
yarn. When they got there they hunted around


for water, which he said they had not tasted
for a week, but I did not swallow that fairy
tale. They found it, however, and were
sleeping off the effects of their too copious
libations —I have heard it said that men who
are nearly dead with thirst get fairly groggy
when they do reach water and drink their fill—
when they were surprised by another tribe and
carried off; where to, do you think ? ”
“ Give it up,” I said.
“ Well, you see how tanned I am ; I could as
soon pass for a yellow as a white man, but the
old boy said my colour only suggested that of
the creature before whom they were taken.
She was a yellow woman, as yellow as a nugget
of gold, he said, and as big—oh ! I was only
a baby compared to her.”
He laughed as he stretched out his arms and
rolled over on to his side.
“ The old chap didn’t have a happy time of
it and took the first opportunity to clear. He
didn’t wait for his mates, who, he maintained,
were eaten alive by this yellow female. He
somehow got away, and, failing to find his way
home, joined the first tribe of blacks he fell in
with after his escape, and had been with them
ever since. But the part of the yarn that
touched me the most was that, in the range,


he said he saw whole lumps of gold. I showed
him one of my specimens I had picked up, to
help him out in his description of the lady’s
colour, and he said there were whole boulders
of that stuff lying about in the ranges. I drew
all the information I could out of the old man
and located whereabouts in the Never Never
country of Westralia that range ought to be,
and now I’m on my way there to look for it;
and you are too, if you care to join me. Do
you feel that way ? ”
“ But what about the tribe ? Were they
yellow too ? ” I asked, in order to gain time
before answering his question.
“ Oh, I forg'ot about that. They were all
little chaps, he told me, dried up and shrivelled
like smoke-cured mummies; but there was a big
crowd of them if what he said was true, though
I reckon he saw double generally, both as
regards their number and the size of the woman.
Anyhow, there may be something in the gold
part of it, and if there is, it is worth having a
shot at, don’t you think ? ”
“ It’s a rough trip,” I said.
“ That’s so,” he answered. “ But so it Is
to Coolgardie, especially from this side. It’s
bad enough from the other. But you take
time before you make up your mind. I’ve


a saddle horse and another for the pack. I’m
going to finish my stores at Wyunga, and, if
you care to join me, we can make a double
purchase.”
“ I was going to Wyunga to fit out for my
trip and look for a mate,” I said.
He smoked on in silence, and I turned his
proposal over in my mind. It sounded about
as far away from the possibilities of life as it
well could, and yet I was taken with it. Still
more was I taken with the man, as he lay on
the other side of the fire with his eyes fixed
on me. He looked like a man who had seen
more of life than the ordinary run; one who
had been in the rough and tumble of Australian
bush life, and had come through it all with
strengthened nerves and toughened sinews. A
man who would make an excellent mate in such
a trip as that which he had suggested; for one
needs a varied experience and a fund of resource
to successfully grapple the difficulties of a
journey through unknown country. My own
experience was limited to the everyday routine
of station life, and the most I had done in the
way of travelling was to bring a few mobs of
cattle some hundreds of miles from outlying
stations to the southern markets when I was
droving. But there is a great difference between


following along well-known stock routes, and
finding one’s way through country where there
is not even a fence to guide one ; and the trip I
had set myself across to Westralia was only
possible to me if I picked up a suitable mate on
the way. Well, here was the mate; and for the
rest, gold was my present desire, and there was
just as much chance of finding it in this black-
fellow’s range as there was in Coolgardie; for
when all is said and done, it is chance that leads
to success or failure in prospecting. Of course
It was risky, but when one has had a taste of
the ups and downs of Australian life, risk is not
considered very carefully in a new venture. If
it turns out well there is no necessity to bother,
and if it fails one can always take up something
else,
“I’m on. I’ll join you and see how much
there is in this blackfellow’s yarn of the yellow
woman and the golden range,” I exclaimed.
He rose and stretched out his hand, and as
I took it his fingers closed round mine and I
felt as if I were being filled with some strange,
warm fluid, which streamed from his fingers into
my hand, up my arm, and through my entire
frame. His eyes were still fixed upon mine,
and his voice seemed to come from a long way
off, and to sink like molten metal into my brain


as I heard him say : “ It’s a bargain. Whether
it’s death or whether it’s wealth, we’re mates in
it to the end.”.
And I answered him in his own words:
“ Whether it’s death or whether it’s wealth,
we’re mates in it to the end.”
As I lay rolled up in my blankets that night
I tried to think the matter over carefully and
quiedy; but I could not get away from a
feeling of lively enthusiasm, which had come to
me from the moment we had exchanged pledges,
I tried hard to convince myself that the trip
was so absolutely hairbrained as to be quite
outside the province of ordinary speculation,
and yet I was smiling to myself with a sense of
elation at the great good fortune which had
come to me. I was not one who had a very
high opinion of the blacks as a rule ; not that I
had had very much experience of them on which
to base any opinion, but in that I was only the
same as almost all other bushmen. It was an
accepted fact that the blacks were the champion
liars of creation, and consequently I attached
very little importance to the story I had heard
of the wonderful and mysterious range. Rather
was I fascinated with the man who had told it
to me—my new mate, whose name I did not
even know.


One of my first acts after waking was to try
and remedy the defect, which in a more civilised
community could hardly have occurred.
“ My name’s Dick Halwood,” I said to my
mate.
“ I’m glad to hear it,” he answered with a
smile.
“ And yours ? ” I inquired, as he did not
seem to be going to mention it,
“Oh, I’m known generally as the Yellow
Hatter,” he said.
“ Yes, but ” I began.
“ Don’t you know, my lad,” he said, inter-
rupting me, “ that in bush parlance ‘ hatter ’
means a man who lives by himself, without a
mate and without a name except what he chooses
to give ? Well, I’m a hatter, and have been
these twenty years, and shall be till I strike it
rich and can—well, never mind the rest. We’re
mates now, unless you care to go back on your
word of last night.”
For a moment I felt inclined to say that I
would ; but then some of the enthusiasm of the
night before returned to me, and I exclaimed,
“ That’s good enough for me.”
And so he remained the Hatter to me until
we had seen our little drama played out to the
finish.


CHAPTER III.
WHEN WHITE MEETS BLACK.
When we had disposed of our morning meal
we debated our future plans.
I had only one horse with me and my
ordinary swag, which contained nothing more
than my limited kit, tobacco, and rations for a
week or so.
“ You’ll need a pack horse,” the Hatter said.
“ And I fancy we had better lay in a good store
of powder and shot, as well as something to use
them with, for we shall have to pass over rough
country on our way, and may meet some wild
niggers into the bargain. Any way, it will be as
well to carry some weapons, in case we find the
yarn about the mummy men to be true.”
“ I would as soon carry a good rig out of
prospecting tools and some dynamite,” I said.
“ Would you ?” he replied. “ Perhaps you
have not had very much travelling in wild black
country. I have, and I know the value of a
good shooter when it comes to business. Peace


and friendship are all very well to talk about
when there are no niggers around, but in the
back blocks don’t go without a revolver, and a
rifle too, if you can get one.”
“ Then we shall want another pack horse to
carry them,” I said.
“And very useful he’ll be when we come
to load up the team with gold,” he replied
laughingly.”
“Please yourself,” I said. “It’s all one to
me, so long as we push along and see what
there is in the yarn. If there’s nothing we can
always get back to Coolgardie.”
“That’s so,” he answered. “If you don’t
mind. I’ll do the fitting out of our party —both
as regards choice and payment,” he added.
“ We will start fair ” I began.
“ When we get to Wyunga,” he interrupted.
“ Now we’ll round up the horses and push on.”
So we saddled up our horses and started ;
but we were not many miles on our way when
we had our first streak of luck.
We were riding along at an easy pace, the
Hatter leading his pack horse, when suddenly all
three animals stopped short in their stride and
stood, with ears pricked up, snorting and
trembling as if playing a revival of the Balaam’s
ass episode. I looked round for some cause of


the alarm but saw nothing beyond the usual
bush surroundings.
“ Camels,” my companion said laconically.
“ What! ” I exclaimed.
“Camels,” he repeated, leaning forward in
his saddle with his head turned on one side and
apparently listening intently.
I had heard, in camp-fire yams, about the
terror which seizes on horses when first they
see or smell the ship of the desert. Their
introduction into Australia for service over the
long waterless tracks which exist in some parts
of the interior had occurred some years pre-
viously, but none had ever come my way, and
my knowledge of them and their ways was
purely by hearsay, but this was evidently not
the case with the Hatter.
“I don’t quite make it out,” he said,
speaking as much to the neighbouring gum
trees as to me.
I was about, to inquire what he meant, when
he cried out: “ Here, catch hold.”
He moved his horses over to me and,
throwing both reins into my hands, jumped
from his saddle and ran quickly to a clump of
gums that grew about a hundred yards from us.
From trembling the horses began to get
restive, and I had a fairly warm time of it, what


with my own mount, the Hatter’s, and the pack
horse. They kept my attention pretty well
engaged, and I could only glance now and
again in the direction whence the Hatter had
disappeared. Presently I heard him call out to
me and warn me to sit tight, and the next
moment I realised the value of his advice. The
deuce itself might have entered into the beasts,
judging by the way they started plunging. I
managed to hang on to my own ; but the pack
horse jerked its reins out of my hand, and the
mare the Hatter rode reared so suddenly, that
the old weather-worn leather of the bridle
snapped and away went both horses as fast as
they could gallop. It was a good ten minutes
before my own grew sufficiently tired of bucking,
in a way I never knew a horse to buck before,
to permit me even to look round.
Then I saw the cause of the mischief. Just
beyond the clump of stunted gums stood a team
of five camels, with the Hatter at the head of
the leader, and holding his sides and laughing
as though he were witnessing the finest pantomime
ever staged,
“ Stick to it, my lad; he’ll be used to them
in an hour or so,” he cried.
Before I had time to answer I was in the
thick of another bout of bucks and pig jumps,


and every other sort of eccentric motion which
the mind of a horse can conceive of on the spur
of the moment as a means to unseat its rider.
I was a fairly good hand at riding, and could
tackle an average bucker with a certain degree
of safety and satisfaction ; but it would Tie idle
to deny that I have no desire whatever for a
further experience of how a bush horse greets
its first introduction to the camel tribe.
It was a great contest between my capacity
for sticking on and the condition of my horse,
and if the latter had not given out when it did I
should have voyaged into space, and, perhaps,
eternity, in a couple more rounds. When it
did end my horse was too fatigued even to
tremble.
“ Here’s a throw in,” the Hatter exclaimed,
when I was able to get near him, and after he
had expressed his entire satisfaction at my
exhibition of horsemanship. “We needn’t
waste time over Wyunga ; we’ve got all the
stores we want, and more too, for that matter,
delivered right into our hands by the gift of
Providence, or the luck of the road, as you
may please to put it.”
The camels, it appeared, he had found
browsing peacefully with their loads on their
backs, but without any signs of a driver or a


keeper. He had looked round as well as he
could, but could see nothing of a camp, and
to his mind it seemed as if the camels had been
where he had found them for at least a week.
He was well versed in the manner of driving
them, and had linked them up as the Afghans
drive them, head to tail, and when I joined
him, had them all on their knees calmly chewing
the cud of pleasant reverie.
“ It looks like a fit out for a big prospecting
trip,” he said, as we walked from the one to the
other curiously examining the packs.
At his suggestion we decided to camp where
we were (there was a half-filled water-hole near the
clump of gums) and overhaul the load, and then,
if the contents were of a kind to suit us and no
owner appeared, we could steer right away for
that wonderful range in the Westralian Never
Never country where the women grew mountains
high and gold lay about in boulders.
Our inspection showed us that our first surmise
was correct ; the team had evidently been fitted
out for some prospecting tour, and in the packs
we found everything we needed, and far more
than we should have purchased, even to weapons
and ammunition.
“ But where are the owners ? ” I said, for it
seemed strange that so much valuable property


should be roaming about at large for any stray
individual to pick up and utilise.
“ Well, they’re not about here, so far as I
can see, but if you’ve any doubts about the
question we can track where the team came
from and see what’s to be seen—though for
my part I’m always open to receive what a
kindly Providence sends my way without asking
questions.”
“ I’d rather have a look round first,” I said.
“Very well; I’ll round up my horses, and
then, when we’ve introduced them and our new
team, we’ll scour the country a bit.”
It was a tough hour’s work to get his horses
back and docile enough to come near the camels,
but he did it at last. When we had unloaded
the team (the Hatter said they would not
wander) and hobbled his packhorse, we mounted
the others and set out to follow the track of the
team.
It was easy work, and it was not long before
we came upon all the evidence we needed as to
the owners.
We found them lying where they fell, with
the ashes of their fire between them, and a
crop of spears sticking out of each. There
were three of them, fine bearded chaps they
must have been, but a week in the hot sun and


with the ants and the crows had made them grue-
some objects to look at, even from the distance.
As we rode round the camp we found three
more bodies, only these had been blacks and
females.
“ It’s best to leave them as they are,” the
Hatter remarked coolly, as he turned his
horse’s head in the direction we had come from.
“ The old, old bush story ! They won’t leave
the domestic hearth of some stray nomad in
peace, and then white civilisation is outraged
because the blacks mete out summary jurisdic-
tion upon the offenders. ”
“ But it’s strange they didn’t plunder the
team as well,” I said.
“And strange they killed the women, too,”
he answered. “They don’t often do that—
unless the camels scared them. By Jove! I
never thought of that,” he exclaimed, looking
round at me with his face aglow. “ They
were scared, I’ve heard, of horses when they
first saw them, and now they’re scared of
camels. But what price our chances with the
yellow lady’s tribe if we ride up on camels ? ”
“ I’d rather trust to the Winchesters if it
comes to business,” I said.
“ Well, I’m satisfied with the camels,” he
answered.


CHAPTER IV.
BLACK SUFFERS.
It seems rather lawless, looking back at it
from the safety of civilisation with a policeman
at the street corner, but we were at least two
days’ ride from the nearest habitation of a
white man, and nothing whatever could have
been served by riding there and telling who-
ever we met of what we had found. Besides,
it would have delayed us, and we were both,
now that we were on the road, as impatient to
get along towards that wonderful though misty
range as schoolboys are to get home for the
holidays. We might have buried what remained
of the men who had, by chance, bequeathed us
our outfit, but that would have prevented
effectually any one ever finding a trace of them.
So we made the best of what fate had thrown
in our way. Leaving the bleaching bones to
rest where they were till some one happened to
come along and discover them, we formed up
our enlarged cavalcade the following morning


and steered for the open desert, which we
knew lay right in our path.
It was the third day from our start, which
we counted from the waterhole where we found
the camels ; the sun was well down towards the
horizon, when the Hatter, who had, it seemed
to me, been very restless all the afternoon, rode
up alongside of me.
“ I should not be surprised if there was a row
to-night,” he said.
I looked round at the sky, which was
without a cloud. “ You don’t mean thunder,
do you ? ” I asked.
“ No, my lad ; niggers.”
“ Why, there isn’t a sign of them, and
besides, what have we to fear ? We haven’t
been disturbing the peace of their hearths,” I
answered, quoting the words he had used when
we found those others poor chaps.
“There’s plenty of sign, and has been all
day,” he said. “As to disturbing them, the
previous owners of these did that,” and he
jerked his head towards the string of camels
slouching along with their packs as stolidly and
methodically as only camels can.
“It’s as well to be prepared,” he went on.
“ I reckon they’re coming, and anyway there’s
nothing like being beforehand with niggers.”


“ Then we’d better take watch and watch
when we camp.”
“Watch and 'watch? No, not much.
Double watch in these parts. They’re mighty
cunning, are the niggers you find near Spinifex
Deserts, and that is the country we are coming
to. I’ve got a little plan for them which I
reckon will just about collapse them.”
It was a pretty little plan too, when he
described it. We were to camp at just such a
place as afforded them (if his surmise were
correct and blackfellows were about) splendid
cover from which to make their attack. They
would creep up and spear us as we lay around
the fire or sat yarning, he explained, but in
order to run them into their own snare, we
would, carefully watching that we were not
observed, fix up two dummy figures under the
blankets and leave them by the fire, while we,
with our Winchesters and plenty of spare
cartridges (both of which we drew from our
camel-packs) would be resting elsewhere with
an open range on to the cover we left con-
venient for the attackers.
We shortly afterwards came upon just such
a spot as we wanted. The country, which
had been rather broken earlier in the day,
opened out into a small level patch, free from


timber except about the middle, where some
scattered bushes grew in front of a few gums.
On the left of the bushes and a little behind
them a shallow ridge shot out like a tongue
from the rougher and more thickly timbered
country we had been travelling over.
“ This is our place ! ” the Hatter exclaimed!
“ They’ll follow close on our tracks, so we’ll
steer straight across to the other side of the
bushes. We’ll light our fire there, right ahead
from here, so that it will show the shelter of
the bushes, and, if I am not mistaken, draw
them clean up to the trap. They’ll be bound
to creep up under the cover and have a shy at
us—only we shall be on that rise on your left,
where we can see them a bit clearer than they
can see us.”
It did not take us long to reach our ground
and get our camp fixed up, and by the time the
sun was sinking we had it all ready, even to our
lay figures. We kept on the move enough to
stop them making any attempt to cross the
open ground between the broken country and
the bushes, but as soon as the dark came we
crept along the ground away from where our
fire was blazing towards the tongue of the ridge.
We had stacked our packs up so as to make a
streak of shadow in the gleam of the fire, and


this and the occasional impedimenta of tree
stems and bushes effectually screened our move-
ments from observation. When we reached the
rising ground we crept back as far as we could
with safety to our shelter, and lay,, with our
rifles ready, barely fifty yards from the bushes,
on the other side of which the fire was blazing.
We had thrown some heavy logs on the fire
before we left, so that the flames should not be
too bright while we crossed to our place of
vantage. They were now beginning to get
well alight, and although we were in deep
shadow we could see distinctly everything on
the open patch between the bushes and the
timber. We lay very still, and as the minutes
went by and no sound came to us save the
crackle of the fire and an occasional noise as
the camels and horses moved, I began to grow
sceptical of the Hatter’s opinion. I was not
used to watching under arms, and the experience
prompted all sorts of foolish actions. First, I
was tempted to tell my companion all I thought
about his suspicions, and only the memory of
his earnest request for absolute silence restrained
me. Then there came a great desire to jump
up, and run, and again to let off my rifle “just
for a lark,” as a schoolboy would say. I fought
all and each and several more equally senseless


ideas in turn and the hours went on, but no
blackfellows showed where we anticipated they
would. I was beginning to grow drowsy, and
rested my head on my arms for a moment. It
could not have been more, I am convinced,
although the Hatter maintained afterwards that
I had been asleep for over an hour, when I felt
a gentle push on my shoulder. I raised my
head, but before I could quite grasp the scene I
heard a low whisper.
“ Steady ! Take from the right Fire when
Iff
say.
Straight in front of me, standing in a half-
circle behind the bushes, was a row of black
fellows, their bodies all streaked and spotted
with ochre, upon which the firelight, now con-
siderably diminished, glowed in an uncanny
way. Each man held a long war spear in his
right hand, the ugly barbed points indicating
like finger posts where our two lay figures rested
under the blankets. Every warrior stood as still
as the trees, not a muscle quivering nor a limb
moving, but with the whole frame in a position
which denoted more powerfully than the wildest
movement a readiness to strike that was, even
in the situation we were in, grandly impressive.
I almost forgot that I was popularly supposed
to be one of the figures half the spears


were levelled at till I heard that soft whisper
again.
“ Have you covered him ? ”
It was my first taste of man-shooting and,
had there been time, I should have cared for it
less than I did. An uneasy tremor passed over
me, and I remember I set my teeth very hard
as I brought the sights of my rifle in line with
the magnificent frame of the warrior on the
extreme right. But, after all, I was only doing
to him as he would do to me, and that idea
gave me resolution for the moment.
“ When they throw.”
The whisper scarcely reached me ere, by some
preconceived signal which was invisible to us,
each spear was hurled through the bushes and
buried itself in mine or the Hatter’s blankets.
I needed no further stimulus, and it was with a
feeling of savage delight that I pressed the
trigger home, my delight becoming elation as I
saw my target leap in the air and fall lifeless.
Our shots must have been a terrible mystery
to those unfortunates, for they stood as if
they were too much amazed to move for the
moment. Then they saw two of their number,
the men who had stood at either end of their
line, lying lifeless on the ground, and with one
accord they crowded round them in two groups.


“ Now, let ’em have it,” the Hatter exclaimed,
as he fired as fast as he could work his repeater
into the thick of his group, while I did the
same into mine. It was horrible work—after-
wards. When the unhappy wretches who
remained realised the awfulness of what was
going on they ran blindly hither and thither
in search of shelter or safety, and as our bullets
took effect one warrior after another rolled over.
They may have been justified in their
slaughter of those who had previously owned
the rifles we used, but they had no quarrel
with us, and for their treacherous attempt to
slay us I felt justified in slaying them.
“ Now we’ll shift our quarters in case there
are any more about,” the Hatter suggested, in
a low tone, and silently we crept away along
our ridge, back into the timbered ground
beyond, until we came to a place where we
could still command a view of the little plain
without fear of being surprised from behind.
There we stayed till the dawn, the Hatter
insisting that he would watch while I camped.
But there was no sleep in my eyes for the rest
of the night. The glow of excitement kept
me awake while it lasted, and when it went
there came that other sense which made the
work we had done a hideous nightmare to me.


“ ' Now, let ’em have it,’ the Hatter exclaimed, as he fired
as fast as he could work his repealer.” [Page 3 2.


The picture was still more gruesome in the
morning’s light. Our dummies were riddled
with spears (which we gathered into a sheaf
and took away with us as trophies) and our
horses had shared the same fate, for we found
them lying on the ground dead, with two or
three spears buried in each. There was one
satisfaction in the loss; it made me fed less
debased before those black silent figures, garish
in their ochre streaks and spots, that lay
scattered over the little plain and seemed to
watch us as we hastily loaded up the camels
with their own loads, and that of the dead
pacKhorse and our saddles and bridles, and
dambering each one upon the least laden of the
team, made our way forward as fast as possible.
We saw no more of the tribe, and two days
later we entered upon the desert. Gradually
the timber became more and more stunted and
straggly, until at last it was only in low,
undersized bushes that vegetation was visible.
Herbage dwindled away the day after we left
the scene of our conflict, and then we found
ourselves in the midst of bare sandstone
boulders and sandy ridges that, rose and fell
in long rolling waves, and which the dawn
painted rosy and enticing and the sunset ruddy
and fierce, while for the rest of the day they
3


shivered and quivered in a furnace-like glow
of blinding yellow light. The nights were
cold, and not even our blankets sufficed to keep
us from shivering in the absence of a fire.
Once we stumbled upon a native well, and
spent nearly a day in digging it out sufficiently
deep for enough water to collect in it for the
camels and our water kegs. Three times we
were deceived by mirage but after that we
ignored the glamour and kept steadily and
resolutely on our track, watching each day
for the sign of a range but finding only sand.
Things were beginning to look serious.
There was barely enough water to last us
another day, and we had journeyed too far
from the native well for the camels to last to
get back to it, even if we could find it, and
still no range showed on the horizon. I had
frequently felt misgivings about our ultimately
arriving anywhere or becoming anything but
bleached bones, but the Hatter seemed to be
utterly indifferent, and when I did speak in
timid accents of the apparent hopelessness of
the search, he always had one answer —
“ It’s good enough to have a shot at, and
whether it’s wealth or whether it’s death, we’re
mates in it to the end,”
I tried once to get beyond this interesting


platitude, and, failing any verbal notice being
taken of my views, I suppose I let my tongue
run its own way. We were camping for the
night, and only a pint or so of water remained
in the kegs, and I remember feeling incensed at
the imperturbable calm of my companion, and
said so rather forcibly. He came over to my
side and took my hand in his, and again there
streamed through me that strange influence I
had felt the night when first I met him. Then
things grew hazy, and I remembered nothing
more till I heard his voice saying—“ Look ! ”
I found myself sitting upon my camel, the
sun high in the sky, and in front of us, in
strange, rugged grandeur, rose a range of appar-
ently beetling cliffs. I felt dazed and bewildered,
and swayed on' my seat as if I would fall to the
ground. I clutched the pack on which I sat,
and the movement brought me sufficiently to
myself to notice that I swayed because the camel
was striding forward at a long, swinging jog-trot,
entirely different from anything either for speed
or discomfort that I had yet experienced.
“Water,” the Hatter cried out; and, following
the direction of his extended arm, I saw a thin
gleam down the face of one steep spur of the
range.
The camels seemed to fly over the ground,


and almost before I could realise it a stretch of
fair green verdure seemed to rise from amidst
the sand, and I was shot from my seat as my
camel sank on its knees beside a clear pool of
water. My head was in it, and I was swallowing
great gulps of it, too, a second later.
Some one seized me by the legs and pulled
me away from it, and I turned with hot words
on my lips to see the Hatter standing over me
and smiling.
“ Wait till I brew some tea, my lad, or you’ll
get as drunk as the blackfellows I told you
about,” he said.
I sat up and looked at him blankly. My
memory came back in a rush. It was only just
now that I had been reviling him for leading
me into a waterless, arid desert to die and leave
my bones to whiten, and yet here I was resting
in the shade of broad-leaved trees with sweet
grass growing under me, and a wide pool of
clear water, some of which still clung to my
hair and beard, beside me.
“ Am I mad or dreaming ? ” I exclaimed.
“ Neither, my lad ; only you were getting a
bit down a day or so ago, so to save trouble
to both of us I sent you off.”
“ Sent me off? ” I repeated.
“ Yes. It’s all right. I had to do it,” he


said laughing. “I’m a bit of a hypnotist, you
know,” he added.
It was a new word to me then, but it struck
me as being a strange sort of proceeding, and I
said so.
“ Well, we'll discuss that later,” he answered..
“ For the present let us camp.”
Whatever he was he had me under his thumb,
for I had to do just as he pleased, whether I
wanted to or not.
After we had finished our meal—a meal by
the way that was the sweetest I had ever enjoyed
—we lit our pipes, and he explained something
of what he meant. I gathered that he had a
control over me, and that, if he liked, he could
make me do anything he wished ; but, he said,
he was not going to use it so long as I stood by
him, as I had said I would.
“We’ve come so far together, not without
danger and difficulty,” he said. “But if my
anticipations are right, and this is the range the
old blackfellow told me of, we may have many
more to face before we start back with our camels
loaded up with gold. Are we still mates ? ”
There was no getting away from the frankness
of his eyes, and, half-ashamed of myself, I held
out my hand.
“ Mates to the end,” I answered.


CHAPTER V.
A POOL OF MYSTERY.
The place where we found ourselves was at
once romantic and weird.
Behind us, as far as we could see, there was
only a weary stretch of dry, dead sand, gleam-
ing and shimmering in the fierce, unbroken
sunlight. Before us, beyond the luxuriant
verdure of our haven, rose the range of barren,
rocky mountains, free from all vegetation, and
as arid as the desert, in all save the face of
rock immediately in front of us. From a
point nearly at the summit a stream of water
bubbled, as if it were coming through an outlet
pipe of some enormous cistern, and trickled
over the rough surface of the rock in a thousand
mimic cascades, tinkling and splashing as it fell
until the air was full of the melody. At the
base of the rock the water gathered into a deep
pool, so clear that one could see the pebbles
lying at the bottom. Round the entire margin
there was a luxuriant growth of vegetation,


fine broad-leaved trees, of a kind I had never
seen before, spreading far their branches, and
shielding from the burning rays of the sun
the velvety grass that grew right up to the
stems. Towards the desert it stopped as
suddenly as the edge of a well-kept lawn.
There was no outlet that we could find for
the water of the pool, and we could only
surmise that it flowed away somewhere under-
ground ; for there were no signs of the pool
ever having overflowed, and yet a considerable
body of water was running into it every hour.
“ Like all our Australian rivers, the biggest
stream is underground, I suppose,” the Hatter
remarked. “ I’ve seen the Murray almost In
flood at one part, while a hundred miles or so
away there was not enough water to float a
wool barge.”
I was looking at the stream as it came bubbling
down the rock.
“ It’s strange the water has not cut a deeper
scar in the rock,” I said. “ These trees look
a pretty good age, judging by their size, and
that stream must have been running a long
time ; but still there is hardly any of the stone
worn away.”
“It’s a quaint place altogether,” the Hatter
said. “ Look how the grass stops growing


when it meets the sand, just as if it were
trimmed every morning. Why, there are no
birds about the place, nor flies, nor anything
else that I can see with life, except the trees
and the grass.”
It was quite correct. We hunted through
the trees for a sign of some token of animal
life, but beyond our camels and ourselves there
was none. In our search we came up to the
rock down which the water tumbled. We
understood then why it had worn away sc little,
for not even with the aid of a chilled steel
drill and a heavy hammer could we make more
than the faintest impression upon it.
“ If this is our golden range and we have
to mine in stuff like this, I’m afraid it will be
a long time before we get our camels loaded,”
I said, as we rested from our fruitless efforts.
“We could have driven a hole a foot deep
in the toughest rock I ever met with by this
time, and there is hardly a dent in this, and
the point flattened off the drill into the bargain.”
“ It is a quaint place, and I should not be
surprised even if we met the Yellow Lady of
twenty feet stature, and her hordes of shrivelled-
up mummies,” the Hatter answered, looking
at the rock with a puzzled expression on his
face.


“ I wonder what dynamite would do,” I
suggested.
“ Not worth wasting it. We may need all
we have before we get to the end of our
journey,” he answered.
“ I don’t feel altogether comfortable,’’ I said,
as I rose from the boulder I had been sitting
upon. There was a strange oppressiveness
in the air now that the first effects of the charm
were wearing away. “ I’m inclined to over-
haul our rifles and sort out the ammunition.
We may want them before long.”
The Hatter looked at me with a smile
lurking away down in the depths of his eyes.
“ Getting nervous ? ” he asked.
“ Not exactly, but what’s that ? ”
If ever I felt my heart in my mouth it was
at that moment. The Hatter jumped to his
feet with the blaze in his eyes that always
came when he was suddenly startled, and I felt
braver when I saw that he too had felt the
shock.
We had been resting with our backs to the
pool, and a heavy plunge and its accompanying
splash, that sounded terribly loud in the quiet
of the place, had been the cause of our alarm.
We hurried to the pool.
A few bubbles still floating on the surface


and the race of ripples travelling from the
centre to the sides were all we could discern.
The Hatter stood watching the pool, calm
and unconcerned again, while I looked any-
where and everywhere for some explanation of
the mystery.
“ It is too absurd,” I heard the Hatter say,
and then he laughed, and I turned towards
him.
“But we’ll get our rifles all the same,” he
went on, looking round at me.
“ Why, what do you make of it ? ” I asked,
as we hastened to the spot where we had piled
the packs when we lifted them off the backs of
our tired camels.
“ Bunyip,” he answered. “ Look at the
camels.”
The creatures that we had left browsing
peacefully in the shade of the trees when we
went to test the quality of the rock were now
standing out in the sunlight on the desert, their
necks swaying from side to side and their big
blabby lips shaking, while their eyes rolled and
glared in every direction.
“ Here, let’s get out of this,” I cried, a
horrible tremor of fear running over me.
The Hatter did not answer, but walked to
the packs and drew out the rifles. Then he


opened the box of ammunition and handed me
a packet of cartridges.
“ Load up the magazine, and put the rest in
your pocket,” he said, as he proceeded to set
me the example.
When we had finished filling the Winchesters,
the Hatter produced two revolvers, which were
also in the armoury of our treasure-trove camel
train. We took one each, carefully loading all
the chambers and keeping some spare cartridges
in our pockets.
“ Now we can look to the camels,” the
Hatter said.
We went to them and tried to soothe the
terror they evidently felt. They came to meet
us, and followed us as far as the beginning of
the grass, but nothing we could do would induce
them to come off the sand.
“ It’s no use wasting time over them. Let’s
go back and wait,” the Hatter said.
“ But what have we got to wait for ? ” I
asked.
The bunyip,” he answered laconically.
“Oh! go slow!” I exclaimed. “You don’t
believe that silly yarn, do you ? ”
“My lad, I’m ready to believe anything
about this place after the rock and that splash.
The old man swore the pool he and his fellow


niggers drank out of was the bunyip’s lair, and
that was why they all went to sleep. If this
isn’t the place and the range he talked > about,
then it’s another equally peculiar. I’ve always
thought there must be something in the bunyip
yarn,”
I laughed. “You’re as bad as a new chum,”
I exclaimed.
“ Wait awhile,” he replied. “ You’ve heard
the yarn the same as I have, and I suppose
every other white man has who ever saw or
spoke to an aboriginal. Only, perhaps, I have
heard it more often, because I have had more
to do with blackfellows, and that in every
part of the continent, from York Peninsula to
Wilson’s Promontory, and from the Swan river
to Moreton Bay.”
“ That’s a pretty stiff bit of country,” I
interrupted,
“ It includes what I say—every part of the
continent,” he continued quietly. “ Now just
add this up, and see what it comes to. From
every blackfellow who has told me the yarn—
and there have been a few hundreds of them—
the description has always been the same. You
can’t talk about collusion between men and
tribes who never saw or heard of one another.
Firstly, they’re all scared out of their lives


of it. ‘ Baal th’at pfeller bunyip; ’im no
good, ’im debbil-debbil,’ they tell you, if they
talk what they call English. If they don’t,
they tell you the same in their own tongue.
They’ve never seen it, but—and this is the
second point—they tell you it lives in deep
waterholes and lagoons, and for that reason
they will never go into strange water nor camp
near it, and sometimes will go for days without
a drink rather than visit a pool where the
bunyip is said to be.”
“ No one has ever seen one since the white
man came here, at all events,” I answered.
“ Well ? ”
“And they’ve looked often enough. Why,
scares are always getting up about the bunyip
being heard or seen in some lagoon or other,
and all the country side turns out and hunts,
and hunts, and hunts, but nary a bunyip can
be found.”
“ Well ? ” he repeated.
“ Well, isn’t that enough ? If it isn’t, how
do you get over the fact that these scares get
up at places hundreds, and sometimes thousands,
of miles apart? Does the bunyip fly, or are
there more than one, and if there are, why
hasn’t ”
“ There is only one,” he interrupted.


“Then how does he travel from one place
to another ? ” I said.
“ Look here, my lad, the water from that
pool goes somewhere, doesn’t it ? ”
“ I suppose so,” I replied.
“And so does the water of hundreds of
other pools and rivers in Australia—but it
does not flow on the surface. Why should
there not be underground channels leading
from one to the other, and perhaps ending or
centring here, for example, as an ideal bunyip’s
lair ? ”
“ That’s too stiff for me! ” I exclaimed,
“ All right ; we’ll wait and see,” he answered.
We dropped the discussion, and turned to
consider our plan of campaign. I could not
accept the bunyip theory, but at the same time
there was no questioning the fact that some-
thing very mysterious had occurred when we
heard that splash, or why should the camels
be so terrified?
“ I fancy the trees,” I exclaimed, looking up
into the leafy canopy of one. “If we get up
above the lower branches the leaves will screen
us from below, while we can see all that goes
on, and have a grand command over any enemy
underneath us.”
“ It’s a stiff climb,” the Hatter answered,


looking at the trunk, which rose a good thirty
feet without a twig to mar its smoothness.
“ I think I can do it,” I answered, for I was
always a great hand at climbing, and rather
plumed myself upon my prowess.
“ But I doubt if I can,” the Hatter said.
“ Why, there’s that rope ladder in the tool
kit that we were nearly throwing away,” I
exclaimed, suddenly remembering the article
which had caused us some wonder as to the
reason of its inclusion in a miner’s swag when
we first found it.
“ Our luck again,” he answered, as we over-
hauled the packs until we came to the one we
wanted. Taking a coil of light lanyard with
me, and leaving my rifle at the foot of the tree (I
did not care to go up without my revolver, in
case I should meet anything unexpected), I started
to swarm up the tree. It was, as the Hatter
had remarked, a stiff climb, but I did it,
although when I reached the lower branches I
was pretty well blown. I threw one leg over
a bough, and, holding on to the trunk of the
tree, I examined the situation.
The leaves grew thick almost to the stem,
and about six feet above me another set of
branches shot out from the trunk. The bough
upon which I rested forked out into two prongs,


as it were, some three feet from the trunk, of
the tree, and each of these again forked a foot
farther on. Growing laterally, the twigs and
minor branches formed a perfect network of
stems, with the leaves so thick that it was
difficult to see through, and impossible for any
one to fall through them to the ground. The
branches which stood out all round were equally
dense, and I called out to the Hatter that I had
found a place where we could almost stow the
camels.
Climbing on to the boughs I lowered my
line, which he made fast to one end of the
ladder, and I soon had it up. The other end
lay on the ground in a coil, so I clambered up
to the second tier of branches and made my end
fast there. Then I called out to the Hatter
to come up.
He came up and inspected.
“ We’ll fix our camp up here,” he said, “ and
I reckon all the bunyips in the world won’t
reach us.”
The sun was getting down towards the
horizon, so that we had not much time. We
made the most of it, however, and when it went
down, we had all our ammunition and blankets
up in our nest, besides food and water, to last
us for a day or so. While we still had light


we bent some of the boughs so as to enable us
to have a clear view of the ground and the pool
below us.
The moon was at the full, and as the sun
went out of sight it rose. Out on the desert
we could see our camels grouped together and
crouched down as if asleep. The pool, lit up
into a silver sheen, rested unruffled below us,
and between the dense foliage of the trees the
moonlight streamed upon an open patch of
closely growing grass immediately in front of
our look-out holes. Everywhere else the
shadow was impenetrable.
We had taken a hasty meal, and now lay prone
upon our blankets, with rifles ready, waiting and
watching for anything which might eventuate.
The subdued tinkle of the falling water was
the only sound to be heard, and the weird
stillness of the scene was beginning to affect
me more than I appreciated, when suddenly
we heard a heavy grating noise from somewhere
in the darkness beyond the trees.
The Hatter touched me, and I turned my
face towards him.
“ There’s something in the air I can’t make
out,” he whispered.
“ Where ? ” I asked in the same tone, and
looking quickly round.
4


“ Nothing to see,” he answered. “ I feel it.
Oh, look there ! ”
I peered through my loophole, and felt the
blood run cold in my veins.
Beyond the glare of the moonlight upon the
open patch I have spoken of, and through the
black shadow on the far side of it, there came
a faint greenish phosphorescence which increased
slowly and spread as if the source of it were
coming nearer. It lit up the trees and made
even the grass distinct in its horrible ghostly
flicker. Then in the centre of it there appeared
a form which I shall never forget as long as I
live.
Luminous with the greenish phosphorescence,
and striding along with a majestic carriage that
would alone have been awe-inspiring, was the
form of a woman. Even from the place where
we lay we could see that she was of enormous
proportions, and the utter absence of drapery
of any kind, together with the sombre depths
of the shadow beyond her, made her appear
really taller than she was. Her skin showed
through the unearthly light like polished brass,
and her eyes, which were wide open and gazing
straight in front of her, gleamed like those of
a cat.
I shuddered as I looked, and felt my flesh


Creep and the very marrow of my bones turn
cold. The Hatter gripped me tight by the arm,
“ The Yellow Woman! ” he whispered
hoarsely.
Across the open space she walked, the lumin-
ous sheen fading as she came into the full light
of the moon, but the fire in her eyes burning
more brightly and more horribly than it had
done in the dark.
At the edge of the pool she stopped, and,
raising her arms above her head, she shook
down a mass of hair that twisted and curled
round her in a red wreathing cloak extending
below her knees, and, to my mind, making
her still more unearthly and fearful.
Silent she stood, as if waiting for something,
while we, too startled to move, lay and gazed
down upon her.
Presently she turned and uttered a cry in
a voice that pierced the air like a shrill shriek-
ing steam whistle. A sound more hideously,
horribly fiendish, it would be difficult to imagine.
Again we heard the harsh grating sound
and directly afterwards a peculiar pattering on
the ground. A moment later and a swarm of
figures ran from the shadows into the moon-
light and surrounded the woman. At first
they seemed to be small monkeys which scarcely


reached to her knees, but as we watched them
more closely we saw that they were men, small,
wizened, shrivelled-up men, and involuntarily
the expression of the Hatter’s blackfellow
came to my mind. They were moving and
living copies of sun-dried mummies!
She waved her arms, and the swarm scattered
round the pool until they stood, a ring of
withered gnomes, at the edge of the water.
She clapped her hands, and the figures,
stooping down as if impelled by one instinct,
began to beat the surface of the water with
both hands, so fast that it was soon a white
foaming cauldron.
Again she clapped her hands, and the beating
ceased, every little figure standing still and
silent, so still that we could hear the bubbles
bursting in a soft hissing sound.
The woman stood gazing intently upon the
pool until the last of the foam had vanished.
Then again she clapped her hands, and again
the throng of figures beat the water till it
frothed, and again she waited till the foam had
disappeared. Three times was the performance
repeated before she uttered a sound. Then as
the last bubble burst she spoke.
I do not know what she said, but with the
first word the Hatter exclaimed, “Ah.”


I suppose it was due to the strain upon my
nerves, and the intentness with which I had
been watching the scene, but the sound of the
Hatter’s voice startled me so suddenly that I
clutched my hands in sheer fright. I was
holding my rifle with a finger on the trigger,
and the result was a shot.
It rang out upon the night, the flash of the
powder gleamed in the dark, and the bullet
plunged into the middle of the pool. I heard
the Hatter make a startled exclamation, and
the rest was a wild nightmare.
The woman, turning her frightful eyes towards
our hiding-place, raised her arms to their full
length over her head with her fingers extended,
and uttered a long, low wail, that horrified me
and terrified me nearly to a stupor. The
swarm of pigmies scattered from the pool, and
ran hither and thither through the trees, making
inarticulate sounds that were as though an army
were gurgling in the last agonies of convulsions.
I felt the Hatter’s hand grip my wrist, and
in my ear I heard him whisper—
“ Fool, sleep.”
Then darkness fell upon me.
It seemed an age by the time that I recovered
my senses, although the Hatter told me it was
only a few minutes.


I heard his voice in my ear—
“ Lie still, and fear nothing.”
“All right,” I whispered back, and at once
I felt cool and collected.
Below me the woman still stood wailing, and
round and round the pool the pigmy figures
were pattering.
“ Listen,” the Hatter whispered again. “ I
think I know her language, and I’m going to
play a bold stroke.”
“ All right,” I answered. They were the
only words I seemed to know.
For the account of the following scene, so
far as the dialogue is concerned, I am entirely
indebted to my companion, the language in
which it was conducted being to me merely
an aimless babble of sounds, without accent,
rhythm, or anything else that distinguishes the
chatter of apes from human speech. The
Hatter told me afterwards that it was the
tongue of a tribe he had come across some-
where in the Pitchorie district, a tract of
country in North Australia, hundreds of miles
from anywhere save desert, where the blacks
find their much-valued narcotic, the pitchorie
plant.
Leaning over his loophole the Hatter called
out in a loud voice :


“ Who seeks the King of Night ? ”
The effect upon the woman was dramatic.
Her wail stopped at the instant, and, with her
horrible gleaming eye lifted up towards us, she
sank forward upon her knees, stretching out
her arms towards us. The pigmies arrested
their movements and fell down upon their
faces, and the night was calm and quiet as it
had been before they came.
“ Who seeks the King of Night ? ” the
Hatter cried out again.
“Nay, awful lord, I came but to seek him
of the silent pool,” the woman answered, her
eyes still gleaming towards us.
“You lie,” the Hatter cried angrily.
“ Nay, nay, most mighty one. It is the
time when the moon is full, and I come to
greet him who shares with me the burden of
the ages.”
“ If you speak truth, speak on and paint to
me the image of whom you speak.”
“ He, monarch of all pools and waters, last
of the race that sprang from the union of the
ruler of all men and the chosen of the reptiles.
He, who lives and has his realm in the streams
that flow beneath the earth ; his body clothed
in the scales of his mother’s kind ; half fashioned
like a man and half like a lizard of the pool.


He who comes but once in the lifetime of a
moon to view the world, where once his father
ruled, till the end shall come, and I shall find
the love for whom I languish, and he the way
to ceasless sleep.”
“ How name you him ? ”
“O mighty one, why ask? Was it not
spoken from the clouds when he came forth
in life, a word of terror to all men, to live
while he lived, to last while our people lasted,
and then to be a mockery in the mouths of
those who shall come to jeer our fallen power
and wrest the ruined fragments from our hold ? ”
“ Name him.”
The wail broke out again as the woman bowed
herself to the ground and writhed in an agony.
“ Need I speak again ? ” the Hatter cried.
She raised herself on her knees, pressing her
hands to her head and swaying to and fro.
“ O King of Night, forget not what it
means. His name from me portends his doom
and I shall be alone.”
“ Speak it or die.”
With a shriek that made every pigmy form
quiver, and cut my ears like a sting, she leaped
to her feet and rolled on the ground again as
she cried. “ Oh, no, not that, not that.”
“ Then speak,” the Hatter yelled.


She stood up again, her eyes flaring in a
fresh horror.
“ I name him. Bunyip ! ”
The pigmies seemed to shrink into yet
smaller and more repulsive forms at the
mention of the word, and she who uttered it
crouched down upon the ground till her wealth
of hair spread over her and hid the glaring
yellow skin from our eyes, while sobs shook
her frame and added still more to the weird,
unearthly spectacle below us.
“Go back from whence you came. Rest
hidden till the moon comes up again. Then
come here once more.”
She pushed back the hair from her face as
she looked up.
“ My destiny, O king,” she said.
“ Learn it then.”
With a cry she sprang to her feet, and the
pigmies, galvanised, as it were, into life by her
voice, jumped up and rushed away into the
shadows from whence they first appeared. She
waited till they had gone, and then, turning
towards our hiding place, she bowed seven
times to the ground before she followed her
army into the darkness.
Again we heard the grating sound, and then
the night was silent.


CHAPTER VI.
THE BUNYIP DIES.
“ Thank heaven, that’s over ? ” I exclaimed.
“ But it isn’t yet, my lad,” the Hatter said.
“ The blacks are right; there is a bunyip, and
I reckon we’re going to finish him.”
I was going to say something sceptical, when
the Hatter interrupted me. “ Look at the
pool,” he said.
Its calmness had gone, and the surface was
eddying and bubbling, as if a fire had been lit
beneath it and the water was just coming to
the boil.
“Keep your nerves steady, and be ready
to shoot,” the Hatter said quickly.
As he spoke there was a splash and a swirl
in the pool, and a monster rose to the surface,
almost more horrible than the Yellow Woman,
The head was that of a man, with huge shining
teeth showing through its mouth, and the eyes
green and phosphorescent, like those of our
recent visitor. The arms were long, and the


hands were shaped like the fore feet of a kan-
garoo, with long claws at the end of each
finger. Below the waist the limbs were formed
like those of a crocodile, and there was an
immense tail, frilled along the top with a double
row of jagged plates, shaped and standing up
like the teeth of a huge cross-cut saw. From
the neck downwards the creature was covered
with scales that glittered in the moonlight.
It swam to the edge of the pool, and dragged
itself out upon the grassy patch where the
Yellow Woman had stood, and, opening its
mouth, it gave vent to a laugh which seemed
to contain all the blood-curdling elements of
a thousand maniacal fiends.
“ Aim at its eyes, and fire,” the Hatter said,
his voice expressing the horror that he felt.
Our rifles spoke together, and the huge
beast rolled over and over on the grass, uttering
cries and sounds that were even more horrible
than its laugh.
“ Fire till he stops! ” the Hatter cried, and
we went at it as hard as our rifles would work,
till the form lay still where the moonlight
streamed over it.
“ Awful! Horrible !” I heard the Hatter say.
“ Another night like this and I’m a lunatic,
or dead,” I answered.


“ Bear up, my lad, we’re as good as million-
aires now; but that beast is hideous. Just
what the blacks always described it.”
“We are safe from interruptions till the
morning, so I think we might have a camp,”
he answered.
“ Sleep ! What, with that thing down there ? ”
I exclaimed. “ I might as well try to fly.”
The Hatter laughed.
“ All right, my lad,” he said. “ Then we’ll
try the bushman’s solace, and have a pipe. We
can discuss the situation.”
So we sat and smoked and yarned till the
dawn, arranging our course of action in the
meantime.
The Hatter interpreted to me all that had
passed between him and the Yellow Woman,
during the interview to which I had been a
silent and impressed witness.
“ Everything seems to corroborate the tale
told by that old blackfellow, and I really am
inclined to believe that there are boulders of
gold somewhere about this range,” he said.
“ But how are we to get at them ? The
rock is harder than chilled steel and, so far as
I could see, the range is as inaccessible as the
wall of a house.”
“ I noticed that, too,” he answered. “ But


you forget that grating noise we heard before
our lady friend appeared and after she had
gone.”
“ I certainly do not see what it has to do
with our getting over the range.”
“ That’s it. You see, you were rather taken
aback by the development of events; and I
do not wonder at it, for I’m not particularly
nervous myself, but I felt the strain all the
same. Still, perhaps, it is just as well, for that
shot of yours brought matters to a head and I
think gave us the advantage. But that’s neither
here nor there. What I was going to say is this;
I imagine that there is some secret entrance to
a pass which leads into the range. That pass
is probably hidden by a mechanical contrivance,
and the grating sound we heard is caused by the
working of it.”
I laughed aloud.
“You don’t seriously mean to say that you
regard those pigmy creatures as capable of
constructing anything mechanical, do you ?
Why even the best of the blacks ”
“ Understand the principles of the boomerang,
an instrument that puzzled our great scientists
till they were told how it was done,” he inter-
rupted.
“ Yes ; but they are not mechanics,” I said.


“ My lad, we don’t know what they are, let
alone what they have been,” he said seriously.
“ The aboriginals in their present state are
mysterious enough, but the race we are now
dealing with surpasses anything that I ever
heard of.”
“ Well, supposing there is a secret door or
entrance through the rock, how are we going to
find it out, and what are we going to do when
we have found it ?” I asked. The Hatter had
a solemn way of talking when he started on
the aboriginal topic, and could bring out so
many strange and forcible arguments on his
side of the question that I knew it was no use
my continuing the discussion. What I wanted
to see was the gold, and what I wanted to do
was to get back to civilisation with it as soon as
possible. I had had more than enough of
uncanny experiences.
The Hatter smoked for some minutes before
he answered my queries.
“That is just the problem I’m trying to
solve,” he said at length. “ I’ll tell you my
idea and then we can discuss it in detail.”
He unfolded his plan, and as I listened I
was amazed at the extraordinary fertility of his
mental resources. What would have taken
me years to evolve he reeled off as fast as he


could speak, and sometimes faster than I could
understand.
“ What a genius you are! ” I exclaimed
when he had finished.
“Nonsense!” he answered. “What has
already occurred is the basis of my idea, and
I merely elaborate the possibilities arising there-
from, Do you agree with my scheme ? ”
“ Indeed I do,” I answered, and, as it worked
out without a hitch, I will not anticipate, but
content myself with describing it in the order
of its unfolding.
With the dawn we descended from our nest
and cautiously approached the horrible creature
we had killed during the night. Our caution
was unnecessary, for it was stone dead, with
bullet-holes all over it. Closer inspection
showed it to be even more repulsive than it had
appeared to be when first it rose to the surface
of the pool, and it was a relief when, in accord-
ance with the Hatter’s scheme, we covered it
over with a blanket and hid its gruesome
proportions from our sight. Upon the blanket
we scattered grass and leaves until that too
was hidden.
We next turned our attention to our camels,
They were still huddled into a group away
out on the desert, where we had seen them the


previous night, and, failing in our endeavours
to lead them back to the grass, we had to cut
and carry some of it out to where they were.
Having attended to their wants, we satisfied
our own, and then proceeded to follow along
the track our visitors had made through the
scrub. As the Hatter had foreseen, it ended
at what to all appearances was a solid wall of
rock.
“ Now for our preparations,” the Hatter
exclaimed, when we had satisfied ourselves that
we could never hope to find out by ourselves
how that rock moved. We returned to the
pool and worked steadily till the sun was well
overhead, and with everything arranged to
our satisfaction for the evening’s performance
of what the Hatter termed our one-act comedy,
we climbed up to our nest and took advantage
of the opportunity to make up for the loss of
the previous night’s sleep.
The sun was sinking in the west when the
Hatter awakened me, and together we sat and
waited for the moon to rise and the Yellow
Woman to come. To me the time seemed
to drag, until minutes grew to hours, and my
nerves were strained to their utmost long before
we heard the, grating noise which indicated the
approach of the unearthly-looking creature we


awaited. The Hatter leaned over to me and
whispered :
“ You must be perfectly cool and collected.”
“ I’ll try,” I answered uneasily.
“ You must,” he hissed in my ear, and I
felt my heart grow steady. It was well that
he had strength of will enough for both.
“ Aim over her heart, but keep your finger
off the trigger until I cry out; then fire,” he
said, just as the gleam of phosphorescent light
glimmered through the trees.
A moment later the weird, majestic form
appeared, and walked almost on to the blanket
that covered the other horror.
“Stand and wait,” the Hatter cried out in
the—to me—meaningless jargon.
Immediately she stopped, and I, resting my
rifle along the boughs, took a careful and steady
aim.
“Who am I ” the Hatter asked.
“The King of Night,” she answered, turning
her ghastly eyes up towards our hiding place.
“ Why come you ? ”
“O mighty one, was I not promised that
to-night I should learn my destiny ? I have
come, as you commanded, to learn. O mighty
one, speak on.”
Her eyes were almost pathetic as she spoke
5


and, extending her arms towards us, she sank
down upon her knees.
“ First, must you see him whom you named
to me,” the Hatter cried, and, pulling a line
we had fastened to the blanket, he scattered the
leaves and the grass, and exposed the dead
horror to the woman’s gaze.
The agony of the cry with which she
greeted it made my heart bleed for her. Her
unearthly surroundings and appearance were for
the moment forgotten in the perfectly human
anguish she displayed.
She had fallen forward upon the body, and
was moaning piteously.
“ Seek you to know your destiny,” he cried.
She raised her face towards us, and the misery
written upon it was too real for us to doubt
the profundity of her grief.
“Oh ! what is my destiny to the loss of the
companion of centuries and the solace of my
solitude ? ” she answered, and buried her face
in her hands.
“ Listen and know. Weep while you may,
for in a vision shall even now appear before
you the image of your lord. Strive not to
touch him or you die. Before you he shall
rise. His eyes shall see you and his ears shall
hear you, but his mouth shall be closed. From


afar he comes to seek you. Tell him then
your history. Unfold to him the secret of the
rock, and, as a token and a guide, when the
vision is before you, go to your myrmidons
and bid them build above the dead one a pile
of the shining yellow stones that lie within the
wall.”
She listened as he spoke, her eyes gleaming
and flickering, and when he ceased she looked
around.
“ O mighty one, where comes the vision ?
1 see it not.”
“ Weep while you may,” the Hatter answered;
and she, looking down upon the lifeless creature
again, renewed her lamentations, spreading her
hair about her and hiding her face from sight.
Silently the Hatter lowered the ladder, and
climbing down, crept along to the opposite
side of the pool. With my heart thumping
against my ribs I waited until he stood full in
the moonlight, his magnificent form drawn up
to its full height, his face raised towards the
light, and his arms folded across his chest.
Then, with my right hand on my rifle, ready
to fire if necessary, and my gaze fixed upon
the woman, I reached out with my other hand
to where my revolver was strapped to the branch
and pulled the trigger.


With a scream of mingled fear and rage the
woman sprang to her feet, her eyes glaring up
towards me. Then, as if controlled by some
subtle power, she looked across the pool to
where the Hatter stood. For a moment she
stood as if carved in stone.
Throwing wide open her arms, she took one
step forward, her face transformed by the look
of ineffable love that swept over it.
“My love, my life! Ah ! come to me,”
she cried, and I, fearing she might forget the
Hatter’s warning and rush towards him, brought
my rifle to bear upon her heaving breast, at
the same time giving vent to the best imitation
I could produce of what I thought a god-like
growl of disapprobation ought to be.
Without removing her gaze from the Hatter,
she said (so he told me afterwards),
“ O mighty one, fear not. I will not seek
to touch the vision.”
But she looked at it—looked until I thought
she was never going to speak or move again—
and all the time the Hatter stood like a statue,
“ Loved one, who seek for me, knowing not
my resting place, keep wide your ears that I
may teach you where to find me, how to know
me—even though you come from whence the
anger came that doomed our race to woe.”


With many movements and a wealth of
dramatic action, but always with her gaze fixed
upon him, she told, without a pause, the follow-
ing extraordinary story to the Hatter:—
“ Loved one, I am Tor Ymmothe, the Queen
of Lemuria. -
“ Once, where those deserts lie, waved fair
gardens. Mighty, palaces rose from amidst the
scented forests, and we, a mighty people, knew
of nothing mightier. Only the sun scorned
our bidding and the moon ignored our man-
dates, and the king, my father, hurled at them
his wrath.
“From afar there came a stranger, a man
whose skin was not as ours, but yet who spoke
with our tongue. He came before the king,
my father, and rebuked him. He, the unknown
stranger, rebuked the king, my father, who
was the king of kings.
“ Thus he spake : ‘ King, only a man thou
art; different from the beasts ; distinct from
the trees ; unlike the creatures of the pool.
Yet only a man, sharing with them the govern-
ment of time and the monarchy of death.’
“ And the king, my father, laughed, and
those around him laughed, as he said, ‘ If I am
but a man, I will create that which shall be more
than man, for he shall rule both on the earth


and in the pool, and when he comes your blood
shall bathe his baby face.’
“ That which lies before me is the image that
the king, my father, made. But when they
poured the heart blood of that stranger on his
baby face a voice came from the clouds that
swept throughout the land, and gave forth a
doom and a curse to last while the image lived,
and until that stranger came again to liberate
our souls.
“ At the sound of that voice, the king, my
father, died in agony. The palaces fell down,
and the gardens and the scented forests faded
away to dust. Fire swept the earth ; water
roared around us. Mountains sank into sand,
and when the rage was over only this one pool
remained, only these few trees escaped of all
the gardens of the king’s palace ; only the
ruined wall which lies beyond the trees is left
of that mighty home.
“ I and the image lived, our doom revealed
—he to haunt both pool and earth, a horror
and a fear to all men ; I to wait, fed by the
vital force of every creature born around me,
until there should come again the stranger,
thou, my loved one, who would slay the image
and release me from my deathless bond.
“ Hasten to me ; hasten over the sands and


wastes that lie between us ; hasten with your
love that will alone beat back the fury of
the past.
“ Here, above the image, I will raise a pile
of yellow stones to guide you over the desert.
When you see them you will know that you
are near me,
“ Wait but a moment, and see the pile I’ll
build.”
She turned and hastened away through the
darkness, and the Hatter ran to the ladder and
climbed up beside me, pulling it after him.
His face gleamed white in the dim light, and
his hand as it touched mine was deathly cold.
He was scarcely up when she returned,
followed by a swarm of pigmies. She looked
about quickly, and then turned her eyes
towards us.
Speaking with a tremor in his voice, the
Hatter said :
“ He whom you seek has vanished from your
sight. He stands afar off searching for the
yellow stones.”
She spoke to the pigmies around her, and
it was as if a vast ant-hill had emptied out its
myriads. Thousands of the little creatures
poured in an endless stream across the patch
of moonlight until the grass was hidden and


the gigantic figure of the woman towered above
a seething sea of black, moving life. Each one
as he came from the shadow carried what
looked to me like yellow bricks, which he
threw down upon the prostrate form of the
bunyip until, as we watched, the pile grew
higher and higher, and the last of the hideous
creature was hidden. Still the swarming
thousands worked, and the yellow heap came
to a point. Then they laid their burdens on
the ground, retiring, as the yellow pathway
grew, farther into the shade. At length there
were none in view, and the Yellow Woman
stood alone.
“ Tell him, O mighty one, that it is done,
and I await his coming,” she said, looking up
again.
“He comes on the wings of the wind.
Await him within the secret gate, nor let it
open till he calls,” the Hatter answered.
She smiled towards us, and stretching out
her arms, bowed to the ground seven times
before she turned and walked along the shin-
ing yellow path into the shadows.


CHAPTER VII.
THE CRY OF THE SOUTHERN LAND.
It was gold—all solid, rich blocks of bright,
gleaming gold—and we were rich beyond the
madness of avarice, for in that heap and along
that pathway there were tons and tons of it.
In a fever of excitement I urged the Hatter
to load up the camels and start away at once,
and then come back again with hundreds of
camels and take all our gold away.
“ Our gold,” I shouted; “ our tons and
tons of gold.”
He was disgustingly unaffected.
“ One camel load is more than you will ever
spend,” he answered. “ Let us leave some-
thing of her token to ease her sorrow through
the ”
He broke off and turned aside. I looked at
him amazed. Had it been other than the calm-
minded Hatter, I should have said he broke off
with a sob.


“We had better camp till the dawn,” he
went on.
“Why, there’s the sun coming up now,” I
cried, pointing to the glowing east.
He had been the unquestioned leader of our
little party up to that morning, but the events
of the previous night had had a terrible effect
upon him, and I had to assume command over
him before he was inclined to do anything. I
only had one idea, and that was to load up all
we could of the gold on our five camels and
start at once for settled country. My en-
thusiasm revived him to a certain extent, for
I was going to sacrifice everything for the gold,
and even leave food and water behind so as to
give each of the camels a full load of the yellow
bricks instead.
The Hatter objected to that. A camel for
each of us, we carrying food and water beside
us, was the arrangement he proposed, the other
three to be loaded with gold, and, to hasten
our departure, I agreed. When the sun was
sinking in the west that night only a faint blue
line on the horizon told us where the ruined
wall of the Lemurian Palace guarded its in-
calculable wealth of bullion.
Steadily we journeyed on, the Hatter re-
covering his former manner as we gradually


approached near to civilisation and left the
mystery of the Yellow Woman farther and
farther behind. Soon we ceased almost to
speak of her, or the dead bunyip resting
beneath his imperial tomb of wealth.
We had a more fascinating subject—the
future. We tried to calculate our riches. I
hazarded half a million between us, but the
Hatter laughed at the idea.
“ You’ll be a millionaire all right, my lad,”
he said. But I did not understand his meaning
then.
We reached timbered country in course of
time, without any adventures worth mentioning,
and a few days later picked up the track of a
dray. Now a new difficulty presented itself to
us. How were we going to get our gold
disposed of in safety?
To let it be known that we were ’driving a
gold-laden team would be to bring upon our
heels every man in the district, and, besides
running the risk of having our riches stolen
from us, would subject us to an amount of
questioning that would make our lives a burden
to us. We debated the point long and
earnestly, and at last decided that in the
morning the Hatter should follow along the
dray track till he came up with some one who


could tell him where we were, and which way
we were to travel to reach the nearest township
with a bank in it. In the meantime I was to
camp with the team.
He was away two days, and when he got
back it was with the news that we were within
a few days’ ride of Coolgardie.
“ That will suit us just as well as anywhere
else,” he said. “We can arrange to get the
stuff into the bank without letting any one
know till it’s in, and then we can spin them
yarns about the ranges in the south-east.”
So we arranged it, and once more we had
luck with us; for the day we rode into the flat,
straggling, fever-stricken camp -of Coolgardie
most of the miners were away at a reported
wonderful discovery to the north, where men
could make their five ounces a day at dry
blowing. We had all our stuff weighed and
banked before they came back, cursing the man
who first spread the rumour. We left that
night for Perth, and by the time that our
deposit became public news we were far enough
away to escape from the badgering and ques-
tioning we should have had to face had we
remained in the township. As it was, our
deposit went to swell the total amount of gold
won on the field, and, I dare say, played no


inconsiderable part in the flotation of many a
Coolgardic property upon distant markets, and
amongst sublimely trusting investors.
We hastened on to Perth, and from there
to Albany, where we joined a mail steamer
bound for Adelaide, The previous occasion
of my being in that interesting city of churches
was when I was poor and unknown. Now I
was the proud possessor of a deposit receipt
for over a million sterling and in banking
circles, at all events, a person of much interest.
We made ourselves as comfortable as our
wealth enabled us to, the Hatter insisting,
however, upon avoiding all suggestion of os-
tentation. I fear I should have done what the
Americans term “ spread myself ” if he had not
been with me, but as all the money was banked
in my name (he still remaining the Hatter)
and I had to act as treasurer in meeting all our
bills, it went against my conscience to force any
expenditure upon him, or rather his money.
The next question that we considered was
where we should go to spend our princely
incomes to the best advantage, for I never
looked upon what we had brought away with
us as our capital. The golden pile beside that
silent pool across the desert was too prominently
before my eyes for that.


We discussed the matter frequently and
lengthily before anything was decided upon, the
Hatter insisting that to purchase a good station
and settle down as squatters was the best course
to adopt, while I was equally persistent in
urging a visit to Europe, and, to use a
colonialism, having a “ fair old tear round.”
It was no easy task to persuade my comrade to
come to my way of thinking, and I had almost
despaired of ever doing so when, one day, he
announced his acceptance of my scheme.
A two-berth cabin was at once secured in
one of the mail steamers which would shortly
be passing the Semaphore on her way to
London, and for the sake of convenience, we
journeyed down from Adelaide on the day she
was to arrive, proposing to have our last dinner
on Australian soil at the hotel which overlooks
the roadstead.
The Hatter had interested me more than
ever of late. His reputation as a wealthy man,
combined with his magnificent physique and
handsome appearance, made him a notable and
popular figure amongst the Adelaide people,
especially with those of the feminine persuasion.
He was continually in request, and had he been
so minded, the fairest of South Australia’s
daughters would have mated with him for the


asking. But he never asked. In the midst of
his admirers, he was always diffident and
reserved, and his very coldness added zest to
the paying of homage to him, until I sometimes
feared that he, being a man, could no longer
resist, and that I should, after all, voyage to
England alone.
We had finished our dinner and sat smoking
and thinking in silence, our minds too full, I
suppose, for conversation. From our window
we could see on one side the wide, smooth bay,
with ships lying at anchor, and beyond them
the faint blue shade of Kangaroo Island away
on the horizon ; on the other side, the ranges
around and behind Adelaide stood out in
purple distinctness, and towards the west the
sky was growing lurid with the colour of the
setting sun.
“ This is our last meal together here,” he ;
said suddenly.
“ Till we come back,” I laughed, in answer.
He looked at me steadily for a minute or so
with those great solemn eyes of his.
“ You’ve been a good mate, Dick, my lad,
and I thank you for it.”
I glanced at his face, wondering what he was
going to say next,
“ I mean you never tried to get beyond


the mystery of the Hatter,” he said, with a
smile.
“ I took you at your word, and I don’t regret
it either,” I answered.
“ And now I’m going to redeem it,” he went
on. “ Never mind dates and names, but before
I came to this country I was known by a name
which you will find emblazoned in English
history for centuries back. I held a title which
was amongst the proudest, if not amongst the
highest, in the land—and I dragged it to the
gutter.”
He stopped with a heavy frown on his brows,
and I held my peace, waiting for him to go
on.
“ I came here with one idea, to amass wealth
and go back and regild the shrine I had
stripped.”
“ And you can do it,” I exclaimed.
“Yes, I can do it; but I do not want to
now.”
“ Don’t want to ? ” I echoed.
“ No, my lad, don’t want to, and don’t mean
. y>
to.
“ But our cabin ”
“You use it alone.”
“ Then there’s the money. It is all in my
name.”


“And will remain so. You will use that,
»»
too.
“ Oh, but I I began impatiently,
“My lad, you do not understand,” he in-
terrupted, “My mind is made up. All that
we have brought down here is yours entirely
and absolutely. To-night we part; you to
voyage to other countries, I to remain in
Australia. Don’t try to persuade me to change
my mind. It is impossible.”
“ But why ? ” I asked.
He smiled as he answered me.
“ In memory of our companionship I will tell
you. In this country there is a woman ”
“ Ah ! ” I exclaimed.
“Whom I love,” he continued. “Where
she is I must be. I cannot leave her. Where
she waits, there must I go, surrendering all
else, forgetting all else, to dree my weird and
hers.”
A light broke in upon me. Leaping from
my chair I cried, “ Not ”
“Tor Ymmothe, Queen of Lemuria,” he
answered quietly.
I stood speechless. Such an idea had never
crossed my mind. A hundred fancies throbbed
through my brain and whirled my senses into
confusion. Dimly I felt him take my hand,
6


and saw his eyes, lit with a strange and
wonderful glow, looking into mine.
“ To liberate her from the thraldom I have
imposed ; to lift the curse of ages from her
soul ; to bring back the breath of life once
more to those who, with her, are doomed, I go
—for life, for love, for destiny.”
He stood between me and the window, and
the rich red light of the blazing west streamed
round him as I looked.
“ Do not seek to change me ; do not waste
words or reasons,” he went on, speaking slowly
and softly. “ The desire has been with me
since I gave her that promise. I have fought
with it, and tried to conquer it, but in vain.
A man may not cheat his destiny.”
“You cannot go back now,” I exclaimed.
“ We are mates to the end.”
“And the end is not yet,” he interrupted.
“To-night we part; perhaps for ever, perhaps
for a time only. You will go to Europe and
enjoy the fortune you have made ; I will go—
where destiny decrees.”
“ But it Is folly; blind, senseless folly. You
can never reach that place alone. Come with
me now; and in a year, if you wish it, we will
come back together. You must think of
your ”


I have thought,” he answered quickly.
“ No; you have only been dreaming. It is
only some fancy that has taken possession of
you. A change of scene will destroy it. The
sight of your old home, of your old friends,
will show you the folly of it.”
“ Where is my old home ? Where are my
old friends ? ” he said, with a ring of sadness
in his voice. “ Who can say that all are not in
the bygone remnant of Lemuria ? ”
“ Nonsense,” I exclaimed curtly.
“And maybe your own as well,” he continued,
I laughed as he spoke.
“I certainly do not remember them,” I said.
“No ; men do not remember through the
mists of ages while the scales of blindness are
on their eyes ; but sometimes the scales fall,
and then they see and understand.”
A remark more tinged with levity than meta-
physics rose to my lips, but before I could utter
it he took my hand in his.
“ Good-bye,” he said softly. “ Somewhere
and sometime we shall meet again, as we have
met before, at destiny’s decree. Till then,
farewell.”
An eerie sense stole over me, and drove back
the inclination to laugh and jest at him. It
was as though I had suddenly become enveloped


in a mist, through which I vainly strove to
look. Then I turned to answer him—but he
was gone.
I hastened from the room to seek him, but
my efforts were useless. I sought him in the
hotel and out of it, without the slightest success.
The steamer was leaving in the morning, and
when I failed to find him I posted to Adelaide,
in the hopes of finding him there. Throughout
the night I searched, but always in vain ; and
at last I abandoned the chase and went on board
the steamer.
Now, a year later, in the metropolis of the
world, surrounded by every luxury that wealth
can command, I am restless and impatient.
From over the miles of water that lie between
me and the far-off Southern Land, the voices
of the lonely bush are calling; the scent of the
eucalypt comes in memory to my nostrils, and
I pant and long for just one breath of the hot,
dry air of the free and glorious land. Visions
of “ golden-haired September,” when the
wattles gleam and spangle through the scanty-
foliaged gums, and the dill-birds call and answer
from the shadows of the scrub, pass through
my yearning brain, and I long for the lonely
freedom of the old rough life again. Just one
glimpse of a dusty track, with the blazing sun


overhead ; a throat growing dry, and a skin
tanned and moist; a reckless, careless future
ahead, and a jumbled past behind—it’s a vaga-
bond life, but it is a life, and I would give all
London’s joys for just such a glimpse and a
billy of tea shared with a mate on the road.
It comes back to me now, clearer and more
assertive than ever. To check it I wrote this
yarn—and now it is stronger than before. Is
it the weird attraction of that strangely sombre
land or the will of the Hatter that is drawing
me ? In the midst of revelry and feasting it
comes to me ; when I am alone it controls me
—this fierce, wild longing to go back.
Surely I, too, do not love the Queen of
Lemuria ?


CHAPTER VIII.
THROUGH THE MISTS OF TIME.
Another year has passed since I vainly strove
to ease the longing of my heart by writing of
all that had led up to it.
The world has gone on spinning along its
predestined route like some great top humming
its way through space, carrying with it that
load of mystery and marvel which we call life ;
spinning and humming just as it has been doing
through asons of time, always with the same
speed and the same buzz, while we have opened
our eyes and shut them and opened them again
and wondered. Two little glimpses at the
pulsing and throbbing of a little balance in
the machinery of the universe ; and we rub our
eyes and wonder.
Once more I look back, this time from a
place farther along the track of time. For
since the day when, rich with the gold brought
from the pyramid built above the slaughtered
ogre of Australian pre-historic life, I pined and


longed and fretted for the lonely bush, I have
been once more to the secret, desert-surrounded
range ; have seen once more the remnant of a
people who lived in power and splendour while
yet the Alps lay fathoms deep beneath a sea
that now no longer rolls; and have learned
that which for ever has dispelled my faith in
my own power for good or ill, save when
guided and controlled by the pre-ordered
destiny of fate.
It was upon the anniversary of my first
return to England that, 4n order to battle
with the persistent longing to journey again
to Australia and look upon the terrible fascina-
tions of the Yellow Queen once more, I wrote
down the story of my first experiences within
her territory. For a brief while I had relief,
but only for a brief while. Then the longing
came afresh upon me in a constant fretful
anxiety to get away from all that which should
have pleased and charmed, and voyage away
to the rough and ready existence inseparable
from exploring among the deserts of Central
Australia,
It is unnecessary to enter into the full detail
of my struggle to retain what I felt I was
gradually losing, for although there was the
ever-present subtle influence urging me to leave


England, I was yet loth to go. But in the
end I was vanquished, and a happiness I had
not known for years came to me as I stood
on the deck of an outward-bound steamer
going down the Thames, and heard the
“ coo-ees ” with which the crew of a sailing
ship greeted us from their airy positions in the
rigging as we steamed past them.
From the Thames to the Suez Canal the
voyage, so far as I was concerned, was a pleasant
lapse of time, and with the knowledge that
every day brought me nearer and nearer the
land of my attraction, I was free from every
kind of mental activity and merely existed in
a state of dull slothful content. So entirely
was I under the influence of this lethargic
enthraldom, that I did not even think how I
was to act when I arrived at my immediate
destination of Adelaide. I was living in a
perfect fool’s paradise until we reached the
Suez Canal. Then I was awakened and came
out of my content with a rush and a wrench,
to know a restless dissatisfaction which hovered
over me as a threatening demon, overshadowing
all else, until I found and lost and found again
the talisman it could not face.
We had arrived at Port Said, that home of
jumbled nationalities, alike only in their degree


of wickedness, late in the evening. The lights
of the town glared and blazed as we came to
our moorings off the retaining wall above the
Custom House, and the passengers trooped
down the companion-way over the side, as soon
as the vessel made fast, into the shore boats
that swarmed round us.
For several hours the ship would be delivered
over to the throng of shouting, begrimed Arabs,
who were already waiting in the great coal-
lighters to carry on board our supplies of fuel
which was to serve us till we reached Colombo.
There was not much attraction to keep one on
board with all the port-holes closed and the air
filled with fine coal dust, but for me there was
less ashore and I made myself as comfortable as
I could right away aft, and sat and watched the
scene of coaling by night.
The lighters came alongside with great blazing
braziers at each corner, and the Arabs in grimy
groups standing around them. A pandemonium
of shouting and yelling told when they made
fast and ran out the long planks up on to the
deck, for the men to trot up with their loads
and down with their empty baskets. I watched
them as they started. Some one of the number
began a mournful wailing chant in minor
semitones, the chorus of which was taken up by


the remainder of the men on the lighter, while
on the other side of the vessel the crew of the
other lighter sought in a similar wailing song a
stimulus for their labours.
The glare from the braziers tinted the
hurrying, wailing, dust-grimed figures with bold
glints of ruddy colour, as they worked amidst
the clouds of coal dust, or trotted up and
down the planks into the cold, brighter gleam
of the electric light, varying their dismal chants
occasionally with strange discordant shouts and
ejaculations as one of their number did not
move quickly enough, or was too energetic, for
the steady trot on the planks, and so brought
upon himself the anathemas of his fellows.
They wore but scanty attire ; short fluttering
shirts on their bodies, and over their heads,
loosely wound strips of heavy cloth. The coal
dust gathered on their raiment and sparkled in
the varying lights, but threw the shade into a
misty, weird, unsubstantial dimness. There
was a suggestiveness of the unearthly In all they
did, and as their sad, monotonous chant fell
upon my ears, there came to me the picture of
the pigmy hordes who swarmed from behind
that mysterious rock In the distant desert range.
Only that the Arabs were of a larger build,
they might have passed for a kindred race, so


imp-like and ghoulish did they look as they
toiled and chanted—the remnant of an ancient
race doing the menial work of the later con-
queror. Throughout the night they worked
with an untiring energy that was worthy a
higher task, until the dawn came up, and in the
grey mist they became still more of the ghoul
and less of the man. Then I left them and
retired to my cabin to get what sleep I could.
By midday we had taken in as much coal as
we needed, and were able to let go the shore-
lines and steam slowly into the canal. It was
a hot day, fierce in sun-glare, and with a dry
scorching wind blowing from over the stretches
of Egyptian desert, which made the upper deck
of the steamer a place to be avoided. My
cabin was fortunately on the port or lee side of
the ship, and as I had it entirely to myself, I
found it more pleasant to remain in, revelling
in the freedom of deshabille.
I was stretched out on my bunk, lazy and
indifferent, when I heard the telegraph bell ring
in the engine room and immediately afterwards
the faint throb of the slowly revolving screw
ceased. Then the stream of air which, while
the vessel was moving, was directed into my
cabin by the windsail of the porthole, ceased ; I
raised myself on to my elbow and glanced out


at the bank of the canal, and saw that we were
stationary.
“ Some vessel going to pass us, I suppose,” I
dreamily thought before I Jay back again, in
order to drift once more into the lazy indiffer-
ence I had been in before the sound of the
telegraph bell disturbed me. But the fascina-
tion of lethargy had departed, and in its place
there had come a feverish restlessness which
annoyed while yet it mastered me. For some
minutes I turned and twisted from side to side,
striving to regain the comfortable ease of my
former position. But my senses refused to
slumber and my muscles seemed to have become
suddenly galvanised as they twitched and
quivered. Impatiently I swung myself out of
bunk and stood on the floor of the cabin, and
then, without a reason or a thought, I drew in
the windsail from the porthole and put out my
head instead.
Immediately below me the limpid waters of
the canal, reflecting in perfection the clear
faultless blue of the sky overhead, rippled from
the side of the vessel away to the dull yellow
mound of sand which formed the bank of the
canal on the Asian side—scarcely twenty yards
away. From thence the sandy desert stretched
away in a monotonous waste of drear sombre


yellow as far as I could see, until it reached
and became lost in the faint blue haze of
distance. Here and there the ground undu-
lated, or rose into rugged barren ridges, upon
the tops of which the sun glared and burned,
and scorched into the eyes as they caught the
reflection.
The porthole was only large enough to
permit of my head passing through, and my
body was invisible to me ; only the black side
of the vessel appeared when I looked down-
wards towards where my feet were ; only the
black side of the vessel and the limpid blue
water of the canal, growing pale and green
as it came against the ship’s side.
As I gazed across the water and over the
barren sandy waste beyond, a terror came upon
me ; for it was as though I, the sentient,
feeling being, saw, felt and knew while yet I
had no sense-cognisance of either limbs or
body. And a fear came upon me, a fear which
was part of a horror and a terror of absolute
negation and personal eradication; such a fear
as might come to a man when he has drawn
in his last breath, and realises that he still lives
and has his being, though his heart has ceased to
beat, his lungs to breathe, and his brain to act.
A feeling of being and yet not being ; a sense


of existence without all those tokens which give
security and reality to existence ; an emotion
of wonder which changes in a fraction of a
second into a fear which snaps and ends with
a shock that almost breaks one’s consciousness
into atoms and then—why, then peace.
By the measurement of time the whole
experience did not possibly cover more than
a second ; but it was as a lifetime to me, and
now, a year after, every detail is clear in my
memory.
The terror passed as it had come, and after
it there came the sense of peace, of calm
unruffled peace, which nothing could disturb
or injure.
Thoughts rushed through my brain and
glimpses of knowledge came to me with all
the overwhelming force of absolute conviction,
and I felt and understood the reality of things
I had not even dreamed about before.
The sandy desert before my eyes was some-
thing more than dull dead sand. It was as
though a memory were stored within it, a
memory which was shared by every grain of
dry inorganic dust, and a memory that was
visible and knowable to me in my then state,
as the ordinary physical manifestation had been
to my visual faculties when first I gazed upon


jt. There were intangible suggestions, as frail
and unsubstantial to my physical self as a
scarcely remembered dream within a dream one
sometimes has ; but to this new emancipated
self even the flimsiest of the dream-shreds was
concrete reality.
Writing now, when the drama is concluded
of which this was the preliminary scene, and
in view of all that subsequently transpired, I
cannot refrain from mentally inquiring whether
it was not all the hallucination of an ill-balanced
mind. Surely such things could not be ; surely
the memory of my adventures is only a de-
lusion, a trick of an affected brain. And I look
around the room in which I write and have my
answer, for on all sides I have evidence of
great wealth, and the only means I have had of
acquiring that wealth have been those which
came to me out of the prosecution of that
adventurous career which began with the ex-
perience I am describing. There is no more
convincing witness than a big bank balance ;
a man must know that he is not dreaming when
he can satisfy himself that such soulless, un-
imaginative institutions as Joint Stock Bank-
ing Companies endorse and substantiate his
“ dream.”
It were as though I were at some point in


the immeasurable area of space from whence
I could look forward and backward ; forward
through the mists of eternity; backward
through the asons of time. There was no
limit as to the range of my vision ; no measure-
ment as to the scope of my knowledge. The
ages of the past, vague, shadowy and unsub-
stantial as the remnants of dispersing mists, were
as close to me as the life of a second ago, or
the intense mystery of the formless future.
For an instant I wavered as to the direction
in which I should turn the force of my new-
found energies. Then a fancy passed through
me, not in words, but in sense only, for until
I recalled it later and clothed it in material
thought, it was without words.
“ Let the future wait ; the record is in the
past,” was the form the fancy took in words,
and so I formed it and fashioned my demand
upon the will and impulse of the moment.
“ Let the past be clear,” I cried mentally,
“ Let me know the bygone record.”
At once before me there rolled, in tumultu-
ous confusion, a mass of visionary scenes and
panoramas of pomps and splendours, until my
senses whirled into a dizziness. From out
the tangled blur there rose one scene clear and
individual, surpassing in its loveliness ; a scene


of landscape rich in the modulated glories of
colour and graceful oudine. Stately white
buildings glistened in the sunlight ; majestic
trees, smothered in blossoms of delicate tints,
waved their branches in the air and spread
abroad the sweet fragrance of their flowers ;
rich grasses clothed the ground, the deep green
being picked out by a myriad of many-coloured
blooms, while in the more sheltered spots there
was the gleam of water and the delicate fronds
of filmy ferns.
Towards one such spot I seemed to be
rushing with tempestuous speed, and as I came
to it I saw beyond it a long, white, low building,
in the wall of which there were many small
windows. From one of them I saw the face
of a girl looking towards me, a face that was
as familiar to me as my own and one which
set all my being vibrating with rapturous
elation. I strove to reach out my arms
towards it, but they were powerless; only
could I look into the eyes that were turned
towards mine and strain, in an agony of
remorse, to get nearer.
Then, from somewhere in that shadowy land
of beauty, there came a low, soft, wailing voice
and I heard, in an unknown language, a
sentence that I have never forgotten :
7


“ Naggah, naggah, oom-moo-hah.”
The agony of remorse was intensified a
hundred-fold as I heard the words ; for it seemed
to me that I both knew and understood them,
and yet could not grasp their meaning. All my
energies went out in the struggle, and with a
wrench and a crash I came to myself, with my
head hanging out of the cabin porthole and
my eyes straining to get a last glimpse of
another face, the face of a girl, which was
looking towards me from out of the porthole
of a passing steamer.
The vessel passed on its journey and out
of my range of vision, the last thing I saw
being that girlish face, before I drew in my
head and stood, quivering and shaking, on
the floor of my state-room.
Presently I heard the bell in the engine-room
ring again, and a few moments later the steamer
trembled as the screw began to revolve ; but I
scarcely heeded it; my mind was full of that
visioned face, and my brain kept on repeating
the words, “ Naggah, naggah, oom-moo-hah.”
For the remainder of the day the vision of
that face and the echo of the unintelligible
words haunted me, and made me even more
pre-occupied and reserved than I had been since
we started. With the restless anxiety which


had preceded my departure and the subsequent
placid content of mind when I was at last on
board ship journeying to the south, I had
paid but slight heed to my fellow-passengers.
The simple interchange of ordinary everyday
salutions and opinions were all that passed
between me and them up to the day when I
had gazed out over the Asian desert into the
mysteries of time ; after that experience even
this slight intercourse ceased on my part, and
in lonely, silent brooding I lived through the
days that had yet to elapse before we reached
Australian waters. My fellow-voyagers possibly
regarded me as a monomaniac of some descrip-
tion, for once the doctor of the ship came to
me and spent some time with me, his manner
and his conversation alike convincing me that
he was striving to gauge my mental condition,
I trust he was satisfied. Any way he did not
repeat the experiment, and for the remainder
of the voyage I was allowed to enjoy my soli-
tary musings undisturbed.
As we neared the Australian coast, the rest-
lessness which had preceded my departure from
England, and which had slumbered during the
voyage, came upon me again and I used to
pace the deck with quick rapid strides, sniffing
at the salt sea air in the hopes of distinguishing


the scent of the gums. When we were a day’s
journey from Albany, the wind was blowing
strongly from the direction where the great
Southern Land lay shrouded in its forest garb.
There must have been a big bush fire some-
where on the coast, for the smell of the gumtree
smoke was borne on the breeze, and a thin blue
haze hung along the horizon. It was early in
the morning when I smelled it first. As soon
as the dawn had come I was on the deck with
a longing in my heart that I might catch a
glimpse of the melancholy-hued coast, and as
I emerged from the companion on to the deck
my face caught the breeze and my nostrils
inhaled the faint pungency of the wind-blown
smoke.
I sprang to the side and held my face up to
the breeze, drawing in great sniffs of the
aromatic perfume, sweeter to me than the most
delicate essence made by man. It was the old,
old smell that I had learned to dread so much
in the days when Smiles and I did battle against
the fires on Curriewildie Station, and strove to
save Mrs. Halliday’s property from destruction.
Then we used to curse it when it reached us
on the soft bush breezes ; now I turned to it
and blessed it, aye, and worshipped it, and I
felt my heart grow light and my blood leap


as I caught it, for it spoke to me of home, and
the home life, free and open, of the glorious
unfettered bush. And even as I revelled in
it, there came in to my mind another memory,
and I clutched at the rail of the bulwarks ; for
it was not the hard dog’s life we had had at
Curriewildie in the last few months of our
stay that the scent alone brought back to me.
With a rush and a staggering distinctness my
brain remembered—the girl’s face in the
steamer porthole and the unknown cry I had
heard.
The men of the watch came round to wash
down the decks, and I returned to my cabin and
stood with my face at the open port, so that I
could still breathe in the scent of the burning
bush, while I tried to get some intelligible reason
out of the tangled confusion which filled my
mind. It was, however, a waste of effort, for
the best I could do was only to separate my
emotions into the conflicting combination of
pleasure and sorrow, pleasure at the recognition
of familiar tokens, and sorrow I knew not for
what, save that the face I had seen on the steamer
we had passed in the Suez Canal was in some
way connected with it.


CHAPTER IX.
IN THE SOUTHERN LAND.
The following day we arrived at Albany.
I had decided in my own mind that I would
remain on board until we reached Adelaide,
where I would land and run up as far as Currie-
wildie and see how the old place was looking.
Now that I was on the eve of landing once
more on Australian soil, the impulse that had
so controlled me at the beginning of the voyage
waned, and it would have been difficult for me
to have stated at that moment why I had come
back. So I persuaded myself that it was only
some out-of-the-way idea to look once more on
the sun-scorched plains of Curriewildie, and
taste once more the free air of the bush, after
which I should be cured and able to return to
London, and continue to enjoy in peace the
handsome competency which still remained out
of the wealth I had taken home with me.
Some such thoughts were in my mind as I
hung over the bulwarks and watched several of


the passengers clambering into a boat which
was to take them ashore for a brief run.
“ Any more coming ? ” the man in charge
called out. Looking up at me, he added,
“Won’t you come, sir? There’s just time.”
It was as good as staying on board after all,
and without another thought I went down the
companion ladder and stepped into the boat,
which at once cast off from the steamer and
carried us over the short distance which separated
the vessel from the wharf. There was no one
to welcome me when I stepped ashore, and my
fellow-passengers walked on without waiting
for me, for, as I have said, I was not on close
terms of intimacy with any of them. But still,
when my foot touched Australian soil, and I
saw around me the bronzed skins and open
faces of Australians, my heart leaped for joy,
and I could have capered like a school-boy in
my delight.
I walked along the wharf and along the
dusty roadway which led to the straggling town,
already growing into the dignity of a well-laid-
out city, feasting my eyes on the dull prosaic
looking shanties and humpies which formed
temporary shelters for the owners of allotments
that would be valuable properties, probably in
less than a year’s time. One could do very much


worse than invest a few thousands in such land,
I was thinking, when I heard a quick step be-
hind me, and a well-remembered voice exclaim :
“At last you have come. I had almost
grown hopeless,”
I turned towards the speaker and cried out
in my surprise, for at my side stood the Hatter,
gaunt, grey, and haggard.
“ Great heavens,” I cried. “ What is the
matter ? ”
His magnificent physique was gone, and in
its place he was thin, almost to emaciation, and
there was an ugly stoop in his shoulders. His
face had lost the bronze hue of health and
was pallid, while his one-time raven hair was
more than streaked with grey, and his eyes
gleamed with an unhealthy light where formerly
they had sparkled with a happy intelligence.
“ Nothing—now you are here,” he answered.
“ We’ll start at once,”
There was a feverish impatience in the man’s
voice and manner which I did not like.
“ Start for where ? ” I asked.
“To my place away back,” he replied,
nodding his head in the direction of the town.
“But all my traps are on board. I was going
on to Adelaide before I landed, and only came
ashore here for a stroll,” I said.


“ You’re not going back on me now, are
you?” he asked quickly.
I only looked at him for answer, and he
wrung my hand.
“ God forgive me for doubting you,” he
went on ; “ but lam tortured to death. Come
to my humpy and we’ll discuss it.”
“ First I shall have to get my luggage
ashore,” I answered. “ Unless you care to
come on to Adelaide ? ’ ’
“ No,” he replied shortly,
“ Then I’ll get my things on the wharf and
go right along with you,” I said.
He would not come on board with me, and
I had some bother before I could get all my
belongings put over the side into a shore boat.
But at last I managed it, and went off the
steamer without a soul bidding me good-bye.
I fancy they were rather pleased than otherwise
at getting rid of the “mad Australian,” as I
heard some of them term me once.
As soon as I was on the wharf I found the
Hatter waiting for me with a dray.
“ You’ll have to pay for it,” he said. “ I’m
stony broke ; but we cannot hump all this swag
twenty miles through the bush, so I hired this
dray in your name.”
“ What is there at the humpy ? ” I asked.


“ Nothing,” he replied. “ Don’t I tell you
I’m stony broke ? ”
“ No horses or ”
“ Nothing,” he interrupted. “ I took the
land up—it’s only sixty acres—but there’s
nothing on it save a few wallaby. I’m out of
stores.”
There was no need to inquire further; I
knew from bygone experience all that he would
have said if I questioned him for a day; so I
climbed up into the dray, where my luggage
was, and we started off for the township. At
the first store we stopped, and I got down and
went inside. The storekeeper glanced at my
clothes and my fresh complexion, and I saw
that he sized me up as a raw “ new chum,”
and, consequently, a fair mark for a deal.
When I gave my order he was rather taken
aback, and executed it without even an argu-
ment as to the wisdom of my choice in the
matter of the articles purchased. I laid in
enough to last the two of us for a month,
and when it was all on the dray we had a
very fair load, especially as we had to ride in it
as well.
“We had better get a couple of horses,” I
said. “ There’s more than enough on board
without us, and we shall want them later.”


“This is good enough,” the Hatter said
abruptly.
But I was disposed to argue the point with
him, when he cut me short by remarking, “ Do
you want the whole township at our heels?
Because you’ll have it if you buy much more.
They’ll think we’ve struck gold somewhere near
my humpy.”
The warning came too late, for although we
started away at once, we had not gone a mile
before a couple of horsemen caught us up and
travelled with us. We tried to shake them off
by making a camp a good two hours before
sunset, but they joined us, and we could not,
by the rule of the road, refuse them a share
of our fire and “ tucker,” particularly as they
had none of the latter with them.
They were a decent pair of fellows, a little
down on their luck, and terribly anxious to
know whether there was any chance of their
standing in with us in our find. It was useless
our saying there was no find in the case; they
said that the storekeeper was sure there was by
the stores we had bought, and so he had put
them up on horses on the understanding that
they were to give him a third of anything that
came of it. We had a lot of yarning before
we learned as much as that, for both of them


were smart chaps, and did not give their game
away until they judged us to be as square as
they were. They were mates who had come
over from Queensland to make their pile in
the Westralian rush, and had nearly made their
graves instead.
“We’ll give you the straight tip about it,”
the Hatter remarked, when they had told us
about the storekeeper’s dodge. “ You’ve been
square with us and we’ll be the same with you.
This is an old mate of mine,” he continued,
indicating me. “ Some time ago he struck it
rich and went home for a spell, but like many
another he longed for a sniff of a campfire
smoke and a taste of billy tea. So he came
back. I struck it too, but dropped it, and was
in Albany stony broke when I wandered to the
wharf to see the mail boat come in, and on my
way I met my old mate. I explained matters
to him and he elected to come and spend a
time at my humpy in the ranges and brought
his own stores with him. And that’s gospel;
so you can ride back in the morning or come
on, if you like, and see my camp.”
“You’ve a lay on somewhere,” one of them
remarked.
“ Perhaps we have and perhaps we hav’n’t,”
answered the Hatter, “ Any way, we’re not


going there now, and when we do go you don’t
come, if you still stick to that storekeeper
game,”
“We’re not very keen on that,” the man
answered, “ provided the other is all right.’’
The Hatter remained silent for a time and
I watched him closely. • He evidently had
something in his mind and as we had not as
yet had time to discuss matters I was in the
dark as to his motives, so I held my peace,
knowing from experience that he was quite
able to conduct the affair, whatever it was, to
our best interests by himself.
“Then I’ll tell you,” he said presently.
“My mate and I are going to my humpy,
which is in the ranges, and there we shall stay a
couple of weeks or maybe a month. You can
go back and tell your storekeeper where we
have gone and cry off the job, and then, in a
fortnight’s time, if you’re on, you can come and
pay us a visit, and we’ll see what is in the wind
then. Only you’ll have to keep it a dead secret
till we meet again.”
They fell in with the proposal, and by the
time we went to sleep it was arranged that they
should accompany us as far as the humpy and
then return to Albany, taking the empty dray
with them.


By daylight the following morning we were
on the road again and journeyed steadily until
we arrived at the selection the Hatter had taken
up in a small narrow valleys between two steep
ridges in the range, and upon which he had built
his rough slab hut. We unloaded the dray and
got all the stores and my baggage inside before
our new friends left us on their return trip.
“ Mind you, we’re dealing square,” the
Hatter said at parting. “You keep it dark
and get back in two weeks’ time and you won’t
be sorry for it.”
When they had gone out of sight I turned
to him.
“ What’s your idea ? ” I asked.
He laughed as he answered :
“They helped us to get the stores in and
they’ve saved us a journey with the dray, and
after all, we may want a couple more with us
when we start, and both those are good-hearted
chaps. Any way, we score so far, and at no
cost to ourselves.”
“ I don’t see why we should ” I began.
“ No, my lad, I have not had time to spin
my yarn yet. Wait till you hear that. You’ll
understand better then,” he said, interrupting
me.


CHAPTER X.
THE HATTER’S YARN.
We had finished our evening meal and sat, one
on either side of the wide open chimney up
which the flames from the burning logs flared
and danced. There was light enough for us
to see the smoke from our pipes, and while
the Hatter fulfilled his promise and told me
all that had happened to him since he dis-
appeared that night in Adelaide, I sat quiet,
smoking and listening.
“ I did not care to tell you about it at first,”
he said. C -It seemed too ridiculous for me
to believe, let alone any one else. But it
mastered me ; it mastered me.”
He sat silent for a few minutes, gazing at
the fire, and I watched him, noting how he
had changed from the first evening I had
scrutinised him by the firelight—that evening
so long ago, as it seemed, when we had given
one another our pledge to be mates to the
end.


c ‘ Yes, it mastered me,” he continued. “ I
tried to banish it from my mind but I could
not; the look in that woman’s eyes when she
bade me hasten to her and liberate her from
the horrors of her doom, has haunted me ever
since—and I must go back.”
Again he paused, and I let him rest without
interruption.
“ I meant to have gone with you; to have
seen the old world again and tried to forget,
in the pleasures of a re-awakened memory, the
miseries of the past. But at that last dinner we
had, the emotion I had been stemming back
flowed over my barrier of self-control and swept
me away in a stream, which whirled me round
like a straw until it landed me here—here,
penniless and hopeless.”
His voice wailed with the last words and I
reached out my hand and touched his.
“ No, not now,” I said quietly.
“ No, not now,” he answered dreamily, and
then, as if bestirring himself, he went on with
more vivacity in his voice, u You see, I forgot
about the money. When you had gone I
remembered that I could not at once start back
for the land of her captivity, because I was
without the means even to purchase a pair of
blankets. But I had a desire driving me on,


and I wandered over to Westralia again and
struck a lucky spot, making enough to set me
on my feet in a couple of months. I kept on
until I had a fair amount in cash, and then I laid
my plans. It was quite possible to miss the
route the first time, so I decided to be prepared
tor a failure. I came down here from the
goldfields and took up this patch of land and
built this humpy. In one corner of it I con-
structed a little hiding place, which I will show
you to-morrow, for the storing of all my surplus
cash and some other things I wanted to have
handy. I reckoned that if I never came back
no one would find them, and that is the very
end I wanted while you were not here. But
I did come back.”
“ You have not started yet,” I interrupted.
“ Quite right,” he answered. “ I’m inclined
to wander a bit, in the telling of this yarn, so
keep me to it. I planted what I did not want,
and then, having fitted myself out with a couple
or so of horses, and stores enough to last me
for three months, I started.”
“ My idea was to get away steadily towards
the north-east until I struck somewhere about
the place where I left you in charge of the
camels when we came across that dray track
leading to Coolgardie. I followed the scheme
8


out until I had travelled a good three days’
journey beyond where I fancied I ought to have
picked up some guiding point, but without
discovering any. So I struck more easterly and
soon got into desert country with longer and
longer stages without water. My horses began
to give over, for there was practically no feed
for them, and when I did come to a patch I
did not care to delay, so anxious was I to see
that blue range showing on the horizon. It
was madness to do it, but I did, and pressed
on until one after the other my horses dropped
in their tracks and I was left with only one,
and he, poor brute, wasted to near a skeleton.
I put on him as much as he could carry and
trudged along beside him for another day, sure
in my own mind that before the sun went down
I should see the shade of the range on the
skyline. But I did not, and that night saw
the end of my last horse.
“In the dawning light I saw him lying on
his side, I had about a pint of water in my
water bag ; not enough to quench my own
thirst, let alone revive him, so I left him where
he lay and struggled on. My mind became a
little confused then, and I lost count of things,
until I came to my senses and found I was
trying to squeeze another drop of moisture


out of the dry canvas of the water bag, while
the sun blazed down upon me and the horizon
stretched all round me without a break or a
rise. I fancy I must have fallen down, for it
was dark when next I remember, and rain was
falling. When daylight came I was wet
through, and here and there in the hollows of
the ground were little rain puddles which I
drained before the sun came up, or it would
soon have scorched them away. I managed to
half fill my water bag, and then staggered
along, fancying that I was still heading for the
east, but in reality wandering aimlessly in every
and any direction. At last I saw some trees
in the distance and hurried towards them,
finding a good-sized pool of water near them.
"After that everything is a blank, until I
came to myself and found that I was lying
under a tent. I learned afterwards that it was
the camp of a prospecting party, one of the
members of which had found me staggering
blindly along, starving and jabbering incoherent
nonsense. He took me to their camp and
somehow or another they pulled me through.
Then I wandered back here to refit.”
He waited long enough to refill and light
his pipe before he continued.
“ The plant I had for my cash was all right


and I took a fairly long spell before I set about
the fitting out of another expedition. I tried
to persuade myself away from it time and again,
but it was no good. The craze seemed to have
sunk into my bones, and I only tortured myself
when I tried to drive it out. The money I
had left was not much more than enough to
buy me horses and stores, and the little balance
that was over I put in the hiding place again
as a forlorn hope, in case I had to come back
once more with another defeat behind me and
the want of a spell in peace.
“Well, I did come back, sooner than I
expected. Niggers settled me that time, by
spearing my horses and nearly finishing me ;
but I managed to get away somehow and
reached a mining camp. I knew there was not
enough cash here to set me up again, so I tried
to make more. But it was no good. My luck
had run clean out, and for months I could not
even make enough to keep me in food. To
improve matters I got the fever and so badly
that, when I could move about again, I had
not the strength to work. So I walked back
to this humpy and lived on what I had hidden
away.
“ It was plain to me then, that I could not
do the trip by myself, and I only knew of one


mate who would do it with me, and he was
the Lord knows where. The longing to go
was stronger than ever in my heart, and I sat
here yearning and yearning, and trying to send
out my soul to you, wherever you were, to tell
you to come. Then I spent my last shilling,
and ate my last bit of damper, and walked in
to Albany to face the end—when I met you.
“ And that’s my yarn,” he added, after a few
minutes’ silence, “If you had not come I fancy
it is all there ever would have been to tell,
for I was hopeless and heart-broken. But you
have put new life into me, and I only want
to be off again.”
“ You want a month’s rest and a good course
of feeding before we start,” I replied. “It’s
no use starting on that trip unless we are pre-
pared to do a good deal of hard work.’ ’
“ That is so,” he said. “ And besides, we
must wait for those other two chaps. We can
do with their help ; at least you can, be-
cause ”
“ Because what ? ” I asked as he stopped.
“ Well, perhaps you have not thought about
it, but when we reach there, your idea, I take
it, is to come back with more gold.”
“ Of course it is,” I said.
“ Yes, but you see mine is not. This time


I stay there—with her—and you’ll want some
mates to travel back with.”
“You never mean ” I began.
“ I must, I must,” he cried, excitedly. “ I
can never leave her again. I cannot reach
there by myself, but I am not going to prevent
you from getting back home again when you
have helped me to find the way. There’s gold
enough for you and them, and a dozen more
if need be, and why should not you have it ? ”
The expression of his determination to remain,
when he succeeded in reaching once more the
scene of our previous adventures, did not sur-
prise me. I felt it long before he said it, and
in my mind there was an echo of the wish.
I wanted to penetrate behind that mysterious
sliding stone, which moved at the sound of a
voice, like the ancient doorway of the robbers’
cave in the nursery story of Ali Baba. I wanted
to see what there was at the back of it, and
in that weird silent range, and I wanted to
learn something more about the pigmy race
that obeyed so implicitly the slightest sign of
the awful creature with whom the Hatter was
enamoured. More than that, there was an
impulse within me, which almost suggested more
than a passing interest on my part with the
Yellow Woman herself, in spite of the terror


with which she had inspired me when I first
beheld her.
“ I also wish to stay,” I said quietly.
The Hatter swung round upon me with an
ugly gleam in his eyes.
“You? Why should you stay? What is
she to you ? ” he cried.
“ She ? Do you mean Tor Ymmothe ? ” I
asked, in an unconcerned voice.
“ Who else should I mean ? ” he replied
abruptly.
I sat without replying for a minute or so, and
then I said quietly :
“ I want to see what there is behind that
stone. I want to see where all that gold came
from. There is a great and wonderful mystery
in it all, and I want to clear the whole thing
up before I come back.”
“You will carry your life in your hands,”
he remarked.
“ I have done that before,” I answered.
“ The gain is worth the risk, and if we get into
the stronghold or whatever it is, I reckon we
can get out again.”
“ I shall never come out again,” he said, with
deep solemnity in his voice. “My life only
has one aim now to keep it going, and that is
to be with her. Once that is accomplished I


care for nothing. > But it is different with
you.
“You remember our compact?” I said.
“We were to be mates to the end. Do you
want to go back on that now ? ”
He did not answer for a time, but sat
still, staring at the fire.
“ No, I do not want to go back on it,” he
answered at length. “ But things have changed
since then. I had a power over you then. I
have none now. All I can do now is to urge
you not to come with me farther than that pile
of gold.”
“ And all that I can say is that I am deter-
mined to go with you behind that barrier as
you are to go yourself. I believe it was for
that I returned, so do not try any longer to
dissuade me from it, for I am absolutely
determined.”
He smoked on in silence, and I continued:
“My plan is very simple. We will stay
where we are for a time, and, while you are
getting up your strength, you can teach me
that jargon they speak over there, so that I
can understand all that goes on if we ever
do manage to reach the range again. For the
rest, we will consider the advisibility of taking
those other two with us when they return


here. For my own part, I do not fancy we
shall ever see them again.
“ Oh, yes, we shall,” he said. “ They will
come back safe enough.”
“Then we will discuss the matter further
when they do. For the present let us camp
for the night.”


CHAPTER XI.
GUMTREE PHILOSOPHY.
The following morning I awakened with the
dawn, and, slipping out so as not to disturb
the still slumbering Hatter, I went to the door
of the humpy and watched the sun rays
struggling through the morning mist which
hung over the gumtrees in the vicinity. The
tops of the ridges round about the place were
already lit up with faint, rosy hues, and over-
head the sky was of that wonderfully clear
blue only seen when the sun rises on an Austra-
lian morning. The bush birds were chirping
and twittering, and a gentle, cool breeze fanned
my cheeks, and brought to my nostrils the
peculiar scent of the eucalypt, I expanded
my chest to breathe in the delicious air, and felt
my pulses tingle and my blood rush through
my veins. What was London, with all its joys
and attractions that it offers so lavishly to a man
of wealth, compared with this sublime delight


of breathing in the scented air of this dear
sunlit southern land ?
I walked from the door to where a fallen
log lay on the ground, and sat upon its bulky
form and watched, as I had often watched
before in the bygone days of station toil, the
glow of sunshine spread over the country.
It was difficult to imagine that only a few
weeks ago I was in a city where such a sunrise
was unknown, and where a glimpse of such a
sky would have thrown the population into
ecstasies. And yet I had voyaged half round
the world to see it, and for no better reason
than to—
“ Doing a think ? ”
I turned, startled at the voice and saw the
Hatter standing just behind me.
“ I fancied you were still asleep,” I said.
“ What, when the sun is up ? I’m too old
a bushman for that. The first gleam of it
always wakes me just as thoroughly as an alarm
gong,” he answered. “And I did not sleep
very well last night,” he went on. “ I was
thinking and I want to tell you at once. I’m
glad you are coming with me into this un-
known land.”
He held out his hand to me and I grasped
it warmly.


“You’re a true mate, Dick, true all through,”
he said. “ Don’t let us say any more about it.
The thing’s settled now and I’ll teach you
Pitchorie and show you my plant.”
“ But there is nothing in it, you say,” I
replied.
“Oh yes, there is,” he said. <c Do you
remember what I told you about myself? ”
“ I do,” I answered.
“ Well, it was not very clear, was it ? Just
a brief, vague outline. But since then I have
written it all down in full, and that story is
what I have in my secret dungeon cell,” he
added with a laugh.
“It is my whole history,” he went on, his
voice growing serious as he proceeded. “ I
do not expect ever to come back, but you
may, and I want you to do something with
it. Ido not want you to touch it until you
know for certain that lam no more. Then
I wish you to return here, open that nook, read
the paper which is in it and act as you please.
That is all. If you don’t care for the business,
say so ; if you do, then just give me your word
to that effect, and that you will not attempt to
learn the story until I am gone.”
“ You wish me to promise ? ” I asked.
“ I should like you to,” he answered.


“ Then I give you my promise to carry out
your wishes if I can, though I do not expect
there will be any necessity,” I replied.
“ Thank you, Dick,” he said as he held out
his hand, which I clasped. “ Now let us say
no more about it and I will reveal the secret
chamber,” he added, with another laugh.
We returned to the hut and he pointed out
two slabs, one on the northern and one on the
western wall, and in each of which a brass hook
was driven.
“Now you take that spade, and when you
have drawn a line from one slab to the other,
draw another one from that line, at right
angles to it, up into that corner,” and he in-
dicated where the two walls met. “ Then dig
where the second line starts and go down two
feet.”
The floor of the hut was, as it usually is
with rough-built bush humpies, the plain earth,
and when I had made the lines he suggested
I dug. At about two feet the spade struck
a hard surface, and, clearing away the debris
I discovered that the obstruction was a flat
piece of stone,
“ Lift it up,” he exclaimed.
I did so, and found that it formed the top
of a small square space which was carefully


built up with flat stones. In the centre of the
space a block of stone had been placed on
several small pieces, and upon the block there
was a package rolled up in waterproof cloth.
“ That’s the paper,” he said, pointing to it.
“All right,” I answered, and I replaced the
flat stone on the top and filled in the hole
I had dug, carefully smoothing away all sign
of the lines I had traced on the surface.
“You’ve got it,” the Hatter said when I
had finished. “ It’s a good place, isn’t it ? ”
“ I think I had better leave all my papers
there when we start,” I answered. “No one
will ever find them if we do not return.”
“ Oh, you’ll come back,” he remarked. “ I
am sure of that, and now, till we start, let us
leave the subject alone.”
There was a nervous anxiety in his voice and
manner, so I fell in with him and carefully
avoided any reference to the matter afterwards.
The study of the Pitchorie tongue occupied
my attention instead, and kept it fully engaged
too, for of all the extraordinary combinations of
sounds that man ever adopted as a means of
conveying his thoughts to another, commend
me to Pitchorie. To impart all its peculiarities
to me occupied the Hatter very much more
than the fortnight which was to elapse before


the two men, who had followed us from
Albany, were due to return.
I was not surprised when they did not
appear to time, and told my companion that
there was no longer any chance of their
coming near us again. But he would not agree
with my view and insisted that they would
return later. In the meantime we struggled
with the Pitchorie tongue, —the one to impart,
the other to acquire. The steady occupation
of the Hatter’s mind, combined with the rest
and the constant dieting I insisted on his
following, had an excellent effect upon him,
and I was glad to observe how every day he
showed unmistakable signs of the return of
his former strength and physique.
Another fortnight passed and I was sufficiently
advanced in the Pitchorie tongue to carry on
a conversation with the Hatter, i/ one can
speak of a conversation in connection with a
language which conveyed a greater amount of
information by the omission of words than
by their use.
It was the great stumbling block in my
road to proficiency and fluency, this practice
of omission; but the Hatter was loud in its
praises and maintained that it was, to him,
evidence of the vast antiquity of the tongue,


and of the tremendous heights of mental
culture to which the race that once spoke it
had attained.
“ Do you mean to contend,” I said one day
to him, “ that there was ever a race which was
on a higher plane of civilisation and culture
than our own ? ”
“Not only do I mean to contend it,” he
exclaimed, “ I firmly believe it, and this
tongue, spoken by an-out-of-the world remnant
of humanity, as the tribe which inhabits the
Pitchorie district may be termed, is to me a
convincing proof of my contention.”
I laughed scornfully in reply.
“ Now, see here,” he went on, speaking with
some of his old warmth ; “ don’t you make
the big mistake that many people make. Our
civilisation may be the best that we know of
historically, but history does not represent
everything that has ever occurred in this world.
The Alps and the Himalayas are very high
mountains as things go nowadays, but once
they were below the sea and, when they were,
other places which are now down were up.
Just bear in mind that we know of grander
mountain chains, of more tremendous pinnacles,
and greater precipices rising from the bed of
the ocean and yet beneath its surface, than


anything that exists above its level. There is
a sudden drop of five miles in the depth of
the Pacific not one hundred miles from land,
but you cannot show me a mountain peak which
rises sheer five miles above the sea level to-day.”
“ But what has that got to do ” I began.
“ What has that got to do with our
civilisation ? Is that what you are going to
ask ? Well, just wait a moment and I will
come to that,” he interrupted quickly. “We
may fairly reason that, in ages far remote from
the present, the earth’s surface was very
different from what it is to-day. We know
the plants and animals that lived on it were
different, and, if the plants and animals, why
not the distribution of land and water ?
Our land at the present time is all moving,
either up or down. Once Australia was
divided into two parts by a sea which rolled
where now South Australia exists. We know
that, as absolutely as we can know anything by
reason and deduction, for the eastern flora is
distinct from the western flora, and they blend
towards the middle, where there is any growth
at all on the dry sandy desert which lies between
them, and where the lakes are mostly salt, —that
is, filled with sea water left by the tides millions
of years ago when the land slowly rose above
9


the surface. I don’t want to go down to
abyssmal depths for my illustrations, but if such
changes have taken place in land, in animals,
and in plants, why not in man also during the
time he has been on the earth ? How do we
know that he was not, in the past, more highly
civilised and cultured than we are to-day ?
How do we know that we are only stumbling
along the path he passed over millions of years
ago ?
“ But surely,” I exclaimed, “ surely you will
not say that there has been a greater race and a
greater civilisation than we have ? ”
“ Why not ? ” he answered. “ Just think a
moment. When Pompeii was overwhelmed
with an eruption of Vesuvius, it was obliterated
for centuries. But we have evidences here in
Australia of volcanoes, now extinct, which were
fifty times as big as Vesuvius; and tokens of
earthquakes and cataclysms that pass the com-
prehension of man to grasp. Now supposing
that such volcanoes suddenly burst forth in
Europe and America in this year, flooding all
the country with streams of lava hundreds of
feet thick and keeping up an incessant can-
nonade of earthquakes and convulsions. Just
imagine that 3s occurring for only one single
month, and where would your great civilisation


be? Your cities, London in its millions, New
York in its power, and all the rest of them,
would be tumbling, crumbling heaps of ruins.
And the people ? What would they do ? What
would become of them ? Paralyse your trade
for one month ; suspend your manufactures,
stop your communication and spread over
humanity the pall, the awful, terrifying pall
of seismic eruption, and where would your
civilisation be? But let that warfare of the
elements run on for a generation—and more
than a generation passed while the Alps were
rearing their heads to their present altitude—
and where is your world? All the boasted
triumphs of your age are forgotten. Those
of your people who are not dead from fear or
starvation, are babbling maniacs, terror-stricken
and degraded to a herd of savages, struggling
in the first rudimentary stages of the fight for
physical existence. And all because the earth
for what, in its life history, is but a brief
moment, shakes and stretches itself and turns
itself upon its heel. Oh, boastful, egotistical,
blind-eyed man ! How cheap is your wisdom ;
how insignificant your power ! ”
There was a fine impressiveness about the
Hatter when he let himself go like that on any
subject. On our previous journey he had often


poured forth, by the hour together, his views
on Australia and its original inhabitants ; but I
was too dense or too indifferent then to pay
very much heed to him. My one great hope
on that journey had been to get rich. Well,
I had got rich, and gone to the place where
of all others in the world riches can command
the greatest return, and had turned away from
it all to come back again to the lonely, sad-hued
bush and the thoughts that are possible under
its spell.
I had often in my sojourn in London recalled
the Hatter’s orations, and as my mind became
expanded under the influence of my surround-
ings, I regretted more and more my folly in
not having paid closer attention to what he had
to say, especially on the aborigines. I knew
he had had a vast experience with them in all
parts of the continent, and I was sure he also
had that power of thought which unfortunately
does not always accompany the men whose
personal contact with the natives is their only
reason for the claim they set up, as being the
sole authority upon all things aboriginal. I
wanted to hear him talk on the subject again,
so I adopted the trick of opposing him,
knowing that he would at once launch forth
in his efforts to show me my errors.


“ All that may be,” I said. “But it does not
explain any of the habits of the aboriginals.!’
He looked at me critically for a few moments,
“That is just what it does do,” he said, at
length. “It explains their habits as nothing
else can do. Take, for example, their restless,
nomadic life. Assuming that once before, in
the long long ago, man lived on the earth’s
surface for a couple of thousand years, during
which the world was free from any terrible
convulsions of nature. It would be absolutely
impossible that he should not rise in the scale
of civilisation ; the common experience of the
race during that two thousand years must have
put the general intelligence higher at the end
than it was at the beginning. Now, Britain
two thousand years ago was little more than
one of the larger Pacific islands is to-day, as
regards the condition of its inhabitants. The
early people of our race were tattooed, or
stained, which is very much the same thing;
their weapons were the primitive bow, arrow,
and spear, and they worshipped awe-inspiring
deities, whom they sought to propitiate by
human sacrifices. But at present they, or their
descendants, are the highest civilised nation on
the earth. In the last century they have made
more progress in the acquisition of common


experience [which is only another term for
civilisation] than in the preceding ten. That
is the result of a prolonged period of peace ; I
mean peace so far as the natural forces are
concerned.
“ Occasionally there have been outbursts here
and there. Krakatoa went down in a night,
and a few hundred thousand people with it—
only they happened to belong to one of the
so-called inferior races, and we, of the ruling
white caste, were not affected by the loss and,
therefore paid scarcely any attention to it,
beyond noting the fact that the eruption or
convulsion was a magnificent pyrotechnic dis-
play. In Japan, which I believe is a doomed
remnant of a bygone continent, these occurrences
are so frequent that they are scarcely noticed,
and it wants a tremendous commotion to make
a stir there. But it is within a hundred miles
of the Japanese coast that the huge pit I
mentioned as existing in the floor of the ocean
has been found. Suppose the precipitous sides
of that pit caved in ! Just fancy the displace-
ment of water alone which would result, and the
tidal wave which would sweep over the adjacent
islands, even supposing that they did not also
go down in the general collapse, and then say
what the mental condition of the survivors


would be. Do you imagine for one moment
that any ordinary number of human beings
could experience such a catastrophe as that and
still retain all their up-to-date, civilised notions ?”
“I do not see why they should not,” I said,
as he paused, evidently for my reply.
“Well, let me try and show you,” he con-
tinued. “ Your ordinary, up-to-date, civilised
being would be somewhat upset, would he
not ? ”
“ I should imagine so,” I assented.
"And assuming that the affair occurred in
the night, he would be very glad to see daylight
again ? ”
“ Certainly,” I said.
“ But, however upset he might be, he would
still be liable to experience hunger in due
course, and have a desire to satisfy it ? ”
“ Quite so,” I agreed.
“ Then how is he going to do it ? Suppose
such an occurrence took place in Europe, and
Britain was affected. The ordinary citizen
who survived would probably want a fire in
the morning to warm himself, but he would
have no matches and no coal. He would grow
hungry, but .there would be no shops open
where he could buy the necessaries of life.
There might be a few sheep, and he might by


chance kill one ; he might also manage to make
a fire at which to cook part of it. But there
might also be several other ordinary citizens
who were hungry and cold. Now, would he
share with them, or would he try to keep what
he had to himself? ”
“ I should say he would stick to it,” I
replied.
“ Yes ; and what would that mean ? A fight,
and a fight under the most bitter conditions ;
for it would be for life on both sides. Assuming
that our first ordinary citizen wins and has his
feast. He feels slightly more secure when
his hunger is appeased—and he remembers
the cost of his meal. He is a murderer. The
continued teaching of religion, which has be-
come almost a hereditary instinct with him,
re-asserts itself after the preliminary rush of
rage and passion. Perhaps the elements renew
their combat, and he feels the earth tremble
under his feet ; the sky over his head grows
black with thunder-clouds, and all the horrors
of cateclysmal fury surround ham. What
would it mean to him, but the sign of the wrath
of an outraged deity ? What state would he
be in after twenty-four hours of such an
experience ? As I said a little while ago, he
would be a babbling maniac, terror-stricken


and cowed ; trembling at every sound he heard,
lest it should be the forerunner of more awful
tragedies; shivering with anguish at the
approach of night, and crouching in abject
fear through the hours of darkness, his mind
becoming less and less able to work and reason,
and only the animal part of him, his hunger, his
thirst, and his other appetites, remaining. Place
two such creatures, male and female, together.
The production of offspring would be inevitable,
but what sort would they be ? I tell you that
if such a climax came down upon us now, in
the midst of all our boasted civilisation and
pride, we should be within a year, the parents
of gibbering animals of less brain power than
the apes. The flower of our cultured civilisa-
tion would wither in a night, and in the after
struggle for existence, those of whom we now
speak as being coarse and brutal would be the
only ones to survive. And even they would
go farther down the scale of human intelligence
than they are at present.”
“ And the aborigines ; where do they come
in ? ” I asked.
“ They are the descendants of a race that
passed through some such ordeal as I have
spoken of,” he answered solemnly. “Other
branches of the race escaped, probably to the


north, and spread over Asia, treasuring up
fragmentary remnants of their knowledge which
they handed down, strangely distorted by reason
of their including with it a lot of fancies bred
of their own mental confusion, to their
descendants. These in turn passed on the
legendary knowledge to their children; each
generation as they grew up and advanced along
the path of experience, rounding off the
apparent rough edges of the tales, so as to
make them more symmetrical, more compre-
hensible—and erroneous. Realise that, and
you have the key to the appearance of similar
groundwork in all the varied editions of that
which is the primary foundation of civilised
progress —dogmatic religion. But the unfortu-
nates, who were left in the terribly disturbed
area of which our Australian continent is the
remains, had no chance of retaining even the
fragmentary remnants of their ancestors’
knowledge. Centuries must have passed and
all filled with cataclysms, until the humanity
that struggled for life, and ultimately drifted
to what is now Australia and the most
southern part ot South America, were
mentally little more than hereditary idiots.”
“ But I thought you held that our
aboriginals were really a better race than


those who term them the lowest type of
humanity will allow ? ” I exclaimed.
“ The aborigines of to-day, yes ; but they
have struggled back gradually under peaceful
conditions, as regards the ground under
them, from the hopeless condition you find
in the people of Tierra del Fuego. Then,
there have been incursions from the northern
continent of Asia; but the influence of
hereditary instincts, acquired during those
centuries of tumult, were too strong to give
place all at once to the later influences ; though
some of them found a foothold and made
our aborigines what they are to-day, a com*
plex, topsy-turvy lot, who generally regard
things from exactly the opposite standpoint
to our own.”
“I don’t quite follow,” I said.
“I will give you an example,” he said
quietly. “ The blacks are inimitable as
trackers, and tracking is unquestionably an
exercise of the faculties, of observation and
of orderliness. To our minds they have no idea
of order—that is, our idea of order, prim, rigid
arrangement of things in their proper places.
But that is not their idea. Nature’s order is
theirs, the order you see in the tangled vines
of the scrubs or the droop of leaves on branches.


If you turn a leaf on a twig the wrong way, or
reverse the twining swirl of a vine, we should
not notice it. But the black would. He would
know at once that it was out of place, and
consequently untidy. Bend a grass blade down,
and the black, seeing it, knows that it could
not grow that way, and he at once recognises
the fact that some one or some thing has been
there and disturbed it. But the majority of
our race have no patience to care about all this.
They see that the blacks are not in the habit
of viewing things as we view them', and at once
say that they have no view at all. It is the
old fable of the two men and the two-sided
shield ; it is not that they have no view, but
that they view differently from us ; and we, in
our impatient presumption, call them fools
and dullards.”
“It is an audacious theory,” I said,
after awhile. “ How did you reason it all
out ? ”
“I did not reason it all ; it came to me in
glimpses and suggestions during my lonely
wanderings, until I saw it in all its clearness,
and understood. That is why I want to pene-
trate the mystery of that desert range and learn
the secret of that woman’s life. I believe the
proof of my theory is there.”


“ But it you are not coming back, what good
will it be to the world ? ” I asked.
He looked at me and smiled.
“ What does it matter to the world ? ” he
said dreamily. “ They would grab the gold ;
but do you think they would understand the
object lesson taught by the last vestige of
Lemuria ? If they did, the millennium would
have come; for they would understand that
knowledge, and not money, constitutes the
only real wealth.”


CHAPTER XII.
A FRESH INTEREST.
It was a month after my arrival at the Hatter’s
selection—Wonga, as he called it—when one
evening, just as we were having a last smoke
before turning in, we heard a horse trot up to
the hut, and a voice calling out a question
whether there was any one inside.
We went to the door, and in the dim light
could see a man getting off his horse. He
came up to us and we at once recognised one
of the two men who had followed us from
Albany.
“ I was afraid you had cleared,” he said ;
“ but Oates and me didn’t know how to send
you word.”
“ We had nearly given you up,” I exclaimed.
“ Well you see,” he continued, “ it was not
all our fault. That storekeeper chap’s a perfect
dandy in his way, and would have it that we
were trying some dodge on him. So we had
to take on a job of fencing to show that we


were in earnest when we said there was nothing
in following you. But still he suspected us,
and neither of us could get away without being
tracked until Then we heard of
another contract that was open for fencing away
back, and I set off, telling him that I was going
out after it. Even then he set a chap to follow
me, but I dodged him this afternoon, and as
soon as it got dark I came on, trusting to my
luck to find the humpy.”
“ You are going to camp here ? ” the Hatter
asked.
“ Of course I am,” he answered.
“ Then turn your horse into the paddock
behind and come in,” the Hatter said, and went
inside, leaving me to show the man where the
“ paddock —about an acre, roughly fenced—
was situated. When we got inside the Hatter
had a fire blazing up the chimney, and the billy
on to boil.
As soon as we were comfortably seated the
newcomer began:
“ Oates, that’s my mate, and as white a man
as ever walked,” he was saying, when the
Hatter interrupted him.
“We didn’t get as far as names the last time
we met,” he remarked. “ But we’d better
exchange now. This is Dick Halwood ; I’m


the Hatter to him and to every one else—” and
he looked hard at our new friend.
“ All right, boss,” he said. “ I’ve been on
the Barcoo, and know what that means.”
“ That’s all right, then,” the Hatter continued,
“ and I hope your mate does too,”
“ Oates? Well, I should smile. Why Oates
was a hatter himself till he met me,” and he
laughed a low musical laugh, which attracted
me towards him very considerably.
“ Then, now we know your mate and you
know us, who are you ? ” the Hatter asked.
“Me ? Well, I’m Bill the Axer generally,
but in my own family circle I’m known as
William Coventry.”
I saw the Hatter start; but as Bill, as I will
term him, was leaning over the fire for, a light
for his pipe, he did not notice it.
“ Coventry,” the Hatter said quiedy, “ that
is a name well known in ”
“ I belong to Suffolk originally,” the man
interrupted. “ I don’t mind telling you, be-
cause I think you’re both square, and Oates
knows. I’m one of the Coventrys of Saxted
Manor—the only one in fact, for my crowd
went smash years ago, when I was a youngster.
I came out here, and have been knocking about
ever since, while my father and brother both


died and I was left, the last of the Coventrys
of Saxted Manor.”
He spoke with that sharp incisiveness which
conies to men who have a bitter past, when
they speak of their bygone glories, and at the
end of his remarks he leaned forward again,
presumably to reach another light for his pipe,
but really, I believe, to hide the tremor of
his lips, and the gleam in his eyes. Thus he
missed what I saw; a spasm of pain on the
Hatter’s face and growing pallor of his skin.
“ You were—the family was ruined, I
suppose? ” he said, with a hard ring in his
voice.
The man turned round as he stooped, with
the red glare of the fire playing on his sun-
burnt features.
“ Ruined ? Yes. By a mean, ungrateful,
lying cur,” he exclaimed fiercely, as he stooped
again over the fire.
“I like those old-world stories. Tell it
to us.”
I had to look at the Hatter to make sure
that it was he who was speaking, so changed
was the voice.
“ Tell you ? Yes, I will. We’re going to
be mates, I suppose ? ”
“To the end,” the Hatter said.
to


“ That’s so,” I added.
“ Then I will,” Bill went on. “ Though
it isn’t a pleasant yarn. My father had two
sons and a daughter. I was the youngest.
My sister was the eldest and she fell foul of a
fellow, curse him, who was a rich and titled
scoundrel. She was handsome, and he made
love to her and married her. Then he played
fast and loose and broke her heart, but not
until he had inveigled the old man into endors-
ing some bills. He never attempted to meet
them, but bolted, like the coward that he was,
and his disappearance broke my sister’s heart,
as it ruined and killed my father and left my
brother and myself beggars. That’s the yarn.
Short and unpleasant, like a donkey’s gallop.”
" And—you never heard of him again ? ”
the Hatter asked.
“ Heard of him ? Not much. Sir Claude
Digby, of Tollen Hall, Baronet, was not the
man to face trouble,” Bill said sneeringly.
“He left that to us,” he added, “ and never
even inquired after the poor little innocent
who came into the world when her mother
went out.”
“ A baby ? Was there a baby? ”
The Hatter’s eyes glistened as he asked the
question ; but Bill could only stare at the fire.


“Of course there was, and Charlie and I
gave up the last bit of our birthright so that
she should not live to be a pauper. Her aunt,
my father’s sister, has brought her up. Charlie
died, and I came out to this infernal country to
make a fortune and buy back the old place—
and became a bush fencer instead,”
“ But you’ll make your fortune ; you’ll buy
back the old place yet,” the Hatter exclaimed.
“How do you know?” Bill asked sharply,
facing round.
“ Because, Dick and I well, I cannot speak
for him yet, but I am on to take you and your
mate with us, and if he agrees ”
He paused and looked at me with a mute
appeal in his eyes.
“ I’m agreed, after hearing that yarn,” I said.
“ Then we’ll show you where there is enough
gold to buy up the whole county of Suffolk
and then you can cry quits with this—what’s
his name ? Digby ? ”
“ Yes, that was his name,” Bill answered,
still eyeing the Hatter.
“That water’s about boiling,” I said, as I
rose and went over to the fire and lifted the
billy on one side. “ Pass over the tea, Hatter,”
I continued. I did not care for the turn matters
had taken, and wanted to get the conversation


away from the sombre subject of sorrow-laden
pasts. In addition to which there was another
thing which disconcerted me. The anxiety of
the Hatter to hear Bill’s story, and the way in
which he had received it, made an ugly
suspicion come to my mind. Was the man
I had stood by, and who had stood by me,
going to turn out to be nobody else than the
unprincipled scoundrel who was the villain of
Bill’s short but dramatic story ?
It was an ugly suspicion, but it would not
leave me ; and, while Bill was taking his meal, I
kept covertly watching the Hatter. As I
watched, my feeling of resentment and suspicion
grew stronger and stronger against him. He
had told me that he had inherited a proud
family name, which he had dragged down to
the gutter before he left England for Australia.
I knew that in the floating population in the
interior there is many a man who, under a
rough nickname, hides a life’s tragedy and a
smirched escutcheon. So there was nothing in
the fact that the Hatter desired to conceal his
real identity; nothing, that is, to suggest that
he and the villain of Bill’s little drama were one
and the same. But yet I believed it, and I
could not bring myself to think otherwise. I
felt repelled from him as the evening wore on,


and I am afraid that the feeling was not too
well disguised.
We had a brief discussion before turning in
as to the course we were to adopt, and it was
decided that Bill should go on as soon as day-
light, and work back to his mate. Within the
next fortnight they were both to return to the
selection, and, in the meantime, we were to
make all the arrangements for a start to our
misty, visionary range, of which we only gave
Bill the vaguest outline. He left us in the
morning, and the Hatter and I were alone once
more.
“Dick,” he said, when Bill had ridden out
of sight, “ would you like to open that packet
in the hole under the floor ? ”
“ I have already told you that I should not
do so except under the conditions you named,”
I answered somewhat stiffly.
“.I know that; but you looked at me last
night when Bill was spinning that yarn of his,
in a way that made me suspect you fancied I
was the man he referred to. If you like, you
can open that packet now and read the whole
story,” he said.
“ I don’t go back on my word,” I said,
shortly; but, all the same, I was sorely tempted.
“ Well, I am satisfied with it,” he said, with


a sad tone in his voice. “ I would rather take
it than a good many other men’s bond. And
that is why I ask you now to do something
more for me. I want you to take any share of
gold there may be for me out of this trip, and
deal with it as you think I would wish you to,
after reading my history? ”
“ Half of what we got last time is yours and
waiting for you,” I said.
“ No. I gave all that up. I did not know
then that well, you’ll understand some day.
We do not all do as we should in this world ;
there are stronger things than human will and
intelligence. You will do as I ask ? ”
“ I will do as you ask,” I answered.
“And I know you will never go back on
your mate, whatever he may have been,” he
said, In a sad, pathetic tone of voice, as he
looked at me with a peculiar, soft light in his
eyes ; and into my heart there came a great
pity for him. After all, I thought, if he were
the man Bill had spoken of, what right had I
to judge him ? He had been a true and
sterling mate to me ; and if he had done wrong
in the past, surely he had paid for it in the
lonely, blank, dreary life he had, lived since.
I yielded to the impulse of the moment and
held out my hand.


“I don’t know who or what you are, Hatter,”
I exclaimed. “ But we started on the password
of ‘ mates to the end,’ and I don’t go back on
my word.”
He grasped my hand in silence, and stood
with averted head, as though he did not wish
me to see his face. When he turned it to me
his eyes were luminous and moist, and his voice
trembled as he said :
“Please God you will never regret giving
one poor devil a leg up in his misery.”


CHAPTER XIII.
THE START FOR THE DESERT RANGE.
Although I could not allow myself to go
back upon my word with the Hatter, the ugly
suspicion I had formed effectually prevented me
from mentioning to him anything of the experi-
ence I had had in the Suez Canal. I had
intended to tell him as soon as I arrived; but
one thing after the other turned the conversation
whenever I attempted to approach the subject,
until it ceased to be uppermost in my memory.
Then came the visit of Bill, and my suspicion
that my mate was the man he had inveighed
against so severely, and all desire on my part
to confide my experience to him left me. As
the weeks wore on after my arrival, the weird
effect of the experience gradually left me; the
constant effort to acquire a mastery over the
involved intricacies of the Pitchorie tongue pro-
bably assisting in no small degree to diminish
the keenness of the memory.
A few days after Bill had departed we fell


to discussing our plan of campaign. It did not
take us very long to agree as to the course we
were to adopt. Now that we knew all about
Bill and his mate, we did not hesitate about
trusting to them to carry out any arrangement
we made with them; and, with that clear in our
minds, we decided as follows :
We were to purchase, a team of at least ten
camels, which, on the outward journey, were to
be laden mostly with water ; for, with the
experience we had already had of the arid
country we should have to travel over, water
was the greatest necessity, A camel apiece to
carry us, as well as our stores and ammunition,
would leave six to carry water ; and that, we
considered, would be ample. When we arrived
at the oasis, where the mighty pile of gold was
waiting for us, we would unload our team of
everything except provisions and water enough
to last Bill and his mate until they reached
fertile country again. Two camels and some
stores we would retain for our own subsequent
use, and the rest could be utilised for the trans-
portation of as many gold bricks as we could
load. Then Bill and his mate could start with
the bullion, on the understanding that they were
not to divulge from whence it came ; but that,
when we joined them, if we ever did so, we


were to have half the proceeds. We anticipated
that, with such a fortune as even half that load
would be, the two men would be more than satis-
fied, while Bill would be enabled to buy back his
old home again. It was to him, therefore, that
we decided to entrust the keeping of our share,
which, if we did not appear to claim it within
a period of five years, he was to divide between
himself and his mate. When the two joined
us a few days later, and we put our proposal
before them, they both accepted all our
conditions.
As regards the balance of our arrangements,
they only affected the Hatter and myself, and
were not therefore communicated to our new
mates. We decided that, as soon as our com-
panions started back and were out of sight, we,
being well armed, would go to the rock and
challenge, as Tor Ymmothe had told us. Then,
if the rock moved and the passage were open
to us, we would enter. After that—well, it
was a matter of awaiting developments before
we could arrange anything further.
“ But supposing the rock does not move?”
I said, when we were discussing it.
“There is no need to suppose that,” the
Hatter answered, as he looked at me and smiled.
“ I am certain that it will.”


From discussing our plan of action we
naturally drifted to the action itself, and the
first thing that demanded our attention was
the preparing for the expedition. After con-
siderable discussion, we agreed that it would
be better to carry out our arrangements gradu-
ally, so as to avoid the chance of creating in the
township that suspicion which was bound to
follow any lavish expenditure for stores and
other necessaries.
There was a big station over the ranges,
the Hatter told me, and it was arranged that
I should go there on foot and purchase a couple
of horses with what ready cash I had ; after
which I would ride down to Albany and com-
municate with the Adelaide bank, on which I had
a draft and instruct them to remit the amount to
Albany, Then I would draw all the money
out, and bring it on with me to Wonga, and,
leaving a portion of it in the hole under the
floor in case of a reverse, travel on with the
rest towards the goldfields and buy camels;
the Hatter meanwhile remaining at the selection
for Bill and Oates to arrive, when they were to
start off and meet me at a point on the route.
The first part of the arrangement was easily
carried out, and having bought my two horses,
I rode back to Wonga and handed one of them


over to the Hatter, while I rode on into Albany
with the other. It took some time to get my
draft business fixed up, and while I was waiting
I bought an outfit of weapons and ammunition
for myself. When the money was available,
I drew it out and returned to Wonga, where I
found that Bill and Oates had already arrived.
The Hatter told me that he had already
explained our scheme to the other two, and
they re-affirmed their complete acceptance of
it. We modified it sufficiently to allow Bill
to join me in the purchase of camels, etc.,
while Oates and the Hatter travelled together
and purchased arms for themselves. My
money I divided amongst the tour of us, Bill
and I taking the largest share for the purchase
of our team, while a sum in gold, which I had
brought specially for deposit in the hole under
the floor, I kept to myself until the Hatter got
the other two out of the way and enabled me
to hide it. I opened the place and placed it
on the stone alongside the waterproof-covered
manuscript. I was sorely tempted to open it
and glance at its contents, just to satisfy myself
whether my suspicions were correct or other-
wise ; but I fought against the inclination,
and hastily covered up the hiding-place and
obliterated all trace of the disturbed soil.


The next morning we separated, Bill and
I to visit the fields and obtain our camels and
necessaries; the Hatter and Oates to travel
slowly along towards the north-east and work
to and fro until we overtook them at an
arranged spot.
It is scarcely necessary to go into that part
of our expedition and detail our adventures ;
how we visited one field after the other, buying
a camel here and another there, always having
to fence with numerous inquisitive miners, who,
finding the alleged glory of Westralia not so
pronounced upon a close acquaintance, were
anxious to throw everything they had to the
winds, if they could have a chance of striking
something solid. And they were all suspicious
that we had a find somewhere about, and
wanted to follow us and “ chip in ” with our
luck. There was a good deal ot interest in
it while it lasted, though the memory of it is
dwarfed into comparatively nothing by the
exciting incidents and episodes which occurred
to me soon after. We managed to obtain all
that we desired, and, with our cavalcade, moved
along slowly towards the spot where we had
arranged to meet the other two. We found
them camped beside the only waterhole there
was for miles round, and just on the fringe


of the desert land. We elected to spend a
day or so in idleness before we began the
difficult ride across the shimmering sands in
search of the Bunyip’s Pool.
During our spell we overhauled our outfit
and distributed the loads amongst the camels,
and as the water was good, we filled all the
kegs we had brought to carry our supplies,
while we had the chance. The Hatter and
Oates had horses with them, and we decided to
take them with us, for although they would
make a certain demand upon the water, if the
worst came to the worst, they would be avail-
able for food, should our supply of salt beef—
not too lavish—run out.
The Hatter and I tried to locate the position
of the range we wanted to reach, and with our
memory of the route we had taken to and from
the place, and the situation of Coolgardie in
regard to where we were at the time, we
determined that it ought to be about north-
north-east from our starting place. We made
a rough sketch of a map and calculated how
many miles we had to journey, and how long
our stores of food and water would last, and
then we started away from the camp and were
soon in country where the scanty dwarfed vege-
tation and the preponderance of sandstone


boulders told us we were at all events heading
towards the dry desert interior.
With our previous experience of the blacks
we kept a sharp look out until we reached the
open, barren, sandy wastes. Then we pushed
on, feeling safe from any attacks of wandering
tribes. For ten days we struggled along
through the heat and glare of the sun-scorched
sand, and on the eleventh day our eyes were
gladdened with the sight, away on the horizon,
of the blue line of a range. Since we left the
camp we had not seen a single waterhole, and
our stock was already getting low when we
saw that sign on the horizon.
It was early in the day when we first sighted
it, and the Hatter was wild with delight as soon
as he caught a glimpse of it.
“ It’s your luck that has done it,” he exclaimed
to me. “ I knew we could find it if you were
with us.”
“ But it may not be the right one after all,”
I said.
“I would swear to it, even at this distance,”
he answered. “ Come along, boys ; there’s a
fortune for everybody who wants it there,” he
shouted, as he urged his wearied horse forward.
We pressed on, and as the outline grew clearer
and clearer I shared the Hatter’s sanguine views.


An hour from sunset we saw the dark green of
the trees showing distinctly ; the horses and the
camels must have caught the scent of the water,
for they needed no urging on our part to hasten
forward. Then the glow of the setting sun
was reflected among the trees and, as on our
first visit, we reached the wonderful oasis when
it was lit up with the rich red light of the dying
sun.
After the long, dreary stretch of dry, scorching
sand, there was an inexpressible pleasure in
standing once more on green verdure, and the four
of us rolled with delight on the grass ; while our
animals, having drunk their fill, cropped at it
with their loads still on their backs.
We had struck the lagoon on the side farthest
away from the spot where the pyramid had been
built, and the quick setting of the sun did not
enable us to see whether it was still there. The
Hatter suggested making a big fire, so that we
could see how to unload the animals and make
a secure camp,
“ Do you think it safe ? ” I said to him quietly,
for we had not told the others about the race of
pigmies who lived behind the cliff.
“Pah! They will not come out till we call,”
he answered.
I was sceptical, and carefully looked to the


firearms while the others made the fire. But
my fears were groundless and the Hatter was
right. A huge blazing fire was made, but no
pigmy army appeared.
As the flames leaped up and illumined the
scene, the Hatter gave a shout of joy.
“ There, my boys, there,” he cried, pointing
across the water to where, amid the shelter of
clustering vegetation, a yellow gleam appeared.
“ Look at that, for that’s the gold. Look how
it gleams in the firelight.”
With one accord we all started towards it
and stumbled over roots and branches in our
haste to reach it. As if it could have moved
after waiting for us so long !
It is impossible to describe the wild, almost
hysterical joy of our two mates, when they
realised the fact that it was all solid gold.
They danced and leaped about, beside them-
selves with delight, and even the Hatter and I
were more or less carried away. We ought to
have been more careful, and have mounted
guard against a surprise, but the idea never
entered our heads, and Bill and Oates were for
loading up the camels at once. The Hatter
and I managed to drive into them the folly of
such a plan, and at last we persuaded them
that the best thing to do was to have a meal;
11


though, when we sat round the fire discussing
it one or the other of them would jump to his
feet every now and again, and run over to the
pyramid to make sure that it was really all
gold, and still there.
I suppose I was the least enthusiastic of the
four, the result of my previous visit having
robbed me of the delight Bill and Oates felt
at the sight of so much wealth. They were
still talking of all the wonders that they would
be able to accomplish when they reached home
again, when I felt myself gradually getting
sleepy ; so t without disturbing their conversation
I quietly rolled a blanket round me, and,
stretching out by the fire, I dozed away into
a deep and dreamless sleep.
When I awakened the sun was shining, the
fire was out, and my three companions lay
soundly sleeping around me, while the camels
and horses were peacefully browsing round the
edge of the lagoon.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE RESULT OF EXPLORATION.
As soon as I was awake I arose, and inspected
on my own account the pyramid of gold, and
wandered along the pathway of golden bricks,
between many of which the grass was growing,
up to the. bare face of rock behind which so
much mystery existed.
The water still trickled down from the heights
above into the deep pool, from whence we had
seen emerge that hideous monster, whose re-
mains still slumbered beneath that magnificent
tomb that the myriad of pigmies had raised. I
stood and watched it as it fell in tinkling sounds,
over the lip of the cliff. The volume did not
appear to have changed in the slightest since
the last time I had looked upon it; there was
no evidence that the pool had overflowed, and
the stoppage of the grass at the end of the
desert was just as sudden and clean cut.
I turned towards the rocky wall and examined
it closely and carefully for some sign or token


to guide me into finding where that hidden
portal existed ; but all the face was smooth and
unbroken, and I could find nothing which in
any way could be regarded as a break or a
crevice.
I applied my ear to the wall and listened
attentively, but caught no sound and was in
the act of removing my head when I glanced
upward. Above my head I saw that a line
ran across the face of the rock about ten feet
from the ground.
I leaped back and looked, and now that I
had discovered where to look, I wondered that
I had not noticed the mark before. I could
distinctly trace the line and saw that it was
some six feet long and a good ten feet from the
ground. From either end other lines, uneven
and irregular, rose straight up to about twenty
feet when they converged together until they
met and formed a pointed arch. In tracing
them my eyes also caught sight of something
else, and that was a narrow ledge, which sloped
up near the point where the water fell over,
and which apparently went down to the foot
of the wall some distance away.
Fired by my discovery, I hastened along the
wall until I came to the edge of the water.
A narrow ledge ran along and under the fall,


and without stopping I hurried along it, press-
ing close against the rock so as to avoid slipping
off into the water. I succeeded in reaching
the other side where I found the vegetation
growing thick and rank, and in order to examine
the rock more closely, I shinned up a small
thin sapling which grew close to it. When I
had gained a point above the top of the under-
growth, I glanced towards the face of the cliff
and saw that, a little farther on, the ledge I
had noticed descended rapidly to the ground.
I slipped down again and pushed my way
rapidly through the bushes until I came to the
place where the ledge was level with my waist.
It was barely two feet wide and sloped in
towards the rock, rising in a steep grade to the
top of the waterfall. I scrambled up on to it
and, on my hands and knees, climbed slowly
upwards, I was soon above the tops of the
trees and could look out over them across the
barren stretch of yellow sand, away to the
horizon, where the desert merged into the blue
mist of the sky. A little farther on and I was
just below the jet of water and, looking care-
fully upwards, I saw that there was another
ledge above me. I hastened along until my
head was above it and then I saw that which
made me start so violently that I almost lost


my balance and nearly fell into the great deep
pool below.
What I had taken to be another ledge was
in reality the summit of a wall of some twelve
feet in thickness and as my head rose above it
and I was able to look over it, I saw, stretching
away for at least a hundred yards, an expanse
of rippling, sunlit water. Beyond the water
there rose another rocky wall which I did little
more than glance at, for a light breeze was
blowing, and as my eyes caught the first glimpse
of the ripples coming towards me, I started,
the unexpected view impressing me with the
idea that they were huge waves rolling down
to overwhelm me. Fortunately my hands were
tightly gripping the edge of the parapet, or I
should have crashed down to destruction below.
As it was, I could barely keep my balance and
scrambled up on to the wall and lay there pant-
ing and trembling with the effort I had made.
When I had recovered my breath I looked
around, and understood the mystery of the
jet of water which spurted out from the face
of the cliff and fell into the pool at its base.
A channel had been cut through the solid rock
up to within a foot of the edge, and the water
of the lake flowed through it and then through
a hole which had been pierced in the remaining


foot of rock below the water's level. My eyes
followed the causeway upon which I was resting,
to where it swept round in a bold curve away
towards the face of rock on the other side.
I saw that it sloped up on one side to the
summit of the next face, and as my glance
travelled across that, I noticed a long thin
silver streak standing out clear against the dark
background of the rock. I was on my feet,
intending to hasten round and satisfy myself
whether the distant cliff was yet another retain-
ing wall of a reservoir, when my ears caught
the sound of a coo-ee away down below among
the trees.
In my excitement I had forgotten all about
my companions. The shouts were continued
and I crept back to the edge of the cliff and
looked over. They were evidently alarmed at
my absence, for I could see them running
hither and thither as they looked among the
trees for me, and I could hear their coo-ees
and their shouting of my name.
Lying flat on the top of the cliff, I put my
head over the edge and gave a long loud coo-ee.
They all heard me and looked up, but could
not distinguish me, until I waved my hat, and
I could then see them gesticulating and waving
for me to come down.


I was about to do so when I heard a curious
grating sound below me, and glancing down,
I saw a slab of the wall at the place I had
noticed the crevices, slowly fall outwards. I
shouted out and looked towards the three ; but
they had also seen the rock moving, and I saw
them run to the camp and come back a
moment later with their rifles in their hands.
The top of the slab of stone by that time was
a foot away from the face of the cliff and I,
clutching my revolver which I fortunately had
in my belt, lay and watched it moving, with
a breathless fascination.
Slowly it lowered, and from my position I
could see' that it was apparently working on
a hinge ; though how it was prevented from
falling out at once I could not grasp. As it
stood out from the wall I tried to peer into
the black hollow space behind it, but I was too
high to command any view of what there was
beyond. It continued its slow descent until
it stood out at right angles with the cliff; and
I looked again at my comrades, who stood
watching it as though they were spellbound.
Then, from out of the space at the back of it,
I saw a swarm of the pigmy people crowd out
upon it, and the downward movement became
quicker until the end of it touched the ground.


Those who were nearest at once jumped off,
and then the whole swarm rushed forward
looking, from where I lay, exactly like an
army of ants streaming from a rift in an ant
hill. The stone slab was covered with them
and the ground grew black as they rushed on
to the three men who stood without even
raising their rifles.
In a moment, as it seemed to me, the swarm
was upon them and over them and I saw the
three borne down to the earth and held by the
crowd of impish figures. I could not under-
stand how it had happened, so quickly did the
swarm do its work, but the three men were
pulled over to the slab and dragged up its
slope, exactly as if they were grains of wheat
being carried off by ants. So fascinated was
I that I could move neither hand nor foot as
the extraordinary scene was being performed,
and I only realised the full significance of it
as I saw the stone slab rise rapidly, and, with
a repetition of the grating sound, fit back into
its place.
I cannot describe the feeling of hideous
terror which then took possession of me. I
dared not move from where I lay, not even to
look behind me ; I could only lie and stare
vacantly at the cliff where that great slab had


grated back into its socket. I was torn with
a thousand conflicting fears for my own and
my comrades’ safety until there came into my
mind, with a flash, the recollection of how the
Hatter and I had hidden ourselves from the
vision of the pigmy army and its Yellow Queen
on our previous visit.
At once I scrambled down the narrow ledge,
and as soon as I reached the firm ground below
I hastened to the spot where we had unloaded
our team the night before. Then I remembered
that we had no rope ladder in our kit, and,
without thinking, I rushed about to try and
find the stores we had discarded when we loaded
up to our first team with gold. Covered and
hidden by the undergrowth I found them un-
injured by the exposure to that dry atmosphere.
The ladder was where we had thrown it, and
taking a coil of lanyard with me I sought and
found the tree we had previously occupied.
Fear and anxiety lent strength to my muscles ;
and I was up in the branches, and had the
lanyard thrown over one of the second tier,
before I remembered that I had to go down
again to fasten the end of it to the ladder.
But it was long enough to hang over the
branch while both ends reached the ground,
and I came down the tree again and fetched


the ladder, which I fastened to one end and
pulled it up by hauling in the other. I
hastily reclimbed the tree and secured the
ladder to the branch, and, without a pause,
worked with the energy of a fanatic until I
had reconstructed a nest of blankets for myself,
and had taken up all our arms and ammunition
and enough food to last me for some days.
We had a couple of fowling pieces with us,
as well as the rifles, and I carefully loaded them,
as being more servicable against the pigmy
swarms than the weapons which fired only
single bullets; and, with them handy within
my reach, I pulled the ladder up and lay down
upon the blankets I had spread out on the
branch, to watch and wait.
Throughout the day I stayed, straining my
ears to catch a sound ; but without any result,
save weariness. The slab in the cliff did not
move, and all that I could hear was the steady
and persistent tinkle of the water, as it fell into
the pool from the top of the cliff. The sun
was going down towards the horizon, and I
had seen and heard nothing which gave me any
indication of the return of the pigmies, or the
whereabouts of my comrades, I forced myself
to eat some food, for which I had but little
appetite, and then, when the sun had dis


appeared, I lay through the darkness of the
night, filled with a terror and dismay which
passes the power of language to describe. A
horrible dread was in my mind, and I dared not
look towards the spot where I knew the remains
of that hideous monster we had slain Jay resting
beneath his pyramid of gold, nor towards the
pool that shimmered through the darkness, Jest
my fancy should deceive me into believing that
once more I saw the hideous form of the dead
thing. The night seemed interminable to me,
and I wonder now, looking back at it, how I
came through it without a shattered mind.
But at last a grey pallor spread over the sky,
and I hailed it with feverish delight, for it was
the token of the coming dawn.
When the sun mounted above the horizon,
and I was able to look around and see every-
thing as it had been when I last saw it the
evening before, my mind was somewhat easier,
and I ate ravenously, a circumstance which
added to my confidence ; for I reasoned that,
while I could eat, I was not quite past hoping
for. Still, I dared not descend from my lofty
stronghold, but Jay still throughout the day,
anxiously wondering what had become of my
comrades, and trying to formulate some plan
by which I could help or rescue them. But


everything I could think of seemed so utterly
impracticable. I could not face those swarming
myriads, even if I knew how to get that slab
of stone out of its place; whereas, on the other
hand, the Hatter, if he came before the Yellow
Queen, would be able to hold his own with
her, as he had done before. It was the latter
idea which steadily gained upon me and kept
me inactive ; for I reasoned that it would be
better for me to wait for developments, rather
than rush into a course of action which might,
after all, only make matters worse. So the day
passed and night came on again, and once more
I felt the horrible lonliness of my position.
While it was dark I could not sleep, but lay
in an agony of suspense and dread, fearing at
every moment, as I had feared the night before,
that there would be some spectral appearance
of- the slaughtered horror. But none came,
and when the sun rose once more I was
exhausted in mind and body, and, having fed,
dropped off from very fatigue into a deep,
sound sleep.
The sky was red with the glow of the setting
sun when I awakened and looked out away over
the desert. Then I started up with a cry, for
away in the distance I could see the dark line
of the camels, walking as they only walk when


they are driven, while a little on one side were
the two horses with a man on each.
I looked down at the pyramid. It was
disturbed, and the topmost layers of bricks
were gone. Then the truth came upon me.
While I slept, my comrades had been released
or escaped ; they had sought for me, perhaps,
but not being able to find me had given me
up for lost, and had then loaded up the team
and had started.
For a time I was beside myself with dismay,
and know not what I did until I heard the
warning, grating sound and found that I was
stretched out on the ground at the foot of
my tree. I sprang to the ladder and clambered
up, drawing it after me when I had reached
my nest. Then I lay still, terrified and un-
nerved.


CHAPTER XV.
THE PIGMY SWARM AGAIN.
The night was dark, and I could not even
see the ground below me, as I lay with my
eyes straining to pierce the gloom. But I
could hear, and what I heard did not tend to
soothe my nerves.
There was a soft pattering, first in the
direction of the cliff, and then extending all
over the place, and I knew that the myriad
swarms of pigmies were running hither and
thither among the trees. It occurred to me
that they were seeking for me, and I lay still
for fear that they should hear me if I only
moved, and so discover my hiding-place.
The pattering of their feet, and the rustling
of the leaves as they brushed past, continued
for a time and then subsided, and the night
was still and quiet again. I expected to
hear the stone slab grate back into its place
again, but it did not, and I was wondering
whether it had done so without my hearing


it, when I saw a faint gleam of light come
from the direction of the cliff, and the pattering
recommenced. A moment later and the swarm
appeared, each one carrying a small blazing
torch. They ran along until they lined round
the pool below me, and I reached out for my
shot-guns and rifles in a horrible fear that yet
another monster would appear from the depths
of the silent pool.
Another sound came from the direction of
the cliff, and as I turned my eyes towards it,
my breath caught; for, coming down the path
of gold which led to the pyramid, illumined
by the pale phosphorescence of her skin, was
the majestic figure of Tor Ymmothe, and
behind her, wrapped in a gleaming yellow robe,
walked the Hatter.
They walked slowly down to the edge of
the pool, the flickering light from the pigmy
torches making the sight hideously weird, and
I gripped one of the shot-guns without
thinking what I was doing. For a time they
stood silent and still. Then the Yellow Queen
waved her hand, and I saw the pigmies behind
her plunge forward and leap upon the Hatter
who was borne down to the ground and held
helpless. He seemed to be utterly powerless,
for he did not even attempt to resist as they


dragged him towards the pyramid and laid
him upon the broken summit, fastening him
with a perfect network of slender cords. I
did not know what it meant, but the sight
of my comrade in such a position drove the
last vestige of fear from my mind, and I was
cool in my rage and hate against the yellow
fiend who stood and watched him.
Presently she uttered one of her blood-
curdling laughs, and stepped towards him
where he lay, and I saw something gleam in
her hand. She raised it, and I saw a long,
thin blade flash in the light of the torches.
In the instant it was clear to me. The
Hatter was to be sacrificed upon the tomb of
the slaughtered ogre.
I changed my shot-gun for a rifle and,
throwing the barrel forward, I aimed straight
for the breast of the Yellow Queen. She
leant forward over her victim and then, drawing
back, raised her knife to the limit of her reach,
and I fired.
I heard the hideous chorus of yells and
shrieks which followed the report of my rifle,
but I did not heed them in my intentness
to watch Tor Ymmothe. The knife was
knocked out of her hand; for as she reached
her arm back, she leaned her body forward
12


and I, striving to cover her heart, fired too
high and the bullet struck the knife, scarcely
an inch away from her hand. Seeing that I
had missed her, I caught up the shot-gun. A
crowd of pigmies ran towards the knife where
it had fallen, and stooped around it. With
only a desire to kill in my mind I fired both
barrels at them, the shot scattering them, while
the shrieking and yelling broke out afresh.
I saw the woman standing still and erect,
looking towards my nest, and, drawing my
revolver, I snapped the trigger at her, the
bullet striking the ground at her feet and
splashing some soil over her. I was aiming
more carefully at her heart when I heard the
Hatter cry out :
“ Steady, Dick ; steady. Don’t shoot her.
It’s all right.”
The woman turned round towards him and
then looked up again in my direction.
“ It’s all right, old man,” the Hatter
continued, and to my intense surprise, I saw
him rise from what I thought was about to be
the altar of his sacrifice.
“ For Heaven’s sake, man, say what it all
means,” I shouted ; for with my nerves strung
as they were I could think of nothing else to
say.


The effect of my voice upon the Yellow
Queen was magical.
She flung herself flat upon her face, and
uttered a similar shriek to that which had so
curdled my blood on the night we first saw
her. It went through me with a thrill of
horror, but it was evidently even more terrible
to the swarm of shrivelled little ape-like
creatures who were about her, for they moaned
and whimpered in so agonised a fashion that
1 could scarcely keep from firing upon them,
as one fires on wounded rats, to put them out
of their misery.
The Hatter, standing by her prostrate figure,
called out again.
“You’ve done it now, Dick ; you’re the King
of Night after this. You must speak Pitchorie
and tell her to go inside with all her people,
and then I’ll come and explain matters.”
I acted on the suggestion. Anything was
better than the anxious suspense I was in, and
whether I made myself the King of Night, or
any other mythical potentate, was a matter of
indifference, so long as I could have a few
words with a fellow-creature and obtain some
idea of the mystery of all the recent events.
I leaned forward and called out in the most
impressive tone that I could adopt consistently


with a correct pronunciation of that extra-
ordinary tongue.
“ Thou Queen of Lemuria, listen to me.”
She sprang to her feet and stood with down
drooped head and limply hanging arms.
“ Retire with all your people behind the
secret door in the rock, and there await our
coming,” I cried.
She turned and spoke to her swarms and then
laid her arms upon the Hatter’s shoulders.
“ He is to stay,” I yelled.
A sad wail broke from her lips.
“O King of Night, take not from me the
light and glory of my life, even for one
moment.”
It struck me that the Hatter must have
been making rapid progress with his inamorata
to have made himself the light and glory of
her life in a period of two days ; and a touch
of sardonic humour came to me, giving my
nerves a refreshing stimulus, and soothing my
anxiety more than any thing else could have
done.
“ Did I not send him to you ? ” I shouted.
“ Yea, O Lord of Night,” she answered
submissively.
“ Then obey, lest I take him away again for
ever,” I continued in an angry tone of voice.


She wanted no further inducement to depart,
and, having marshalled her troops from the
field, she flung her arms around the Hatter and
then followed them.
We waited until the stone jarred back into
its place,
“ I’ll just see if it’s all clear,” the Hatter
said, “ There’s nothing like caution, now
you’re in it too,”
I heard him walk away and I lay waiting
until I heard his return.
“ Here’s the ladder,” I said softly, when
his footsteps sounded below me and I lowered
the ladder down.
He climbed up slowly and when he was at
the top and on to the bough, I pulled up the
ladder also. Then he grasped me by the hand.
“ For pity’s sake, give me a smoke,” he
said, “ I have not had one for days.”
The mingled fear and distress I had ex-
perienced since I saw my comrades carried off,
had actually driven all idea of smoking out of
my head, but the mention of it by the Hatter
brought the longing back to me with a rush.
“ Neither have I,” I exclaimed. “ I was
too scared.”
I sought and found my pipe and some tobacco,
and we shared it in turns. For the first few


minutes we did not speak ; but at length, when
it came to my turn to draw at it, the Hatter
found his tongue,
“ This is a pretty muddle,” he said. “ I
thought you were miles away with the others,”
“ And I thought you were,” I exclaimed.
“Me ? Why I said I had come to stop,”
he answered,
“Yes, but I only saw the team away in the
distance ”
“ Only saw them in the distance ? Why,
how was that ? ” he interrupted me to ask.
The shortest way to explain was to tell him
all that had occurred since I saw him and the
others seized, so I detailed it as well as I could
recall it.
“ Well, this business gets more strange at
every turn,” he said meditatively. “You will
have to go through with it now, whatever it
means.”
“ Of course I shall have to go through with
it; for Ido not see how lam to walk over that
desert by myself.”
“ And I cannot come with you,” he said.
“But tell me all that has taken place,” I
exclaimed. “ Why did you let them collar
you ? Why did not you shoot ? ”
“ I did not want to, and the others were too


scared to do anything when they saw the stone
falling and Tor Ymmothe standing in resplendent
majesty towering over the hordes of animated
shrivelled mummies that surrounded her.”
“ She did not come out,” I said.
“ No. She stood inside the opening like an
enshrined saint. But, of course, you could not
see her from where you were.”
“Tell me the whole story. Begin at the
beginning,” I exclaimed.
“ Well don’t interrupt me and I will,” he
replied, and commenced a story to which I
listened with rapt attention.
It appeared that the three of them, tired out
with their exertions on the night of our arrival,
slept very much sounder and longer than I did.
Oates was the first to awaken, and noticing that
I was not by the fire, he roused the others,
fearing that something had happened to me.
They coo-eed to me but receiving no reply,
searched for me among the trees, shouting all
the while. As they could find no trace of me
nor obtain any answer, the Hatter feared that
the pigmies had surprised me and carried me off,
and began to tell the other two about the secret,
mysterious opening in the rock. But they only
laughed at him and he led them to the place, to
show them where the pigmies had come from,


when I caught sight of them. Oates and Bill
still laughed at his story and started shouting
again when they heard my answer, and were
looking up at me and wondering how I had
managed to scale the precipice when the stone
began to move.
The pigmies, hearing the noise, had told their
Queen, and she at once concluding that it was
her promised love, prepared to greet him in due
state. The moving stone turned the ridicule
of Bill and Oates into alarm, and they ran for
their rifles. But when they saw the stone fall
and the stream of pigmies rush forth, while
the Yellow Queen stood towering above them,
with her phosphorescent skin gleaming against
the black shadow behind her, with her mass of
marvellous hair hanging round her and her arms
extended, they were paralysed so completely
that they could not even raise their weapons, let
alone use them.
He denied that the pigmies captured them,
all the same. They only carried them into the
interior in state, though the Hatter admitted
that the state was somewhat crude.
Once inside, the stone rose into its place again,
and they found themselves In impenetrable
darkness, the only glimmer of light being that
shed by the phosphorescence of the Queen, a


by no means soothing apparition to Bill and
Oates.
The Hatter told them to keep cool ; that
they were all right, and that he would guarantee
their safety. Then he addressed Tor Ymmothe
in the Pitchorie tongue. He told her that
he had come in obedience to the orders of the
King of Night, who had also sent the two
others who were with him. He was to stay
with her and break the spell of her doom, but
the others were to return from whence they
came, carrying with them, as a token to the
King of Night, as many of the yellow bricks
from the bunyip’s tomb as they chose.
She listened to him in silence, but when he
stopped she broke out into a fury of anger.
She reviled him and the King of Night and
vowed that they should all be devoured, for
if only one remained the spell of the doom
could not be broken, save by her surrender of
him, and that she would not allow.
“I could not make out what she meant,”
the Hatter said. “ Nor do I understand it
now ; but she kept on repeating, over and over
again, c Who will wake her ? Who will wake
her, If only one remains ? ’ So as I was in the
dark and it looked rather bad for all of us, I
played a bold stroke. ‘ Queen of Lemuria,’


I cried. ‘ Beware the King of Night, Until
he sees the others depart he will be in anger.’
But the only answer she would give was to
repeat her query, ‘ Who will wake her ? Who
will wake her, if only one remains ? ’ ”
Having once assumed a threatening tone
with her, he felt that it would be suicidal to
change it. For himself, he said he did not
care, but the lives of Oates and Bill, as well as
mine, depended upon his persuading her that
the others were to be allowed to go free. The
more he threatened, however, the more deter-
mined she became in her assertion that none
should go. At last he lost patience and
shouting out in a loud tone, he ordered her
and her tribe to leave them where they were,
while he communed with the King of Night.
She retorted by inviting him to commune with
the King of Night while she was present, and
was casting doubts on the genuineness either
of himself or his potentate when an idea came
to him upon which he acted.
He quickly asked Bill and Oates whether
they had their revolvers with them, and as they
had, he told them to be ready to fire one shot
straight up over their heads when he gave
the word.
“It was a mad, reckless thing to do,” he


went on. “It might Have brought down the
roof on our heads or anything else, for we did
not know what there was above us except dark-
ness. However, we had to do it, so I told the
Queen that unless she retired we would each of
us send a message to our King, telling him of
her rebellion, and I threatened her with the
most terrible consequences if she were there
when the reply came back. She answered us
with one of those marrow-thrilling laughs of
hers and I gave the word to fire.
“ The flames from the barrels shot directly
up over our heads, and to those who did not
know what gunpowder meant, must have had
a terrible effect. But the crashing of the
bullets against the rock overhead and the
spatter of flying chips and splashes consequent
upon the bullets striking made the effect a
hundred-fold more weird. In a wild, hideous
chorus of shrieks and screams, the whole horde,
headed by Tor Ymmothe, rushed away into
the darkness and disappeared.
“We had a momentary glimpse of our
surroundings when the pistols flashed. We
seemed to be in a large low-roofed cavern,
the floor of which rose up to the roof round
the edges, like the inside of a saucer. We
could see no opening, but we could see on


every side, crowding one against the other, the
repulsive faces of our pigmy captors, and it
was not a pleasing sight, especially to Bill
and Oates.
“When they had gone, we discussed the
situation, and tried to find the way of moving
that mysterious stone, but failed ; as we also
failed to find any outlet from the cavern. We
were caged clearly enough, and as the time
wore on and no one came to us, matters assumed
a more and more serious aspect. As we had
not had breakfast before we started to look for
you, we began to feel the growing hunger, but,
strangely enough, we felt no thirst all the time
we were in that cavern. As we were in total
darkness it was impossible to judge the flight
of time, but it seemed a terribly long wait be-
fore we heard a grating sound, and saw almost
immediately the form of Tor Ymmothe standing
against the wall farthest from us.
‘ O Queen,’ I cried out as soon as she
appeared. ‘ The King of Night is angry, and
if you do not at once obey his orders, you
and your race shall be destroyed for ever.
But if you obey him, then will he hearken
to you through me, and grant what you
desire.
“ ‘ How shall I know that ? ’ she asked.


“‘ I stay here,’ I answered. ‘ And am I not
sent to you by him whom you own as monarch ?
Have you forgotten how his tongues of fire
slew the bunyip in his strength ? Would you
also die as he did ? ’
ct I had accidentally struck the right note,”
the Hatter continued, “ for she at once gave
way, and said that the stone should be moved,
but only for a very brief space. I told the
other two to bolt directly the stone was re-
moved ; to catch the team, load it with gold
and clear out, with you if they could find you
in time to get away within six hours, or without
you if they could not. They did not stop to
argue the matter, and directly the stone moved
and they saw daylight through the opening they
made for it, and the stone closed again on me,
on Tor Ymmothe, and on darkness.
“ Then she told me that when the sun was
gone she would lead me to the bunyip’s tomb,
and await the sending of the other one by the
King of Night, making pretence to kill me so
as to hurry him up. I expected to lie there
till I died of hunger, because I had anticipated
that you had gone off with the others, but it
was no use giving my game away at the start,
so I agreed to everything, and well, you
know the rest.”


“ But what does she mean by c the other
one ’ ? ” I asked,
“I don’t know what she means; but I do
know I’m nearly starving, especially now that I
have had a smoke,” he replied,
I passed him some food, mentally reviling
myself that my selfish curiosity had not given
him time to ask for it before.
“ It ought to be dawning soon,” I exclaimed,
glancing towards the east which was growing
grey.
“ Then we had better have a brief camp, and
discuss our future plans when we have rested,”
he replied.


CHAPTER XVI.
BEHIND THE BARRIER.
When I awakened the sun was well up in the
sky, but the Hatter, wrapped in his yellow
robe, lay still sleeping. I crept over to his
side and examined the quaint garment he was
wearing.
It was a long loose cloak, more like a clergy-
man’s surplice than a robe perhaps, and was
made of a very fine metallic-looking thread
closely woven. I took a piece between my
fingers and examined it carefully, and while I
was so doing he awakened.
“ It’s a queer looking garb, isn’t it ? I
believe it is made of a wonderfully fine gold
thread, judging by the weight of it,” he said,
when he saw what I was doing.
He had expressed the idea that was in my
mind, and my curiosity to visit the interior of
that strange stronghold was more than intensi-
fied. What further extraordinary things might
we not discover about this marvellous race,


shrivelled up through the course of vast ages
into vitalised mummies, but who once had
developed their arts into such a state of perfection
as to be able to weave a veritable cloth of
gold ?
We examined the article carefully, but there
was no suggestion of any ornamental pattern
upon it; the weaving was extremely close and
the thread marvellously fine, so that the whole
piece was just a gleaming sheet of fine-spun
gold, woven into shape without seam or a
stitch that we could discover,
“ Well, never mind the rag,” the Hatter
exclaimed, “ Let us have some breakfast and
a smoke.”
We elected to descend from our nest, feeling
secure against interruption from the pigmies ;
so we went down to the spot where we had
camped. We found that Bill and Oates had
left nearly the whole of the provisions behind
them, sacrificed doubtless to the greed of gold,
and we made a sumptuous meal, after which
we smoked awhile, the Hatter recovering his
own pipe again.
“ I’ve got a plan,” he said, breaking a silence
which had lasted some time. “I don’t know
if you’ll care for it, but it is the only thing I
can think of.”


“ Let me hear it,” I answered. “It seems
that I must stay here for a time any way, until
something turns up.”
“Yes, that’s it. You cannot attempt to
walk across that desert; at least, not yet.
Besides which, I should like to know all about
that saying of the Queen. So this is my plan.
We will make everything secure here in case
of necessity arising for us to need a place in
which to stand a siege. Most of the stuff we
will haul up into the tree, keeping enough
down here to last us for a month or so. There’s
ample, what with the stores we left and what
those other two discarded, to keep us going
for half a year. When we have made our
arrangements we will summon Tor Ymmothe
to open the gate, and we will play out our little
drama.”
“ That is all very well,” I said. “ But
what is the little drama ? ”
“I am coming to that. I shall tell her that
you have been sent by the King of Night in
response to her request; that, as we are of a
different race to her people, we must have
our own food which the King of Night has
also sent, and which her hordes will have to
carry inside for us. Then well, then we
shall have to wait developments,”
13


“ But we must know something of what
they are likely to be,” I said. The programme
as it stood might be all very well for him, if
he wanted to stay inside that mysterious place
for the rest of his life, but as I had no such
ambition, I could not quite see where I came
in.
“ Yes, we must, somehow ; though I don’t
see how we are going to do it.”
“ I have it,” I exclaimed. “ When we were
here before, you made her explain to you all
about herself. She did not go much into detail,
certainly, but she gave a fair outline of events.
Why not do that again ? Why not tell her
she is commanded by this interesting potentate
to tell me all she knows ? ”
“It’s a good idea,” he said, after a few
moments’ thought. “ I’ll try it.”
“Then there is another point. How long
is it to last ? When do we start back and
how are we to go ? ” I asked.
“ I never go back,” he said gravely, “If
you want to I will do all I can to assist you
short of accompanying you; but I don’t
believe you will want to. I cannot tell you
why I believe it, but I do. There is going
to be some strange business come out of
this.”


“ I don’t mind a little experience inside there,”
I said, pointing towards the face of rock.
“ But I am not prepared to enter it for life.
We can go in all right and try to learn
something of the mystery of it all, and then
I think we shall be better out of it, and among
civilised people again. Besides, we have to
return to join Bill and Oates, and get our
share of the gold they took away.”
“ I never go back,” he answered, as he
looked at me with a strange smile on his
face. “If you want to go, I should advise
you to start now. You are outside the barrier
and know that there is only the desert between
you and settled country, though that in itself
is a fairly difficult obstacle to get over. But
once inside there, neither you nor I know how
to get out again. If your mind is set on
getting home again, go now, and leave me to
face the Queen alone; it is useless your coming
in with me, if you want to get away again.”
“ If we can get in, we can get out again,”
I exclaimed. “ For the rest, my curiosity
is aroused, and I want to know more about
the mystery of the people and the place.
While we stick together we need not fear,
however many the pigmies may be, and I
reckon none of them are bullet-proof.”


“ It’s a very risky business for you,” he
said gravely. “ I tell you candidly I do
not believe there is any chance of your
coming out when you are once inside.”
“ Oh, well,” I said. “We can only know
about that when we are there. For the
present there is nothing to be done but, as you
say, wait developments. If the worst comes to
the worst, I must make the best of a bad job,
and at all events it will be an experience.”
So we set to work, and stored most of the
provisions up in the tree ; and while we were
doing so I kept on telling the Hatter that, if
the worst did come, I should look to him to
stand by me, even to the point of accompanying
me from the place.
We found that Bill and Oates had been
terribly reckless with the stores; for they had
discarded so much that we feared whether they
had taken enough with them to last them until
they reached settled country again. As it was,
we had even more than sufficient to last us for
six months, and we stacked nearly three months’
supply, for the pigmies to carry inside for us.
At last, just at sundown, we had everything
ready. I was for waiting until the following
morning before challenging the gate, but the
Hatter insisted upon doing so at once. After


all, he said, it was no use wasting time over
the matter, and I, having a good stock of
cartridges and a couple of revolvers in my belt,
felt fairly secure and self-reliant and agreed to
face the unknown.
The red glow of the setting sun lit up the
face of rock when we approached it. The
Hatter shouted out the name of Tor Ymmothe
three times, and then we saw the stone slowly
move and heard the strange grating sound as
it left the solid rock. I did not wonder that
Bill and Oates had been scared at it, for it
had a weird effect upon me, and I knew what
was behind it; though, looking back at the
experience now, it was a trivial affair compared
with what followed during our stay in that
most uncanny of uncanny places.
The stone slowly fell until it stood out at
right angles from the face of the cliff, and I
could see that behind it there was a great
yawning, dark cavern. Then it was sufficiently
down for me to see what the others had seen.
Along what I may term the threshold of the
cave there was a line of pigmy forms, their eyes
shining like the eyes of cats, with the dark
background behind them and the ruddy glare
of the sun in front. But it was not alone their
eyes that the ruddy glare illumined.


Standing well within the cave, I saw the
majestically moulded form of the Yellow
her golden-hued skin shining like polished metal
where the sun rays touched her, and with her
great eyes glistening like living lights. It was
a sight which held me speechless and moveless,
and I scarcely noticed how the stone had
descended to the ground, and how the troops
of pigmies were swarming over it and towards
us. I was dumbly fascinated, out the spell was
rudely broken. A score of brown, shrivelled
hands were laid upon my legs and I was lifted
from my feet and laid, as helpless as a child,
upon the broad of my back, while all over my
body I felt those tiny hands plucking and
grasping me, and all round my face the
wizened faces of the living dead creatures were
pressed, as they strove to lift me from the
ground.
A thrill of the most intense horror passed
over me, and I swung myself round in an effort
to fling them away from me, I might as well
have tried to fling off a swarm of bees, for the
tiny hands gripped like steel and held me, and,
even as I struggled, I was subdued into passive
inertia.
I was carried up the sloping stone and into
the darkness of the cavern, and through it


again into a place where the air was wonderfully
cool and the light soft and dim. There I was
laid down gently, and the pattering of little
feet told me that those who had borne me so
easily were leaving me. I turned on my elbow,
and glanced behind me just in time to see the
last of the figures disappearing through a small,
dark hole; and before I could leap to my feet
the hole had disappeared, and I was staring at
an apparently unbroken wall of a dull yellow
colour. I glanced around me and found that
I was in a large circular room, with an arching
roof high above me, through which a soft light
streamed and filled the entire chamber. The
walls were all of a dull yellow colour, and when
I approached them I found that they were
built of the same sort of bricks that had been
used to build the tomb above the dead bunyip.
The floor was of the same material and I
gasped as I realised that I was in a veritable
golden chamber, the value of which would be
almost incalculable were it to be transported
into one of the civilised centres of the world.
On the side of the room farthest from the
point where I had seen the pigmies disappear-
ing was a heap, which I at first thought was
only a pile of loose particles of metal. I went
over to it and found that it was a number of


cushions made of the same class of fabric as
the Hatter’s robe.
I sat down on them and sank into a delici-
ously soft couch which yielded to my weight
only to cling around me with a caressing touch,
in comparison with which the softest eider-
down would be hard and rough. It was so
entrancingly enjoyable, especially' after the hard
couch of a bushman’s experience, that I lay
back at full length, revelling in the luxury, and
forgetting for the moment that I was alone and
heaven only knew where.
When I remembered that, the spell of the
soft dreamy couch was forgotten and I sprang
to my feet and shouted out the Hatter’s name.
My voice echoed in an unearthly way all round
and round the room, and then went up into the
lofty dome and came back to me again in
strangely modulated tones that made my blood
run cold, so human and yet so utterly unearthly
were they.
I dashed round the room, hammering the
walls with my fist and kicking with my boots,
but only to find them everywhere hard, solid
and immovable. In despair, I found myself
again at the place where the golden cushions lay
spread, and threw myself upon them in a
paroxysm of fear that had come to me. I


buried my face in their soft clinging embrace
and lay in a stupor of fear and alarm.
How long I remained in that position I do
not know, but I was aroused from it by hearing
my name called, and, springing up, I saw the
Hatter standing in the middle of the room,
“ Where have you come from ? ” I cried, for
my hurried glance round the walls showed no
opening.
For answer he pointed down to the floor and
then, with a laugh, came towards me.
“ This is the rummiest place I ever was in,”
he exclaimed. “ Talk about modern science ;
why, it is not within a mile of what these ancient
Lemurians could do. Do you know what ? ”
“ I know I’m caged up here like a convict,
and can find neither door nor opening by which
to get out,” I replied sharply.
“ Well, don’t try up there,” he said, pointing
to the roof.
“ How can I, when it is anything up to fifty
feet over my head ? ”
“ Do you know what is on the top of it ? ”
he asked. “Do you know what makes this
room so cool and the light so soft? ”
“ What is the use of asking me such insane
questions ? How am Ito know anything, seeing
that those infernal little imps carried me in here


and left me on the floor, disappearing through
the wall heaven only knows how,” I retorted.
“ Then I will tell you,” he said quietly,
seating himself on a corner of the pile of cushions.
“ You remember the lake you discovered when
you scaled the cliff? Well, you are under the
middle of it. If you could break through that
dome the water would flood in and drown you,
for it is fathoms deep above you and all around
you,”
I looked at him without replying.
The light,” he continued, “ never varies.
It comes from a great lamp which is burning
in a vacuum chamber built similarly to this,
beneath the waters of the reservoir which rises
above this one.”
“ The second cliff where I saw the water
falling over across this lagoon ? ” I asked, point-
ing upwards.
“Exactly,” he replied. “I cannot tell you
aiiy more at present, as to the way of it. All
I know is that in that second chamber is lying
the person to whom Tor Ymmothe referred
when she said, ‘ Who will awaken her ? ’ Who
or what she is I know not, but the Queen
believes you are the one sent to awaken her, for
until that is done the spell of her doom cannot
be broken,”


“ But how am I to get there, when there is
no way out of this ? ” I exclaimed.
“ There are a dozen ways,” he replied.
“ The door and openings work by the same
power that moves the stone in the cliff. The
secret at present is only known to the Queen ;
but I have guessed what the power is, and we
have only to watch to see how it is applied and
controlled.”
“ You are not going to say ” I began,
when he interrupted me.
“ The power is water, and in this place I am
convinced there is one of the grandest schemes
of hydraulic energy ever dreamed of by man.
But we cannot go into that now. Tor Ymmothe
accepts the suggestion you made, or, as she
understands it, the King of Night orders. She
is waiting us in an adjacent room, where some
of our stores have been taken. She wants to
see the food we eat and also to see us eat, and
then she is going to explain matters to us, or
rather to you, for I am supposed to know all
about them already,”
“ I don’t care where I go, so long as I get out
of this dungeon,” I exclaimed.
“ Well, when you are ready we will go ; only
you have to wear this,” he said, as he reached
over amongst the cushions and pulled out a long,


loose robe of similar yellow fabric to the one he
was wearing ; only this one was worked into
a wonderful pattern of extraordinary hiero-
glyphics, the figures being raised and spun from
deeper coloured thread than the cloth itself.
I took it from his hands and examined it.
“We will study it afterwards,” he said. “ Let
us hear the story first; then we shall probably
be able to read the signs better,”
“You mean these things ? ” I asked, pointing
to one of the figures that was uncommonly like
an ordinary shovel, with a big snake loosely
twining round the handle,
“ That, and the others ; they are the same
old marks,” he added dreamily. Then, rousing
himself, he exclaimed, “ Come, put on the robe
of state,” and I slipped it over my shoulders.
It entirely enveloped me from the head to
the ground. My arms found their way through
two arm-holes into long hanging sleeves, and
the Hatter drew my attention to a long pointed
hood which hung down the back, and which,
when pulled up, covered my head.
“Am I a clown at a circus, or a Chinese
idol ? ” I said, as I turned myself round,
“You would impress the people of London
if they could only see you now,” he replied.
“ Are you ready ? ”


Without waiting for any answer, he kicked
three times on the floor. There was a slight
noise in the wall, and the apparently solid mass
had opened, showing a long passage, lit with the
same soft light, leading away through the wall.
He stepped forward and I followed him, try-
ing to discover how I could draw my revolvers
in case of need.
The passage was wide and lofty, and about
twenty yards from the opening it curved and
led into a room similar to the one we had just
left. But in this a pile of cushions was in the
centre upon a raised platform, a few small piles
being scattered over the floor below the level
of that on the platform.
On the floor, in strange contrast with their sur-
roundings, stood our smoke-stained billy and tin
pannikins, a lump of damper, and some salt beef.
“The sublime and the ridiculous,” the Hatter
exclaimed with a grim smile. “ And yet that
old billy could buy up all the rest, for they did
not seem to know anything about tin in the
days of old Lemuria.”
I was about to answer when a part of the
wall opposite to us opened, and, clad in gorgeous
robe, more resplendent than either the Hatter’s
or mine, Tor Ymmothe walked into the chamber,
and the two openings closed.


CHAPTER XVII.
THE CONQUEST OF THE QUEEN.
She stopped at the platform upon which the
cushions were piled, and stood looking at me
long and steadily. On her face there was a
smile of fiendish cynicism, and her eyes took
an expression of the most hideous cruelty and
coldness, such as I have only seen equalled in
those of a snake when it has struck its prey,
and lies coiled round its victim, holding it in
an embrace of merciless rigidity, gloating in its
enjoyment of the gradually weakening death-
struggles of the hapless creature. A cold thrill
of horror passed over me as I met those' eyes,
and I felt my flesh quiver, and my heart flutter,
as a feeling of faintness came upon me. In-
stinctively I knew that I was being dominated
by her, and my mind leaped in a spasm of fear
as the figures of the gruesome pigmies floated
through my brain, and I understood the mean-
ing of the words she had used when she told
us that she was doomed to live upon the sub


stance of those around her. Even now she
was drawing the vital forces of my being from
me, and soon I should be as those wretched
creatures were, if I did not resist and overcome
the glamour of her eyes.
The thought steeled my mind and I strained
every nerve to meet and return her gaze. It
was a terrible effort on my part to look into
those pale, luminous orbs with the phosphores-
cent flames flickering away within their lambent
depths, I could not have stood it much longer,
when she shifted her glance to the Hatter and
said in a softened voice :
“He whom the King of Night has sent
is strong of will ; surely he will succeed where
others have failed.”
The Hatter mumbled in reply, and I looked
at him. His eyes had drooped before hers,
and she held him helpless under the terrible
fascination of her glance. This, then, was the
reason of his anxiety to return to her dominion ;
she had bewitched him on that eventful evening,
when he appeared before her.
If he, the strong-willed man, who had so
easily overcome my mental powers, fell so
quickly under her thraldom, what chance
should I have, I asked myself. The fear
that followed the thought and the horrible


possibility of defeat wrought my mind into
a perfect fever of desperate resolve, and, with
all my faculties roused and alert, I met her
glance again with a fixed gaze and a fierce
determination in my brain that, if I could not
subdue, I would not be subdued.
I felt that she was exerting herself to break
down my resistance, and that she was calling
to her aid all the devilish tricks and subtleties
of her black, magic arts. In my ignorance I
knew not what to do to cope with them; all
that I could do was to set my teeth and clench
my hands the while I held my mind in a fierce
resolve that I would not yield, whatever forces
and powers were brought against me. Suddenly,
I know not how, I felt that I was gaining an
ascendency; her eyes drooped before mine
once more, and then her head leaned forward
and she raised her hands as though to shield
her face.
“ Hold up your head,” I cried sharply ; and
she did so, keeping her eyes, however, still cast
down.
“You dare to pit your strength against
mine,” I exclaimed angrily. “ Try it once
more and I turn you into a dead thing, such
as the bunyip is, who sleeps by the lagoon
beneath the trees.”


She sank forward and crept towards me on
her hands and knees.
“ Oh, thou, who art of almighty power,”
she said; “ take the place that you would
grace so well and reign with me. We can
dispose of this,” and she extended a hand
towards the Hatter.
“ Speak such a tale again, and I let loose the
waters above our heads,” I cried, with more
than simulated anger. It was maddening to
think of all the time and money the Hatter
had wasted for the sake of this cold-blooded
monster, who now, because she had been able
to subdue his will to hers, wanted to dispose
of him and make way for another.
She looked up at my face, her eyes flickering
and gleaming in a horribly repulsive manner.
Then she leaped to her feet and stood towering
over me, her face working and her hands
clenched, but with her eyes always averted
from the glance I steadily fixed upon her. It
was a battle royal while it lasted, between the
subtle forces of our natures. But I had already
gained too much advantage over her for her
efforts to set back my control, though I felt
myself growing weaker and weaker under the
strain of a contest I could only blindly realise.
Perhaps she also understood that it was of no
14


use her striving against me at that moment,
for she suddenly sank down upon the cushions
behind her and hid her face in them.
“ Stand up,” I said, as fiercely as I could ; for
I was panting from the exertions of the last
few minutes.
She obeyed me silently, and I took a step
towards her, fumbling with one of my revolvers ;
for I could have shot the creature where she
stood, without a moment’s compunction.
“ I have that which would slay you in an
instant where you stand,” I said angrily. “ See
how little your power is now,” I added, turning
to the Hatter, who, throughout the struggle
between the Queen and myself, had stood a
mute and unruffled spectator. “ For God’s sake,
man, rouse yourself, or we are lost,” I shouted
to him, in English.
At the sound of my words he started.
“ What am I doing ? ” he asked in a dazed
tone.
“ Wake up,” I answered, “ before this demon
here has us both under her control.”
He turned and looked at her, and she raised
her head with a quick turn so that her eyes
met his.
“ Don’t lower your glance ; stare her down,”
I shouted.


“ I know,” he answered dreamily. “ I know.
That is the mistake I made; but 1 win this
time.”
“If you do not, I shoot her where she
stands,” I cried, and held my revolver under my
cloak ready to fire the moment that I saw his
glance waver.
But it was hers that gave way, and when it did
she fell weeping on the cushions, while the Hatter
came up to me and grasped me by the arm.
“You have saved me, Heaven only knows
from what,” he said brokenly. “ That fiend
had almost mastered me,”
“ Listen to me,” I cried, facing towards her.
“ Rise and listen to me.”
She obeyed and stood in an attitude of
dejection, while I mounted the platform and
lay down upon the cushions, telling the Hatter
to do so too, and keeping my revolver handy,
in case my new-found psychic strength should
give way.
“Speak to me the legend of the sleeper,” I
said to her.
She shivered where she stood, but did not
answer.
“ Speak it or I awaken her at this moment,”
I cried,
“No ! No ! No ! ” she exclaimed, and her


terror was not unreal. “ I will speak, it, though
it means the loss of my life and love.”
She wailed out the last few words, and 1
heard the Hatter murmur under his breath,
“ Poor lonely devil.”
She retired a few paces from us, and then
turned and faced us with her hands, clasped in
front of her and her eyes hidden by her drooped
eyelids.
“ In the days ere the stranger came from afar
and rebuked the king, my father, there was in a
neighbouring land a prince’s daughter, fair and
lovely to behold. And the king, my father,
whose will was law on the earth, in the air, and
in the waters, and whose wishes were never
disputed or gainsaid, saw her, and saw that she
was beautiful.
“ She, in the folly and conceit of her form
and features, laughed when she heard of it, and
spoke of the king, my father, who could never
grow old, but was always in the heyday of youth,
as of one who was ancient and decrepit. And
my father, hearing of this, sent forth his em-
bassies and had the girl brought before him and
installed in his palace.
“ Later, there came to them a daughter, more
lovely than even the mother had been, and she
was the joy and the flower in the life of the king,


my father. All the treasures of his ’kingdom
were for her ; all the beauties of the universe he
would have brought to her, had she asked for
them ; her word and her will were second only
to one other, and that one the king, my father.
“As she grew up, she grew more and more
beautiful; and the king, my father, the mightiest
of all mighty monarchs, sought for a fitting
mate for her. Over the entire universe he sent
messengers and embassies, and many a visitor
came forward to claim her, even in the face of
the conditions imposed, which were acceptance
by her or death at the hands of the priests on
the sacred blood-red altar, which was never dry
through twice ten thousand years.
“ In the first year many came, and many were
scorned by her and seized by the priests to be
laid upon that sacred altar, which gleamed with
the blood that dripped from their tortured flesh ;
and the youths and maidens who else would
have been the daily sacrifice, escaped with their
lives, and those who were yet to serve the ritual
of the priests clamoured for more suitors, so that
they too might escape the doom of sacrifice.
“ But the fame of her coldness, and of the
thousands who had shed all their hearts’ blood
upon the altar of the priests, spread over all the
earth ; and at last there came a time when no


more suitors came, and the priests clamoured
that she herself would have to be handed over
to them, so that the altar might be cleansed and
made fit once more for the sacrificial youths and
maidens. Then was the king, my father, sad in
his heart; but the priests were obdurate, and a
fiat went forth that if, within the life of another
moon, no suitor came, she, the joy and light of
the earth would be yielded up, that her blood
might moisten that holiest of altars.
“ The king, my father, grieved and perplexed,
called together all the wise men and women of
the world and bade them prophesy. Many of
them prophesied a suitor within the early days
of the coming moon ; but no suitor came, and
the blood of the false prophets was shed to keep
wet the sacred altar until none would prophesy,
and the king, my father, groaned in the affliction
of his mind.
‘ c At this time there arose an old man, who
came from afar and told how a suitor would
come who would be the chosen of the fair
daughter of the great king, but whom neither
the king nor the priests would allow to wed her ;
for the man would be a slave of the poorest
class. Then would the priests exert their power,
and on the altar would the blood of the accepted
suitor flow, even as that of the rejected ones


had flowed. But the maid would wed none
other than the outcast slave she loved, and when
his blood was spilt, her soul would meet his
beyond the stars, while her body sank, and
slumbered till the sway of the king, my father,
and the power of the priests, were dead, and
the empire of Lemuria had shrunk to a for-
gotten dream.
“ When the king, my father, heard the
prophecy, he raged in his wrath, and the priests
seized the aged prophet and carried him to
the blood-stained altar and slew him upon It.
But before another moon had risen there came
to the palace gate a slave of the meanest class,
clad in rags, who claimed the right of the
maiden’s choice, and her hand if she accepted.
The priests sought that he should be given
over to them at once, but the king, my father,
refused until he had proved the truth of his
words. Then was the fairest maid brought
in, and she straightway turned to the ragged
slave and, smiling upon him, took his hand and
proclaimed him as her love.
“ The king, my father’, raved and stormed ;
the priests clamoured and threatened ; but the
pride of the universe laughed them all to scorn
and swore she would wed none other than the
lover she had chosen.


“ All the great ones of the earth were called
together to pronounce a judgment upon the
slave, and they pronounced that he should be
led away to the altar of the sacrifice. The
priests seized upon him and dragged him from
the presence of her who loved him, but 'before
he could be taken he looked back on her and
cried, f Sleep, in the sleep of death, until I
come to you, and say, “ Death, O Death, thy
reign is ended.” ’ ”
As she uttered the last words I leaped from
the cushions, a flood of vivid emotions surging
through my being ; for the words she used
were the words I had heard in the vision on
the steamer in the Suez Canel.
She looked at me as I stood there, trembling
in my excitement, and said again the words :
“ Naggah, naggah, oom-moo-hah.”
“ She—this girl of whom you speak, where
is she now ? ” I cried,
“ She sleeps in the silent chamber, where the
lamp burns that gives light to the palace, and
which will burn until he who is to awaken her
enters the chamber and calls upon her to awake.
Then, either she awakens or he dies; either I
and my race are liberated from the doom that
is upon us, or it extends to him who fruitless
dares to challenge it.”


“ Lead me to the place where she is,” I
exclaimed, when I felt a hand upon my arm
and, glancing round, I saw the Hatter standing
beside me.
“ Not now, Dick ; wait awhile, until we can
arrange for our escape,” he said, in English.
“But I must go,” I exclaimed impatiently.
“It may be only a trap,” he whispered.
“ Just a trap to separate us. Don’t leave me
alone with her just yet,” he added, with an
appealing look in his eyes.
“ You don’t understand this. It is something
I have not mentioned to you,” I said.
“ I know that,” he answered. “ You did
not trust- me after Bill came. Perhaps you
were right; but now it is different. Our very
lives depend upon you now. I dare not face
her alone again. For God’s sake save me from
that.”
“Are you ready? ” Tor Ymmothe exclaimed,
interrupting us.
“ I will go to-morrow,” I said.
“ Send her away,” the Hatter whispered.
“ I’ll watch how she opens the wall.”
“ You must come now,” she answered.
“ You must come now, or I will never show
you the way.”
“ Obey my words,” I shouted, “or I will


call down upon you the anger of him who
sent me.”
She covertly glanced at my face and then,
turning away, walked to the wall. She leaned
forward with her hands against it and stamped
her foot three times on the floor, when a panel
slid aside, leaving an open space leading into
a passage. She passed through and the panel
closed.
We both sprang towards the spot and tried
to trace the panel ; but in the dim, soft light
we could not find a sign of where it began
or ended.
“ After a spell we will try that dodge,” the
Hatter said. “In the meantime, let us eat
while we may.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
A FLIGHT FOR LIFE.
In spite of the peculiarity of our situation we
had excellent appetites, although we had to
content ourselves with what cold tea remained
in the billy for liquid refreshment. Then we
filled our pipes, and stretched out upon the
luxurious cushions, wrapped in our eccentric-
looking robes, in mind a couple of ordinary
bushmen, but in appearance undeniable can-
didates for admission to the nearest lunatic
asylum. While I had the opportunity, I
arranged one of my revolvers, so that it would
be ready for immediate service ; the attitude of
Tor Ymmothe not being conducive to trusting
confidence on my part,
“ You have saved my life and more than my
life,” the Hatter exclaimed suddenly.
“What do you mean? ” I asked ; for at the
moment I was thinking whether I should fire
on the Yellow Woman when next she appeared
and trust to luck to solve the mystery of the


sleeping girl and the queer cry that I had heard,
or rely upon my newly discovered psychic
powers to subjugate her to my will and learn
all the secrets of the weird, unearthly place
we were in.
•“ Just now,” he continued.
“ When she was in here, do you mean ? Oh,
you were only a little unnerved. I have the
whip hand of her now, so we need not fear.
Even if she does try any more of her infernal
tricks, I reckon a revolver shot will put an end
to them ; and it will hardly be murder to kill
such a monster as she is,” I said.
He shook his head and looked down with
a terrible expression of despair on his face.
“ Why did you come in ? Why did not
you go away? I warned you as much as I
dared. We shall never get away now,” he said
slowly, with almost a whine in his voice.
“ I came here to find out what things were,
and I’m going to do it,” I answered briskly.
“If I cannot get away it will be a bad job,
both for that Yellow Queen and her swarms,
I can tell you.”
“ It’s no good,” he mumbled. “We are
helpless now.”
I tried to laugh at him, though to tell the
truth I was far from feeling mirthful. He


seemed so utterly depressed since he had com-
menced to speak.
“There’s something you don’t know,” he
went on. “ I did not tell you before. Don’t
blame me. I could not. I shall not be able
to do so soon, either. I feel it coming on
again.”
“ Rouse yourself up, man,” I exclaimed.
“ What is the good of all this silly nonsense ? ”
“It isn’t nonsense, Dick; I wish it were,”
he answered. “Listen. I will tell you now.
Quickly. Don’t interrupt. When I joined
you in the tree, after she had gone, I only told
you part of what had happened. The three
of us were not left together. I was taken away
and brought in here. She came in and fixed
me with those terrible eyes of hers until I felt
them burning right into my being. I struggled
against it at first, but I was powerless to resist;
and soon I felt myself sinking under her con-
trol. Then she came towards me and took my
hands in hers, and laughed that awful laugh of
hers ; and I felt my strength oozing out of my
body. I knew that she was drawing out of me
all that .made me a sentient, strong, human
being; and her eyes glistened and gleamed
with ghoulish glee as she saw me shrink and
shiver,”


“ Go on,” I said, as he paused.
“ At that moment I hated her, but I could
do nothing but what she said. She told me
that one was enough at a time, and that the
others would be allowed to go, as many others
had been allowed in the past, so that they
would come back from the horrors of the
desert, and she could then serve them, as she
intended to serve me, at her leisure. When
they had gone I was to be laid on the grave of
the monster we had slaughtered, until she had
drawn, atom by atom, the vital principles from
my body, and I was reduced to a level with the
other victims of her hideous life.”
“ Do you mean ” I began.
“ All those shrivelled mummies were once
vigorous men, like you and I. But she has
sucked their life out of their bodies until they
have become the wizened-up imps we know.
Many of them may have come here as we came,
in search of gold and wealth. How many
bushmen have disappeared without leaving a
trace behind them ? Think of it. They may
be among that swarm.”
His eyes glistened horribly as he spoke, and
I reached out and took him by the hand.
“Go on with your story,” I said quietly.
“ Never mind the other part.”


“ I was to be one of them, and should have
been by this time, perhaps, had you not been
at hand to save me. You have gained what I
have lost, and it is the only card to play against
her now. And since then you have done it
again. Here. Just now. For since we were
carried into this infernal place, she has once
more drawn my vitality out of my being and
made me the slave of her will—till you broke
through her spell—and here am I ; my God,
what a fool! ”
He sprang to his feet and flung away the
gleaming yellow robe he was wearing.
“Take it off!” he shouted. “I had to
make you wear it so that you should become
impregnated with its properties and yield your-
self to her wretched wiles. Take it off; it is
bewitched.”
“Nonsense, man, nonsense,” I exclaimed.
“ How can a robe like this influence me ?
Besides, these sleeves are handy to hide my
revolvers, and I may want to use them on the
lady before I am through.”
He looked at me vacantly for a moment.
“ It’s no good, Dick, she will devour us,” he
said.
“ Rouse up, man,” I exclaimed. “ What has
come over you ? You did not talk like ”


“ I know,” he said. “ But that yellow crea-
ture has paralysed me. I cannot resist.”
“ Listen to me,” I said sternly, hoping to
rouse him from the dangerous mental condition
he was evidently drifting into. “You heard
the words she said just now ? ”
He shuddered.
“Yes, I heard them,” he said, “She said,
‘ I am coming now to devour you—both of
) ft
you.
“ Rubbish,” I cried. “ I mean, when she
was telling us about the sleeping girl. Well,
when I way on my way out here I heard those
words in the Suez Canal, and saw—something I
had never seen before.”
“ It’s no good,” he moaned, as he sank down
into the cushions again. “We are lost. She
will devour us. She is coming now.”
I could see that he was terribly unnerved,
and a fear that I had felt before returned to
me. Was he going mad ?
It was an ugly thought to have—ugly when
it first came to me at Wonga, but a hundred
times more ugly now; and I was trying to force
it back when the wall opened and Tor
Ymmothe stood before us.
The Hatter rose and walked towards her in
a slouching, listless manner.


“‘And now for you !’ she cried, as she stepped over him where
he lay.” [page 225.


“ Come back ! ” I shouted to him, gripping
my revolver with the intention of shooting at
her directly he moved from between us.
He paid no heed to me, and she laughed at
me, showing her gleaming white teeth as she
uttered her blood-curdling laugh.
“ Hatter,” I shouted ; “ stand aside, or I will
shoot ”
I might as well have called to the wall, for
he staggered over to her and rolled at her feet
like an abject, cowering hound.
“ And now for you,” she cried, as she stepped
over him where he lay ; and I felt the hideous
influence of those ghastly eyes upon me,
“ Stop, or I will call the aid of him who sent
me,” I shouted.
Again she laughed as she approached me, with
outstretched arms and blazing eyes ; and I saw
that all round the room the walls had opened
in innumerable panels, and myriads of the
pigmy forms were crowding through the
openings.
I twisted my revolver from under my robe
and fired, unable at the moment to know
whether the barrel was pointing up or down.
I heard the bullet crash over my head and
knew that I had fired at the roof.
The flash of fire and the report of the shot
l S


terrified the woman momentarily ; but it was
not the effect of either that brought from her
lips the hideous scream she uttered, and which
found an echo from every pigmy as they went
careering through the openings in the walls.
The splash of water on the floor beside me
was the explanation. My shot had smashed
through the dome of the roof and the water
was flooding in upon us.
I leaped towards the spot where the Hatter
lay, and dragged him along towards a doorway ;
and even then the water was trickling over
the floor from the column which descended
from the roof.
“ Hatter! Quick ! Get up !” I shouted,
striving to rouse him, when I saw Tor Ymmothe
dart between me and the opening, her wealth
of hair streaming out behind her as she fled.
The pigmies had disappeared and only she,
the Hatter, and myself, remained in the chamber.
In a moment it flashed into my mind what
it would mean if she escaped, and I sprang
after her. As I sped I saw the panels closing.
I just remember getting beside her and
charging her with all my weight, sending her
staggering on one side, and, unable to stop
the impetus of my rush, I was through the
opening just as the panel slipped into its place.


I found myself in a wide, lofty passage, the
floor of which sloped upwards. It was tips
last fact which alone impressed me at the
moment; for I was only conscious of the instinct
of self-preservation, as I sped along the passage
as fast as my legs would carry me. The robe
inconvenienced me, but I would not stop to
take it off, being satisfied to pull it up and
twist it, as I ran, round my waist.
The passage turned and twisted, but I paid
no heed to its course, so long as the floor
continued to rise, until I saw in the dim light
a flight of steps in front of me, I leaped up
them two and three at a time, until I had
exhausted my breath. Then I paused, gasping
and panting, and with the perspiration streaming
from every pore in my body. The light was
gradually growing less as I ascended and,
looking ahead, I saw the stairs vanish into a
deep impenetrable gloom.
I stood where I was, listening intently. A
faint sound came to me and as I strained my
ears to catch it more distinctly, it was as if
a gentle breeze were blowing; but besides the
soft sound of the breeze, I heard the lip, lip
of ripples of water. I knew not where the
steps might lead me, nor what I might encounter
in the darkness above me ; but the sounds


I heard only had one significance to me and
that was the steady pursuit of the water from
the flooded room below. I turned again to
the ascent and clambered and staggered up the
steps.
Presently, through the gloom above me I saw
a faint glimmer of light, such as might come
from a starlit sky, and a fresh, gentle breeze
fanned my cheek. I redoubled my efforts, and,
in a few more steps, found myself standing on
a small landing with the stairs going on above
me, but at the side an open doorway, through
which I could see the deep blue of the tropical
sky studded over with its brilliant planets and
stars.
I approached the doorway, seeing as I did
so that the platform or landing upon which I
stood terminated apparently at a dark, solid wall.
I stepped forward, and found that the wall
turned at right angles a little further ahead;
and, continuing my way cautiously and slowly,
I found myself at the end of the wall and the
platform at the same time, and gazing upon a
scene, the grandeur of which forced me to start
backwards, and so escape a headlong plunge
into the depths below.
A quick glance revealed to me where I was.
Far below me there glistened in luminous phos


phorescence, such as one sees on the ocean in
tropical climes, the reservoir I had discovered
when I scaled the cliff above the Bunyip’s pool.
I could trace the dark outline of the rocky
wall which surrounded it; and, away beyond
that again, merging with the fainter hue of the
horizon, I could see the flat desert, stretching
away in its arid monotony.
Near at hand I could hear the sound of fall-
ing water, and I knew at once that I was
standing somewhere on the face of the cliff I
had seen across the surface of the reservoir, and
down which I had traced the silver thread of
a waterfall. I looked upward and saw the cliff
still towering above me, and without hesitating
further I returned to the steps, and resumed
the ascent of them. They had hitherto risen
steadily in one direction, so that, while the
light lasted, one could look down to their
commencement. But now they were in the form
of a spiral, and I held the centre pillar with
one hand while I felt the outer wall with the
other.
I was now in impenetrable darkness, and no
sound came to me save the soft hum of the
breeze, and the tinkle of the falling water as I
climbed up and up along what seemed to be a
never ending ladder, until once more the


glimmer of the starlit sky showed above me,
and I emerged through another open doorway
and stood on the summit of the second cliff.
On one side, away down below in the silent
darkness, lay that lambent pool, while on the
other side I gazed across a vast expanse of water
rippling in the breeze, and flickering with a
ghostly pallor of phosphorescence. The path-
way on which I stood wound along in front of
me, and, as I followed it with my eyes, I saw
how it skirted the pool round to the other side
where what appeared to be trees stood out
against the skyline.
I decided to follow it; and, walking very
cautiously, I went along it, with the waters of
that great pool on the one hand, and on the
other a sheer drop of some hundreds of feet.
The pathway was some twenty feet wide and
fairly smooth, and I went nearly half-way round
before I stopped.
The exertion of climbing those steps was
beginning to tell on my strength now that fear
no longer spurred me on to escape from the
overwhelming flood, and I halted for a brief
rest at a point where the path widened into a
plateau, some fifty feet across. A few boulder-
like knobs stood out above the surface, and
beside one of them I lay down.


The night was wonderfully silent, the soft
breeze that had been blowing on the lower level
not being apparent where I was lying. Only
the lip, lip of the minute ripples came to my
ears in a delicious monotony that acted upon
my tired faculties so quickly that I was asleep
before I realised that I was drowsy.


CHAPTER XIX.
A CRY FROM THE DARKNESS.
The heat of the sun shining down upon me
awakened me, and, as I sat up, I uttered an
involuntary exclamation at the beauty of the
scene before my eyes.
I was lying on what was evidently the rim
of a huge rocky crater. It was filled almost
to the brim with water, which caught the clear
blue of the cloudless sky overhead and reflected
it back in its full, rich intensity of colour, save
where surface ripples were touched by the
golden sunlight and flashed and glittered in
streaks of liquid fire. The pathway along
which I had wandered in the dark was the rim
of the cup-shaped crater, not always so smooth
as where I was, for some distance away and
farther round, I saw a jagged broken wall
rising into queer, fantastic shapes, which, in the
darkness, I had mistaken for the loom of tree
shadows. I looked away across the water to
where the pathway appeared to run into a
solid block of stone on the nearest side of


which I could see, as a dark patch, the opening
through which I had emerged.
Looking away from the water across the
desert over which we had come, I could see
it stretching away in its miles of glaring yellow
sand, while immediately beneath me the lower
reservoir, evidently the remains of another huge
crater, glittered in similar blue and golden
hues ; but I could see nothing of the trees that
grew round the pool at its base. Looking in
the opposite direction from the desert, I saw a
mighty range of peaks and eminences, thrown
together and jumbled about in as much con-
fusion as if they had sprung up in a night and
crowded and jostled one another in their hurry
to climb up, so that none could rise without a
kink or a twist in their form. The bright, clear,
dry air brought them very close to me. The
sun shone upon them and made them glow in
rich pink hues where they caught the full
glare ; but where fissures and gullies scored their’
sides, as well as on the slopes that were sheltered
from the sun, shadows of purple-blue formed a
wonderful colour contrast with the sunlit hues,
and made the jagged, ragged forms marvellously
soft and beautiful.
But nowhere was there any sign of life ; no-
where a suggestion of vegetation; not even


where the water rippled against the moistened
rock was a patch of moss or lichen visible. All
was dead and silent, and as I gazed upon the
scene, so exalting in its beauty of colour and
impressive in its wildness of form, the awfulness
of desolation grew upon me and made me
depressed and sad.
To help me to throw off the sombre feelings
that were coming upon me, I renewed my walk
round the crater, with the intention of making
a closer examination of the fantastic shapes of
the wall of rock which lay farther round. But
as I approached I saw that the pathway suddenly
turned in between two columnar blocks of stone.
I hastened forward and found that it was as if
the solid face of the rock had been cleft, so as
to leave a narrow pathway in between.
I turned into this narrow alley way and
walked along it. The walls on either side rose
sheer up for some twenty feet, while the path-
way between them, scarcely three feet wide, was
smooth and sandy, so that my footsteps made
little noise. The sun was not high enough to
shine directly down between the two walls, and
the air was cool and the light soft as I advanced.
The passage sloped down for some distance, and
then, branching off at a sharp angle, led up to
another open doorway in the face of the rock.


Enough light came from behind me to enable
me to see, as I peered into the opening, that the
passage was roofed over, and that it widened
out on the other side of the opening, while the
floor sloped at a greater decline. Determining
to follow it, I walked through the opening, and
then, slowly downwards, along the. passage. It
soon changed from the straight, and twisted
and turned, sometimes having a floor smooth
and even, and at others rough and sloping.
The light gradually decreased as I proceeded,
the coolness of the atmosphere became more
pronounced, and the silence more intense ; and
yet the feeling of depression which had been
upon me when I started, was gone, and in its
place there had come an exhilarating excitement
and a keen desire to press on.
The passage became so tortuous that I was
turning at every three or four steps. Then it
narrowed until my shoulders touched the sides
as I walked, and the turnings were so sharp
that I felt sure I should soon come to the end of
it; when, having squeezed round one more than
usually sharp turn, I found that I was standing
just within a vast chamber, in the centre of
which a mass of semi-transparent substance
shone with a curious glow.
I hurried across to it and curiously examined


it. It was, to all appearances, a block of clear
yellow quartz, through which a light radiated
as though the sun were shining below it and
through it. I walked round and round it, and
clambered up on top of it, in the hopes that
I should be able to peer down and understand
whence the light came from. But I could see
nothing more than the gleam through the yellow
mass. I fancied that on one side of it the light
was stronger than on the other ; and, looking
up, I found that it was on the side opposite
to where I had entered the chamber. Possibly,
I thought, there is a continuation of the passage
down at that end of the chamber, and I hastened
over to the wall to examine it.
There was no continuation of the passage,
but close to the ground I saw a small opening,
and stooped down to examine it As far as I
could see, the opening seemed to run into the
rock ; lying prone, I tried to wriggle into it.
My shoulders pressed against the sides, and my
chest and back touched the floor and roof, but
my hands, which I had stretched out to the
full extent of my arms in front of me, felt the
walls trend away on either side. I gave a
push with my feet to help me reach the wider
portion. I was now in absolute darkness, and
as I felt with my hands along the sides of the


passage, I found what seemed to be a crevice
running vertically on each wall. I bent my
fingers over, and gave a vigorous pull. My
body slid forward, and my arms reached out
on either side into space. The floor seemed
to glide from under me, and I flung my arms
down in order to press them on .the floor and
stop my advance. They went out to their full
reach without touching anything, and at the
same moment the floor went from under me,
and I felt I was falling. I clenched my hands,
and set my teeth as I rushed through the air,
nerving myself for the hideous smash I knew
must come.
A plunge into ice-cold water was the last
thing that I expected, and so I sank down and
down before I recovered sufficiently from the
shock to strike out for the surface. When at
last I managed to get my head above the
surface, I was almost breathless, and, weighted
by the heavy clinging cloak that had become
loosened as I fell, I could scarcely manage to
keep myself afloat.
My sensations were 'horrible. All around
me was absolutely dark ; below me was a depth
of water I knew not how profound ; and the
only sound was the echo of my own gasps for
breath, and the splash of the water as I strove


to swim. I had no means of ascertaining
whether I was in a stream or still water; whether
the pool was of large size, or only a flooded
shaft. I struggled sturdily to keep myself a-
float, thinking of little else till there came into
my mind a hideous fear. What if, in the depths
below me, there should be another monster
such as the one we slew when first we came to
the range ? Why such an idea of all others
should have come to me at that moment I do
not know, but the effect of it upon my nerves
was beyond description. Cold as the water
was, my blood ran colder ; a terror came upon
me that, . even as I floated, some such awful
creature might be rising from below to seize
me and drag me down ; and I flung myself for-
ward, floundering and splashing, and the echoes
of the noise I made reverberated over my head
and added to my fear. To go forward might
mean only to rush into the clutches of an un-
seen foe ; to wait where I was seemed to be
courting the very end I wished to escape, and,
in the frantic whirl and fury of my terror, I
shouted for help where I knew no human being
could hear me.
I cried out in one long wailing yell, and, as
the sound left me, I moaned in the anguish of
despair. For the cry echoed and rumbled


through the darkness, and from a dozen points
around me there came back my cry of “ Help! ”
in every shade and intensity of hideous mockery.
It travelled from side to side of that great
immeasurable space, throbbing and fluttering in
a myriad of whispered calls ; pulsating over
my head ; floating away into some cavernous
distance to come back with a-jeer, and a mock-
ing taunt, as though some envious sprite had
caught it, and flung it back in a tone of malicious
glee. The echoes were re-echoed and multiplied
as they sped, until the articulate cry was lost
in a confused babble of noise, which, to my
straining nerves, was as a burst of revolting,
fiendish laughter.
Then the sounds seemed to gather themselves
together in the vault above my head, and rush
away into the darkness, till they were only a
faint tremor of vibration somewhere away in
the depths of the night. They had almost
ceased, when they seemed to be returning
towards me, and I held my breath to listen.
They grew louder and louder each moment,
and a roar of sound came upon me, as though
a thousand lusty voices were shouting and
shrieking in hoarse derision from the depths
of the impenetrable darkness.
I lay in the water, helpless and inert, as I


heard the sounds pass over and around me,
and spread out again to die once more into
whispers as though they were chasing one
another through all the mysteries of that vast
mountain cavern. Again they faded almost
out of hearing before they came back in
stronger intensity, and as they came nearer and
nearer, my terror passed all control, and I made
the hideousness still more awful as I shrieked
and plunged in the frenzy of despair.
The sound of my voice seemed to meet the
returning echoes and throw them into still
wilder confusion, producing vibrations and
tones before which my heart almost ceased to
beat, as the fiendish crash and war of noise
boomed and howled, surging from side to side
in jarring eccentricities until I almost felt the
water quiver. Then a mighty sound of rend-
ing filled the air, and a lurid flare of light
formed a gleaming halo round a huge mass
of rock, which I saw fall out from the space
in front of me.
It fell with a tremendous splash, throwing
the surface of the water into a rage of disturb-
ance, which swept over me and hurled me
about like a straw. A few seconds more of
the unearthly rage of noise and I must have
sunk beneath the flood, if only to escape from


the pitiless tornado of terror that swept through
my brain ; but when the water broke over me,
I felt that I was fighting an element that at
least I understood, and so I struggled against
it, and kept myself afloat.
I saw that, where the mass of rock had fallen,
an opening had been left, through which there
came a blaze of light that lit up the space
around me, and showed me, some thirty yards
ahead, a floor of rock scarce a foot above the
surface, I struck out for it with all the des-
peration of a drowning man, but before I could
reach it, the return waves of the mighty splash
came hissing and fuming from behind me, and,
lifting me in their rush, hurled me into the
second cave and threw me, bruised and ex-
hausted, on the floor.
As the water flowed back again I lay like a
log, and the little breath that was left in my
body was almost expended as the flood washed
over me, trundling me on the hard rock. I
was more dead than alive when it had gone.
I knew not where I was, save that I was on
solid ground with a strange gleam of light
around me, as I felt the last vestige of my
strength leaving me, and I sank into a blank
of unconsciousness.
16


CHAPTER XX.
THE LIVING DEAD.
When I recovered my senses I was wet and
cold, lying on the smooth floor of a large
cavern. The interior was lit up with a bright
clear light, so much like sunlight that I felt
certain there must be some passage way leading
from the cavern into the open air. The
presence of the light, and the conviction in my
mind that I should soon be able to get out of
the mysterious passages and dark caverns into
the day, revived my courage, and I was able
to look around me and note the appearance of
the place I had literally fallen into.
As I rose to my feet there was directly in
front of me the wide jagged opening from
whence the mass of rock had fallen when the
echoes of my cry had come back magnified into
a fury of sound. I stepped towards it and
looked out upon the great pool of water
beyond. The light from the cavern where I
was, streamed out over it and revealed its


motionless surface stretching far away into the
mountain until it disappeared in the gloom and
blackness of the distant shadow.
Overhead the roof sloped up from where I
stood into a vast dome, the top of which I
could not see, but beyond the light dimly re-
vealed the other side descending to within some
twenty feet of the water. It did not look so
very far away from me as I stood gazing at it,
for the rock swept round on either hand and
joined it in almost a circle. I fancied I could
throw a stone over to it, and picking up a
small fragment of loose rock, I threw it with
all my strength. It fell into the water with
a hollow resounding splash very much less than
half-way across, and the ripples that it caused
caught the light and glittered as they swept
over the black stillness of the pool.
As I watched them my attention was arrested
by the echoes of the splash. It sounded all
round the dome, travelling from place to place,
as though it were bouncing round the rocky
wall. Then it passed under the sloping roof
beyond, and I heard it grow fainter and fainter
in the distance until it was just a whisper of
the original noise. But it did not cease. It
seemed as though it had passed in a curving
journey like a boomerang and turned when it


reached the end of its course to return with
magnified power, gaining strength at every
repetition until it burst into the dome again
with a roar as of a mighty billow crashing
against a cliff.
The air trembled as it passed me, and died
away behind me while I stood and wondered.
There was a great mystery in front of me, some
extraordinary natural formation which had the
power of magnifying sound, and I wished for
the moment that I had the ability and the
knowledge necessary to understand it; but that
was impossible, and I could only wonder then,
as I wonder now, how such a marvel came
about. I was tempted to fire my revolver 'and
watch the effect of the explosion, but I had
only a limited supply of cartridges and was
not sure even whether they were not spoiled
by the wet.
So I turned away from the dark gloom of
the pool and the darker gloom of the cavernous
tunnels and glanced round the place where I
was standing.
It was a chamber which, with its smooth
walls and level floor, suggested other than
natural agencies in its construction. The roof
was domed, but in a regular form and at either
end of the wall, immediately opposite the


opening on to the pool, there were unmistak-
able doorways through which streamed the light
which illumined the place.
I walked across to one and found that it led
into a short passage-way, beyond which there
seemed to be a large open space. Proceeding
to the other I found a similar passage-way
terminating in a similar open space, and I
elected to follow along it. A few steps carried
me through and into another vast chamber, in
the centre of which there stood what at first
sight appeared to be a mass of glowing quartz.
Immediately over it, in the ceiling of the
chamber, I saw another and similar mass and
this I guessed to be the object which had so
excited my curiosity when I passed from the
narrow passage-way Into the cavern, from
whence I ultimately escaped by way of that
terrible pool.
As I approached this extraordinarily luminous
body, I noticed that there were similar masses
at intervals round the walls of the chamber and
my attention was more upon them than the one
in the centre of the floor until I was close upon
it. When I turned my eyes towards it, I
stopped in my amazement, and stood staring
at it.
In shape it was a cube, made of some trans


parent substance, and in the middle of it lay
the form of a girl, while at each corner there
was a radiant pyramid of luminous flame.
That was all which I was capable of observing
at the moment, for directly I caught a glimpse
of the girl’s face my heart stood still, and I felt
as though every nerve in my body had become
numbed into inaction. I stood, scarcely
breathing, with my eyes fixed by a strange
fascination on the face, for it was the face I
had seen looking out at me from the long,
low, white building on the sunlit scene of my
vision in the Suez Canal.
I know not how long I stood entranced, but
dimly through my mind there flitted memories,
sweet in their beauty, though too visionary to
be more than passing phantasies. A curious
sense of familiarity with my surroundings,
and with the features of the girl within the
crystal cube, and a half-formed feeling of
having a previous knowledge of the whole
scene, came to me. I knew not what was going
to occur, to the extent of being able to defi-
nitely state in words ; but yet it was all familiar,
and I felt I was waiting for that to occur which
I knew would occur, and yet could not
express.
As I stood, the light from the four pyramidal


flames grew dim to my sight, and over me there
came a mist as of vapour. My eyes lost their
power of vision for the solid material things
before me, but acquired the power of looking
through them upon other things which were
ordinarily invisible. I saw around me and the
crystal cube, the shadowy forms of scores of
beings, whose eyes looked out from the vision-
ary heads with a mute, but terrible appeal in
their glances. I saw, within the dull opaque
body within the cube, a luminous haze confined
and imprisoned by the denser material around
it, and I knew that it was seeking freedom,
and that only I could give it the power to
shake off the cloying bonds that held it. And
I watched it as it fluttered and trembled in its
efforts to seek its own way out, and knew that
for centuries it had so fluttered and trembled,
and would continue to do so for centuries more
if I held aloof from helping it.
My vision, growing stronger, swept farther
afield, and I looked through the dense rock
around me, and I saw the plan of the mountain,
and of the Lemurian palace within it, at a
glance. I saw the chamber where the Hatter
and I had been, filled with water, and I sought
for the Hatter. At once I saw him, with Tor
Ymmothe, toiling up a long flight of stairs


which led directly to the place where I was ;
and I knew and understood that they were
coming, he to do my work at the bidding of
her whose slave he was, while I and the sleeping
girl were to be sacrificed to the black, cruel,
revengeful lust of the Queen of the pigmy
horde.
In a flash I was back in my normal state
once more, looking at the crystal cube and
its mysterious contents. I saw how the girl lay
on a clear gleaming slab, wrapped in a robe
similar to that which I was wearing, and which
left one arm, exquisitely moulded, and half her
breast exposed. Her face, perfect in the
contour of its beauty, was calm and serene,
as though she slept a peaceful, easy slumber,
the dark lashes of her eyelids resting on her
cheeks, and her lips lightly closed with a half-
smile hovering round the corners.
At each angle of the slab there was a clear
crystal bowl, in which was a deep crimson-
purple liquid, on the surface of which a mass
of luminosity, formed like a pyramid, floated
and threw abroad a wonderful radiant light.
I was marvelling at the continuance of a flame
in what seemed to be an hermetically sealed
space, when, with a jarring, grating noise, one
of the masses of quartz I had noticed on the


wall at the other end of the chamber, swung
back, and Tor Ymmothe, with the Hatter at
her side, stood before me.
Back into my mind rushed the vision of a
few moments ago ; back before my eyes came
the spectacle of those shadowy forms with
their mute, appealing looks, and I knew that
the hour had come for some drama to be
played, the significance of which I could not
understand.
Over me there surged a great wave of hatred
against the Yellow Queen and the man who
stood beside her, and I grasped my revolver
with a sinister and ugly motive in my heart.
They saw me, and Tor Ymmothe uttered a
shrill cry which echoed round the vault and
rushed past me down the passages behind me,
until I heard it echoing and echoing away in
the distance of that cavernous tunnel and knew
that it would soon return with terrible force
and velocity.
“ Quick ! Quick ! Speak the words,” I
heard her say to the Hatter.
I felt, rather than knew, what was in her
mind, and, facing towards the sleeping girl,
I shouted:
“ Naggah ! Naggah ! Oom-moo-hah.”
My voice rang through the cave and I


heard Tor Ymmothe moan as she fell forward
on her knees, her glittering eyes fixed in a
horrible stare upon the crystal cube.
The words echoed and shivered round the
place and then whispered along the passages
and through them just as the returning echo
of Tor Ymmothe’s cry came near. I remember
how I stood calmly confident, as I knew the
two volumes of sound approached one another,
and waited for the result which the evil Yellow
Queen feared so much. And, it came; came
with a phenomenon that I shall never be able
either to forget or to explain.
It was as though the words I had uttered
met the returning volume of inarticulate sound,
and absorbing the gathered strength of the
latter, yielded to its impetus and rushed back
to the chamber with the roar and speed of a
mighty thunder-bolt.
They reverberated round the crystal cube
and I saw the four flames quiver and leap.
Then the sides of the cube split into a myriad
of atoms ; I saw the girl open her eyes, glance
in wonder around her, and, with a cry in which
joy and fear were strangely blended, spring
to my side and cling to me just as, with a
hissing sigh, the flames expired and left us in
darkness.


Only one thing was visible ; the phos-
phorescent form of Tor Ymmothe.
“ Save me, save me from her,” I heard in
my ear.
“ Dick, for God’s sake, save me,” came to
me in the Hatter’s voice.
The hatred and rage of a moment ago
returned to me, but now it was against Tor
Ymmothe alone ; and, raising my revolver, I
aimed at her gleaming breast and fired.
The noise of the shot sped away into the
inner darkness as the unearthly form of the
Yellow Woman fell heavily to the ground and
lay, with dull lambent flames flickering and
gleaming over it like the light on the sides
of a fish when it hangs in the night.
The girl, grasping my arm tightly, cried in
the Pitchorie tongue;
“ Quick! Let us fly before the men can
come.”
“ Hatter,” I shouted. ‘ c Where are you ?
Come with us.”
“Anywhere, anywhere,” I heard his voice
answer in a hopeless, lifeless way.
“ Take his hand,” my companion said, as she
led me hurriedly forward, holding one hand
and leaving the other free to grasp the Hatter
as we passed him, I presume that she led us


through one of the openings behind the blocks
of quartz, but it was impossible to know more
than that we suddenly found ourselves on a
narrow ledge with a parapet in front of us and
the roof low over our heads, just as the magnified
report of my revolver shot crashed through the
cavern, making the Very rock tremble in the
terrific vibration of the noise and clamour.
“We dare not go farther till they come,”
our guide whispered to us.
“ Who are to come? ” I asked.
“ Why, those who threatened us just now,
before Eilatow Jed us through the sacred temple
into the place of the awful voices,” she answered.
The Hatter gripped my arm,
“ Silence, for God’s sake, silence, till we get
out; else I shall go mad,” he whispered hoarsely,
I turned my head towards him as I heard his
voice, and in so doing I caught sight of the
phosphorescent gleam from the prostrate form
of Tor Ymmothe on the right below us. It
presented a horrifying sight in the dark and I
felt the Hatter shudder and crouch down behind
the parapet.
The next moment a racking din of yells and
shrieks filled the air, and a ruddy light streamed
through the masses of quartz on the wall of
the cavern. Then they were pushed in and


a crowd of the most hideously revolting looking
creatures I have ever imagined, rushed through
the openings, waving blazing torches over their
heads, and howling and shrieking in an abandon
of reckless defiance.
They were creatures who seemed to have
been made up of an odd collection of limbs,
trunks, and heads, and were in every degree
of crippled malformity; one had a huge skull
balanced on a body scarcely any larger than
that of one of the pigmies ; while another, with
disproportionate limbs, had only a monkey skull
upon its shoulders; another had tremendous
arms on a lilliputian trunk, and another legs
which were five times as large as they should
have been. They were a nightmare, a vile
nauseating spectacle, such as might come in
the dark, lonely hours of night to mock and
torment the stricken fancy of a diseased brain.
They rushed hither and thither as soon as
they entered, until one of them noticed the
prostrate form of the Yellow Queen. He
howled in abject terror, and, flinging himself
on the ground, crawled towards the body with
fawning, snaky writhings.
The others stopped their pandemonium at
his cry and grouped themselves behind him,
advancing as he advanced, while through the


doors behind them other forms crowded and
pressed.
“ Great heavens, he is growing,” the Hatter
gasped, and, as I looked, I saw that the grotesque
form of the cringing creature was developing
before my eyes into that of a powerfully built
athletic giant.
From him I glanced at the others. They
were all growing, and I turned sick at the
spectacle and the horrible significance of it.
Tor Ymmothe in her life had absorbed the
vitality from her people until they had shrunk
and shrivelled into the ape-like pigmies we had
seen ; but now that she was dead, the stolen
forces of their bodies were returning to the forms
whence they had been drawn by the diabolical
arts of the Lemurian Queen.
The man crept along until he was near enough
to touch the corpse of his slaughtered sovereign.
As he neared her, I heard the returning echo of
their cries coming nearer and nearer until, as he
reached out his hand and touched her, the sound
burst forth in a fury of uproar through the
two passages.
The effect upon the horde of misshapen beings
was indescribable. They faced round towards
the sound and us, for as I now saw, we were
in one of the passages but high up on a ledge


near the roof. They evidently regarded the
noise as a challenge, for with a renewed outburst
of yells, they charged forward and through the
passage.
I leaned over the parapet to watch them.
The black pool was lit up by the glare of their
torches, and across it the noise of their own cries
was speeding. The foremost were at the water’s
edge before they realised what it was and then
it was too late to stop, for the crowds were
pressing fast upon their heels. They staggered
and fell over the edge into the water and others
followed so fast that soon the light of the torches
of those who were behind lit up a scene of
frightful and awful struggles.
- The men, hideous in their half-completed
growth, fought like demons one with the other,
shouting and shrieking in every tone of frenzied
rage and fear. And still fresh hordes pressed
forward through the passages and surged across
the floor of the cave, trampling the body of their
fallen Queen out of all semblance.
“ Come. Let us free the floods and measure
justice to them all,” the girl said quietly, taking
my hand again, and drawing me forward ; while
I, in turn, seized the Hatter’s arm and led him
unresistingly after me.
We walked along an upward sloping floor,


constantly turning from one side to. the other
until suddenly we saw in front of us the glare
of daylight. A few seconds later we were
standing on the summit of the wall which formed
the rim of the upper reservoir. Our companion
ran forward to a long level stone and sprang
upon one end of it with all her weight. It sank
slowly at that end and rose at the other, and she
scrambled back from off it as it swung into an
upright position ; and we heard a great rush of
water down below, mingled with the shrieks and
shouts of the struggling hordes.
“It is done. Now, let us seek Eilatow and
tell him how we have done the task he set us,”
she said, turning to us.
As she turned, her glance wandered away
over the stretch of desert which lay below us.
She raised her hands to her head and screamed.
“ Look ! Look ! ” she cried. “ Where is
the city ? Where are the temples and the
palaces ? Where are—oh, what is it ? ”
Her eyes met mine with an agony of fear
in them.
“ Speak! Tell me of this mystery,” she
cried.
. “Do not fear,” I said. “You are safe now.
I will tell you presently.”
I placed my arms around her, for I feared she


would fall and well, there was something in
my heart which bade me do it.
She looked at me steadily for a moment.
“ The robe is that of the altar priest and the
face is the face of my love. Why then should
I heed, seeing that you and I are at last
together?” she said.
‘'Look at the lower pool,” the Hatter ex-
claimed in English, bringing me back from a
misty dreamland I was fast drifting into.
I glanced downwards. The water in the pool
below us was agitated and boiling, and presently
it rose over the rocky rim which circled around
it and fell with a roaring thunder over the
sides, while that in the pool beside us whirled
round and round in a seething foam.
“ The gates have broken,” the girl cried.
“ The city will be swept away.”
She threw her arms in the air and fell back
in a swoon against me.
“ Help me with her,” I exclaimed, as I laid
her gently on the ground.
The Hatter did not answer; and, glancing
up at him, I saw him standing, looking down at
her with an expression of the most hopeless
sorrow on his face that I have ever seen.


CHAPTER XXI.
TO DUST AND ASHES.
Viewed from a latter point of view in the
course of events, I feel that my action was
cruel and selfish; but at the moment I was
irritated beyond measure at the attitude the
Hatter had assumed.
Had he resisted the Influence of the Yellow
Queen when we were together in that chamber,
and had agreed to stand by one another, all the
later trials I had undergone would have been
avoided. I did not stop then to consider that,
had it not been for those trials, I should never
have discovered the girl, for whose welfare I
was so much concerned. I could only revile
the Hatter for his indifference in not coming
at once to her help and my own.
But my words fell upon deaf ears, for he did
not even raise his eyes, only did he stand staring
down at her and murmuring under his breath,
“ How like ! how like ! ”
In my impatience I lifted up the girl’s form


in my arms, and carried it towards a spot where
a boulder of loose rock threw a slight shade.
There I laid her, taking off my gorgeous robe
and rolling it into a pillow for her head.
“It will terrify her when she comes to,” I
heard the Hatter say at my elbow.
“What will?” I exclaimed angrily, as I turned
towards him.
“To see you in those clothes. Don’t you
understand? She does not know that she has
lain through unnumbered centuries of time,
while the whole world has been changing.
She thinks you are her lover.”
“ And so I am,” I answered fiercely,
A spasm of pain passed over his features and
contracted them, and he put up his hands to
his eyes for a moment.
“ Dick, my boy, you will know when you
get back. We won’t quarrel now,” he said
sadly, extending his hand to me.
I would have taken it; but my charge sighed
at that moment, and I could only, attend
to her.
“She is coming to,” I said softly, and he
came and bent over her.
She opened her eyes slowly and let her glance
dwell on my face. There could be no mis-
taking the love which shone in their deep,


brown, liquid depths ; and, as I saw it, I felt
my heart leap and tremble as I never had
known it to do before. Then her glance
wandered from my face to my costume and she
started up.
“ Who and what are you ? ” she cried in a
terrified tone of voice.
“ I am he who found you just now,” I said
soothingly. “ See, my robe is your pillow.”
She glanced round at it.
“But these? Whence came you that you
wear such clothes? Your face is ”. She
broke off with a scream. “ Oh, tell me what
it is ? Tell me, tell me,” she cried excitedly.
“ What has occurred since we met ? ”
“You remember all that took place, then?”
asked.
“ Yes, of course. I was to have been handed
over to the priests of the altar to be sacrificed,
because I would wed none but you, my beloved;
and my blood was to keep the altar wet after
they had laid you on it and offered you up in
sacrifice. But Eilatow promised to substitute
the priest, whom he hated, for you, and was
to enable us to escape. And I waited for you
to come ; waited ; waited ; until in weariness
I slept and you came just now to rouse me,”
I looked over at the Hatter who was sitting


on the ground on the other side of her, for
I felt that I could not tell her anything.
He interpreted the appeal of my look and
rose to his feet.
“ Do you remember me ? ” he asked.
“ Why yes, you are the stranger who brought
the rebuke to the king and who they said
they had killed you,” she broke off. “ How
did you escape ? Not many can elude the
vengeful vigilance of the priests of the crimson
altar.”
“ I did not escape,” he said solemnly.
“But you are here,” she answered. “How
could you be here, if you had been killed ? ”
“It is a terrible story,” he went on. “ A
terrible story and I, in the learning of it,
nearly lost my reason. How then shall I tell
you ? ”
She looked at me.
“ You are the one I love and the one who
faced death for my sake ? ” she asked simply.
“ Yes, and would face it again,” I exclaimed
passionately, as I took her hand in mine.
“ Then what does it matter ? ” she said, as
her fingers closed round mine. “We are
together, and what does it matter, even if all
the world were dead and gone from memory
while love remains ? ”


“All the world you knew has gone from
memory,” the Hatter said gravely.
She glanced away across the desert and round
upon the desolate rocks that rose on every side,
and then her eyes sought mine again and her
hands clasped mine more tightly.
“ I do not understand,” she said slowly.
“ Only do I know that you, whom I love, are
here. Let me sleep again. lam so weary.”
Her eyelids drooped, and she lay back upon
my folded robe, breathing slowly and faintly,
while I watched her with a fearful growing dread
in my heart.
I felt a hand on my shoulder and heard
the Hatter’s voice in my ear.
“ The time has come for the soul to return
to earth once more, and it is seeking for its
new body. Have patience, my boy, your lot
is easier than mine, for you will find her again
while I have lost her for ever.”
He sank down upon his knees and fell
forward, with his head on his arms, his frame
shaking with great spasms of grief.
Over me there stole a sense so awful and so
mighty that I was powerless to move or speak.
Only could I hold the hands of the woman I
loved, and watch her bosom slowly rise and fall
with her faint breathing ; and, as I watched, I


knew, by some subtle intelligence which filled
me with dread, that soon the breath would cease
to come.
Presently her eyes opened once more. A
sweet, soft smile came over her face, and into
her eyes there crept a look of rapturous love
that thrilled me into an agony of passion.
Then it gradually faded away into a dreamy
far-off vacancy, and from her lips there came
the words :
“ I am waiting ; waiting ; waiting ; with our
new and grander race.”
The Hatter rose at the sound of her words
and came to my side.
“ Come, my boy, come,” he said gently.
“ The shock may be too much.”
I turned my head round with fierce words
upon my lips, and as I did so, I felt my fingers
close upon themselves. A shuddering awe
swept over me and I felt my blood run cold.
I glanced down. My hands were clasping air,
and where a moment before I had seen that
lovely face, there was only a heap of dry grey
dust sprinkled over the garish robe.


CHAPTER XXII.
THEORETICAL HISTORY AND TRAGIC
REALITY.
The shock was so sudden and the blow to my
senses so horrible that, for a time, I sat mutely
staring at the gleaming robe which lay on the
ground, and which so lately had enveloped a
lovely living form. It was difficult to realise
at the moment the full significance of the awful
event, and I was as one in the dark, groping
my way in search of some tangible reality which
I could grasp, and assure myself that I was
actually in a material world and not in one
peopled with vapid shadows, which gathered
and dispersed in the twinkling of an eye. Had
it not been for the robe before me, I should
have doubted my senses to the extent of
attributing the whole occurrence to a mere
passing delusion. But there was the robe
before me, real and substantial, and within it
the ashen dust was visible when I lifted up
one corner.


It was too tangible a thing to be ignored,
and so I was prevented from regarding all my
experience as a dream, a dream of sweet and
entrancing beauty mingled with grim horror
and despair. It was only too real.
My memory, saturated with the influence
which that beautiful being had shed upon me,
retained her image in all its glorious detail.
Her wonderfully soft and expressive eyes ; her
full, rich, ruddy lips ; her rounded cheeks and
her wealth of dark hair; all were as clear to
my mental vision as they had been to my
physical sight only a few moments before.
But that was all I had, and ever should have,
I thought in my agony of mind, to treasure
and remember.
As the thought came to me of the utter
eradication of her whom I loved, I leaped to
my feet in a fury of madness. She who had
been in earthly life but just now, had gone
across the boundary into that other world in
which we all believe and yet cannot reach save
through the portals of death. She could not
have gone very far, I thought. I would go
after her, and I sprang forward to leap over
the cliff which was within a few feet of me.
I felt myself thrown to the ground, and as
I fell forward, strong arms clasped me.


“ Dick ! Dick ! Don’t yield to such madness.
Be calm. Is this how you will deceive
her?”
The Hatter was stooping over me, holding
me down, and I looked at him vacantly, trying
to understand in my confusion how he had
come there, for only one thing was in my
brain, and that the loss I had sustained.
Gently he talked to me, reasoning with me
and persuading me, and the while he did so I
saw how strained and careworn his face had
grown.
“ Come with me, my boy,” he said. “ Come
back to the camp we left, and there let me
explain to you the mystery of it all.”
I was as a child now, with no idea nor will
of my own. Only there was a heavy load of
grief weighing me down, and numbing all my
other senses with its dull, heavy pain.
He led me along the path round the pool,
and down a long flight of steps, sometimes in
the dark, and sometimes in the light; but I
scarcely noticed whether it was the one or the
other until I found myself amongst the. trees
once more, beside the pool whence the bunyip
had come.
“ The sun is going down, and I am starving,”
he said to me. “ Rouse yourself, my boy, and


let us get up into the tree. It may not be safe
to stay down here.”
“All right,” I said. It was indifferent to
me what I did now.
He arranged the ladder, and I climbed up
and lay down on the blankets we had left spread
on the branches, watching him without interest
as he busied himself examining the fire arms
before turning to the provisions. Then he
brought some food over to me.
“ You must eat,” he said. “ Remember you
have to go to her where she is even now wait-
ing for you.”
“I don’t want food for that,” I replied.
“ She is in another world.”
“ She is in this world, living and waiting for
you,” he exclaimed warmly. “Have I told
you lies hitherto that you need doubt me
?))
“ It is impossible,” I said.
“ Impossible !” he cried. “ How can you
speak of impossibilities after all that you have
seen ? I tell you it is real and true. We have
stood on an eminence from whence we have
seen from the incarnation of to-day back through
the myriad of ages, back through the incarnation
of countless generations, into the time when
the foundations of mankind were laid.”


It came to me that it was of no use to argue
with him, I would let him have his way now,
and when night came I would go and join her
whom I loved.
“ Thousands of years ago,” he continued,
“ you loved the woman you saw to-day. The
completion of your love was denied you, for
you were slain, the body of you, that part
which manifested the love in your senses. But
you, the real being, could not be slain. The
race of which you were a unit had acquired
many a power which we have not yet been able,
in this later growth, to realise. It was those
powers which wrought the doom of that race
in the universal working of the great law of
compensation, as it will in the distant future
work out ours also, should we abuse the know-
ledge in the same way. But for a time that
bygone people held and controlled those powers,
and used them, in the folly and vainglory of
their arrogance, to wreak upon you and her
a greater vengeance .than the mere slaying of
your bodies. Yours was slain ; but hers was
so placed that as the aeons of time rolled on,
her soul would remain chained to her material
form, both being devoid of sense, and incapable
of change. You sought for her, the twin star
of your being, in all the realms of life, but


could not find her, for she was here, bound and
imprisoned, and only to be set free when you,
in the body, came back to her, and burst the
bonds that held her. Then her soul, freed
from the thraldom of inertia, sped through the
space of eternity, through the vastness of time,
through the immeasurable vastness of creative
epochs, to the body which had grown for her
occupation. And there you will meet her and
recognise her, and complete the sequence of
natural existence which the diabolic powers of
perverted humanity strove to destroy thousands
of years ago.”
As his words fell upon my ears, a wave of
conflicting emotions passed over me. Improb-
able as his theory sounded to me in my every-
day, matter-of-fact habit of thought, it yet
seemed to me to contain a greater amount of
truth than I could rationally justify. The
recollection of that vision which had come to
me, when I was on the steamer on my way out
to Australia, returned to my mind. There was
the insatiable longing which had preceded it, a
longing to leave all that which was ordinarily
attractive and enjoyable, to return to the
rough-and-ready life of the Australian bush ;
to leave the pleasure and fascination of civi-
lised life in the foremost city of the world, to


come back to the barren wretchedness of an
inhospitable, sandy desert. By what practical,
modern, material view could that be justified
or explained, I asked myself ? But how in-
telligible it became, if one could accept the
idea of previous existence with a connecting
chain of influences, reaching from one life to
the other.
More than that, the idea was balm to my
stricken spirit. The love that had come to
me so suddenly, and with such overwhelming
strength, leaped and thrilled me as I clutched
at the shadowy hope of once more meeting
with the object of it. If she really lived, this
girl, for whom I knew no name, save the
gentlest, sweetest word I understood, what
would I not do to meet her again?
“ Tell me how I may know that it is true,”
I exclaimed, in my new-found fervour.
“Your own perceptions tell you already,”
the Hatter answered. “ Believe in them—and
remember that it is a very long time since we
tasted food.”
He commenced eating with the haste of a
man who has the ravenous hunger of starva-
tion upon him, and as I watched him I felt
my mind grow calmer.
“ If I could only know,” I said.


“My boy, don’t make one mistake,” he
exclaimed. “All the mystical side of life we
may not know, but we do know the practical.
Don’t make the mistake that many do, of
losing sight of the practical in a mist of specu-
lations about the mystical. We cannot live
without food. Eat while you may.”
He resumed his meal, and after one or two
ineffectual attempts on my part to bring him
back to the train of thought he had been in
before, I followed his example, and by the
time that the sun sank out of sight, I had
at least acknowledged the needs of a practical
life, even in the midst of more than a mist
of speculation about the mystical.
As we lay back on our blankets after our
rough, but welcome meal, we lit our pipes and
lay smoking in the calm, warm air of the
tropical night. It would not have required
an inordinately imaginative mind to have re-
garded everything which had occurred since
we last lounged so and smoked as a phantasy
of the brain. But there again the presence of
one of those ancient robes belied the imagina-
tion, a robe which, if the Hatter’s theory were
correct, had served to grace religious cere-
monials thousands of years ago, and now
served to demonstrate to two rough-and-ready


bushmen, that their senses were not belying
them.
It was a curious contrast from then to now,
and I broke the silence to ask the Hatter what
form of religion had been served by the priests
whose robes we had worn,
“A religion of brutalised humanity,” he
answered, “What we know now as science
had been developed to a degree of perfection,
far beyond anything we have as yet reached.
But, unhappily for the race, the prevailing
religion of the day was not forced from its
position of ignorant arrogance by the dis-
coveries of investigators. Instead, the power-
ful priesthood dominated the investigators, and
retained for their own use the benefits which
should have been spread over the whole world,
with the result that, as the knowledge of man
increased, the bulk of humanity sank lower and
lower, weighed down by the greed and avarice
of the unscrupulous combination of miracle-
mongers. It is not difficult to understand
what took place. Suppose for a moment that
in these modern times, all the great discoveries
and inventions were retained and controlled by
a corrupt priestcraft. Just imagine the effect
upon a superstitious race in our own time that
a conscienceless body of men could produce, if


s
they had an intimate knowledge of electrical
appliances and the people none. How many
miracles could be wrought by the telephone
alone? And so, it was with the people of
Lemuria, and our great advance upon them,
and our enormous development is due, not
alone to the discoveries we have made, but to
the fact that those discoveries are the property
of the people and not of the priests.”
“ But what did they worship ? ” I asked.
" The people worshipped the priests, and the
priests worshipped themselves, as they always
do, sooner or later, when they have entire
control. You can prove that to-day in those
out-of-the-way places, where the medicine
man, the witch doctor, and all the other local
religious potentates, whatever their names
may be, are invested with a supernatural
halo.”
“ How do you know all that ? ” I asked,
“ I learned it while I was in there,” he
answered. “ Some of it I had thought out for
myself before ; I don’t know how nor why ;
but when I heard her speak of it there was
nothing strange in it to me.”
,c You mean Tor Ymmothe ? ” I said.
‘ c Who else ? ” he replied briefly.
“When I left you,” I began, “ in the room
18


where the water was coming. What took place
after that ? How did you escape ? ”
“ Easily enough,” he said. “ She opened
another panel and I did as you did, sprang
through it; only she came through as well.
You should have stayed with me then,” he
added sadly.
“Do you remember what you did ? ” I
asked. “How you went over to her and left
me, and ”
“Yes, I know,” he answered dreamily.
“ That is what you do not understand yet, and
I cannot tell you now. When you reach
Wonga again you will know. The curse of
my existence has ever been you will learn
it then,” he broke off.
“ But how are we to get back? ” I exclaimed.
“ I never shall,” he answered. “ Even if I
would, I could not. For you the way is open,
and you will travel it, though I cannot tell you
how.”
I was more anxious to hear all that had
transpired between him and the Yellow Queen
and turned the conversation back again.
“ But what took place after I left ? ” I asked
again.
“When I first went in with the other two,
she obtained control over me,” he said. “ I


fought against it, but I was powerless against
it until I had you with me. All that really
occurred after you had escaped I do not know.
I only have a vague recollection of her speaking
to me, and all she said at once became absolute
truth to me. Then we went together up those
stairs, and on the way she told me that I had
to kill you, but I did not want to when I saw
you.”
“To kill me ? ” I exclaimed.
“ Yes, it was either that I killed you, or
that you killed her. She had tried to master
you and failed, and when you fled she tried
to overtake you, but somehow you eluded her,
and then her only chance was to make me
awaken the sleeper and slay you. But there
again fate was against her, for you managed
to reach the room where the girl lay, before we
did ; how I do not know, for she said that there
was only an entrance on our side, and she was
certain you would never find it. She told me
all about the place we were going to.”
He ceased speaking, and I exclaimed; “Go
on, tell me the whole story.”
“ I thought I heard, something,” he said.
“ However, I will finish first.”
His voice was strangely monotonous, and
the horrible thought I had had before recurred


to me. Was he really sane, or was he still
under the influence which bade him kill me ?
He resumed his story as the idea came to me,
and I grasped my revolver to be ready should
my fears be well founded. As he spoke, he
rose and took off the robe he was wearing.
“ The range over there is an old volcanic
outlet,” he went on, in the same dreary mono-
tone, “It was extinct when Lemuria was in
existence, and the priests explored the crater
and the cavernous tunnels which ran off from
it. Some they built up into chambers, such as
those we were in, chambers connected by a
labyrinth of passages. The two craters above
they filled with water, which they used as a vast
source of hydraulic power, and to illuminate
the, subaqueous structures, they used their
chemical knowledge to produce what the old
alchemist brotherhood claimed to have known,
but at which modern science scoffs, and that
is, the oil of gold, a liquid which has the
property of burning almost eternally so long
as it is in vacuum, giving off a power of illu-
mination that loses nothing either by reflection
or refraction. It was in the vacuum chamber
where the lamps were kept that they placed the
girl whom you would have wed, after sending
her into a deep cataleptic trance, which was to


endure until air reached her, and she heard the
words you somehow learned and used, a con-
tingency they held to be beyond the bounds
of possibility. The only chance of her being
able to snap the first link in the chain that
bound her was in the revival of volcanic activity,
but that they did not anticipate for ages upon
ages. Behind the chamber where she lay, there
was a curious combination of passages and caverns
which had the extraordinary power of magnify-
ing sounds by some inherent acoustic properties,
and this the priests made use of as a means
of terrifying the people, for they so constructed
the passages and the chambers between this
cliff and the echoing gallery, that a word
spoken in front of the gallery roared through
the opening in the cliff with the voice of
thunder.”
“ But I found that ” I began.
“ You found the gallery and shouted for
help, and it was the echo of your cry which
came to us and made us hasten to the sleeper
so as to defeat you and waken her before you
reached her. Then we should have destroyed
not only her but you also.”
As he stopped a dull rumble sounded through
the air.
“Is that thunder ? ” I exclaimed.


A horribly discordant laugh came from - my
companion.
“ Thunder ! ” he yelled. “ Yes, the thunder
of your doom. You who slew her and robbed
me of my life ; you whom I have saved up till
now, so that I might see you perish in the flames
of the fires you have let loose. You ”
A frightful crash stopped his words and a
glare of lurid light lit up the scene. I glanced
towards the range and saw the red flames leap
up in the sky, and then I faced the Hatter.
He was standing with his face turned towards
the glare and with his arms outstretched, and
another fiendish laugh came from his lips as
he shouted, —
“ Blaze! blaze ! Let the fires of hell come
forth to burn the curse away.”
I crouched down as he raved and shouted
the most terrible anathemas at the blazing
mountain. Then he sprang towards me,
shouting,—
“ Come ! We will run and meet it! ”
I sprawled over in my attempt to spring on
one side and he, grabbing at me, just missed
me. He tried to turn but could not stop, and
with a cry of dismay I saw him fall headlong
from the tree.
I looked down and saw him scramble to his


feet and run blindly to and fro, yelling and
laughing that terrible laugh. The light gleamed
on the robe he had been wearing, and I snatched
it up and hurled it from me. It fell down to
the ground, and as the Hatter saw it he leaped
towards it and jumped upon it in an abandon
of fury.
Then a terrific crash sounded and In an
almost blinding glare I saw the rock split in
two. For an instant the water, gleaming with
the blaze above it, stood still, ere with a roar
it fell forward, foaming and rushing. In a
moment it had passed over the space between
me and the cliff, and was surging round me and
over me ; and with the noise of a hundred
thunder-peals roaring in my ears, I felt myself
borne resistlessly onwards.


CHAPTER XXIII.
ACROSS THE DESERT.
My next recollection was to find myself, bruised,
sore, and exhausted, lying on the sand of the
desert.
I raised myself on to my elbow and looked
around me. My clothes clung to me, wet and
cold, and the sand below me was wet also,
while away in the distance I could see the ugly
red glare of the volcano, and the noise of loud
explosions came to me.
Then fear, wild unreasoning fear, took pos-
session of me, and, starting to my feet, I ran
forward without any thought save that of
escaping. I ran till my breath grew short and
my limbs ached and trembled, but still I plunged
forward; now sinking up to my ankles in the
soft wet sand, now stumbling in my stride
and staggering down on to my hands and knees.
There was a panic in my brain and it lent me
a strength that would not recognise either
exhaustion or fatigue. Through the whole


night I staggered and stumbled forward, with
only one idea of direction, and that away from
the place where the red lurid glow in the sky
told me the range was situated. I must have
covered a very considerable distance in my
terrified run, for when the sun rose above the
horizon and, I looked back, I could only see
a cloud of smoke hanging above- the sky line
where I expected to see the loom of the range.
I could not believe that I had run out of sight
of it; rather did it seem to me that the whole
mysterious structure had been swallowed up in
the convulsion.
Now that the sun was up, I began to feel
the effects of my flight. The efforts I had
been putting forth for hours past had left me
weak and thirsting, and now that the impetus
of fear had passed away with the appearance
of the sun, I was cognisant that my throat was
parched and my limbs and body weary. My
head was bare to the fierce heat of the sun rays,
which grew in intensity at every moment, and
my heart failed me when I recalled all that had
recently occurred, and remembered the hopeless
condition I was in to attempt the journey
across the sterile wastes before me. I had
neither food nor water with me, let alone a
horse, to help me over the stretch of desert


which lay between me and watered country.
And worse than all, I was in ignorance of the
direction I should take to bring me to the
nearest point where I could obtain shade from
the sun and water to revive me. I had turned
towards the sun when I first saw it rise above
the horizon, without heeding in what direction
my face was before I turned ; and now I did not
know whether I was retracing the course I had
followed during the night or not. I tried to
rally myself by regarding the cloud on the
horizon as being above the site of the range,
and, turning my back upon it, I trudged
forwards, tearing part of my shirt away so as
to form some covering for my head.
Soon my tongue began to dry and my throat
grew more and more parched, until it was almost
cracking, while my eyes ached with the glare
of the sun on the sand, and my spirits drooped
as I looked despairingly ahead and saw only
the same interminable stretch of glaring yellow
waste. My one idea was to keep going forward,
and I kept my feet moving till my senses left
me and I reeled and fell.
I remember, every now and again, coming
to myself and finding that I was lying with
my face to the sand, digging my fingers into
it in the hopes of being able to reach down to


a cooler spot than the surface. Then I would
stagger up and forward again, until my strength
gave out and I fell once more, I lost all count
of time ; I forgot what I was doing ; only the
agony of thirst remained constant with me until
I fell and failed to rise again.
I learned afterwards that a party of blacks,
skirting the desert, had seen the’ glare of the
volcanic fire, had pressed forward in order to
ascertain what it was, when they descried me
staggering along. They came up to me soon
after I had fallen for the last time, and, seeing
how matters were with me, had carried me back
to the camp they had left in the morning,
where there was a small water-hole. There
they tended me, I know not for how long, for
when I did get water it was only just in time, and
brought back the flicker of life within me, to set
me face to face in a struggle with a raging fever.
All that I remember of that period is a
haunting vision of a beautiful figure, which
constantly danced before my eyes urging me
to go forward, while a hideous ogre clung to
my neck and held me to the ground. So
persistent was the vision that, even when I
recovered my wits and found myself stretched
out, thin and weak, under the shelter of a
native gunyah, I saw the form dancing and


smiling at me and beckoning me to come to
it, among the few stunted trees that grew round
the water-hole.
But I was too emaciated to attempt to follow
it, and for weeks I must have hovered between
life and death, with my mind more often
wandering than not. The blacks used to
share their food with me, and in the intervals,
when my mind was fairly clear, I tried to make
them understand that I wanted to get to
the coast. Perhaps they understood, but I
do not suppose I shall ever know ; for one day
as I was sitting listlessly in the shade of the
gunyah, trying to piece some intelligible scheme
out of the jumble that was in my mind, I heard
an English tongue.
I sprang to my feet and glanced around me.
The camp was deserted of blacks, but two
white men on horseback were approaching the
waterhole. I cried out in the wildness of my
joy, and fell senseless to the ground.
The story that they told me when I came
to myself again was full of interest to me.
They were two of a party of seven prospectors,
who had pushed forward in the hopes of being
able to discover the whereabouts of a veritable
El Dorado, which had been reported to be in
the vicinity of the desert. About a month


before, they said, a horseman had arrived at
a mining camp some hundreds of miles beyond
Coolgardie and had applied to the local police
constable for an escort. The matter had been
kept a secret until the arrival from the head-
quarters of a sub-inspector and twenty constables,
and the men of the camp then heard that the
horseman was one of two mates, who had struck
it rich away out back and had brought in a
camel team loaded with great nuggets of gold.
The escort had started before the news
leaked out, or else the chances of the two men
retaining all their gold would have been very
small, for the patch that the camp was working
was terribly poor and the miners were nearly
all cleared out of cash. A general stampede
ensued as soon as the real destination of the
troopers was known ; but when they found the
team, it was guarded by the police, and not
even the desperately hard-up miners cared to
try conclusions.
But one of the two men gave them the
whereabouts of the find, and by the next
morning everybody in the township had cleared
to track it out. Seven of them had started out
together, and had stuck together ever since,
but no sign had they been able to find of the
range the two men had spoken of.


“But what are you doing?” one of them
asked me.
“ I was prospecting with a mate, and we
struck the desert and got done for water. I
don’t know what became of my mate, but the
blacks found me almost dead and brought me
here, and here I’ve been ever since,” I answered.
I guessed who the two men with the camel
team were, but I did not tell my rescuers all
I knew about them. A mention of the range
would only have led to a continuance of the
journey in search of what I believed had long
since disappeared. And now that I heard that
Bill and Oates had reached settled country
again, I only had one desire, and that was to
do so too, and start away for England.
They took me back to the spot where the
remainder of their party were camped, and I
pitched them so horrible a tale of my own
experience in the desert that they decided to
regard the tale of the fabulous range as a
traveller’s story put up to deceive them, and
return back to Coolgardie again. We started
the next day, my new mates setting me on a
spare horse they had ; and I never was so pleased
as when I really had my back turned on that
desert which had been the scene of such terrible
events in my life.


But if my new-found friends brought me
luck, I did the same for them ; for a week later,
when we were nearing the settlement, I chanced
upon a find which has since developed into one
of the biggest things in the Westralian field.
We were making our camp for the night,
when I wandered off into a patch of scrub to
try for a shot at some wallabies I had seen
making for it. I chanced upon one just as it
was leaning forward browsing, and fired at it,
bowling it over. I ran over to pick it up and,
as I approached it, I saw where my bullet had
struck the ground before hitting the wallaby
and had ploughed up a small furrow. Out of
idle curiosity I ran my finger along the furrow,
'to find what had turned the bullet upwards
again ; and, in doing so, saw something gleam in
the soil. I stooped to examine what it was,
and found a splinter of gold, A few moments
later and I had torn back the shallow turf, and
exposed a blobby excrescence of almost solid
metal.
My shouts brought my comrades to the spot,
and all ideas of a camp were forgotten in the
joy and excitement of the discovery. A huge
fire was lit, and, by its light, the soil was thrown
back sufficiently to expose enough gold to make
every one of us a rich man. Subsequent


development showed that the gold was- only
on the surface, just a “ blow,” as they term it,
of metal in a cup-like hollow ; but there was
enough to satisfy us, and whatever the ultimate
shareholders may think of it, we had no reason
to grumble at the “ Lucky Shot,” as we named
the claim.
For my own part, I was not particularly
anxious to share in the find, because I knew
that my share in the wealth Bill and Oates
had taken away would be more than ever I
could spend; but my mates insisted that I
must stand in with them ; especially as I was
the discoverer. So we decided that two of
us should ride on to the nearest township for
a supply of stores and, while one returned
with the stores, I would ride on to the coast,
leaving it with the others to forward my share
of the gold to my London bank.
As soon as I could I made my way back
to Albany, and from there rode out to Wonga.
My curiosity to read the manuscript, which I
knew contained the history of the Hatter’s
life, was very keen, I had often wondered
whether he too had escaped when the waters
of the reservoir burst down upon us. It
seemed very improbable to me that he should
have done so, for the flood must have reached


him where he stood on the ground, even before
it reached me in the branches of the tree; and
while I was borne along on the top of the
rush, he must have been overwhelmed and
drowned. There was no doubt in my mind
as to the mental condition he was in at the
time, and I doubt whether he would have
made an effort to escape, even • had it been
possible.
Such thoughts recurred to me, as I rode
slowly along the track which led to the humpy
on Wonga ; and I was doubtful whether or not
to expect to find him at the place.
At Albany I had heard about the departure
for London of two men, who had carried away
with them, not only very heavy bank drafts,
but almost an incredible amount of gold in
bullion. The men, it was rumoured, had
chanced upon the gold in that locality which
is usually located in Australia as "out back,”
but they were very reserved about it otherwise,
and kept both their knowledge and their
company very much to themselves up to the
time of their departure.
I again concluded that the two were Bill and
Oates, and wondered whether they had visited
Wonga before leaving, or whether they had
given both the Hatter and myself up for lost.
l 9


CHAPTER XXIV.
THE HATTER NAMED.
There was no sign of human occupation about
the humpy when I passed through the slip-rails
on to Wonga. The door was closed ; no
smoke came from the chimney, and grass,
sheltered from the sun by the verandah, grew
rank and strong, where it would soon have been
trodden down by any one coming and going
through the doorway.
I rode up to the deserted-looking place ; and,
taking the saddle and bridle from my horse,
turned it into the small fenced paddock beside
the hut. Then I went round to the window at
the back ; and, opening it by the trick the
Hatter had showed me, I scrambled through it
into the one room of the interior. As I crossed
the floor to open the door my eye caught sight
of some white chalk marks scrawled on the
wall, and I read, “ B. and O. clearing. D.H.
or H. write Saxted.”
Both Bill and Oates had been out, then I


thought, as I read the vague message; they
evidently believed that the Hatter and I were
still likely to turn up, though how they could
think so, when they had taken all the horses
and camels with them when they started, I did
not know. The latter part of the message
showed that they had gone home; and I was
satisfied that all the references to the two rich
but uncommunicative miners that I had heard,
related to my quandom mates.
I opened the door, and brought in my saddle
and swag; and soon I had a fire blazing up
the chimney and a billy of tea on to boil.
While it was brewing I drew the line from the
two posts and located the spot where the Hatter
had constructed his secret hiding place. It was
an easy task, and I had the packet of manuscript
out, as well as the money I had placed there, by
the time my tea was ready, I had my meal
with the packet lying in front of me on the
table, the while I speculated as to its contents ;
and when I had finished I lit my pipe and
opened the waterproof wrapper.
Inside I found a second wrapper of paper, on
which was written: “To my friend and com-
rade, Dick Halwood. If this falls into other
hands than his, will the finder gratify the
wishes of a dead man and destroy it, unread.”


An eerie feeling crept over me as I read this
inscription. The manuscript had fallen into
the hands he had intended it for, and I was
entitled to open it, in accordance with his
expressed wish ; but the latter part of the
inscription struck me in an uncanny way. He,
poor unfortunate, had little thought when he
wrote it that I should take it from the place
where he had placed it, with an uncertainty in
my mind as to whether he was really dead or
alive, but with the knowledge that he had more
than once tried to do that which, had he been
successful, would have prevented me from ever
returning to the place where he had asked me
to seek for it.
“Poor demented creature,” I thought aloud.
“ He was not in his right senses then, for no
truer, more faithful, comrade ever existed than
he had proved himself to be ; and whatever he
may have done, which was seemingly either
treacherous or dishonourable, was not done by
him, but by some hideous power which con-
trolled him against his own better will.”
I raised my eyes from the packet as I
involuntarily spoke, and then I sprang to my
feet; for there, in the clear light of day,
between me and the fireplace, stood the Hatter,
clothed as I had last seen him, and with the


gentlest smile upon his face that one could
imagine.
“ Great God ! How did you ”
My tongue failed me before I could complete
my excited exclamation; for the form, which
was so perfectly clear to my eyes at the moment
I raised them, had vanished even as I spoke.
I stood gazing at the place where it had
appeared, and past me and over me there swept
a momentary chill, as though a breath or cool
air had, blown upon me ; in my ears there
sounded a soft rustling, and I caught the words,
“ Good-bye and bless you, comrade ” ; and I
rushed from the hut, quivering and unnerved,
and stood in the clear, warm sunshine.
I sat down on a log for a time, until I managed
to get some control over myself; and then, re-
entering the hut, I quickly gathered up my
swag, and rolling it up with the money inside,
I put the packet of manuscript in my pocket
and went out to saddle my horse. That done,
I returned to the hut, scattered the fire upon
the floor, closed the door, and, mounting my
horse, rode away ; for I felt that to have stayed
inside that humpy any longer would have driven
me mad. As the track turned away out of
sight from the hut I glanced back, and saw the
smoke bursting through the roof.


I did not draw rein until a score of miles lay
between me and Wonga, and then it was only
to ease my horse a bit, for I was determined
to push right on to Albany. Fortunately the
night was beautifully moonlight after the sun
went down, and I managed to reach the township
in time to secure a room in one of the hotels,
long after midnight though it was.
I retired to my room and, locking the door,
sat down to read the manuscript, the examina-
tion of which had been so strangely interrupted.
Once I began it I could not stop until I came
to the last word ; and I sat till the grey dawn
came up, wondering and marvelling at the tale
I had read—the life history of a strangely
complex nature, to which only the final chapter
was wanting ; and that I already knew. This
is the story that I read :
“When you come to read this, you will
understand what has hitherto confused you.
As you bore with me in the past, bear with me
now ; for I shall be what the world terms dead,
although it is my steadfast belief that I shall be
beside you at the moment, invisible to you, but
conscious of your every thought and act. There-
fore be merciful, for the hell of theology is the
consciousness of the disembodied spirit to the
full significance of its bygone bodily acts and


thoughts, and the interpretation put upon them
by those it loved on earth and loves still in the
other world. Remember ! Of the dead speak
only in kindness and think only in charity. The
acts of men are decreed by the power of fate, and
the ill deeds of one may be the salvation of
many. Pity and forgive, but do not blame,
until you know and understand what made me
all I was, and then think of me as I was to
you, your mate and comrade, and not as the
ruined, reckless scoundrel, Claud Digby, baronet
and fool.”
When I had read so far I raised my eyes, half-
expecting to see before me again the vision I
had seen in the hut. But there was only the
commonplace detail of an Australian bush-hotel
bedroom around me, and I was sorry it was so ;
for in my heart there was a great yearning pity
for my old comrade, and I would that I could
have told him of it. Perhaps he knew, better
than I could have explained to him, for he
might after all have been right in his ideas, and
he might have looked into my heart of hearts
and seen and known my feelings and rejoiced.
What human being could dispute it ?
With such thoughts within me, I turned the
page over and read on, “ I was born with the
proverbial silver spoon in my mouth. The heir


to an ancient title, insignificant in rank, perhaps,
but second to none in ancestral glory ; with
parents who doted on me and showered all that
love could suggest upon me, and with a vast
fortune as my future property, my childhood
should have been one prolonged period of
happiness and content. As I was well endowed
in material things and physical appearances, so
was I also fitted mentally to occupy a prominent
position among my fellows. In every way
except one ; and therein lies all the sorrow,
the disgrace and the misery of my life, and of
those with whom destiny allied me. Sometimes
I have tried to reason with myself that it was
the taint of insanity which was in my blood ;
but it is a poor consolation, the poorer that it
is not true. I was never mad. I was only
dominated by some malevolent influence,
created by my own folly in former periods
of existence, for in the loneliness of my
Australian life I have come near to those
subtle forces which lie within all men’s reach,
and especially those who live in and with
Nature ; and thus have I been enabled to look
backwards upon the turgid currents engendered
in bygone ages, and trace them from the single
evil tendency, from which there has spread
onwards a stream that has grown stronger


and stronger in each successive swirl, until it
has become the seething flood of murky
influences which surge round rhe now.
“ With a purer past I might also have learned
to look forward ; but the dense materialism of
my being befogged my vision when I looked
ahead, and only could I see trivial acts, and those
the clearer by reason of their own stolidity.
But the past I could see distinctly, and- in it
I recognised my evil genius, engendered until
it took to itself suflicent strength and force to
manifest itself as a separate entity and dominate
my original nature, whenever that sought to
assert itself and cleanse away the stains of its
defilement. Being a man, the evil of my own
creation took to itself the form of the opposite
sex, and, as a woman, has overshadowed me
and lured me downwards to the depths of my
depravity.
“Strange that it should be so, and the more
bitter, since in my life there has twice been
given to me the means of escape from the
thraldom of my sorrow ; and both were the
loves of women. The first was that of my
mother; the second that of my wife. Either
would have sufficed could I but have had them
to understand, or could I but have seen clearly.
But the mists of my own making obscured my


vision, and they only realised, when it was too
late, the power of the foe they had to meet.
“ My mother understood it as she was passing
away into the other world, and with her last
breath implored me to seek and win the only
means of strength, the love of a true-hearted
woman. She looked down into my heart and
saw the black, cold cruelty, the fiendish treachery
and unscrupulous perfidy of my inner nature.
Her mother’s Jove for the one who owed his
life to her did not quail at the sight; rather
did it look deeper and farther, until it recognised
the underlying impulse, bound and weighted
into inactivity, but with all its vitality un-
impaired, if only it could be freed from its
shackles and allowed to utilise its own potenti-
ality. As it was, the influence of her words
stirred my better nature, and for a time the
other and the stronger side was held in sub-
jection, Could I have met at that period the
one whom I met later, the ultimate defeat of
my evil tendencies might have been complete ;
but it was not to be, and gradually the restrain-
ing control wore off, until it only remained in
a memory at which I scoffed and jeered as the
remnant of a passing weakness, plunging the
more into the slough of vice and iniquity.
Only when I was steeped to satiety in wicked


ness did I meet the second angel in human
form.
“ At our first meeting I felt the demon at
my elbow grow faint and weak, while the
vestige that remained of my mother’s influence
revived; and in a fit of deep and abject remorse
I foreswore my past course of life and sought,
honestly and manfully sought, to effect my own
reclamation. It was easy to win the love of
that pure, sweet, innocent girl; too easy, I have
sometimes thought, for had the struggle been
harder and longer I might have gained a greater
ascendency over my unfortunate bent of iniquity.
But not yet was my emancipation to be achieved;
for even as I felt myself surrounded by all
those glorious and sustaining incentives, which
come to a man who receives the love of a
noble-hearted woman, my evil nature burst out
into revolt—the more terrible that it had known
something of restraint. The stream of destiny
surged and bubbled round me, and I was swept
away—a useless, thriftless derelict. In my mad
fury I sought to pollute the purity of her
whom I loved, and to drag her down from the
pinnacle of her excellence, down to the degraded
level that I occupied. She, barely realising
the awful significance of it all, chided and
counselled me with sweet, gentle kindness, which


only maddened me the more ; and I deliberately
planned and schemed to drag her, and all her
family, down, by ruining them financially, since
I did not seem to be able to do it morally.
“ There, too, I failed; for the crash of
material disaster only brought out the clearer
and the stronger the noble attributes of their
natures, and I fled from among my fellow-men,
away into the nameless interior of Australia,
where I wandered, a nameless, miserable wretch.
“ Once I nursed the wish to rebuild the
fortune I had squandered, not for my own use,
but for the use of those I had wronged. For,
strange and contradictory as it may seem, my
constant desire was to benefit and succour
them, even when I acted in such a way that I
could only attain the reverse. In that lay the
subtlety of my torture. Always was I conscious
of what I was doing ; always was I awake to
the terrible consequences of my acts; and always
did I know and feel my own debasement; even
while I gloried in the treachery and the cruelty
I was committing.
“ For years I wandered in search of wealth,
often with it just within my reach ; but the
prospect was all that I ever realised, until
eighteen years had gone by from the date when
I fled from among my fellow-men. Then I


met you, and read in your face the character
I so sorely needed. Chance had thrown you
in my way; chance made you do what hundreds
of others had done—trust me, and believe in
me. And in that I knew lay my last opportunity
of beating back the demon I had created in
my past. Once more I resolved, and swore to
myself, never to betray or deceive you; and I
have kept my word. When we returned with
wealth enough for both, and enough for me
to buy back my lost estate, I put my ambition
from me ; for once I robbed myself, and sacri-
ficed myself, giving to you all that meant the
realisation of my dream of nearly twenty years.
“ Nor was that the only sacrifice I made.
In the woman, the abnormal monster whom we
saw, I recognised the personification of the ogre
that had haunted me through all my life, and
with the chance of returning to my own land,
and strong enough at last to make some amends
for my evil past, I renounced it, and forced
myself to go back to where the, to me, hideous
and repulsive impersonation of my evil genius
dreed her miserable weird.
“ But again I failed. All my efforts to reach
that place of horrible doom were frustrated,
until I cried in the agony of my helplessness,
even to make this poor amend for my wasted


life, for the help of the only human being who
could aid me. For days and weeks I have
been longing and striving to reach out to where
you are, and tell you of my needs. As the
time goes on, and you do not come, I turn to
this idea and write down the story of my life,
in the hope that, before I die, I may be able
to send it to you, and that you may read it,
and give me the one small thing I ask—your
pity. Only a passing thought ; only one touch
of human sympathy from one who now knows
me as I am, and to whom alone, of all the
world, I have been true and faithful. Then,
wherever my soul may be ; however much it
may ache in the sorrow and the misery I have
prepared for it, a gleam of light will come ; and
I shall know that one, at least, has not suffered
from my acts ; that one, at least, has nothing
to forgive in me ; that one, at least, remembers
me without hate, but with the gentle kindness
of regret.”


CHAPTER XXV.
COVENTRY OF SAXTED.
As I sat on the verandah of the hotel the
morning after reading the manuscript that the
Hatter, or as I may now call him, Sir Claud,
had left me, I was angry with myself; for, in
spite of all that I could do, there was only one
idea paramount in my mind, and that was to
start for England directly a vessel came into
the port.
All my life I had rather prided myself upon
the sturdy practical view I took of things.
When I had met men with, curious opinions,
as one sometimes does in that land of extra-
ordinary contradictions, the great southern con-
tinent—it is folly to term it an island—l had
always scoffed at them and twitted them that,
for all their theories, it was to beef and mutton
that they looked for the mainstay of exist-
ence ; and beef and mutton it would be for all
time.
Yet, a few months ago, I had deliberately


turned my back upon the material prosperity
which was at my command in London—the
very acme of my beef-and-mutton theory—to
voyage out to Australia again. I had per-
suaded myself that it was the sunshine and
the scent of the gums I was yearning for ; the
romantic life of the swagsman tramping along
the eucalypt-fringed roads, with his swag on his
back and freedom in front of him. Well, I
could see just such men from where I sat—men
who were toiling along, perspiring and profane,
what with the heat of the climate, and the dust
of the road—and somehow the romance of the
situation was not so evident now as it had been
when I was comfortably settled in the capital
of the world. But it was undoubtedly very
strong within me then; or was it that I was
weak in my practical view of things, and had
allowed myself to be carried away against my
better judgment ?
It was useless trying to find the reason now.
I had come from peace and comfort into rest-
lessness and roughing; and now, like a shifty
weather vane, I was round on the other course
with an overmastering desire to go back home
again. There had been visions of a cosy little
station in the balmy Australian atmosphere,
where I could spend the rest of my days with


a strapping Australian girl as my companion,
and a crowd of young Australians growing up
around me and giving me a reason for all I did.
The realisation of that dream was possible
now, but to my intense disgust I found that
the attraction of it had passed. Instead of it I
had another impulse, and that—to go home.
It seemed ignominious to give way to such
a vacillating influence, and I struggled to per-
suade myself that the events of the last few
months alone should be enough to keep me
where I was. I tried to rouse my dormant
enthusiasm for an Australian life, by recalling
the scene upon that ridge, when the whole of
my soul had gone out in a great love for the
girl who had so strangely come into my life.
Surely if she came back at all from the realm
of mystery into which she had vanished, it
would be in Australia that she would re-appear ;
and therefore, on that ground alone, I should
remain. So I reasoned with myself, but it was
useless; I was beginning to discredit even mv
own memory.
The events which I recalled could not pos-
sibly have happened, I told myself. The fever
that I had had before the prospectors found
me with the blacks had caused me to be de-
lirious, and the delirium had left these im-
-20


pressions on my mind—and, to prove it was
so, I would go home and seek out the men who
had gone with us to that visionary place. It
was not superfine reasoning, but it provided an
excuse, some slight mollification of my out-
raged pride of practical views of life; and I
went and secured a passage to London by a
steamer that was due on the morrow.
The sense of happiness and content which
had come to me when I went on board the
steamer in the Thames, on the day of my
departure for Australia, came to me again when
I embarked on board the “ Ballaarat,” in King
George’s Sound, and, steaming out of the
harbour, I saw the coast line of Australia
gradually fade out of sight.
The time occupied by the voyage passed on
wings; and it seemed that scarcely a week had
elapsed when once more I was on English soil,
with a vague wonder in my mind as to how I
had ever left it.' Two days later and I was on
my way to Suffolk, to seek out my quondam
mate, at Saxted.
When I arrived at the station which the
guide books told me was the nearest that the
railway went to that sleepy, small, old-fashioned
village, I found that I was still seven miles
away from it. But as I arrived early in the


afternoon the distance did not disconcert me.
I engaged rooms in the village where the rail-
way ended, and secured a conveyance to drive
me out to Saxted Manor.
On my way thither I entered into con-
versation with the driver, in order to learn all
I could about the family I was going to visit.
Discounting the village gossip, with which the
knowledge of my informant was very largely
tinctured, I arrived at a result which was very
much in accord with what I expected. Years
before, the driver told me, the daughter of the
house had been married to a “ bad lot,” as he
expressed it, who had ruined all her family, and
then deserted her and her child. The old
place was sold ; the father of the girl dying of
a broken heart and the girl herself following
soon after. Two sons remained, one of whom
went to the wall, but the other—he was a
perfect hero, according to his enthusiastic
historian.
Geographical knowledge was somewhat of a
hazy quantity in Suffolk, to judge by the
succeeding remarks of my companion; for he
averred that the last of the Coventrys of Saxted
had voyaged to Australia, and personally at-
tacked the country belonging to one of the
native kings there; had been made prisoner


and doomed to lifelong slavery, but managed
to escape with all the king’s treasure in a native
ship ; and had sailed about until he fell in with
a British man-o’-war, when he and his prize had
been towed into port, from whence he had
returned to the old village. He had bought
back the family property from the man who
had secured it when the father had been sold
up, and was now electrifying the whole country
with his wealth, his magnificence, and the
wonderful tales of his marvellous adventures.
There was so much reverence in the man’s
voice when he was speaking of the latest and
the greatest of the Coventrys, that I did not
like to tell him that the powerful magnate,
which provincial innocence had made him into,
had not so many months before been only
plain “ Bill, the Axer,” a hard working Austra-
lian bush-labourer, with no money to speak of,
and less prospects. He would not have
believed me if I had; so I left him with his
romance about the war with the native king
and the escape in the native ship, intact.
Romance in a Suffolk labourer is too rare and
brilliant a thing to be disturbed when it is met
with.
When we arrived at the old Manor I sent
him back to his village, and walked down the


approach to the house—a grand old red brick
structure surrounded by ancient elms, I had
not written to announce my coming; for at the
time I left London I was not sure that Coven-
try had returned to the place, so that when I
reached the door of the house and a servant
answered my ring, I contented myself with
sending in word that I wanted to see Mr.
Coventry on business.
The servant left me standing where I was,
and presently I heard the voice I had last heard
in that far-off Australian desert the night we
arrived at the oasis by the range. I turned
away when his footsteps drew nearer, and only
when I heard him asking my business did I
face him. It was a thoughtless thing to do ;
for the shock when he saw and recognised my
face was very great. He staggered back from
the doorway.
“ God ! ” he exclaimed. “ Are you man or
spirit? ”
“ Both,” I answered. “ Don’t you know
me—Dick Hal wood ? ”
Away somewhere in the house behind him
there was the sound of a girlish voice, and he
grabbed my arm almost savagely.
“ Come in here ! ” he exclaimed, as he pulled
me across the hall and into a room which


opened off it. “ You scared the life out of
me,” he added, in an apologetic tone, when
we were inside the room and he had closed
the door. “ Where did you come from, and
where’s the Hatter ? ”
“ I reached London two days ago,” I
answered. “ The Hatter is, I believe, dead.”
He looked at me curiously, without speaking.
“ And Oates ? ” I asked.
“ Oh, he is all right ; he is in Scotland now,
I fancy. But you—we never expected to see
you. We thought you were dead, and ex-
pected that the Hatter would come round some
day and say so. It is all very strange, very
strange,” he went on.
There was a peculiar, distrustful air about
him, and he eyed me in a suspicious way ; his
glance, when it met mine, giving me the im-
pression that he was not overjoyed at my
arrival. It occurred to me that he might be
hungering after our shares of the gold, even if
he had not already taken them for his own use.
“ I suppose you remember me well enough ? ”
I asked ; not perhaps in the gentlest of tones,
for the suspicion in my mind angered me.
“ Oh yes,” he answered shortly.
“I saw the message you left in the hut at
Wonga,” I continued.


“Oates left that. I did not go out, but
stayed in Albany,” he answered. “We realised
all the stuff as soon as we reached this side, and,
taking a fourth each, we banked the rest for
you and the Hatter, You can have it when-
ever you want it.”
His manner lost nothing of the restraint
it had had during the first moment of our
interview ; and now that he had referred to the
money, there was only one explanation of it
in my mind. He did not wish to renew our
acquaintance now that he had derived all the
benefit he could out of it, and wished to give
me the cold shoulder. The idea nettled me
even more than his implied suspicion.
“ Very good,” I said shortly. “ And what
about the Hatter’s ? ”
“ I suppose it must wait till he comes,” he
answered.
“ He has given me full power and instruc-
tions what to do with it,” I said.
“ Oh, has he ? ” he replied, as if my ob-
servation were of no possible interest to him,
and my anger increased. If the man were
going to treat me in this offhand manner, I was
certainly not going to consider his feelings,
as I had intended to do, in the breaking to him
of the news as to who the Hatter really was.


“Of course you do not know what his real
name was ? ” I asked.
“ How should I ? A man who says he is a
hatter is nameless to any one who understands
the rule of the bush. It is no business of mine
to find out who or what he was.”
“ Excuse me, but it is,” I rejoined curtly,
still more irritated at his voice and manner.
“ The Hatter’s real name was Sir Claud Digby,”
I intended to surprise him, and I succeeded ;
for he turned ashen grey as I mentioned the
name which, of all others, I knew he hated.
“ What does it mean ? What does it mean ?’’
he exclaimed, staring at me vacantly.
“ I have his written statement, which he left
behind him at Wonga, in case he died while we
were on that journey. If I am not mistaken,
he was your brother-in-law, and the father of
your niece,” I went on maliciously.
The man stood staring at me after I had
finished speaking, with an expression of vacant
wonder on his face.
“ He desired me to see that his child received
his full share,” I added.
“ I don’t understand it,” he muttered. “It
is too preposterous.”
I took the words as being applied to myself,
and I resented them immediately.


“ Whether it is preposterous or not, it is a
fact,” I exclaimed warmly.
He looked up at me quickly.
“ Forgive me, Halwood,” he said, “ I have
been unintentionally rude; but you do not
know what all this means. I do not dispute
your statement; it is the coincidence that
amazes me.”
“It is my turn not to understand,” I
replied shortly ; for having been once nettled
I could not smooth away my anger in a
moment.
“I know,” he answered quietly. “And as
yet I cannot explain.”
“I have no wish to pry into anything that
does not concern me,” I went on stiffly, and
liking the man’s manner less and less. “ What
I know is that which Sir Claud wished me to
know and, also, to act upon. I am here now
merely to carry out his wishes. He felt that
he had injured all your family and, having
made a fortune at last, he would have given it
to you ; but as you, through his instrumentality,
have made one also, his naturally goes to his
child, of whose existence he was totally unaware
until you yourself told him.”
“ Yes, there it is again. There is more of
the mystery, I met him, of all men in the


world, and did not know him. Had I.done
so I should have most probably killed him ; but,
instead of that, he enables me to make my
fortune and I look upon him, my bitterest
enemy, as my dearest friend. And now you
come here ; you, who are even a greater con-
undrum.”
“ My appearance need not inconvenience you,”
I retorted hotly. “ Whatever conundrum there
is ”
“My dear Hal wood, this is no time for
heroics,” he said, interrupting me, “ I should
have preferred to have waited a little longer
before accepting what appears to me to be a
contradiction of everything that one usually
regards as rational and tangible; but you give
me no option. Will you come with me ? ”
He opened the door as he spoke, and walked
along the passage outside, and I followed him.
We crossed the fine spacious hall, hung round
with old oil portraits, and then we ascended a
wide stairway. At the top a passage ran at
right angles to it and, turning to the left,
Coventry stepped forward. I turned to follow.
Then I leaped to his side and, gripping hold
of his arm, held him, while I pointed excitedly
to a picture at the end of the passage, which
was so placed with regard to the light that the


figure it contained seemed as though it were
standing out from the frame.
But it was not that trick of the painter’s art
that startled me; it was the face of the subject,
a face wonderful in its beauty of feature and
expression—and the face of the girl I had found
lying in that far-off range in the sleep of death.
So taken aback was I at the apparition that I
could only stand grasping Coventry by the arm
and pointing, but unable to utter a word. To
my startled eyes the figure was smiling upon
me as it advanced towards me.
“ That is my sister’s portrait; Lady Digby
that was,” Coventry said sadly. “It was painted
before her marriage with—great Heavens, man,
what is the matter ? ”
It was his turn to grasp my arm; for I
should have fallen headlong to the ground as
I heard his words. The shock of seeing the
picture was bad enough, but the words I heard
him utter recalled to me others that I had
scarcely heeded at the time they were said.
Again I was standing on that distant ridge,
bending over the fainting form of the girl I
had found, and to my memory there came the
Hatter’s words, “ How like ! ” and then the rest
of the sentence, “ I have lost her for ever, but
you will find her again.”


The emotion of love had lain dormant from
the time that I had accepted the idea he had put
forward that I was to Jive, to escape from the
dangers of the desert, and come home again to
find her. It had not died; only had it sunk
peacefully down, waiting in patience till the
time should come for it to manifest itself once
more in the presence of its queen. Now that
I stood before her portrait, recognising her, and
knowing her in spite of the modern vestments
she wore,.as the later incarnation of my Lemurian
bride, my love swept over me in a great wave
of passionate impulse, and even in the midst
of it came the cruel heartrending knowledge
that too late by twenty years had I come to
claim her.
The place seemed to spin round me; there
was a dull roaring in my ears and my heart
stood still. I dimly felt the grip Coventry had
of my arm, and heard his voice speaking words
I could not understand, and I knew that I was
falling.
Something of his meaning penetrated the
stupor that was upon me, and I made one effort
to rouse myself. I saw him turn and hasten
down the stairs, and my eyes went towards the
picture again.
I raised myself up on my arms, staring in


wild terror, for there, between me and the
picture I saw, more clearly than I could see
the picture beyond, the form of the girl I loved.
She was wearing the loose yellow robe she was
wearing when I found her ; her face was towards
me, and her eyes looked at me with an expres-
sion of such deep pathos and affection as to
be almost reverence, while her arms were ex-
tended towards me, and her lips were parted
in a soft, sweet smile.
A thousand fancies flashed through my brain,
but only one was clear enough to be understood ;
and that was the idea that I was on the point
of death, and this was my disembodied love
waiting to greet me beyond the pale. I essayed
to spring towards her, but as I gained my feet
I felt my head throb ; and, with the feeling that
something had snapped in my brain, I fell
forward into darkness and never-ending space.


CHAPTER XXVI.
THE UNKNOWN PORTRAIT.
My next rational conception was to realise that
I was lying in a remarkably cool and comfort-
able bed, in a room into which the scent of
flowers came through the half-opened lattice
window. That was all my eyes could see when
I again consciously opened them, and I moved
slightly in order to see more.
Immediately a nurse in a grey costume, with
white cuffs and apron, appeared at my bedside ;
and I blinked at her, the more puzzled that
there lingered in my brain shreds of delirium
night-mare, strangely blended with the familiar
face and form of this girl. She smiled as her
eyes met mine.
“Now you have had your sleep and I have
chased them all away,” she said. “ They won’t
come back, I’m sure, but you had better take
this and get strong in case they should.”
She held out a cup to me, and I tried to put


out my hand for it; but found that I could not
raise my arm.
“ I’ll manage,” she said, and, leaning over,
she put the spout of an invalid cup between my
lips, and slowly poured some liquid into my
mouth. When it was finished she laughed
softly and said, as she put the cup down :
“ Now, if they do come, we will blow them
all up quite easily.”
“ What do you mean ? ” I asked, my voice
so weak that I could scarcely hear it myself.
She turned quickly round and looked at me,
placing her hand on my forehead at the same
time.
“ Oh, this is capital,” she exclaimed. “ But
you must keep very quiet. You have been ill,
and hurt yourself; but you will soon get well
now. Just lie quiet and rest,”
“ But where am I ? ” I asked, struggling to get
some sense out of the muddle of my mind.
“In my care,” the nurse replied brightly.
“And if you are not pleased with that I shall
be very much offended.”
“ But where, where ? ” I queried, not to be
put off. “ This isn’t Australia.”
“Of course it isn’t; but if you are going off
to Australia again I shall go away.”
“Why?” I asked.


Through the open window there came the
sound of wheels on a soft gravel road.
“ There’s the doctor, and if you’re not quiet
now I don’t know what will happen,” the nurse
said, as she smoothed my pillow; and almost at
the same moment, a man appeared at my bedside
whose face was, like my nurse’s, absurdly familiar
to me and yet unknown.
He came ruid spoke to me softly, and then
gave me something more to drink; and I felt
myself sinking into a peaceful sleep. When I
next awoke, both the nurse and doctor were
still there.
“ I must have dozed for a second,” I said, as
I saw them.
“ Yes, a few hours ago,” the doctor answered,
with a smile. “You will soon be all right now ;
except the arm, of course,”
“What arm ? ” I asked.
“ You don’t remember. Well, I think you
will be better if you know. You fell down
the stairs, breaking your arm and damaging
your head ; but we have got you over the brain
part of the difficulty, and now you have only
to pick up your strength and let your arm
mend.”
“ And don’t fight pigmies,” the nurse added.
“ No, don’t fight any more pigmies,” the


doctor echoed. “We don’t want to have to set
it again. Now I think you might see Coventry
for a few minutes.”
He turned away, and presently I saw
Coventry approach my bedside.
“ This is a great improvement,” he said.
“ I’m glad to see you so much better, old
man ; don’t worry, and we’ll soon. have you
all right again.”
“What does it all mean, Bill? ” I said. “ I
don’t understand.”
“ We’ll tell you about it to-morrow, but
you must go to sleep now,” the nurse interrupted.
“ They are in charge, old man,” Coventry
said ; “ but I’ll come in again in the morning.”
By the following morning I had advanced
sufficiently along the road to recovery to be
told something of my recent exploits. Coventry’s
version was, that I grabbed him by the arm
and then fell, apparently in a swoon, to the
floor of the passage on the top of the stairway.
He turned to run down for some brandy, and
had reached the foot of the stairs when I came
crashing down after him, rolling over and over
from the top to the bottom, smashing my arm
and nearly fracturing my skull in the fall.
After that I had naturally developed delirium,
in which I only seemed to have one idea, and
21


that was to slay the crowds of pigmies .that
surrounded me. But my efforts were not con-
ducive to the knitting of my broken bones, and
once the doctor had to reset my arm; after
which I was carefully tied down, which explained
my inability to move when I tried to.
“ I knew what the pigmies meant, but they
would only have laughed at me if I had said
so, and I held my tongue,” Coventry said.
“ But the girl ? What about the girl ? She
seems to have been here. I cannot quite
remember. I saw her somewhere,” I exclaimed.
“Oh, you mean the nurse. Yes, she has
done no end for you,” he said.
“No, I don’t mean her. I mean—l mean
the girl,” I replied.
“Don’t, old man. Get well; but don’t worry
over vestiges of your fever. You have mixed
up the nurse with your dreams,” he said
quickly.
I wanted to dispute with him that it was
not so ; but he would not talk about it, and said
that he would have to go away if I got excited.
So I had perforce to keep my own opinion, for
the nurse also declined to let me talk about the
girl who haunted my mind. It was not until
I was allowed to get up from my bed, that
Coventry would talk about anything connected


with our trip. But at last he was satisfied
that I was well enough to hear his story, and
then he told me.
He said that after being carried into the
cave by the pigmies, he and Oates were kept
together in a small, dark chamber, and allowed
to hear and see nothing until the Hatter came
to them and told them that they, were to be
set at liberty. His advice to them was that
they should round up the team at once, load
it with gold, and start without more delay than
was absolutely necessary to try and find me.
When they got outside again, they shouted
and searched for me, and, as they could get
no answer, they concluded that I had either
been carried off as well, or killed. So they
loaded up the camels, working with a will,
which was not diminished by the fear of the
horde once more pouncing upon them. By
sunset they had everything ready and were
away, not drawing rein until the range only
showed as a shadow against the horizon.
The following days they pressed onwards
until they struck timbered country, and from
there they made their way into a settled district
hairing on the outskirts of a camp until they
obtained a police escort. A few days later
they were on board a steamer at Albany, with


most of the gold, in bullion, in the strong
room.
He detailed their experience in just as many
words as I have used, and stopped short at the
departure from Albany,
“ But after you arrived here ; what did you
do then ? ” I asked.
“ Oh, we were all right, then. But how did
you manage to get clear ? ” he inquired.
I hesitated a moment before replying. There
was a manifest anxiety on his part to avoid,
or at all events to postpone, for as long a time
as possible, a full statement of his own doings
after he had arrived in his own country again.
I could only interpret this as being in some
way connected with what I had told him about
the Hatter. It seemed useless on my part to
try and induce him to talk freely on the subject
until I had given him the information he desired
about myself. So I at once entered into an
account of my experiences, from the moment
when I had shouted to them from the top of
the cliff to the time when I arrived at his house.
He listened without once interrupting me, but
with a keen and close attention.
“ What an extraordinary story,” he said, at
length, when I had finished my recital. “If
I had not seen the pigmies for myself, and


penetrated a little way into their cavernous
dwelling, I should , not hesitate to regard it
as a piece of wild imaginings of utterly
impossible events. But I cannot, in the face
of my experiences.”
“There is yet a stranger part to tell,” I
said.
“ Why, I thought you said you had told
me all from the moment that you shouted to
us, until this ? ” he exclaimed.
“No, I said to the moment when I arrived
at your house,” I answered. “The strangest
part comes afterwards, at least to my way of
thinking.”
He look at me with questioning eyes.
“ Finish your story,” he said quietly.
“ When you were showing me up the stairs,”
I said, “ I saw a portrait hanging at the end'
of the passage,”
“ Quite right,” he answered. “It was the
portrait of my sister.”
“It is the portrait or the girl I found in the
pigmies’ cave,” I exclaimed.
He sprang from his chair, and stood staring
at me with wide-open eyes.
“ You must be mad,” he cried,
“ I thought so myself when I saw it,” I
replied. “ Then you left me and I saw, be


tween the picture and me, the living, substantial
form of the girl I had found, loved, and lost.”
He continued to stare at me with startled
eyes.
“ I strove to reach her, but fell—as you have
since told me, down the stairs,” I added.
“ Halwood, is this life reality or a visionary
dream ? ” he exclaimed. “ Are we any of us
responsible beings, or are we only playthings of
Fate ? Because,” he continued, not waiting
for me to reply, “ either we are both mad, or
we are experiencing something which knocks
all the theories of personal responsibility into
atoms.”
“I don’t know,” I replied. “I only know
that the image of the girl I found asleep in
that cave fills my heart now, and is the one
thing that will fill it till I find her. And
that I do not expect to be able to do until I
cross the barrier between this and the next
world.”
“ But,” he exclaimed excitedly, and then
stopped, looking at me in a curious manner.
“ There is something about this that you
have not told me,” I said quickly. “I have
told you my story plainly and truthfully ; can
you say the same ? ”
He sat down again and remained silent for


a time with his brow puckered in thought.
Then he looked at me fairly in the eyes.
“ No, I cannot,” he said. “ But I will now.
I did not do so before, because it seemed to
me to be so impossible. As things are turning
out, I hardly know what to call it—absurd,
miraculous, or visionary. Do you feel well
enough to face that picture of my sister again ?
I want to show you something, and we shall
have to pass up the stairs.”
“ I believe I am strong enough,” I answered.
“ Then come,” he answered, and together we
left the room and proceeded along passages
until we stood opposite the picture. I stopped
and looked at it, but on a nearer inspection it
struck me as being less like the image I had
in my mind than when I first noticed it, and I
said so to my companion,
“ What is the difference ? ” he inquired.
“ The mouth seems different, and the eyes
are too hard. The girl I seek has a mouth
with lips that are full and soft, but yet with a
good deal of strength in their curves, while her
eyes are dreamy and dark—not blue, like those,”
and I nodded towards the picture.
He looked at me with the same curious
expression on his face that I had noticed before.
“ Let us go on,” he said quietly, and he


resumed his walk, leading me into a room just
off the passage.
It was a fairly large room, and was lit by
two large windows at the end; but it was abso-
lutely bare of furniture, with the exception of
an artist’s easel, on which there was a draped
canvas.
“Tell me who this is,” he said as he walked
to the easel and threw back the drapery from
the front of the canvas.
I started back with a cry. Painted on the
canvas, with bold, daring skill, and looking
at me with almost living eyes, I saw the
portrait of my own face.
“ Who painted that ? ” I exclaimed.
“ Come back to our chairs and I will com-
plete my story,” he replied as he let the drapery
fall again.
We went back to the room where we had
been sitting, and as I listened to him I could
do little else than echo his question, “Is life
a reality, or are we only the playthings of
Fate ? ”


CHAPTER XXVII.
THE LAST CALL.
“ Before my sister’s child was born,” he began,
“ she had passed through that terrible ordeal
of having her home shattered, her life wrecked,
and her fair name betrayed by the man she
had loved. More than that, in the overthrow
of her own fortunes, she also saw those of her
father and of his family overwhelmed. I do
not want to speak harshly of the man you
regard as a friend; but this I will say, that
had I known who he was at the time that he
offered me the chance of sharing in the wealth
you two had discovered, my answer would
have been a blow.”
He spoke bitterly and with a hard ring in
his voice, and I felt that what he was speaking
was the truth. For some minutes he remained
silent, and I did not care to interrupt his
thoughts.
“ Well, the child was born,” he went on
presently. “ And then my sister’s troubles in


this world were at an end. Then my lather and
brother followed her and I went to Australia;
so that what I know of the child up to the
time I came home again is, of course, hearsay
only. My father’s sister took charge of her—
for it was a daughter—and with the influences
that surrounded her mother before the little
one came, it is not so very extraordinary that
even as a babe the child should have been
peculiar.
“ She has not ” I began, when he held
up his hand, and I stopped.
“ She was—well, peculiar,” he continued.
“At the time when she should have been
light-hearted and full of childish whims, she
was quiet and listless. The ordinary childish
amusements had no attractions for her, and her
chief delight, if one can call it so, seems to have
been the wandering about in the fields and lanes
by herself. If any one were with her she used
to remain stolid and pre-occupied; and when
she did say anything it was only to give
expression to ideas which would have been
more appropriate for an old woman in her
second childhood than for an innocent little
five-year-old. Once, they tell me, she and her
aunt were walking down a lane, when she found
a dead sparrow lying on the footpath. The


child stopped and picked it up, smoothing its
feathers as it lay in her hand. Her aunt told
her to throw it away, and she looked up and
asked why. ‘lt is a nasty dead thing ; throw
it away,’ her aunt repeated. The poor little
creature burst out crying. ‘lt is only asleep,’
she said tearfully. ‘ Why is it nasty because
it is asleep ? ’ ‘lt is dead,’ her aunt told her.
‘ Dead ? What is dead ? ’ the child asked.
Her aunt told her that she would understand
when she was older ; but that would not satisfy
the child, and in the end her aunt had to take
the sparrow away and throw it over the hedge.
For days the poor little thing fretted for her
sparrow ; and, to console her, they bought her
a big new doll. But she would not look at
it. ‘lt is not even asleep. Take it away ;
it is a deader thing than my sparrow,’ she told
them.
“ When she grew older she grew even more
peculiar. She did not care for any companions,
and used to sit for hours staring away into
space in a dreamy, listless way, until they
thought she was going into melancholia. So
they had doctors to see her ; but none of them
could say anything more than that she wanted
rousing, and to have some interest in life. At
her school work she was clever, and at music


and painting she showed more than ordinary
talent—only she would not develop it. To a
certain extent she followed instruction ; but just
as she was beginning to make some real progress
she would break away and follow her own
ideas, which were usually such as to be incom-
prehensible to any one save herself. In playing
she used to leave the music that was given her
to learn severely alone; and, instead of practising
it, she used to strum such wild, doleful things,
making them up as she went along, that they
used to upset every one who heard them, and
especially the old aunt, and the result was that
the music tuition had to be abandoned. It was
the same when they tried to teach her drawing.
She scorned the copies set her after she had
mastered the elementary part of the work; and,
instead, used to waste the paper with crude
sketches of the most gruesome-looking objects.
So they stopped that too.
“ Her aunt was rather religious ; but poor
Maggie used to horrify the old lady with her
opinions upon Church and theological matters.
When she was old enough to be confirmed the
vicar tried his hand at her ; but he had to quit
the task. She was too many for him; though
where she got the ideas she held puzzled every
one. He gave her up in despair after a time,


and told her aunt that she was worse than the
veriest heathen ; and the only excuse for her was
that her intellect was weak. And yet she was
the gentlest creature possible, if any one were
ill or in pain. It was not her fault that she
was so peculiar; it was her ideas, not her
nature ; for she never grumbled or complained,
even when they interfered with her strange
amusements, and tried to rally her into some-
thing like any other ordinary, common-place
girl. Perhaps if they had left her alone, she
might have astonished them ; but the old aunt
belongs to the old-fashioned school, and believes
that every girl should be built on the same
model. Poor Maggie, I believe, tried hard
in her own way to do what was wanted of her,
but her way was not understood ; and so she
was alternately blamed and pitied, until she
ceased even to try, and fell ill through it all.
What took place before she was born is to
blame for it all, I think,” he added sadly.
“ Is she still like that ? ” I asked, touched
by the dejection in his voice and on his face.
“She fell ill,” he went on, ignoring my
query. “The doctors urged a long sea trip,
as a means of rousing her from the despondent
state she had fallen into. They took her
abroad, though it was a big strain on their


income. But it certainly did her good in one
way, for when she came back she was not so
sad and despondent. Instead of her listless
apathy, she seemed to be taking some interest
in what was going on around her, and tried
hard to carry out the little tasks which her aunt
thought formed a proper occupation for her
mind and hands. The trip they took was on
a mail liner as far as Ceylon and back, and it
was on the homeward journey that she first
showed signs of improvement. The bright,
clear, warm air of the tropics seemed to cheer
her, and her aunt was congratulating herself
that there was some hope for the poor thing
after all. There might have been, if they had
only left her to herself, and allowed her to live
out her life in her own strange way ; but they
do not appear to have been able to understand
that. It is what I have done since I came over,
and although there is not very much improve-
ment so far, Maggie is no worse, and I believe
that with another trip into a warm climate we
shall be able to get her back, at all events to
the point where she was when they interfered
with her and her ideas, and upset her the last
time.”
“ Poor girl,” I said; for the story of her
unfortunate existence—another result of the


Hatter’s unreasoning folly, I thought—affected
me, and for the moment I was thinking of
nothing else.
“ It was such a simple thing too, as it ap-
peared then,” he went on. “ She had somehow
obtained possession of some colours and brushes,
and over an old oleograph she had painted that
picture I just showed you.”
“My portrait! ” I exclaimed. .
“ She had kept it perfectly secret from every
one,” he continued, not heeding my interruption.
“But they found it'out somehow, and then,
watching her, discovered that she used to sit
in front of it every night talking to it, and
telling it how she had been trying all the day
to do what they wanted her to do and fighting
her besetting sins, as her aunt and the clergyman
called them. • Foolishly, they let her know that
they had found it, and from that day she went
back into her lonely, silent listlessness. When
I came back and hunted them up and heard all
about it, I made them bring it out, for they
had hidden it away from her, and I nearly
dropped when I saw who it was like. That is
why I was so startled when you came here.”
“Go on,” I said, as he stopped. I felt
myself growing more and more excited at his
recital but compelled myself to listen.


“I have had medical experts to see her,”
he went on sadly ; “ but they do no good.
All they say is that she wants rousing. Then
I had that picture put in the room, where it
is now. When she wants to go and look at it
she can ; only she does not even seem to care
about that now. She seems to be either in a
deep lethargy or in a state of utter indifference.
She either sits all day in a state of almost trance,
when she neither heeds nor hears, or else she
regards everybody and everything with dreamy
listlessness ; and, if she speaks at all, it is always
in a tone that suggests to me the idea that she
is a body without a soul.”
“ Tell me,” I exclaimed, as I heard his words
and a thought flashed through my brain ; “ you
say that she was different on her way home.
Where was she then? Quick! Tell me.”
“They first noticed it in the Suez Canal,”
he answered.
“In the—when, when ? Tell me. She was
it 1.”
My tongue could not frame the thought in
words, for over me and through me there was
surging a flood of emotion so intense, so over-
whelming, that I could only articulate in dis-
jointed incoherency, as I sprang to my feet and
stared wildly at my companion.


Coventry jumped up and laid his hand on me.
“ Steady, old man, steady,” he said quickly.
“Keep cool or 1 should not have told
you. It will ”
But his words fell on ears that scarcely heard
them, for as he spoke the door on the opposite
side of the room opened and there, framed in
the portal, stood the form I had sepn standing
between me and the picture in the passage
above the stairs.
She was looking straight at me, with a soft
sweet smile playing round her lips and, as she
stood, I saw two others come up behind her,
an elderly lady and the nurse who had attended
to me. I saw them take hold of her arms and
try to lead her away ; but she stood firm, looking
at me.
“ William,” I heard the elderly woman
exclaim, and Coventry turned. “My God!
what have you done ? ” he cried, as he sprang
towards them.
The appealing softness in her lovely eyes
thrilled through me with delight, and I stood
drinking it in, lost in the ecstasy of the moment,
till I saw that they were dragging her back.
Then I found my senses, and with a wild cry
also sprang forward, shouting the words that
had come to me twice before ;
22


“ Naggah ! Naggah ! Oom-moo-hah ! ”
The girl scarcely seemed to move, but she
Aung the three of them from her, and was
crouching at my feet, sobbing and crying in a
fit of hysterical abandon, before they realised
what she was doing.
With my uninjured arm I raised her, and she
clung to me with her' arms round my neck,
and her head pillowed on my shoulder. I
looked at the three who were in the doorway,
and over them and around them it seemed to
me that some dark influence hung.
“ The folly of man is measured,” I cried,
feeling my heart throbbing with a sense of
victorious elation. “ The power of destiny has
won.”
I felt the girl’s head lift from my shoulder,
and, glancing down, my eyes met hers. I bent
my head till our lips touched.
What it was I know not, but even as I stood
in that old English house, holding the girl in
my embrace, I was conscious in all the vividness
of actual reality, of being once more upon that
distant, desert ridge, kneeling by the side of
the slumbering form of her whom I had found
in that strangely illumined cavern ; but only
the form was visionary and unreal, while the
living entity was in a luminous presence beside


me, and with me. A sense of ineffable gladness
came upon me as the vision passed, and left
me conscious of only one state of being, that
of standing in the room of old Saxted Manor,
a physical man with a material environment,
and with a living, breathing woman clinging to
me.
“At last, at last,” she was saying. “ The
darkness and solitude have passed, for you, my
love, have come to me.”
* * * * *
The medical experts said it was a complete
vindication of their theory that my lovely
Margaret only needed rousing from her lethargic
apathy to become the bright, happy, intelligent
woman she now is. But she and I, in the
sweet communion of our perfect love, look to-
gether in awe-struck solemnity at the fleeting
vista of dimly realised scenes and memories
which seem to blend the living present with a
bygone past. And we strive to understand
something of the subtle chain which links the
mystery of the present with the far-off eternal
mists of changeless Time.
THE END.
Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.


London: 10 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, W.C.
A Selected List
of
Books
published by
Mr James Bowden
Telegraphic Address:
M Reperuse, London M


BY JOSEPH HOCKING.
Crown B vo, cloth pit, 3/. 6d.
The Birthright
By Joseph Hocking,
Author of “ All Men are Liars,” “Andrew Fairfax,” &c.
With Illustrations by Harold Piffard.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“This volume proves beyond all doubt that Mr Hocking has
mastered the art of the historical romancist. ‘ The Birthright * is, in
its way, quite as well constructed, as well written, and as mil of in-
cident as any story that has come from the pen of Mr Conan Doyle
or Mr Stanley Weyman,”-— The Spectator,
“We read Mr Rocking's book at a sitting; not because we had
any leisure for the task, but simply because the book compelled us.
. . . We hold our breath as each chapter draws to an end, yet cannot
stop there, for the race is unflagging. . , . We congratulate Mr
Hocking upon his book, for it is a great advance upon anything he
has done. We prophesy a big public for ‘The Birthright/”— The
Daily Chronicle.”
“‘The Birthright' will be appreciated on account of its successions
of exciting scenes, its crisp dialogue, its play of varied character, and
a certain eerie air of superstition with which it is pervaded. . . .
—The Daily Mail*
“ A thoroughly enjoyable romance. . . . Mr Hocking has woven
a story which few will lay down unfinished. The interest never
flags for a moment, and the faithfulness with which the scenery of the
land of Tre, Pol and Pen is described, and the quaint dialect and
traditions of its older inhabitants are reproduced, is beyond praise/'—
Weekly Times,
“ We feel certain that, were we still condemned to go to bed at
nine, we should sleep with the book under our pillow, and wake with
the birds to see what happened ... A capital story of its class.”—
The Star,
Mr JAMES BOWDEN'S Announcements.
London : 10 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, IV.C.


SECOND EDITION.
Crown B vo, cloth gilt, 3.1. 6 d.
Uniform with ‘The Birthright.’
And Shall Trelawney Die?
By Joseph Hocking.
Author of “ The Birthright,” “ All Men are Liars,” etc.
With Illustrations by Lancelot Speed.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“There is nothing pessimistic nor fn dc siede in Mr Joseph Hocking’s
writings, but a bright, hopeful tone; an air, as we may say, of good-
ness ; genuine romance in treating love, with real feeling for all the
ties of home life. Last year he wrote a good Cornish tale, and this
year’s book 1 And shall Trelawney Die ? ’ is, perhaps, even better.”—
The Guardian.
“The two Cornish tales contained in Mr Hocking’s new book
are admirable stories, quite simple in construction, related in vigorous
English, replete with exciting scenes, and abundantly enriched with
local colour. It were but the barest justice to the novelist to admit
that they held our attention in tight grip from start to finish.”— The
Echo.
“ For thrilling interest and local colouring they are worthy of a
place besides ‘ Q’s’ well-known stories. Two of the best stories
of the year,”— Methodist Timer,
“Interesting and well told, and enriched by the local colour and
knowledge of the characteristics of Cornish men and women which
distinguish Mr Hocking’s books.”— St James’s Gazette.
“An engaging and fascinating romance. . . . The reader puts
the story down with a sigh, and wishes there were more of these
breezy Cornish uplands, for Mr Joseph Hocking’s easy style of
narrative does not soon tire.”— Weelly Sun,
“ Vigosous and healthy, Mr Hocking has a fine appreciation of
the inner significance of wild Cornish scenery, while his consistent
devotion to one corner of England, gives him an intimate knowledge
and mastery of detail that are extremely valuable.”— The Star.
Mr JAMES BOWDEN'S Announcements.
London ; 10 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W.C,


SECOND EDITION.
Crown B vo, cloth-gilt, gilt top, 6s.
The ‘Paradise’ Coal Boat
By Cutcliffe Hyne,
Author of “The Recipe for Diamonds,” &c
“ In Mr Cutcliffe Hyne our great Anglo-Indian romancer (Rudyard
Kipling) seems to have found a worthy comrade. . Grim and
powerful tales. . . . Alike from a literary and political point of view
Mr Cutcliffe Hyne has, in his latest volume, deserved well of the
commonwealth.”— The Echo. .
“Mr Hyne knows the sea, and the seamy side of sea life. He also
knows the West Coast of Africa, and whether we are voyaging with
him in a tramp steamer between London and Shields, or off the Lagos
Coast, we feel that we are somehow in the proper atmosphere. Con-
structively his stories are always excellent.”— The Scotsman,
“ Mr Hyne knows the secret of free and boisterous life on land and
sea; he can spin a smuggler’s yarn, or tell a tale of lynching with the
best man going.”— Morning Leader,
“In his tales of the sea, in his pictures of life on reckless traders,
in his types of dare-devil seamen, Mr Hyne is only equalled by
Rudyard Kipling.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
« They are not only capital light reading, but they give us an insight
into phases of life well outside the hackneyed range of fiction.”— The
Sun,
“ Notably distinct in their force and virility from the general run
of short stories.”— Daily Mail.
« One of the best of recent volumes of stories.”— To-Day.
“We can heartily commend the volume, , , . Highly entertaining
and thoroughly realistic sketches of certain phases of colonial and
seafaring life.”— Bradford Telegraph .
“ All the talcs are interesting, and some of them, in their way, are
very nearly as good as good can be. . . Your attention is held, your
pulses are stirred, and you are heartily sorry when you get to the end
of the book. . . . We doubt if stories like ‘The “Paradise” Coal
Boat* and ‘The Salvage Hunters* could possibly be bettered.”—
Daily Chronicle,
Mr JAMES BOWDEN’S Announcements.
London ; 10 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W.C,


This Edition is issued ibrdroubfion
in Ms Cofonies and India only, and
must not be sold in or imported into
M b United Kingdom.
