

*£=;■* r^gg
fins if.
R. Bone, Printer, Bond Street, Sydney.


r OOLGEOWEES’ ANNUAL.
II POOLII & SOI,
Makers of
ALL KINDS OF WEIGHING APPARATUS.
ALBION FOUNDRY,
LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.
FOR WEIGHING WOOL.
PORTABLE PLATFORM WEIGHING MACHINE,
With new Registered Pattern Pillar,
Mounted iiozr Wheels,
and fitted with Back Frame tor supporting Bales, Sacks, &c.
The Cheapest and Best Machine in the Market.
Show Rooms and Chief Office for Australasia:
873 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


Australian Mortgage, Land & Finance Company
LIMITED.
-♦
HEAD OFFICE:
13 LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.
COLONIAL OFFICES:
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND GEELONG.
GENERAL MANAGER:
E. M. YOUNG, Esq.
MANAGER FOR AUSTRALIA:
JOHN COOKE, Esq.
LOCAL ADVISER:
Hon. H. C. HANGAR, M.L.C.
Advances granted on Wool Clips for shipment to London, or
sale in Sydney or Melbourne.
The Company being absolutely unfettered in its
arrangements for shipping Wool, can always secure for
its clients the best terms and facilities.
The Company makes expert valuations of Wool,
independently of Selling Brokers, and exercises the
strictest supervision over auction sales.
W. A. COTTEE, v
Manaqer.
2 Spring Street,
Sydney.


"OOLGEOWERS’ ANNUAL.
NO APPARATUS,
G WOOL.
With new Registered Pattern Pillar,
]Mouziteci .o xx Wheels,
and fitted with Back Frame tor supporting Bales, Sacks, &c.
Show Rooms and Chief Office for Australasia:
373 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
IT & SON,
of
MO ADDADATMO
SUNDRY,
IN GLAND.
PORTABLE PLATFORM WEIGHING MACHINE,
The Cheapest and Best Machine in the Market.


Australian Mortgage, Land & Finance Company
LIMITED.
HEAD OFFICE:
13 LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.
COLONIAL OFFICES:
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND GEELONG.
GENERAL MANAGER:
E. M. YOUNG, Esq.
MANAGER FOR AUSTRALIA:
JOHN COOKE, Esq.
LOCAL ADVISER:
Hon. H. C. DANGAE, M.L.C.
Advances granted on Wool Clips for shipment to London, or
sale in Sydney or Melbourne.
The Company being absolutely unfettered in its
arrangements for shipping Wool, can always secure for
its clients the best terms and facilities.
The Company makes expert valuations of Wool,
independently of Selling Brokers, and exercises the
strictest supervision over auction sales.
W. A. COTTEE, '
Manaqer.
2 Spring Street,
Sydney.


HAYWARD’S
DIPS.
HAYWARD’S
HAYWARD’S
SPECIFIC.
DIPS gained First Prize, Chicago, 1893
HAYWARD’S DIPS improve the health of the sheep,
and enhance the value of the wool.
HAYWARD’S DIPS are -recommended by many lead-
ing Pastoralists and Stock Inspectors.
HAYWARD’S SPECIFIC. The finest Drench and
Tonic in the world. Destroys and removes all
Intestinal Worms. Largely used in New South
Wales and Queensland.
No Sheep Owners should he without the above Preparations.
SOLE IMPORTING AGENTS
GEO. MACKENZIE & CO.,
13 PITT STREET,
SY3DNEY
Importers of all Station Supplies, Woolpacks, Salt, Wire, Iron, See., See.
WRITE FOR PRICE LIST.


Mcßurney,|}Wallis & Co.’s Woolgrowers’ Annual
Reid & Gray’ s Patent Drain or Mole Plough.
This implement makes a cheap and very effective drain. Drains can be con-
structed or formed by this Plough at one penny per chain. A number of
these Ploughs have been in work in New Zealand for a number of years, and
are highly reported upon. This cheap and expeditious mode of draining
should prove a great boon to the farmers and orchardists of the district where
the land suffers from such a superabundance of moisture as to have a very
deleterious effect on plant life.
TESTIMONIALS.
Messrs. REID & ORAY, Invercargill. Spar Bush, Southland. .
Dear Sirs, —We have much pleasure in informing you that the Drain Plough pur-
chased from you last spring has given us very great satisfaction. Since making the
purchase we have thoroughly drained close upon 800 acres of land, representing
fully 200 miles of drains, and have no hesitation in saying that it is the best in-
vestment Of money and labour we have made for along time. With a Plough
drawing up to 20 inches , with 3 men and 12 horses , we have no difficulty in putting in
10 miles ner day and calculate that less than one penny per chain covers all cost.
Yours faithfully, COCHRANE BROTHERS.
A gentleman who has one says : “ I am at present ploughing a paddock which, had it
not been drained with one of these Drain Ploughs, could not have been ploughed for
the next three months.” v
The Sydney Agents are —
Idessrs. WOOD, PATON & Co,
GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
From ivhom all particulars can be obtained.
Price, from £l7 10s. in Sydney.


Mcßueney, Wallis & Co.’s Woolgrowers’ Annual.
MARTIN and MARTIN,
SYDNEY.
EVERY FARMER, SELECTOR, AND GRAZIER should try
MARTIN and MARTIN, 213 Clarence Street, Sydney,
For Hardware and Goods of every description required in the improvement of the
HOMESTEAD, FARM OR ESTATE.
No. 8 BEST SIE B L y rr a WIEE ’ £7 12s. 6d.
SPECIAL QUOTATIONS FOR LARGE LOTS.
Galvanized BARB WIRE, close set, 4 point, on 1121 b reels, 18s. per cwt.
BEST QUALITY ROOFING IRON £lB per ton, 5,6, 7 and 8 feet lengths.
SHEEP EAR MARKERS at REDUCED PRICES.—SIit 6/6, Fork 7/-, Slash 7/-,
Half-penny 7/9, Triangle 8/-, Bayonet 7/9, Club 10/-, Note 8/6.
WOOLPRESSES of best sorts by best makers, at makers’ lowest prices.—
“Ferrier’s” Farmer’s Press, specially designed for Farmers and Small Graziers as a
cheap and good woolpress. Price £2O at Geelong. Delivered into steamer or railway,
Sydney, duty paid, £5 extra. “Ferrier’s” Celebrated Patent Lever Woolpress, an old
favourite with Pastoralists, price £45 at Geelong. Delivered into steamer or railway at
Sydney, duty paid, £6 ss. extra.
Ritchie’s I.X.L. Farmer’s Woolpress, £22 10s. Ritchie’s New “ Premier” Wool-
press, £35. All above are first-class Presses with a good record, and cannot be beaten.
POULTRY NETTING, EVERY WIDTH AND MESH.
3 feet wide, H in. mesh, from 9/9 per roll of 50 yards. 3 feet wide, 2 in. mesh, from
7/- per roll of 50 yards. 3 feet wide, 2£ in. mesh, from 6/6 per roll of 50 yards. Other
sizes in proportion at MARTIN and MARTIN’S.
ROOFING FELT FOR POULTRY HOUSES.
Put up in rolls 25 yards long by 2 feet 8 inches wide, a cheap and handy material for
covering ; also barns, waggon-sheds, stables, cow-sheds, piggeries, dog kennels and other
outhouses. Each roll covers about 187 feet, and costs about |d per foot. Any Length
cut as required.
“ A GREAT COUNTRY WANT SUPPLIED.”
These are the words of A DIGNITARY OF THE CHURCH AND A VERY OLD
COLONIST, who has just inspected and ordered a lot of our
NOW FAMOUS FARM GATES.
We have improved the quality of these gates, and are selling for the modest sum of
TEN SHILLINGS
a perfectly made Hardwood Gate, to suit any opening fom 8 feet to 10 feet.
We invite inspection of these Gates. Their value must be seen to be understood.
MARTIN and MARTIN, 213 Clarence Street, Sydney.
RAILWAY RATES ON OUR GATES.
The Commissioners for Railways carry our Gates at the same rates as charged for
ORDINARY TIMBER.
A single gate weighing about 112 pounds is carried 20 miles for Is., or 50 miles for Is.
6d., or 100 miles for 2s. 6d. The rates are made lower in proportion to the number of
gates sent at one time, thus a lot of 20 gates, weighing about 1 ton, go 20 miles for 3s.
10d., or 2|d. each; go 50 miles for Bs. 10d., or s£d. each; go 100 miles for 17s. 2d, or
10-fd. each ; go 200 miles for £1 lls. 4d., or Is. 9d. each.
TENDERS given for every description of Station and Farm Gate, delivered to any
Railway Station in New South Wales.
MARTIN and MARTIN, 213 Clarence Street, Sydney.
Manager: Mr. ALEX. MARTIN,
for 20 years connected with P. Lassetter & Co., Sydney.


1 Spring Street, Sydney
JOHN LISTER & CO.
acting entirely in the interests of squatters, are prepared to supply all
STATION REQUIREMENTS
at lowest prices. „ , . , ...
As they have a practical knowledge of what is required on a station,
Squatters can rely with confidence that all orders sent to them will be
intelligently carried out, .
John Lister & Co. will be pleased to send their Price List to any
Squatter who has not received it.
|®Bl m 4k
1 SPRING STREET,
SYDNEY.
jc±_ Little More Trutto. About
SHEEP DIP-
The highest prices in the Sydney market for Quihell dipped wools.
Still more convincing proof of the superiority of Quibell’s Dip, which is the best Dip
used in Australia. _ _ . , »» •
Testimonial just received from the manager of one of the best known Stations in
Jtfew South Wales, , -»■
From DT. Tully, Esq., Manager Duntroon Estate, Queanbeyan, dan. 16/94. -
“ I dipped the half of the Duntroon sheep with Quihell Bros.’ Dip, the other
wit h Dip. Quibell’s came out on top, there being no break in Quihell s, and
there was with , and some of the sheep cast their wool in patches, but there was
not the least injury with Quibell’s Dip, the wool is in splendid condition. Your Dip
shows to great advantage. In this trial I undertook to see which really was the best
dip I have taken great care that both dips were used with the same water, at the
same time, and under exactly the same conditions. I must my that QmbeH_s is muich
easier to mix, and is the best dip I ever used. (Signed) D. 1. TULLY, Duntroon.
From C. L. HUME, Esq., Castlesteads, Burrowa.
“ I have used Quibell’s Powder Dip last year and again this year. lam very
much pleased with it. My wool was bright and quite free from ticks ; the fleece wool
realized 9fd per lb. in the Sydney market. The powder is very easily mixed with cold
Thousands of others from all parts of the world. _
Books on Sheep and Sheep Dipping, illustrated, and all particulars free on application to
OUIBELL BROS., Wool Exchange, Macquarie Place,
x sYX33xrs3-sr, nxr.s.-w.


ATCHERLEY & DAWSON,
TEA MEERCHANTS
Eyery description of Ration and Family Teas kept.
INDIAN, CHINA & CEYLON TEAS.
Celebrated “ GLOBE ” Blends.
Choice Flavouring Buds.
You will have no trouble to obtain any of these delicious Teas. We
have agencies throughout the Colonies, and you have only to state what
kind, quantity, and priced Tea you require, and enclose a remittance or
City reference for the amount, when the Tea will be forthwith despatched
and* delivered at your door in any township, no matter where it is,
FREE OF ALL EXPENSE.
ATCHERLEY & DAWSON
257 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY (next Bank of Australasia).
Also MELBOURNE and BRISBANE.
JAMES SAYDY & CO.
[Established 1859.]
The cheapest House in Sydney for
STATION SUPPLIES.
Absolutely Pure White Lead, 26/6 per cwt.
Woolmarking and other Oils.
Fencing Wire.
Rock Salt and Woolpacks.
Save Money, Ask Quotations.
330 & 371 GEORGE STREET
SYDNEY


Mcßuhnet, Wallis & Co.’s Woolgbowees’ Annual.


Mcßurnet, Wallis & Co.’s Woolgrowers’ Annual
QH, AUSTRALIA ! fair and lovely,
Empress of the southern sea ;
What a glorious fame awaits thee
In the future’s history.
Land of wealth and land of beauty,
Tropic suns and arctic snows ;
Where the splendid noon-tide blazes,
Where the raging storm-wind blows.
Be thou proud, and be thou daring—
Ever true to God and man :
In all evil be to rearward ;
In all good take thou the van !
Only let thy hands be stainless,
Let thy life be pure and true,
And a destiny awaits thee
Such as nations never knew !
AGNES NEALE.


INTRODUCTION.
In compiling this little work we have endeavoured to avoid all
statistics that we consider would be of no interest to the Wool
Producer.
To business houses statistics are often a necessary evil, but
the Wool Grower does not, as a rule, wish to be confronted with a
sea of figures which might well be considered capable of turning the
brain of a man unaccustomed to such complications. We have
therefore confined ourselves only to those statistics which directly
concern the Squatter and Sheep Farmer.
We have endeavoured to shew Growers who have not the
chance to see for themselves, the manner in which their wool is dealt
with after leaving their hands, and to this end have included a few
illustrations which in themselves may prove useful information.
We wish here to thank all \ who have supported us, and to
assure those who may send to us in the future that our whole
energies are put into our business, and coupled with the knowledge
gained by many years of experience in the trade and our personal
attention, we can say, without egotism, we are in a position to
guarantee highest possible prices.




THE WOOLCROWERS’ ANNUAL
JOURNEY, WALLIS & CO
THE WOOL SEASON OF 1893-94.
Shearing.
Blessed with a good season, the absence of a strike, and with
conditions in general favourable, the Wool Growers of New South
Wales, as a rule, were enabled to complete shearing earlier than in
previous years, when so many things occurred to hinder work at the
sheds.
Arrival of Wool in Sydney.
In October a quantity of wool was stored in the various ware-
houses waiting an introduction to buyers, who from all parts of the
manufacturing world flock to our shores at this juncture eager for
the fray.
Dispute between Buyers and Sellers.
Unfortunately a hitch now occurred between buyers and sellers,
considerable delay and annoyance being thus occasioned to every-
body concerned. Some of the selling brokers demanded payment


by marked cheque, and the buyers objected, mostly on sentimental
grounds. A compromise was eventually arrived at, and the sales
commenced. Meanwhile several large clips had been shipped to
London by owners who had no patience with the position of affairs.
Being disbelievers in anything that tends to hinder a producer
from converting his wool into hard cash as soon as possible, we
took an independent stand and refused to join the deadlock, holding
sales all through, and consequently obtaining for our constituents
exceedingly high prices.
Demand for Crossbreds.
During the early part of the season the demand for crossbred
wool was startling, buyers with orders for that particular class
vieing eagerly with one another, and bidding in that state of frantic
excitement which only a man from the Continent can work up to.
We would here like to caution growers against rushing headlong
into the production of crossbreds, and would advise them to still
aim at a good strong merino.
We are advised from London that indications of next season’s
Paris and London fashions are in favour of pure merino wools
being extensively used. As the sales progressed the call for cross-
bred wool slackened considerably, and the season on the wane found
the demand for that kind quite ordinary, showing the rush in the
early months to be only the outcome of a temporary European
fad.
First-class Merino.
The most disheartening feature of the season was the neglect on
the part of buyers, especially during the early stages, of first-class
merino clips. The want of demand in this case was chiefly owing
to the absence of American competition, killed by the uncertainty
which has for some time surrounded their import duty. Towards
the end of the season, and as the crossbred craze died out, high-
class pure merino found much more favour.




We are inclined to predict a better fate for our good wool clips in
the coming season of 1894-5.
The Clip as compared with Last Season.
This year the New South Wales wool was sound, well-grown and
healthy, with much more weight to the fleece than last season, when
fleeces were exceptionally light.
We do not propose to deal at length with the condition of the
clips of each individual district, for by so doing we may only weary
the reader. A man on the spot and with his interests at heart
must know as much about the yield of his district as we do.
Our remarks are therefore condensed. The clips from Yass,
Young and Burrowa Districts were to a point eagerly sought after,
and the top prices of the season have to be credited in this
direction.
As we before mentioned, the absence of American competition
did much to mar the sale of these good clips.
We have to thank the Growers of Yass and the Southern Dis-
tricts for the great support they gave us.
Our New England friends are also to be complimented on the
get up of their clips, and we are glad to notice they are going in
more for dipping. Dipping undoubtedly means more money for
the wool, and pays well. Western Wool was of good sound
staple, but in some instances a little dust-stained. Monaro Wool
was about equal in quality to last year’s clip, but carried more yolk,
and consequently in many cases lower prices had to be accepted,
although the net result was about the same. We would advise
growers of this district to go in more for dipping.
Less Price-More Money.
Although most owners had to submit to a lower figure for their
fleece wool than last year, in many cases the extra weight more
than compensated for the difference in price. We know of several


instances where producers were very loth to accept what they con-
sidered ruinous prices, viz :—about one halfpenny per pound under
last year, but when they came to compare last year’s net proceeds
with this season’s, they found themselves actually in possession of
more money. Wool is sold by weight , and calculations must be
based accordingly.
The Sale of Oddments.
Bidding for Oddments from start to finish of the season was
remarkably brisk, and in some instances, good pieces sold at almost
the same price as the fleece.
This seems to be a sign of the times, and goes to show that cheap
and inferior clothing is more in demand, presumably on account of
the present scarcity of ready money throughout the World. Another
reason may be the improvement of machinery which enables the
manufacturer to work in the pieces to much better advantage than
heretofore.
Scoured Wool.
Scoured Wool with a fair percentage of weight left in, met with
ready sale all through the season until perhaps the finish, when
adverse telegrams from the London market had a slightly depressing
influence. Since the close of the season prices of Scoured as cabled
from London have been still more discouraging. We are pleased to
say news from the London market does not now affect our local
sales nearly so much as in years gone by, when most of the wool
offered in Sydney was knocked down to the speculator. The only
chance for a speculator in our market at present, is to pounce on a
line of very high class scoured.
Average Value per Bale.
This season we find a bale of wool to have been worth about £lO,
as compared with £lO 3s. Bd. last year. This goes to prove that our


remarks on a previous page that the results of the season just con-
cluded were much better than some of our country friends reckoned.
Of course this is only a rough method of making a comparison,
but may be taken as a fairly good guide.
The Rapid Growth of the Sydney Market.
The total number of bales sold in the Sydney Market in the
season of 1890-1 may be taken at about 250,000. For 1893-4
the proud total of about 400,500 bales was reached, shewing in
three years the enormous increase of 150,500 bales. This in itself
is sufficient evidence that manufacturers prefer to meet the grower
as near home as possible. And as old time speeds on and the
number of buyers increase, so must the number of bales sold. Who
will ship to London with all the manufacturing countries fully
represented here ? If any man does he must repent his action, for
he will be placing his wool on a market minus heart and animation,
two essentials necessary to the realisation of a satisfactory price.
Some years ago Wool Buyers in Sydney were mostly speculators,
who knew if they gave a certain figure here they could depend on a
margin between Sydney and London prices, and by selling to the
manufacturers at London Sales a profit was almost a certainty.
-1 he Sydney Sales of to-day cannot boast a buyer who is to any
extent a speculator, for the simple reason that our market can hold
its own with London, and the margin mentioned above is defunct.
Several lots of wool were offered in Sydney last season and
“ passed in ” and shipped to London, where they were knocked
down for the same price bid here. Add shipping charges, &c., and
it is evident the motto for the wool producer is “ Sell in Sydney,”
and invariably the sequence will shew him in a position to pat
himself on the back.
Manufacturers are always eager to secure the new wool clip to
blend with the old, which has lost a lot of the life and brightness
contained in the new. By purchasing in Sydney a clear month is


saved. Instead of waiting for the wool to be shipped to London,
offered there at auction, purchased, and re-shipped to its final
destination, the wool may be bought in the Sydney Sale Room and
shipped direct to the manufacturer, thus saving time and money,
and consequently the price paid must be very much in the pro-
ducer’s favour.
Some interesting articles on this important subject have appeared
in the Sydney Wool and Produce Journal , being the opinions of
the leading buyers. These gentlemen are unanimous in thinking
that the time is not far distant when Sydney will be the wool depot
of the world.
Sell your Wool before Christmas.
We have noticed, through our many years of experience in wool
sales, that the highest prices are usually paid prior to the Christmas
vacation. The reason seems to be that the sales are in full swiu»-
O
and good samples are offering, and buyers are at work in real
earnest, each eager to secure the particular clips he has set his value
on. The bulk of wool is now offered during the months of
November and December, and thus the season is much more con-
densed than of yore, when the “ iron horse ” did not penetrate so
far inland and in so many directions. When the sales open in
January the catalogues are too long for buyers to properly inspect,
and some clips stand a good chance of being neglected. In this
particular we are always careful to display even the smallest and
worst “ got up ” lots of wool to the best possible advantage.
Towards the end of January “the beginning of the end” of the
season makes itself apparent. The Ist of February sees small
catalogues, and the approach of March is the forerunner of fort-
nightly sales.
At this period buyers migrate to their headquarters in far-off
lands, and the selling brokers and their assistants heave a big sigh
of relief to think the frantic rush of another season is over, and
they have time to breathe at the normal rate again,


We would urge all who can manage it to have their wool sold in
Sydney before the sales are discontinued for the Christmas holidays.
After Christmas, as a rule, many buyers find their orders nearly or
quite satisfied, and naturally competition is somewhat weakened.
Sell in November or December is our motto, and last season was
no exception to the rule.
What Happens your Wool after Consignment to
Sydney.
Many producers in the country think, if they consign a clip of
wool to a Sydney wool broker, it is carried direct to the broker’s
warehouse without a hitch of any kind. Consequently we often
receive letters from impatient senders, asking why we have not
received their wool and when we are going to offer it. In some
cases it is expected that the account sales should be rendered and
cheque for proceeds posted before we have set eyes on the wool
itself. In the endeavour to dispel this misconception we will give a
short account of the various stages the bales pass through before
they are handed over to and shipped by the purchaser. The
impatient grower will then see that he may often be in error when
he blames his broker for delay in offering.
In the first place the wool, when loaded upon the railway trucks,
does not always come right through to Sydney, but may recline for
days on a railway siding, owing to the rush of traffic when the
season is in full swing.
Again, a lot from a railway station 100 miles from Sydney is
often delayed longer than a consignment from a station 800 miles
away. We must add great praise is due to the Railway Commis-
sioners for the able manner in which they have coped with and
improved upon the helpless bungles that used to take the place of
management in the years gone by. Still we think there is margin
for improvement.


Arrived at the Darling Harbour Wool Sheds the wool consigned
to each broker is kept separate as much as possible and carted to the
various warehouses. Sometimes, however, a few bales belonging to
a clip will go astray, and even the railway officials will be puzzled
where to look for them, although they are certain the bales have
been duly received in the shed. Much delay may in this case be
caused in offering, and possibly a good chance to sell missed. To
avoid such a contingency we always keep a representative in the
Darling Harbour Woolshed, whose sole duty it is to fish out our
stray bales and have them carted to our warehouses without delay.
By this means we are often enabled to effect good and speedy sales,
and to save our friends the annoyance of waiting for proceeds. We
know wool is grown merely for the money it brings the producer, and
we hold the sooner he clutches the hard cash the better he is pleased.
At Darling Harbour Goods Sheds the wool is placed on trollies or
drays, carted to our warehouses, drawn up at the receiving shoot,
and all the drayman has to do is to place the bales on the shoot as
fast as he can, and away they go into the store and land on what is
called the receiving floor. Here the weights are carefully taken in a
book which is so contrived that three copies are written at once.
One copy is forwarded to the owner, one for entry in the office
books, and the third is retained as the store record. After being
weighed the various clips are stowed on the other flats, each clip
being kept by itself, and each quality separate. Where owners send
us their weights we always carefully compare them with our own,
and if any bales differ they are again placed on the scales and re-
weighed in the presence of the head storekeeper. Thus all possi-
bility of a mistake is avoided. Two days prior to the sale the
sample floor is cleared and carefully swept, and the sample bales are
hoisted in the lift, worked by hydraulic power, and arranged in order
for the inspection of buyers. The seams of the caps are cut for
about half way, and the side seams are cut about a quarter of the
way down. The bales are arranged with passages to enable buyers


to walk along, pull the wool out and value it. Small iron plates
denote the different lots, and by the evening, before the sale every-
thing is in first-class order, and in readiness for the buyers, who
begin to value shortly after daylight on sale mornings.
Wool Sales are held in Sydney every day in the week but Friday
and Saturday. Friday is reserved by buyers as a day on which to
attend to their correspondence. On Saturday afternoon buyers may
be seen busily engaged valuing wool on the sample floors belonging
to the selling houses that offer wool at auction on Monday. We
hear a lot of talk (mostly from those who do not work) about the
long hours and hardships of a Selling Broker’s office, but we may
safely say “ a buyer’s life is not a happy one,” and the midnight gas
is burned to a much greater extent in some of the buyers’ offices
than it is even in those of many Selling Brokers. On sale mornings
the purchaser is hard at work making his valuations of the various
lots offered, and picking out the particular class of wool his orders
include. He has to base his calculations not only upon the condition
of the wool before him, but upon existing rates of freights and other
expenses which must be incurred before the wool is safely placed at
the manufacturer’s door. One thing the purchaser in the Sydney
Market can always omit from his calculations is the very heavy
storage charge which buyers in the London Market are compelled to
reckon. This is one of the many reasons why wool sold in Sydney
realises more money for the producer than wool sold in London.
The less the charges to be considered by the purchaser the higher
will be his bid at auction. In this respect Sydney has undoubtedly
the best of it. The cabmen of Sydney reap a good harvest during
the wool season driving buyers to and from the various warehouses.
The whole morning is occupied in valuing, and it is a novel and in-
teresting sight for “the man from the country” to stand on the
sample floor and note the men who are his judge and jury com-
bined, and whose verdict, given in the auction room in the after-
noon, will go far to shape his fortune for another year. The looker-


on is astonished at the dexterity with which the wool is handled,
and the energetic manner the bales are dived into for a sample. In
the long overalls worn to protect their clothes from the grease con-
tained in the wool some of the busy operators present a weird
appearance, hut all prove themselves thorough masters of the situa-
tion, and go about their work with that unmistakable air of confi-
dence which at once declares a man to be an adept in his profession.
At 1 o’clock most of the valuers snatch some lunch ; but even dur-
ing lunch hour and up to 3 o’clock in the afternoon (the time the
sales commence) some buyers may be noticed still handling the most
important product of our country.
At a quarter to 3 the sale room will be found empty. At five
minutes to 3 a stream of buyers and sellers is pouring into it, and
sharp at 3 the auctioneer whose turn it is to sell takes his place in
the rostrum, and calls “ Lot 1.” Immediately about ten or twenty
voices call “ six and a half ” (or whatever the value of the wool
offered may be). The auctioneer picks out the first bidder, repeats
the bid himself, pauses slightly to allow any other buyer time to
advance, failing which down comes the hammer.
The auctioneer repeats the price and name of the purchaser, a
clerk on either side of him notes it on catalogues they have for the
purpose, and “ Lot 1 ” is gone for ever. The same process is re-
peated with each lot of greasy wool. For in buying wool in the
grease buyers bid right out on their valuations, and although six
men may call the same price it does not follow that any of them will
advance another farthing, consequently the wool is. knocked down to
the first bidder. Some of our country friends say this method of
selling is nothing short of a sacrifice. That such is not the case we
can give our guarantee, because in offering wool for sale ourselves
we always place our own valuation upon each lot , and always decline
to sell under it.
Thus a grower’s interest is protected just as much as in the old
days, when a lot of wool worth 7d. a pound would be started at
or 6d., and slowly run up to the 7d. before being knocked down.


The present system is absolutely necessary as a time-saver, and we
cannot see any difference in a man bidding out on his valuation at
once or in his delaying his bid until somebody runs the wool up to
what he can give. We favour the present method, because some-
times if a buyer particularly requires a certain lot he will stretch a
farthing more than he has set down to secure it, and this he is
forced to do where the auctioneer lias taken another man’s bid first.
Scoured wool is slower, and this may be accounted for because at
any given time it is more difficult to judge the value of this class of
wool to a farthing than it is to set down the value of greasy.
The frantic efforts made by the foreign buyers to impress upon
the auctioneer their claim to first bid is highly amusing to those who
do not witness the turmoil as an everyday occurrence. An attrac-
tive lot of greasy will sometimes be asked for with such a frantic
rush (buyers jumping out of their seats and waving their hands like
schoolboys) that an observer may find himself wondering if this par-
ticular lot of wool is all that is left for sale. When we consider that
probably thousands of similar lots will yet be offered during the
season, we cannot help feeling proud of the animation which marks
a Sydney Wool Sale.
After the wool is purchased, shipping instructions are handed by
the buyer to the seller, and the wool is shipped accordingly. The
selling broker holds the shipping receipts until they are handed to
the purchaser in exchange for his cheque, and the wool may then be
considered to be on its way to the manufacturer.
Star Lots.
We wish to impress upon all producers the benefit of avoiding
Star Lots.
Star Lots are three bales and under which are all catalogued by
themselves, and, as some of the buyers will not bid for such lots, it
is a natural sequence that they often do not bring as much money
as similar wool in a four-bale lot would realise.


Mcßukney, Wallis & Co’s Produce Stoke, Circular Quay.


This method of cataloguing lots of three bales and under is a rule
made to save the time of buyers who will not look at small lots, and
practically makes no difference to the sale of the small lots. The
rule to be observed by the grower is, make a four bale lot wherever
you can.
Wool Classing.
Over-classing is a very big mistake. We have known a wool clip
to be divided into as many as fifty-two different qualities, and yet
when the wool was put up to auction the clip would be sold in nine
or ten lots, a number of qualities being bunched. We are of opinion
that if the classer were asked to separate the different qualities in
Sydney he could not possibly do so without referring to the marks
on the pack. We fail to see where the virtue of this kind of class-
ing comes in. Surely it is a waste of time and money.
A first and second combing, first and second clothing, broken
fleece, first and second pieces, bellies, and locks are, as a rule, all
the qualities required.
A classer who wishes to introduce all the letters of the Alphabet
is, as a rule, not well up in his business, and does his best to appear
so.
Skirt Carefully.
Our advice in this direction is decidedly in favour of moderate
skirting. Have it done so that all inferior wool, and inferior wool
only, is removed. Many clips are spoiled through want of know-
ledge or carelessness, and we have often noticed a good fleece ruined
by some of the best wool being taken out and bellies and inferior
left.
If properly executed skirting will bring its reward to the owner.
Some growers still prefer to place their wool on the market with-
out taking anything off. But wool so offered is finding less favour
with buyers each year, and we would, in their own interests, advise
such producers to try at least a modified form of removing the in-
ferior wool.


Go in for Dipping.
Many a clip has been improved of late years by annually dipping
the sheep. Dipping not only does away with tick stains, but it
brightens the wool and makes it in every way more attractive to the
buyer’s eye.
In Hew England dipping has been making rapid strides, for
each season proves the custom to be remunerative to the grower.
Those who have not yet tried the effect of dipping would do well to
act upon our advice, and not allow another year to pass without
doing so.
The Use of Salt.
Always keep the sheep well supplied with rock salt, and good
health will be the result, except where conditions are very much
against the welfare of the flocks.
Sheep will take salt readily, and a liberal supply will often keep
back the ravages of many diseases which settle in the liver.
To keep the flocks healthy of course means to command a higher
price for their wool.
The Melbourne Market.
It is sometimes remarked that wool will bring a better price in
Melbourne than in Sydney. We do not agree with this opinion.
Although the high-class Victorian clips often realize fancy prices,
they have never been tested in the Sydney market, and if they were
would certainly reach at least the same figure, *for they would come
under the eye of the same class of buyers, and meet with even more
competition, our observations having proved to us that medium
clips meet with a much better sale in Sydney than in the southern
capital.
The Weight of the Sample Bales.
Some of our country friends think they suffer loss of weight
because the sample bales are opened out for buyers’ inspection and


the wool thrown on the floor. Our constituents should remember
that the bales are weighed into store , and on the in-weights the
invoice to buyer and account sales to owner are made up. Thus the
sample bales, as far as weight is concerned, in no way touch the pro-
ducer’s pocket. After the sample bales have gone through their in-
spection the wool is carefully replaced in the packs and the bales re-
weighed to prove the in-weight has been made up. This last
precaution is a protection to the buyer, who alone would 'lose if the
sample bales were not honestly refilled.
Wool Production of New South Wales for the Year
ended 31st March, 1894.
The total number of bales produced by our colony for the above
period was 964,000, as against for previous 12 months 880,000 ;
increase 84,000. This was not due to an increase in the number of
sheep, but to the increased weight and consequently bulk of the
fleeces.
Range of Prices
during Past Season.
D. D.
Superior Merino Greasy Fleece...
Good ~ „ „ ...
Medium „ „ „ ...
Inferior „ „ „ ...
Superior Crossbred ~ „
Good ~ ~ ~ ...
Medium „ „ „ ...
Inferior „ „ „ ...
to 10 per pound
7 „ Bi
6 „ 6|
5 „ 5f „
8| „ 10
8 „ 8| „
7i „ 7| „
H » 7
8 „ 9
7 „ 7| „
5% » „
4 ~ 5i „
7 „ 7i „
0 „ 6|
5 „ 5f „
Superior Greasy Lambs
Good ~ ~
Medium „ „
Inferior „ „
Superior Greasy Pieces
Good „ „
Medium „ „


Inferior „ . ~
Superior Greasy Bellies
Good „ „
Medium „ ~
Inferior „ „
Superior Washed Fleece
Good „ „
Medium „ „
Inferior „ ~
Superior Scoured Fleece
Good „ „
Medium ~ „
Inferior „ „
Superior Scoured Pieces
Good ~ ~
Medium „ ~
Inferior „ „
Superior Scoured Bellies
Good „ „
Medium „ „
Inferior „ ~
Superior Scoured Locks
Good
Medium „ „
Inferior „ „
3* „ 4f u
5 „ 6* „
4 „ 4f „
3 „ 8| „
2 „ 2| „
... ii „ni „
... io „ 10|
» 9f »
>> 84 „
... 15 „ 17* „
' ... 13* „ 14f „
... 12 „ 131
... 10* „ Hf „
... 13 „14
... 11 „ 12f „
... 10 „ lOf „
... 8 „ 9| „
... H* 12* „
... 10* „ 11* „
8* 10* „
7 „ 8* „
8* „ 9
7 „ 8
6 „ 6| „
4 „ 5| „
Bales Wool Sold in Sydney, and Distribution of Same.
The total number of bales sold in Sydney during last season was
about 400,500. This number was distributed as follows :
Continent ... ... ... ... 271,000
Yorkshire and Home Trade ... ... 97,400
Local Scourers... ... ... ... 26,100
America and Canada ... ... ... 5,500
Japan, China, and India... ... ... 500
Total.,,
400,500


The Sheep of Australasia.
Beneath we give as near as possible the sheep depasturing in the
various colonies for 1893-4.
New South Wales
56,200,000
Victoria ... ... ... .. 12,970,000
Queensland... .. .. ... 21,700,000
South Australia ... ... ... 7,250,000
Western Australia ... ... ... 1,680,000
Tasmania ... ... ... ... 1,620,000
New Zealand ... ... ... 19,350,000
Total
... 120,770,000
The Colonies’ Wool Sales.
We here compare the sales of season just ended with those of the
previous season, to end of February in each case.
1892-3 1893-4
Sydney
359,780 400,360
310,800 305,700
54,200 62,800
Melbourne and Geelong
Adelaide ...
New Zealand
74,000 75,000
Totals
798,780 843,860
Wool Exports for 1893-4.
New South Wales
Victoria
710,560
470,500
191,642
140,564
South Australia
Queensland
Western Australia
Tasmania
19,844
15,760
305,500
New Zealand
Total
1,854,370


The Get-up of Wool for Market.
Don’t brand your bales with anything oily ; use ink.
Don’t brand your sheep with tar ; use lamp black and oil.
Brand the bales plainly on side and ends, and number the whole
clip from one upwards.
Don’t number each quality from number one, as this causes
confusion in the Sydney warehouse, and necessitates the re-num-
bering of the clip.
Don’t use a common initial for a brand, or your clip will be one
of many so marked, and the brand will have to be altered in Sydney
to save confusion.
Brand with a name short and uncommon.
Mark the quality of each bale on side and ends thus :—H for
hoggets, W for wethers, E for ewes, P for pieces, lambs and locks
in full, B for bellies.
Pay careful attention to skirting.
Give your sheep plenty of salt.
Put only one quality of wool in a bale. Mixed bales never
sell well.
Do not spade press if you can purchase or borrow a press.
Spade-pressed bales are often overlooked by buyers, as they do not
make neat shipping parcels.
Shear and sell your wool in the grease, except locks, which may
be sometimes scoured to save trainage.
Don’t tie the fleeces with string. It takes a long time, and gives
trouble to the grower, and also to the buyer in making his
valuations.
Don’t put a reserve upon your wool. Send it to an agent who
looks after his business personally (as we do), and trust to his
valuation and judgment of the market.
Write to us for stencil plates to enable you to clearly mark your
bales. W T e will supply same at cost price. Fill in way bill forms,
numbers, quality and weight of each bale, and mention number of


bales in the clip. Post all particulars the day you send the wool
away. If you consign to Mcßurney, Wallis and Co., your wool
will meet with unflagging and personal attention, and account sales
will he rendered with the utmost promptitude.
Queensland Wool.
The rapid strides the Sydney market has made in the last four or
five years, and the fact that the last season’s prices in Sydney were
fully equal to those ruling in London, and in some cases better,
should make Queensland Wool Growers be on the alert and think
more than once before sending their product to London, 16,000
miles away, instead of to the nearer and more remunerative Sydney
Auctions.
“ Sell in Sydney ” should be the Queenslander’s motto, and if he
gives our market a trial we are prepared to guarantee he will thank
us sincerely for putting the idea into his head.
New Zealand Wool.
For above reasons we think our New Zealand friends would do
well to test the Sydney market. Surely it would pay the New
Zealand producer better to place his wool upon a market nearer
than London.
Sydney is a wool market where all classes of wool are eagerly
sought after by Yorkshire, French, German, Belgian, American,
Indian and Japanese buyers, and we fail to see why the good
crossbred wool of Maoriland should not in Sydney meet with com-
petition equal to or better than that of the London market.
Ourselves.
Being naturally modest, we do not wish to press ourselves too
much upon our Country and Intercolonial friends. At the same
time we think it only fair to those who do, or may do business with
us, to tell them why and how the firm of Mcßurney, Wallis & Co.
came into existence.


In the first place we have been many years in the trade, and have
taken an active part in the manipulation of the business of the grand
old firm of Mort & Co., which unfortunately for some, and luckily
for others, passed out of existence some five years ago, although the
Directors retained the Sydney management of Goldsbrough, Mort
& Co., Limited, for 5 years, which ended with the close of last June.
We did not strike out for ourselves, as many people think, because
Goldsbrough, Mort & Co. Limited, closed its doors and recon-
structed. If that Company had continued without a hitch, our
firm would still have sprung into existence.
We started business because the reign of Mort & Co’s. Directors
closed on June 30th last, and we are proud to think that we stood
by them to the end. We thought we saw a good chance to start a
new firm in which each partner would work, and thus enable our
constituents’ interests to be studied at first hand, instead of being
left to a salaried officer. We had a number of friends, but we did
not ask one of them to join us until we had left the old roof, and have
the consolation of knowing that we stuck to the grand old firm of
Mort & Co. until it had drawn its last breath. And then like
orphans leaving their parents on their death bed, we turned away
with a sigh as we thought of the bright days when our hearts and
all our energies were with the old firm, and went out into the world
to fight the business battle of life on our own account.
That we have succeeded is due to the fact that, in many cases
unasked, our old friends have stuck to us, and finding their wool
and produce well and promptly dealt with, and Account Sales
quickly rendered, they have gladly promised continued support to us,
and we are doing our utmost to protect their interests.
At the present time our produce sales, such as Hides, Tallow,
Sheepskins, Marsupial Skins, Opossum Skins, Hair, Horns, Bones,
Wattle Bark or Tobacco Leaf, will stand comparison with the sales
of any of the older firms.
We have to thank those who supported us in wool last year, and


many who now regularly consign produce to our care, and who were
hitherto unknown to us.
We commenced business too late to expect anything very extensive
last season, and yet we sold about 4000 bales. This total we think
highly satisfactory, considering that we have all along looked to the
approaching wool season as practically our first, and from promises
and good wishes expressed to us from all parts of the country, are
confident of a much increased turn-over in the wool season of 1894-5.
We have endeavoured as much as possible to resuscitate the system
upon which old Mort & Co. was worked, and have added many
improvements which our long experience in the trade has suggested
to us.
Our warehouses are capacious and easily managed, containing
self-acting shoots (altogether our own idea) for the receipt and
delivery of wool.
By this means the packs are not torn, as is often the case where
hooks are used. We can deliver wool faster than a drayman can
stow it on his dray.
You should patronise Mcßurney, Wallis and Co.,
Because—
Account sales and proceeds for wool and all other produce sold
by us are rendered as soon as the documents can be made out.
Because—
We act as selling brokers only, and never purchase wool or
other produce. We are thus enabled to faithfully protect our
constituents’ interests.
Because—
We forward supplies to all who ask for them at cost price, and
do not seek a profit for ourselves.
Because—
We hold wool or produce any length of time in store prior to
sale free of charge.


■MMBgT • ' "'T;-.vv*V. ■ "H - -- . v' '
WKSSBB&k.-' ■ ' ■ •;
;i. ' ’ ;
H|b. # dH^P^^^RrB' 3
Itii iii 11 i 'I’h l -V..H < . *>
' f
» -
Sectional View of Show Room.
McBijbney, Wallis & Co.’s Wool Wahehoitses, Margaret Street, Sydney.


Because—
Because—
when incurred.
Because—
Because—
Because—
Because—
Because—
Because—
protect it up to our valuations.
Because—
diately upon receipt into store if you ask for same.
If you are not satisfied with the price offered for your wool in
Sydney, we will ship it to our London agents, and give an
immediate and full advance, although we recommend selling
here.
We make a commission charge only, except actual cartage
We will make liberal advances on wool or produce sent in for
sale upon receipt into store, or when we receive railway receipt
for same.
We supply wool presses, woolpacks, or anything else at lowest
prices possible.
We treat the smallest consignment with attention equal to the
largest. Which means that we put all our energies into every
sale we make.
When we send you a telegram, which we do when referring
best bids, we do not charge you with its cost.
We are always careful to fully insure all wool and produce from
the moment it enters our warehouses.
We carefully value all wool and produce before offering, and
We will always send you our valuation of your wool imme-


Because—
A membfer of our firm conducts each sale, and we superintend
all the work ourselves.
Because —
The producer’s interest is always our first consideration.
Because —
We can supply you with Cooper’s Sheep Dip, which will serve
to improve the quality and quantity of your wool.
The Shearing Trouble.
It is a pity to have to contemplate another strike when we con-
sider the result of the last, which was considerable loss to everybody
concerned, and most to the men who went out.
This time labour is so plentiful that we do not fear a general
strike, and think the shearers will shew their good sense and think
for themselves, instead of listening to the exaggerated utterances of
agitators, whose sole object in life seems to be to create as many
strikes as possible, that they may for the time have a very rosy ex-
istence at the expense of the foolish fellows who listen to them.
The following is an extract from the Sydney Mail of sth May,
and is written by a sheep farmer : —“ From one side of the corres-
pondence proceeding through your columns on the above subject one
would be led to think that no second trade has any right to partici-
pate in the £1 per 100, but that it should be the exclusive right of
the man who bends over the sheep. Ho consideration is given to
the engineer finding the motive power and sharpening the combs, or
the constant employment furnished in the workshops making the
engines and machines, and repairing them when out of order. lam
surprised to notice that this aspect of the case has missed the obser-
vation of the Trades Council. The plain fact is that the introduc-
tion of machines has furnished the means of distributing the big
shearing cheque (£600,000 a year), and has made it possible for the


higher class of tradesmen to share it. Consequently, the proposal
to taboo machine sheds is extremely short-sighted, and if supported
by the Trades Council will be an action equal to playing cut-throat
euchre on the most loyal supporters of unionism. It has been con-
tended, and I do not think it has been disputed, that the cost of
machine shearing will still be £1 per 100, distributed as follows :
17s. to the man who handles the sheep, and 3s. among the various
callings, making and driving the machines ; and that the wages per
week will not be diminished.”
The Bradford Market.
There would appear to be a better tone on the Bradford Wool
Market on March 29, judging from the following excerpt from the
local journal of the same date, which runs:—“Wool: Although
business is still rather quiet, there is a better feeling throughout the
trade. Users are making more general inquiry with a view to
getting in at the lowest point, and the concession of half-a-crown a
pack would be sufficient to bring a large business. Top-makers are,
however, quite unable to make a profit as it is, and are holding
firmly for full rates. Mohair is quiet, with nothing doing. Yarns :
On the whole, and bearing the holidays in mind, merchants have a
fair number of orders in hand. The export trade, though not brisk,
is healthy. Yarns are usually wanted at once, and spinners are
kept well supplied with particulars. Lustres are very firm, and
there is no weakness elsewhere, the general impression being that we
have seen the bottom in prices. There are offers for mohairs at a
fraction below what spinners have sold at. Alpacas are very firm.
Pieces : In the home trade warehouses business is a little better.
The fine weather is having its effect, and already—though it is soon
after the holidays—there are a good many buyers about. Prospects
abroad are more encouraging, and the colonial trade is in better
form. Stocks, both in the warehouses and in the hands of manu-
facturers, are very heavy, and for some time to come any improve-


ment in business will be but little felt by the manufacturer.”
By cable from London, under date May 4, it is gleaned that the
Bradford market was quiet. Tops were £d. per lb. lower all round.
The Frozen Meat Trade.
The following is an extract from the Sydney Mail :—“ A good
deal of interest is being taken at present in the development of the
frozen meat trade with England. Among others who are inquiring
into the matter is Mr. R. B. Bennett, a representative of Messrs.
Henry S. Fitter and Sons, colonial meat salesmen, of the Central
Market, London. Mr. Bennett states that the chief portion of the
trade has hitherto been done by Hew Zealand. The trade has
fluctuated a good deal for the last twelve years, but the result has
been a large increase in business. At the same time the trade has
not increased so much of late years as it did during the first
few years. Hew Zealand is now, Mr. Bennett says, meeting with
keen opposition from Hew South Wales, and also from Queensland
and Victoria. The trade was really commenced by Australia, but it
was taken up by Hew Zealand, and that colony prosecuted it with
the greatest success. The merino sheep, which is mostly grown in
Australia, does not make a good carcass for the butcher ; but the
crossbred sheep of Hew Zealand are well fitted for this purpose.
Therefore Sydney mutton does not, as a rule, command such a good
price in England as Hew Zealand mutton. Speaking of the
wholesale trade, Mr. Bennett says the Australian sheep are usually
sold about a penny per pound cheaper than the Hew Zealand, and
that the Canterbury mutton takes the lead in price, being usually a
farthing per pound dearer than sheep from any other portion of Hew
Zealand. Mr. Bennett says that the Hew Zealand traders are
pushing the business a good deal. At the same time he understands
that the Sydney exporters are taking the matter up in earnest. He
thinks that Hew South Wales mutton can compete successfully
against the second quality meat of Hew Zealand ; but it remains to


be seen whether this colony can send home sheep that will compete
with the first quality of New Zealand mutton. Certainly New
South Wales did not do so at present. Farmers in this colony
were, he noticed, going in for crossbred sheep, and it was likely that
with the exportation of a better animal the prospects of the trade
would improve. A great deal of frozen meat was sent to England
from the River Plate District. Formerly this business was of a
poor character, but there has been great improvement in recent
years. Indeed, some of the meat from there is now first-class.
Generally speaking, Australian mutton was rather better than the
River Plate meat, which probably fetched the lowest price in the
market. The prejudice in England against frozen mutton has
almost entirely disappeared. The best way of improving the trade
was, Mr. Bennett thought, to send only the best animals home, and
to boil down the rest. The trade was an increasing one, and there
was, he thought, a great future before it.”
Fat Stock.
We dispose of stock in conjunction with a Sydney firm of Fat
Stock Salesmen, so those consigning to us have the benefit of two
firms looking after their interest for only one commission charge.
We always have a representative at the stock sales. We forward
trucks to any station when asked.
Tallow.
This market has been in a very depressed state for some months,
owing chiefly to boiling down operations, which have been exten-
sively carried on in various parts of the colony. This method of
ridding the country of the played-out sheep is now being discon-
tinued, and stocks in England are rapidly lessening, so we think we
are safe in predicting that a rise in tallow is not very far away.
As quotations are to be found each week in the papers and Wool
and Produce Journal , we will not give any here, for by the time
this reaches our friends prices may be altered.


Sheepskins.
Again, boiling-down operations have to bear the brunt of the low-
ness of the sheepskin market while operations were in full swing.
For the same reason that we predict a rise in tallow, sheepskins
should advance, especially when we consider, wool being now very
scarce, fellmongers are again beginning to operate freely.
A feature in this market during the past few months was the
quantity of skins purchased on Continental account. For quota-
tions see papers, or Wool and Produce Journal, which will be more
up to date than we can give here.
Hides.
The Hide Market has been at a very low ebb for many months,
mostly on account of the great depression in leather.
With the New Year prices improved somewhat, and now the
market may be termed firm at reasonable rates. We will not quote
prices current, lest they should alter before this reaches our friends,
and our figures be misleading.
Kangaroo Skins.
We anticipate an improvement in prices as the winter months set
in, although we cannot promise anything like the figures paid a
couple of seasons ago. Grey skins command best prices.
Wallaroo Skins.
This class of skin has steadily declined in price during the past
months, but we have hopes this winter will see an improvement.
Wallaby Skins.
Have also been very low, and even now do not show signs of im-
provement in price.


Opossum Skins.
Throughout last winter the demand for opossum skins was
decidedly brisk, and notwithstanding the large quantities placed
upon the market each week prices were well maintained.
We fear the market this winter will not be as profitable to the
procurer as that of last winter, but still we expect to receive a large
quantity, which we believe will be placed at remunerative prices.
For quotations see our reports in papers and Wool and Produce
Journal.
Bear Skins.
This is a market which depends on the demand of the moment,
and may languish for weeks, to be picked up unexpectedly by the
presence of a new buyer, who will make things brisk until his
orders are satisfied, and then down falls the market, like the
mercury in the barometer, until another purchaser appears.
Rabbit Skins
Sold remarkably well last winter, and from indications will be
well worth sending to market this season.
Wattle Bark
For some months was almost unsaleable, but lately has moved off
with much better results to owners, although still far behind the
good old days of a few years ago.
Tobacco Leaf.
An overstock, which defies all efforts at reduction, continues to
keep the market at very low tide. Should the quality of our leaf be
improved, Tumut experimenters will be deserving of the thanks of a
large section of our colonists, and prices must increase accordingly.


Horns and Bones
Are still selling at prices which may be considered good, and
should be satisfactory to owners.
Hair
Meets with a ready sale whenever it is placed on the market.
Beeswax
Can always be disposed of at prices- which should pay the sender
Artesian Wells.
A few words with reference to Artesian Wells may be acceptable
to our constituents and others interested in pastoral and agricultural
pursuits. Without a doubt the want of an unlimited supply of good
fresh water has been one of the great drawbacks to pastoralists in
these colonies, causing great anxiety and often considerable loss,
hence the progress and continued success of artesian bores in various
parts of the colonies has been watched with interest, and credit is
due to the Governments of this colony and Queensland for the
manner in which they are having the country tested, and results
have shewn the money has been well spent, and also proved artesian
water can be obtained in almost any part of the colony by sinking
to a sufficient depth. It is to be hoped that the Government will
not, after doing so much good thus far, pass a measure restricting
owners of private bores from using all or any part of the water they
may obtain from this source as they may desire, for it stands to
reason, if an occupier of land can only use a limited quantity of
the water, he will not be inclined to go to the expense of a bore—in
fact, it will not pay him to do so ; and it will be time enough t 0
legislate on the matter when it is proved that the water supply is
diminishing.


Good practical and trustworthy drillers are satisfied that so far
any bores that have tapped the main supply have increased in
volume since they were first put down. Moreover, the actual
source of the water has not been found, and it is likely to be
a considerable time before it is ascertained for a certainty. Therefore
there is no need of hasty legislation, which will only stop owners
from putting down bores, or leave the country, as far as water is
concerned, in its primitive state.
When it is intended to put down a bore, and the site is selected,
considerable expense will be saved if a tank of, say, 1200 yards is
excavated to supply the plant with water, and care should be taken
that the undertaking is placed in the hands of reliable and
experienced contractors, so that the work will be carried out with
dispatch, as one of the great expenses in drilling is time, and by
having the work done quickly you will haye the use of the water
earlier, and possibly when much needed.
We have much pleasure in recommending the firm of Wallis,
Milton and Co. to all who think of putting down a well. They
have the latest and most complete plants, and, beyond their own
large experience, have imported the best drillers from Canada, the
headquarters of artesian boring. We will be happy to receive
correspondence on the subject, as we are acting as agents for the
above firm. The following are particulars of a few bores they have
already put down, which speak for themselves :
NOORAMA No. 1 BORE.—On Noorama Creek, about 50
miles S.S.E. of Cunnamulla. Depth, 1502 feet ; supply, 2,000,000
gallons per diem. Temperature, 115.
NOORAMA No. 2 BORE.—On same creek, 60 miles S.S.E.
of Cunnamulla. Depth, 1589 feet ; supply, 1,500,000 gallons.
Temperature, 110.
CAMDEN PARK BORE.—On resumed portion of Noorama
Run, about 50 miles S.E. of Cunnamulla. Depth, 1632 feet ;
supply, 3,500,000 gallons. Temperature, 115.


3
CD #
CTQ*
£
5*
CT3
O
o
o
g
Q
td
a
w
'at
ft)
!►
tn
g
CD
gf>
Q
q,
qd'*
3
p
5
CD
o
<s
a
P
g
aq
p
N
d
et-
-03
"-2
d
CD
02
ts
CD


BURRANBILLA BORE.—I 7 miles S.S.E. of Cunnamulla.
Depth, 1811 feet; supply, 4,000,000 gallons. Temperature, 125,
Pressure, 2401b5. to square inch.
CHARLOTTE PLAINS BORE, No. 2. —On Widgiegoara
Creek, 28 miles east of Cunnamulla. Depth, 1848 feet ; supply,
4,000,000 gallons. Temperature, 120.
CLAYERTON No. 1 BORE.—About four miles east of War-
rego River, 55 miles north of Cunnamulla. Depth, 1753 feet;
supply, 2,500,000 gallons. Temperature, 118.
CLAYERTON No. 2 BORE. About eight miles east of
No. 1. Depth, 1777 feet; supply, 2,000,000 gallons. Tempera-
ture, 115.
CLAYERTON No. 3 BORE.—About 18 miles west of War-
rego River, near Numanmulla Creek. Depth, 1819 feet ; supply,
2,500,000 gallons. Temperature, 120.
BANDO BORE.—About 22 miles west of Bando Station,
Warrego River. Depth, 2090 feet; supply, 3,000,000 gallons.
Temperature, 124.
Small Clips.
A consignment of wool consisting of only one hale is treated by
us with the same careful attention we extend to the largest clip
entrusted to our care.
The members of our firm personally superintend the handling of
small lots, even in the minutest detail, and we are therefore in a
position which cannot be surpassed to guarantee highest possible
prices.
Our whole energies are in our business, and we fully understand
it is to small growers we have to look for a large share of support.
To this end we have made most complete arrangements for the
display of small clips in our sample room, where they command the
full attention of buyers, and are seen to best advantage.
Knowing that money is always acceptable to the small grower, we


make a point of rendering account sales and proceeds as soon after
sale as the documents can be made out.
In befriending small producers we feel we are supplying a long-
felt want, and we have determined to give them the full benefit of
our knowledge | and we ask all who wish for highest prices to send
their wool to our care.
We invite correspondence at all times.
Marsupial Skins.
To shooters and trappers of all descriptions of marsupials we
have addressed much information on the preparation of skins for
market, in a little work entitled “ Marsupial Skins : Hints to
Shooters and Trappers.” These pamphlets we will be happy to
forward on application, free of charge. Several of our friends, in
writing for our books, have enclosed postage stamps. We ask you
not to do this, as we forward copies post free.
We invite correspondence at all times.
Butchers’ Produce.
We have lately published a pamphlet on the “ get up ” for market
of all kinds of butchers’ produce. We will be happy to forward
copies to all who ask for same, and do so absolutely free of charge.
We forward casks and all butchers’ requisites at cost price, and
give owners the benefit of any discount we may receive in connection
with the purchase of same.
Correspondence will always meet with prompt attention.
Ram Sales.
We wish to notify to intending purchasers at the forthcoming
Ram Sales, to be held first week in July next, that we will be most
happy to give them every assistance in selecting sheep best suited to
their requirements. This we will do willingly, free of all charge, for


we hold it is to our interest, as well as the producer’s, to do our best
to improve the flocks of our colony.
To all who visit our city during the sales we extend an invitation
to call on us at our offices, Macquarie Street North.
Our Employees.
Although the members of our firm personally conduct all sales ,
the rapid growth of our business has rendered it necessary for us to
employ a clerical staff of assistants who, under our personal super-
vision, carry on the routine of office work.
Our accountant, Mr. McDowell, has passed through about 14
years of financial training with the late firm of Mort and Co., and
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co., Limited, and in no office, as constituted
in the good old days, could a man a sounder knowledge of
the business from every point of view. He gave up his position to
throw in his lot with us.
We have mapped out a system of office work which ensures the
quickest possible returns to owners, no matter how large our business
may grow.
One of our clerks has invented a table which saves the trouble of
calculating the value of hides and tallow when sold, and with us the
time thus saved will go to the benefit of owners, for we always send
away account sales and proceeds as soon as the documents can be
made out.
Turning to the practical side of our business, we superintend the
working of the Wool and Produce Warehouses ourselves , and, if
necessary, we are not afraid to take our coats off in our constituents’
interests.
Wool and other valuations are made by members of the
assisted by Mr. Booth, who for years was connected with his father’s
wool business in Bradford, and for the past 12 years was associated
with the now defunct firm of Mort and Co., and Goldsbrough, Mort
and Co., Limited, which position he left to join us.


An Interesting Interview.
We extract the following from the Sydney Daily Telegraph—
“On April 25th, the Bradford Chamber of Commerce had before it
the official inquiries made by Mr. Alexander Bruce, our Chief
Inspector of Stock, as to the cause of depreciation in wool. The
answers to his inquiries were given by Mr. Charles Fawcett,
Chairman of the wool supply committee of the Chamber of
Commerce, and are of considerable interest and importance to the
wool trade. The following statement therefore gives the answers in
full, and Mr. Bruce’s questions in a condensed form :
1. What is the reason of the disproportionately low prices of the
fine and superfine merino wools ?—“ To fine wools being considerably
out of fashion, and the absence of the American demand. Great
improvements in machinery have a tendency to make goods of 60’s
and 64’s qualities so perfect that the very fine qualities have not the
proportionately high value that they once had.” 2. “Are the
comparatively high prices of crossbred wools likely to continue ?”
“If crossing increases in an abnormal degree, crossbred wools will
certainly suffer in proportion, especially when out of fashion. The
tendency of fashion is from one extreme to another, hence goods
made from merino wools will probably come into fashion again.”
3. “As regards the first cross with the merino, which breed of
English sheep gives highest price wool per lb,, the Lincoln, the
Border Leicester, the English Leicesters, the Shropshire, the South-
down, or the Romney Marsh ?”—That which produces the finest
crossbred wool, always provided it is not unduly ‘wasty’ (liable to
waste) in grease. As a general rule, all else being equal, the lowest
qualities of crossbreds waste least in scouring, whilst the finest
always lose the most.” 4. “Is the wool of the first cross of the
merino with, say, the Lincoln, or that of the second (the Lincoln
put again to the crossbred ewe), or that of the third or fourth cross
of the most value per lb., and for which cross is the demand the
greatest and most likely to continue ?”—“ This is again dependent


on fashion, which is ever changing.” 5. “ I would explain with
respect to this question that in judging merino sheep at our
metropolitan shows we divide them into three classes—(l) ‘fine’
(including superfine), (2) ‘medium,’ and (3) ‘strong,’ “ Supposing
that a breeder held country which would carry either a ‘medium’ or
‘ fine ’ woolled sheep, which would you recommend him to keep with
the view of his growing the wool most likely to be in demand and to
make the better return for the sheep?”—“Unless the sheep were a
very good lot of fine or superfine woolled ones, probably those which
produced the heaviest fleeces would pay best in the medium and the
fine, and also in the strong and medium. At the present time the
prices of the strong, medium, and fine, are so near that the above in
their present proportion of value would probably be correct.”
6. “Has merino wool ever been classified, and the classification
recognised by the trade, as ‘strong,’ ‘medimll,’ ‘fine,’ and ‘superfine’
by the diameter of the fibre ?”—“Your figures have no recognition
in England.” 7, “I should be glad to have your opinion how far
the division of the scale of marks into 42 for weight-making points,
and 58 for quality of the wool, is a correct division.”—“Appended
is the number of marks which a buyer would probably consider, and
in proportion as he would value the wool. He wants length (and it
should be as regular as possible), strength of staple, fineness, and
evenness of quality. This list would divide the marks as follows :
Weight, 32 ; quality, 68. With the present disproportion of prices
between the different qualities, the buyer’s first question in looking
at merino wool is, 1 What will it waste ? ’ His next, * What is its
quality, and do I want this particular grade ?’ Then he examines
the length and soundness, &c. Sound wool produces more yarn
than tender wool, and costs less to work.”
Suggested Basis of Award.
Weight of Fleece.
Length of staple ... ... ... 20
Density of Fleece ... ... ... 6
Evenness and fulness of covering ... 6


Quality of Fleece.
Brightness...
Softness ...
6
8
Fineness and character
Strength and elasticity of staple
Evenness of quality all over fleece
The Wool and Produce Journal.
We will be happy to forward The Wool and Produce Journal ,
containing full market reports, to all who write us for same.
McBUENEY, WALLIS & CO.,
Wool Beokees.
Circular Quay, Sydney.


WALLIS, MILTON & CO..
Artesian Well Boim.
POSTAL ADDRESS-
C/o McBURNEY, WALLIS and CO.,
Circular Quay,
SYDNEY.
NEWEST AND BEST PLANTS.
Specially Imported Drillers.
LOWEST RATES.
QUICKEST WORK.
gsr* For some of the work we have done,
see page 34.


FIRE & MARINE.
SOUTH BRITISH
Insurance Gompany,
(UNLIMITED.)
©iFlfil,, - £1,900,000,
SYDNEY DIRECTORS:
T. R. ALLT, Esq. Chairman.
C. E. STOKES, Esq. W. B. W ALFORD, Esq.
R. C. CLOSE, Esq. T. H. KELLY, Esq.
Offices: 12 Bridge Street, Sydney.
EIRE & MARINE risks of all classes accepted at Very Lowest Rates.
STORES, HOTELS, &c., and their contents Low Rates.
DWELLINGS a Specialty.
HAY STACKS Insured.
WOOL SHEDS and MACHINERY at Current Rates.
WOOL Insured from the Sheep’s back to Sydney or London, including
risk of Fire and Flood, and until warehoused there.
PRODUCE of all descriptions, and also GOODS to and from Sydney,
can be Insured under “Open Policies” at Low Rates.
CLAIMS are promptly met and can be made payable in nearly all parts
of the World.
M, METCALFE & Co.,
General Agents for NEW SOUTH WALES:


A Sulky, to balance well, must have a moveable seat, and the best of all are
SIMPSONS
Patent Jump-Seat Sulkies.
Send for Illustrations and Price List of the “ Squatter,” “ Back-block,” “ Town and
Country No. 1,” “Town and Country No. 2.” SIMPSON, Coach-builder, Newtown,
Bucknell St., nearly opposite Missenden Road. Pleased to send you a price for any-
thing, from a bolt to a buggy. The best of work, the lowest price, and CASH ONLY.
A Remarkable Red Wine, equal to many Ports
■ I I I 111 m at double the price, 275. per dozen.
Edinburgh Ale & Dublin Stout—“ Castle Brand.”
In 4-doz. cases, qrts., for 305.; in 7-doz. cases, pts., for 355. Assorted cases if desired.
“TOWER BRAND” CHINA TEAS.
“They Tower above all others.” 1/9, 2/-, 2/3, 2/6 per lb.
Station Teas from 275. 6d., 305., 355., 405., 455. per half-chest, according to quality.
Pure Ceylon Teas—“ Heathcote Estate” Brand.
Unequalled for Strength, Flavour and Freshness. At Is. 6d., Is. 9d., 25., 2s. 3d. and
2s. 6d. per lb.
Connoisseurs will find the
“Old Methusaleh” WHISKY
Old and Thoroughly Matured.
In 2-gallon jars at 28s. per gallon ; bottled at 60s. per dozen.
TURNER & CO., Importers,
64 Sussex Street, Sydney.
Orders and Letters receive prompt attention.


Mcßuenht, Wallis & Co.’s Woolgeowees’ Annual.
IMI A A| The next best
thing to having
' M the wool, is to
good, strong, simple and serviceable
WOOL-PRESS that will do the work
EASILY, RAPIDLY, ECONOMICALLY
mechani-
cal device
the power
increased
as the
descends
so that
not only
is the
necessary
pressure
exerted
but the
work is
easily and
rapidly
accompli-
The CHEAPEST
Board Steamer at Sydney.
The capacity of this Press is
ted Pamphlets To
& Catalogues facilitate
of Woolpresses the filling of
and other the Bales,
kinds of the Top box
turns over
and after
the bale is
pressed, it
is easily and
quickly
In buying a
WOOLPRESS
you might
just as well
get a good one
removed by
releasing
one of the
sides of the
bottom box
so that
NO TIME
IS LOST.
JAMES MARTIN & COMFY
HARKST & CLAEIICI STREETS) STDMBY.


Mcßuenet, Wallis & Co.’s Woolgeowees’- Annual.
CURTIS’S & HARVEY’S
SPORTING POWDERS.
Try “Amberite,”
The New Smokeless Powder
SCOTT, HENDERSON & CO.,
6 & 8 Loftus Street, Sydney.
The Cheapest and Best Sheep Marking
Oil is
“MORRISON’S IMPERVIOUS
WOOL-MARKING OIL.”
Packed in 5-gallon drums.
Write to McBURNEY, WALLIS & CO., for supplies.




VETERINARY
Sheep Station Management
is quite a new industry.
I introduced it four years ago, but we had been twenty years working
out the principles, and it is now very largely patronised by the most highly
educated and advanced Managers in
New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria,
and the system has given employment to at least 300 additional men, but the
profits arising out of it have yielded already 20 and 50 per cent.
Our Chief Principles are
ABSOLUTE ANNIHILATION OF ALL LOSSES
FROM DISEASE.
The sheep are ultimately rendered Disease-proof. Stations which adopted
the system four years ago have now perfectly healthy sheep, though badly
diseased when we commenced operations. This on some stations has been
equal to 30 per cent, increased value on properties, with a yearly increase of
clip of
£6OO IN EACH 100,000 SHEEP.
The weight of fat carcasses has risen from 451 b. to 601 b. and 701 b., and even
higher. The commercial gain has been enormous—equal to a revolution in
sheep management.
We employ as Experts gentlemen with a previous scientific education,
and the practical we give ourselves. Either one of my sons or one of our
Experts visits any locality desired, and proffers to our customers the soundest
information on the new principles of profitable sheep -raising.
:o:
JOHN POTTIE & SONS,
Veterinary Unrgeen®,
232 CASTLERBAGH ST. SYDNEY.


GIBSON, BATTLE and CO.,
05 PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
Sole Agents for
RHETOR, PROCTOR & CO. US., JSgd,
Portable,
Traction,
Fixed & Semi
fiixed
(Simple and
Compound)
ENGINES
STEEL Ropes,
Castings, Rails.
ESTIMATES
For Irrigation
Centrifugal
Direct-Acting
PUMPS.
Saw Benches,
Huston’s Ec-
centric
for Complete
Electric
Lighting In-
stallations.
Threshing
1 Machines.
Large Stocks
always on hand
H BROADBENT’S HYDRO-EXTRACTORS,
Over 3,000 Machines Sold. Send for Descriptive Zists.
SOLE AGENTS:
GIBSON, BATTLE & CO., 85 Pitt St., Sydney.
EXCEL ALL OTHERS
IN STRENGTH AND
QUALITY.
THEY ARE OF AN
UNIFORM STRENGTH,
CONSEQUENTLY
RELIABLE AND SAFE.
Sheep-owners are. invited to test RATTLE'S against
any other Dips and judge for themselves.
GIBSON, BATTLE and CO., Sydney and Melbourne.


WORLD’S FAIR, 1893.
COOPER SHEEP DIP
THE CHAMPION!!!
HIGHEST AWARD FOR EXHIBIT
AND
319 PREMIUMS WERE' GAINED BY
COOPER-DIPPED SHEEP.
Extract from the “ TEXAS STOCKMAN AND FARMER”: A most
important and startling feature of the recent Sheep Show at Chicago
World’s Fair is the fact that the large majority of premiums were won
by sheep which had been dipped in the COOPER SHEEP DIP. The wool
on these sheep was in the pink of condition, and much admired by all.
It is once more emphatically shown that Dipping for the improvement
of the wool alone must be largely practised in the future on this Con-
tinent as in England and her Colonies. Regular Dipping is one of the
features of successful sheep-farming, and it is a paying investment, at
all events with the Cooper Dip.”
WM. COOPER & NEPHEWS, 63 PITT ST., SYDNEY
Sold by McBUENEY, WALLIS & CO., Sydney.
