

THE FEDERAL DAIRY CATALOGUE
The “EMU” Milking Machine Complete
(Except for Pump Delvies Rod).
Broce & Co., Print., 434 Bourke se, Melbourne—11/22.
T. ROBINSON & CO. Pty. Ltd.
SPOTSWOOO near MELBOURNE.


Making Dairying Pay
, r pHE improvement in recent years in Mechanical Milkers, since
their first introduction, has again brought the advantages of
their use prominently before dairymen. Different systems
have been evolved and perfected with more or less satisfying results,
but no matter how good a Plant be from the Mechanical standpoint,
there are two features of first-hand importance to the User, and
every careful Dairyman requires to be assured concerning them.
They are —
SIMPLICITY.
LOW COST OF INSTALLATION AND UPKEEP.
J N bringing the merits of the “EMU” Plant before your notice,
we do so with complete confidence that in these two
Essentials the “EMU” is unrivalled. Almost every milking
machine will do its work as far as the actual milking is concerned.
Why then instal an expensive plant when the same results are ob-
tainable by the “EMU” at practically half the cost of others?
Your milk returns will not be pledged for any lengthy period
providing instalments to cover the more costly outfits. The “EMU”
makes no such demands. It is quickly paid for, and Dairying Pays
when you instal the “EMU”
T. ROBINSON & CO. PTY. LTD.
Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD, VICTORIA.


MILKING MACHINES.
Illustration Showing the Installation of the “Emu” Milking Machine Complete
, TESTIMONIALS.
(Copy of letter from Mr. Reg*. A. Austin, “Moore Park.” Moe, in reply to Mr. E. J.
Thomas’s enquiry (Port Fairy) regarding - working of “EMU” Milking Machines.)
Mr. E. J. Thomas. “Moore Park.” Moe, June 6th, 1922.
Dear Sir, —Your memo, of the 26th May to hand re Milking Machine “EMU.”
Although living close to town, T only get my mail once a week; kindly excuse delay.
Taking your letter as a whole, the most important question is—Do they give
satisfaction? On my herd of 26 I only had two that I did not milk with machine:
one was so tough that I milked her by hand; it took too long with the machine. The
other one was a. bit leathery (neither tough nor easy), but having bought her from a
neighbor who was using machines 1 was not surprised. On the other 24, while
using the machines, they certainly were a great success, some milking right out
clean, others with more or less stripping, according to the length of time it was on
the cow. I make this statement because the machine is a very fast milker, and as
I use the double bails (two cows in one bail), one machine will be finished milking
and standing idle before I can get to it from the other end of the shed. lam using
the bucket system three-cow plant.
It is very easy to clean: in fact, there is very little about it to clean; the milk-
ing, separating, washing up, was all done in a quarter the time it took to do the
milking alone.
Re the effect it has on the cows for next season. It is too soon for me to make
a definite statement, but up to the present I can’t detect the slightest injury, and
you can rely on it I am watching pretty close; things generally are in a pretty bad
state without adding any unnecessary losses. I installed machines last October.
In conclusion, I might add that, after the first milking, the cows increased in
their milk very noticeably per milking.—Yours, etc.,
(Signed) REG. A. AUSTIN.
Messrs. T. Robinson & Co. Yambuk. 30th September, 1922.
Dear Sirs, —I am forwarding cheque for Milking Machines. They are doing
very well. We had three visitors yesterday inspecting them, and one of the Experts
from a large Milk Factory in the district said he was satisfied they were the best
for cleanliness. —Y'ours truly,
(Signed) E. J. THOMAS.
MEMO. —Since the above Mr. Thomas has ordered an additional unit, Increasing
the size of his plant.
Seven Reasons Why The “EMU” MILKING MACHINE
Should Appeal To You: —
1 The action on the Cows’ teats is a natural one.
2 The breaking down of the Vacuum to zero at every pulsation absolutely prevents the teats from
heating.
5 The entire absence of any mechanical pulsator, & consequent guarantee against operative troubles.
4 It can be installed in any shed.
5 The system is a single bucket one, which has proved itself to be the simplest and cleanest type
It also permits of testing and recording of each cow’s yield.
6 It is doing most satisfactory work for others, and will do the same for you,
7 Its low cost compared with other types and the small expense to maintain it in good running order.
ERECTED and STARTED FREE.
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd.


jggg £ES?E!OHIAI..
Zn** * Moorci lurk,
TJ 0 E.
17th August, 1922.
Messrs. 5. Robinson & Co. Pty. Ltd.,
SPOSSV.'OOD.
Dear Sirs,
Perhaps it would be interesting to you to know that all the cows ixich wore
milked with your Thru PI nt right through re coming in perfectly sound and
norasal, and to say th t I am satisfied with the machine is only expressing
it mildly.
I am gratified to say that my returns from the factory show superfine or
choisest grade cream right through the season, which X contend speaks for
itself, or rather the machine.
I might further add that the factory manager told me in the course of a con-
versation that ay cream was shipped to town ana sold to the cafes in the city
on account of its uniformity and reliable flavour.
lours faithfully,
(Sgd.) R.A,AUSTIN,


The “EMU MILKER” is the Last Word in Simplicity.
IT is operated by a reciprocating square bar of wood running in guides placed at the head of
the bails and extending the length of the shed. ' This bar is in turn operated by a crank
and pitman rod having a stroke of 1 5 inches, and running at about 48 strokes to the minute.
The pump is attached to a board or head plate just above the square bar, and in the centre
between the two Cows to be milked, whether it be single or double bails, a plain, steel pin is-
placed on the board, and the pump is merely slipped into position.
The plunger of the pump is turned at right angles on the outside end, and is secured to
fthe square bar by a suitable casting.
' On each outward stroke of the pump piston sufficient Vacuum is obtained to apply suction
to the teat cups, which, together with the action of the specially designed and moulded rubber
I tops on the teat cups, draws the milk from the Cow.
The Vacuum is reduced to zero at every return stroke of the pump. This gives the neces-
-1 sary action for successful milking and release, and is absolutely harmless to the Cows.
Each unit is a complete plant in itself, comprising as it does, pump, releaser, bucket, and
• claw.
The Releaser is small and compact, and designed to have ample space to receive the milk of
i one free-milking Cow. At each pulsation the milk is discharged into a milk pail The milk
j pail is not under Vacuum at any time.
POWER REQUIRED.
The Power required to operate is very small, as an “EMU” 11/fj h.p. Engine will handle
I 4 machines comfortably.
| CAPACITY.
i Each Unit will milk 7 to 8 Cows per hour under normal conditions, and 3 Units can
i be handled by the average man.
DURABILITY.
The moving parts on the “EMU” having been cut down to the absolute minimum, and
working speed being so slow there is practically no wear and tear, consequently the upkeep
is very low.
CLEANLINESS.
The “EMU,” having so few parts to wash up, and the milk pails being so light to handle,
cleaning up ceases to be laborious. There are no Inflations in the “EMU, therefore no
weekly dismantling of Teat Cups and renewals of inflations.
MILKING MACH INKS.
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. tls
» Ami at Sydney and Wagga, Iff.S.W.


THE outstanding feature of the “EMU” Milker is that it is a complete unit in itself. The
unit comprises a Vacuum Pump of small and extremely simple design. Teat Cups, Claw
and Releaser, and with only six rubber connecting tubes. There are no inflations in the
Teat Cups of this machine.
One unit is suitable for either single or double bails, 4 units will operate 8 bails.
Each item of the unit is connected by one line of rubber tube.
Rubber replacements are- a mere bagatelle, as only a rubber neck washer and short tubes are
used on it.
The “EMU” Milker is quite the easiest and quickest milking plant.
It lends itself specially to easy cleaning and operation, and the cost of maintenance is practically
confined to an occasional replacement of rubber tubes.
A UNIT COMPRISES— A Vacupm Pump.
4 Teat Cups
Claw and Releaser and Rubber Connecting Tubes
Besides these each Plant includes—
-9 ft. of |l4 in. Shafting and 3 Bearings (any length over
this to be paid for extra at market rates)
1 Driving Pulley
1 Iron Crank.
1 Wooden Pitman
Connecting Bar to Pitman
1 Hardwood Wall Plate 5 in. x 1 Y-> in.
Each Plant is equipped with—
A full set of Normal Size Teat Cups
One set of 4 Out Size Teat Cups
One set of 4 In Size Teat Cups
Additional sets of Out Size or In Size Teat Cups Extra
ALL THERE IS OF IT EXCEPT DRIVING ROD.
Free of all Complicated Parts
No Vacuum Tank
No Pulsator
No Gauge
No Long Line of Piping
No Mechanical Teat Cups
No Rubber Inflations.
Simplified Simplicity
There is Nothing to Get Out
of Order.
Worked by a Simple ' Pump
that Cannot Go Wrong.
A Bucket Releaser that
Works Automatically.
And Cups that Fit Cows,
Heedless of the Size of their
Teats.
MILKING MACHINES.
m 1 Tlj T 1 1 Hoad Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD, Vlt,
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. Vl< "


Illustration of the “EMU MILKING MACHINE” parts
The Bucket Releaser (part of Bucket Cover) and Claw.
(Details of Pump and Teat Cup Fittings, and showing Releaser).
MILKING MACHINES.
ATIYXIO A\T 1 TVi. T Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD. Vic.
. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. SsS: &ST- vic -


Code Word.
Discount
for Cash
on
Erection.
Sizes. List Price.
-i p i 4 Cash on
, Cash on , Start ;
Starting | i in 6 mths .
, m 6 m,h s . iin g mths ,
3 ,n !2mlhs.: i;n 12m , h ,
Miff . .
2 Units . . . . . . . .
Mild
3 Units
Mill . -
4 Units . . . . . . . .
Mind . .
5 Units . . . . . . . •
Minx
6 Units
Showing Sketch Ground Plan of Milking Shed
and Lay-out of Engine and Shafting.
“EMU” MILKING MACHINES.
The prices quoted are for delivery in trucks at Melbourne or Spotswood, and include cost of
erection and starting, but not freight.
Promissory Notes to be given for all extended payments. Settlements to be completed when
Plants are erected and started.
Trial periods as per arrangement.
Plan of shed, engine-room and line of shafting and measurements of width between bails to ac-
company order.
MILKING MACHINES.
_. / - VT4Tl . Trirvlk T 1 f \ r»j t j i Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD, Vie.
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. “;. s^ ,b - vic -


MELOTTE CREAM SEPARATORS.
MODEL 00B.
Capacity—
18 gals per hour
MODELS.
A B C.
Capacities—28 to
30 gal. per hour.
MODEL No. 1
Capacities—40 to
50 gals, per hour.
MODELS No 11.
Capacities—60 to
130 gals, per hour.
MODEL
Showing friction Clutch
for driving by Engine
Power.
The Gream Separator of True Quality.
'T'HE “MELOTTE” Separator, as is
generally known, is made in Belgium,
and the works of this huge concern
were one of the first to be captured and oc-
cupied by the Germans, who used the plant
for ammunition making. Upon the comple-
tion of the Armistice the “MELOTTE”
people found their factory building intact,
but much of the valuable plant had been re-
moved and taken away. The delay in re-
placing same, and the other difficulties that
can easily be imagined to he got over, ac-
count for the new supplies only coming for-
ward now.
During the war period—with no possibility
of obtaining duplicate fittings from overseas
—it fell to our lot to make up all the spare
parts or duplicate fittings required, not only
for this State, hut also for the rest of the
Commonwealth and New Zealand. We claim
to have achieved a considerable success in this
work, and have thereby maintained the high
reputation of these famous Cream Separators.
It is worth consideration by intending pur-
chasers to know the means are at hand to as-
sure them of any duplicate parts that may be
necessary for the machine.
There are many thousands of “ MEL-
OTTE” Separators in this State, and we
strongly counsel those intending to purchase
a Separator to ask any user of a “MEL-
OTTE” what he thinks of the machine,
both for efficiency and low cost of upkeep.
We place our service—our expert service—
at your command, with the confidence that
no Cream Separator can please you so well
as the “MELOTTE” can.
NO SATISFACTION NO SALE.
We have been selling the “Melotte” Separator on the Australian Market for
the past 20 years—a Proof of its Excellence- To-day the sales are larger
than at any previous period —It has Stood the Test.
T-w^ /-y-fx-j-Tk yri/\\T 1 /'t Tfci Til Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD, Vie.
. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. &ST- v,c


Code Word
Free on Rails or Boat Melbourne or Sydney
Approximate
Weight.
Size
Capacity
per hour
Power
K ecom mended
for
Cows.
c. q. lbs.
Septennial
00B
18 gall
Hand
1 to 5
0 3 0
Septfoil
A
28 „
5 „ 10
110
Septical
B
40 „
10 „ 22
1 1 0
Septuary
C
50 „
16 „ 25
1 1 0
Sepal
No. 1
40 „
„ or Power
10 „ 20
2 10
Separable
No. 2
50
16 „ 25
2 10
Sepia
No. 3
66 ,,
18 „ 30
4 10
Sepoy
No. 4
88 „
25 ., 40
4 10
Sept
No. 5
110
„
30 ,, 50
4 10
Septenary
No. 6
130 „
»
35 „ 69
4 10
You should buy a “ MELOTTE” Cream Separator.
Because Quality alone is the True Test of Cheapness.
■THE “MELOTTE” is easy to turn, easy to clean, strong and durable, and skims
absolutely clean, not only the first few months, but for many years. Our claim that the
“MELOTTE” will outlast two or three other machines is endorsed by users of from 12
Showing
the Melotte Bowl
hung in
Suspension,
therefore no
Friction.
Other Makers’
Bowls are of
this Type.
to 18 years’ standing. There is only one
“MELOTTE,” and there is no other ma-
chine “just as good.” Notwithstanding that
the price may be higher than that of other
machines now offered, the “MELOTTE,”
by reason of its superior quality and merits,
is still the cheapest Separator, and by far the
best investment.
Easy to Operate, Why?
Because the “MELOTTE” has no
bearing or bushing or top-heavy bowl which
cause friction. The neck bearing, which is
always giving trouble and expense in other
Separators, is.not used in the “MELOTTE”
construction. For the above reasons it is not
only the easiest to handle, BUT THE
CHEAPEST to keep in repair, and for the
same reason it is the most durable, and will
outwear two or three Separators of othe
makes. The “MELOTTE,” whilst being
the cleanest skimmer, runs at a low speed,
thus giving the greatest efficiency and dura-
bility.
Hand Separators can be converted to Turbine Machines at an extra cost.
Friction Clutch Pulley for Engine Power, Nos. 1 to 6. Extra
A, B, and C sizes mounted on tripod stand. Nos. Ito 6 mounted on solid frame castings.
TERMS PRICES—Are 5 per cent, to be added to list price for one year’s period.
Payment by One-third Cash, balance by 4 Promissory Notes of equal amounts at 3. 6,9,
and 12 months’ currency, or as may be arranged.
MfLLOTTL CRLAM SEPARATORS.
TDADTATOAM J Hi. T i-J Head Office and Works; SPOTSWOOD, Vic.
. kujdIINoUJN ana Co. I ty. Ltd. r,:s(i - r,: i B^ o,,rk< ‘ s r e,b - v,c
v And at Sydney and Wagga 9 N.S.W.


Advantages of the “MELOTTE.”
LESS POWER REQUIRED.
The “MELOTTE" Bowl is not mechanically bal-
anced, but self-balancing- No bearings or bushings
are necessary to support the bowl or spindle- The
wide “MELOTTE” Bowl is more easily cleaned
than the long narrow bowls of other makes. There
are no tubes, small holes or crevices in the
“MELOTTE” to wash, as in other machines. The
“MELOTTE” Bowl can be set to give cream of
any thickness.
MORE EASILY CLEANED AND MAN-
AGED.
The ease with which the "MELOTTE” runs
greatly assists the cleaning, as, if 1 gallon of sepa-
rated milk and then 2 gallons of cold water be
passed through after the milk has been separated,
the bowl will be practically cleaned whilst speed is
running down. The rest of the cleaning can be done
in a very few minutes, as owing to the extreme sim-
plicity of the “MELOTTE,” every part is readily
accessible, and can be cleansed with facility. The
Milk Receiver has a large capacity, and, standing
near the floor- is easily filled.
BOWL CASING ENAMELLED.
In the No- 1 to No. 5 sizes, the bowl casing and
milk and cream outlets are beautifully enamelled,
rendering them specially suitable for contact with
milk and cream. The “MELOTTE” is the only
Separator in the world fitted with an enamelled bowl
casing.
EFFICIENCY OF SEPARATION.
This largely depends upon three conditions:—
1. Proper construction of the bowl.
2- Maintenance of the speed at which it is driven.
3- Regulation of the inflow of milk to be separated.
The “MELOTTE” JS the most efficient Separator
because:—
1. The bowl is constructed with plates which divide
the milk into layers, the only means of affording
perfect separation. The “MELOTTE” plates
are made of pure Aluminium, therefore non-
corrosive, and being few in number and very
light, are quickly and easily cleaned, and re-
quire less power than others-
T he “MELOTTE” Bowl being wider than other
bowls, gives greater centrifugal force; thus the
separation in the “MELOTTE” machine is
more perfectly done-
2. The power required is so little that the operator
can maintain the speed with ease.
3- The inflow of the milk is regulated automatically,
and does not require the constant attention of the
person turning the machine.
50 PER CENT. LESS OIL REQUIRED.
A very small quantity of oil suffices to lubricate
the bearings, as the construction of the machine re-
duces the friction to a minimum- The lubrication
is so arranged that no oil whatever is wasted-
DURABILITY—ONE “MELOTTE” WILL
WEAR OUT TWO OTHER SEPARATORS.
Friction in a hand machine means hard turning and
consequent wear and tear- The “MELOTTE * is
the most durable Separator made, because it does
its work with much less friction than any other-
The “MELOTTE” Bowl is suspended to a hooked
spindle, which revolves on six balls and a steel cone,
all running in oil, so that all friction is reduced to a
minimum-
QUALITY v. PRICE.
Unlike other farm machinery, running at slow
speeds, and employed only occasionally, or for a few
days or weeks during the year, the Cream Separator
is used every day practically throughout the year,
and runs at very high speed; hence the supreme
importance of buying the Cream Separator which is
most perfect as regards design- materials, and work-
manship-
IT IS, THEREFORE, FALSE ECONOMY
TO BUY A SEPARATOR BECAUSE OF
ITS PRICE ONLY. A LOW-PRICED. BUT
HARD-TURNING AND CHEAPLY-CON-
STRUCTED SEPARATOR IS DEAR AT
ANY PRICE.
1. Because, being hard to turn, it will not be
run to speed, and, therefore, a large per-
centage of cream is lost.
2. Excessive friction and vibration in a few
months will mean expensive repairs and
renewals.
The all-important question to be considered is: Can
the Machine be easily turned to speed for, say, an
hour, by a Boy, Girl, or Dairymaid.
We can point to “MELOTTE” Separators which
have been running for TEN YEARS; costing a
few shillings only for repairs.
HIGH-CLASS WORKMANSHIP AND
MATERIALS.
A machine running 6000 to 7000 revolutions per
minute, and working twice daily throughout the year,
demands the very best of design, materials, and
workmanship- The “MELOTTE Works are re-
plete with the finest of modern machine tools, and
the staff are specially trained for this class of work.
MELOTTE CREAM SEPARATORS.
T'r\rvT|T\TOA\T 1 /"I TJ 1 Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOI), Vic.
. KOBIJNh(JJN and Co. Pty. Ltd. u> " v,c -


ATSA CREAM SEPARATORS.
THE VERY BEST FOR HOUSEHOLD AND SMALL DAIRYMEN.
ATSA CREAM SEPARATORS.
GUARANTEED EASY and NOISELESS RUNNING.
SIMPLEST MECHANICAL CONSTRUCTION of all Small Separators.
The Cleanest Skimmer. The Milk is really Skim Milk after it goes through the Atsa.
A Low-priced Machine possessing all the latest improved features brought forward in the
Swedish Separator Industry up to the present time.
FOR HOUSEHOLDERS: FOR DAIRYMEN:
A size, 9 gallons - ■ No. 1 size, 18 gallons
„ 2 30 „
B „11 „ - - - „ 3 „ 45 ~
]. All Gears are encased, and. consequently, protected from dirt and dust, thus making- for the
long life of the machine.
•> T J, C Bowl Spindle is of large dimensions, and made from the best quality steel. The bottom
bearing is provided with a removable Phosphor Bronze bushing, and a steel ball is placed
in the spindle end to further eliminate friction. Adjustments are made by means of a
screw, which permits of the Bowl being regulated whilst in an upward position.
•; in the “A” and “15” Household Sizes the bowl is one piece, without any disc sets. The open
top is sufficiently wide enough to make the thorough cleansing of the bowl a simple and
easy "job. This design for a small Separator saves or avoids tho objectionable delay caused
when the bowl is comprised of several parts in its interior.
The Skimming Efficiency in this size is just the same as that of the larger machines, and the
capacity for separating milk which is cold, or skimming thick cream, is surprising.
The Bowl of the Nos. 1 to it Sizes is provided with a simple and well-constructed set of conical
plates that give a highly efficient skimming capacity. The diameter of the bowl is large,
and consequently, allows of a moderate working speed. The bowl sits loosely on the spindle,
and'is therefore,'self-balancing, runs easily, and is free from undue vibration. Tt is quickly
and readily taken asunder; the plates conic out as one piece, and are placed on a disc
remover, on which they are scalded, and when ready to replace go in as one piece, hence
it is impossible to put the bowl together wrongly.
4 The Milk Vat is made of one-piece pressed .vteel. heavily tinned, and with well designed
rounded corners to permit of easy cleaning, it is low set, and broad with top edges folded
back thus conducing to strength and lessening effort when filling the vat.
- T(ie jve'ck Bearing is simple and strong, and sufficient elasticity is obtained by means of
three special fiat springs fastened to a bearing washer, which is screwed to the frame. The
po-k bearing bush in which the bowl spindle revolves is of Phosphor Bronze, provided with
r»l«tractioM of the Frame follows the usual rigid lines, save that special features have
Len in the ATSA for self-oiling. The latter is on the splash system, and once
the machine has been set up and run properly the internal mechanism need not be further
oiled as the oil collects and is sprayed over the spindle and gears, returning to the oil
pump. ' The overflow or waste is collected in a cup hung at the outlet tube, and so does
not run over the floor. .
7 The Pawl In the Worm Gear is designed to take up anywhere instead of only once every revo-
lution of the handle, as is the case with other machines, hence there is no shock to the
gears of the ATSA when starting the machine. ,
5 The Turning: of the ATSA Machine involves very little exertion. The length of the ciank and
the number of turns per minute have been so arranged that the manual working is done
with the least possible effort.
TKV IT IT COSTS NOTHING IF YOU ARE NOT SATISFIED.
__ - 1 J 1 I I Head Office and Works: SPOTS WOOD, Vic,
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. v,c -


FARM ENGINES.
Power for the Farm
The “ Emu” Engine is of present
day design and marks the foremost advance-
ment in fJXCodern Construction of this class of
internal combustion Engine.
It is essentially the Engine for the farm, not
because of any lack °f hiigh finish —it is highly
finished —but because its mechanism is so simple..
It is so easy to start; anyone on the farm can
do it, and once started it k ee P s §°‘ n §-
It will go always when you want it to.
‘TT/ie Rated Powers are bona fide and are
guaranteed.
No Farm Outfit is complete without the “ Emu.”
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. SSsSr a


Some Main Features of the “ EMU.”
FRAME is very rigid and compact. The cylinder is fitted to the base on the tongued and
grooved principle, which mak«e for greater certainty of perfect alignment in Piston travel,
preventing side thrust, friction, undue wear, and the elimination of vibration.
These are the first essentials of an engine suitable for continuous heavy duty service.
FUEL TANK.— The main Fuel Tank is placed in the base of the engine, and is connected
by pump with the mixer. Any overflow goes back into the tank.
COMBUSTION CHAMBER.— The design of the Combustion Chamber and Mixer is an
outstanding feature of the “Emu.” At starting, a small amount of benzine is poured into
the mixer, and as soon as the chamber is hot enough, which happens in a few moments
after the engine is running, the feed automatically comes over on to kerosene.
This is very important to the operator, because there need be no waiting about or
adjustment of valves to get the engine working at its best.
The “Emu” is working as a good engine should do right from the start.
When the “Emu” is sufficiently hot, the exhaust is just as clean on kerosene as on
benzine.
Kerosene Carburettor
THE “Emu” kerosene carburettor was designed to
make possible the use. of kerosene as a satisfac-
tory fuel, and is the result of almos’ ten years’
experimental work upon the part of one of the best engi-
neers in the Trade, and one who is considered authority
on internal combustion engines.
The importance of this feature is specially appreci-
ated in Australia, where the cost of kerosene is so
much lower than that of petrol.
IGNITION is obtained by a Webster Tri-Polar Magneto, which is the type usually adopted
by the leading makers of this class of engine. It has been proved to be the most effective
and reliable. It does away with the heavy grinding that is usually prominent in starting
smaller powered internal combuston engines, the spark being just as strong at slow as it is at
high speed.
GOVERNOR is of the High Speed Fly-Ball type (as is
used on steam engines), ball bearing, adjustable and
interchangeable; thus the speed at which it operates
ensures the closest possible regulation, and with less
vibration than any other design known.
PISTON is special cast, turned, finished, and ground to
a perfectly smooth surface, and machined to exact
size within one-thousandth part of an inch. The
Piston Rings are each cast separately.
FLY WHEELS are of improved design, and in addition
to heavy keys attaching them to the crank shaft, are fitted
with large boltsto keep them firmly in position, thus making
it impossible for them to shift. They are so accurately
balanced that at full speed there is an entire absence of
oscillation.
CONNECTING ROD is of the “I” beam design, drop-forged, and of ample dimensions to
ensure great strength.
FARM ENGINES.
Tj\/\T|T\TnrV\T 1 /'IA T|i T J_l Head Office & Works; SPOTSWOOD, Victoria.
. KOHIiNSUiN and CO. Fry. Ltd. v,c -


Specification and Sizes of Stationary “
EMU
Engines.
Brake
Horse
Power
Speed
Pulley.
Flywheels.
Floor Space
Overall.
Diam. of
Crank
Shaft
Approx.
R.P.M.
Diam.
Width.
Diam.
Weight
lbs-
Length.
Width.
Nett.
Cwt.
Wi
350
4-m.
4-in.
18-in.
44
31-in.
22-in.
1 %-in.
2%
3
475
8-in.
6-in.
22-in.
93
40-in.
26-in.
1 %-in.
41/0
5
425
12-in.
6-in. -
28-in.
166
47-in.
28-in.
2-in.
7
7
375
16-in.
6-in.
34-in.
228
57-in.
32-in.
2%■-in.
10
9
325
20-in.
8-in
38-in.
400
65-in.
36-in.
2%>-in.
15
12
300
24-in.
8-in.
44-in.
530
74-in.
39-in.
2 %-in.
22
MAIN BEARINGSare extra wide, with large reinforced bearing stand. The bearing radius
and sides are accurately machined in relation to the groove in engine base, so that the
crank shaft and connecting rod must be in absolute line with the cylinder bore.
The bearings are interchangeable.
The use of die-cast removable bearings makes
it possible for the owner to remove the old bearings,
when worn, and replace them with new ones. In
order to use the die-cast bearings, however, it becomes
necessary to machine the entire surface of that part
of the main frame which supports the bearings, re-
quiring six machine operations, and while this is the
most expensive method it makes possible the use of the
very best bearings known to engineering science. An
engine can be no better than the materials used in its
construction regardless of price.
The “Emu'* engines will operate successfully under all conditions on common kerosene,
whether full load, one.half, or no load.
Sizes in stock:—ll/-2 B.H.P. Stationary or Portable.
5
7
9 „
12 „
The 3 B.H.P. “EMU” will drive—
C- 3. m in- mouth 3-knife Chaff cutter.
No- 2. 9 1 /2 in- mouth, 2-knife Chaffcutter-
BENTALL’S 2-knife 9^in-mouth Chaffcutters, or
BENTALL’S RSA or RSE Corn Crushers-
KELLY Grinder, No- 50.
MELOTTE or other Cream Separators: all Sizes*
2- Sheep Shearing Machines, with Grinder.
3- Milking Plant-
-2V2-i- Centrifugal Pump-
-24-i- Peg Drum Thresher and Separator-
PEACOCK Winnower with 26 in- Riddle-
Grain Grader.
FARM ENGINES.
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd.


FOOD PREPARING MACHINERY.
Grinding Mills (Made in Australia) —- Fof m£lkin§ FIIIC Of CoctlTSG
Meal of all kinds of Grains; Peas, Beans, Oats, Maize, Barley.
This machine is designed for grinding all kinds of
grain—peas, beans, oats, wheal, maize, barley—
into fine meal or to any coarseness desired*
The grinding plates are cast in special white iron,
and being vertical and of large diameter, they wear
a very long time- The life of these plates is about
400 bags, and they can then be rcgroimd or re-
placed at small cost. It can be.fitted with a double
handy bagger, which elevates the crushed grain and
fills the bags-
Note the lowness of the hopper, making the machine
very easy to feed-
It is a most reliable machine for grinding whole
meal, or. if it is fitted with a sieve, which we can supply
at a small extra cost, it will grind wheat into whole-
some flour.
THE KELLY GRINDING MILLS will grind maize
on or off the cob, and will also crush the cobs, and
grind all other grains, as well as lucerne, into fine
or coarse meal-
Code Word- Sizes-
Kelos . . No- 50, 2to 3 B-H-P-. 4to 6 bushels per hour, 750-1,000 R-P-M-;
grinds maize off the cob; 4x4 pulley
Kelmed . . No- 10, 3to 5 B-H-P-- 8 to 15 bushels per hour, 700 R-P-M-;
fitted Cob Crusher; BxB pulley
Kelarg . . No- 30, Bto 10 B-H-P-. 23 to 35 bushels. 750 R-P-M-; BxB pulley:
Handy Bagging Ele/ator for Nos- 10 or 30, if required , .
BENTALL, Unchokable Disc Root Pulpers, Graters,
or Slicers.
For pulping, grating, or slicing Mangels, Pumpkins, Melons,
Potatoes, or other root foods (or stock feed or jam making,
for hand or power.
Code Word- Sizes-
Bengn . . W-P-N- Pulper, or Slicer, 18m.
Disc, Hand or Engine
Benpm . . W-P-M. Pulper, Grater, or Slicer,
21 in- disc, hand or engine . .
Benbs . , W-P-B. Pulper, Grater, or Slicer,
26 in. disc, for engine power
The above are supplied as either a Pulper, Grater, or Sheer-
Extra Discs are obtainable to make machine a combination
of either one or three types-
m 1 /'I t j I Head Office and Works: SPOTSWOOD, Vie,
T. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. s^. ,b - vic -


Corn Crusher For Crushing Wheat, Oats, Barley or Maize.
(Does not Grind into Meal. See “Kelly” Mills over leaf for this purpose).
AN UP-TO-DATE MACHINE.-
The value of the food which you feed to your stock, whether for the maintenance
of their strength for doing the work on the farm or for increasing their weight to
make them sought for in the market, can be materially enhanced by using appli-
ances specially designed to prepare foods for easier assimilation.
Crushed or ground grains are more easily digested than whole, and are easily fed
without waste with cut fodder.
The machines described below are suitable for dealing with foods lor Horses,
Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, or Poultry.
The FRAME of this machine is made of solid
metal, and it is strongly built throughout.
The PRESSURE SCREW is worked in a large
square nut, which can be replaced at any time
for a few pence.
The ROLLERS are exceptionally heavy, and the
BEARINGS long, besides being syphon fed-
The machine is equipped with a DOUBLE
BAGGER, thus it can crush continuously.
The machine has a very large HOPPER, and
is built very low down, which makes it easy to
feed.
It is built to crush Oats, Barley, Maize, etc.
Speed, 700 revolutions per minute-
Code Word. Sizes.
Muncorn . . No. 1 Grinding Mill, 12 bags per hour, 4 B-H-P-, with
Bagging elevator . .
Muncrib . . No. 2 Smooth Roller Corn Crusher. 5 bags per hour, 2
B-H-P., no Elevator
Muncrack . . No. 3 Smooth Roller Corn Cruiber, 10 bags per hour?
24£ B-H-P,• with Elevator
Muncrush . . No- 4 Smooth Roller Corn Crusher, 18 bags per hour, 4
B-H-P., with Elevator
FOOD PREPARING MACHINERY.
1 TVL X A. 1 Heml Office and Worktu SI'OTSWOOD, Vic.
. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. u ’” vic -


CHAFF CUTTERS.
Hand Power Chaff cutters
THE BENTALL CXB AND CDC CHAFF-
CUTTERS, formerly in our lists, have been re-
placed by the No. 4 St/ijin. mouth and No. 5 7% in.
mouth Machines, both made after BenlaU’s pattern.
Wooden legs are fitted to the No. 4, which cuts two
lengths and can be fitted with pulley for Engine or
Horse Ciear.
For small users, the No. 5 7% in mouth Chaff-
cutter will be found easy to turn, and will supply a
nice sample of feed in two lengths.
No. 4, with cast-iron frame, wooden legs; No. 5,
cast-iron frame and legs.
We also supply Chaffcutters of larger capacity and Travelling Outfits, particulars of
which we shall be pleased to send on application.
T. ROBINSON & CO. Pty. Ltd.
MAKE OR SELL—
Disc Ploughs in Set or Stump Rabbit Poisoners
Jump — Scoops
“Peacock” for Heavy Soils. Pea Rakes.
‘King” for Lighter Soils. Seed-Cleaning Winnowers.
Hillside Reversible Disc Plough. Horse Gear and Chaff Cutters.
Mouldboard Ploughs (all sizes). Chaff Cutters and Baggers.
Stump Jump Mouldboard Ploughs, Triumph Wool Press.
Seed Drills. Federal Wool Press (One Man).
Combined Cultivators and Drills. Wheat Graders and Threshers.
Disc and Drag Harrows. Spring Tyne Cultivators.
Stump Jump Harrows. Lucerne „
One-Way Cultivators. Hay Rakes.
Lime and Fertilisers Spreaders. Mowers.
Saw Benches. Orchard Implements.
Tr>/-vT»TXTOn\T 1 /"'I Til Tj 1 Head Office and Works: SVOTSWOOO, \’ic.
. ROBINSON and Co. Pty. Ltd. v,c -




