

COMMERCIAL, PASTORAL UNO AGRICULTURAL
ASSOCIATION
NEW SOUTH WALES:
ITS ORIGIN APvPb PURPOSE.
IS STRENGTH.
PRICE Olsr_E SHILLING.




THE
pastaral ami
ASSOCIATION.
£afctwtt:
TURNER AND HENDERSON




Chapter
Page
Introduction ....
I.
3
The Western Division .
II.
8
Tke Origin of the National Land Policy
. in.
i5
The Prospectus Framed
IV.
21
Tenant-Right ....
V.
26
Rents .....
VI.
36
Scrub and Vermin ....
. VII.
46
What the Association Proposes to do
VIII.
55
Mr. Copeland's Amending Land BiM
. IX.
7i
The Commonwealth
X.
78
List of Members ....
. XL
81
Appendix—Prospectus, &c.
XII.
84
CONTENTS.




THE COMMERCIAL, PASTORAL. AND
AGRICULTURAL ASSOCIATION.
A new era opened in New South Wales when this
voluntary combination arose.
Discord, intrigue and confusion had exhausted
their forces in a struggle for the soil, which had lasted
for nearly the life-time of a generation, and all classes
and every interest had lost by the contest. None
had gained.
The great grazing industry was loaded with dead
expenditure incurred in buying land, to make an
insecure tenure safe.
Debt, departmental disorder, and litigation
hampered and thwarted every effort of pastoral
enterprise, and the ruin of individuals, though fre-
quent, passed unheeded in the general trouble.
The settlement of the population on the public
lands had equally been stamped out and impeded
by the action of legislation which professed to
encourage the small settler and the farmer.
Our land laws were purposely framed to create a
system of class hostility and mutual injury, and the
families of the two classes concerned, the Squatters
and Selectors, were reared in the standard belief that
the one could prosper only by the destruction of the
other.


Three years ago, a majority of the constituencies,
indignant with a state of things which was alike
wasteful of the public estate, damaging to industry,
and fertile of moral and social wrong, determined to
abandon a method so pregnant with evil, but their
intentions have been up to this time retarded by the
spirit of antagonism which had become a second
nature to both the factions which divided the rural
population.
When the Act of 1884 was under discussion in
the Assembly, the representatives of the two parties
strove far more strenuously to oppose each other, than
to legislate for the common good of all, and the result
was that the Bill when passed, was mutilated in some
of its most essential provisions.
Still, though emasculated by the Legislature,
and a mere weak reflection of the policy announced
by Messrs. Stuart and Dailey, the law of 1884 pre-
served enough of the spirit of the proposed change
to keep a door open for further reform.
The grazing industry carried on upon Crown
lands was by this law to pass under new conditions
of tenure, and the interests of all classes using the
native pastures would, by the same provisions, become
identical. Secure leases in well-defined areas were
for the future to take the place of a chaos of con-
flicting rights and over-riding claims, and the antici-
pation of the result to arise from the new policy, has


already suggested union and common action among
those concerned, in place of the mutual hostility
which had been the essence of the repealed law.
At the same time, an increased interest in, and
acquaintance with the land question had spread
among the population not directly connected with
the soil. Townspeople, business men, mechanics, and
the youth and intelligence of the colony had all more
or less through the efforts of the Press, begun to
give proof of awakened concern in regard to this
class of subjects.
All who had earnings to lay out and children to
settle in life began to ask why New South Wales
was not like other young countries, like Canada for
instance, where the waste lands of the Crown offer
an unlimited field for settlement and investment —or
even like some of the neighbouring Australasian
colonies.
A few years ago two delegates representing
a number of Norfolk farmers and yeomen came to
Sydney to arrange about the purchase or leasing of
a tract of country. These intending immigrants
possessed a fair amount of capital, they had growing
families, and they were in all respects the very type
of desirable colonists. They applied at the Lands
Department in Bridge-street; they could get no
information there as to any available land. Then
they tried some District Land Offices, with a like


result; and finally they left the colony convinced
that to take up even one bare selection might turn
out to be something like buying a law-suit.
They went to New Zealand and soon got what
they wanted.
Every citizen of New South Wales has even
now, in spite of the Act of 1884, to face the same
problem that disconcerted the Norfolk yeomen, if he
wants to find a family homestead.
Moreover, the expectation of new industries
being started, and of new methods being adopted, had
engaged the public attention, and certain obvious
reflections had led people to question whether any
such innovations are possible in the state of Augean
chaos which the map of New South Wales displays.
The irrigation schemes which within a few years
have doubled the wealth of some districts of
California, a country strikingly like our own, offer an
example worth following, but how can such works be
carried out in a country where there is nothing
certain about the land administration but its
ambiguity and incoherence ?
A good deal of information as to the Public Lands
had been forced from the unwilling Departments
during the discussion which preceded the passing of
the Act of 1884. This information verified what
many people had previously surmised, namely, that
the complaints put forward by squatters and


selectors against each other were equally misdirected
—that the source of the evil was inherent in the
system, and not in either class of tenants. The
essential difficulty which presses upon both classes
is comprised in the fact that neither is allowed to
hold land under such a tenure that it can be profit-
ably turned to use.
In spite of defective legislation and the inveterate
instincts of the Public Service, ever harking back to
obsolete and condemned methods, there still remains
in the Act of 1884 a promise for the future. The
best feature in the measure is unquestionably the
establishment of Local Administration.
The Land Boards dealing with all matters in
public provide themselves the means of exposing
abuses and ultimately of supplying remedies, and
they have gained the confidence of the Press, and
of the intelligent public.
Thus, though the present law has failed to realise
the results predicted, the way has been cleared for
further advance, much light has been shed on
the problem of the day, and when circumstances
arose some months ago which prompted the present
movement, the people of the colony were better
prepared to comprehend and welcome a national
scheme of land reform than at any former time.


THE WESTERN DIVISION.
Some months ago, the merchants of Sydney
observed a contraction in the trade of the Western
Districts. Remittances were few, and the demand
for goods had fallen off. At the same time, the news
came that the towns of Bourke, Brewarrina, Wil-
cannia, and others were filled with tank-sinkers,
fencers, teamsters and mechanics out of work.
Shortly, some of the Darling squatters came to
Sydney, and they complained that they had been
compelled to drop all works of improvement owing to
the action of the law of 1884.
Under the old Act, which allowed them to buy
certain of the lands which they brought into use, a
great deal of arid country had been watered and
fenced so as to carry stock, but as the new law pro-
vided no security for improvements, this work of
reclamation had to cease. These stations were
worked on borrowed money, and the Banks and
monetary institutions declined to make advances for
the construction of works which would be appro-
priated by Government.
This explained how thousands of men who had
for many years made a good living by tank-sinking
and fencing in the “ Dry Country,” were thrown out


of work, and it also accounted for the Storekeepers’
business stagnating, and for the traffic of the
Western towns having dwindled away. The stoppage
of w r ork on so many large sheep-stations had
brought out the same symptoms as the failure
of one of the great gold-fields, or as would arise
from the sudden suspension of all railway contracts
in progress.
And this was not the only complaint that came
from the country beyond the Bogan and the Lachlan.
The law of 1884 aimed at settling a new class of
sheep-farmers in the Western country. Experience
had shown that the small settler could not thrive
inland unless his industry was based on the use of
the natural grasses, and consequently it had been
provided that farms of 2,560 acres could be taken
up in the Central Division, and of 10,240 acres in
the more arid and thinly grassed Division further West.
To convert a patch of dry plain or scrub into a
paying sheep-farm, can be accomplished only by the
most systematic and minute improvements, mainly
directed to the distribution of water and the sub-
division of paddocks. Such works do not take effect
immediately. They cost time and money, and their
results tell after a term of years only. Tanks do not
hold water at once. Much patience and judgment
also are wanted in bringing new paddocks into use,
as there is great risk of destroying them with over-


stocking, and upon such considerations, the success
of the small grazier depends. Any rash attempt to
anticipate nature will bring him to grief with half his
sheep dead, and the valuable herbage of his pad-
docks destroyed. But the Legislature seems never
to have grasped the conditions under which the small
grazier of the West was to live, and the existing law
affects the Homestead Lessee in precisely the same
manner as it affects the Squatter, All improvements
become the property of the Government at the end
of the lease.
Instead of the considerate encouragement
which such an enterprise deserves, the penalty of
confiscation has been held up in menace over every
man who may venture to improve the public estate.
Therefore, no improvements have been made or can
be made upon these Homesteads while the lawremains
what it is, and the new sheep-farmer is debarred from
making use of his land by the same Act of legisla-
tion which placed him in possession of 10,240 acres.
In this way, all further use of a great tract of
country, more than one-third —nearly one-half of
New South Wales has been prohibited.
Tanks and fences much wanted, cannot be com-
menced ; contractors and workmen are idle ; the two
classes of Crown tenants are in equal difficulty —
neither can turn round. Stores are empty, and
roads once busy are becoming grass-grown. A


magnificent season, most favorable for all work,
especially for saving water, is passing, and owing to
the action of the peoples’ representatives, who have
made insecurity the central principle of our land-
tenure, whole districts are in a state of stagnation,
when they should be preparing for the ever-
threatening drought, certain to return in due course
in the cycle of the seasons.
It may be thought that the Members of
Assembly should have known this large portion of
the colony better than to legislate in such fashion.
A knowledge of the history and climate of the
Trans-Bogan and Lachlan country might possibly
have prevented such a mistake being made. But it
is to be borne in mind that three years ago, not only
the tract of country alluded to, but that much larger
portion of New South Wales lying west of a line
drawn from Albury to Bourke, was much better
known in Melbourne and Adelaide than to the poli-
ticians of Sydney. Until lately, it was rare to see
a Sydney man beyond Hay. No Minister of the
Crown had been in country that was familiar to resi-
dents in the neighbouring capitals, and no superior
official had been on the Darling since the days of
Sir Thomas Mitchell, although the river had been
thoroughly examined by the Surveyor-General of
South Australia in search of information as to stock
routes and navigation. The inhabitants of the dis-


trict got their supplies entirely, till the other day, by
the Murray and Darling Rivers, or through Echuca.
Their business arrangements seldom led them to
Sydney, and they felt nothing in common with the
Colony to which they accidentally belonged.
This is not surprising, for our politicians as a rule
take little interest in any portion of their dominions
which does not bring trade to Port Jackson, and when
they have legislated for these unknown Western
regions, if they considered the matter at all, they
assumed that the country was something like the
neighbourhood of Wagga Wagga or Tamworth.
But, now, some of our public men have really
been a few hundred miles inland, and those who
influence political questions have begun to recognise
those characteristics of feature and climate marking
the far interior.
On the boundary of the Western Division,,
beyond Walgett, Condobolin, and Booligal, the coun-
try becomes nearly dead level, and the rainfall gets
smaller perceptibly every degree of west longitude.
There have been left behind far to the east the open
forest country, the black soil plains, and the basaltic
ridges, with their twenty inches rainfall, usually
enjoyed by favoured regions in the Central Division,
such as the Namoi, the Castlereagh, and the Mur-
rumbidgee, and the traveller passes over grey or red
plains sparsely covered with salt-bush, or through a


monotonous low scrub. There is no water
but in the big rivers, except what the Squatters
have saved, and there is hardly a timber tree to be
seen except here and there in the pine scrubs, and
these become few as you approach the Darling.
Some of the scrub is eaten by stock, but there are
great tracts covered with mallee and spinifex, which
grow green and bright, but are perfectly worthless.
Sand ridges of light red loam cross the country
at intervals, and the dust from these is whirled into
the air in towering columns, and falls again, silting
up the tanks and staining the fleeces of the sheep.
Three years out of four the stock are in danger of
starvation. Every seven years or so, as in 1877 and
1884, the sheep die in thousands ; but if they can be
kept alive, a harvest will be reaped in due course,
for the years of fatness are as inevitable in the cycle
as the years of famine, and there is no country in
Australia where the sheep fatten so fast when
there is anything to eat, for there is neither fluke,
foot-rot, nor any disease whatever in the salt-bush
country.
Some ninety millions of acres in New South Wales
are like this—not far from one-half of the colony—
and these are the conditions under which the occu-
pation of grazing is carried on.
But the wisdom of Parliament makes the
improvement of this country penal, and confiscates


all tanks, dams, fences, buildings and structures
which any person, squatter, or selector may venture
to place on the ground !
Why men ever ventured to occupy these wastes
remains an enigma. As yet, the seasons of fatness
have not paid for the deaths by famine, not to speak
of the tanks excavated at one shilling per cubic yard,
and the wire and sawn stuff brought all the way up
the Murray and the Darling.
When all operations in the Western country
ceased after the Act of 1884 came into force, and
business became paralysed, the Sydney merchants
felt that there was a problem before them, and they
called a public meeting at the Exchange.


THE ORIGIN OF THE NATIONAL LAND
POLICY.
Meeting after meeting was held. The cause of
the stagnation in the West was revealed, and other
grievances came to light. People from the Central
and Eastern divisions claimed to be heard. From
every part of the colony there were received
complaints as to some substantial defect in the
land law that demanded a remedy. The matters
complained of were as various as the surroundings
of those aggrieved and the characteristics of the
country and climate.
From the narrow, local, and sectional character
which up to this time has marked our social, indus-
trial, and political life, no man, as a rule, either
knows or cares for anything outside his own district
and his own special pursuit.
It is quite safe to say that not six members of
the late Parliament had any grasp of the Land Law
as a whole. One Honourable Member declared
that he knew and cared nothing about the Bill
except so far as the pastoral rents of the south-
western corner of the colony were concerned.
Another, whose interests were centred in the coast
country, gave his whole attention to the new scheme
of non-residential selection. The representatives of
Selectors’ Associations made a point of opposing any


suggestion that could possibly help any Squatter
whatever, not having the least idea of what the work
of a Darling Squatter was ; while, on the other hand,
the representatives of the Squatting districts thought
that they could not go wrong in opposing every-
thing that made life easier to the dairy farmer of
the Shoalhaven or the small sheep-farmer of Monaro
or New England, not having the least conception
of what they were voting against.
The half-dozen climates, various soils and
diverse social conditions of New South Wales were
disregarded then, nor do they attract much discri-
minative interest now.
And yet, in the matter of grazing alone, the
different conditions under which sheep-stock are
kept offer for consideration a problem worthy of
attention. Mr. Bruce’s last returns show that in the
Western Division some twelve millions of sheep are
kept. In the Central Division, some fourteen
millions are depastured ; and in the Eastern the
number is about the same as in the Western, about
twelve millions. A squatting station in the Western
Division is a tract of country generally measuring
about forty miles by twenty, carrying fifty to sixty
thousand sheep, while the unit of grazing in the
Eastern Division is usually a few square miles of
country carrying a few small flocks. The twelve
millions of sheep in the Eastern Division are in the


hands of some thousands of small graziers, or
properly, sheep farmers, while the twelve millions in
the West are kept on large stations.
The stock returns of last year illustrate this
all through. Opening the volume by chance, two
sheep districts, Goulburn and Glen Innes, present
one of these characteristics with unmistakeable
precision. The area of the Goulburn district is about
the same size as a first class Darling station, namely,
789,630 acres, and it grazes 386,233 sheep in the
hands of 385 owners, 214 of these having not over 500
sheep, and 17 1 having over 500. The largest stock
hekl in the district by any one person is 18,000.
In addition, this piece of country carries about 20,000
cattle, and 6,500 horses, besides comprising a
considerable breadth of land under cultivation.
Glen Innes, similarly situated on the summit of
the table-land, but four hundred miles farther north,
contains 2,000,000 acres. The sheep-stock
grazed numbers 567,877, in the hands of 232
proprietors, 70 of these owning not more than 500.
The largest stock held by any person in the district
is 41,000. There is also a large stock of cattle
(79,000) in many hands.
Turning now to Bourke and Wilcannia, as
showing the Western system, we find that the first
contains 12,000,000 acres, grazing 1,240,000
sheep and 35,000 cattle belonging to forty-one


stations, while the second measures 10,000,000
acres, with 1,000,000 sheep and 3,000 cattle, in 23
properties.
These few figures serve to show under what
very different circumstances grazing is carried on in
different parts of New South Wales. The Eastern
Districts are marked not only by the great number of
grazing properties, but there is four times the stock
kept for the acreage as compared with the Western
Division.
From these and other districts, differing as
much in their form of settlement, all sorts of repre-
sentations were received. From some sheep districts
there came the statement that the minimum rent of
one penny per acre was oppressive, while the people
on the Hume scouted this assertion as absurd,
because private land-owners above Albury can
readily let their paddocks to sheep-owners at 2s. 6d.
per acre. Both statements are perfectly correct.
There is country with good soil and favorable rainfall
both in the Central and Eastern Divisions that will
command such a rent because it will keep a sheep to
every acre and a half, and there is country on the
Darling which requires nine acres, improved at a
cost of two shillings per acre, to keep a sheep one
year with another.
The spread of the pine scrub was the avowed
terror of the Central, while the rabbits threatened


both West and Centre, but the people of the East and
North were quite unconcerned about both.
The help of the Legislature was wanted on
every side, but this help was claimed by different
localities and different classes, all having diverse
aims; and, according to former experience, each of
them would as a matter of course oppose every
concession demanded by any district and any class
except their own.
At the same time there was no section of the
grazing interest that could be said to hold any pre-
dominance either in pastoral wealth, in national
importance, or in political influence.
If any class was entitled to the first place in
consideration on either score, that class was certainly
not the Western Station-owners.
On the ground of the distress which they
suffered, and the courageous efforts which they had
made to reclaim a wilderness as yet unprofitable and
intractable, they might fairly claim better terms of
tenure from their fellow colonists, but to put forward
a claim for special consideration on any other grounds
would be to damage a just cause by unwarrantable
pretension, and would provoke against them the
opposition of all other classes and districts.
At the same time, the small graziers of the
East were as unlikely to get their special grievances
redressed if they made a separate effort on behalf of


their class; and the long list of grievances that came
from the Centre —the debateable land of the squatter
and selector—proved clearly that no Reform of any
value could be achieved as long as the division
between classes, districts, and interests was main-
tained.
Stern necessity at length supplied the answer
to the riddle. The only possible line upon which
reform could advance was a National land system,
which would do the best for all districts and all
classes consistent with mutual rights.
On this basis the Association was formed, and
as we have said, a new page was opened in colonial
history when “ a National Land Policy” became the
watchword of a powerful party.


THE PROSPECTUS FRAMED.
The nucleus which adopted the principle of a
national land policy comprised men of varied expe-
riences.
There were among them merchants and the
heads of monetary institutions ; there were selectors
and squatters ; there were were homestead lessees
and country storekeepers ; there were men who had
been all over Australia ; there were some who had
been in the front ranks of the pioneers in the days
af Landsborough and Mackinlay; and there were
townsmen who had hardly left the city.
All were keenly conscious of the present defects
of our land system, and all were united in the wish to
amend what was wrong, and in the hope to see peace
and security established for the future.
Those who had first come forward under the
influence of a local or sectional grievance had seen
at last that their only prospect of a thorough remedy
rested on a national effort which would advocate the
application of certain principles irrespective of cliques
or districts.
Two principles applicable to all holdings stood
out prominently and gained the support of the body.
The first was the adoption of a Leasehold system for


all the Crown lands of the colony, based upon a
sound method of appraisement. The second was
—Tenant-right, giving to the occupant of the public
lands a right of property in his improvements. The
Prospectus which was shortly framed embraced these
provisions, and advocated their application to all
holdings in all districts, —to the squatting leaseholds
of all Divisions, to the homesteads of the West, and
to the conditional leases of the East and Centre.
By the middle of September this Prospectus had
been distributed widely over the colony, and
had attracted a good deal of attention. Two
men, representative of their respective classes,
came to Sydney to negociate terms of union or
understanding with the Association. One repre-
sented the Homestead Lessees of the Darling
and the other the Selectors of the Macquarie.
The conference which ensued produced very impor-
tant results. These Representatives intimated the
readiness of their principals to make common cause
with the Association on certain terms which they
stated as follows : —“ There is a great deal in your
Prospectus that we would gladly help to carry out,
but there is no use of your expecting co-operation
from our Societies if the Homestead applicants and
Conditional Purchasers and Lessees are to be
harrassed and annoyed as they have been when they
used the right the law gives them of occupying land


within Resumed Areas. The Act states clearly that
these Resumed Areas are held in trust simply for
purposes of settlement, and yet, as soon as any selector
or homestead man enters on such an Area —as he is
entitled by law —the grass is trampled out by the
squatter’s sheep, and every other possible pretext is
used to obstruct his legitimate possession. If your
Association will do what you can to prevent such
abuses for the future, we, as a body will join you,
and we will help all we can to get the squatter as good
a lease by law as he can rightly claim, but —under-
stand once for all, the claim we make is this, that the
Resumed Areas are ours, by law, just as much as
the Squatters’ Leases are theirs.”
On the 17th September, this declaration was
placed before the General Committee of the
Association as the basis of a treaty, and was
accepted.
To give validity to the policy adopted, sub-
sections (h), (i) and (j) were passed and embodied in
the Prospectus, and a circular was at once printed
and sent abroad announcing the important action
which the Association had taken in favour of the small
settler.
The first sub-section of the three advocated that
the right of immediate occupation on prima facte
approval by the Land Board should be granted to
the selector or homestead lessee.


The second was in favour of granting executive
power to the Land Boards to take action so that
lands under application should not be destroyed by
crowding on squatter’s stock.
The third brought forward a proposal to grant
in the Central and Eastern Divisions leaseholds of
2,560 acres on the same footing as the homestead
leases in the West, without burdening the lessee with
compulsory purchase, at one pound per acre.
This, with the addition of the tenant-right, and
the rental equitably appraised, would, it was thought,
prove a far greater boon to the small settler than
any that had yet been conceded, and it would more-
over encourage the reclamation and use of much in-
ferior country.
The Prospectus finally adopted will be found in
the Appendix to this pamphlet. Perusal of th e same
will fully bear out the assertion that the Association
has adopted a National Policy.
The claims of all Crown Tenants to Tenant-
Right, ana a fairly appraised scale of Rental are
clearly advocated, and a pledge to protect the rights
of all classes to the soil is spontaneously given.
By the beginning of October, members of the
Executive Committee had declared to public meet-
ings in New England, and on the Murrumbidgee,
that the Association would strive to get justice for all;


so that the Resumed Areas would be as secure to the
Homestead Lessees and Selectors as the Pastoral
Leases would be valid and safe for the Squatters.
The next chapters will discuss in detail the
application of the principle of Tenant-Right, the
Rent question, and the other items contained in the
Prospectus.


TENANT-RIGHT.
In the recent study which has been bestowed
on the land question, no point has come out so
clearly as the necessity for some arrangement that
will give the tenants of the public grass lands a right
to their improvements. One half of our indigenous
pastures are naturally waterless, and the other half
can be used to good purpose only by clearing and
keeping down the forest growth and by the free use
of fencing. A freehold tenure has this great advan-
tage, that it affords the owner the most absolute
security, and thus prompts and encourages the
utmost development of the country ; but as we have
adopted the leasehold system for good reasons, the
Tenant-right must be a necessary adjunct. A tenant
who has no right to his improvements must use his
land in a nomadic or gipsy fashion, and indeed, if
such a method were adopted, a great part of the
country would be grazed over only in dripping
seasons like the present.
If the State refuses this needful recognition, one
result will certainly ensue ; a result which invariably
follows every disability which attaches to the use of
the soil. The small grazier will absolutely disappear,
both the minor squatter and the grazing selector,
and financial causes will, as formerly, throw the lands
wholesale into the hands of speculators.


The stand taken by the Association on this
point is clear and explicit. Subsection (b) of clause
6 reads as follows :
(h) Existing improvements and improvements
that may be subsequently made with the
concurrence of the Local Land Board, to
be paid for to the outgoing tenant by the
incoming tenant, the amount paid being
based on the assessed value to the incom-
ing tenant, and in no case shall such
payment exceed a limit of so much per
acre or per sheep to be defined in the
Amending Land Act, and that this shall
apply to ALL CLASSES OF CROWN
TENANTS.
To secure this equitable concession, —the Magna
Charta of land-reform—equally for the large man
and the small, for the Darling squatter and the
New England sheep-farmer—the Association stands
pledged.
The soundness of the principle cannot be ques-
tioned. Indeed, on the Resumed Areas of Runs
under the Act of 1884, the method is in daily
operation. The incoming tenant is assessed by the
Land Board for improvements constructed by the
lessee going out.
And every effort was made by the late Govern-
ment, in framing the same Act, to apply the prin-


ciple to the Leasehold Areas, but the Assembly
would not have it. The objections cited were two-
fold.
The first was that the compensation claimed
would cost the Treasury one or two millions every
year. Of course this plea, though blatantly reiter-
ated by our legislators, had no weight with those
who took the trouble to comprehend the principle
advocated. As it is, if Tenant-right were adopted
to-morrow, not a farthing would be paid out of the
Treasury, except in those rare instances when Govern-
ment resumed leasehold land for railway, stock, or
mining reserves, or new townships; and, in such
instances, the existence of tanks, wells, and other
inexpensive works, would be obviously advantageous
for any public purpose. Neither on the score of
administration would any expense be incurred. The
Land Boards, sitting in public in the districts where
the cases dealt with arise, provide the very machinery
required to appraise the value of, and to determine
upon the necessity for, the improvements changing
hands.
The second objection, which is still urged,
had more substance in it, and was based on a well-
founded distrust. Under the old law, the practice of
over-loading land with sham and useless construct-
ions, made with the object of resisting selection,
had been practised to an enormous extent, with


marked connivance and interested aid supplied both
by members of the Assembly and the Lands Depart-
ment.
But, in the discussions which have recently
taken place under the auspices of this Association,
no topic has been more thoroughly considered than
this phase of the improvement question. Various
suggestions have been put forward.
The first was, that, on the termination of
tenancy, the Land Board should decide which of
the improvements on the ground were absolutely
necessary for the use of the grass, and that those
only so determined should be charged against the
incoming occupant. For instance, if some ingenious
lessee, following the traditional practice of Riverina,
constructed three tanks within a mile of each other,
the Board would appraise the value of one only,
and the other two would fall into the home-
stead or conditional lease applied for without any
compensation being provided. For this reason, that
the value of a tank to an incoming tenant depends
entirely on the extent of grass which it commands,
and therefore everything placed on the ground
beyond what is necessary, should be dealt with as
superfluous or sham improvements.
The second suggestion put forward was that
payment should be made only for such works as
have been constructed after the consent of the Land


Board has been given. This method would be
weak and unsatisfactory. It would exclude works
already on the ground from the safe-guard of the
tenant-right, and it would leave the lessee too
much in official leading-strings. No worse thing
can be done than to strangle individual effort with
red tape.
A third suggestion, in bringing forward another
idea, frees the hands of the lessee, while it imposes
an effectual bar against tampering with the public
estate. The suggestion is this, that no compensa-
tion shall exceed a certain sum per acre. The cost
of necessary improvements, for water and fencing,
in the Central and Western Divisions, is about two
shillings per acre, that is, for holdings divided in
paddocks of the larger size. When the paddocks
are smaller, the cost of both water and fencing would,
of course, be proportionately greater, but it would not
be difficult to adjust a scale of compensation, fair to
the tenants going out, and not oppressive to the man
coming in.
Of late, it has been argued that the occupant of a
valid leasehold under the Act of 1884 ought to have
no right to his improvements, as the tenure which
he holds for a term of years, being secure against
encroachment, ought to enable him to recoup the out-
lay through a sinking fund. But so costly is the
work of reclaiming outside country of small carrying


capacity that it would require, not, as now, a 20
years lease, but a 60 or 80 years tenure to enable a
lessee of Western lands to make a sinking fund to
cover cost of his improvements. Late events have
shown clearly that no works such as will substantially
benefit the country will be undertaken unless Tenant
right, as security for expenditure, is conceded by law
to the tenant. When the Act passed in 1884,
bankers stopped their advances to Western squatters,
and all works ceased in the country west of the
Bogan and Lachlan.
Apart from this financial check, against which
no argument avails, there is a manifest weakness and
impolicy in any system which does not encourage the
utmost improvement of the soil. To tell a man that
the State claims all the work of his hands at the end
of his tenancy, is to stop all fresh effort, and to pre-
vent the maintenance of improvements in existence.
The tenants of all holdings, large and small, in
every district would gain by the adoption of the
Tenant-Right principle, and with any of the safe-
guards detailed, the public could in no sense lose,
either by the forestalling of the land or by the cost of
administration.
The squatter and homestead lessee of the West
would receive the utmost encouragement that
legislation could give them to make their lease-


holds drought-proof ; and it would soon be
ascertained whether sheep could be kept with profit
in the semi-desert.
It is incredible that a Legislature which has
expended some ten millions on non-paying railways
should grudge a simple concession like this, which
involves no disbursement whatever, which must be
followed by a revival of industry, and which may on
the same good grounds be claimed alike on behalf
of the small settler, as on behalf of the Joint Stock
Company.
The adoption of the principle would be of special
advantage to the conditional lessee of the Central
and Eastern Divisions. If there was one point more
earnestly contended for than another in the discus-
sions which preceded the passing of the law of 1884,
it was that the selector should get the full good of
his grazing right. It was shown from undeniable
-evidence, that except in a few counties on the coast
and table land, the selector could not live without a
■certain use of the grass, and that when he lost this
advantage, he was compelled, in most cases, to sell
out.
No doubt, when Parliament in its wisdom gave
the small settler 2560 acres of land with the option
of buying the same at one pound per acre, it was
intended to give him a chance to make a living, but,
to buy second-rate land at such a price, though it


might suit a retired citizen wanting a small estate, is
far beyond the capacity of a working settler who has
to get the value out of the soil.
Nothing short of a miracle could enable him to
extract from stringy bark ranges, or mingled plain
and scrub, the four thousand pounds that would be
needed to buy, fence, and reclaim such a holding.
But if the tenant-right with an extended lease were
substituted for the option of purchasing, the earnings
of the Selector or Conditional Lessee would be much
better left in his hands to invest in fencing, ring-
barking, tree and grass culture, and other work
appropriate to small settlers, and the State would
benefit in holding a security growing in value with a
rental steadily advancing.
As the law stands at present, if the conditional
lessee finds himself overweighted by the purchase
money, or unable either to buy or to improve, he will
to a certainty follow the example of his predecessor,
and will sell out. It is decidedly to the interest of
the community and of the State to encourage the
selector as a small grazier, especially if this can be
done by the cheap expedient of conceding Tenant-
right, which costs the country nothing, and must
prompt a man to make the most of his land.
By some writers, the expediency of allowing the
tenant’s claim on account of water conservation is
admitted, but they are opposed to recognise any other


improvements. For the use of the whole country,
fencing is absolutely indispensible, while water needs
to be artificially stored only in certain districts. In
reality, neither water nor grass can be used bene-
ficially without a good deal of fencing, and in the
case of the small holdings partly arable and parth
pastoral, which the Act of 1884 professed to
encourage, the absolute necessity of iencing and of
subdivision is self-evident. Growing crops, culti-
vated grasses, dairies, orchards, and all the special
industries of the small settler, necessitate fencing to
a much larger extent proportionately than the station
or homestead sheep-farm, and yet the man who
enters upon this form of settlement on 2,560 acres
has the shortest of all leases, and a sentence of
forfeiture stands recorded against him, which prac-
tically must end in the same way for him whether
he tries to save himself by buying the land or not.
Consequently, all the small settler does \\ ith his
conditional lease at present is to keep a few sheep
or cattle on the grass. He neither fences nor
improves, but chances his being able to hold on to
his land, and trusts to get his evasion of the law
condoned through political interest.
The wisest policy for the whole colony is to
encourage fencing by a tenant-right interest.
Whether for the large holding or the small, no
improvement is so beneficial. On stations there is


no worse plan than to place a large tank or dam in a
large paddock. The stock coming and going
trample out more grass than they eat, and the soil
becomes like a brick-yard. With small paddocks
and small tanks the grass is economised, and the
stock thrive much better. If the policy which
encourages the saving of water is sound, then the
encouragement of fencing is squally desirable.


Not long ago the public and the Press took for
granted that there was no difficulty about fairly
appraising the rental value of the public lands.
“All Crown land is worth one pound per acre.
Five per cent, on one pound is one shilling, and one
shilling per acre would be a moderate rent.”
This was the logic of many, and it was. supposed
to be sound. All complained that the revenue from
the public pastures was totally inadequate, and the
Minister for Lands remarked once that 3d. per acre,
recommended by some of the Land Boards, repre-
sented an interest equal only to 1J per cent, on the
capital value.
At this stage of knowledge, the distinction
between improved and unimproved lands had not
been discerned. Neither were there recognised the
different conditions comprised in a secure tenure as
contrasted with one less safe, or in a lease that
encouraged improvement, as compared with another
lease that barred the reclamation of arid country or
other land naturally unavailable for immediate use.
No such distinctions were considered.
The political voice simply demanded that those
who ventured to make use of the public estate should
be substantially taxed for the privilege.


At one time, a majority of the people of New
South Wales lived in the country, and they were
engaged, more or less, in reclaiming the wilderness
and in bringing the lands into productive use. But
times have changed. The last census showed that
by far the greater number of the electors live now in
the towns, and a claim is frequently being put for-
ward that the lands belong to the majority, and that
those who reside upon and turn the same to use are
bound to supply a revenue for the behoof of this
political landlord.
The fathers of our colonisation would indeed
wonder if they learned that such a theory had taken
root —that the men who tackled the real work of
colonisation were to be in any way placed in the
position of the debtors or the feudal tenants of the
urban electorates !
But if the settlement of the country is to be a
recognized object of our national policy, rent must
be considered not as a debt due by those who use
the land to that part of the population that makes
no use of it, but simply in the light of a tax paid as
an equivalent for protection and administration ; and
like any other equitable assessment, it ought to be
levied in fair proportion to the advantages derived
by the tenant.
The amount of rent that the Government can
justly claim must be based upon the value of the


produce, and this will in the long run be determined
by the encouragement and protection which the
tenant receives.
Under the Act of 1884 the first problem in
fixing rental arose from the division of the runs. A
lease-hold run secure for a term of years, either
naturally available or improved so as to keep stock,
could pay a full rate of rent, but it was evident that
the resumed areas were in a different position alto-
gether, as they were liable to be taken up by
homestead lessees and conditional purchasers and
lessees at any time. Indeed, the possession of any
resumed area could not be reckoned upon for a week ;
consequently every arrangement for the season that
involved the use of the land was liable to be upset, and
therefore this portion of run being merely in the market
waiting for a customer, could not be assessed at the
same rate as grass lands under a good tenure. This
distinction has not yet been sufficiently marked in
the appraisements which have been published.
The capricious nature of the new law, in respect
to improvements effected, must also be altered
before a fair appraisement can be arrived at. Indeed,
as was pointed out in the foregoing chapter, the
beneficial use of most of the country hinges upon the
application of the principle of tenant-right, and the
rent value must necessarily be largely influenced by
the same principle.


It would be difficult to fix any rent at all upon
a back-block, waterless and unfenced, unless the
tenant held the land on such conditions as would
encourage him to make the most of it.
Under the old law, the lands of the Darling
could have paid no rent at all, except upon the river
frontages, if they had not been made available by
the tanks and wells constructed on freehold land,
and by other protected improvements.
The action of the Legislature in dealing with
this misunderstood question, has been alike feeble
and arbitary ; nervously anxious to exact full value,
and at the same time captiously averse to allow any
tenant scope to make the most of his position.
Security for improvements has been withheld ; the
shortest possible leases have been granted in a portion
of the colony ; and at the same time a minimum
rent has been established, with a scale progressive
every five years. The logic of the progressive rent
it is impossible to fathom. Surely, if the appraise-
ment has been fairly conducted, the rental determined
upon should be maintained until the next appraise-
ment is held. But, no. According to the Act, the
Minister says : —“ The Board informs me that your
pastoral leasehold in the salt-bush country is worth
one penny per acre, therefore I will charge you one
farthing more at the end of five years, and another
farthing at the end of ten years ! ”


Grazing lands back from centres of traffic, rail-
ways and, steamboat wharves, do not participate in
that cumulative value which we notice in George-
street leases. Progress is slow in the back blocks,
and such augmentation in value as may be reasonably
expected can come only from good improvements
telling upon the grazing capability after a term of
years ; for the beneficial results of tank-making and
even of judicious paddocking are not immediate.
It may be well to ask is there any common sense
in this quinquennial addition of rent ? If the grazing
value is thought to have increased, would not a
periodical appraisement be the proper course to-
ascertain the fact ?
Onereason constantly adduced forapplying strin"
gent conditions to pastoral tenancy is the necessity
for checking the tendency to monopoly, which
grows out of a system of large holdings, but the
climax of absurdity is attained when we find the
small settlers granted conditional leases on terms
which they cannot fulfil and live. The 2,560 acre
man mast pay twopence per acre rent annually for
1,920 acres, besides the yearly quota due on the pur-
chase of 640 acres. He is bound to fence in his
holding; and if he wants to save his home and
improvements from confiscation at the end of ten
years, he must buy the leasehold at one pound per
acre.


Moreover these small graziers are not assessed
by a regularly conducted appraisement, but by a
rule of thumb method.
Some pains are taken to get station lands under
pastoral lease valued by men properly qualified, but
the small grazing right of the selector is assessed by
a junior of the survey staff, a youth probably who
has seen little but the brick and cement streets of
Sydney. Consequently it is quite cnmmon to find
a pastoral lease rated at 2d. per acre, and the con-
ditional lease adjoining separated only by a fence,,
put down at 3^d.
Such blundering incongruities cause infinite
mischief, but the official mind appears to be perfectly
incapable of avoiding them. The national welfare,
as a standard to work by, is a thing unknown in the
Lands Department, equally hidden from the Perma-
nent Head as from the batches of youngsters at
a year each, who have been left as legacies from one
Ministry to another.
The rule in every Branch is “ Never try to stop
the growth of muddle, and rather than allow any of
the public to get anything that can possibly do
anybody good, take to passive resistance, answer no
letters, and do nothing ”
Under a fair and intelligible system, appraise-
ment would be guided by the character of the tenure*
and the method would be uniform for all classes of


holdings, whether the Pastoral Lease of 200,000
acres, the Homestead Lease of 10,240 acres, or the
Conditional Lease of 1,920 acres.
Then, the matter to be considered in each case
would simply be the productive value of the land.
The rental of the Western Division, and of the
greater part of the Central must be determined by
the capability of the ground to keep sheep. There
is no other possible standard. Neither the keeping of
cattle, nor the cultivation of the soil, nor any future
speculative Increase, adding to the leasehold value*
is to be looked for. The rent must be fixed entirely
in relation to the production of wool and mutton.
By a general consensus of opinion, admitted in
Victoria as well as in New South Wales, it is agreed
that a sheep, if kept on fair run without much trouble
or risk, should contribute eightpence a year to the
revenue. If one acre of land will keep a sheep from
year to year, then the rent of that acre should be
eightpence. But the capability of pasture varies
greatly. In a few favoured spots, country is* met
with that will keep sheep at the rate of one acre to
an acre and a-half per head ; but over by far the
greater part of the colony, three acres per sheep are
needed, while in the Western Division—not far from
one-half of our whole territory —from four to ten
acres are required, even where there is an ample
supply of water.


Now, in estimating the rental of these poorly
grassed and arid lands, with a rainfall of from seven
to twelve Inches in the year, an important considera-
tion comes in. Sheep, kept on such lands, each
running over three times the area that is necessary
in richer country, are kept at a much heavier cost
per head. The cost of fencing is twofold, also the
•cost of distributing and conserving water, and, from
the greater distances, the cost of management
is also much greater. Therefore such country
•cannot pay so much rent per sheep as the better
grassed districts. Now, reducing the estimated rate
per head to rent per acre, and starting at eightpence
per acre for one acre-country, it is evident that
three-acre country can much less afford to pay two-
pence per acre than one-acre country can pay eight-
pence, while, if we go down to six or ten-acre
country, the augmented cost will reduce the surplus
available for rent to a mere nominal fraction. And
this rough estimate is fully borne out by the history
•of the districts we are discussing. Ihe general
result has been such that those who have studied
the facts, wonder how men have ventured at
such cost to place stock in a drought-stricken
semi-desert. Up to this time, the profits have not
been sufficient to pay interest on the dams, tanks
.and fences, and the rents have been paid out of
capital. Dripping years like the present, which


come once or twice in a decade, cheer the pioneer
and the capitalist, and the venture is kept afloat.
But these good years are few and intermittent, and
the drought is chronic, with black famine ever
threatening, so that on most Darling Stations the-
profits are yet in the distance.
In the number of estimates and statements that
have came before the Executive Committee of the
Association, one of the most remarkable seemed to
prove that it was more profitable to keep sheep in
the old districts, paying two shillings per acre for
paddock-rent, than to occupy dry country on the
Darling at the minimum rent of one penny per acre.
The paradox is more in appearance than in reality.
A station account, detailing the history of a large'
holding in the Western Division, proved that each
sheep required nine acres of country improved at a
cost of from is. 6d. to 2S. per acre. In other words,,
the interest on the Improvements, added to the
minimum rent on nine acres amounted to about
two shillings per sheep per annum. Distance from
markets, extra cost of management, exceptional
drought-risk, and deterioration of fleece from dust
and climate, increase the handicap upon the Darling
grazier.
All such aspects of the rent question must have
been quite strange to the Legislature which imposed
the “minimum” and decreed the “progressive scale !”


The matter wants careful study rather than
dogmatic dictation. Especially does it need to be
treated by men who have seen the country and
know it.
It is only by careful appraisement, based on
sound principles, and conducted by persons com-
petent, that justice can be done to all settlers,
whether large or small, and that the pastoral revenue
can be placed on a sound and consistent basis.


VII.
SCRUB AND VERMIN.
This Association might find work for three years
in mastering the above branches of the land quest ion,
without doing anything else.
While class discord and weak legislation have
obstructed our healthy progress in one direction,
forces, voiceless indeed, but as effective for mischief
as the power of Parliament, have fastened on the
heart of the colony and threaten to choke industry
and settlement.
When the pioneer enters upon new country, he
almost always sees around him open forests and
plains grass-clothed, with little scrub, and not much
game. The hunter-race keeps the balance of nature
at an equipoise, and a condition of things is main-
tained that serves their primitive wants. Every two
or three years, each piece of country is in turn
hunted over, the wild animals are thinned down,
and then the grass is burned. After this few
seedlings grow ; the scrub never gets the chance to
thicken, and thus both vegetable and animal increase
are kept in check.
But with the first flock of sheep that enters the
country a change begins. The grass is gnawed close
down,and thebush fire, when it comes, finds nothing to


lay hold of. The seeds of the gum and wattle, and
the cones of the pine are covered with the dust raised
by hundreds of hoofs, and they germinate with the
first rain. In twenty years, there are a dozen trees for
one that used to grow on the same ground, and
patches of dense thicket are springing up over the
once open pasture.
In the meantime, the blacks have left the hunter
life, and they are represented by a remnant sponging
about stations and townships for old clothes, grub,
and tobacco ; while the other animals of prey, the
dingoes, have been cleared off by poison. Thereon
the kangaroos begin to breed in flocks ; the scrubs
cover thousands of acres and are filled with wallabies,
which trim the grass for miles round, as if shaved by
a razor. The sheep and the marsupial compete for
every blade that grows. Bush fires are things of the
past, and there is a prolific vegetation, but it is of the
wrong sort, for the scrub is fast covering the ground
where grass and valuable herbs used to grow. This
noxious growth is not confined to any one part of the
colony. Of late years, the destructive spread of the
callitris or cypress pine in the Central Division has
attracted attention, but the growth of eucalyptus and
mimosa scrub has done harm in almost every district,,
and various kinds of scrub cover ground that might
otherwise be turned to good use. Though not
absolutely accurate, it may make the matter Intel-


ligible to say that the Eastern Division suffers from
the gum and wattle scrub ; the Central from the
pine ; and the Western is intersected and prejudiced
by the broom and mallee. Whether the latter has a
tendency to spread to new ground has not been
proved, but it is certain that it thickens after being
burned.
In this way the increase of the marsupial and the
growth of the scrub have kept pace, but for the last
five years a war of extermination has been waged,
and the living pest has been reduced in number, but
no such success has been achieved in checking the
progress of the other, and runs that carried at one
time twenty and thirty thousand sheep are now able
only to feed eight and ten thousand, while many
districts show the available grazing area contracted,
and the belt of thicket or jungle steadily closing in
upon the once open grass land.
So far the struggle detailed has been against
■evilswhich were the natural outcome of the occupation
of the country, and yet the sequence of events
could hardly have been foreseen by us. But, our
difficulties have been multiplied tenfold by our own
deliberate action.
It is questionable if anything wise in the work
of acclimatisation has been done in New South
Wales since the days of Captain James Macarthur,
at is, about eighty years ago.


We have had ships from Valparaiso with wretched
mustangs on board, their manesandtails being matted
with burrs, thistles, and castor-oil plant seeds. One
kind old lady got some sweet-briar from Home, and
sent it round among her friends in a radius of one
hundred miles, and we can see the consequences all
over the tableland. We have had alpacas from Chili,
and Cashmere goats, and Spanish jackasses, and they
have left no sign ; but quite lately we have succeeded
in establishing the sparrow, the hare, and the rabbit.
The sparrow is the terror of suburban gardens ;
the fruit-trees have to be covered with netting; the
hare destroys green crops and gnaws the bark off the
peach and apple trees, and he is already included in
the list of “ noxious animals ” by some of the Country
Boards. The rabbit is already filling Blue-Books,
and has become the enigma of the day.
Accounts differ slightly as to how he w r as
introduced. One narrative says that he was let go
in Victoria by Mr. Austin in iB6O. Another version
has it that a lot were carefully tended and coddled
near Geelong in 1857, until they got a firm hold of the
country. All versions agree in saying that the
importer thought he was doing a splendid thing
for the country, and so did all his neighbours. It
was a sporting, public-spirited, thoroughly English,
plucky proceeding I Seeing what the characteristics
of our countrymen are, it is a wonder that some of


the Anglo-Indians among us have not proposed
bringing down from Bengal a few litters of tiger-cubs,
in the interest of sport.
Bunny first crossed the Murray in 1878, after
infesting the whole of Victoria, except Gippsland.
At the end of 1885, before the rains of the last
season set in, his burrows reached thirty miles north
of Cobar; they had got east as far as Wagga, and
they were working up the Paroo, nearing the
Queensland boundary.
Whatever the seasons may be, whether wet or
dry, we will hear of them very soon at Walgett,
Cunnedah, and Yass.
The danger of a rabbit invasion has been
under-rated, people being misled by the well-known
fact that there are many places in the colony
where small numbers are running wild, and these
never became numerous enough to be trouble-
some, But the real danger does not come from
these scattered lots, but from the fact that the
pests have fairly established a stronghold in the
scrub country on the banks of the Murray and lower
Darling, and that a migration from this stronghold
to the North and East is constantly going on. In
the mallee and spinifex country, where live stock
can hardly live, the rabbit thrives. It is believed
that he gets both food and water from the succulent
roots of this desert vegetation. The present writer


saw the rabbit fat and strong in the mallee,
near Pooncaira, during the drought of 1884,
when the turkeys, emus, and kangaroos were dying
all about, and when every gully was putrid with
dead sheep.
The connection of the rabbit with the scrub
pest is most significent and ominous. If it were
not for the great fastness of some thousand square
miles of scrub and sand in our south-western boun-
dary, the stray detachments that reach the open
country would soon fall victims to their natural
enemies, or they would be confined within narrow
limits ; but with wave after wave thrown out from
this centre every ordinary season, they will soon
baffle all such minor opposition, and they will effect
lodgements in all favourable ground. By far the
most likely tract to harbour them in myriads is the
great Central pine scrub. They are now on its out-
skirts. If once fairly in possession, some twenty
millions of acres, when once doubly infested by pine
and rabbits, will become absolutely untenantable,
and the ever advancing scrub will shelter the other
enemy, and will carry ruin in two-fold form into every
adjoining district.
As to the desolation which ensues when rabbits
fairly take possession of a country, we have had the
most convincing proof from New Zealand, Tasmania,
Victoria and South Australia. The ground becomes


honeycombed, every green thing disappears, live-
stock cannot live, and the cultivation of the soil
becomes impossible The change of the seasons
does not affect the plague. They breed up to the
full capability of a good year, and when the drought
comes, they fatten where the wallabies starve, for
they find food and moisture among the roots under-
ground.
Unorganised action with guns, dogs, nets and
ferrets seems to do little more than scatter them,
and poisoning is something like baling out the sea.
with a bucket.
Organised persistent effort by the whole com-
munity, backed in every way by the Central
Government and the local authorities, is absolutely
necessary to bring the evil under control.
A mass of testimony exists to prove that one-
adjunct helps the work of extermination materially,,
namely, wire netting. With fences thus made proof,
the migration of rabbits ceases, and, hemmed in,
they can be rooted out and destroyed. Printed
reports in number show that this has been the result
elsewhere, and what other people can do, we ought
to be able to manage.
The Conferences held lately concur in recom-
mending the use of netting, but it is necessary that
both Government and private effort should help in.
the work.


The great national barrier line of fence from
Albury to the Queensland boundary now begun
should be completed without delay. This would
protect the portion of the colony yet untouched, and
would check the movement to the north-east.
The second line should divide the lightly infested
from the heavily infested country.
The third should run along the South Australian
border.
These three lines should be constructed by
Government. Other lines should be carried out by
local and private effort, facilitated in every way by
the authorities, and all working in concert.
But it must be borne in mind that mere fencing
of Itself will do little. It must be accompanied by
the most unremitting, methodical effort. The hunt
must not cease while a rabbit remains.
And it is questionable whether wire-netting and
the most persistent work wall succeed fully, if the
destruction of scrub is not carried on simultaneonsly.
We have now twenty millions of acres infested
with pine scrub ; we have other forty millions infested
by rabbits. The two pests are rapidly drawang
together, and in a few years more we may have to
face the problem of some sixty millions acres grown
over with thicket and alive with vermin.
The crisis clearly calls loudly upon the national
•courage, intelligence, and energy.


It is only a few years since there was beautiful
open country where the pine-scrubs are growing now,
and there was hardly a rabbit on the Darling five
years ago.
What may we not expect in other five years if
something more is not done than is being done now ?
Above all, legislation in this matter should take
the direction of encouragement to private enterprise.
Is it quite hopeless to appeal to the Legislature ?
The political intellect of the day seems to con-
centrate itself in the effort to add to the burden of
our debt and to increase our public expenditure at
the time when the soil calls aloud for willing hands,
and when a danger is at our doors that demands the-
brain and muscle of the colony to meet it.
Let us waken up and borrow some ideas from
our neighbours. Victoria and South Australia try to-
induce people to tackle and subdue their dry plains,
and mallee, rabbit-infested river flats. They offer
long leases at nominal rents, and secure the men who
reclaim these wastes in the work of their hands.
But our statesmen seem to be mostly bred under
the shadow of the Treasury and the Law Courts, and
their main idea is to tax and cramp with restrictions
those who vainly strive against the perils of the
wilderness.


VIII.
WHAT THE ASSOCIATION PROPOSES
TO DO.
In the preceding chapters, the circumstances
which led to the forming of this Association have
been detailed. The principles and policy adopted,
and the main questions involved, have been discussed
at length.
The specific action which the body has deter-
mined upon in reference to each interest and each
class in occupation of the soil will now be put
forward.
The Squatter necessarily comes first, as the
leader of the main national Industry. Crops are
precarious and patchy, minerals return but a transient
profit, but the grass is a perennial source of wealth
and basis for industry in a climate like this —where
with moderate moisture, it grows all the year round.
The term “ squatter” is now applied to many
varieties of settler.
There is the representative of the great Pastoral
Company in the Western Division, trying to reclaim
half a million acres of country naturally waterless
under an arid climate. Then, there is the occupant
of a smaller holding in the Central Division, with
freehold land interspersed through his leasehold,
struggling as much or more against legislative and


financial difficulties as against climate j and nearer
again to settlement there is a third type in possession
of a moderate freehold estate, the fragment he retains
of his original station.
The term is also applied to other owners who
have made up properties by purchase, and to those
who have inherited or acquired grants issued in the
days of Sir Thomas Brisbane and the other early
Governors.
All these various types live by sheep and cattle,
and all are, in the popular mind, confusedly lumped
under the general designation of “ squatter,” though
the half of those so-called, are not really squatters
at all.
But the class or interest that we have to deal
with now, that which represents the real squatter, is
the Pastoral Lessee of the three Divisions, the Crown
lenantof from 16,000 acres on the coast to one
million acres'west of the Darling.
\\ ith all the other grazing settlement that has
taken place in various forms, more than one-half of
the live stock of the colony is still kept on the Crown
lands within squatting stations, and the future
progress and happiness of this community depends
largely on the wisdom and justice exercised in the
disposal of this large territory.
Under the existing law, each Station or Pastoral
holding is divided in two portions, the “ Leasehold”


and the “ Resumed Area.” The Leasehold is by law
assigned to the squatter for a term of years, and is
not liable to be encroached upon. The Resumed
Area is set aside for purposes of settlement, and the
squatter by law is allowed only the temporary use of
the same until it is occupied.
Under the abrogated law, the whole of every
Station was open to selection, and the change of
policy which led to the partition of each holding
between the two interests, was intended to benefit
both.
Before the Act came into force, almost every
squatter declared that he would be well pleased if
one-half of his country was freed from the risk of
selection, and was assigned to him for a term of
jears, under conditions which would enable him to
use the grass to advantage. In like manner, intending
■selectors generally favored the division of Stations,
as thereby they expected that they would be enabled
to acquire land in the areas resumed without opposi-
tion from the squatter.
The Association proposes to advocate amend-
ments that will give validity to these professed
■objects of the Act.
In the first place, in regard to the Pastoral
Leasehold, the Association will contend for certain
in all three Divisions —


i. The term of Lease should be in the West
twenty years, and in no Division should it be less
than fifteen years.
2. A periodical appraisement of Rent, say every
five years, without reference to any “ minimum/’
should be adopted. The estimate should be based
on the validity of the tenure, the security for improve-
ments, the character of the country, the natural
facilities in respect to markets and supply of timber
and other material, besides the records of the rainfall,
and the climatic conditions extending over a term of
years. The existingprovision in reference to periodical
increase of rent should necessarily be abandoned.
3. As regards the Western Division, the pro-
vision contained in Section 78, as set forth in sub-
section (I.) dealing with the date of commencement
of the new Lease, ought to be clearly interpreted by
the authority of Parliament. The succeeding sub-
section (II.), in reference to the commencement of
“ Rent,” is clearly at variance with sub-section (I.)
It is discreditable to the Assembly that the clauses
of an Act of such importance should be framed in
this slovenly fashion, and there is gross injustice to-
the tenant involved in the dilemma which has arisen.
He must either accept such a decision as may be
adopted by ministerial or official caprice, or he must
spend money in carrying the point in question before
lhe Law Courts.


4. The principle of Tenant Right should be
embodied in the Law. When the Pastoral Lease
shall terminate by effluxion of time, or by special
resumption under the law, the outgoing tenant should
hold a lien over certain improvements, for which he
should be recompensed by the tenant succeeding
him, or, if the land is taken for any public purpose,
by the Government.
The improvements for which the outgoing tenant
shall be entitled to claim compensation shall be such
as the Land Board, after due enquiry, shall publicly
declare to be necessary for the grazing occupation of
the country, provided that the cost of the same to the
Incoming tenant shall not exceed two shillings per
acre in the Western Division, three shillings per acre in
the Central, and four shillings per acre in the Eastern
Division. These improvements would consist of works
for the storing and distribution of water, namely, wells,
tanks, dams, flumes, canals, natural reservoirs made
permanent, fencing, clearing, and buildings.
The application of the principal of Tenant
Right to the various divisions would need to be
modified according to local necessities. Paddocks in
the Central and Eastern divisions are from necessary
circumstances smaller than in the Western; the cost
of fencing is consequently higher and a different rate
of compensation may be fairly adopted, especially
as the ground carries more stock for the area.


Moreover within two hundred miles of the coast,
the development of the grazing capability does not
depend on saving water, but on thinning and clearing
timber, on keeping down the growth of gum and
wattle scrub, and on the subdivision of paddocks.
At the same time there should be some discri-
mination exercised in allowing compensation for
clearing. It is doubtful if ring-barking can be con-
sidered a permanent improvement. Frequently the
process is succeeded by a growth of scrub or seed-
lings, and the destruction of these will cost more
than the killing of the original forest.
These are the demands which the Association
has determined to make on behalf of the Pastoral
Lessees of all three Divisions—namely,
A term of lease sufficient to enable the land to
be occupied to advantage.
A rate of rental periodically appraised on sound
principles, - •
And Tenant-Right for expenditure, limited by
reasonable safeguards.
Such conditions would provide a satisfactory
tenure —safe for the occupant, and beneficial to
■enterprise and industry.
The Association has next to consider the
Resumed Areas.


These tracts of country are in a position totally
different from the Leaseholds, and the adoption of
the amendments above detailed would make the
contrast still more marked. The Leasehold, as
proposed, would be in much the same position as
a Scotch farm lease, giving every encouragement
and security to the tenant to make the most of the
land. The Resumed Area, on the other hand, is by
law little better than commonage, as it may be taken
up at any time by the homestead lessee or selector,
and no arrangements in anticipation of the coming
season, involving the use of these lands, can be
entered upon with any certainty. In fact, they are,
according to law, simply T waiting for settlement, and
as soon as an applicant appears, the squatter s stock
is liable to be moved.
On these grounds the Association would desire
to advocate a large reduction in the rental charged
on the Resumed Areas, but the examination of the
facts connected with these portions of country has
disclosed a state of things so unsatisfactory m a
national sense, and so fraught with trouble for the
future, that the duty of arbitrators voluntarily under-
taken by us wmuld not be worthily discharged, without
placing the whole subject in all its bearings before
the public.
Almost all the Resumed Areas in the Eastern
and Central Divisions and several also in the Wes-


tern Division are intersected and spotted with pur-
chases made in the interest of the Stations which
have been subjected to division. The proportion of
land so secured is generally ten to twenty per cent
of the area of each station, but in some parts a much
larger proportion has been bought up.
This mangled state of these Areas results from
the vicious law of 1861. To lease land to one man,
and then to tell another to take it from him if he
can, naturally suggests attack from the one side and
resistance from the other, and this legacy from a
period of agrarian war, which we wish now to heal
over and forget, involves one of the greatest diffi-
culties in the way of adopting a national land policy.
The object of making these purchases was, of
course, to resist selection, but as this took place in a
time of open war between the two classes, —war
promoted by the law of 1861, —the action of the
Squatters cannot be considered as unfair.
Now, however, as the war is over; as the Selec-
tor has abandoned his claim to select within the
Pastoral Leasehold —under a certain understanding—
clearly, in fairness, the strategic occupation of the
country entered upon by the Squatter in self-defence
should not be maintained.
The principal evil that has resulted hitherto
from this “ peacocking” of the Resumed Areas has
been felt in the obstruction of intending Selectors ;


but the results are also apparent in the irregular
forms which Conditional and Homestead Leases
necessarily take. hrom their boundaries winding
out and in, to avoid Volunteer Land Order Grants
and Improvements Purchases, the expense and diffi-
culty of fencing and working are greatly augmented.
But of late the annoyance connected with these
severed purchases has not been confined to the
Selectors and Homestead Lessees. Many Squatters
have wished to bring their purchased lands together,
finding economy and advantage in so doing ; but the
Ministerial dictum has thwarted their intentions,
although that which they aimed at was distinctly in the
Selectors’ interest as well as for their own benefit.
Section 75 of the Act contains some feeble
provisions which purport to enable the Minister to
accept surrender and effect exchange of purchased
land within Resumed Areas, but these have been
wholly inoperative.
Powerful reasons opposed to all remedial action
influence both Members of the Assembly and
functionaries of the Department, as every successful
-effort in the direction of simplication tends to
diminish the importance of the staff, and also to
deprive Land Agents 111 Parliament of their profits.
This muddle on the Resumed Areas must
become aggravated daily, and no compulsory
legislation can make a way out of it.


That which a man buys legally is his own, and
the right of the Squatter to hold his purchased
land within the Resumed Areas cannot be ques-
tioned ; but, as respects the unpurchased lands within
these Areas, is the matter likely to remain at the
point it has reached ?
Viewing all the manifest objections to things as
they are, and the prospective difficulties of the
position, the Association would earnestly recommend
to all concerned the study of a Scheme of Consoli-
dation which will be found in the Appendix to the
pamphlet.
It is better for the Squatters voluntarily to meet
that which is inevitable in a a spirit of conciliation,
than to allow the natural course of events to inflame
existing causes of dissatisfaction until they find vent
in a new outburst of class-antagonism. Better to
make fair terms of peace than to renew the war.
This, then, is the position of the Resumed Areas
While cut up as they are, it would be absurd
argue as if they were held according to the professed
intent of the Legislature, but if the Squatters agree
to meet the public by proffering a voluntary exchange
or consolidation of their purchased lands, to be
ratified by Parliament, then the Association would
advocate that the grazing charge for the use of the
Resumed Areas should be a nominal rate, in no case
to exceed the rent under the law repealed.


Further, as respects the Western Division, the
Association would feel bound to advocate, in view of
the great difficulties which have been encountered In
reclaiming that Country,that a moiety of the Resumed
Areas only be opened to settlement, and that the
remaining moiety shall remain as a Special Reserve
for the use of the Lessee until the first portion, or
three-fourths of the same, has been taken up in
Homestead Leases.
The division of the Western holdings as already
carried out would stand, but only one-fourth of each
Station would be open for settlement at one time
instead of one-half as at present.
For the Homestead Lessee the Association
claims the very same conditions as for the Pastoral
Lessee of the Western Division, namely,
Twenty Years’ Lease,
Periodical appraisement on sound principles,
And the Tenant-Right under proper conditions.
It is also necessary that the applicant for a
Homestead Lease should be authorised to occupy
the land applied for immediately after his application
has received the prima facie approval of the Land
Board, but at his own risk and subject to the final
survey. It is essential too that upon this approval
being given by the Board, the right of the Licensee


to depasture stock on that portion of the Resumed
area should be at once cancelled.
It has been represented on behalf of the Home-
stead Lessees that the Travelling Stock Routes cover
a considerable portion of their holdings. As there is
seldom any grass on these Stock Routes, though
the Pastoral and Homestead Lessees have both to
pay rent for what is virtually a mere right of scramble,
it has been suggested that all classes of tenants be
for the future charged greatly reduced rent for so
much of their leases as may be covered by the
Stock Routes.
As the Route reserved is generally one mile
wide, it is evident that in a holding of 10,240 acres
the four miles of road intersecting the same would
cover one-fourth of the surface, namely, 2560 acres.
These suggestions are reasonable and will be
supported.
For the Conditional Lessee of the Eastern and
Central Divisions the Association claims the same
concessions as those demanded for the Pastoral and
Homestead Lessees, namely —
A Lease of duration sufficient to warrant the
thorough improvement of the country.
A Periodical Appraisement conducted by the
same method and the same appraisers as


in the cases of the Pastoral and Home-
stead Lessees.
And Tenant-right under the same conditions as
in the case of the other Crown tenants.
The improvements to be appraised should be
•determined by local circumstances, with the view of
enabling the small settler to benefit by his fencing,
clearing, tree-planting, &c.
Further, the Association advocates, in the in-
terest of the Conditional Lessee, that he should
have the option of taking under lease his whole area
of 1280 acres in the Eastern Division and 2560 acres
in the Central, exactly on the same footing as the
Homestead Lessee of the Western Division, without
its being necessary for him to make a Conditional
Purchase.
Also, as in the case of the Homestead Lessee,
the Conditional Lessee should have the right of
occupying the land he has applied for on receiving
tthe prima facie approval of the Land Board, and
the portion of the Resumed Area affected should at
once be withdrawn from License.
Lastly, for groups of Family Selections, and
Conditional Leaseholds, the condition of fencing
might be safely modified so that one ring fence
the group would be sufficient. The sub-
stitution in certain parts of the country of other
improvements in lieu of fencing can be left to the


Local Land Boards, but the principle of fencing must
remain untouched.
The Association will be glad to assist the
Western Associations in bringing in a plan to deal
with the scrub country infested with rabbits. It is the
opinion of many members of the Association that
special legislation is needed for the (< Far West’’ and
that it may be necessary to appoint a Royal
Commission to deal with that country.
Meantime it must be borne in mind that there
are scrubs that can be destroyed by being cut, and
scrubs that can only be eradicated by being grubbed,
a process far too costly to be indulged in on land
that can be used only for grazing purposes.
There is great danger that immense tracts of
country in the west, such as the mallee on which the
scrub cannot be eradicated by cutting, will be
abandoned, as besides being heavily infested with
rabbits it will only carry a sheep to 20 or 30 acres.
It is absolutely necessary that such country shall be
fenced off with rabbit-proof fencing and dealt with
on the system adopted in Victoria and South Aus-
tralia, namely, nominal rental, long lease, and compen-
sation for improvements under stringent conditions
as to rabbit destruction. In the appraisements now
being made, the Rabbit Pest has not been considered,
the matter having been left to be specially dealt
with.


With regard to scrub lands infested with pine,
belar, &c., that can be destroyed by being cut,
instead of issuing Scrub Leases within existing leases,
Land Boards should have power after inspection and
approval to declare, all or a portion of any Pastoral,
Homestead, or Conditional Lease to be Scrub Lands
for which, after rough survey and under stringent
conditions as to scrub and rabbit destruction, the
rent shall be 2s. 6d. per square mile for the term of
the leasehold advocated, viz. : 15 years in the
Central and Eastern, and 20 years in the Western
Divisions. The Land Boards should further be
■empowered to grant extension of lease after this
period to those who satisfactorily fulfil the conditions,
but at an appraised rental.
This the Association considers much better than
issuing Scrub Leases withiiTother Leases, and if this
plan were adopted a very inexpensive process of
Survey would suffice.
The Land Boards should also have power to
•define in each district the scrubs that must be cut and
those that should not be cut, either because they are
•edible or because cutting them causes them to flourish.
On Resumed Areas, Land Boards should have
power to grant Scrub Leases for fifteen years on
similar terms, to any person, except Pastoral Home-
stead or Conditional Leases, their [agents, partners,
or representatives.


The Conditional Lessee should, however, in
addition to any scrub land within his lease, be allowed
to take up scrub land adjoining his holding, to the
extent of say two thousand acres. It has also been
suggested that the Land Boards should have power
in certain cases to allow Occupation Licensees who-
shall have cleared the scrub off their Leaseholds to>
destroy the scrub on the Resumed Areas but without
any claim whatever for tenure, any one subse-
quently taking up such land to pay cost of clearing
to date of application as assessed by the Local
Land Board, in no case such payment to exceed
a certain limit per acre. It is considered that these
provisions will result in the total destruction of the
scrub that can be destroyed by being cut, and that
considerable impetus will be given to rabbit destruc-
tion. Moreover the Association is fully alive to the
absolute necessity of fresh rabbit legislation.
THESE ARE THE AMENDMENTS
which the Association will advocate. They have
been considered and adopted, not in deference to
any class, or to seek favour from either the large
or the small settler. But they commend themselves
to those who have framed them as wholesome and
sound for the country, and fit to jembody in a
National Land Policy.


IX.
MR. COPELAND’S AMENDING LAND BILL.
The Measure of Amendment, proposed by the
Minister for Lands, appeared in print at the time
that the issue of this pamphlet came first under
consideration.
Almostall the points in the Association’s scheme
of Reform now put forward had then been placed
before the public, in the Prospectus and in other
forms, and it was therefore gratifying to the members
to recognise a certain affinity between Mr. Copeland’s
proposals and the policy of the National party.
It was not to be expected that during the first
three months of our existence, the full spirit and
intent of our policy should have permeated Parlia-
ment; or should have been accepted fully even by a
patriotic and upright Minister, but the fact that
the views advocated by the Association have been
recognised and embodied in the measure, even par-
tially, suggests the most hopeful anticipation both
as to the future of our movement and as to
Mr. Copeland’s success as a Minister for Lands.
Still the Amended Bill falls far short of our
scheme of Reform.
Repayment for water improvements upon Pas-
toral and Homestead Leaseholds is provided, if the
same have been constructed after recommendation


by the Land Board, but there is no similar provision
in respect to dams, tanks, and wells now on the
ground, and the principle of limiting the amount of
compensation is not introduced.
Fencing is in no way recognised, and, as we
have already shown, neither grass nor water can be
used to advantage without a good deal of fencing.
In like manner, compensation for buildings and other
permanent works finds no place in the section,
though how stock can be be worked without wool-
sheds, drafting-yards, and dwelling-houses, has not
yet been tried.
A further vital defect blemishes the measure,
in as much as similar terms of compensation have
not been provided for the Conditional Lessee. In
fact, the future of the small settler seems to have
been little studied in this draft Bill, as if it was taken
for granted that he must in due time sell out and
take himself off.
Touching Rents, a reconsideration of all appraise-
ments affecting Pastoral and Homestead Leases is
arranged for, but the objectionable periodical increase
is retained ; the equally objectionable minimum is
still to continue to hold up a false standard and to
hamper fair appraisement, and the ambiguity as to
the mean date of termination” is dealt with in a
way that will not hold water. The Gordian knot is
cut, but the difficulty is not fairly and judicially solved.


We, on the other hand, claim a revisal of rents
with right of appeal in open Court for all Leasehald
and that the contradictory provisions in Section 78
ought to be adjusted in a spirit fair to the tenant.
As in the case of “Tenant-right,” the Con-
ditional Lessee has been left out of consideration in
regard to any revisal of his rent.
The concession of the right to convert land
under the 52nd section is well enough, but it is so
very slight a thing as compared with the Association’s
suggestion of a good long lease with tenant-right, at
a rent periodically appraised, that any selector who
considers the matter can hardly fail to see which is
best for him.
The adoption of the ring-fence for family groups
of selections is a frank recognition of a much-felt
want, and is entirely in favour of sound settlement,
but the substitution of other improvements to the
value of ten shillings for the fences dispensed with
is a very questionable condition. Improvements to
that value would probably be constructed by any
thriving industrious family, as they were required ;
but to impose an arbitrary rule would be exacting
and unwise. Moreover, it would prompt evasion of
the law, and would entail further expensive and
complicated appraisements.
The 36th Section we hail with satisfaction, as
giving effect to the principle which our General


Committee adopted on the i 7th September. Manifest
abuses made this protection to the Homestead Lessee
and Selector necessary, and it is to be hoped that
Parliament will pass the clause without mutilation,
so that applicants may have the privilege of occupying
their holdings without obstruction or delay.
Another important topic that has been brought
before the Association has been dealt with in.
Section 40.
This has no connection with up-country settle-
ment, but it affects some of our most valuable
National lands, the harbour frontages.
The wisdom and patriotism of our early Military
and Naval Governors provided that the frontages to
Port Jackson should be reserved for public purposes.
When Parliamentary Government was inaugurated,,
the appropriation of these Reserves for themselves-
and their friends became a favourite avocation of
the people’s representatives, and some twenty miles'
of this invaluable natural wharfage was sold to-
favoured individuals at ten pounds per acre, which-
they are now retailing at the price of ten pounds per
lineal foot. Section 40 will provide a certain protect
tion against the continuance of this abuse, but people-
best acquainted with the subject say that these
valuable public lands within the Metropolis will not
be safe from peculation as long as they are dealt
with secretly and privately by the Department; and,,


indeed, there seems to be no reason why the Metro-
politan lands should not be dealt with in public by
the Metropolitan Land Board, in the same way as
the country lands are dealt with by the Local Land
Boards.
The changes proposed in the constitution of
the Local Land Boards and the Land Court, as
detailed in Sections 9 and 11, require careful con-
sideration. The Local Boards have proved so worthy
of support that the Association, as a body, would
hesitate before assenting to the dismissal of the
local members, even on the important ground of
economy.
It is to be borne in mind that there are 95 Land
Office Districts, though there are only sixteen Chair-
men. Now, the question is, can the Chairman, in
his own person, exercise full supervision over all the
five or six Land Districts which he visits periodically?
And, necessarily, from the distances and other
circumstances, is it not likely that he must depend
largely upon the local knowledge possessed by the
one or two me'mbers resident in each sub-district ?
In the Act of 1884 a scheme of decentralisation:
and local administration was embodied, and every
day shows that strong influences are at work in the
direction of reaction towards the old method.
Flourishing Parliamentary interests which grew and
’throve upon the abuses of the old centralised system


are represented in the persons of several popular and
able politicians, and they neglect no opportunity
that offers to discredit the new system.
The theory of the reformed policy is that the
■Chairman, with the aid of the Local Board, should
take the Act in his hand and administer it indepen-
dently and in the full light of day and publicity.
The Official and Land Agents’ theory, on the
other hand, is that the Chairman should take his
orders from the Minister like any Government clerk,
and that the Ministerial staff in Bridge Street should
administer the Act secretly and subject to the well
understood rules of Ministerial discretion, with the
back stairs always open to the right sort.
Now, if the reduction of the Boards should in
any way weaken the position of the Chairman,
prejudice his local independent attitude, and bring
him even one step lower in the direction of official
subservience, this Association would advocate the
retention of the members. It is probable that some-
thing may be done by picking out the best men, but
the value of the Boards, as independent tribunals, has
been clearly shown, and they should be strengthened
instead of being weakened.
The reconstruction of the Land Court, on the
other hand, commends itself to us as a most salutary
change. A non-political body, sitting in public,
would in every way be preferable to the Court


as at present constituted. A legal element would
be a desirable addition to the proposed plan, and
the members should not be liable to dismissal at the
caprice of any chance Ministry. The scheme
requires further consideration, but the principle put
forward is a good one.
Since the amended Bill was put before Parlia-
ment, Mr. Copeland has appointed a Board to report
upon the state of the Lands Department with a view
to economy and efficiency. It is to be hoped that
the traditions and etiquette of the Service will not
bar Messrs. Fitzgerald and Houston in their inquisi-
tion. Besides plenty of useless officials, there is a
vast deal of useless work to be got rid of, and we
think this Hydra of officialism can be trampled out
only by increasing the publicity of the administration,
and by further decentralisation.
But the real root of the system is in the
Assembly itself.
Honest, intelligible and economical administra-
tion, such as is to be seen in the Lands Department
of Queensland, would be quite incompatible with
the well-being of dozens of our members. They
could not make a living under such a state of things.
The cure must come from the hustings, for the
influences set in motion there have turned the Lands
Department into an asylum for State pauperism and
imbecility.


X.
THE COMMONWEALTH.
The Association has put forward its political
-creed in plain terms. The good faith of its members
may be questioned certainly, but would such doubt
be reasonable ? The men who have published their
names in the Prospectus have thereby signed a bond
which they can falsify or ignore only at their peril.
No doubt the acceptance of a National land
policy has been an effort to some. Prejudices had
to be got over, and the smarting of supposed injuries
still stung, but a wide view of the general welfare,
and the conviction that self-interest would, in the
■end, be best served by a healing measure, are fast
reconciling old differences.
All reasons tend in the one direction, both
political and social.
How has the amassed capital, the savings of
the country, been for years Invested ? Certainly not
5n works of industry or improvement, but in dead
land purchases.
What has filled our Courts with perjury and
litigation ? The Land Law.
How are our politics corrupted and distorted ?
Why is it that we have neither self-help nor
■economy in our public life ?


Because the huge surplus Land Revenue of
past years was scrambled for by the Electorates, and
profligacy and log-rolling were substituted for these
■essential principles.
These things are so certain that they leave us in
no doubt as to the quarter from which the strongest
■opposition will arise to the proposed Reform, and we
-would end our pamphlet with one word to the electors
of New South Wales.
Beware of politicians who cherish class discords ;
beware of those Members of Assembly who make
their living as land agents ; distrust those who have
no political views of their own, but who can only
defame and slander others.
Join all men who aim at peace, security, and
economy, especially if they can render a reason for
the faith that is in them, and you will do a good
work.
You will help to build up a Commonwealth
of industry, independence, and prosperity, that will
make your memory live among those who come after
you.
Sydney,
December. ISS6.


Commercial, Pastoral & Agricultural Association of N,SI.
Equitable Life Insurance Buildings, 40 Hunter Street.
President —S. A. Joseph—Montetiore, Joseph & Co.
Vice-Presidents —
t, and the President of the ( hamber of Commerce,
Treasurers -
Hon. J. B. Watt, M.L.C. A. C. Garrick,
F. H, Moore—Dalgety & Co., Ltd., and W.A.
The President,
Executive Committee —
Vice-Presidents, and Treasurers (ex-officio)
Armstrong, W. H.—A. Rowan & Co.
Armstrong, A., land agent
Cohen, Geo. —D. Cohen & Co.
Du Faur, E., land agent
Fraser, H. C. —Fraser & Co.
Fetherstonhaugh, C., Goorianawa Station
Cottee—Australian Mortgage, l.and & Finance Co., Ltd..
Hodnett, R., Bourke
Kater, H. E., Moss Vale
I,acker, Hon. John, M.L.C.
Kanken, George—Mayor East St. Leonards
Trebeck, P. N. —Trebeck, Son & Gain
General Committee-
Arthur, John —Cramsie, Bowden & Arthur
Alison, Wm., Cannonbar
Abbot, J. —Mort & Co., Limited
Brock, F. A. —-Young, Brock, McKinnon & Co.
Brooke, Arthur, jun., Tapio, Wentworth
Brunker, J. N. —Brunker & Wolfe
Barker, F. L., Sydney
Badgery, H. S, —Pitt. Son & Badgery
Brown, David, Killara, Tilpa
Beale, C. G., Coonamble
Bacon, A. F. —Bacon & Co., Gunnedah
Bloxham, F. E., auctioneer, stock and station
agent, Bourke
Brooke, T. C. Veronica, E. St. Kilda
Burton, H. —McKellar & Burton, Brewarrina
Broughton, 8., Hillston
Byrnes, W. A., Cootamundra
Carson, W., Sydney
Chisholm, E.— Brown & Co.
Clark, W.—Hill, Clark & Co.
Clark, G. K., land agent
Chalmers, G. C. —Roberts Chalmers & Co.
Cunningham, H. —Aust. Mortgage & Agency Co.
Cox, G. H., Hon., M.L.C.
Cameron, Angus, Moulamein
Crossing, H.
Dean, Alex., Sydney
Dangar, A. A., Dangar Bros.
Dickson, D. P.—Blomfield & Dickson
Doake, G. H., Storekeeper, Wilcannia
Evans, D., Beduba, Nvmagee
Friend, Walter —W S. Friend & Co.
Garnsey, W. K. —Garnsey & Wilcox, Forbes
Geddes, J. H. —Geddes & Co.
Graves, Warden Harry, stock and station agent
Green, VV. J. —Lassetter & Co., Limited
Griffiths, G. N., Sydney
Hayes, C. H., Secretary Exchange Co.
Harrison, H. V., Eden
Hebden, C. S., Wanaaring
Holmes, G. H. — H. H. Brown & Co.
Jamieson, J. S. —Prince Ogg & Co.
Jones, Richard, jun.—Harrison,Jones & Devlin, Ltd,
Kelly, J. E., Trangie
King, Robert—Geo. King & Co.
Keep, John—John Keep & Son
King, P. G., Hon,, M.L.C.
Killen, E., Jerilderie
Leeds, Joseph, Leeds & Suttor
Lang, H. H.—N.Z.Loan SrMercantile Agency Co.
Lamb, J. De V., Sydney
Loughnan, G. N. —McDermott, I.oughnan &Scarr
Lavender, J. —Wilkinson & Lavender, Hay
Maiden, George—Goldsborough & Co.
Mort, Henry, Sydney
Milson, A. G. —Union Mortgage and Agency Co..
Merivale, G. M. —Gibbs, Bright & Co.
Murchison, K., Coonabarabran
McMaster, Duncan, Binnia
McPherson, J. — Holdsworth & McPherson
McAlary, D. j., Emu Park, Tenandra, Warran
McMurtrie, Geo. —McMurtrie, Kellermann & Co.
Newton, John—Christopher, Newton Bros. & Co>.
Norman, C., Walgett
Prosser, E. —Prosser & Co.
Pridham, T., Wellington
Ranken, John —-Wilson & Ranken
Richardson, W. W., Sydney
Robertson, Thos., Sydney
Roxburgh, A. Cobar
Rogers, Patrick, Forest Hill, Wagga Wagga
Ryder, Rupert, Sydney
Shannon A.—Scottish Australian Investment Coi-
Simpson, R. P., Stock & Station Agent
Street, John R., Sydney
Strickland, T. A., Lark, Sons & Co.
Thompson, J. —Thompson & Co.
Vickery, E,, Sydney
Waugh, Harvey, Murilla, Walgett
Westman, W., Pres. Trades & Labour Council 1 .
Whitley, David, Melbourne
Wilson, David —Mason Bros., Limited
Weaver, F. G. —Griffiths & Weaver
Wilson, Alex.—A. Wilson & Co.
Williams, W., Bourke
Wilson, R., Wilson & DeLauret, Dubbo
Wrench, E.—Richardson & Wrench
Wright, J. J., Queanbeyan
Young, John—Mayor of Sydney
With power to add to their number.


Abbot, J.
Armstrong, W. H.
Arthur, J.
Australian Mortgage & Agency Co.
Australian Mortgage L. & F. Co.
Armstrong, A.
Alison, William
Arndell, John
Akhurst and Co.
Alison and Son
Australian Joint Stock Bank
Australasian Mortgage & Agency Co
Ayre, R. M.
Armstrong, J. K.
Armstrong, C. T.
Brunker, J. N.
Beale, C. G.
Bacon, A.
Bloxham, F. E.
Brooke, J. C.
Broughton, B.
Byrnes, W. A.
Bettington, J. B.
Booth, Oakden and Co.
Balcombe, H.
Balcombe, A.
Blackwood, A. R.
Bacon, F. and Co.
Barker, F. L.
Barton, E. H.
Brooke, A. T.
Bucknell Bros.
Brown, Bros.
Brodribb and McPherson
Brown, H. H.
Blaxland, C, C.
Brock, F. A.
Badgery, H. S.
Brown, J. L.
Brown, D.
Baines, H.
Brown, Andrew
Bank of New Zealand
Buckland, T.
Burton, H.
LIST OF MEMBERS.
Burcher & Cox
Baillie, Thos.
Bank of Australasia
Bromfield, W.
Currie, Geo., & Co.
Colwell, Chas.
Clark, G. K.
Commercial Bank
Cohen, G.
Cohen, D.
Dickson, D. P.
Doake, G. H.
De Lauret, J.
Dickson, G. L.
Du Faur, E.
Dangar, W. J. & Co.
Bacon, F. W.
Bank of New South Wales
Bell, R. & P.
Bedford, Armstrong & Co.
Boulton, E. B.
Blomfield & Dickson
Bloxsome, O.
Boyle, R. B.
Broughton, G. A., & Co.
Chalmers, G. C.
Cunningham, H.
Cameron, Angus
Crossing, H.
Chisholm, H.
Cox, Hon. G. H.
Cottee, W. A.
Cramsie, Bowden & Arthur
Carson, W.
Carson, W., junr.
Campbell Brothers
Campbell Bros., Urawilkie
Chisholm, E.
Cope, W.
Clark, W.
Campbell Bros. & Co.
Campbell, S. A.
Cooper, D. & Co.
Gumming, J., junr.


Dangar Bros;
Davis, W.
Dangar, A. A.
Duguid and Co.
Dean, Alex.
Darchy, M.
Dalgety & Co., Limited
Desailly, A., & Co.
Diener, C.
Douglas, H.
Davis, T.
Evans, D.
Elder, David
Edwards, C.
E. S. and A. C. Bank
Everitt, E.
Fleming, G.
Fetherstonhaugh, C.
Feehan, M. J. A.
Feehan, W. J.
Feehan, R.
Firth R. H.
Fanning Bros.
Forster, G.
Feldheim, Gotthelf, & Co.
Fraser, H. C.
Fitzpatrick, Thos.
Friend, W. S. & Co,
Garnsey, G. K.
Geddes, J. H.
Green, W. J.
Griffiths, G. N.
Gardiner, A. D.
Govan, Gilchrist & Co.
Gamson, W.
Goldsborough & Co.
Gibbs, Bright & Co.
Gilchrist, Watt & Co,
Giblin, N. F.
Gatenby, N. A.
Gordon, G. H.
Graves, W. H.
Garrick, A. C.
Govan, J.
Grant & Childe
Goddard, W. C.
Gair, J.
Gurner & Co.
Gilgunnia & Nymagee P. H. L.
Association.
Hayes, C. H.
Harrison, H. V.
Hebden C. S.
Holmes, G. H.
Hodnett, R.
Hunter & Leslie
Hebden, G.
Hope, J. Exors
Hughes, H. B.
Hay, Graves & Taylor
Hill, Henry
Hunt, C.
Harden, Theodore
Holdsworth & M'Pherson
Henderson, J.
Hill, H.
Hunt, Brothers
Horsley & Cox
Horsley & Seaborn
Hope Bros.
Hannah, D.
Henderson, Jno.
Hunt, Thos.
Harrison, Jones, & Devlin
Ilillawa Co.
Joseph, S. A.
Jamieson, J. G.
Jones, R., jun.
Jones, J. W.
Johnston, J. W.
Kelly, J. E.
King, R.
King, Hon. P. G.
Killen, E.
Kennedy, W.
Kennedy, S. J.
Kennedy, W. & E.
Kennedy, R. H.
Keep, John, & Son
Kater, H. E.
Kiddle, W.
King, Geo., & Co.
Lackey, Hon. John
Lamb, J. De V.
Leeds, Joseph
Lang, H. H.
Loughnan G.
Lavender, Jas.
Lakeman, Allan
Leslie, Hunter


Lark, Sons & Co.
Laurence, A.
Landers Brothers
Lang, Mathew, & Co.
Lassetter & Co.
Laidlaw, W. G., & Co.
Lawrence, Jas., & Sons
Martell, C. R.
Milson, A. G.
Merivale, G. M.
McPherson, J.
McMurtrie, G.
McCallum Bros. & Co.
McDonald, A.
McDonald, H.
Murray, Andrew
Manchee, C.
McAlary, D. J.
Moore, F. H.
Maiden, G.
M'Kinnon, Dill, & Co.
Moomba Co.
Mount Gipps Co.
Manchie, J. C.
Morrison, R. H. M.
Murchison, K.
Mackay, J. D.
Mason Brothers
Mort, Henry
Mort & Co.
Mack, A.
Murch, J.
Mercantile Bank of Sydney
Macgregor, W., & Co.
Moss & Fergie
Macpherson, P., & Co.
Moore, R. S.
Macpherson, D., & Co.
Mackenzie, W. H.
Mitchell, James
Munro, A. G. F.
M‘Master, D.
Munro, H. R.
M'Dermott, Loughnan, & Scarr
M'Murtrie, Kellerman, & Co.
M'Queen & Co., A.
M'Queen, A.
M'Farland, T. M. C.
M'Farland, R. & A.
Mein, G. A. P.
Moore, Dorwood, & Co.
Newton, John
Norman, C.
Nail and Irving
New Zealand L. & M. A. Co.
Newton, C.
New Zealand & Australian Land Co
Newcomen, Hy. (Estate of)
Oakden & Booth
Oakden, P.
Officer, C. S.
Prosser, E.
Patterson, Harvey
Parsons & Co.
Prince, Ogg. & Co.
Parker, F. L.
Pring, J.
Palmer Brothers & Co.
Parnell, T.
Peele, Borodaile, & Co.
Peacock, W.
Peacock, J.
Pearson Bros.
Penny, R.
Pitt, Son, & Badgery
Ryder H.
Richardson, W. W.
Robertson, Thos.
Roxburgh, A.
Rogers, P.
Ryder G.
Ryder, R.
Ryder, T. K.
Ryder, C.
Roberts, Chalmers & Co.
Rodier & Shaw
Reid, W. L.
Ranken, John
Robson, Whitely, & Co.
Ranken, G.
Richardson & Wrench
Read & Evans
Rowan, A., & Co.
Reid, J.
Riddock, G. & J.
Ronald, Wm., & Co.
Richmond, Jas.
Ricketson, H. T.
Rouse, G.
Ridge, R.


Shannon, A.
Simson, R. P.
Street, J. R.
Seller, R.
Shepherd, Isaac
Splatt, L. A.
Stirling, Hart & Co.
Scott, C., & Co,
Suckling, J. L.
Scott & Co.
Sawers, W.
Sharpe, J. B.
Sharpe, Henry
Smith, J. R.
Strickland, T. A.
Scottish Aust. In. Co.
Senior, F.
Stanbridge, Meares, & Waugh
Sproule, Robert
Shaw & Davis
Seward, J.
Scott, J., & Co.
Scott, John, & Co.
Suttor, H. C.
Thompson, J.
Traquair, G. E.
Tindall, C. F.
Trebeck, P. N.
Trebeck, P. C.
Turner & Henderson
Tully, Armstrong, & Co.
Tully, Walter, & Co.
Tully, R., & Co.
Union Mortgage & A. Co.
Vickery, E. & Son
Waugh, Harvey
Westman, W.
Whitely, D.
Wilson, R.
Wrench, E.
Wright, J. J.
Warden C. F.
Winter, Irving
Wiseman, A. D.
Waddell, Thos.
Watton, H. F.
Westby, E. & A.
Watt, Hon. J. B.
Wilson, D.
Waugh, & Sons
Webb, R. 0.
Whittingham Bros.
Wilson, J.
Weaver, F. G.
Wilson, A.
Williams, F.
Wilson, A. & Co.
Whittingham & Co.
Wynne, Hudson, & Co
Wilson, W.
Walker Bros.
Waite Thos.
Wilson & Dougharty
Westby, A. A.
Williams, W.
Wilson, James
Young, J.


PROSPECTUS.
COMMERCIAL, PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL
ASSOCIATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1. —lt is beyond controversy that the Colony of New South Wales is
suffering from general depression in nearly every trade and industry within
its borders ; that, there is much want amongst the working classes, in the
country districts, and the number of unemployed is daily increasing, with
the probability that there will be a large influx of surplus labor in the
metropolis so soon as shearing operations are finished.
2. —This association has been formed with the object of endeavoring
to remedy so unsatisfactory a condition of affairs.
3. —Notwithstanding the termination of the long-continued and disas-
trous drought, and the upward tendency of our staple product, the best
informed on these matters are convinced that, unless certain amendments in
the Land Act are effected, the Pastoral Industry, as a whole, can neither
recover its lost position nor afford that employment to labour and capital,
and the consequent stimulus to trade which is so necessary to the welfare of
the community, and there is a remarkable unanimity of opinion
“throughout the country that one of the most potent and active causes
of the present depression is the unsuitability and unfair incidence of
some of the provisions of the Land Act of 1884 which directly affect the
.great Pastoral Industry of the country as represented by the several classes
of Crown Tenants.
4. —The chief object of this Association will be to devote its energies
to the speedy and satisfactory settlement of the Land Question on National
lines calculated to benefit all classes.
5. —The Association will take great care that due regard be alike paid
to the interests of Conditional purchasers and Crown Tenants, viz., Pas-
toral Lessees, Conditional Lessees and Homestead Lessees.
6. —The Association will urge upon the Government to introduce this
Session an Amending Act for dealing with the following most important
-questions :
(a) Abolition of the minimum rent, and adoption of such method
of determining the rents as shall ensure fair rentals with
right of appeal for all classes of Crown Tenants against
excessive rates.
( b ) Existing improvements and improvements that may be subse-
quently made with the concurrence of the Local Land
Board, to be paid for to the outgoing tenant by the incoming
tenant, and in no case shall such payment exceed a limit
of so much per acre or per sheep to be defined in the
Amending Land Act and that this shall apply to all
classes of Crown Tenants.
(c) Amendments of the clauses and regulations relating to scrub
leases.
( d) Special legislation as regards the rabbit pest.
( e) Amendment of the Act with regard to the proposed change
of rent in the Western Division prior to the expiration
of the mean date of determination of the old leases.
(/) Also dealing with amendments of the 52nd clause, required
by Conditional Purchasers and Lessees, giving holders of


Conditional Leases under it the same rights as leaseholders
under the 48th and other Clauses, subject to the same
conditions except that of residence.
(«•) Amendments in the fencing clause, which, while leaving the
principle of fencing untouched will meet the requirements
of Conditional Purchasers and Lessees.
(li) This Association pledges itself to advocate in the amended
Land Act that applicants for Homestead Leases or Condi-
tional Purchases within Resumed Areas be authorised to
occupy the land as soon as the Local Land Board shall
have approved of their applications.
(i) That upon application by parties interested, Local Land Boards
shall have power to regulate the number of stock to be
depastured by the respective occupants of that land within
Resumed Areas under whatever tenure held.
(/) That on the payment of costs of survey by the applicant Con-
ditional Leases may be taken up in the Eastern and Central
Divisions without the necessity of the applicant holding
any Conditional Purchasers provided by the present Land Act.
(£) And such other amendments desired by the Conditional Pur-
chasers’ and Lessees’ Associations as are fair and just.
7- The Association is altogether opposed to anything in the shape of
class legislation. It desires that justice shall be done to all, and it main-
tains that the amendments asked for will be of National benefit, and will
assist to raise the colony out of its present depression.
g. Anyone wishing to join may become a member on payment to the
Treasurers or Secretary of the annual subscription of One Guinea. _
g_ This Association solicits the co-operation of Kindred Associations-
throughout the Colony ; and, with a view of ensuring unanimity of action,
each local Association may nominate a member of the General Committee.
Entrance Fee, One Guinea. Any member of any Kindred Association
paying an annual subscription of not less than One Guinea to such Associa-
tion may become a member of this Association by making an annual
payment of Five Shillings.
IO ,—A Petition for presentation to Parliament, urging immediate
amendment of the Land Act, has been forwarded to the principal centres of
population for signature.
CORRESPONDENCE.
THE MINIMUM RENTAL.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Sir,— Mr. Copeland’s amended Land Bill does not abolish the minimum
rental, and lest the reason for its removal may not be quite clear to all your
readers, I will try and show how it at once clogs the whole machinery of
fixing rents, and how it completely ties the hands of the Land Boards.
The mode of procedure is as follows A Government appraiser
inspects a pastoral homestead or conditional lease and arrives at an estimate
of the carrying capacity; his evidence, together with any evidence which
the lessees may produce, is given on oath in open court before the Land Board.
Let us suppose that the evidence points to one conclusion, namely,
that the area being appraised is not worth the minimum rental; the Land
Board in defiance of evidence have but one course open to them, and


that is to recommend the minimum rent to the Minister, thereby forcing
the lessee at considerable expense to appeal, for obviously the verdict of
the court is not based upon facts.
Another reason why the minimum rent should be abolished is that it
must establish in the minds of the Land Boards a fictitious standard of
value, for it fixes the value of the worst lands at the minimum, and there-
fore all lands except the worst must be recommended above the minimum.
The process is just upon a par with the following illustration. Let us
imagine the owner of an estate sending to a competent valuator and saying,
“ I am about to let my estate, and I wish you to make all inquiries and tell
me the yearly rent I should receive for it; but bear in mind you must not
recommend me to take less than so F-'.uch per acre.”
Surely the rent of each holding should be decided upon its merits.
The increase of rent every five years is another question demanding
consideration, and for this a fresh appraisement should be substituted.
There need be no further expense, the same evidence might be used as to
carrying capacity, and their prices of wool, tallow, &c., might form the
basis of a new rental. If there were any reason for assuming that the leases
will be more valuable in five years, there would be no objection to the
increase. But, looking back, we find that five years ago the profits from
the land were greater, and ten years ago they were still greater than they
are now; and the reason is not far to seek, for prices of our exports were
higher, and Queensland was a market for our surplus stock, whereas now
Homebush, at reduced prices, is our only outlet.
Yours, &c.,
H. E. Kater.
Mount Broughton, Moss Vale, sth November.
THE LAND CRUSADE.
RENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Sir, —“Saltbush’s” vigorous, trenchant and indeed pathetic letter is
in no way second to Mr. W. E. Abbott’s eloquent letters on the calamitous
position the Western men occupy and the Crown Lands Act of 1884.
Allow me now to supplement “Saltbush’s” letter with some particulars,
which, though more prosaic, will, I think, enable business men to form a
correct judgement of the case.
This matter lies in a nutshell. It was thought when passing the Act
of 1884 that the tenure provided was sufficiently liberal to enable Crown
tenants to make a sinking fund, and during its currency to cover cost of im-
provements. My table of comparative rent shows that the interest on cost
added to cost of improvements on country requiring 9 acres to feed
a sheep—viz., ly^d,—comes without charging any rent at all, to qd.
a sheep more than what is a fair agistment, viz., 1 Any State school
scholar can show that unless payment for improvements be allowed a tenure
must be given nearly as long as the colony as been in existence.
The fair average annual rental of Crown lands, originally dry but now
improved, is exercising the minds of a good many. Starting on the
assumption that the poorest lands are worth only a nominal rental, I some
time since came to the conclusion that originally dry Crown lands are


worth an annual rental of from 2d. to gd. per sheep, the latter amount,
being, I consider, a fair rental for country which will feed one sheep to the
acre, and which will necessarily be situated at no great distance from rail
way communication in a district where there would be a fair rainfall. I
also took the rent paid for church and school lands as in some measure a
guide to what should be a fair rent for Crown lands. These lands are for
the most part, though not high class, situated near railways in districts-
favored with a good rainfall, and are let at from 6d. to rod. an acre. I find
also that in such a district as Albury, where the rainfall is about 26 inches,
land wh»ch will carry one sheep to the acre is readily rented at 3s. per
acre. Here is a standard. But to ask men who can let their land at
g6d. per acre, and even higher, to believe that one farthing an acre is a
fair rent for country which, though requiring 10 acres to feed a sheep, is
thoroughly good, sound, wool-producing and fattening country, seems like
trying to impose upon their credulity.
Nevertheless, I can show conclusively that the man who pays the36d. an
acre for highly improved freehold land in a good climate and near a railway
receives a better return than he who pays only a farthing an acre for Crown
lands improved at great cost, in an arid climate subject to great droughts
and at a distance from a railway, and that the only way to bring the two
graziers together is to give the latter a long tenure, and payment or tenant
right for improvements. This is freely recognized in the neighboring
colony of South Australia, where the lessee of country in class C, corres-
ponding to our western country, has a 28 years’ lease with a payment for
water improvements at the end of the lease. The rent is 2s. 6d. per square
mile, and 2d. per sheep for the first 14 years, and double for the second 14.
The State can resume the land at any time for agricultural or special
purpose, by giving three years’ notice, and in such cases all improvements
are paid for by the State. As in such country agriculture is not possible
under existing circumstances, resumption cannot take place.
A line on the map divides our western lands from South Australia; the
country is similar on each side of the line. But, whereas the South
Australian Crown tenant may hope to make a profit out of his tenure, our
men must be ruined unless justice is done them. Why, then, not put them
on as good terms as their neighbours.
That which makes dry outside country dearer at £d. an acre than
inside highly improved country at g6d. an acre is chiefly the immense cost
and difficulty of improving the former. The inside man has to invest no
capital beyond that necessary to stock the country he rents ; he has no
interest to pay on cost of improvements, no sinking fund to make to cover
the cost and the amount paid as premium for the country. He is working
his sheep in a good climate, with an ample rainfall, at less expense
in carriage and management, and where the return in wool and from sale of
sheep is much larger. The outside man has to expend enormous sums in
improvements, waiting sometimes years before his costly dams and tanks are
filled. Interest on cost of these improvements increases his rent by about
fd. a head for each additional acre required to feed a sheep; carriage is a
heavy item; his wool returns him quite is. a fleece less than if grown inside,
and distance from market reduces the price realised on sheep. It is absolutely
certain that unless payment for improvements be allowed to occupiers of
country which can only be used after the the expenditure of large sums, ruin
must overtake them and the depression all classes are laboring under will
increase:—


TABLE OF COMPARATIVE RENT FOR
DRY COUNTRY.
Acreage
Required to
Carry
One Sheep'
Cost of
Improvements
per Sheep.
Interest, ai 74 per
cent., on Cost of
Improvements,
Assessments
Sheep, Rabbit,
&c.
Rent per Sheep
Total Rent in-
cluding Int. on
cost of improve-
ments.
Add Sinking
Fund to Cover
Cost of Improve-
ments.
Length of lease.
Totals— Rents
Int. on Cost of
Impr’m’ts, As-
sessment, Sink-
ing Fund— per
Sheep.
One Acre ...
s. d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
Yrs.
d
5 0
44
1
9
144
4
15
184*
Two „ ...
5 10
54
1
84
74
144
5
15
194
Three „ ...
6 8
6
1
144
6
15
204
Four „ ...
7 6
6|
1
6|
144
44
20
19
Five ,, ...
8 4
74
1
6
144
5
20
194
Six ,, ...
9 2
84
1
54
144
54
20
20
Seven ,. ...
10 0
9
1
44
14|
6
20
20 5
Eight „ ...
10 10
9|
1
3f
144
64
20
21
Nine ,, ...
11 8
104
1
3
144
7
20
21i
Ten ,, ...j
12 6
114
1
24
144
74
20
22
The Sinking Fund is calculated on
the presumption that the five years
lease provided for by the Act will not be interfered with. Doubtless some ot
the Central and Eastern Divisions will take more than three
rule three acres will suffice.
acres to feed a sheep, but as a
The above table shows conclusively that as the cost of improving land
increases so the rent charged should decrease, and I trust
considered in fixing rents.
this will be duly
TABLE OF COMPARATIVE RENT
The greater the acreage required to feed a sheep the greater will be the
cost of improvement per sheep, and interest on this cost must be reckoned
as so much more rent. Dry country that will carry a sheep to the acre can
be well improved at a cost of ss. a sheep, interest on this, viz., 4|d., added
to yd., the amount we have taken as a fair rent for such country, gives 133 d.
as a fair rate of adjustment and a standard to work from.
Now, take country requiring nine acres to feed a sheep. To improve
such country will involve £4lOO for each block of 64,000 acres, or ns. Bd.
a sheep (more is generally allowed for cost of improving 64,000 acres).
Interest on this at y\ per cent, comes to io|d. The rent, therefore, must
be reduced by the difference between the relative cost of improvements,
which in this case is 6d. The rent, therefore, of the lessee of the nine acre
country must be reduced to 3d. per sheep; this amount added to the
for interest brings the rent of the nine acre man to a level with that of the
one acre lessee. Then comes the necessity for payment for improvements,
for if this be not granted a, sum to make a sinking fund to cover cost of
improvements must be added and reckoned as so much more rent. This
sum in the case of the one-acre man will be 4d. a sheep, while the nine-acre
man will have to provide an annual amount of yd a sheep.
The difference, 3d., must come off the rent he pays the State, so that
to bring the two men together the 9 acre to the sheep lessee can pay the
State no rent at all.
So great is the difference that, as I show below, the inside grazier on
improved freehold land, while paying a rent of 36d. per sheep, can calculate
almost certainly on a profit of 2s. 6d. per sheep, the unfortunate occupier of
outside Crown lands which he has to improve at great outlay, may, if the
inevitable droughts are not too severe, make a profit of yd. a sheep.'
In rabbit country this problematical yd. will be absorbed in rabbit
destruction and interst on cost of rabbit fencing—leaving the unfortunate
pioneer absoutely nothing, not even interest on outlay! My estimate of


returns and expenditure are carefully calculated, and I know that few
Western runs return up to my estimate. I asked a friend on whom I can
thoroughly rely for returns of the working of his run in the “ Far West,”
which he has held for six years. It is an exceptionally good run, requiring
only six acres to feed a sheep; he has had not much loss; the last two
seasons have been very good ; he has first-class sheep and is an economical
manager, and the run is fairly, but by no means heavily improved. The
result is, if he sold to-day even at a high valuation, he would after his six
years’ hard work not only have received no interest on his capital, but he
would lose of it. Now, what must be the position of men occupy-
ing inferior country, whose losses in stock have been greater ?
Here is another run ; it cost £j6,000 for 9,000 sheep 13 years ago. At
present there are on the run 33,000 sheep ; 5,800 acres of land have been
purchased to secure improvements, and { 33,000 have been expended in
improvements. The run will carry about 60,000 sheep, and it stands the
owners in £97,500. If this property were sold to-day, with wool at good
value, and in a magnificent season, the owners would lose at least ,£50,000.
It may be said that those who are bold enough to occupy and improve
such country should have it free of rent for a term of years. That reclaim-
ing waste land and making it produce wool and meat, involving employment
of labour, encouragement to trade, and consumption of dutiable articles,
thus adding to the revenue, is enough return to the State for the use of
such lands, but if the tenant will pay one-third of a penny an acre on con-
dition that the man who succeeds him pays a fair value for necessary
improvements, will not this be much better for all concerned ?
In this case the country will be well improved, the improvements will
be kept in repair up to the last day of the lease, the State will have a
property in good order to relet, and the incoming tenant instead of coming"
into a property with tumble-down fences and silted tanks, will be glad to
pay a fair price for improvements in such repair as to enable him at once to
profitably use the land.
In considering this question, we must not forget that the state of our
finances, together with the falling off in our imports and the depression in
trade and labour, have not a little alarmed those in the old country on whom
we depend. If the home capitalists cut off our supplies, ruin swift and sure
will overtake us. It therefore behoves our legislators at this critical period
in the history of our colony to deal with the question affecting that industry
in which a large amount of English capital is engaged in a broad and
statesmanlike manner and from a national point of view.
I quote a friend —“ Once confidence is destroyed it will take many
years to re-establish it with a cautious and slow-acting people like the
English.” It is to be hoped that such wise and beneficial legislation will be
enacted as will prevent the otherwise inevitable ruin of men who during the
last 15 years have reclaimed immense areas of waste lands, making them
reproductive by means of costly improvements, which improvements have
through want of knowledge, been unjustly and unwisely confiscated.
Yours, &c.,
CUTHBERT FeTHERSTONHAUGH.
Commercial, Pastoral, and Agricultural Association.
October, 1886.


COMPARISON.
i. Return from well-improved freehold country, carrying one sheep to
the acre, good rainfall, carriage about £j to £3 10s. per ton, rent 36d.
per acre :
Six and a half pounds wool at lOd. per lb. for fleece, and 7d. per lb for pieces d "
d. per lb. for bellies, 2d. per lb for locks in Sydney | .58
Returns from sales of fat sheep or stores, allowing 75 per cent, for increase and
’.7s. for net sales _ 04,
Gross return __
Cost of Production.
Rent
•Carriage at £3 to £3 10s [ 'oi
Rams—annual Cost , *
ixcirns annual ... ... , tt iti
Assessments—rabbits, &c.
Expenses of management g
Shearing, pressing, packing 4
Total cost of production ... 53
Leaving nett profit per sheep of 29
Occasional dry seasons might reduce the profits by having to keep
fewer sheep, but no losses need ever occur.
2. Return from Crown Lands originally dry but now well improved
and requiring 9a. to carry a sheep. Rainfall small and uncertain. Rent
3d. per sheep. Carriage £g a ton. Lease, 20 years.
61b. wool at 9d. per lb. in Sydney for fleece, and 6d. per lb. for pieces, 4Jd. per lb.
for bellies, 2d. per lb. for locks 4g
Sales of sheep at 6s. nett and allowing an increase of 70 per cent, upon about
2-sth of the whole flock 20
Gross returns gg
Supposing there are no droughts, but as during the last 20 years there have been
8 years of severe droughts, we must allow at least one year in four to give no return,
and this reduces the average annual return to " 50
Cost of Production.
Rent, 3d.; interest on cost of improvements, assessments, Id.; manage-
ment, 9d.; shearing, pressing, &c., 5d.; carriage, 6d.; rams, l|d 36
Add sinking fund to cover cost of pioneering and stocking, or of premium of sav
£l5OO for each 64,000 a 2
Add sinking fund to cover improvements 7
Total cost of production 45
Leaving the lessee sd. per sheep profit, but that would be more than absorbed by the
-cost of destroying rabbits and scrub. 50d. is over the average gross return from a run
requiring so much land as 9 a. to a sheep. C. F.


CONSOLIDATION OF STATION PURCHASES.
The sketch herewith illustrates a proposed scheme of consolidation. The-
lower diagram represents a station in the Central District, secured in the
usual way by purchase. The division of the run under the Act of 1884
leaves the lessee’s purchase equally distributed on both sides of the line.
The Resumed Area was supposed to be thoroughly protected against selec-
tion ; but, practically, it is found that every available opening tempts the
conditional purchaser to try and secure a conditional lease, while the retention
of these severed portions entails a considerable annoyance and expense to
the squatter.
On the other hand, from the selector’s point of view, the resumed area
is so spoiled as to make it difficult for him to get what he wants.
In short, both classes have found out that the Resumed Areas have
been so mangled that neither one nor the other can get any good of them.
At present this area presents an example of a true dog-in-the-manger policy.
Neither claimant can eat, nor will he allow the other to eat, and the
ground is wasted rather than used.
On national grounds, the consolidation represented by the upper diagram
is recommended.
The yellow portion shows the several purchases in the lower plan lumped
together in the form of a freehold estate of 35,000 acres, and the remainder
of the run, the Crown Lands unsold, is divided into two equal portions of
50,000 acres, the blue area being a leasehold for twenty years, with tenant-
right interest in improvements, and the green a Resumed Area clear of all
competing interests.
By adopting this arrangement the following advantages would be
secured: —
1. The squatter would hold a compact, unsevered property, much
more cheaply and easily managed than formerly. On the
freehold portion especially he would have an opportunity
for carrying out works of water conservation and other
important schemes which he cannot command now, and
could not undertake in other circumstances.
2. The property shown by the yellow and blue would be much more
saleable than that shown in the lower sketch. Consequently
it would provide a much better financing security.
3. The advantage to the selector would be obvious. Instead of
trying to pick his conditional purchase and leasehold from
a chaos of purchases made in defence of the run, he would
have an area of 50,000 acres open to his choice under the
protection of the Local Land Board.
4. One immense advantage would follow this arrangement if made-
the basis of our reformed land policy. This advantage
would not specially affect either squatters or selectors, but
it would be of overwhelming moment to the people of New
South Wales. The consolidation of these scattered lots
would involve the wiping out of one-half of the arrears of
work now clogging the Lands Department; simplicity and
intelligibility in future administration would be possible;
one-half of the staff might be dispensed with, and an
immense annual expenditure would be saved to the colony.


''arch i Lan
easehoid
burned /
Total A
Scatle/ec
$ 3 $ <0






MEMBERSHIP !
ONE GUINEA PER ANNUM.
FOR MEMBERS OF KINDRED ASSOCIATIONS,
FIVE SHILLINGS PER ANNUM.
Offices of the Association ;
40 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY,
New South Wales.
