

i
■■ t
t
■ * -
Cl A


■: ■: .
/ .
-
"'rv'
fe.
J
I' ■
-
'
ft''
■1-
•ffr '■
W'-i ■
•.r
>'■- -I-' ■*
u,
--
/ Ji#
.^'C:
i. Ji
%■ '
,
■f- ■ ' ' - .1- I
- 'i
f ' ~ -V . i' ’
' ; ;.. ' *' '’' ' '
■-- -■-


THE CASE
O’" FREDEIUCK BEER
MITH A
COMMENT AND NOTES,
J. SHERIDAN
Principal of HantiinifK
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AT THE - ” ” PRINTING OFFICE,
109, YOKK STREET.
1 86 8.


The writer in order to get at the truth, and the whole truth
traced the case from its very origin—traced it from cause to effect
and from effect to cause through the severest logical process of
which he was capable--tried hard to find a weak link in Dr.
Beer’s chain of defence—even a possibility of his guilt, drawn
from his general character and the story of his life as revealed
in the evidence. He acknowledges, as the result of his patient
and protracted inquiry, his conviction of Dr. Beer’s thorough
innocence and his certainty that the sanctity of justice has been
basely violated—most foully desecrated—in the name and under
the sanction of Law. All this will be demonstrated —every mate-
rial fact being substantiated by sworn testimony —in the following
pages. More than this, when he found that the dead body of
one of the chief witnesses against Dr. Beer—that of the woman
Brown, who died in June last—furnished equally positive testi-
mony of her perjury,* of the soundness of Dr. Beer’s treatment
and of the utter worthlessness of the Medical evidence against
him, he felt not only more fully convinced of the truth of his
previous conclusion, but experienced an absolute certainty of Dr.
Beer’s innocence, and a moral responsibility of putting the proofs
of that innocence before the public.
The case naturally resolved itself, when under investigation,
into the following points of consideration :
1. The early connection of Dr. Beer with the Browns —their
antecedents and his.
2. The facts in reference to the Insurances —actual or attempted
—of the life of the woman Brown.
3. The charge on which Dr. Beer was arrested and committed
for trial.
*See Dr. Anderson’s Certificate of her post-mortem examination, Ap-
pendix B.


4. The trial itself and all its surroundings, particularly the cha-
racter of the medical evidence given.
5. The treatment of Dr. Beer after the Judge who tried him,
the Jury before whom he was tried, and a Select Committee
of the Legislature had substantially pronounced his inno-
cence.
6. The present refusal of those in power not only to do him
justice, but even to listen to his cry for justice.
On these several points the premises of a just conclusion are
laid down in the following pages. They will prove Dr. Beer’s
innocence in .thought, word, and deed, of the crime with which
he was charged; they will prove his sufferings and unmerited
dishonour in a manner which, if there is a sense of British fair-
play in the community, must lead to a complete vindication of
his character and some indemnification for the temporary dis-
honour done to it. It would be an insult to the intelligence of
the people—a national participation in a public crime—a base
violation of eternal justice—a houndish servility to those in
power—a violation of the Kedeemer’s Commandments of Bro-
therly Love—to allow a man, whose innocence is demonstrated, to
walk under the slightest shadow of that cloud of infamy, which
prejudice, perjury, perversion of law and equity, and mad pro-
fessional jealousy flung over it more than twelve years ago.
“Advance, Australia” is a good motto! Yes, “Advance, Aus-
tralia” in the path of true moral progress, which also leads to
the pleasant ways of national greatness, by righting the wronged
and resisting the oppressor.
J. S. M.
Sydney, August 20th, 1868.


THE CASE OF DR. FREDERICK BEER.
One of tlie most remarkable, and at the same time one of the
most painful, stories that has occurred in these colonies is that of
Or. F. Beer. The loss of twelve years is a long period in the life
of any man, in the intercourse of his fellow-man, even if this
loss is occasioned by sickness or voluntary seclusion. But the
case is far harder when the law has been the unjust cause of his
sufferings, and has robbed its victim not only of his liberty, but
of his reputation and honour. Twelve years have elapsed since
Or. Beer was convicted of a crime which could only exist in the
imagination of his accusers; and he now comes forward to prove
that innocence which, as he declares, he was not allowed to vindi-
cate at the time, and to bring a righteous retribution upon those
who perverted justice to their own malignant ends. Very painful
indeed is this story; especially as long disgrace and punish-
ment have fallen on the head of the victim whose only fault
was his great generosity towards his accusers.* Indicted upon
a charge which carries its own absurdity upon the face of it;
accused by testimony directly opposed to the highest authori-
ties and experience; condemned upon a supposition which should
of itself have been sufficient to obtain an acquittal, and silenced
by a judge having an interest in the event —even were this all.
Dr, Beer would have no small claim upon justice and upon
society. But this by no means embraces the whole state of the
case. During the dreary period of his punishment, he has spared
no pains to obtain that full inquiry, the denial of which when he
*See the evidence of the woman Brown She swears that Dr.
Beer befriended her—that his treatment relieved her—that the worst
symptoms of her disease developed themselves through neglecting his
advice—that he promised to watch her case, even after he had quarelled
with her husband. Strange as it may appear, Dr. Beer’s misfortunes
seem to be the consequences of an impulsive and ill-placed generosity.
6


was tried for his life forms, if it indeed be true, one of the most
monstrous cases in British jurisprudence.* And what has been
the result ? The highest Medical authorities have declared his
innocence. The Judge who tried him- has declared his innocence.
The Jury who condemned him have declared his innocence. The
Committee of the Legislature who examined him have declared
his innocence.f All this was done years ago, and yet in the face
of all this he has been left to work out the full sentence of the
Court, and even now to bear upon him the stigma of infamy on
account of a ciime which it is acknowledged by all, enemies as
well as friends, he not only never committed, but which never
possibly could have been committed.:|: Such cases are happily
rare, but when they do unfortunately occur they call for the
utmost vigilance on the part of the Press and the Public.
*Dr. Beer’s cry for justice runs through a series of letters, petitions,
appeals, &c,, too voluminous to reproduce. We give, however, a few of
them in Appendix A., in the following order;—
1. His first letter after conviction.
2. His petition to Sir William Denison,
3. His petition to Judge Therry.
4. His application to have his case brought under the Executive Council.
5. The petition to the Legislative Assembly of 1004 inhabitants of Braid-
wood entreating investigation.
His efforts through the Press are too numei’ous to be even summarized.
The fact is, he has evidently consecrated the remainder of his life to the
vindication of his character.
tThe conclusion at which that Committee arrived is given in Appendix C.
iThe language of the hostile Judge, and the more inveterate ly hostile
Herald, pi'oves that the crime of which Dr. Beer was convicted exceeded the
bounds of moral possibility. The Judge’s opinion:—His Honor said the
issue they were trying was as to whether there was an intent to poison,
and not whether the prisoner failed in giving poison to procure abortion.
it
The jury, he added, had taken a most humane and merciful view of his
case; for had they found him guilty of the charge in the second count, he
(prisoner) would stand in a very different position from the one he then
occupied.—Report of the Sydney Morning Herald, Monday, April 14th, 1856.
In the Herald of Tuesday, April loth, 1855, a few days after Dr. Beer
had received his sentence, the Editor writes :—The jury have pronounced
a verdict, and that verdict condemns the accused. It is impossible
not to find that, if the jury have not erred in their judgment, the
criminal has heen treated with a leniency wholly undeserved. * * *
* * * If Dr. Beer had no desis:n on the life of the mother, there cannot
be the smallest reason to suspect him of maliciously compassing the death
7


The facts of this cause celehre are as follows:—In the year
a young Swiss Doctor of the Zurich University came to establish
himseif in Sydney. He was but imperfectly acquainted with
our language and possessed of few friends and no interest. One
of his drst patients was a Mrs. Brown, who had been attended
for some time by Dr. Salter for supposed cancer, and was the wife
of a Tidewaiter in the Custom House. Isolated in position and
ignorant of the peculiarities of the Colony, it was impossible for
the young Swiss to suspect (what he afterwards learned too late)
the antecedents of this Officer in Her Majesty’s Service and his
wife, and to refuse the only friendship which was proffered to
the stranger. Utterly depraved in morals, Mr. and Mrs. Brown
appear to have possessed, as is sometimes the case, much kind-
ness of heart; and when Dr. Beer fell into pecuniary difficulties
assisted him out of them at no little coat to themselves. Influ-
enced therefore by strong feelings of gratitude, Dr. Beer
bethought himself of some way in which he could return the
kindness shown him by the family. Now, during the intimacy
which had sprung between the Dr. and Mrs. and Mr. Brown,
of the child. * * * We say at once that if there can he any
doubt that he intended to kill the mother, to just the same extent is there
good ground for doubting that he acted in bad faith and with malice in his
endeavours to destroy the child. If he did not mean the death of Mrs.
Brown, all the evidence on the Insurance was irrelevant. All the conver-
sations about the policy, the false certificates, and the threats of exposure,
which were submitted to the jury, were beside the question. If Dr. Beer
did not mean to kill the mother there is not the smallest reason to imagine
that he acted in bad faith. ****** If the case were stripped
of all the facts which relate to the insurances, as is done by the verdict,
we could have no hesitation of acquitting Dr. Beer of the charge alto-
gether. The motive for the crime is taken away. ****** A
Welsh jury brought in a verdict of manslaughter against a man for stealing
in a dwelling-house a pair of breeches, when that offence was punishable
with death! The present case is not quite as absurd, but certainly if Dr.
Beer did not intend to kill the mother, there is no imaginable reason for
thinking that in any criminal sense he sought the destruction of the child.
•In this aspect of the case it may be the duty of the Executive to deter-
mine, whether a verdict of not guilty, on the second count, is not in fact
an acquittal on the first—whether a jury which has acquitted Dr. Beer of
designs on the mother had any evidence to convict him of a minor charge
—whether in short they were not led to infer malice, wholly and solely,
from the present mass of startling facts which were accumulated round
the Insurance papers, but which the verdict has totally set aside. « * *
* * * Either Dr. Beer deserves the severest penalty the law allows, or
he is an innocent man; and we regret that the jury did not acquit him
rather than ignore the only evidence on which guilt could be assumed at all.


the real character of the latter had begun to betray itself; and the
former saw that in the event of Mrs. Brown’s death, no care would
be taken of her unfortunate family. Influenced, therefore, by strong
motives of gratitude, he determined that the benefits of the father
should be repaid to the children, urged upon Mrs. Brown the
advantage of insuring her life in their favour, and in order that
her dissolute husband might be unable to obtain possession after
her death, he suggested that it might be made out in his own
name, and a deed of transfer to the children drawn up. The
draft of this deed hearing date ivas drawn up hy Mr. Deane, Solicitor,
and entirely removes any suspicion, room to which might have reason
had the policy been effected.*' Pursuant to this advice various
applications were made to different offices by the Browns with
these results:—
1. In April 1855 (when Mrs. Brown could not have been preg-
nant), Dr. Beer made application to the Monarch for an
Insurance in his own name on the life of Mrs. Brown which
Policy was, as we have said, to have been transferred to the
children. This Policy was refused, and nothing more was ever
heard of insuring Mrs. BrownHs life in favour of Dr. Beer.
2. Mr. Brown applied for an Insurance on his wife’s life to the
London and Liverpool and was refused.
3. And at the same time, Mr. Brown applied to the Church of
England and was accepted.
4. Mr. Brown applied to the Mutual Provident Society and was
accepted.
5. Mr. Brown applied to the Alliance and was refused; Dr.
Beer in the last case advanced him the money (.£4o)f to pay
the premium.
•See Mr. Deane’s letter, Appendix C.
tFor receipts, see Report of Select Committee—pages 19 and 20—
another instance f Dr. Beer’s generosity to the Browns.


One more circumstance must be noticed in connection with
these Policies, a circumstance which undoubtedly tended greatly
to throw a shadow on the conduct of Dr. Beer. The subject is
most delicate, but justice requires plain speaking. Three of the
Insurance Companies sent an Inquiry paper to Dr. Beer, not as
their own paid agent but in the private capacity of Medical advi-
ser to Mrs. Brown, containing amongst other things the following
question. “Is there anything to shorten life?” Now, in the
course of his treatment. Dr. Beer had discovered not only that
the supposed cancer was in reality a Venereal complaint, but
that his patient was also suffering from Bokitanshy-stricture of
the Rectum, a disease which in all probability was produced by a
crime punishable by death, committed by another while suffer-
ring from Venereal disease. This complaint the Doctor did not
feel called upon to reveal—in the first place, on account of the
professional secrecy so necessary between Doctor and Patient,
and so strongly advocated by the Judge in his summing up, and
partly because it did not necessarily tend to shorten life. He
therefore said nothing about it in his certificates of health, leav-
ing it to the paid Medical advisers of the Companies to discover
wdiat in reality was their business to find out, and not Dr. BeePs
to reveal. How far he was culpable in this it is not necessary
for us now to discuss, but unquestionably this was a point which
strongly weighed against Dr. Beer in the public mind. Most
unjustifiably; since the revelation of that fearful disease, although
it did not tend to shorten life, would have exposed Dr. Beer to a
prosecution by the Browns for disclosing family secrets. Had
he revealed it, the whole Faculty, when aware of the fact, would
have expressed strong reprobation for such violation of profes-
sional secresy. It was one of those cases no medical man should
—or decently could—make known. No one blames the priest
for refusing, even for the ends of justice, to disclose the secrets
of the confessional. Such was the position of affairs on the 10th
of February, 1856, Dr. Beer possessing no interest whatever in the
death of Mrs. Brown, her husband having £2OOO in that event,
and being moreover engaged to be married to a second wife as
soon as death would be kind enough to relieve him of his first


whose disease had practically long rendered him a widower.*
Let us mark the events which follow. On the 14th of February
Dr. Beer called on Mr. Brown. In the account of this visit there
occurs a contradiction —the first of a long series in which the
truth on the one side or the other can only be ascertained by
considering the circumstances of the case. Mr. Brown has sworn
that Dr. Beer threatened him to inform the Insurance Companies
of the disease of Mrs. Brown, unless one of the Policies were
given up to himself. Dr. Beer swears that he threatened to do
so, because Mr. Brown otfered to “pay him handsomely if his
wife should die,” and in that event he should not receive the
amount of the policies. The result of course is oath against
oath, and each man must judge for himself whether it is most
probable that merely a virtuous indignation at attempted extor-
tion should induce this man Brown, loathing his wife and
engaged to be married to another when she died, to give up his
£2000; or whether the intending murderer, baffled in his machi-
nations by Dr. Beer’s expressed determination, took fright at the
exposure he had made of his own desires, and hastened “to gain
the whiphand ” of the man who had refused to be his tool and
threatened to be his accuser. A few days after this interim
(“ 19th of February ”) Dr. Beer called on Mrs. Brown for the
last time, and we shall not dwell upon the scene that is repre-
sented to have occurred there.f It is sufficient to observe that
Mrs. Brown herself admits by implication, that Dr. Beer had no
*The following letter, which bears about it intrinsic evidence of reliability,
and the writer of which is ready to give his name when necessary, will substan-
tiate the above statement: —Dr. Beer—Sir—l have read your case of Beer v.
Brown. To vindicate your character, that said Brown ought to hang. Go
to Mr. William Dean, Draper, Windsor, and ask if Brown was not court-
ing his housekeeper (Smith), and when Lockyer informed him be (Brown)
was a married man, whether be (Dean) did not satisfy himself by following
Brown to Cumberland street; ask him what Brown told him when threat-
ened wdth a horse-whipping, confessing to be married, but that in a month
he would be able to make the girl (Smith) his wife. As a proof, vide BtU’s
Life of that time, about Whity-Brow’n taking his pigs to the wrong market.
What he said on the night before that white-washing is sufficient to place
the guilt, and clear your character from imputation.—You don’t know me,
but Ido you, and believe you to be the victim of a scoundrel. I throw out
these hints, *• Take them or leave them.”—Yours respectfully, * * *
West Maitland, December 23rd, 1867.
tSee evidence in Report of the Parlimentary Committee.


intGrest in hsr life, and that he said he would continue to watch
her after another doctor had been called in “ whether Mr. Brown
liked it or not,” as indeed it was his bounden duty to do after
the conduct of Mr. Brown.
Such is the extraordinary prelude to the still more extraordi-
nary trial of which we have now to speak. But as we have
already given the substance of the evidence, it will not be neces-
sary to go into the allegations of each particular witness; but
merely to direct attention to those particulars in which the pre-
sent trial differs from the ordinary course of justice. The very
first step in it is as extraordinary as it is ridiculous. On the sth
of March Dr. Beer was arrested for attempting to procure abor-
tion by means of Belladonna, administered as suppositories on
the 10th of February. The Doctor burst out laughing, and well
he might. Conceive a Medical man arrested for attempting to
commit murder by ordering a black draught or'to destroy the
complexion by an application of Rowland’s Kalydor, and the
accusation is equally credible and equally creditable.
Dr. Beer burst out laughing well knowing the impossibility of
the offence of which he was charged. But though he knew that
Belladonna could not procure an abortion of the “foetus,” he
did not know the yet more subtle poison which can procure the
miscarriage of justice. He was taken to the Police Court, and
there he learned how little the most palpable innocence can pre-
vail against the triple alliance of Jealousy, Ignorance, and Un-
scrupulousness. For five weeks he lay in Darlinghurst—with
no friend to console, no lawyer to advise him—unable to do
anything to establish hi.«» own defence, unable even to obtain the
depositions upon luhich he was committed from the Police Court.
Five weeks did he lie there; and not until three days before his
trial, was he put in possession of the testimony of his accusers.
But this is nothing. This is legal. Let us go on to the next
move. On the sth of March Dr. Beer was committed for attempt-
ing to procure abortion by administering Extract of Belladonna;
on the 9th of April he suddenly, and without notice, found him-
self placed on his trial for the attempted murder of Mrs. Brown!—
Since when was such a thing heard of in British Courts of Jus-
tice!—A man finds himself placed at the Bar of an English Court


to be tried for his life without a word of warning; not on the
precise charge on which he was committed, but on a far more
serious one subsequently added to the indictment. Such a case
is a blot on our records that can never be wholly erased. Alone
then, defenceless, unacquainted with the niceties of English Law,
unfamiliar with the language in which the question of his life
or death was in debate, this young stranger had to defend him-
self against a sudden stroke of the Law, as the unwarned trav-
eller against the secret hand of the assassin. No warning was
given, no preparation was allowed. Not only was the charge of a
totally different nature from that on which the prisoner had been
committed, but the evidence requisite for the defence involved
a somewhat new and difficult element. The former charge of
attempting to procure abortion was so ridiculous as to betray its
absurdity to anyone possessing ordinary medical knowledge,
but the charge of attempting to murder might have had some
colour and pretence if Mrs. Brown had not been previously dis-
eased, and if any motive could be shewn for the attempt. Thus
two new classes of evidence were dragged in, the evidence of
former illness and the evidence of the Policies. Against all this
the prisoner had to defend himself, in the agitation and conse-
quent confusion of a sudden attack made by the Law on his life.
He seems to have been a man of no mean strength of mind.
When arrested on the first charge, he merely laughed at its ab-
surdity; when tried for the second, he collected himself as coolly
as though his life had not been in danger. The judge offered
him counsel, he declined; the prosecutor urged him, he refused.
Well would it have been for him had he steadily persisted in
his refusal, but the urgency of the Court was repeated again and
again, and at last he consented to accept. The next morning he
was told that neither of the two Counsel he had named, Mr.
Darvall or Mr. Broadhurst, was in attendance, but that a Counsel
of the name of Blake had been provided for him. The trial, if
trial it can be called, went on, the first witness being Mrs. Brown
herself. Of the credibility of this good lady, we shall merely
observe that she swore to having rolled in agony for a whole
night on the floor of the room in which her husband was sleep-
ing, without his being disturbed by it in any degree, and that in
13


describing the effects of the drug administered, the only symp-
toms hit upon by her which was really characteristic of poisoning
by Belladonna, was one which could not have been exhibited till
after death. So difficult is it to be a consistent liar. The next
witness called was Mr. M. G. Brown.
He swore—
1. That Dr. Beer administered drachm of Belladonna, a state-
ment disproved now by Dr. Elliott and by the box of sup-
positories produced in Court.
2. That he did not direct the suppositories to be introduced if
required, a statement contradicted by the very prescription.
3. That he himself (Mr. M. G. Brown) did not read the label,
a statement contradicted by his son G. B. Brown.
4. That up to the time when Dr. Beer told Mrs. Brown that she
could not live, she was in general good health, a statement
of the most vital moment, contradicted by Dr. Salter, Henry
Hargreaves, Ann Seath, Ann Bay, the Chemist Horner, and
the son George B. Brown.
o. And, finally, that he (M. G. Brown) was never present at any
operation performed on Mrs. Brown by Dr. Beer, a state-
ment contradicted by Ann Bay, and his son, G. B. Brown.*
Such was the evidence of Mr. Brown. After this reliable
witness came the valuable testimony of the Doctors, and as
Medical evidence is always intricate, we present that in a
tabular form:—
*For a contradictiou in extenso of these five points iu Brown's evidence,
see Appendix F.


From what source these “savans’' obtained their notions of this
drug it is not easy to divine, not from PEREIRA,” as we h.avo
just now seen. The only explanations that appear as possible
is, that they all simply confounded extract of Belladonna with
its principle Atropia, which would be something like mistaking
Castor for Croton Oil. There is a grim humour in this docu-
ment which is quite unique. The perfect simplicity with which
these learned men first declared themselves to have had no expe-
rience in the working of this ordinary drug, and then proceed to
contradict all the most renowned authorities, is not unworthy of
Dr. Shallow or Dogberry. No comment of our own shall mar
the rich effect. There is, however, one little incident to which
we must allude in order to refute the extraordinary theories of
the “ Collective wisdom of New South Wales.” Dr. Beer in the
course of the investigation at the Police Court endured a test
which should have satisfied the most practical of men, the Duke
of Wellington. While the Doctors were swearing that from j
to J a grain was a dangerous dose, he coolly swallowed grains
without producing any effect whatever. The whole Court was
in confusion. For three hours they watched the Doctor, expect-
ing like the Barbarians of Melite, that “ he should fall dead, or
that some evil should happen to him.” It is a pity, that when
after all, they found no evil ettect, they should not have had the
generosity of the same Barbarians to change their minds and say
he was a God. The rest of the evidence concerned the history
of the Policies, and simply proved, beyond a doubt, that Doctor
Beer had no interest whatever, directly or indirectly, proximate or
remote, in the death of Mrs. Brown. This closed the case for the
prosecution, such as it was, and one would have thought that a
sufficient amount of injustice had then been committed. But
next came an event which exceeds all the rest put together, and
strikes at the very root of Justice and Freedom. The Counsel
whom the prisoner had, at the instance of the Court, reluctantly
consented on the second day to accept, was a man of tolerable
parts, but quite ignorant of the merits of the case, and new to
legal proceedings. He neither read his brief nor communicated
with the prisoner. He examined Dr. Lassus, who had previ-
ously given evidence at the Police Court, and obtained from


Dr. Aaron (an honorable exception to the Medical evidence
for the Crown) testimony directly in favor of the accused,
based upon his own experience in the use of Belladonna;
and then he (this assigned Counsel) quietly absented* him-
self without calling a single witness subpoenaed by Dr. Beer
for the defence. We may conceive what would have been
said had an English Barrister acted in a similar way. But
now let us conceive the situation of this unhappy stranger.
Placed suddenly upon his trial for his life, accused of a crime of
which he had no suspicion till he actually found himself in the
Dock, and deserted by his own Counsel to whom in an evil
hour he had consented to intrust his life and honour. One can
imagine how every point would be strained in his behalf by an
English Judge. One would imagine how every effort would be
made by the Court to provide for the fullest investigation and
elicit the smallest material circumstance that would tend to
establish his innocence, particularly when the accused had pro-
mised to the Judge at an early stage of the proceedings “to prove
the evidence of the principal witnesses as false,” and the whole
a concoction. For the salt of England is the uprighteousness of
her judges.
Abandoned by his Counsel, the prisoner was about to conclude
the case, as he had commenced, on his own behalf. But he was
stopped by the Judge before he could call one of his witnesses.
Fourteen men and women were waiting outside the Court ready
to give evidence, and it may be to establish his innocence, viz: —
Dr. Salter, J. C. Horner, Mrs. Ann Seath, Mrs. Nesbitt, J. Dent,
J. Kim, Mr. Kussell, Mrs. Kussell, Mr. Robinson, Mrs. Hickey,
Mr. Dean, Mr. Reynolds, Ann Ray, Mr. Hargreaves, and Dr.
Willmott, and not one of those was allowed to be called by this
immaculate Judge. No! was the reply, “Your Counsel has
closed your case!! and besides your trial has lasted already four
days !!!” The remainder of the trial was in strict keeping with
what had already taken place —this Judge having absolutely
cross-examined three witnesses in the absence of the prisoner’s
Counsel, and after he had himself declared the case to be closed.
His Honor then proceeded to his summing up.
♦The cause of this absence should have been inquired into and given.


He first observed on the imperative duty of a Doctor to pre-
serve inviolable the secrets of his patients, and then consistently
condemned Dr. Beer for having preserved inviolable the exist-
ence of a disease of a most delicate nature, not tending to shorten
life, the mere utteiance of which might have caused a fiiminal
prosecution. Yet, throughout the trial, Mrs. Brown had been
represented to the jury—by herself, by the Crown Prosecutor,
and the Medical Savans —as having been a perfectly healthy
woman notwithstanding her admissions to the contrary. He
quietly assumed that the Doctor possessed an interest in Mrs.
Brown’s life, “a prospect not existing,” disregarding the ample
evidence to the contrary, and utterly omitted to suggest that had
the Doctor intended to secure a Policy this very fact would have
been a motive for preserving her lile until the interest became
existing and not prospective. And he absolutely thought proper
to address to the Jury such language as the following:—“The
conduct of the prisoner was of a most detestable and hypocrit-
ical character, leaving them (Mr. and Mrs. Brown) to believe
that his object was to benefit them and their family. The whole
of his representations on this point were of a most gross and
treacherous character.” This is the language not of the Prose-
cutor, but of the Judge, and that too in the very face of the
draft intended to transfer the Policy—applied for more than
twelve months before—if granted for the benefit of Brown’s
children! The verdict in this extraordinary parody of judicial
proceedings was not unworthy of the indictment, the prosecu-
tion, the evidence, and the judicial charge. Cutting away the
motive supposed to be derived from the Policies, there was no
ground for supposing that any crime whatever had been at-
tempted. So the jury ingeniously decided that the prisoner was
not guilty of the only crime which could by any moral possi-
bility have been committed, and found him guilty of one which
was not merely impossible, but which must have been utterly
useless had not the first one been committed also. Let this
point be well understood and remembered: the Jury declare him
innocent of any attempt on the life of the mother but find him
guilty (!) of trying to procure the destruction of an unborn
child, and that by small doses of Belladonna in suppositories!


There is something grimly ludicrous as well as horrible in this”
decision —of which eleven of the Jury were, a few months after-
wards, penitently conscious, as their appeal to the Government
for a mitigation of Dr. Beer’s sentence, proves.
Thus ended this most painful farce, this mockery of a trial.
Where shall we find an explanation of its anomalies? We give
the following facts which Doctor Beer found out (when too late),
and leave it to others to say whether they are likely to be in any
way connected with or led to the event. The facts are these: —
“ The Prosecuting Counsel, two of the principal witnesses, the
Judge himself and some of the Jury, were all members of the
Prosecuting Society,” were all in fact Prosecutors themselves.
And the Judge dared to sit in judgment and the Jury to con-
demn !
It were vain to attempt any summary of injustices committed
in this monstrous case. The whole prosecution was a series of
infamies. The testimony was false, the trial hurried and ille-
gal, the Judge interested, and the crime impossible. It might,
indeed, be said, that no blame was attached to the Insurance
Companies, for they could not tell the absurdity of the accusation
or judge otherwise than by the opinion of their Medical advisers,
if they had abandoned the case after the exposures elicited at
the Police Court, during the course of the investigation, and the
comments of the daily journals. It may be that the principal
portion of the Medical Body of Sydney knew nothing of the
nature of an ordinary drug, and did venture to attempt to swear
away a man’s life through pure ignorance. We cordially hope
it was so, and trust that they will learn a little of the contents
of the handbooks on Medical Science before again giving in their
evidence as Medical “Experts.” And we most earnestly hope
that they knew nothing of the characters of the informers and
of the nature of the testimony that they were obliged to give.
But whether the ignorance of all of them was real or assumed,
we shall have something to say anon.
of the Jviry signed this petition; the twelfth could not be found
in Sydney.


But what shall we say of the perjury of the Browns? What
shall we say of the lawyer who abandoned his client? What
shall we say of the judge who permits a man to be arrainged
for procuring abortion and tried for attempting murder, who
interrupts the Counsel for the defence by a quibble for the prose-
cution, and who finally refuses the prisoner to produce a single
witness for the defence? Such a case is happily rare, nay it is,
we believe, unparalleled, and we hope that the punishment will
be as equal as the crime. A man who murders another hurts
perhaps a few people, but a judge and prosecutor who trample
upon justice inflicts a wound upon the whole nation. The mere
fact that anyone has been tried without a warning, tried illegally
and improperly, and sentenced without defence, is sufficient to
startle the most apathetic! And the nation should not rest
until full reparation has been made to the unfortunate victim of
a Jury’s ignorance—of professional jealousy—of a Joint Stock
Company’s fears—of perjured wutnesses —and of such a Judge.*
With this summary and critical survey of the case we might
bring our remarks to a close, had not one circumstance of a sin-
gularly significant and startling character occurred, during the
evidence of the medical men at the Criminal Court, which the
strongest considerations of truth and justice compel us to men-
tion. While Dr. Beer was conducting his own case, and while he
was defending his treatment of the woman Brown by appealing
to distinguished foreign and English authorities—particularly
Taylor, Christison, and Thomson amongst the English—one of
the medical experts in the witness box depreciated the value of
*Mr. Justice Therry exhibited a wavering or impulsive character all through
the case. He morally forced the defendant to intrust his case to Counsel—he
refused to allow him to call his witnesses—he bullied him for having at-
tempted to unveil the real character of the Browns—he neglected to urge as he
ought. Dr. Beer’s case on the Government, after he had become satisQed about
his innocence—he declined to accept Sir Benjamin Brodie’s handwriting as
genuine (although it could be proved by Medical men who knew it) till authen-
ticated by the Lord Mayor and Corporate Seal of the City of London—he kept
that authentication of Sir Benjamin Brodie’s letter for weeks by him (in fact
till within three days of his exit from the Colony)—and, finally, he carried
off with him his Judicial Note-Book (probably to enrich his Reminiscences of
N.S. W. with apt illustrations), which has seriously affected Dr. Beer’s means
of bringing perjury home to more than one of his persecutors.


those authorities, and refered to Pereira as being more “ satis-
factory and respectable ” —the very words sworn to. Hereupon
Pereira’s great work—the Materia Medica —was put into the
Judge’s hands, and he read from it the following passage, marked
for him by the Doctors :
As a prophylactic against Scarlatina. —lhe introduciion of belladonna into
practice as a preventive of scarlet fever, is owing to the absurd homoeopathic
axiom of similihus curantur:” for as this plant gives rise to an ailec*
tion of the throat, and sometimes to a scarlet rash on the skin, its power of
guarding the system against the reception of scarlet fever has been assumed;
and the assumption has been endeavoured to be established by an appeal to
experience. Bayle has collected from various publications 2,027 cases of
persons who took this medicine, and were exposed to the contagion; of these
1,948 escaped. Oppenheim gave it to 1,200 soldiers, and only twelve became
affected. To the authorities here referred to may be added Hufeland and
Koreflf, who admit, from their own personal observations, the efficacy of the
remedy, though they have not specified the number of eases In which they
have tried it. But bearing in mind the well-known capriciousness evinced by
scarlet fever (as indeed by other contagious disorders) in regard to the sub-
jects of its attacks, and the large number of those who, though exposed to its
influence, escape, the best evidence hitherto adduced in favour of the notion
must be admitted to be inconclusive. While, therefore, the facts brought
forward in favour of the existence of this prophylactic power are only nega-
tive, those which can be adduced against it are positive. For I conceive
twenty cases of failure are more conclusive against the opinion here referred
to, than one thousand of non-occurrence are in favour of it. Now Lehman,
Barth, Wendt, Muhrbeck, Hoffmann, Bock, and many others that I could
refer to, declare it has failed in their hands to evince its prophylactic powers.
In this country we have no extended series of observations to quote; but the
cases which I am acquainted with are decidedly against the efficacy of the
remedy. A remarkable failure is mentioned by Dr. Sigmond of a family of
eleven persons who took the supposed specific, yet every individual contracted
the disease.
Now, although there is not a word in this passage which any
well-informed mind could apply as an argumen.t against Dr.
Beer’s treatment of Mrs. Brown—the whole passage referring
solely to the use of Belladonna as a prophylactic against Scar-
latina—still it made a prejudicial impression on the minds of the
Judge and the Jury. But will the public believe, that if the
Judge had read either the page before or the page after the para-
graph, he would have found the great Pereira —“the satisfactory
and respectable authority ” of the Sydney Savans —absolutely


supporting Dr. Beer’s treatment and defending an application or
use of the drug far in excess of that for which Dr. Beer had been
arraigned at a Criminal Bar? Here is a passage from the very
next page of Pereira, which the Doctors did not show to the
Judge, and which the Judge did not tind out for himself:—
BtllcbdoTitut. —As the strength of the extract is extremely vaii-
able, some writers recommend only one-quarter or one-half of a grain to be
given at the commencement of its use, and to be repeated three time.s a day ;
and the dose to be increased until the well-known effects of the remedy are
produced. Mr. Baily observes that he at first begao with one grain, and
repeated it every four hours until relief followed; but fuither experience
induced him to commence with three times that and, if a repetition
were necessary, to give it in diminished doses afterwards. Spread upon lea-
ther, the extract is frequently used as a plaster to relieve neuralgic and other
pains (see Einplastrum Belladonnce). Diluted with water to the consistence
of cream, it is applied to the eyebrow to produce dilitation of the pupil; or
an aqueous solution of the extract is dropped between the lids. Mixed with
lard or spermaceti ointment, it is used as a topical anodyne and antispasmodic
in various diseases (see Unguentum Btlladonnce). A bougie smeared over with
the extract and oil is sometimes used with benefit in stricture. A drachm or
two of the extract, either alone or in the form of ointment, may be applied
to the os uteri to diminish rigidity. In irritation of the bladder, urinary
organs, or rectum, clysters holding in solution the extract are sometimes
used.
What! Pereira recommends a drachm or two—sixty or one hun-
dred and twenty grains —of the bare extract to be applied in cer-
tain cases. Dr. Beer prescribed five grains as an application in
one of those case.s, and for this he was being tried for an attempt
to commit murder! In the very page before the paragraph read
by the Judge, Pereira’s opinion is equally clearly given. Pie
himself emphasises the following passage : "'ln spasmodic stric-
ture of the urethra, and of the sphincters of the bladder and rectum,
and in spasmodic contraction of the uterus, the topical use of the
extract (smeared on a bougie) applied to the perineum or other
parts, or employed by way of a clyster, has appeared to give
relief.” Can we any longer charitably assume that the Doctors
acted in crass ignorance and without malice ? Did they not
know what was in the very “ respectable authority ” they had
relied on? Not know what was stated on the page before and
the page after the paragraph they had handed for perusal to the


Judge? We entreat every reader, is anxious to learn fully
and fairly the doctrine of Pereira on the uses, &c. of belladonna,
to read his “Elements of Materia Medica,” from page 1402 to
page 1415, vol. XL (edition of 1850), and he will be able to
form a true opinion of the candour and spirit of the medical
savans who “gave evidence for the Crown” in this remarkable
case.
After so complete a vindication of Dr. Beer’s treatment as we
have just given from Pereira, it will seem superfluous to offer
further corroboration of its correctness. But as the opinion of
Sir Benjamin Brodie will be valued wherever sterling English
honesty is prized and sound English ability appreciated, we can-
not resist recording it, just as it is embodied in the very letter
(addressed to Francis Beer, Esq.), which Mr. Justice Therry
doubted to be genuine, till he had got the authentication of the
Lord Mayor of London. It runs as follows :
Glasgow, Septcmbej', 1857.
To Fkancis Beer, Esq.,
Sir —Your letter of the 25th August has been forwarded to me at this
place. If I uuderstaud your statement rightly the circumstances of the case
on which you wish to have my opinion are essentially as follows :
I.—Your brother, Dr. Frederick Beer, was consulted by Mrs. Brown, that
lady being then in a state of pregnancy.
2.—Mrs. Brown was in a very delicate state of health, having suffered from
syphilis. It w'as your brother’s opinion also that she laboured under disor-
ganisation of the bowels, but it is not very clearly stated what was the exact
natnre of the disease of the bowels, which that term is intended to express.
3.—On the 10th of February, 1856, your brother was called to see Mrs.
Brown who was then labouring under slight labour pains, great irritation of
the rectum, and what your brother supposed to be some kind of stricture of
the rectum, preventing the passage of either air or foeces.
4.—Your brother under the circumstances (being apprehensive of labour
coming on prematurely) prescribed a course of suppositories, each consisting
of five grains of Belladonna, to be introduced into the rectum. It is not
stated whether only one or several of these suppositories were had recourse
to, nor in what form the Belladonna was employed, but I suppose that it was
in that of extract.
o. Under this treatment Mrs. Brown obtained relief from the symptoms,
and the premature labour which Dr. Beer apprehended was prevented.


€.—Dr. Beer continued to attend Mrs. Brown until the 15th of February,
and on the 19th of the same month criminal proceedings were instituted
against him on the ground of his having administered the suppositories of
Belladonna with a view to procure abortion, upon which charge the Jury
brought in a verdict of Guilty.
Now concluding that the main facts of the casse are such as have been just
stated, I cannot have the smallest hesitation in saying that both the charge
and the verdict are utterly absurd. I can uudei stand that Dr. Beer might
have prescribed the use of Belladonna with a view to prevent premature
labour, but I cannot suppose that either he or anyone else should dream of
prescribing it for the purpose of procuring abortion.
But I ought to add that if the suppositories were made of the extract of
Belladonna, that remedy was administered in much larger doses than I should
think prudent to prescribe, if it had been prepared by one of the best Loudon
chemists. This, however, as well as many other extracts, is often very imper-
fectly prepared, and it is very probable that that which was to be procured
at Sydney was not of the very best quality. At any rate it does not appear
from the accounts which you have sent me that Mrs. Brown suffered from
any of the peculiar symptoms which an overdose of Belladonna is liable to
produce.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
B. C. BRODIE.
A word of comment—a word of illustration —a single line of
commendation —on the contents of this document, would simply
detract from its force and mar its effect, besides being an insult
to the reader’s intelligence and common sense. It may, however,
be of some interest to non-professional readers, to know what the
recent practice of English physicians has been in the use of bel-
ladonna. At a meeting of the Koyal Medical and Chirurgical
Society of England—we are culling the information from the
Medical journals —held on the 23rd May, 1865, Charles Hunter,
Esq., read a paper on “The Hypodermic Administration of Cer-
tain Medicines.” In the discussion (see l7th June, 1865,)
Dr. Stewart said “he had often administered remedies by the
rectum. His favourite method of treating intestinal obstruc-
tions had long been the injection of extract of belladonna in
doses of two or three grains.” Mr. Savory remarked that with
solids a much larger quantity of drugs may be applied as they
*Dr. Beer attended Mrs. Brown, not as Sir B. C. Brodie supposes only till the 15th of
February, but till the 19th of the same month. Further, he was not made aware of the
fact, that Mrs. Brown had been accustomed to the soothing effects of belladonna, having
often had it applied in ten-grain doses endermicully (on a freshly abraded surface), as can
be seen by referring to her own evidence and that of Mr. J. C. Horner at the Folice Court.


remain a long while in the rectum without being dissolved.
I’his fact the Committee also proved “ by placing a similar sup-
pository” to that prescribed by Dr. Beer to Mrs. Brown, ‘-made
up at the same druggists shop, in a glass of water, when at the
end of four hours, they found it was not all dissolved.” A
more complete justification of Dr. Beer’s practice could not be
found in the annals of medical jurisprudence. In addition to
this, and as undeniable proof that the opinions of the “ medi-
cal talent” of Sydney as to the powers of belladonna, and
more particularly with reference to its specific action on the
uterus or foetus, were dusty cobwebs of their imagination, the
reader is referred to Taylor’s Medical Jurisprudence (7th Ed.,
1861), an acknowledged standard work, in which Dr. Beer’s case
is alluded to with natural surprise that sound medical treatment
should have produced such results.
Well, the case came to an end —as already stated—and Dr.
Beer was convicted by a British Judge, chiefly on the evidence of
British medical men, of having attempted the life of an unboi-n
child by administering five grains of belladonna, in suppositories,
to its mother, and narrowly escaped hanging for the administra-
tion of the said five grains! And although his innocence was
established years ago, no Government has had the honesty to
repair any portion of the injury done him.
We had some idea at the outset of presenting to the reader a
picture of this victim’s dreary imprisonment —of the stolid but
maddening indifference with which his cries for justice have been
received by those in power —of the horrors of mind which a
well-born, refined, and educated young man must have endured
in being thrust from a good social position, to herd with common
felons. Nothing could have saved him from suicide or madness,
during that horrible period of legal vengeance, save the invigorating
consciousness of innocence and the heroic determination (equally vivi-
fying) to vindicate his clmracter. With these few words, we will
spare the reader all details of how he was punished—through a
whole decade of years —for having prescribed a course of bella-
donna in suppositories, each containing five grains of the extract,
and of which suppositories only two-and-a-half wei'e required, in
consequence of irritation in the bowels and of premature labour
having ceased!


The perversity of a certain class of minds is as ludicrous as
it is exasperating. You will meet people in the streets who,
although they believe Dr. Beer’s treatment of the woman Brown
was sound and successful—so successful to restore the creature
to tolerable health notwithstanding her habits of intemperance
—will still put on a solemn look, and talk to you in a mysterious
way about the Insurance Offices,” and “the policies,’ and “the
bills of health,” as if there was some strong element of crimina-
tion mixed up with those proceedings. (See Appendix H.)
So far from Dr. Beer’s dealings with the Insurance Offices
being any evidence of criminal motives on his part, they furnish
positive —nay infallible—proof, that he could not have had any
criminal intent at all. They prove, on the one hand, beyond the pos-
sibility of doubt, that if he had' had any wicked desire to profit by
the policies, it tvould have been a main object of his to keep Mrs. Brown
alive till a personal interest in her death arose. But we have seen
he was arraigned for an attempt to murder her, not only when
he could gain nothing by her death, but for drugs administered
several days before the day to which the man Brown swore that
Dr. Beer spoke to him about “ one of the policies.” These said
policies, on the other hand, furnish equally positive proof that
while Dr. Beer never had a single farthing’s interest in the death
of Mrs. Brown, her husband had on that event. They also
furnish intrinsic evidence of the fact, that all the notions which
Dr. Beer had originally gathered about Insurance matters (for he
was at the time a young man not long away from his University
in Germany, where Insurance certainly did not form a part of the
curriculum), he must have gathered it from the Browns them-
selves. It will become as clear as the brightest of summer
noon-days to anyone who takes the trouble to study the whole
case, that the man Brown worked upon the young foreigner’s
generosity and equally on his ignorance of our British prejudices
in reference to medical etiquette, and got him to furnish bills of
health for Mrs. Brown to sundry offices. Now, although Dr. Beer
did not in those bills of health put forward a single statement
that was not true, knowing as he did that her peculiar disease
did not “tend to shorten her life,” and further feeling convinced
25


that his treatment would restore her to health; still the mere
fact of his having given so many of them--three or four—within
a short period created a prejudice against him. Why? If he had
a criminal motive at heart, would he have been so insane as to
give such indications of that motive by issuing a whole series of
certificates? These very certificates are proofs positive of his
innocence—of the singleness of purpose with which he acted—
of the readiness with which he was willing to assist the Browns
in any way he honorably could. The man Brown through whose
infiuence he furnished those certificates, had evidently been
“speculating” on his wife’s death; at all events he had all the
interest in her death, while Dr. Beer had not then—never in his
life had, as before stated—any interest at all, save his profes-
sional interest in keeping her alive —in restoring her to health.
When will men (of the perverse class alluded to) begin to reason
on the facts and surroundings of a case before jumping at conclu-
sions? Why will they not prefer getting at the truth, though it
may be with some trouble, rather than killing their fellow-man’s
reputation with a calumny? The whole history of the Insurance
transaction is one that redounds greatly to Dr. Beer’s impulsive
generosity of feeling—to his sense of gratitude; and one which
furnishes the most obvious proof of his innocence “in thought,
and deed,” of the crime with which he was charged. No
doubt his prosecutors cleverly mixed up these “policy matters”
and fairly puzzled the Jury with them. But why did not the
Judge—the arbiter of divine Justice between the accuser and the
accused—put the facts fully and in order before the Jury ? The
facts were simple. Dr. Beer some fourteen months before his
arraingnment had applied for a policy on Mrs. Brown’s life with
the view of transferring it (the draft of the transfer was in the
Judge’s hand) to her children. That policy was refused. Dr.
Beer never afterwards applied for another. Mr. Brown had applied
for several, and succeeded in securing two. This, then, was the
state of the case when “the break” between Dr. Beer and Mr.
Brown occurred —at the Argyle Store. Why, we ask again, were
not all the facts stated in the order of their occurrence, and not
muddled up together—“certificates” being mixed with “policies,”
and both with five-grain doses of belladonna in suppositories!


Auotlie>r ctugl wrong was don© to Dr. Beer at the trial. He
had become insolvent, through pressure from a judgment credi-
tor, some twenty months before his trial, liabilities £1900; and
at a meeting of his creditors held shortly after his insolvency,
they agreed to accept 2s. 6d., in the pound, which they paid.
Did this payment satisfy Dr. Beer’s sense of honor and justice?
Xo; seven months afterwards (in July, 1855,) he inserted an
advertisement in the Herald, announcing to his creditors that he
was prepared to pay them twenty shillings in the pound; and he
did pay them twenty shillings in the pound accordingly. In the face
of this fact —paying over more than twelve hundred pounds for
which there was not a shadow of legal claim on him—can it be
believed that six months later he attempted to murder a patient
for a few hundreds! The supposition is so monstrous, that who-
ever makes it must possess a brain of extraordinary or rather
abnormal structure. During his trial, the prosecution frequently
made “a point” of this insolvency, but without a single allusion
to the fact (well known) of the insolvent having paid Uventy shill-
ings in the pound. Was this British justice?
The bare idea of Dr. Beer’s exhibiting a mercenary disposition
(to say nothing about committing a crime, for money) is posi-
tively ludicrous to those who know him. While the present
writer was connected with the Italian Consulate, and before his
acquaintance with Dr. Beer, he became officially aware of the fact
that Dr. Beer had spent over £SO to enable a poor Italian to pro-
cure a passage to India. It also came to his (the writer’s) know-
ledge, and he is prepared to give proofs and particulars of the
fact to any one who wishes to see them, that Dr. Beer expended
over a thousand pounds to save a well-born gentleman from
poverty, and the probability of a shadow being cast on his re-
putation. He also to the writer’s knowledge (and of which the
writer possesses the proofs) erected a monument, at considerable
expense, over the grave of one of our public men through a feeling
of generous shame at the ingratitude of the public in whose ser-
vice that gentleman had long laboured and died. The writer
also knows that both in Braidwood and Sydney, Dr. Beer has
always been the poor man's Doctor (w'hich means acting profes-
sionally those who cannot pay fees), and has not only given


advice and medicine gratuitously to the poor, but often money to
procure comforts. Again, then, we ask, is this a man likely to
commit a crime for a few hundreds? By looking to Appendix G.
the reader will find a few facts, in the light of which he can
pretty correctly read Dr. Beer’s character. From those facts and
the statements above made (all af which can be attested on oath
if necessary), the reader will be able to come to the writer’s con-
clusion, that it is all but a moral impossibility that a man of
I)r. Beer’s temperament, generous instincts, and philanthropic
aspirations, would commit the smallest crime—nay, even to do
the most trifling of mean actions —for the sake of money!
And yet this man—so liberal and large-hearted, so consistently
kind and charitable—has not only been foully wronged, but there
seems to be no disposition or intention on the part of those in
power (and whose solemn duty before God and man it is!) to
right him. He cried aloud for justice during the dreary period
of his cruel punishment; he cries aloud still. But Justice in his
case is not only blind and deaf, but turns her face from him.
Immediately on his return from Europe last year, he commenced
proceedings against the man Brown for perjury; and although
he established one of the clearest cases of perjury that was ever
set forth in a Court of law, the presiding Magistrate (doubtless
acting under advice) dismissed it. The matter was then brought
under the Attorney-General, who promised to look into it, but
never did; who on being reminded of his promise, repeated and
neglected it; and who on being reminded again, got angry and
refused to move in the matter at all! Do we live in a land
governed by British laws and administered by Englishmen ? or
are we at the mercy of an autocrat ? Is the performance of an
act of simple justice to depend on the state of a public officer’s
nerves, or the fluctuations of his temper, or on any of his peculiar
temporary humours?
The correspondence which we subjoin will —better than any
words of ours—show “ the latest additional wrong ” which has
been done to Dr. Beer:—


129, King Street, Sydney,
12th June, IS6B.
My dear Sir—l regret exceedingly that my efforts to procure the favour-
able notice of the Attorney-General, or any reply from him to my letters
written, as your attorney, have proved abortive. In justice to myself, how-
ever, I enclose you copies of those letters, and a note and reply from Mr.
Driver, s© that your friends may judge and yourself be satisfied that I have
not been negligent of your interests, prompted, as I have always been by a
conviction of your innocence with reference to the original charge made
against you, and your undeserved and great sirffering in consequence. I
should advise yon to take steps to bring the matter before the Legislature,
as it appears to me impossible to obtain any attention from the Attorney-
General in his of&cial capacity while so much of his time is devoted to his
private practice.
Yours x.ery truly.
WILLIAM HELLYER.
F. Beek, Esq., M.D.
129, King Street. Sydney,
lOth February, 1808.
To the Honorable James Martin, Esq., Attorney-General.
Beer v. Brown. Perjury.
Sir—On behalf of Fredk. Beer, Esq., M.D., I bring under your notice a charge
of perjury brought by him against Michael G. Brown, before C. D. F. Scott,
Esq., P.M., Sydney, alleged to have been committed by the defendant in the
year 1856, in the inception and prosecution of a charge against Dr. Beer, that
he, on the 10th of February, 1856, feloniously and unlawfully administered
to, and caused to be taken by Phillis Brown, half a drachm of belladonna,
with intent to procure her miscarriage. The depositions were sworn to by
M. G. Brown, on the sth, 7th, and 10th days of March, 1856, before J. S*
Dowling, Esq., J.P., in Sydney, and contained the statements following:—
1. That Dr. Beer administered half a drachm of belladonna.
2. That he did not direct suppositories to be introduced if required.
3. That Michael George Brown did not read the label.
4. That up to the time Dr. Beer told Mrs. Brown that she could not live,
she was in general good health.
5. That Michael George Brown was not present when any operation was
performed.
6. That he never applied any instrument except an enema, and never saw
anv other instrument.


Upon this evidence, material to the prosecution of the charge against Dr.
Beer, he was convicted, sentenced to ten years on the roads or other public
works of the colony, with hard labour, and served the full period of his pun-
ishment. The prosecution was conducted by A. T. Holroyd, Esq., for the
Australian Mutual Provident the actual prosecutors, the Judge who
tried the case, the then Solicitor-General, the Attorney-General, and counsel
prosecuting, and some of the jury, being members of the same society.
The case of Dr. Beer has already engaged the attention of a select commit-
tee of the Legislative Assembly, who by their report, dated IGth day of
January, 1862, “absolved him altogether from the charge on which he was
found guilty, and stating that the use of belladonna in the mode prescribed
could not have procured abortion, perjured evidence and professional rivalry
giving a foundation for the verdict.
Dr. Beer was condemned, degraded, and imprisoned unjustly. It is due to
the honourable profession of which he is a member, to himself as innocent,
and in the furtherance of justice, to establish the correctness of his treat-
t,ment of the case of Mrs. Brown; remove the stain cast upon the profession in
his sufferings; and punish those who wilfully and corruptly brought about
his conviction.
The prosecution of Michael George Brown, for perjury, is the first step
taken to place the truth before the public, and to expose the malignant com-
plication which has embittered the best years of Dr. Beer’s life, and if not
exposed further is calculated to enshroud and blast his future.
I shall endeavour to establish the perjury on each assignment, and the
materiality to the prosecution of Dr. Beer, by a reference to the evidence
taken before Captain Scott, on the 29th of November, 4th, lOth, and 16th of
December last.
That the first and second assignments are false, is conclusively proved by
the evidence of Dr. Beer, that 2i suppositories, containing grains of
belladonna only were administered, 3| suppositories being produced at the
trial. The evidence of Dr. Elliott, that the box containing suppositories
from his brother’s establishment was produced at the trial, with a label con-
taining the same direction as the prescription, and the presciiption given by
Dr. Beer for the suppositories.
The label and directions ©n the box, the said prescription, and the evidence
of George Brown then taken, prove the third assignment of perjury.
The evidence of Dr. Beer, Dr. Salter, Henry Hargraves, Ann Seath, Ann
Kay, and George Brown, then taken, and the evidence of J. C. Horner, then
read, fully proves the fourth assignment of perjury.
The evidence of Dr. Beer, George Brown, and Ann Kay, then taken, prove
the fifth assignment of perjury.


The evidence of Dr. Beer, George Brown, and Charles Reynolds, then
taken, prove the sixth assignment of perjury.
I respectfully refer to the depositions taken : I submit that the perjury
committed by the first, second, and fourth assignments were directly mate-
rial to the charge brought against Dr. Beer, and that the perjury mentioned
in the third, fifth, and sixth assignments were also material, and in support
of the statement made in the fourth assignment; and that the case before the
jury could not have been substantiated against Dr. Beer without such evidence
being offered. The statement made in the first assignment is in support of
the fact of administering. The statements made in the second, third, and
fourth assignments are in proof of the intent charged; and in the fifth and
sixth are material to the fourth.
* I find, on perusal of medical authorities, Taylor on Poisons, and Pereira,
that the administering of belladonna, as charged, could not have procured
abortion if Mrs. Brown had been in general good health, as alleged ; but
having regard to her state of disease, as described by medical testimony, could
not have injured Mrs. Brown in any manner. It is distinctly proved that she
had long been suffering from venereal disease) that operations for the removal
of tumors from the vagina had been frequently and successfully performed by
Dr. Beer; that she was, at the time of administering, afflicted with Rokitansky-
stricture, the result of venereal disease in the rectum ; and that the applica-
tion of belladonna was absolutely requisite as a relaxant to allay the irritation
of the stricture.
It was material to the prosecution to prove that Mrs. Brown was a healthy
woman (even according to the medical testimony offered at the trial) to
assume that the application of belladonna was an improper remedy, and I
refer to an extract from the brief for the prosecution in corroboration. “ All
the above facts having been communicated to the Australian Mutual Provi-
dent Society, it being ascertained that the suppositories contained belladonna
in dangerous quantities, the Australian Mutual Provident Society, with the
two other societies above mentioned, have determined to have the matter
fully investigated. The principal evidence will of course be by Mr. and Mrs
Brown.”
I have respectfully to request that you will direct a new inquiry, or prose-
cution, of this case against Michael George Brown, and in that event I venture
to repeat the expression contained in a letter from the honorable member for
Braidwood to Dr. Beer—“l hope that I shall then be able to obtain from the
country that justice which seems to have been so long denied to you.”
Awaiting your reply,
I have the honor to be,
Your very obedient servant,
WILLIAM HELLYER,
Solicitor, &c.


129, King Street, Sydney,
21st March, 1868.
To the Honorable the Attorney-General.
Dear Sir Re Beer v. Brown, On the 10th of February last I wrote to you
with reference to this matter, and have anxiously expected some reply, May
I ask your attention to it as the delay is felt very deeply by Dr. Beer, and he
has been informed you have stated an intention to do something in the matter
of the prosecution.
Your very obedient servant,
WILLIAM HELLYER.
129, King Street, Sydney,
12th May, 1868.
To the Honorable James Martin, Esq,, Premier and Attorney-General.
Sir—At the request of Dr. Beer I again call your attention to my letter to
you on his behalf of the lOth day of February last, to which you have failed
replying although your attention has been frequently directed to it, and you
have repeatedly promised to look into the matter and give me an answer. I
regret this matter of such vital importance to Dr. Beer should have hitherto
met with such continuous indifference, it adds much to the suffering he has
undergone, that at the very fountain of justice attention to his case is appa-
rently denied. Had an English labourer been so shamefully treated in a
foreign land the nation would have been roused t» compel redress. Surely
some consideration should be shown to this Swiss gentleman.
Awaiting an early reply.
I have the honor to be,
Your obedient servant,
WILLIAM HELLYER.
129, King Street, Sydney,
21th May, 1868.
To the Honorable James Martin, Esq., Attorney-General.
Sir—When I saw you for a moment in the Jury Court on Friday last, you
were busily engaged as counsel in the case of Guinness v. Joshua; and perhaps
my inquiry on behalf of Dr. Beer was not well timed, and your reply, “ that
it was entirely at your discretion whether you would look at the depositions,
or do anything.” (after you had promised to Mr. Driver and myself to look
into the matter) had not received sufficient consideration.
If I erred in addressing you in your public or ofldcial capacity while thus
engaged, I must urge that I considered I was entitled to make the inquiry I
did make, believing (as I did) that your public duty had not escaped atten-
tion; but my communication with the head of an important depai’tment
should have been by letter. .


I must acknowledge that I heard with great astoniehmeut, “ That you did
not understand receiving letters about Dr. Beer in the way you had;” but
that was much increased when you added, “ I’ll not allow either him or his
attorney to address me in the manner you have done,” the more especially as
my letters to you were temperate and respectful, submitting to your judg-
ment that which I conceived to be my client’s wrongs; and asking such relief
as the humblest subject is entitled to, and the highest authority could justly
and consistently grant.
I trusted to the merits of the case of Dr. Beer, to his unparalleled wrongs
and sufferings, to set in motion the highest legal authority to punish legally
and constitutionally a great crime. Yet, three months have elapsed, and no
attention has been directed to it, and the casualties which occur during such
a period have operated very unfavourably to his interests.
I have not resorted to other influence, or to any political or public pressure
hitherto, yet you have adopted a tone and bearing that only would be merited
by a criminal, whose only claim to notice was his own insignificance and
guilt, and one which I submit this case did not merit.
I again bring under your notice my first communication to you oh the 10th
day of February last (to which you have repeatedly promised attention), and
respectfully request an answer by Monday next.
I have the honor to be.
Your very obedient servant,
WILLIAM HELLYER,
Solicitor.
129, King Street, Sydney,
6th June, 1868.
Re Dk. F. Beer.
My dear Sir —In the last session of Parliament you kindly brought under
the notice of the Attorney-General the case of Beer v. Brown, for perjury,
and on the 10th of March last, a notice of motion was on the Votes and Pro-
ceedings of the Legislative Assembly in your name for an address to the
Governor for the production of the papers in the same case, and (if I under-
stand you rightly) was withdrawn by you on that day upon the express pro-
mise of the Attorney-General that he would read through the depositions and
look into the matter. Please inform me if my recollection is right as nothing
has yet been done by the A. G.
Yours very faithfully,
R. Driver, Esq., M.L.A. WILLIAM HELLYER.
Pitt Street, Sydney,
June 12th, 1868.
Beer v. Brown.
My dear Sir—ln reply to your note, just received, in this matter, I post-
poned and ultimately withdrew the notice of motion of the 10th of March
last, upon the promise, as I understood, of the Attorney-General that he
would read through the depositions in the case, and look into the matter.
Yours very truly,
Wv. Hellyer, Ksq., Solicitor. Rd. DRIVER.


And so the matter rests at present! The victim of the Law’s
perversion may cower in the gloom of unmerited obloquy—may
writhe in every fibre of his sensitive nature—may go down to
his grave not merely unhonoured but dishonoured—because it is
optional with the Attorney-General to look into the merits of the
victim’s case or not, just as it jumps with his humour! This is
not England’s estimate—England’s sense of justice! This is not
the view which English publicists and statesmen take of the
moral duties of those to whom the administration of the
laws is intrusted! Listen to the words which the great Glad-
stone recently addressed to his constituents at Southport—words
of rare eloquence and high moral resonance—words which have
sunk deep into the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands of
Englishmen, filling them with delight, inspiring them with con-
fidence in the sublime ideal of justice which the future Premier
of England has formed, and enlarging their love for the laws
under which they live! “We should not confound,” said Mr.
Gladstone, “the cause of Fenianism with the cause of Ireland.
Eecent proceedings have sent a thrill of horror through the
country; and when such proceedii'.gs occur, it is very difficult
for the country to preserve a perfect balance of their minds—
especially at a time when every man among us must feel that
there is no absolute security or guarantee for any one man not
becoming the victim of crimes of which he has hitherto been only
the spectator. It is a solemn duty for us to keep the balance of
mind. If the public are excited the excitement will find its way
to the jury box. Aye, it will afiect even the benches of justice.
But there is no calamity that can happen to us one-half so great
as that the purity of justice should be sullied by one single
shade or the straightness of its aim diverted by one single hair’s
breadth from its mark. It often happens that when crimes are
horrible, by a false logic, dictated by a false and spurious feeling,
we begin to suppose, or to act as if we supposed, that because
the charge was dreadful, therefore we might be less particular
about the proof; but depend upon it there cannot be a more fatal
error. It is absolutely necessary that in every case against men
who have been tried or against men who are to be tried for out-
rages that make our blood run cold, they should have precisely


the same advantages, precisely the same favour and indulgence
as in ordinary times is given to the most ordinary, the slighest
offence —and that all should remember that in the eye of English
law every man is innocent until he is legally found guilty. The
august figure of Justice has eyes and ears —nay, it should be all
eyes and ears for every description of testimony and information
that bears upon the truth of charges; with whatever tends to
prejudice the case, to inflame the mind, to carry the heat and
temper of passion into the verdict that may be delivered —for all
such matters the old proverb is good, “Justice should be abso-
lutely deaf and absolutely blind.” If the very Throne were at stale
—the ancient Throne on which sits the beloved and venerated figure of
owr Sovereign; if the old and time-honoured laws of this kingdom
were at stake; if every institution that we value and hold dear; if
every institution that we have received from our fathers, and that we
hope to hand down to our children were at stake in the issue of a cri-
minal charge—still you must look at nothing hut the sufficiency of the
proof; you must let all charges, you must let all dangers he incurred,
you must suffer the world to take its course, even though it were crack-
ing in your ears, rather than allow the credit and the sanctity of jus-
tice to he tainted for a moment in the smallest degree” And we have
practical proofs every year of our lives of the upright zeal and
generous liberality with which the people of England right the
wronged and indemnify the victims of injustice. An outlay of
three or four millions sterling, uugrudingly expended, during the
Abyssinian war, for the rescue of a few captives, is an illustra-
tion in point. Nor is this spirit of uprightness confined to cases
which assume political significance. No year passes without
our hearing some instance of individual innocence asserted and
all the justice of the case vindicated. Here is a recent example
—which we find skilfully sketched by a literary artist in the
Empire. “Talking of verdicts,” runs on the writer, “reminds
me of a paragraph in the last mail telegram, which might be
made the text of a very forcible sermon. Some time ago, a Mr.
Wilkinson, a bank manager, was convicted in England of forgery,
and sentenced to five years imprisonment. It seemed rather a
hard case at the time, and now we learn that it was even harder
than it seemed, Mr. WTlkinsou after having served a considerable


part of his sentence having been discharged from custody
as the innocent victim of some “ great mistake.” A few years;
ago this great mistake would have cost Mr. Wilkinson his life;
as it is, who can say that it has not cost even dearer things ?
Justice does not always whirl with equal measure, even in courts
of law; hut a great mistahe which consigns a man to a gaol, and at
one fell blow blights his future and dishonours his name, is rather
beyond the fair limits even of legal malpractices. I wonder how
many more victims there are of similar “great mistakes,” pining
in our gaols, or cursing in obscurity and disgrace the laches of the
law.”
We need hardly add another word. Dr. Beer is before the
country for justice. His cry becomes intensified in proportion
as he is flouted or baflied. He calls aloud for justice in the
name of that Law which was strained—perverted —misapplied —
to ruin him twelve years ago. He asks for it in the name of that
Hospitality which was wickedly violated, when he—a stranger—
a foreigner —ignorant of the mode of our legal procedure and of
our customs—had not that impartiality of Bench and Bar exhi-
bited in his regard, which is vouchsafed to the most hardened
British felon. He calls for it in the name of bitter sufferings
heroically endured and of innocence long since established. He
demands it in the name of British Truth and Honour, both of
which are deeply stained till his fair fame be assoiled, and the
record of his disgrace be removed from the legal archives of the
country. He implores it in the name of the good God, the Eter-
nal Justice! who penetrates the secrets of all hearts, and scru-
tinizes all motives, and who will one day judge both Dr. Beer
and his prosecutors! Shall this appeal be in vain ? There is a
principle of ethics—a canon of morals —a glorious axiom of all
civilized nations—-wrapped up in a proverb —it is this :
FIAT JUSTITIA, KUAT CCELUM!
May Australia adopt it in the case of Dr. Frederick Beer.


APFENDICES.
APPENDIX A. No. 1.
tiS“ Dr. BEER’S LETTER TO Mr. REYNOLDS AFTER SENTENCE.
Cockatoo, lith May, 1856.
My dear friend.
I know lam the victim of a villanous conspiracy. However, I put my whole
confidence and trust in God, and in you and my remaining friends, and hope,
as you lead me to expect, and as my conscience assures me, that all will still
be right.
For fear of any accidents I wish you would take affidavits of the following
persons that were subpoenaed by me.
Dr. Salter: To prove Mrs. Brown being seriously diseased and attended
by him some time ago.
Mr. Horner: That I attended no other Mrs. Brown, and that by the cash
receipts of £7 lOs. and £3 15s. produced in court by her, it was her account;
that she was treated for venereal, and took 17 boxes of Dzondis corrosive
sublimate pills, had been under influence of belladonna dressings on blisters
9 times, and has had the same suppositories before. (23rd April, 1865.)
Mrs. Seath, formerly of Black Swan : That Mr. and Mrs Brown said to her
and to Mr. and Mrs. Carroll, I cured her of a cancer in December 1855.
Messrs. Want, Roxburgh and Want: That I took their advice about the
Alliance Insurance, and that they said the receipt for £4O or premium was
only part of the transaction, and that legally Were and Pritchard could not
be forced to issue a policy, and this was before the 10th of February, so I
could not have had any idea of getting the policy.
NichoUs and Williams, Solicitors, Pitt Street; The same advice given to
me, alike before the 10th of February. I fetched the order from Brown for
the £4O the 7th of February after I took these advices.
Mr. Russell: That Mrs. Brown satisfied Mrs. Russell as to the fact of her
being diseased by her husband.


Mr. Rudolph Robinson, formerly at Leigh’s Bonded Store: That Brown told
him he would get me to go to Were and Prichard and try to get the policy,
as a man of standing; that I lent hin-i the £4O; that he would take the whip
hand first into his hands and render up his policies.
Mr. Wiliam Dean, Market Street: As to Brown’s character, and his late
adventure and promises to
Mr. Kim: That I would not attend Mrs. Brown any longer if I had any
interest in her life ; Messrs. Dent, Elliot, Senior, Henry, and Horner, Drug-
gists, can prove as to the doses of Belladonna I generally gave and in which
form, showing the prescription for Mrs. Brown being no extraordinary one.
Believe me to be, Dear Sir,
Yours, most obliged,
FREDERICK BEER.
APPENDIX A. No. 2.
Dr. BEER’S PETITION.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR Wm. T. DENISON, Knight, Commander
of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath, Governor-General in and over
all Her Majesty’s Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South
tralia and Western Australia, and Captain-General and Governor-in-
Chief of New South Wales and its depencies, and Vice Admiral of the
same, and to the Honorable the Executive Council of New South Wales.
The humble Petition of Frederick Beer, at present in the City of Sydney
in New South Wales, a ticket-of-leave holder for the District of Braidwood
in the said Colony,
Respectfully Sheweth,
I.—THAT your Petitioner on and previous to the tenth day of February,
one thousnud eight hundred and fifty-six, was a duly qualified Medical
Practitioner in the Colony of New South Wales, and being Medicinse,
Chirurgiaj, artisque Obstetricias Doctor of the University of Zurich and
practising his profession in the said City of Sydney.
2. —THAT your Petitioner was on the ninth day of April, one thousand
eight hundred and fifty-six, tried at the Central Ci’iminal Court at Dar-
lingliurst in the said City before his Honor Mr. Justice Therry and a jury
of twelve “for having on the tenth day of February, one thousand eight
“hundred and fifty-six, feloniously and unlawfully administered or caused
“ to be administered to Phillis Brown a large quantity of noxious drug, to
“ withalf a drachm of Belladonna with intent to produce a miscar-
“ riage,” and was found Guilty and was on the twelfth day of the said
month of February sentenced to be confined and kept to hard labor on the
roads or other public works of the Colony for the period of ten years,—the
fact being and in accordance with the evidence that only five grains had
been prescribed as a dose to be applied, if necessary, every third hour.


3.—THAT the medical evidence on this charge was supported by a
great number of the medical men then practising in Sydney, but who
never having according to their evidence used Belladonna in the manner
in which it had been prescribed by your Petitioner, and having prescribed
the said medicine only in other ways, and that seldom, were unacquainted
with its effects as prescribed by your Petitioner, and therefore merely gave
their opinion as to what effect they supposed the said medicine would
have, which opinion was not only based on the false premises that Mrs.
Brown’s bowels were not in a disorganized state, but is eo ipso irrational
and in opposition to what is laid down in the best English medical works
and a phisiological impossibility, upon which evidence however your Peti-
tioner was convicted.
4.—THAT your Petitioner, conseious that his verdict was wrong and that
his treatment of Mrs. Brown was right, caused the whole of the evidence to
be laid before the first medical authority in England, namely. Sir Benjamin
Collins Brodie, Baronet, Physician to Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen,
in the month of September one thousand eight hundred and fifty-seven,
with a view of obtaining his opinion thereon, and previously thereto in the
month of April in the same year communicated to His Excellency the Gover-
nor-General that he had given the said medicine to Phillis Brown to prevent
a threathening miscarriage, that on the arrival of Sir Benjamin Brodie’s
opinion full credence might be given to your Petitioner’s statement of his
reasons for having prescribed the same medicine.
S.—THAT your Petitioner has since received the said opinion from Sir
Benjamin Collins Brodie, a copy whereof is hereto annexed and he extracts
therefrom the following passages : “I cannot have the smallest hesitation
“in saying that both the cnarge and the verdict are utterly absurd. I can
understand that Ur. Beer might have prescribed the use of Belladonna to
‘‘ IMrs. Brown with a view to prevent premature labour, but 1 cannot sup-
‘‘ pose that he or anyone else would dream of prescribing it for the purpose
“of procuring abortion,” thus in fact approving of the practice of your
Petitioner in this respect.
G.- THAT your Petitioner after receipt of this opinion, namely, on the
loth of June, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight, obtained an inter-
view with His Honor Mr. Justice Therry whilst on a visit to Cockatoo
Island, where your Petitioner had been sent to, and shewed His Honor this
opinion who thereon recommended your Petitioner to present a petition to
your Honorable Council, when he remarked, “ that by the verdict of the
“jury the case was taken out of his hands, but that the opinion of Sir Beuja-
“ min Collins Brodie threw a new feature on the whole case and that the
“ Petition would be referred to him and he would report favorably upon it
‘‘and that upon that account it v\ould not be necessary for your Petitioner to
“ prove the disease of the bowels of Mrs. Brown, of the existence of which
“ he, Mr. Justice Therry, had since had an opportunity to convince himself by
“the evidence of other Medical men who had professionally attended her.’’


7.—THAT in accordance with the suggestion of His Honor yoiir Peti-
tioner applied to Samuel North, Esquire, the Visiting Magistrate at Cockatoo
Island, on the twentieth day of June, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-
eight, for permission to present a Petition to your Honorable Council when
he was informed that he could not be allowed to present such Petition.
S.—THAT your Petitioner with reference to the principal testimony
against him on the facts of the case has only to say that as a foreigner he
believed that Mr. Brown, from the position he held as a Government officer,
was a man of respectability and therefore saw no harm in making, as your
Petitioner supposed, friends of him and his family; but he has learned since
his conviction and can prove if required, notwithstanding that they swore to
the contrary, that they were not even man and wife although living as such,
that they both came to the Colonies as convicts, and that Mrs. Brown, some-
time previously to her appearance in Sydney, had kept a brothel in Flinder’s
Lane, Melbourne, whilst with reference to Mr. Brown your Petitioner he
believes, need only say that his recent conduct has compelled him to fly the
country under a false name, and that their supposed eldest sou, who gave
evidence in the case, was not the son of either of them, and is now willing to
speak the whole truth, which, your Petitioner is assured, will put a very dif-
ferent aspect on the case, —he, however, is at present in the Parramatta Gaol
under the name of George Russell for embezzlement.
9.—THAT your Petitioner, having served four years of the said term, has
by his good conduct whilst at Cockatoo Island become entitled to a ticket-of-
leave which he obtained on the twenty-sixth day of April last for the District
of Braidwood aforesaid with leave to stay in Sydney for a short time for the
purpose of arranging his affairs, and he now takes the earliest opportunity of
laying these facts before your Honorable Council.
YOUR Petitioner therefore humbly prays that a remission of the remainder
of his sentence may be most graciously granted and as a precedent would beg
humbly to refer to the case of Dr. Smethurst, convicted in England in No-
vember last for the murder of Isabella Bankes by poison, who upon the opi-
nion of Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie, that there was not absolute and com-
plete evidence of his guilt was granted a free pardon, and would beg to call
the attention of your Honorable Council to the concluding paragraph of the
letter of the Right Honorable Sir G. C. Lewis to the Lord Chief Baron com-
municating the grant of such pardon as applicable to this case which is as
follows; “ The necessity which I have felt for advising Her Majesty to grant
“ a free pardon in this case has not, as it appears to me, arisen from a defect
“in the Constitution or proceedings of the criminal tribunals. It has arisen
“ from the imperfections of Medical Science and from the fallibility of judg-
“ ment in an obscure malady, even of skilful and experienced medical prac-
“ titioners.”
And your Petitioner as in duty bound will ever pray, <fec.
Dated this seventh day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty.
FREDERICK BEER.
WiLLiiAM Deane, Solicitor for the Petitioner, 9, Hunter Street, Sydney.


EXTRACT FROM A COMMUNICATION OF Dr. BEER TO HIS
EXCELLENCY SIR WILLIAM DENISON, K.C.8., Governor-
General of N. S. W., &c., &c., dated 26th April, 1857.
“Should any of the above assertions become of great benefit for the com-
munity at large, as I flatter myself they will, I crave as the only benefit to
myself that your Excellency may be pleased to peruse the Petition which some
citizens of Sydney will have the honor to present to you at an early date in
my behalf; and the only allusion I wish to make in regard to my unfortunate
case, is to express a hope you will*see, that I could not have had a criminal intent
in the application of the Extract of Belladonna to Mrs. Brown when given in
the form of suppositories (a drug, the beneficial capacities of which until late
seem to have been almost as little known in this Colony as those of the San-
tonin), but that I endeavoured, and that with success, to prevent a threaten-
iug miscarriage taking place, which is always best met with narcotics. I beg
to be allowed to remind your Excellency that the effects of Belladonna differ
from other narcotics in this respect, that its primary effects influence first the
muscular system and not the hrain, by resisting and relaxing muscular con-
tractions, or as iu spasms by relieving them, and that therefore premature
contractions of the womb are best met with that medicine.”
Although His Excellency in his acknowledgment of Dr. Beer’s communi-
cation of June 1857, “could see no reason why the punishment awarded by
the law should be set aside,” it nevertheless is very clear that the rationale
of Dr. Beer’s ti'eatment of Mrs. Brown on the 10th of February, 1856, as set
forth in his communication to His Excellency, coincides with the views of
Sir B. C. Brodie, and is a proof of the former’s superior judgment.
APPENDIX A. No. 3.
Copy of a Petition addressed to Mr. Justice Therry, Ylth January, 1858
Sheweth,
That your Petitioner begs to apologise for trespassing on your time at a period
when he is well aware the great and pressing business of the country occupies
so much of your time and presses so heavily on your energies, but your Peti-
tioner, still feeling thoroughly convinced of his own innocence, has no other
alternative left, in the absence of a court of appeal, but to lay before your
Honor such evidence as will, if carefully examined, convince you that the
assertion of his innocence is well founded iu fact, notwithstanding the verdict
of a Jury to the contrary
Your Petitioner most earnestly implores your earnest consideration of his
case, from the tact of a verdict of a Jury in criminal cases being considered
by the criminal law of England as final, although extreme punishment, in
many ca.ses amounting to death, may be the result; whereas in ordinary trans-
actions between man and man wheu property to a small amount is involved,
the law on a discovery of further evidence admits of a series of trials, by which
either the plaintiff or defendant is aura of ultimately obtaining justice.


That, while your Petitioner is far from imputing any improper motives to
the several medical gentlemen who gave evidence against him upon his trial,
yet he respectfully submits that he is in a position to prove from the testi-
mony of the most learned and scientific men in the medical world that the
whole phalanx of medical witnesses which was arrayed against him on the
part of the Crown was erroneous, and that these gentlemen, however, well
iutentioned, entirely misconstrued the object for which they were called to
give evidence, their premises being contrary to the well-established and de.
fined rules of Physiology, Morbid Anatomy (a science), and, as a consequence,
their deductions being wholly and entirely the antithesis of the truth, and of
course calculated to turn the balance in the minds of an unprofessional jury,
and contribute to your Petitioner’s conviction, which may emphatically and
with truth said to be, not the verdict of twelve enlightened calm and dispas-
sionate men, but the concurrent opinion of unskilled practitioners conveyed
through the conduit pipe of a jury.
That your Petitioner, in making this assertion, does not mean to insinuate
anything disrespectful to the gentlemen who composed that body, but he sub-
mits to your Honor that it is a fact patent that a body so constituted as that
Jury was could be nothing more in his particular case than a mere reflex of
the opinions tendered by the witnesses of the Crown; and it is therefore that
he the more earnestly entreats your consideration of testimony of a far more
exalted character, coming as it does from men far above suspicion, and who
are in truth the light of the age in which they live —not local in their charac-
ter, but shining forth in every country in Europe, as a guide to those who are
anxious and ready to follow the paths of science and truth; and amongst those
illustrious witnesses your Petitioner is about to beg your Honor’s marked
attention to that illustrious man. Sir B. C. Broilie, of whom the Lord Chief
Justice of England said in his charge to the Jury, in the case of the Queen
against Palmer, “ that he was a man far above all suspicion.”
That as a preliminary to the perusal of Sir B. C. Brodie’s opinion, your
Petitioner begs your Honor will be pleased to peruse the memorial which
your Petitioner forwarded to your Honor, under date 23rd August last*
which, although perhaps too elaborate, will be necessary to the right under-
standing of the opinion given by Dr. Brodie, a copy of which is hereunto
annexed, the original being in the hands of Mr. Reynolds, who will produce
it to your Honor if required.
That if your Honor will place these two documents —namely, the memorial
of your Petitioner and the opinion of Di. Brodie—in juxta-position, you will
perceive that, although the one was written by him on Cockatoo Island m
August last, and the other in Glasgow in September last, the opinion of the
latter confirms all the particular points in the memorial of your Petitioner,
and IS a positive sanction to the mode of treatment that your Petitioner pre-
scribed for Mrs. Brown on the 10th February, 1856. Indeed your Petitioner
has never yet used language as thoroughly expressive of the ridicule or sar-
casm of Sir B. C. Brodie, who says—“I cannot have the slightest hesitation in


saying that both the charge (meaning the alleged crime) and the verdict are
utterly absurd;” and furthermore Sir B. C. Brodie says, “I can understand
“that Dr. Beer might have prescribed Belladonna with a view to prevent pre*
labor, but I cannot suppose that either he or anyone else would
“dream of prescribing it to procure abortion.”
That your Petitioner, in submitting this testimony to your Honor, has far
more confidence in the discrimination, discernment, and judgment of an en-
lightened gentleman, well versed in most of the sciences and all the affairs
life, than he had in the decision of a Jury, who are bound and trammelled to
the necessity of reducing themselves to be exponents of the opinions of men
not competent to the task which they undertook, and he confidently hopes
that your Honor will ere this have perceived that your Petitioner acted con-
scientiously, and with a degree of high professional skill in the delicate and
complicated duties which he was called to discharge towards Mrs. Brown on
the 10th February, 1856, and that your Honor having once arrived at that
conclusion, will not hesitate to recommend him to his Excellency the Gover-
nor-General for a free pardon.
That, however, should further corroborative evidence be wanting to clear
away from your mind any shadow of doubt that may possibly remain, he most
respectfully begs to call your Honor’s attention to the evidence of Drs. Red-
head and Williams, who have attended upon and treated Mrs. Brown recently,
and for some time subsequent, to your Petitioner’s conviction, keeping in view
that these gentlemen were called upon to treat Mrs. Brown, laboring under,
the same symptoms of disease—labor pains expected. From their testimony
it will be seen that Mrs. Brown not only sufifered from a disease in the rectum,
but from the very identical one which your Petitioner throughout maintained
to exist, namely, a stricture in the rectum, and that a formidable one, and
they were guided to this conclusion by an exploration per anum with their
finger—a proceeding conscientiously incumbent upon every honorable practi-
tioner in any complaints of suffering about those parts, and without which it
is impossible to form even an approximate opinion or arrive at an accurate
conclusion, inasmuch as symptoms of a similar description at that particular
part of the body are manifested by eleven separate diseases of the rectum, and
amongst them principally those caused by gonnorhoea and syphilitic poisons,
which, according to Rokitansky, always end in stricture, but are self-existent
and entii’ely distinct from those caused by piles or prolapse of the guts,
although the latter complaints may be co-existent with them, and are often
erroneously ascribed to them if the examination is neglected.
That your Petitioner is correct in this view of the case, he begs to draw
your Honor’s attention to the opinion expressed by the learned Charles Bocke,
Professor of Morbid Anatomy (a science), where, at page 334 in his compila-
tion on Morbid Anatomy, he says—“A peculiar kind of inflammation (procti-
tis) of the rectum is, according to Rokitansky, that caused by venereal affec-
tion, which ends always in contraction and stricture of the passage in form of
a callous ring.” At page 666 he says—“ The diseases of the rectum produce a
“peculiar kind of pain, a tenesmus, a bearing down pain, and itchings; bloody


“mucous or pus passes iavoluntarily from the patient, (but are retained if
“stricture is already formed,) and accumulation of wind; as they frequently
“cause also pains in the small of the back (regio sacralis), and in the bladder,
“and may also cause piles and prolapse of the rectum, they are not at all un-
“frequently declared as being caused by piles, and remain unexamined; but
“every conscious practitioner makes, in diseases about the rectum, an explo-
“ration per anum.” And your Honor will find, referring to the evidence of
Brown, that previous to the suppositories being administered to her, she
labored under all the symptoms above enumerated. Yet Drs. Williams, Bland,
Nathan, and M‘Farlane maintained, unblushingly, that there was nothing in
Mrs. Brown’s evidence to lead them to suppose that there was disease of the
rectum.
That since your Petitioners conviction it has transpired, on the clearest
testimony, that iVfrs. Brown was at one time confined as a patient in the
Sydney Infirmary, labouring under syphilitic disease, communicated to her
by her husband; thus placing beyond doubt that she labored under this dis-
ease, and that long and severely—calculated as a primary cause for disease of
the rectum, the treatment of which produced ravages on her constitution,
caused extreme delicate health, and caused the death of her infant, which I
predicted would be the case; and Dr. Redhead is ready to submit and prove
to you, or any board of inquiry, that Mrs. Brown labored, and still does labor,
under a diseased and disorganised state of the rectum, and that the treatment
which your Petitioner prescribed for her was the best that could be adopted
under the cix'cuinstances, and, apart of its having prevented premature labor,
and the fatal consequences which might have resulted therefrom, it operated
s the best specific or antidote to the pains and sufferings which she endured
from the refreshed irritation and the diseased state of her rectum. Thus
clearly showing that the Belladonna administered by your Petitioner was
doubly efficacious, and strictly in accordance with the views and opinions of
the most learned men in Europe, and corroborated by the testimony of Dr.
Redhead.
That your Petitioner further wishes to draw your Honor’s attention to the
evidence of the witness Horner, who by a legal subtlety on the part of the
gentlemen who conducted the prosecution, was prevented from making it ap-
parent to the Jury that a large portion of the medicines which Mrs. Brown
paid for, and the receipts for which were produced before the court, consisted
of Dr. Dzondis’ celebrated antisyphilitic mercurial pills (corrosive sublimate),
and which Mrs. Brown in her evidence designated Golden Pills, and that much
of the remainder of the medicines so furnished and charged to her consisted
of Extract of Belladonna, in the various modes of application. Such, never-
theless, was the fact, and Mr. Horner is now prepared to prove the truth of
the assertion, recollecting that he himself not only prepared those medicines,
but took two boxes of such pills himself into her house and personally deliv-
ered them to Mrs. Brown, —which facts, notwithstanding, had been previously
admitted at the preliminary examination at the police-court.


That your Petitioner submits it is needless for him to say he had no inter-
est whatever on the 10th February, 1856, in the death of Mrs. Brown, as was
sought to be imputed to him by the evidence relative to the Insurance Com-
pany, and that a conscientious discharge of his duty, coupled with a sincere
friendship and wish for the welfare of Mrs. Brown and childx’en, prompted
him to the course which he pursued towards her, particularly as he was aware,
from the long course which he had with her domestic circle, that the conduct
of Mr. Brown towards his wife was highly reprehensible, which led to your
Petitioner remonstrating with Mr. Brown on the 14th February, 1856, as to
the impropriety of his conduct towards his wife, evincing, as he did, a total
disregard to her health, and even her life; and your Petitioner feels convinced
that even her death would have been welcome to him, by means whereof he,
and he alone, would reap the benefit arising from the policies of insurance, and
hence it was that he exercised such improper influence over the mind of his
wife, weak and debilitated as she was, which led to your Petitioner’s declining
to attend the family in a formal manner any longer; and it will be perceived
that on the calling in of a new medical attendant, both Mr. and Mrs. Brown
felt “ themselves in such a peculiar position ” as regards their relation to the
Insurance Offices, which induced them to conceal from him the nature of
your Petitioner’s treatment, and induced Mrs. Brown, in particular, to evince
throughout the whole examination and trial that she enjoyed good health, the
policies of insurance being always kept in view by her, and the consequences
likely to result from a fair and candid statement of her health and habit of
body.
Your Petitioner, therefore, most respectfully prays that your Honor will be
pleased to take the preceding remarks into your consideration, and recom-
mend him to His Excellency the Governor-General for a free pardon.
And your Petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
(Signed) FREDERICK BEER.
Note.— His Honor Judge Therry had subsequently an interview with Dr. Beer on Cocka-
too Island, and directed him to lay his case before the Executive, which order is entered in
the minutes of the Island, under date the 10th June, 1858.
APPENDIX A., No. 4.
Cockatoo Island, 20th June, 1858.
To S. North, Esq.,
Visiting Magistrate of C. I.
Worshipful Sir—ln accordance with your permission I respectfully beg to
'address you, shewing the grounds on which I am desirous of petitioning His
Excellency the Governor-GeneraL
I.—Because His Honor Mr. Justice Therry on my interview with him on
the 10th instant stated to me that after the verdict of the Jury the case was
out of his hands, but told me to petition the Executive and bring before


the opinion of Sir Benjamin Brodie, which His Honor admitted to be genu-
ine, and which threw a new feature on the whole case. His Honor at the
same time intimated to me that I should show to the Executive that the me.
dicine (Belladonna) as prescribed, was not dangerous, which I am prepared to
do if permitted.
2. —That ten of my witnesses who had been duly subpoenaed to give evidence on
my trial were not called and examined by Mr. Blake notwithstanding it was
niy wish they should have been, as their evidence would have acquitted me.
3. —I can prove by my assistant Mr. Horner that Mrs. Brown, who gave
evidence against me, was the identical Mrs. Brown for whom I formerly pre-
scrioed Belladonna in equally large quantities, although by a legal ingenuity,
on the part of the prosecutors I failed in proving so on my trial, and the same
witness can prove that I was in the habit in my practice of prescribing to my
patients suppositories containing the same medicine in the same quantity, as
well as the use of the Extract of Belladonna by mouth and upon blisters and
in larger doses comparatively speaking, amongst whom is one Mr. Roberts,
one of the gentlemen who sat as Jurors in my case.
4.—That Drs. Redhead and Williams (junior), who have since attended
Mrs. Brown, will prove that she was at that time and is now labouring under
that particular diseased state of her rectum which I mentioned at my trial,
which led the medical witnesses to give evidence on a false supposition, viz:
that she was in good health.
s.—That I am prepared to prove that the medicine prescribed by me in
that quantity and method of application was not a dangerous medicine and
would not have produced the effects which the medical testimony for the pro-
section attributed to it.
I have learned and can prove by Dr. Wolmat, of Penrith, that he used sup-
positories containing (each) double the quantity of the same medicine than
those I prescribed, which is the dose recommended when used per anum by
many of the most eminent Physicians in Europe.
Lastly, I have learned and can prove that Mrs. Brown and Caroline Smith
by the Convict-Ship “Anson” to Hobart Town are identical, and that she
subsequently kept a brothel in Flinders Lane, Melbourne. Under these cir-
cumstances which had not transpired at my trial, particularly the opinion of
Sir B. Brodie, given after an investigation of the whole case, I respectfully
solicit your permission to petition the Governor and the Executive Council in
accordance with the directions of Mr. Justice Therry, who told me on the
10th instant that such a petition would be referred to him and he would
report upon it, remarking at the same time that it was not necessary to prove
the diseased state of Mrs. Brown’s bowels.
I have the honor to be,
Worshipful Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
FREDERICK BEER,


of Answer to the foregoing address.^
The Superintendent will be pleased to inform Frederick Beer that his case is
not one of those coming under the 3rd clause of the new regulations, and he
therefore cannot be allowed to petition the Governor-General.
(Signed) S. NOKTH.
14th July, 1858.
Note.— During the interview with Judge Therry, on the 10th June, 1858, on the Island
were present the Rev. Mr. Agnew, Dr. West, aud Mr. McPherson, Inspector. His Honor’s
direction to petition is entered in the minutes of the Oflßce on that day.
APPENDIX A., No. 5.
1861.
Itny Soutl) lHalce.
FREDERICK BEER.
(petition from braidwood in reference to.)
Ordered by the Legislative Assembly to he Printed, 2Ath April, 1861.
To the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.
The humble Petition of the undersigned Inhabitants of the District of
Braidwood, —
Respectfully Sheweth :
1. —That your Petitioners are Residents of the Town and District of
Braidwood.
2.—That Frederick Beer was, in the month of April, 1856, convicted at
Sydney, aud sentenced to ten years imprisonment on a charge of having ille-
gally administered Belladonna to one Phyllis Brown.
B.—That in the month of April last the said Frederick Beer obtained from
the Crown a Ticket-of-leave for the District of Braidwood aforesaid.
4.—That the said Frederick Beer has since that date resided in Braidwood
aforesaid, and has been and still is in extensive practice as Physician and
Surgeon.
5. That in the practice of such profession the said Frederick Beer must
necessarily be intrusted with the confidence and the very lives of a large num-
ber of the Inhabitants of the said Town and District
6-—That from circumstances which have transpired since the said convic-
tion, your Petitioners have good reason to believe that the said Frederick


Beer was not guilty of the offence for which he was so convicted; and that
evidence which was not forthcoming at the trial of the said Frederick Beer,
and which could not have then been obtained, but which can now be pro-
duced, will prove that he was not guilty of such offence, and that he was
therefore, wrongfully convicted.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that, for the security of your
Petitioners and the other Inhabitants of this District, and in justice to the
said P'rederick Beer, a full and minute inquiry into, and investigation of, all
the circumstances connected with the case of the said Frederick Beer may be
instituted.
And your Petitioners will ever pray.
[Here follow 1,564 Signatures.]
APPENDIX B.
We hereby certify that on the 23rd June, 1868, we made a digital examina-
tion of the rectum of the body of Phillis Adolphia Brown, at the Lord High
Admiral Inn, Botany Street, Surry Hills, and found about an inch from the
external orifice a narrow annular stricture, and about an inch above this
another stricture also annular, but broad, thick, and evidently of long stand-
ing.
N. G. ANDEKSON, F.R.C.S.,
12, South Head Road.
Equivalent testimony had been previously given on oath by Dr. J. Red-
head. His Affidavit runs as follows- —“On the 27th August, 1860, John
Redhead, of Braidwood, in the Colony of New South AVales, Surgeon, being
duly sworn, maketh oath, and saith as follows ; —I am a duly qualified medi-
cal practitioner, and was so on and before the month of September, in the year
1857. On the last mentioned month and year I attended Mrs. Phillis Brown
professionally. She then resided in Cumberland Street, in the city of Sydney,
in the colony aforesaid. On examining her, I found she was suffering from an
organic stricture of the rectum in the form of a ring, about an inch from the
Sphincter Ani. I found that the disease was one of long standing, and that
she had been previously treated for its reduction, but without success. She
was, when I was called in, in a state of continued irritation. The Phillis
Brown above mentioned, is the same person who in the month of April, 1856,
appeared as a witness, and gave evidence at the Criminal Court, in Sydney
against Dr. F. Beer, on his trial, for the administration of belladonna to the
Phillis Brown.” . -r^
(Signed) JOHN REDHEAD,
Surgeon, &c.
Sworn by the deponent, on the day first mentioned, before me.
(Signed) JOHN GURNEY,
Commissioner for Affidavits.


APPENDIX a, No. 1.
(Report of Committee of Legislative Assembly, January \(}th, 1862. j
The Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly, appointed on the 22nd
October last, “to inquire into and report upon the Petition of Dr. F. Beer,
''presented to this House on the 23rd April last, and ordered to be pAnted
“ on the 2ith ApHl, 1861,” — with power to send for persons and papers,” —
have agreed to the following Keport:—
It appears that Frederick Beer was tried on the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th
April, 1856, on two counts, viz., Ist. for that he did, on 10th day of Feb-
ruary, 1856, feloniously and unlawfully administer to, and cause to be taken
by one Phillis Brown, a large quantity of a certain noxious thing called
Belladonna, to wit, half a drachm of the said noxious thing called Belladonna,
with intent then and there, and thereby, to procure the miscarriage of the
said Phillis Brown; and 2ndly, for that he did, on the 10th February, 1850,
feloniously and unlawfully administer to, and cause to be taken by the said
Phillis Brown, a large quantity of a certain deadly poison called Belladonna,
to wit, half a drachm of the said Belladonna, with intent, then and there,
and thereby, felonously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, to kill and
murder the said Phillis Brown; and that he was found guilty on the first
count, and not guilty on the second; and was sentenced to ten years on the
roads or public works of the Colony, with hard labour.
A Petition was in April last presented to your Honorable House, signed
by 1,564 inhabitants of the District of Braidwood, stating, “ That, from cir-
“cumstances which have transpired since the said conviction, your Petitioners
“ have good reason to believe that the said Frederick Beer was not guilty of
“the offence for which he was so convicted; and that evidence which was not
“ forthcoming at the trial of the said Frederick Beer, and which could not
“have then been obtained, but which can now be produced, will prove that
“he was not guilty of such offence, and that he was therefore, wrongfully
“convicted.”
Your Committee were subsequently appointed to take this Petition into
consideration; and they have now the honor to report, for the information of
your Honorable House, the decision arrived at after the examination of a
number of witnesses, after having given the evidence that careful and grave
attention which the importance of the case demanded, and after having
afforded to the medical gentlemen who gave evidence on the trial, an oppor-
tunity to repeal, modify, or alter their opinions, if they saw any necessity for
so doing.
It is established incontrovertibly that many persons, whose evidence most
probably would have seriously affected the decision at the trial, were either in
Court or waiting to be examined, whom Dr. Beer was not permitted to pro-
duce; and that evidence has since been procured which would further tend
to exculpate him from the crime for which he w-as convicted, viz., that of Bir
Benjamin Brodie, and the evidence of some of the other witnesses examined
by your Committee.


The evidence of Ur. Salter, Dr, Alloway, Dr. Berncastle, Dr. Brown, Dr.
Eichler, Mr. W. J. Anderson, Mr. M. Eagan, Dr. Cox, and Dr. Boyd, proves
incontestably.
1. That abortion could not have resulted from the use of Belladonna, as
administered; on the contrary, that its effects would be to prevent
abortion.
2. That it could not have caused the death of the child, except through the
maternal system.
3. That, as it was administered to the mother, none of the effects stated to
have immediately followed the introduction of the suppository could
result from its use, as a very considerable period must elapse before it
could be dissolved and absorbed.
4. That as a general rule, the quantity could not in any way be dangerous.
And Mr. Dent’s evidence proves,—
5. That Dr. Bter had been constantly in the habit of prescribing this drug,
for other patients in larger doses than those used in this case; therefore
there was nothing unusual in its application here.
It must not be lost sight of—that, whereas Dr. Beer was convicted of
administering half a drachm of Belladonna, not more than five grains, or one
sixth of that quantity was ever taken in one day, and the directions for its
administration were, to persist in its use only according io its effects, which,
if injurious, would very gradually have developed themselves.
Without in any way impugning the decision arrived at by the jury who tried
the case, who, on the evidence pefore them, could perhaps have arrived at no
other conclusion, your Committee have no hesitation in reporting, from the
evidence laid before them, that the use of belladonna, in the mode prescribed,
could not have procured abortion, and, on that ground they absolve Dr. Beer
altogether from the chorge on which he was found guilty.
Your Committee are of opinion that Dr. Beer ought to have had an oppor-
tunity afforded him of placing his case before the Executive Council, and that
the Visiting Magistrate was net warranted in refusing him permission to for-
ward a Petition to the Executive, as suggested by Mr. Justice Tkerry, as it is
clear that the letter of Sir B. C. Brodie was precisely within the category pre-
scribed by the regulation —quoted by the Visiting Magistrate in justification
of his refusal.
MERION MORIARTY.
Chairman.
APPENDIX a, No. 2.
100, Elizabeth Street, Sydney,
23rd, June, 1868.
Re Dr. BEER.
Dear Sir—Your note of yesterday to hand. I was acting professionally for
Dr. Beer in 1865, and about the time named by you Dr, Beer sought my
advice as to the best means of securing to Mrs. Brown or some members of
50


her family the benefit of a Policy of Insurance on her life, which he was
about as I understood to obtain from one of the Insurance Offices in Sydney.
I have no recollection of having prepared a draft assignment (thovigh I may
possibly have done so), but I am clear in my recollection as to his having
sought my advice on the subject and that circumstance always impressed me
considerably in his favour in after events.
Yours truly,
WILLIAM DEANE.
William Hellyek, Esq., Solicitor, King Street.
APPENDIX D.
COPY OF THE FIRST OF Dr. REDHEAD’S LETTERS
Sydney, September, 1857.
To Mr. Charles Reynolds,
My dear Sir—Would you be kind enough to furnish me with the full par-
ticulars of the trial of Dr. Beer, especially the evidence of the medical men
given at the occasion. lam at present in attendance upon Mrs. Brown, and
wish, for scientific purposes, to investigate as far back as possible all the cir-
cumstances connected with Dr. Beer’s afiair, thinking that I may be able to
elucidate a most important point in medical science.
By obliging me with a correct copy of all evidence taken, Dr. Beer’s re-
marks included, you would confer a great favor on
Yours very sincerely,
J. REDHEAD,
Surgeon.
APPENDIX E.
I certify that the original opinion of Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie herein refer-
red to as also the other papers or copies thereof are in my possession.
WILLIAM DEANE,
Solicitor,
Bth May, 18G0. _________ Hunter Street, Sydney.
APPENDIX F
Frederick William Elliott, on oath, states;—l am a druggist carrying on
business in George-street, Sydney; the prescription produced was brought to
me by Mr. Brown’s sou; I made up the drug according to the prescription; it
contains half a drachm of extract of belladonna, I drachm of soap, 1 drachm
lycopodii, to be mixed together in six equal parts ia suppositories; the sup-
positories produced appear to be some of those I made; the label on the box
produced is in my handwriting; the box I delivered to the boy is now
produced.
FRED. W. ELLIOTT.
51


Sworn at the Police Office, Sydney, this lOth day of March, 1856, before
J. S. DOWLING, J.P.
For the evidence of Brown’s son, contradicting his father’s testimony, see
Report in the Case of Beer v. Brown, Empire, 19th December, 1867, which
contains a copy of the son Brown’s affidavit.
That Report fully establishes M. G. Brown’s perjury in the other particu-
lars referred to at page 14.
APPEXDIX G., No. 1.
The following Address, together with a Chronometer Watch and Diamond
Ring, value eighty guineas, was presented to Dr. Beer, previously to his de-
parture from Braidwood, in 1866:
To Frederick Beer, Esquire, Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Surgery, and Doc-
tor of the Art of Midwifery, of the University of Zurich, Switzerland.
‘‘ We, the undersigned inhabitants of the town and district of Braidwood
embrace the opportunity, previous to \ our departure, after six years’ useful
and exemplary residence amongst us, of assuring you that we have witnessed
with pleasure the many acts of unostentatious and disinterested charity that
you have performed during your sojourn in Braidwood, and of expressing our
satisfaction in bearing witness to your uniform courtesy of demeanour, your
unremitting attention and skilful performance of the highest duties that yOur
successful professional career as the confidential adviser and friend of a large
majority of the population could impose upon you”
“ With the most ardent aspirations for your future welfare, we beg you to
accept the accompanying testimonial, as a small token of our never failing
regard.’’
And believe us to be. Sir,
Your affectionate well-wishers.
JOSEPH TAYLOR, J.P., Chairman.
WHLLIAM A. KERSHAW, Secretary.
On behalf of the
Braidwood, New South Wales, April lOtli. 1866.
’Phe following remarks appeared in the leading columns of the Braidicood
Nevis, March 30th, 1866 :
“ It has been understood for some time past by a few of his most intimate
friends that Dr. Beer intended to leave the district in the early part of this
year, but this fact was not generally believed by the great bulk of the com-
munity. We are, however, in a position to state that Dr. Beer really intends
to finally leave the town in the early part of next month. Whether he will
remain in the colony or proceed to Europe, is a matter we are not in a posi-
tion to state. His departure, however, from amongst us will be regretted by
many—very many of the residents of Braidwood and the suirouning districts.
It would be supeifluous on our part to express adulation or praise upon the
high medical attainments which has characterised the Doctor’s career, during
a six years’ residence in this town. His ability as a physician, as a surgeon,
and as an accoucheur, is too wmll-known and appreciated to need comment at


our hands, whatever his enemies may say to the contrary notwithstanding.
At the present moment, when various types of fever —fever which, in spite of
the opinions expressed by other medical men, has proved so disastrous and
fatal —exist throughout the district, the retirement from Braidwood of Dr.
Beer is to be much deplored. Whatever may the opinion of many as the
Doctor’s published predictions, symptoms, and treatment of the fatal scourge
which has periodically visited this district for the last three or four years, it
is satisfactory to know that the other medical men are adopting the same
course of treatment, which has always resulted with success under the hands
of Dr. Beer. There are other little bits of gossip current, which, indeed,
reflect great credit upon the Doctor, and which, notwithstanding his appa-
rent high fees to people] of means, go to show that although he is an able
man, he is also a merciful and charitable one. For the last three or four
months, although upon the eve of his departure from amongst us, the Doctor
has—according to statements made by the parties themselves to us—been
attending upon a number of persons who have been seized with the fever, in
many instances long distances from town. At all hours of the day and night,
we are told, the Doctor has been called from his house to visit this one or
that one, and although well knowing that the chances of his ever obtaining a
farthing was out of the question, he has freely responded to the the call, and
we have it from undeniable authority that in several cases he has put his hand
in his pocket, and contributed small sums of money to the patients to pur-
chase the necessary medical comforts required during their sufferings. We
merely mention these facts to show that the Doctor is not the selfish and un-
charitable being which some few individuals wish to make the public believe.
We may do without the Doctor, but we are sure his full value will only be
known when beyond our reach when needed.”
APPENDIX G., No. 2.
Sydney to Wit, New South Wales. —l, John Williams, of Sydney, in New
South Wales, Broker, do solemnly and sincerely declare that I was subpoenaed
a juryman at the time of Dr. Beer’s trial, in the year eighteen hundred and
fifty-six. That I saw Dr. Beer conducting his own defence, subsequently I saw
Mr. Blake acting as his Counsel, but the last day of his trial I saw him again
without Counsel, That the said Dr. Beer on the said last day of his trial said
to Judge Therry who was the Judge trying him, that he was undefended and
asked for some person or persons to be called (but I do not remember whom)
to give evidence. That Mr, Holyroyd who was procecuting by permission on
behalf of the Crown objected, and that His Honor Judge Therry in reply to
Doctor Beer’s application to call evidence said that he could not allow further
evidence to be called, as the pri.soner’s (meaning Doctor Beer's) Counsel had
closed his case the day preceding, besides which, that his (meaning Doctor
Beer s) trial had already lasted four days. An& I make this Solemn Declara-
tion conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provi*


sions'of an A.ct made and passed m the ninth year of the reign of Her Majesty
entitled an Act for the more effective abolition of Oaths and Affirmations
taken and made in the various departments of the Governments of New
South AVales and to substitute declarations in lieu thereof and for the volun-
tary and extra judicial oaths and affidavits.
JOHN WILLIAMS.
Subscribed and declared before me, by John Williams, of Sydney, this sixth
day of December, eighteen hundred and sixty-one.
(Signed) J. W. DEAN,
Notary Public.
New South Wales, to wit. —On this eleventh day of February, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-five, George Fordermann,
of Braidwood, in the District of Braidwood and Colony of New Souih
Digger, saith as follows:—“I was at the Supreme Court, in Sydney, during
the trial of Dr. Beer for attempting to procure abortion. I was frequently
in and out of the Court, and I saw Medical men after having given their evi-
dence in the Court write something on slips of paper and circulate them
round amongst a number of Medical men who were standing outside the
Court. I acquainted the accused (Dr. Beer) of the circumstance. This
occurred in the month of April, eighteen hundred and fifty-six.”
GEOKGE FORDERMANN.
Declared before me, in Braidwood, this eleventh day of Februax’y, eighteen
hundred and fifty-six.
DAVID DICKSON, J.P.
X I ■
APPENDIX H.
CERTIFICATES OF HEALTH, (page 25).
Sir Dominick Corrigan and other leading physicians in the mother country
object to “family doctors” supplying Insurance offices with Certificates of
Health for their patients, as the following paragraph—clipped from a recent
number of The Illustrated London News —will show: —“ The man who, having
a family dependent on him, cannot save, and does not assure his life, may,
one of these days, be considered as coming into the category of the dangerous
class. Meantime, the myriads of honest and striving men who sleep soundly
because a certain parchment is in the draw with the will, may be interested
in a question which a distinguished medical man has raised. It is asserted
that a man’s confidential doctor ought not to be asked to reveal the secrets
of his patients constitution. Indeed there are some secrets he cannot in
honour reveal. The physician knows things which the patient himself may
not know, and of which it is most important to the latter that he should be
ignorant. If an office, on the report of a man’s private adviser, rejects a pro-
posal, the proposer’s health or sanity may be fatally affected by the suspicion
which will thus be generated in his mind. Anything Sir Dominick Corrigan
may say demands respectful attention.


NOTA BENE.
As some matters of delicacy —essential to the argument
—are touched on in the preceding pages, the Writer
deems it due to his sense of propriety to mention, that
this Pamphlet is not intended for promiscuous perusal.
It will be circulated gratuitously (and solely) among
the Medical Faculty (whose opinion on it is respectfully
asked), Members of the Legislature, Magistrates, Cler-
gymen, Jurors —in a word those who directly control,
or indirectly influence, the administration of Justice.
Copies will also be forwarded to the most
Members of both Houses of the Imperial Parliament,
and to the leading Medical men of Europe and America.
He begs also to intimate that the conduct of only a
small section of the Medical body —pretentiously called
the elite of the profession in Sydney,” twelve years
ago—is animadverted upon.


*■ /■'
A f o
' ' is.- L- ' O
'T ' ■' •>
SYDNEY:
Printed by J. A. Engel. "Guttenberg” Printing Office,
109, YORK STREET.


> ■ ■ '■ ■■ - ■ . ■■■ - ■ -
V, - .- . ■ '*' ■ '' -
Y- ' . . ’ . -■/ " ‘




TABLE showing the diiferenec of practice by the Leading Faculty in Sydney and the Leading Authorties
of Europe,
LEADEES OF THE FACULTY
IN SYDNEY (1856)
LEADING
AUTHORITIES
OP EUROPE.
Dose when Ap-|
PLIED into the
Bowels or |
Womb.
Names op the
Medical Prac-
TITIONER.S OP
Experience
THEY have had ThEIR ExPBRX-
op THE Drug, enceop it take;
APPLIED BY THE BY THE MoUTH.
Dose when Ap-
Be,ST English,
French, and
Cebman Au-
ENCEOP it TAKEN DoSE BY MoUTH,
Dose by Rectum.
BY Mouth. Endermic.
ALLY ON ABRAID-
■ Sydney.
P.D Surfaces.
Bowels.
THORITIES.
HOLROYD
WILLIAMS
BENNETT
NATHAN...
SI'KELLAR
None
None
None
None
None
Grain Less than 34
1-6 to 1 Grain 134 to 2 Grains
34 to 1 Grain to 2 Grains
34 to 1 Grain
1-12 to 34 Grain Does hot consent
to its use by
rectum.
Smeared on a
bougie, or dis-
solved in a
clyster, 1 to 2
drachms when
applied to the
neck of the
womb. Of nar-
coties, I always
exhibit twice
or three times
the ordinary
dose by way of
a clyster.
1 to 5 Grains.
3 to 4 Grains
PEREIRA
None
Not stated
Says lie has some
Not stated
3 Grains to com
BAILEY
! mence.
60 to 120 Grains A probable me-
to the neck of, dium dose is 1
CHRISTISON
the womb. to 5 Grains.
|l to 5 Grains.
THOMPSON
TROUSSEAU
34 to 1-3 Grain
Too dangerous to
be used.
1 to 2 ozs. to 2 8 Grains in 24 20 Grains in a
lbs. water, for hours, increas- fresh wound
several injec- ed till deliri- made for the
tions, to he ous symptoms purpose,
freijuently re- appear,
peated.
Suppositories
each contaln-
Says he has some
34 to 1 Grain
Does not coincide
with practice
of that sort.
LABORDETTE
ing 10 Grains.
In Suppositories
for bowels and
34 Grain
LECLEUO
womb.
20 to 60 Grains
in a clyster
BLACKETT
PLAGGE
1-12 to 1-6 Gr.
1-0 to 1 Grain
1-6 to 1-3 Gr.
1 to 5 Grains
For clysters and 2 to 4 Grains, Highest 10 Grs
Suppositories to commence
(had no experi-
ence, but differs
from the autho-
20 Grains up with, and in-
to at most 60 crease till the
Grains well - known
symptoms.
8 to 12 Grains.
SAUTBR
For clysters, 6
Grains.
STRECKEII
OSTERLEN
Cly.sters, 6t012 6 to 12 Grains .3 to 6 Grains.
Grains to a per day,
dose.
N.B.—The opinions advanced, and the general doses quoted by these Sydney prac-
titioners, stand alone and are unsupported by any medical works, while
their experience in the matter is evidently very small.
N.B.—Coinciding with these authorities is every other
work, as regards the effects and dose of the drug.
medical
