

P&m n-uv
THE COLONIZATION
NEW GUINEA.
E. S. De Eicci.
\
'
jo*
lOSrHpN; ( .M
P. S. KING & SON, AGENCY,
CANADA BUILDING, KING STREET, WESTMINSTER, S.W.
1884.
PRICE THREEPENCE.


■
:
*\ . ' * - , , ‘ V
r ' ' • . ‘ --A , - , r , ' ■ ' • '
:
■ , ,
■ ' i * x\* k . ■ \ v • i . *. ... ■■ . , ' .V*, , ' ? , * *' v- . / ,w f
' . ’ ' . ■ . - 1 -
- • *, 4 • : ■ -
.. - . ■ ■ ' •• v ;» * * • : 1 • ' • ■ *'r' • i - , ; : ..
1 J ' J * ' (' , 1 1 * - A * , / l _ .
. - . . ■ . . - ■ ..
.
- ■ -r-i -j - i ■ /"■' /• > <• ’ ’ ■.' . • i *'• - ' v. •' u- ■ • ■
- ; " 1 - '~ r j’ . . f 1 ,*
>
,
. ’.t - > , ;; . f-# I ?
■
.... .
* 4 / - *' - '
mm. >«■
. /T’ • : A V, ; V' V
,
V „ ’ w f
► *. , * ' , '
: T - ; ,
1
' '
■
. ' ■> '
•
>*
•
' ” ' m '
■ ■ • ' * .V‘ *.
f V • ../ v • ■ \ , V ' . ..■.■■.v-4 ,r. , . -
.
. ' > ■. ri:: , : : ■ , 1 ; - : ■:.... ■, ■ ■,


THE COLONIZATION
NEW GUINEA,
R. S. De Ricci.
LONDOI:
P. S. KING & SON, PARLIAMENTARY AGENCY,
CANADA BUILDING, KING STEEET, WESTMINSTER, S.W.
1 884.


LONDON I
DAN KEN AND CO., PRINTERS, DUCKY HOUSE, DKUUY COURT,
STKAND, W.C.


THE
COLONIZATION OF NEW GUINEA.
Mr. Evelyn Ashley’s "welcome announcement, in reply to the
inquiry of the Lord Mayor regarding New Guinea in the House of
Commons, on the 7th inst., that the Australian Colonies having
undertaken to contribute <£15,000 a year, Her Majesty’s Government
will—without delay—name an additional Commissioner or Com-
missioners “to exercise protection, in the name of the Queen,
over those shores,” having, as we trust, virtually settled the question
of annexation, it behoves those who have advocated that policy now
to direct their attention to the consideration of the measures necessary
to ensure the welfare of the natives; to secure them in the
peaceful occupation of the soil they cultivate, and avert, as much
as possible, those evils which commonly result from the unrestricted
intercourse of white men with primitive races, as well as for the
development of the great natural resources of the country, for the
maintenance of order, and for the regulation of trade.
The Annexation or Protectorate of New Guinea imposes a heavy
responsibility upon this country; a mixed native population, whose
numbers have been variously estimated at from one to three millions,
inhabiting a territory more extensive than the United Kingdom, is now
brought for the first time under the sway of a civilised Power; and
it is incumbent upon that Power to decide, without delay, whether
the extension of British protection to their shores shall be to
these races the starting-point of an era of happiness and prosperity,
or the reverse.


Happily, we can assert, without fear of contradiction, that we
have undertaken the protection of Eastern Papua from no selfish
motive, nor from any desire to extend our possessions in the Western
Pacific, hut solely for the benefit of the natives themselves, and
to save their country from falling into other and perhaps less
disinterested hands. The natives have not been consulted in the
matter, neither would it have been possible to have done so,
divided and broken up as they are into numerous hostile tribes,
having no cohesion or national organisation, and owing allegiance
neither to king nor paramount chief. We have taken them under
our protection in a spirit of practical philanthropy, and it will be
for their own welfare if —for the present at least —we administer
their country in the same spirit.
What the Colonial Office, guided apparently by similar principles,
has already accomplished for the protection of these tribes from
the encroachments of grasping and unscrupulous adventurers, may
be gathered from the following brief extracts from the Blue Books.
In 1875 the Prospectus of the “ New Guinea Colonizing
Association” having been transmitted to the Colonial Office, the
Secretary received a reply of which the following is an extract: —
“No. 24.*
“Downing Street, 30 th October, 1875.
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 9th inst., transmitting the
Prospectus of a proposed Association to be styled the ‘ New
Guinea Colonizing Association,’ with a draft of proposed rules and
regulations for the guidance of an expeditionary force.
“2. His Lordship has attentively examined the scheme laid
* Correspondence respecting New Guinea, July, 1876.


before him by you, and regrets that he is obliged to consider it
one to which he can in no way give the approval which you seek.
“7. In the Prospectus it is suggested that the Association
should ‘purchase land from the natives/ but in the rules and
regulations there is no mention of purchase, the not unreasonable
inference from which seems to be that it is now proposed to take
by force the very large tracts of land required in order to make
a grant of four (or in some cases five) square miles to each
person joining the expedition. There is no evidence whatever
respecting the power of the natives to enter into contracts which
would be intelligible to them, or binding upon them, or of their
willingness to allow private settlers to occupy their country.
“ Edward Schubert, Esq.
“ (Signed) W. R. Malcolm.’’
Extract from the Times newspaper of 18th November, 1875: —
“ Lord Carnarvon received yesterday, at the Colonial Office, a
deputation from the Anti-Slavery Society on the subject of a scheme
which has been formed for the colonization of New Guinea
The memorialists quote the programmes of the expedition to show
that it is proposed to take possession of a large tract of country
which is now cultivated by natives who dwell in large villages, and who
own every acre of the soil In reply Lord Carnarvon
said, .... ‘ and perhaps the deputation would do him the
justice to remember that it was only a few months since he
procured from Parliament an Act called “ The Pacific Islanders’
Act,” which was very stringent in its provisions, and not only
calculated to affect the labour trade in the Pacific, but which was
deliberately framed by him to extend to the coast of New Guinea’
. . . ‘So far as English trade and colonization go, while they
are legitimate, nobody could wish them more success than he.’


‘lf they (the New Guinea Colonizing Association) do acquire land,
the Crown will not recognise titles which they may have obtained
in an improper way 5 and that if there should be occasion to
colonize New Guinea hereafter, such holdings would not he recognised
as legal. He hoped what he had said would be satisfactory to those
present/ ”
On the Bth of December, Lord Carnarvon, writing to Sir Hercules
Robinson, the Governor of New South Wales, on the subject of the
proposed annexation of New Guinea, referred to this scheme of
colonization in the following manner :
* “In the meantime, with a view to avert, as far as possible,
the disasters, bloodshed, and mortality which are likely to arise out
of the speculations of trading companies or quasi-military expeditions,
and also with a view to reserve to the Crown that power which
cannot properly be surrendered, and the abdication of which, in
former times and in similar circumstances, has led to very great
trouble, loss, and expense, it is, I think, convenient that the
warning contained in the enclosed letter, addressed to the promoters
of a projected Company in London, should be made public in the
Colonies, where similar schemes are, as I understand, already being
proposed.’’
On the 16th of July, 1878, the Secretary of “The Australasian
Colonization Company ” addressed a letter to Sir Arthur Gordon,
Governor of Fiji, and High Commissioner for the Western Pacific,
of which the following is an extract: —
+ “ . . . . it is our intention to form a Joint Stock
Company, to be incorporated by Royal Charter, for the purpose of
* Correspondence respecting New Guinea, 1876. No. 34.
f Further Correspondence respecting New Guinea, 1883. Enclosure in Iso. 7.


colonizing the North-Eastern coast of Papua or New Guinea, there
to carry on trading, mining, fishing, pearling, timber getting, stock
rearing, spice and fruit growing, or other suitable industry, as might
appear to our Directors or their employes profitable or expedient
legitimately to engage in.”
Extract from Sir Arthur Gordon’s reply :
“ His Excellency has no pretension and no wish to interfere
with the perfect liberty of action of the members of the Association,
but it must be distinctly understood that the plans of the Association,
as set forth in the Prospectus, have not received, and cannot receive,
his encouragement or sanction, and are of a nature certain to be
disapproved by Her Majesty’s Government.”
It may be of interest to mention here some of the objects
of this Association as set forth in the Prospectus :
1. To form a settlement on the North-east Coast of New Guinea.
2. To found a town
3. That the land should be taken possession of after formal
annexation.
4. That 60,000 acres are to be claimed for plantation purposes,
and 50,000 acres more if gold is discovered.
5. It is intended to reserve 500 fully paid-up shares for the
native chiefs of the territory.
Eive cannon, besides small arras, figure as part of the equip-
ment of these pioneers of civilisation!
On the 24th October, 1883, Lord Derby caused a letter * to
be addressed to the promoter of the “ New Guinea Exploration and
Colonization Company,” informing him that if an attempt should
be made to carry out the project described in the Prospectus, “Her
Majesty’s Government would be under the necessity of instructing
* Correspondence respecting New Guinea and other Islands, February 1884. No. 34.


the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, and the officer
commanding Her Majesty’s Naval Porces on the station, to interfere
for the protection of the native inhabitants of the island.”
This communication brought about a modification in the title,
as well as in the ostensible objects of the company, but, nevertheless,
the Colonial Office declined to lend its sanction to the understanding.
Other companies of a similar character were dealt with in the
same way, but these instances will, I think, sufficiently show how
readily and effectually the Colonial Office at home, and its represen-
tatives abroad, have constantly interposed on behalf of the natives
of New Guinea; and if matters could rest as they are, further
reference to the subject would be unnecessary. In view, however,
of recent events and of the greatly increased interest displayed by
the public in everything relating to New Guinea—an interest which
will undoubtedly once more bring prominently forward proposals
and schemes for colonization, &c.—l have thought it well to refer to
these transactions, and also to summarise very briefly some facts
regarding the character of the inhabitants and the nature of the
country, as well as the tenure and cultivation of the soil; a perusal
of which, together with a reference to the authorities cited, will,
I think, satisfy the reader that if these trading and colonizing
companies had been permitted to carry out their plans, the natives
would have been cruelly ousted from their lands, strife and bloodshed
would have ensued, and at this moment irremediable disorder would
prevail throughout the island.
Mr. A. E. Wallace, in the third edition of his work on the Malay
Archipelago, speaking of the inhabitants of the North-Western
peninsula, says :
“If the tide of colonization should be turned to New Guinea,
there can be little doubt of the early extinction of the Papuan race.”


Mr. D’Albertis, speaking of the inhabitants of the Southern and
Eastern portions of the island, says;
“ I do not doubt that these, more readily than any other
savages whom I know, would answer to the call of a civilised
nation, which, stretching out a fraternal hand, would lead them
towards our civilisation. I am also convinced that, if well treated and
guided, these people would repay any sacrifice made for them with
interest.”
Captain Moresby, E.N., in his most interesting account of the
cruise of the Basilisk, foreshadowing the colonization of the country,
and speaking of our duty towards the natives, observes:
“The climate of a great part of New Guinea would not be
prejudicial to Europeans,— high land, possessing every degree of
temperature, abounds there; and the Europeans who already inhabit
islands in Polynesia appear to enjoy perfect health.
“We may admit that it is an unfortunate fact that the character
of the Englishman often deteriorates when he lives among savages,
but this is not inevitable. The Englishman, however, is determined
to pitch his tent among them, and it is our business to prevent this
deterioration, and to protect his savage neighbours, by applying early
safeguards of law and supervision.
“Our Acts of colonization, the necessities of our commerce, are
bringing us into yearly increasing relationship with them [the natives],
and it is much within our power at present to decide the character
of this relationship—nay, to decide on their fate ; on the question of
their very existence.
“It seems to me that the broad containing lines of our duty
are evident, whilst the filling in must be, and may be, left to time.
“ I will express no opinion. I will but say that I hope to see
my country take up what I conceive to be her duty, and annex New
Guinea and the islands; and thus have it in her power to start right
7


with the aborigines from the first, to prevent the first occasions of
mistrust, disgust, and anger, which would at once and for ever stamp
an image of greed, perfidy, and cruelty as our likeness on the native
heart.”
Sir Henry Parkes, in a Minute for His Excellency, the Governor
of Hew South Wales, says;—
* “ The interest in New Guinea and the belief in
its future importance which have been felt very generally in this
Colony for some years have received fresh strength from Captain
Moresby’s discoveries and from the increasing trade of vessels from
this port (Sydney) to Torres Straits.
“ There is probably no country in the world which offers so
fair and certain a field for successful colonization as this great
island.
11 I feel very confident that many men of high character and
large wealth in these Colonies would at once engage in an enterprise
so tempting and honourable if they had the opportunity of doing so
under British authority . . .”
Captain Armit, writing in 1883 to the Melbourne Argus , says:
[Extract.]
11 , These Papuans are no more savages than we are.
Barbarians they are, no doubt; but even as barbarians they compare
very favourably with us, their gardens show an amount of
thought and well-directed labour and enterprise of which savages
would be utterly incapable. Their houses are well built, comfortable,
and quite up to the standard required by the climate. They are
cleanly in their habits, washing everything before they cook it, and
themselves whenever they get an opportunity. Their laws are strict
and are generally obeyed. Their women are chaste, womanly, and
* Correspondence respecting New Guinea, 1876, in No, 10, Enclosure 1.


pleasant. I am quite delighted with these ferocious Papuans. . .
The country traversed is described as both beautiful and fertile, every
inch of the land along the river being suited to agriculture. There
would be no difficulty in obtaining land, and once the proprietors
sell the purchaser’s right would be as jealously observed as if he were
a native. The whole country is suited to European settlement,
either as farms, plantations, or cattle stations.’’
Captain Armit’s statement regarding the acquisition of land by
purchase must be received with great reserve, as I shall presently
show; but, after making every allowance for exaggeration, it will be
found that in his enthusiasm in favour of the natives he does little
more than re-echo the sentiments of Captain Moresby, Mr. D’Albertis,
Baron Maclay, and Mr. Chester, the Resident Magistrate at Thursday
Island.
Extract from a letter addressed to Sir A. Gordon by Baron
Miklouho-Maclay: —
[Translation.]
Sydney, 23 rd January , 1879.
“ Eirst of all I beg your Excellency to observe (I speak with
a perfect knowledge of the facts of the case) that the inhabitants
of the Maclay Coast (part of the North-East Coast of New Guinea,
between Capes Croisilles and King William), being a numerous agri-
cultural population (some 15,000 to 20,000 men , at least), are bound
to the soil they cultivate; every inch of land, every useful tree in
the forests, the fish in every stream have an owner. This property
is recognised by the neighbours, and the invasion of strangers endea-
vouring to occupy a land already occupied and cultivated for ages
would place the inhabitants of the coast between the weapons of the
whites and those of the inhabitants of the mountains, who would not
give up their land. Murders and wars without end would ensue.”
* Further Correspondence respecting New Guinea May, 1883. Enclosure in No. 36.


Writing again in 1881,* Baron Maclay says, “A general consent
to a sale of land to the intruders is a very unlikely event, and
even should it take place, the land being communal property, each
member of the community has a right to claim his own share of
the payment for it. Again, the natives do not understand parting
with their land absolutely (for this reason I never should have
considered it right to attempt the acquisition of a freehold property
on my coast). Is it a just act on the part of a so-called civilised
people to deliberately swindle a simple-minded race of fellow creatures
out of valuable property for a few bottles, some old nails, or
1 trade’ axes ?’’
Note. —Baron Miklouho-Maclay lived on the North-east Coast of
New Guinea for four years —1871-4—alone among the natives.
Mr. George Palmer, M.P., having, on the 11th December, 1883,
written to the Colonial Office on the subject of the reported purchase
of some 15,000 acres in the Kabadi district (lying to the south of
Hall Sound) at the price of about one penny per acre, w r as informed,
in reply,j* that the matter had already been brought to Lord Derby’s
notice, and that —•
“ Assuming the facts to be as stated (and the various accounts
are substantially in accord), Her Majesty’s Government will certainly
refuse to recognise this transaction or any other, of a similar
character.”
At the Intercolonial Convention of the Australasian Colonies
held in Sydney November —December, 1883, the following Eesolution,
proposed by Sir G. W. Des Yoeux, was passed:—
“ That, in the opinion of this Convention, no purchases or
pretended purchases of land made before the establishment of British
* Further Correspondence respecting New Guinea, May 1883. Enclosure in No. 42.
-f- Correspondence respecting New Guinea, February, 1884, No. 80.


jurisdiction or dominion in New Guinea or other islands of the
Pacific not haying a recognised government should be acknowleged,
except in respect of small areas of land actually occupied for
missionary or trading purposes; and further, that after tlie establish-
ment of such jurisdiction or dominion no acquisition of land should
be permitted except through the Crown, and then only for the
like purposes.”
11 Sir G. W. Des Yoeux, in a despatch to the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, refers to this subject in the following words # :—
“ 19. When proposing this Resolution in a speech of some
length, I dwelt strongly, and with all the earnestness of which I
am capable, upon the serious moral responsibility which the Con-
vention would incur towards the existing inhabitants of any territory
which, on their request, should be annexed or protected by Great
Britain; and I, at the same time, pointed out that a policy of
immediate colonization, while certain to be fatal to the natives, would
in various ways be injurious to Australasia, and especially would
add incalculably to the financial responsibility which it was under-
taking for the repayment of the cost incurred in acceding to its
wishes.
“ 20. While still speaking, I learnt from frequent tokens of
approval that my views were generally accepted, and, when I
concluded, I was much gratified to find that my Resolution, so far
from being disapproved, was held not to go far enough in the direc-
tion desired.
“ 21. Under these circumstances I need scarcely say that I
gladly formed one of a committee appointed to draft a stronger
Resolution on the same subject, and in the event there was passed
unanimously that which appears in the minutes of the last day.
* Further Correspondence respecting New Guinea, February, 1884, No. 106.


u 22. I trust that your Lordship will agree with me as to the
very great importance of this Resolution; while it will be inci-
dentally useful in proving to the world that the objects of Australasia
in desiring annexation or protectorate are simply those which are put
forward, it will very greatly lessen the responsibility of giving effect
to the view r s expressed in the previous Resolutions. It will, more-
over, to an extent which can scarcely be appreciated in England,
render more easy the task of the Imperial officers charged with the
administration in carrying out the only policy which would render
annexation justifiable.”
When it is remembered that the Convention in which this
memorable Resolution was passed was, with the single exception of
the Governor of Fiji, constituted entirely of the foremost Ministers
of all the Australasian Colonies, and that all of them were leading
colonists, it will be admitted that a more complete and satisfactory
vindication of the policy pursued by the Colonial Office with regard
to the attempts to colonize New Guinea could not be desired.
In order to give full and speedy effect to this Resolution, it
might be judged an expedient measure —it would certainly be con-
venient for purposes of administration —to vest in the Crown the
freehold of the entire Colony. This need not affect the rights of
possession of the natives, while it would enable the local authorities,
at their discretion, to treat all squatters and unauthorised settlers
as trespassers. Further, it would place at the disposal of the
Government all uninhabited forests and waste lands, which, when
roads have been made, and the interior opened up, will certainly
constitute a valuable u Crown Reserve.”
For the maintenance of order, and to prevent the evils resulting
from the presence of undesirable persons, it might be made obliga-
tory for all who propose to travel or reside in the Colony to obtain
a permit or licence from the Government; and due care would be


observed that such permits should not be granted until full inquiry
had been made regarding the character and objects of the applicants.
In considering this suggestion it should be borne in mind that at
present only a very limited number of settlers and other persons
have vested interests requiring their presence in New Guinea; they
are for the most part well known—locally—and would either receive
their licence as a matter of course, or, in the case of those considered
undesirable residents, the refusal of the authorities to grant it would
compel them to leave the island. The natives also should be in-
structed to report to the nearest magistrate or agent of the Govern-
ment the arrival of strangers among them. This would effectually
prevent French escaped convicts, and other bad characters, from
finding an asylum in the Colony. I believe that if regulations of
this character are enforced, both the natives and the colonists will
be materially benefited, and many of the worst evils attending the
colonization of an inhabited country will be avoided.
I would further urge that, with the view of preventing mis-
understandings and collisions with the natives of the interior, all
prospecting and exploring expeditions should be prohibited until they
have received the sanction of the local authorities. Such expeditions
should invariably be accompanied by competent interpreters.
For the better regulation of trade, and with the view of pre-
venting the importation of arms, gunpowder, and spirituous liquor for
sale to the natives, it wmuld be desirable to select a sufficient number
of convenient and suitable places for the establishment of trading-
stations, and prohibit all traffic with the natives elsewhere. These
measures, in combination with the presence of the Commissioners or
other magistrates at the centres of trade, would tend to elevate the
tone of commercial morality, prevent frauds upon, and disputes with,
the natives, and also facilitate the maintenance of order and the
administrations of justice.


In speaking of the trade of New Guinea, it is perhaps best to
assume that, as yet, it is practically non-existent; for, although the
Malay traders of the Archipelago for a long time past have frequented
the North-West coasts in search of scented woods, massoy bark,
tortoise-shell, birds of paradise, cockatoos, and edible birds’-nests for
the Chinese market, they do not appear eyer to have had any trading
or other relations with the natives of Eastern Papua; the latter
are still, from the commercial point of view, pure savages. It is
true that the surrounding sea yields a rich harvest, which is gathered
off their coast by the industry of the Australian colonists; but the
Papuans take no part in the labour, and receive no share of the
spoil. Having few wants, and but limited desires, they have no
incentive to labour beyond what suffices to secure their daily food.
Clearly, then, if the natural resources of the country are to be
developed and trade encouraged, the Englishman must be permitted
to undertake the enterprise; there need no longer be any question
of displacing or otherwise wronging the natives, the strong arm of
British law is now there to protect them, and there is plenty of
unoccupied land available which is suitable for coffee, sugar cane,
cotton, and tobacco plantations. The capital is ready; * the only
thing wanting is the labour.
If the labour of the natives can be made available and it is
found reliable and cheap, brilliant results may fairly be anticipated;
indeed it is hardly an exaggeration to say that, under such
favourable circumstances, New Guinea might, within a few years,
supply all the tropical produce required by the Australasian
Colonies, besides becoming a formidable rival to Java, Ceylon, and
Brazil for the supply of coffee for the American and European markets.
On the other hand, if the plantations have to be worked by
coolie labour, considerably more capital will be required, the working
* See Sir Henry Parkes’s Minute, p. 8, an J e.


expenses will be greater, the profits less, and the power of
competing successfully with other producers will be diminished in
a corresponding degree.
Hitherto there have been no opportunities of ascertaining the
capacity and aptitude of the natives for the performance of regular
sustained labour; they have never furnished victims to the “ labour
trade ” of the Pacific ; they enjoyed an evil reputation, and the
kidnappers preferred to give them a wide berth; it becomes, therefore,
a matter of no slight importance to ascertain whether these gentle
savages can be taught to work regularly for regular pay; and I
hope that when the engagement of natives for work on the
plantations receives the sanction of Government, every measure of
precaution will be adopted, which our experience in Queensland and
elsewhere can suggest, to prevent their ill usage or neglect. First
impressions are of the utmost importance; and if the men are
treated kindly and paid honestly, the report they will spread among
their friends will encourage others to follow their example, a feeling
which will receive considerable stimulus where they display the
tangible results of their labour in the various objects which they
have purchased with their wages. Besides the plantations to which
I have alluded, other and even wider fields of industry await the
enterprise of the white man:—Pace, sago, jute, and coir; teak,
ebony, and other valuable woods, are all indigenous, and while the
climate and the soil unite to encourage the production of the
former, the vast forests of the interior promise an almost unlimited
supply of the latter.
Once more, the only thing wanting is Labour. By coloured
labour the resources of New Guinea may be developed to any extent,
and when the country has been surveyed and explored, places will
no doubt be found in the mountainous districts where Englishmen can
work, and live, and perhaps thrive; but it would be nothing short


of a crime to bring white men out to “ colonize ” the districts near
the coast, where they would be certain to die like flies if they had
to perform manual labour. We must not be misled by travellers’ tales
when we have abundant knowledge to guide us to a correct conclusion.
The crew of the Basilisk certainly worked hard, and yet they continued
to enjoy good health; but let it be remembered that they only worked
at intervals, they never slept on shore, they lived on board ship,
away from the immediate influence of the malaria; the ship was
constantly cruising about, and last, but not least, they were free
(except when actually on shore) from the mosquito plague. What
the New Guinea mosquitoes can do when they try, may be judged
from the following extract from Captain Moresby’s book, page 160.
The scene is laid near the mouth of the Edith river :
“ . We prepared ourselves as if for an Arctic night
to defy the mosquitoes—pulling on two pair of trousers, and two
coats apiece, boots, thick stockings, and gloves; wrapping the head,
neck, and ears in bunting, and smearing our faces with oil; and
this done, we hauled off into the stream for the night. Some of
us had three hours of broken sleep, but those who had left any part
of the body unprotected, did not even doze. In the morning our clothes
were as wet with perspiration as if they had been dipped over the side,
but anything was better than being covered with mosquito bites.”
With this illustration I will conclude; the time may have
arrived for the establishment of plantations near the coast, where
the climate closely resembles that of Java; and as managers or
overseers of these competent Englishmen would find suitable
employment; but real colonization, in the sense of white men settling
there with their families, should certainly be deferred until the
interior has been opened up, and the more temperate regions of the
highlands have been connected by railways with the coast.
Temple, July, 1884.
E. S. De Ricci.


'
.
■
■ • , ■ ■ / ' . ;■, ' ' ' ‘ ' 1 * ,
■
1 f, » > «" 1 <• , ■*> <,, 1 * , < . , k -• 1 < ( 1 im
■ ■ ' . . . - f / W • V- r
1
,
■ 1 * / : . *. <
■ • -
- • / '
■ : ' ■ t •. w- , ■ / ' 1 >' v . ,,
' ‘ r‘\> J •' . ' ’ - , -
■ ■ 1 ' ": , ,,
. . * / 1 ■ . . > 1
’ . > / - >
, ■ . ;■■■ l : ■ . ■ 1 ,, i
r u 1 \ “ • > *' i %? / t ( , i i 1 ' t v 1
r? > \ C* * * - ; v . > ' * *•; , > ,• / * * J
' v . h , ' , 11 ’P % y ■,
: i . " . . ' ■ ' ' ■ ■ > , '■
<> ' \ ' ‘
pv,-.' tr.*: ,: 'j\ \A- .a;.-' • \ v .. - " “ ■•!, '* . " ' : 1 -
•
L
r " r i ’ - • « '< . ’ . , - * ' 1 * > .'I- 1 <
: . . ■ 1 : ,
f
■■ ■* , ' , , ■ ' . . '■


