



THE ARTISTS’ MANUAL
OF PIGMENTS.


■1 n
y\ YY w
*


ARTISTS’ MANUAL
PIGMENTS
SHOWING THEIR
COMPOSITION, CONDITIONS OF PERMANENCY, NON-
PERMANENCY, AND ADULTERATIONS; EFFECTS
IN COMBINATION WITH EACH OTHER AND
WITH VEHICLES; AND THE MOST
RELIABLE TESTS OP PURITY
TOGETHER WITH
UDhe <Sci«n« anb girt gßpartmcnt’o (Examination (Questums
on Painting
H. C. STANDAGE
AUTHOR OF “COLOUR APPLIED TO HOUSE DECORATION,” “PRACTICAL PICTURE
HANGING,” ETC., ETC.
Jtjocnnfc ffibitimt, llotiisoli
LONDON
CROSBY LOCKWOOD AND CO.
7, STATIONERS* HALL COURT, LUDGATE HILL
1887
[All rightsreserved ]


LONDON;
PRINTED BY J. S. VIRTUE AND CO., LIMITED,
CITY ROAD.


PREFACE.
Of fate years the question of the deterioration
in hue of modern English pictures is one that
has occupied an important position in art circles.
These pictures are found to be unpossessed of that
permanency of colouring so noticeable in the works
of old masters of foreign schools. The “ why and
the wherefore " for these changes are not far to
seek; they may be attributed to the ignorance of
the modern artist as regards the actual nature of
the materials he employs. This ignorance is due
to his being practically unacquainted with the
chemical nature and qualities of his pigments and
vehicles, whereas “old masters” were their own
chemists ; and notwithstanding that chemical
knowledge in their time was of the most elemen-
tary kind, they perforce, through making their own
pigments, were compelled to become possessed of
some knowledge regarding the chemical reactions
occurring between mixtures of pigments with each


other and with vehicles. This knowledge was
sufficient to enable them to avoid dangerous
immixtures of pigments and vehicles; but un-
doubtedly the great success of the permanence
of their colouring was due to the use of an oleo-
resinous medium instead of pure oil, or oil and
spirits, as now used.
Another cause of the non-permanence of modern
paintings is to be found in the use of impure pig-
ments. The manufacture of pigments has become
a trade, and, like many others, it is one not free
from the vicious practice of selling a sophisticated
article when a pure one is not absolutely insisted
on by the purchaser. Pure pigments can be
bought, but while there is a demand for cheap
paints, and the artist is careless enough not to
satisfy himself that what he buys is perfectly pure,
the supply of adulterated pigments will be kept up.
This supply is greatly encouraged by the huge host
of amateur painters and manufacturers of “pot-
boilers,” who have no name to lose by bad work-
manship, and who, moreover, are not wealthy
enough to afford the price demanded for pure
materials.
Still another cause of the decadence of colour-
ing in modern paintings is to be traced in the


desire, on the part of well-known artists, to obtain
startling, brilliant, or surprising effects of colour-
ing, the means by which this desire is gratified
being carelessly ignored so that they gain their
wishes. These painters recklessly make the most
pernicious immixtures of pigments. The results
show themselves a few years subsequently, and
the picture is worse than a bad imitation of itself
in its former state.
But whatever the cause, the fact remains; mo-
dern pictures are far from permanent. This is
saying very little for art and its patrons, for the
knowledge of the means of painting good sound
work is not difficult to obtain, although through
indolence, prejudice, or self-conceited satisfaction
in their own individual method of working, modern
artists do not trouble themselves to obtain it.
Many pigments are known under several names.
An artist may buy a colour under one name, and
never dream of its being identical in composition
and qualities with one of another name. In the
chapters on individual pigments I have given the
general equivalents by which a pigment is com-
monly known. The reader will, therefore, be able
to identify a pigment bearing half-a-dozen names.
The paragraphs on the “Chemical Names and


Composition” give the chemical nature and quali-
ties of each pigment in its perfect form. This is
necessary, because artists are not chemists, and
elaborate explanations on this point would be of
little value to them.
The paragraphs on the “ Artistic Qualities ”
will, I hope, prove of exceptional value. Those on
the “ Permanency and Non-Permanency ” of pig-
ments are based on a knowledge of the chemical
and physical reactions that occur, or are likely to
occur, between mixtures of pigments.
The information on “ General Adulterations ” is
given that artists may know what to expect, and
the “ Tests for Purity” have been so selected as to
allow of their being practically worked out by
persons devoid of chemical knowledge. Artists’
colourmen may not be to blame for supplying a
sophisticated article if they find a demand for it,
but artists of repute are to blame if they do not take
every means in their power to ascertain that the
colour they use is in its purest form.
The matter contained in Chapters I. to VI. was
first published by the Author under the title of
“The Artists’ Table of Pigments,” a work now out
of print. But the whole of the remainder of the
present volume is now published for the first time.


Chapter VII., on “Chemical Reactions occurring
between Pigments, &c.,” will, I think, demonstrate
that although painting is an art, its foundation rests
on scientific principles if the work is to be of a
sound character.
Chapter VIII. sets before the reader so much of
colour science as can be serviceable to a non-
scientific person; while Chapters IX., X., XI.
are intended for students and those amateurs who
wish to acquire a knowledge of the technical pro-
cesses involved in painting. The Science and Art
Department Examination Questions on Painting
form Chapter XII.
The following pigments have been included in
those chapters in which their hues seem to entitle
them to be classed :—New Blue, Permanent Blue,
Mars Orange, Mars Yellow, Orient Yellow, Mineral
Yellow, Mars Red, Purple Lake, Mars Brown,
Mineral Gray, Neutral Tint, Payne’s Gray, Rubens
Madder.
H. C. S.
31, Delving Road, Fdlham, S.W.
November , 1885.


NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
It is very gratifying to the author to find that the
present little book has met with such a successful
reception as to call for a fresh edition in the short
space of six months. This fact, it is hoped, proves
that it has in some measure met an acknowledged
want.
In issuing a second edition, he has taken the
opportunity of correcting a few errors and mis-
prints to which attention has been drawn by his
kindly critics.
August, 1886.


CONTENTS.
Preface v
CHAPTER I.
WHITE PIGMENTS.
Baryta White, also known as “ Constant ” or “ Permanent ”
White.—Blanc d’Argent, or “ Silver ” or “French ” White. —
Flake White, or “ Body ” White.—White Lead, also known as
Ceruse, Cremnitz, Dutch, Flemish, Hamburg, Venetian, or
Roman White.—Zinc White, or Chinese White.—Normal,
Basic, and Acid Carbonates. —Blowpipe Testing ... I
CHAPTER 11.
GREEN PIGMENTS.
Chrome Greens.—Native Green, or Pure Chrome Green, Green
Oxide of Chromium, Opaque Oxide of Chromium, or Chrome
Oxide.—Transparent Oxide of Chromium.—Emerald Green,
or Schweinfurt, Vienna, Imperial, Brunswick, or Mitis Green.
—Malachite, Mountain, or Hungary Green. —Sap Green, Verde
Vessie, Iris or Bladder Green. —Scheele’s, or Swedish Green.—
Terra Verte, Green Earth, Verona Green, Green Bice, Verdetta,
or Holly Green. —Verdigris, or Viride .ZEris.—Vienna Green, or
Brunswick or Schweinfurt Green.—Viridian, or Guignet’s
Green. —Zinc or Cobalt Green or Rinman’s Green. . .14
CHAPTER HI.
BLUE PIGMENTS.
Antwerp Blue, or Haarlem, Berlin, or Mineral Blue.—Caeruleum, or
Cerulian or Egyptian Blue.— Cobalt Blue, Cobalt Ultramarine,


Vienna Blue, and Azure.—lndigo, or Ind'an Blue.—Prussian,
Berlin, Parisian Blue.—Smalt, Azure, Enamel, Dumont's or
Royal Blue.—Uliramarine, Outremer Lazurline, Lazuline
Blue, or Lazurstein.—Artificial, French, Metz, Gmelin’s Blue,
or Factitious Ultramarine, Bleu de Garance, and Outremer de
Guimet.—New Blue. —Permanent Blue , • • .25
CHAPTER IV.
YELLOW PIGMENTS,
Aureolin.—Baryta Yellow, Yellow Ultramarine, or Lemon Yel-
low.—Cadmium Yellow, Cadmia, or Jaune Brillant.—Chrome
Yellows, Jaune Mineral, Cologne Yellow, Pale and Deep
Chrome, Orange Chrome, Citron, Leipzig or Paris Yellow.
—Gamboge, (Gamboge, Cambogia, Gambodium, Gamboage,
&c.) —Indian Yellow, or Purree or Powre. —King’s or Chinese
Yellow, Orpiment, or Auripigmentum.—Lemon Yellow.—
Massicot, or Masticot.—Naples Yellow.—Yellow Lakes,
Madder Yellow, Italian, English, and Dutch Pink, Quercitron
Yellow, or Lake.—Yellow Ochres, Jaune de Fer, Jaune de
Mars, Sienna, or Raw Sienna.—Mars Orange.—Mars Yellow,
or Jaune de Mars, Jaune de Fer, Iron Yellow, &c.—Orient
Yellow, Turner Yellow, Cassel Yellow, Montpellier Yellow,
Vienna Yellow, Mineral Yellow . • • • • •33
CHAPTER V.
RED PIGMENTS,
Cadmium Red.—Chinese Vermilion, or Carmine Vermilion.—
Crimson Lake.—Carmine Lake. —Indian Lake, or Lac Lake.
—lndian Red and Persian Red,—lodine Scarlet, or lodide
of Mercury.—Madder Lakes : Madder Carmine or Tinted
Carmine, Pink Madder, Rose Rubiate or Liquid Madder,
Lake or Rose Madder. —Red Lead, Minium or Saturnine Red.
—Red Ochre, Indian Ochre, Scarlet Ochre, or Light Red.—
Red Orpiment, or Realgar.—Venetian, English, or Prussian
Red, or Scarlet Ochre.—Vermilion, also called Cinnabar.—
Mars Red, or Rouge de Mars. —Purple Lake . . .47


CHAPTER VI.
BROWN AND BLACK PIGMENTS.
PACK
Asphaltum, or Bitumen. —Bistre. —Brown Pink. —Blue or Frank-
furt Black.—lndian Ink and Chinese Ink.—Lampblack.—
Manganese Brown.—Mummy or Egyptian Brown.—Prussian
Brown, or Iron Brown. —Sepia.—Umber, Raw and Burnt.—
Vandyke, Cappah, Rubens, Cassel, and Cologne Brown.—
Mars Brown, or Brun de Mars.—Mineral Gray.—Neutral
Tint.—Payne’s Gray.—Rubens Madder . . . .60
Table of Reference 70
CHAPTER VII.
CHAPTER VII.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS OCCURRING BETWEEN TWO
OR MORE PIGMENTS, BETWEEN PIGMENT AND
VEHICLE, ETC.
Action of Lead and Sulphur.—Action of Oxygen amongst Pig-
ments.—Action of Alkalies on Pigments.—Explanation of
Loss of Opacity 73
CHAPTER VIII.
COLOUR NAMES AND DEFINITIONS.
Positive Colours.—Primary Colours.—Secondary Colours.—Ter-
tiary Colours.—Tint.—Hues.—Shade. —Tone.—Grey.—Gray.
Popular Analysis of Colours forming Complex Hues. —Primary
Positive Colours. —Secondary Positive Colours, composed of
two Primaries. —Tertiary Hues, composed of three Primaries
with one Primary predominating.—Quartemary Hues, com-
posed of the Primary, with two Primaries or a Secondary
Colour predominating. —Neutral Tints 80


CHAPTER XX.
TABLE OF MIXTURES OF PIGMENTS TO PRODUCE
BLUES, BUFFS, BROWNS, GREENS, GREYS,
PURPLES, AND MAROONS.
Table of Mixtures of Pigments to produce Blues.—Table of
Mixtures to produce Browns, Buffs, and Yellows. —Table of
Mixtures to produce Greys.—Table of Mixtures to produce
Greens.—Table of Mixtures to produce Maroons, Purples,
and Pinks 86
CHAPTER X.
CHAPTER X.
ARTISTIC QUALITIES OF PIGMENTS USED IN POR-
TRAIT, FLOWER, AND MARINE PAINTING IN
WATER COLOURS.
Colours for Flesb.—Colours for Draperies.—Colours chiefly used
in Flower Painting in Water Colours.—Colours used in Sea
Painting 92
CHAPTER XI.
ARTISTIC QUALITIES OF COLOURS USED IN LAND-
SCAPE PAINTING IN OILS.
List of Colours used on the Palettes of Sir F. Leighton, Alma-
Tadema, Armitage, Orchardson, Pettie, Colin Hunter . .97
CHAPTER XII.
QUESTIONS SET AT THE SOUTH KENSINGTON
SCHOOL OF ART EXAMINATIONS IN PAINT-
ING 100
Index 108


ARTISTS’ MANUAL OF PIGMENTS.
A'
P V CHAPTER I.
WHITE PIGMENTS,
BARYTA WHITE (also known as Constant or Permanent
White).
Chemical Names and Composition. —This white is a sul-
phate of barium, or “ baric sulphate ” of the chemist, and
known as “ heavy spar ”by the mineralogist. In composi-
tion it consists of 137 atoms of barium, 32 atoms of
sulphur, and 64 atoms of oxygen. The constituents in
the above proportions constitute the neutral sulphate of
barium. Constant white is occasionally a mixture of car-
iill I 'Willing I 1! lEHlrtl MBIWWW |T|lf l| nil I|l| |- 1
bonate and'Sulphate.pf barium, v
' 'Note.- When carelessly made this white is not entirely
freed from sulphuric acid.) Such acid is injurious to its
stability.
Artistic Qualities. —This white is of a beautiful though


bluish-tinted white, dense in tone, but deficient in body.
It has a darker tone when moist ( i.e. when being used) than
it has when dry. Gum-water destroys or mars the white-
ness. It is of good use for fresco, silicious, and water-
colour painting.
Conditions of Permanency. —This white is perfectly per-
manent under all conditions. Sulphuretted hydrogen gas
does not affect its colour, nor does any pigment containing
sulphur, since the sulphide of barium which might be
formed is also white. This is a great desideratum where
purity of high lights is requisite, or a white has to be used
almost pure. Strong light, darkness, oxygen, lead, or iron,
have no injurious action on the purity of this white.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —The neutral sulphate is
the one the artist should employ, because the acid sulphate
is semi-stable, since the free acid is apt to be injurious when
brought into contact with pigments affected by acids, or on
some of the oils and other vehicles used. In some cases
an acid will darken a colour ; in others it bleaches or robs a
pigment of its colour, and in all cases, other whites as well,
it has a disintegrating action.
General Adulterations.— Lead salts (usually carbonates)
are sometimes added to this white to give it body, i.e.
covering power. Zinc salts (usually the oxide) are also
added to give it whiteness.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —If the white
be pure, no reaction will be shown by adding a little solution
of sulphuretted hydrogen to the pigment. If a lead salt be
present, this test agent will cause a black precipitate to be
formed. To test for the presence of other metals, use the


tests given under white lead. To detect free sulphuric
acid, add a slip of blue litmus paper to a washing of the
pigment; if the blue colour is turned red, free acid is
present. If the white paint is found to contain much
free aeid, it may be greatly divested of the acid by
washing the pigment with distilled water. This may
be done by placing the pigment on a filter-paper, and
directing a stream of water on to it from the wash-
bottle. In this operation the filter paper containing the
pigment is supported in a glass funnel, fi\
Remarks. —The amorphous state of the splphate is the
best for use on the palette, because in its covering
powder is best. This white is the best ter’ use with sulphides
of metals,. lead or iron pigments, Hzg. cadmium yellow,
vermilion, yellow and orange chromes (of lead), Indian,
Venetian, and other reds, of which the basis is iron, and
red and yellow ochres. The neutral sulphate should be
tested for free sulphuric acid, since if present the permanency
of the white itself is weakened, and this acid, has also power
to destroy other pigments.
BLANC D’ARGENT (or Sflver White, or French White).
Chemical Names and Chmposition. —This white is a white
obtained from lead by anprocess different to that employed
in making flake white.
Artistic Qualities. —This white has less body than flake
white, but is of exquisite whiteness.
Conditions of Permanency. —This white is just as stable,
no more, no less, than white lead used in a similar manner.


Conditions of Non-Permanency. — It suffers, in company
with -white lead, since this white possesses all the deleterious
characteristics of the more frequently used white lead.
General Adulterations. —Chalk and baric sulphate are
those most chiefly to be searched for.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The tests
given under “White Lead” apply to this pigment.
Remarks. —This white is sometimes preferred by artists
as a white probably owing to its fanciful name, but it
should be vigorously excluded from use, like the rest of
the whites made from lead.
FLAKE WHITE (when levigated called Body White).
Chemical Names atul Composition. —Oxidised carbonate
of lead, or a compound of protocarbonate and hydrated
oxide of lead.
Artistic Qualities. —Identical under every circumstance
with white lead or other lead carbonates. This white has
the best body of all white leads.
Conditions of Permanency. —The permanency of thiswtiite
varies according to the mode of preparation.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Refer to white lead for
these conditions.
Gena-al Adulterations. —This white is sometimes not
entirely freed from the acid engendered in its manufacture.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Refer to the
tests given under the heading of white lead.
Remarks. —This white is called by the artists’ colourmen-
“ common white.” It owes its flaky character to the mode


of preparation, and takes its name from the scrolls or plates
in which it is formed. If it contains free acid, it is still
more injurious to other pigments than when pure, as will be
seen on referring to the general remarks at the end of this
chapter on normal, basic, and acid carbonates of lead. This
white is occasionally equal to Chinese white in colour, and
generally superior in body to all other white leads. The
presence of the hydrate of lead decreases the opacity of the
product, according to the greater proportion in which it is
present.
WHITE LEAD (known also as Ceruse, Cremnitz, Dutch,
Flemish, Hamburg, Venetian, or Roman White),
Chemical Names and Composition. —The whites known
under the above names are all carbonates of lead. Cremnitz
white is usually pure white lead. Dutch white contains
24 per cent, of white lead and 75 per cent, of baric sul-
phate. If they contain hydrate of lead the components of
water are present. Hamburg white is a mixture of two
parts heavy spar (baric sulphate), and the remainder white
lead. Venetian white is sulphate of barium (basic sul-
phate) and carbonate of lead in equal parts.
Artistic Qualities. —These lead whites possess good body.
The “ body ” (by which is meant covering power) is better
in proportion as the carbonate is whiter and heavier. These
and all lead whites are easy to work, are very opaque, and
impart their quality to pigments compounded with it.
Cremnitz white is the whitest of white leads. When mixed
with barytes white, white lead is semi-transparent. Strong
light, especially sunlight, will sometimes restore the bright-


ness of tarnished white lead ; so also will hydroxyl, i.e. per-
oxide of hydrogen, or water, plus a second atom of oxygen.
Conditions of Permanency .-—Linton says white leads
compound without injury with ultramarine, red and orange
leads, yellow and orange chromes, yellow, orange, and red
cadmiums, aureolin, the ochres, and Indian red, viridian,
and also oxides of chromium. We criticise this assertion
elsewhere.
Conditions of Non-Permanency . —Much oil or varnish dis-
solves these whites, partly by abstracting oxygen in their
process of “ drying,” and partly by becoming brown them-
selves. Also, sulphides of metals and sulphuretted hydro-
gen (the symbol for this compound is SH 2 , which will be used
in future) darken this white. White lead destroys the tints
formed by it with lakes (madder lakes excepted), probably
by oxygenating them, and so bleaching their colour. These
whites are injured by darkness andrimpure air, and blacken
sooner in oil (due possibly to tjje loss of oxygen) than in
water. They are unsafe to useAi fresco and distemper paint-
ing, and in crayon. They are all very fugitive, and lose their
opacity, allowing whatever paint is beneath to show through
rßSffl! Massicot,red
Hydrated jead. gives white lead less covering
power, and it Turnsta aarmvmsh hue.
General Adulterations. —These are whitening, si/phate of
barium, sulphate of lime {i.e. gypsum or “plaster of Paris ”),
oxide of lead, and carbonate of lime. These substances
are inimical to the perfect drying of white lead, and lessen
its body and brightness, and darken the oil vehicles.


Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —If pure,i
white lead is entirely dissolved by nitrous or acetic acid,
either of which leaves a clear liquid. Distinguished from
other white pigments, when acted on by SH 2 or a sulphide
by the formation of a black sulphide of lead. To test for
whitening, add dilute nitrous acid, boil in a test-tube, and
then add hydrochloric acid; filter the liquid, and to the
filtered solution add arnmonic oxalate. A white deposit
indicates whitening. To test for a barium salt, employ
the blowpipe test, inner flame. A green coloration of
the flame indicates barium; with the same test, a red
coloration indicates calcium or gypsum, i.e. sulphate of
lime.
Remarks. —The cause why white lead works- so easily
under the brush is owing to its saponifying with the oil
(i.e. entering into a chemical union therewith), whence it
becomes linoleate of lead, or “ lead soap.” This chemical
union causes the pellicles of oil to be almost destroyed as a
protective coating, since the new body thus formed is easily
acted on by influences that would not attack the oil if the
latter formed simply a coat or covering to the pigment, as
it should do. Besides this union, white lead also parts with
some of its oxygen to the oil, whereby the latter becomes
dry and hard, thus leaving the metallic lead more open to
the action of sulphurous fumes, or to pigments possessing
sulphur, to be turned into the black sulphide of lead.
Cremnitz white is also known as Vienna white, being
brought from Vienna in cakes of a cubical form. It is
the brightest white that is used in oil, but possesses rather
less body than flake white, because the particles are finer.


4 Roman white is of the purest colour, and differs only from
V if M|L__ | iBIIdM II " [ r - J
< £ > planca’Argent in the warm flesh tints of its surface when in
•V large masses.
' •I s w v &
"--i v ~i u '' , A%- i
x WHITE, or Chinese White. C
x .v: Cheniical Names and Composition.- — Qxide_of zinc, or
'., I ':'i zincic oxide. This white consists either ot 65 atoms
j-v - . . J
*< v of l6 of oxygen .or else it is the anhydrous oxide,
: v . the hydra% oxide, or hydrated iasic carbonate of zinc.
Artistic Qualities. —This white. ffiantS-body in oil, but it
N - ifojhe best lt is a bad dryer,
“““"although it is an excellent ‘dryer..”., itself Jon, oils. Zinc
white may be mixed with various pigments possessing dura-
bility, such as the oxides of iron, charcoal, oxides of man-
ganese, ultramarine, &c., and will then furnish colours the
tones of which will remain permanent; and this is a great
advantage in painting, whether alone or mixed with other
pigments. Zinc white is used for oil and water-colours, and
for varnish and distemper painting.
Conditions of Permanency. —This white is thoroughly
permanent under all conditions of use or mixture. It does
not form a soap with oils and fats. It retains its opacity,
and is not fugacious, like white lead. It is most durable jn
silicious painting or stereochromy, in which process of
painting ’TTTorms chemical corapbunds with potash and
stlrconpsvKcfi are"stable. /’
’. „ .
* m *Con3iWmsw Non-Permaiency. —lt is not impermanent
under any circumstances. /
General These are lead and
j-r


NORMAL , BTASIC, AND ACID CARBONATES. „ gl \
i Tests for Pitrity arid Nature of Adulterants. —If the zinc
~C?white be pure, it is perfectly soluble in hydrochloric acid, fgijU.
/tAar. wrtt- QHlivTriiP <->a dnvin/v cAlnfirtM lilrn uini f<=> lan/1 'l' r\ i t 11
and does not effervesce during solution like white lead. To
detect , lead, add SH 2 , and if salts of lead be present, a
black precipitate is formed ; the borax bead, with the blow-
pipe test, will be purple if manganese be present. If iron
is added, that metal will be obtained in a metallic powder
when the pigment is heated on charcoal with carbonate of
soda under the blowpipe analysis.
tfi^ 3
Remarks. —This is a good pigment when well prepared.
Since it does_not saponify syith.. oils, this white is the safest
to use
in itself itis mss onaaue. it possesses less Body than white
lead. It may, however, be laid over white lead when that
has dried, to preserve the latter from subsequent deleterious
influences, and this permanency and opacity of the whites
will be maintained. Chinese white replaces the ordinary
zinc white in water colours.
Normal, Basic, and Acid Carbonates.
The metal that yields the largest number of whites is
and the best white obtained from it, suitable for the artist,
is the carbonate.
Now, carbonates are usually divided into 7iormal, basic ,
and acid.
The normal carbonate is one in which the equivalent of
the metal is united with the compound represented by the
formula C0 8 .


A basic carbonate contains water; that is, the hydrogen
in the water that has united with the carbonate acts
similarly to a base , or the opposite action to that of an acid ;
while an acid carbonate is one that has not been entirely
freed from an acid radicle.
Most carbonates are easily decomposed by heat. The
carbonates of the heavy metals are all decomposed at a low
red heat, giving off carbonic anhydride (CO 2 ) and leaving a
residue of metal or of oxide.
The carbonates of the fixed alkali metals are not decom-
posed by the strongest heat. At a very high temperature
they are somewhat neutralised. The acid carbonates of the
alkalies are reduced by heat to normal carbonates, with evo-
lution of C0 2 .
It may be wondered why we go so deeply into chemical
points, but here it is that a knowledge of these points is
valuable. Thus, alkalies decompose or destroy the materials
used as vehicles in painting ; therefore, if a basic— i.e. an
alkaline—carbonate be employed, we can see that it will
commence a chemical action on the oil or vehicle with which
it is incorporated, and this action may be such as to prove
injurious to the picture; whilst, again, an acid carbonate
may be accidentally incorporated with a pigment—perhaps
the oxide of a metal, and, since an oxide is a base , and tends
to neutralise an acid, here again chemical action would be
set up, the result of which could not but be damaging, even
to the neutralising or fading of the tint.
The greater number of fixed oils by exposure to the air
become viscid and rancid, in which state they contain free
acid. Now ye have seen that bases and oxides neutralise


acids, therefore, a basic carbonate, or an oxide, by acting
on the “ free acid ” would again set up chemical action and
so prove injurious.
Therefore the only carbonate fit for the purpose of a pig-
ment is the normal or neutral one, and hence the value of
having a means of testing the nature of the pigment, or, in
other words, its purity.
Instructions in Blowpipe Testing. —ln many cases where it
is desired to know which metal the pigment is a salt of, the
blowpipe gives a readier means than what is known as the
“ wet process ” of analysis, therefore the method of using
this handy utensil should be thoroughly understood by the
operator, especially so since the operation is so simple.
In the first place, a steady flame is requisite. This is to
be obtained thus: Close the lips and puff out the cheeks
with air drawn through the nostrils ; while the cheeks are so
inflated, press the blowpipe between the lips, and by the
muscles of the cheeks force the air through the pipe, the
supply being kept constant by drawing it in through the
nostrils.
This action will require some little practice to acquire,
but it will be soon and easily learnt after a few trials.
Having managed to acquire a constant blast, direct the
nozzle of the pipe on to the flame of a spirit-lamp so that
the flame is a horizontal one. This flame will then become
pointed, and possess two distinct points; e.g. in the interior
of the flame is a blue coloured cone, while the outer portion
is of a reddish tinge; this blue point is termed the reducing
flame, because it reduces metals from their oxides; whilst
the outer cone or shell is termed the oxidising flame, since


this oxidises salts. The blue flame consists of particles of
unburnt carbon, particles with which oxygen has not com-
bined, and therefore combustion has not taken place, whilst
the outer flame owes its intense heat and incandescence to
the violent union taking place between the oxygen of the
air and the carbon particles of the spirit.
To utilise this blowpipe flame, select a piece of charcoal
free from knots and of fine texture and close grain, trim it
up somewhat prism-shaped, and scoop out a hollow cavity
at one end, into which put the salt to be tested, gradu-
ally bringing the other end of the charcoal in the flame
and then cautiously raise this end; the flame shooting
lengthwise of the charcoal ; the experiment will direct
wherever the oxidising or reducing flame is to be employed.
If the oxidising flame, the point only is employed, and this
must not be directed on to the salt at once, or the whole
would be scattered about, but gradually brought into it as
described; at the same time the full source of the blast must
not be attained until the flux begins to fuse.
Another method of employing the blowpipe flame, in-
stead of the charcoal method, is to make use of a platinum
wire and borax bead. Thus, take a piece of narrow soft
glass tube, six inches long, heat it in the middle in the spirit
flame, and when beginning to bend pull the ends apart and
snap the tube in the centre ; take one of these pieces, and
through the narrow end thus formed insert a piece of
platinum wire four inches long, about three inches remain-
ing out of the tube. By directing the blowpipe on to this
narrow portion the wire will be firmly fused in the glass, the
latter thus forming a handle that will prevent the heat


reaching the fingers. The end of the wire should be formed
into a loop about three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter.
To employ this instrument, dip the loop into a little hydro-
chloric acid to free the wire from corrosion. Never dip any-
thing into the bottle of acid, for that might render the whole
impure, but keep a little acid in a small test-tube or watch-
glass. When testing by means of a platinum wire, hold it in
the lamp or blowpipe flame, dip into a little borax, hold in
the lamp again until the borax is fused into a clear glass
bead ; then, moistening this bead in acid again, dip into the
salt to be tested, and fuse in the inner or outer flame as the
instructions direct.
To free the wire from this bead, open the loop with the
thumb and finger, free from corrosion with the finger nail,
and purify by dipping in acid and heating in flame, after
which it is fit for next test.


CHAPTER 11.
GREEN PIGMENTS.
CHROME GREENS.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Oxides of chromium
or hydrated or anhydrous chromic oxide. Sesquioxide of
chromium. Consists of oxygen and chromium combined
either by wet or dry chemical processes ; it is pale or deep,
bright or subdued, opaque or transparent in appearance.
Artistic Qualities. —These oxides when used in water
require much gum ; when in oil, in which they dry well,
they afford pure, natural, and durable tints.
Conditions of Permanency. —When anhydrous they can be
used in enamelling, and are all thoroughly permanent,
neither injuring nor being injured by other pigments, nor
by foul gas, air, damp, nor light.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —When hydrated they
cannot be used in enamelling Mixtures of chrome yellows
with Prussian and other blues are less permanent than the
actual pigments.
General Adulterations. —Chrome yellow, Prussian or
other blues.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for
presence of yellows made from lead or baryta or Prussian
blue made from iron in usual way. If pure these tests will


give no result. If the tests affect the pigment, we may know
that it is not a true chrome green.
Remarks. —It is better to use the actual pigment than a
green compounded on the palette. Mixed with raw sienna,
gives a sombre and semi-transparent green.
NATIVE GREEN (Pure Chrome Green, Green Oxide of
Chromium, Opaque Oxide of Chromium, or Chrome
Oxide).
Chemical Names and Composition. —ls an impure native
chrome ochre, prepared artificially for the palette. When
obtained anhydrous by dry methods from the metal chro-
mium, it is the only chrome oxide available in enamelling.
Artistic Qualities. —Is a cold, sober, sage green, deep-
toned, opaque, and dull; very dense and powerful. In flat
tints the oxide does not wash well in water.
Conditions oj Permanency. —Unchangeable in themselves
and do not affect colours mixed with them.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Chrome greens contain-
ing Prussian blue are acted upon by alkalies, and those
containing lead suffer the disadvantages incidental to lead
pigments.
General Adidterations. —Ailificially prepared, chrome
greens are often made by mixing solutions of lead and
iron with prussiate and chromate of potash or by adding
potassic chromate and then plumbic acetate to a solution
of Prussian blue in oxalic acid, whence lead or iron may
be accidentally present as adulterants.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Pure chto-


mium greens when subjected to great heat retain their
colour unchanged.
Remarks. —Should be used with a delicate hand to pre-
vent heaviness. In tints with white it is delicate and pleas-
ing, being silvery and luminous ; good for atmospheric
effects.
TRANSPARENT OXIDE OF CHROMIUM.
Chemical Names and Composition. —A compound of oxygen
and chromium.
Artistic Qualities. —Is deficient in body, and only useful
in oils. Is a pale greyish green in powder.
Conditions of Permanency. —Unchangeable and harmless
to other compounding pigments.
Remarks. —A yellowish green of some depth, moderately
bright, in oil not very pure or clear.
EMERALD GREEN (Schweinfurt, Vienna, Imperial,
Brunswick, and Mitis Green).
Chemical Names and Composition.—lt is a cupric aceto-
arsenite.
Artistic Qualities. —These greens, which are identical in
body but variously named, are lighter, more opaque and
vivid than Scheele’s green. Reflect light well; dry badly
in oil, but better in water. Compounded with aureolin they
are softened and semi-transparent.
Conditions of Permanency. —Are perhaps the most per-
manent of the copper greens, both alone and in tint with
white. Are not much affected by damp or foul air.


Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Cannot be used in fresco
or silicious painting. Cadmic sulphide also would de-
compose them with formation of the brown sulphide of
copper.
General Adulterations. —Brunswick green is often but a
mixture of chromate of lead and Prussian blue.
Remarks. —Should be used only in small quantities, or its
brightness toned down by introduction of masses of other
greens. Contains arsenic, so should be used with caution.
MALACHITE (Mountain, or Hungary Green).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Is a hydrated di-
carbonate of copper, combined with a white earth.
Formed native by the constant dropping of water satu-
rated with carbonic acid, and holding in solution the oxide
of copper.
Artistic Qualities. —For artistic purposes it is prepared
artificially ; the latter is not so bright as the native variety,
which gives greens varying from emerald to grass green,
inclining to grey.
Conditions of Permanency. —Durable in pure air and light.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Blackened by bad air
and age, and exclusion from light. Converted into blues by
the action of alkalies. Inferior in durability to Scheele’s
greens.
General Adulterations. —The general adulterants of these
three greens consist of various mixtures of blues and
yellows.
Remarks. —Scarcely fit for the artists’ palette.


SAP GREEN (Verde Vessie, Iris or Bladder Green).
Chemical Names and Composition. —ls the inspissated juice
of buckthorn berries, or made from the green leaves of the
woad, or the blue flowers of the iris, &c.
Artistic Qualities. —Is dark in colour, of a fine natural
yellowish transparent green. Useful in water for flower
painting.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly durable in water
colours, less so in oil.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —lmperfect as a pigment,
as it attracts moisture, and is thus liable to engender mil-
dew. Fugitive in course of time.
General Adulterations. —Adulterated with other vegetable
green colours, such as extract of coffee-berries.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —When pure
has a glossy fracture.
Remarks. —Similar pigments obtained from coffee-berries,
and named Venetian and emerald greens, are of a colder
colour, equally fugitive, and are now obsolete.
SCHEEEE’S, or SWEDISH GREEN.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Cupric arsenite. Cop-
per and arsenic.
Artistic Qualities. —A good light green when well pre-
pared. Should not be used in flesh tints. Is less opaque
and of a darker shade than emerald green (of copper).
Conditions of Permanency. —Similar in stability to emerald
green. Permanent when alone and with white lead. Is


less affected than the other copper greens by foul air and
damp.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —ls destroyed when mixed
with the true Naples yellow or antimoniate of lead.
General Adulterations. —All the metals used in its manu-
facture are present in a free state if carelessly prepared.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants .— The presence
of free copper and arsenic can be detected by using the
tests for those metals.
Remarks.-— Since it contains arsenic, it should be carefully
kept from children, and the brush should not be put in the
mouth.
TERRA VEETE (Green Earth, Verona Green, Green Bice,
Verdetta, or Holly Green).
Chemical Names and Composition. —A species of ochre
containing silica, oxide of iron, magnesia, potash, and water.
When calcined it forms another pigment called Verona
brown,
Artistic Qualities. —Grows darker when mixed with oil.
Weak in body and semi-transparent, dries well in oil, and is
useful for glazing.
Conditions of Permanency. —ls very durable alone and
with other colours ; strong light and vitiated atmosphere
have no effect on it.
Conditions of Non-Permanency.-—lts, colour is destroyed
by acids.
General Adulterations. —Adulterated with yellow ochre.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —See tests
given under yellow ochres.


Remarks. —Useful to landscape and marine painters. In
combination with Indian red and Naples yellow, it gives a
series of mild russet greens, of much use in middje distance.
VERDIGRIS, or Viride JEris.
Chemical Names and Compositioifl—An acetate of copper
crystallised or distilled ; a compound from acetous acid and
oxide of copper. The verdigris of commerce is a sub-
acetate of copper, i.e. a salt in which the oxic\e is in the
largest proportion. (Burnt verdigrisjmeans an oiide instead
of an acetate of copper. / e
Artistic Qualities. —A very langfit^cold' greenT dries
rapidly, and is useful for glazing. Before using it for glazing,
the colour over which it is laid should be thoroughly dry, or
else the whole will crack. Burnt verdigris is of an olive
hue, and from its siccative qualities dries admirably. Dis-
tilled verdigris is useful for the plumage of birds, panes of
church windows, draperies, and where lively greens, as in
precious stones, are desirable. New clean Jjrush^should
be used with this pigment.
Conditions of Permanency. —Crystallised; verdigAs, when ;
grouhd in oil varnish is not soluble in water. \ln oil it is
permanent in light and air, and in varnish stapds better
than in oil. Verdigris employed as directed bjt Bouvier
undergoes no change: —“ It is so ijnprhoned in thecopaiba,
which becomes very hard, and in the varnish, wmcWnes
instantly, that the air has no time to attack it." Bouvier
found that after eighteen years vetdigris used after his method
was as bright as when first put cm.


Conditions of Non-Permanency. — Crystallised verdigris
should be varnished as soon as dry, because being a
soluble- salt it would be carried off whenever the picture
is washed. The least durable of copper greens. Light
fades it in wafer. Damp and foul air first bleach it, then
turn it black. In oil, moisture and foul air change its
colour, and cause it to effloresce or rise to the surface
through the oil.
General Adulterations. —Largely adulterated with chalk
and sulphate of copper.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —If pure,.-
~ \ * v \ ». » X *
vifrdgftr will tfpmyng a green liquid useful for
colouring maps. To test for chalk, see baryta white. If
adulterared with sulphate of copper, SH 2 will indicate
the sulphur. present in it as a brownish black mass of
cupric sulphide, which is insoluble in dilute acids.
Remarks.— Bouvier’s directions for using
are these ; # \ ‘
“ Carefully finish the object to be it,
the greens thereof Prussian blue and Naples yellow or
yellow" ochre. Keep the colour yellowish, or even on
occasion make it pure yellow, but let no white be admitted.
. . . Let the object thus painte?dfyf
crushed some crystallised or distilled verdigris into a fine
powder, mix into it as quick as possible equal parts of fine
mastic varnish and balsam of copaiba (the whitest and least
viscous obtainable), then spread this rapidly as a glaze over
every part, both light and shade, as if you were varnishing.
If the glaze be not deep enough, let it thoroughly dry and
then paint afresh.”


VIENNA GREEN, or Brunswick or Schweinfurt Green.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Compound obtained
from sulphate of copper white' oxide of arsenic, potash, and
acetous acid. Ordinary Brunswick green is compounded of
chromate of lead and Prussian blue.
Artistic Qualities. —Ordinary Brunswick green cannot be
used on walls containing lime, as the action of the latter
alters the tint of the Prussian blue in this green.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Not likely to be of any
permanency.
General Adulterations. —Carelessness of manufacture will
leave portions of the constituents in a free state.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Wash the
green with water and dip in a blue litmus paper; it will be
turned red if free acid be present, and a red paper will be
turned blue if free potash be present. If free copper is
present in the solution, a little potassic hydrate will throw
down a light blue precipitate.
Remarks. —Ordinary Brunswick green is not suitable for
pictures, as the reaction of the chromate of lead on the
Prussian blue ultimately destroys it.
VIBIDIAN, or Guignet’s Green.
Chemical Names and Composition.— Oxide of chromium,
containing a small quantity of water.
Artistic Qualities. —Is eligible in fresco. Is a rich trans.
parent colour ; used with aureolin, is a brilliant foliage green,
and useful for glazing and for aerial and liquid effects. “ A


gorgeous green, being not unlike the richest velvet. Pure
and clear as the emerald, it may be called the Prussian
blue of greens, of such richness, depth, and transparency
is it. In hue of a light bluish green, its deepest shades
verge on black, while its light tints are marked by trans-
parent clearness unsurpassed. No compound of blue
and yellow will afford a green at once so beautiful and
\ stable, so gifted with the quality of light, and therefore so
suited for aerial and liquid effects. When fitly compounded,
it will be found invaluable for the glassy liquidity of seas, in
painting which it becomes incumbent to employ pigments
more or less transparent.”
Conditions of Permanency . —ls the most permanent and
best green of the palette, and is neither injured by nor injures
other pigments. Is unaffected by light, damp, or impure air.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Cannot be used in
enamelling, as the colour, depending on the water of hydra-
tion, is destroyed by the strong heat.
General Adulterations. —If adulterated, other chrome
greens will be found.
Remarks. —Is suitable for both aqueous and atmospheric
effects ; of great use in draperies and illumination.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Compounded of zinc
and oxides of cobalt.
Artistic Qualities. —Inferior in colour and body to the
chrome greens, but it appears to possess more body than any
of the other colours made with zinc.


Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent both alone and in
combination, and similar to cobalt blue in character. It
resists change from oil, light, and foul air.
Getter a I Adulterations. —A spurious green would be made
up of cobalt blue and a yellow mechanically mixed.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —See tests
given under iron pigments.
Remarks. —Moderately bright in tone. “ Zinc green ”
should more properly indicate a cyanide of zinc and iron,
obtained by macerating finely-powdered Prussian blue in a
strong solution of chloride of zinc.


yf , J tJi" m*v' .*» ~., ,/.y ‘'j A
■ PLi->: _ vt*t£ et ('■' -. i"* Y.
*£ *. v ■% ■ . >* k a ,-x r/acr
n," .?■ o rf»' •*■': /
v rt * / I ' *f ■$ „
./ CHAPTER
f ' \ * P^v
ANTWERP, HAARLEM(BERLIN,J»t MINERAI/BLUE.
Chemical Names and (forFtffmtion. —Ferro-prussiate of
baseAhmr) j
Artistic Qtfitnties. —Lighter than, and similar in properties
to, Prussian blue. Is a rich blue, fascinating to the artist,
but should be used with caution.
Conditions of Permanency. —ls more permanent in pro-
portion to ofalummous base itpossesses.
"(Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Not so .permanent as
Prussian blue.
General Adulterations. —Ochres and chalky matters.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Hydrochloric
acid will cause effervescence if chalk be present. Distin-
.guished from Prussian blue .by possessing a more earthy
fracture.
Remarks.- —Lighter in colour and greener in tinge than
■ ■«•>■»«•■ irnir-r*r- j ir iiT'-“i-r“ Wft - -
Prussian blue, with less depth.
(Cerulian, or Egyptian Blue).
Chemical Names and Composition. —The modern pigment
is of Sulphate of lime is sometimes
present. The anclentEgyptian blue was artificially made


of carbonate of soda 15 parts, powdered flint 20, and
copper 3.
Artistic Qualities. —Of dense body. Useful as a water
colour, in fresco and enamel; appears better as a blue in
night-time than in day.
Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent under the influ-
ences of heat, light, or atmosphere.
Conditions of Non-Permaneticy. —Oils are said to injure
the delicacy of its tone.
General Adulteratmis .—A factitious cerulian is obtained
by mixing ultramarine with Naples yellow and white lead.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for
presence of lead and Naples yellow (which see).
Remarks —Becomes greenish in time, probably by the
yellowing of the oil. Linton says that the ancient cseruleum
was a native carbonate of copper.
COBALT BLUE (Cohalt Ultramarine, Vienna Bine, and
Azure).
Chemical Names and Composition.- —Silicate, of cobalt and
potassium, or a compound of cobalt and alumina.
Artistic Qualities. —Fine blue pigment. Somewhat defi-
cient in body in water; dries well in oil. Can be used in
fresco, enamel, and silicious painting. Useful as a substi-
tute for ultramarine, on account of its brightness of colour,
and superior when used in skies and other objects which re-
quire even tints. Used occasionally in retrieving the bright-
ness of those tints when too heavy, and in draperies, &c.
Capable by its superior brilliancy and contrast of saddening
the brightness of other blues.


Conditions of Permanency. —Thoroughly permanent in
mixture with other pigments. Jf
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Light and foul air slightly Jf' ,
affect its brilliancy. When not well prepared, some speci '\% 3
mens incline to violet and green. | x
General Adulterations. —Is purest when free from iron.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Distin- 3 jf
# guishable from native and artificial ultramarine by not being 'if(, $
/ 4 j V
,/vl> >
fling’s blue (a carbonate * ,g
•.-M discolourable by aci
Remarks. — Cobalt blucVinclude-
15 of cobalt), Thenarcfs blue,
— jfi.
..salt of cobalt calcined with
- alumina or_ oxide of _tm)> and sfha.lt (a glass coloured with
& cobalt and then grpund).
& INDIGO, or Indian Bine. - - •'/
\ GjMttt&GkNqiiies and Composition. —A vegetable blue.
Qu%/itiefP+T)cep blue colour, useful in water and
| Good body, powerful and transparent ; glazes well.
evening skies, but not sufficiently bright
Vi S- for skies on clear days. Is useful for the green of trees when
3 with burnt sienna and gamboge ; useful when mixed
&S with lake and gamboge to make greys and neutral tints.
Washes smoothly, and much more easily than Prussian blue.
Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent under ordinary
conditions of pure atmosphere, &c.
Conditions of Non-Permanency .—Fugitive in tint, with
white lead, and affected by foul air.
General Adulterations.- —Sometimes adulterated 50 per
cent, with sand, pulverised slate, or earthy bodies when sold
. in dust or small pieces.


Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The best in-
digo will swim upon water, and is lightest, brightest, and most
copper-coloured, of most fine grain, and inodorous.
Remarks. —Useful to supersede Prussian blue for shadows.
Prussian blue with a little black and a tinge of green in it
equally replaces indigo in its uses. 2 '' / . i
r *7 J 1 ■
BETTE. ‘ ' 7
Chemical Ndtttcs~Snd Composition. — Prussiate of iron and
ferro-cyanide of iron, i.e. it consists of carbon, nitrogen, and
iron. ~
Artistic Qualities. —Good body, powerful yet transparent.
Combines well with white lead to form splendid though
harsh tints. Dries and glazes well in oil. Imperfectly made,
has a greenish tinge. Good drier. Suitable for the blue
part of clear fine-weather skies at all times of the day ;
makes a purple when mixed with lake, which is useful for
distant mountains and drapery. Makes a bright green when
mixed with gamboge, and is permanent, but rarely used for
the greens of trees ; makes a good pearly grey for clouds
when mixed with lake and a little gamboge.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly durable, though less
permanent than the blues of cobalt or ultramarine. Soft or
distilled water should be used with it in water colours, since
any carbonate or lime present in “ hard ” water will injure
its tone.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Alkalies decompose it,
and strong light causes it to fade, but darkness restores its
colour. Hydrochloric acid again restores its colour after
action on it of alkalies.


H** -Sr
.£ • \
'P~ t vi General Adulterations. —Ochres and other earths, mineral
matters, Qhalk, pipeclay, sulphates of lime and baryta;
sometimes starch coloured blue with iodine.
I Tests for Purity "and Nature 'of "^ulterants. —Best kinds
are intense, almost black in hue, hard and brittle. Are in-
3. odorous and tasteless, and adhere to the tongue. If pure
A * this blue does not effervesce with'adds; but if adulterated
with carbonates, as chalk, it does effervesce with acids. If
-a starch be present, boiling water renders the”pigment pasty.
M Remarks. —Cannot be used in fresco or silicious painting,
C ,J| because of action of alkalies. Turnbull’s blue (ferro-cyanide
( iron) is lighter and more delicate than Prussian blue. A
green made with Prussian blue cannot be used on walls con-
—y- taining jjme.
~L SMALT (Azure, Enamel, Dumont’s, or Royal 81ue).,9 A #/./ .
f 0- ■/’** ft y
Chemical Names and Composition. —ls a fused silicate of /} '
'Pi cobalt, consisting of glass rendered blue by fusion ; '**
W’’ . ' .
p(f is then powdered and used as a pigment. it*
. f r Artistic Qualities. —Is a vivid and gorgeous blue,
C f "deep, and transparent. Most valuable for fresco and sili- \
r 4 v
% cious paintihg; can be used in water and oil; possesses
\ little body, and does not wash well.
fcA. Conditions of Permanency. —ls permanent; not affected
f 5 78112 ’ . .
. V General Adulterations. —The finer it is ground the more it \ <SL /
„ fcdecreases in intensity, until it eventually becomes colour- -
? Jess!*"Chalk (carbonate of lime) is the most usual adulterant. . . ij
Tests for Purity anjl Nature of Adulterants.' above %
Cutest for fck* f C '* *
£ y
. /■* % XX


blacks, greens, and greys, and reds for purple. Ultramarine
i-
Ash is obtained from the stone after the richer and more in-
tense blue has been exhausted. Although not equal in
%
beauty and inferior in strength of colour to ultramarine, it is
a valuable by-product, varying in shade from light to dark,
| -and in hue from pale azure to cold blue with a grey cast. It
. \
A* affords delicate and extremely tender tints, not so positive
*f
' . , #as ultramarine, but which, as water colour, washes much
' setter. It furnishes greys softer, purer, and more suited to
(J'dhe pearly tints of flesh, skies, distances, foliages, shadows
)}■ of drapery, &c., than those composed of other blues, with
white and black, which the old masters were wont to
A ' *
\6bJ A "J 4 '* A/W
A£fi' J eiA*fu *ftj ~
»,: . 30 THE ARTISTS' MANUAL OF PIGMENTS/
V
rSßemarks says it dries well, Tingry that it is a
i Afff “Asitvad drier. Probably the bad drier was of a coarse variety.
Oneway to use it to
*a’fr^^^ainte3~BTue^r^und,
to use it to strew it as a dry powder on
j•s 4’J
'JUtv.
(Outremer Lazxtrline, lazuline Blue, or
Chemical Names>tqdi Composifiop-. —Lapis lazuli; it con-
sists of silica, alumina, soda. andf sulphur. % -1
Artistic Qualities. tint; transparent in shade, 'j
dries and works well in oil, and from“ltS" ■sitiddusnature is
useful in fresco and silicious painting. Mingles well with
, . 1 - - - J ... J ... ~. r. . tti. .... .. V
Composition —Lapis lazuli ; it con-
jyy /
of silica, alumina, soda. andf sulphur.
.. it Urii t_l u iCLv, l\ j tv AilV,ii ULU V/&U iiidJlviO tVLl U Vi vli I Lv_/
|^-employ. UltramarinCj how^ereproduces the same effect It $ t
i when and and k
- capered throughout thg a picture, - The ash,^
a nrompounded with lampblack, gives a soft cold grey for dark Jjg
v ; -r lowering clouds, orlorwifight away from the sun’s influence.
i
i J3
Alone it is adapted to very remote hills or mountains, and y A
, A with orient yellow or aureolin, to distant mountains. ' .A?
f;:> ~-p*ry:
' ... v jp- o* *v' r /. r7 ;■ '*■ v u
js
A


( //^|
ULTRAMARINE, ''/ ft fjjfo
Conditions of Permanency. — permanent fer all .-A
usual artistic purposes. J pt
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Hydrochloric —
even a weak acid, like citric acid (lemon juice) decomposes
both tire native and artificial ultramarine. Any acid pig-
ment, as impurely made Constant white, should not be used ,
l /r j#***' < i
with it. M
drbaryta and Urn 'jji/jtv'*'
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Add an acid
4*
's
%
*? >
Nj
to the pigment, and if pure its colour will completely disap- >
pear; and-without effervescence; should it effervesce it
cates tire
adulterant. Ahotconcentrated solution in water, /h/"
or strong distilled vinegar, discolours and
ficial ultramarine. will destroy the blue colour, *’*»'•' /I
leaving only an earthy"yenowish-grey getatmeT If cobalt or**/ ‘ *
Pruslnan'BtutTße used as adulterants, the.acid tests will not
affect the ultramarine. SH 2 does not affect lndigp
but destroys ultramarine, and is a good test. "
Remarks.— One of the best permanent pigments of tile--*
palette, whether native or artificially produced. Varies in
tone and puHty from deep to pale blue; also obtained O,
a greenish violet or rose-colour tinge, according as it has
yellow or red oxide of iron mixed with it. vv
%-J,
4
V
i"
%
-I
si
ARTIFICIAL,! FRENCHy METZ, GMELIN’S BLUE, FAC-
TITIOUS UtiTSAT/fARINE (or Bleu de Garance, and
Outremer de Guimet).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Silicate of alumina
and silicate of soda with sulphide of sodium.


Artistic Qualities. —This artificial pigment, when well
made, can be safely used in place of the native variety.
Conditions of Permanency. Permanent. The most
desirable are those possessing the most colour. -
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Strong heat turns it to
dingy blue, and finally white ; like the native variety, it is
decomposed by ignition in hydrogen gas.
General Adulterations. —Is as a rule darker and less azure
than the native pigment.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —No free sul-
phur should be present, nor sulphate of soda. To test for
latter, wash the ultramarine and add baric chloride, and if
this salt is present a cloudy precipitate will be given.
Remarks. —ln water it should be used with a gum free
from acid. Blue ash is the product obtained from the last
grinding of the lapis lazuli; the’ refuse remains furnish
Mineral Grey. Unstable ultramarine (and the artificial is
stable and unstable) blackens with white lead, which the
genuine ultramarine does not.
New Blue is an artificial ultramarine, hovering in tiht
between a rich ultramarine and cobalt.
Permanent Blue is a pale ultramarine with a cobalt hue.


YELLOW PIGMENTS.
I Chemical Names and Composition. —Cobalt yellow ; a com-
position of cobalt, potissium, and oxide of nitrogen^
Artistic Qualities. —A rich, brilliant, transparent colour;
mixes easily with other pigments. Useful for oil, water, or
fresco. Salter says :—“ With white it forms very beautiful
and transparent tints. With- cobalt and rose madder it-
forms exceedingly pure and transparent aerial greys. With
sepia in addition it forms most agreeable delicate tints for
distant trees when under the influence of a soft light or hazy
state of the atmosphere. For foliage it imparts the vivid-
ness and freshness of nature to every colour with which it
is combined.”
Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent alone and in com-
bination. Sunlight, damp, impure air, and SIJ 2 have no #
effect on it. -
Conditions of Non-Permanency.
enamel, since heat destroys its
is non-permajtefn in
!,ur. A- steel- spatula
mixing it with another pigment,
should not
especially if it be impure, since the steel would be oxidised
by the abstraction 'of oxygen, thus weakening the stability of
the pigment.
General Adulterations. —Most usual adulterants are the
chromates of lead or cadmium yellow.


Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —To test for.
under cadraic sulphides and chromium. Am-
monium sulphate forms a black precipitate with salts of
cobalt. SH 2 does not precipitate solutions of cobalt salts.
If the pigment be heated it assumes an orange red colour,
gives off water, and then nitrous fumes, and leaves sesqui--
oxide of cobalt mixed with nitrate of potassium. If tested "*4 g
in blowpipe flame, the borax bead is coloured a bright blue. -f
Remarks. —Alkalies and SH 2 have affected some impurely
made specimens, and with indigo this has been-known ,to i i
be changed into the white indigo. The action is so very
slight, and the specimens so few, that it,ma^ be >v j
the most permanent yellow known. — lndigo is oxidised or v* _
burnt up bv admixture with, ’'yellow of **
bjcsfflingbrown.
BARYTA YELLOW (Yellow Ultramarine, %v Lemon
Yellow).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Neutral chromate of
baryta. Composed of chromic acid and barium. This is
the true Lemon yellow•-
Artistic Qualities. —Useful in high light) and as a glaze over
greens. A light wash gives cool sunny greens in distance.
Semi-opaque.
Conditions of Permanency. —Theonly chromate possessing
durability ; damp, foul air, light, and steel palette knife have
no injurious effect on it,.JSTeither has \vhite lead, nor other
pigments, either in oil or water. Permanent in fresco and
crayons.
General Adulterations.— Sulphates of lead, baryta, and


w Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for the
of the metals zinc, lead, and calcium.
Remarks. —Opinions differ on the permanency of this
pigment.
CADMIUM! YELLOW (Cadmia, or Jaune Brillant).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Sulphide of cadmium
or cadmic sulphide. 112 equivalents, of cadmium, and 32
equivalents of sulphur. $
Artistic Qualities.— a brilliant orange;
useful in fresco Excellent body and
of great power; washes well. For gorgeous sun-
sets this colpar'Ts very valuable. With white, especially
Chinese*white, it forms beautiful tints for the light touches
of bright clouds or mountains.
Conditions of Permanency. —With the exception of the
chromate, the cadmium yellows are all sulphidesTancTthere-
fore - and impure atmosphere
have no effect. Salter finds that cadmium yellow, if pure
and devoid of free sulphur, neither injures nor is injured by
white lead. If the pigment is doubted, it is best to use zinc
white for forming tints. The full deep cadmium is the
most stable.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —With white lead cad-
mium yellow is unstable. It should not be brought into
contact with pigments likely to be affected by sulphur or a
steel palette knife. It decomposes emerald green. The
pale cadmiums are somewhat unstable. Lemon cadmium
is very fugacious. No free sulphur should be present, as
it is injurious to other pigments.


General Adulterations. —Orpiraent and chromate of lead,
iodine yellow and compounds of copper, bismuth, or mer-
cury are added as adulterants.
Tests for Ptiriiy and Nature of Adulterants. —Cadmium
maybe known from yellow orpiment by not being volatilised
when heated, and being insoluble in ammonic sulphide. If
a black precipitate be given on adding SH 8 , the adulterants
may be mercury, lead, bismuth, or copper compounds. To
distinguish this yellow from copper compounds add SH 2 ,
and if pure it will be unaffected, and will be insoluble in
alkaline sulphides, caustic sulphides, or potassic cyanide ;
insoluble in cold but soluble in hot dilute nitric and hydro-
chloric acids. Soluble also in dilute sulphuric acid.
Remarks. —The “pale” cadmium is not strictly so, except
in comparison with the deep cadmium we have been con-
sidering. This pale cadmium is of a full rich brilliant
yellow, but less orange than the deep cadmium. The paler
the cadmium yellow, the less permanent it is.
CHROME YELLOWS (Jaime Mineral, Cologne Yellow,
Pale and Deep Chrome, Orange Chrome, Citron,
Leipzig or Paris Yellow).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Chromates of lead,
in which the latter metal more or less exists in proportion
to the depth or paleness of the pigment; it is chromic acid
combined with the metallic base. There are other chrome
yellows, being chromates of strontian or zinc, but they are
little used on the palette. Mineral yellow is a compound of
lead and chlorine. Cologne yellow consists of chromate of
lead (25), sulphate of lead (15), and sulphate of Time (60).


Artistic Qualities. —Are of various degrees of depth or
tone, from lemon to deep yellow, possessing opacity and
good body. Go cordially into tint with white, but they pos-
sess a harshness and crudeness when compounded with other
colours, and are devoid of that mellow richness which cha-
racterises the cadmiums. The action of oils is always too
great upon the lead in the presence of oxygen to allow of
the colour being quite permanent. They should be used
in draperies, where the changing would not greatly matter.
Conditions of Permanency. —The sulphates of baryta and
lime are sometimes formed during manufacture, and they
are an advantage, in that they not only lend a softness to
the colours, but decrease the proportion of lead and the
risk of change. Orange chrome is more lasting than yellow
chrome. Foul air has no effect on citron yellow.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Non-permanent either in
strong light, injurious air—in which they blacken—or in tint
with white. They are destructive to Prussian and Antwerp
blues compounded with them. Are likely to be affected
by sulphur compounds and alkalies. The denser the body
the more likely are chrome yellows to change. This change
is more rapid in water than in oil. Citron yellow in con-
tact with organic substances is apt to turn green.
General Adulterations. —The chromates are often mixed
with sulphate of lead—which is white—as well as with the
sulphates of baryta and lime. Lead increases the readiness
of the chromates to become black in impure air.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —lf pure the
chrome yellow will be completely dissolved and without
effervescence when boiled in a test-tube with a little dilute


nitric acid. The borax bead (blowpipe test) will be green
if the tested yellow be a chrome yellow. Alkalies, orange
or red protochloride of tin, and sulphurous acid reduce
Cologne yellow to the metallic state.'
Remarks. —Chromate of lead in its natural state was long
known as “ Siberian Redlead.” Cologne yellow is a cheap
inferior colour unfit for the palette, but is useful for mixing
with other yellows. Jaune mineral is paler than the ordi-
nary chromates of lead. Care should be taken as to what
pigments are mixed with these chromates. Sulphides are
liable to be acted on by the lead in the chromates.
Cologne Earth. —This colour resembles sepia, but has
more depth when dry. It is useful for making sketches,
especially strong effects and classical subjects. These can
afterwards be coloured, and the Cologne earth gives sobriety
without coldness to the various tints which are laid over it.
»GAMBOGE (variously written Gamboge, Gamboge, Cam
bogia, Gambodium, Gamboage, &c.).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Vegetable yellow. A
resinous gum which distils from various trees of a resinous
nature.
Artistic Qualities. —A clear yellow, bright and transparent,
readily dissolving in water. Somewhat deficient in light
and depth. Dries well, and can safely be used with other
pigments. Mixed with lemon yellow of barium, can be used
in oil. Useful for greens when mixed with blues, to be used
in trees and greens, and to make greys and neutral tints
when used with lake and indigo or Prussian blue, but
most frequently with indigo. It should not be used in


the horizon tints of evening skies, yellow ochre being a
more mellow tint and preferable in tone. Gamboge will
make a good orange colour when mixed with burnt sienna,
useful for autumnal tints or faded trees. Makes pure green
when mixed with indigo and Prussian blue.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly permanent if properly
employed. Mixed with other pigments, from its gum resin,
it conduces to their stability and keeps its place well.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —lmpure air deepens, and
light weakens its tone. Not so stable in oil as water. White
lead and other metallic pigments injure it, terrene and alka-
line substances redden it, and alcohol dissolves it and alters
its colour.
General Adulterations. —Earthy matters.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants, —The tests
for organic substances are too complex to produce satisfac-
tory results in the hands of an amateur in analysis.
Remarks. —In landscape, gamboge affords, with indigo or
Antwerp blue, clear, bright greens, and with sepia a very
useful sober tint. For sunsets and sunrise, use gamboge
mixed with cadmium yellow. ,
INDIAN YELLOW (or Purree, or Powre). /\ , ,
Chemical Names and Composition. —Uriopjtosphate of
lime. A magnesian salt of a curious acid called euxanthic.
Artistic Qualities. —Pure yellow. Valuableln water under
strong sunlight. Of far greater body than gamboge ; can be
used in fresco. In oils useful for greens in landscapes. Is very
brilliant, and being transparent is useful in glazing over greens
which may be too dark and heavy, and to give them richness.


Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent
and foul air. Lime does not affect it. hence useful in fresco,
. Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Fugitive in oil, both alone
and in tint. Affected by darkness and obscurity. Is in-
* -tn^vsaMng'
jurious to cochineal lakes and carmines ; becomes brown by
mixture with pigments containing oxygen.
Remarks. —Blackness in the shadows of foliage resulting
from too much indigo is best corrected by this pigment em-
ployed thickly.
KING’S OR CHINESE YELLOW (Orpiment, or Auri-
pigmentum).
Chemical Names and Composition. — sulphide ;
arsenious or sulpharsenious anhydride, a combination of sul-
phide and oxide of arsenic. Found natural; also made
artificially.
Artistic Qualities. —A fine yellow, of good body. Works
well. Highly poisonous.
Conditions of Permanency. —Semi-permanent, in oil or
water.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —White lead destroys arse-
vr-;:ipa»i - ..
nical yellows. Cannot be used witnJNaples yellow made
from antimoniate of lead. Should not be used with green
chromium oxides.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adidterants. —If pure it
will be entirely volatilised when heated on a piece of porce-
lain ; neither should it alter its colour when warmed with
dilute hydrochloric acid. Test for white lead.
Remarks. —The sulphur in combination with the arsenic,
having less affinity for that metal than for lead, lets it go,


and forms a sulphide of lead of a dark greyish colour when
this yellow is used with lead paints.
LEMON YELLOW.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Chromate, carbonate,
and sulphate of lead. A mixture of chromium, carbon, sul-
phur, oxygen, and lead.
Artistic Qualities. —It has some better qualities than the
chrome yellows generally.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly permanent under ordi-
nary conditions when well prepared.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Less affected by SH 2
than the chrome yellows.
Ge7ieral Adulterations. —Sulphates of baryta and lime and
arsenic.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for
the metals barium, calcium, and arsenic.
MASSICOT (or Masticot).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Protoxide of lead.
A higher degree of oxidation transforms massicot into
minium. Combination of lead and oxygen.
Artistic Qualities. —Unsuitable for fresco. May be em-
ployed in preparing the drying oils, but drying oils prepared
from lead pigments are dangerous to use. Light yellow
sold in shops under this name is generally Ceruse calcined.
Conditions of Permanency. —Pure and unmixed it is as
permanent or fugitive as white lead.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —ln tint with white lead,
and in damp and foul air, it is destroyed.


General Adulterations. —Other yellows compounded with
white.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Employ
blowpipe test for chrome and baryta yellows.
Remarks. —One of the undesirable pigments. All lead
pigments, notwithstanding their opacity, good body, and
easy working, should be banished from the palette if perma-
nency is desired. |
NAPLES <■ Giallolino ” of the Italians).
ChemicaLPfames and Composition. —Now compounded of
zinc; “formerly lead oxide and antimony, or antimoniate of
lead.^S
Artistic Qualities,—Good, body; opacity, and covering fU
power. \The yellow now used in enamel painting is very
similar t(p Naples yellow, being composed of the oxides of i /
antimony\nd lead.
Conditions v of Permanency. — Not affected by sunlight. N.
Prof. Church that the continental
posed of zinc add antimony, ispermanent.
OondltiSns^of by SH 2 , foul
gases, and steel (whifch it oxidises by parting with oxygen)
or iron pigments, as Prussian or Antwerp blues.
General Adulteration's. —Sulphates-drlead, barium, and lime.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Should be
tested for the presence of lead, sinpe that metal if in its
composition is very injurious. !
Remarks. —In the manufacture of | Naples yellow it is of
the greatest importance that the metals combined should be ,
in the complete state of oxides. \ A X^.A
UTAm
■ A ‘\f)


YELLOW LAKES (Madder Yellow, Italian, English, and
Dutch Pink, Quercitron Yellow or Lake).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Vegetable dyes on
earthy bases. Obtained from annato, turmeric, and quercitron.
Artistic Qualities. —Bright yellow; very transparent ; bad
driers in oil. Time changes their colour to orange or foxy hue.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly durable if pure.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Light, oxygen, and white
lead destroy their colour. Metallic, arsenic, and alkaline
bodies redden them.
General Adulterations. —lf adulterated will be with yellow
dyes.
Remarks. —Lakes of all colours should be used with cau-
tion and looked upon with suspicion.
YELLOW OCHRES (these include Jaune de Per, Jaune
de Mars, Sienna, or Raw Sienna).
Chemical Names and Composition. —Hydrates of iron, and
peroxides of iron; i.e. they are composed of oxygen, water,
and iron, sometimes closely combined with silica and alumina.
Artistic Qualities. —Semi-opaque in oil or water. Useful
for mixing for tints, and with Prussian blue to form greens.
When calcined they acquire a deeper colour, sometimes
becoming brown and red. Should be heated to 21 2° before
mixing with oil, to expel superfluous Useful for
stone buildings or plaster, cornfields, and ydlow lights of
the sky towards the horizon; mixes well with Venetian red
for warm lights on buildings, &c., but never to be used in
the green for greens of trees, since it is not transparent


enough, and liable to be washed off too easily. Burnt Sienna
is useful for rich banks of earth in sunshine and evening
tints, and for glowing tints on buildings; not to be used on
the horizon tints of skies, but particularly useful in making
greens of various degrees of warmth and depth, when mixed
with purple grey; easily converted into different degrees of
warm or sober brown. Roman Ochre is useful for the
purpose of yellow ochre, but being less bright is adapted for
drawings of a deeper tone, and is more useful for the light
tints of stone buildings. Not to be used in the green of
trees.
Conditions of Permanency. —Fairly permanent. Foul air
does not affect them. The chemically prepared ochres have
a more violent action on other pigments than the native
variety, and are less preferable.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —The-eebres should not be
used with pigments affected by iron, or with carmine, lake,
andjntense blue. _ They affect sulphates of lead.
General Adulterations. —Chalk and china clay (kaolin).
The greater the proportion of clay the brighter the colour.
Turmeric, Indian yellow, and yellow of coal-tar colours.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Hydrochloric
acid will cause effervescence if chalk be present. Boil this
solution, and if clay be present it will exhibit itself as a white
gelatinous residue. When there is a proportion of clay the'
substance feels greasy, and has more body than one mixed
with chalk. Wash with ammonia; if coal-tar yellow be pre-
sent the liquid is coloured.
Remarks. —Jaune de Mars.and Jaune de Fer arc artificially
prepared iron ochres. Merimee gives good reasons for


considering that no artificial ochres can have the same
permanency as natural ochres.
Mars Orange is a subdued orange of the burnt sienna
class, but without the brown tinge that distinguishes the
latter. It is marked by special clearness and purity of tone
with much transparency ; it affords bright sunny tints in its
pale washes and combines effectively with white. Being an
artificial iron ochre, it is more chemically active than native
ochres, and needs to be cautiously employed with pigments
affected by iron, such as the lakes of cochineal, and intense
blue.
Mars Yellow, or Jaune de Mars, Jaune de Fer, Iron
Yellow, &C., is an artificially prepared iron ochre of the
nature of sienna general qualities it resembles
the ochres, with the same eligibility and exceptions ; but is
more transparent, as well as purer, clearer, and richer and
brighter. Like them it is quite permanent.
Orient Yellow is absolutely permanent and perfectly unex-
ceptionable in all respects, both in water and oil. It equals
aureolin in stability ; not possessed of the same amount of
transparency, it is distinguished by greater richness and
depth. Of a soft golden hue, lustrous and luminous, it
resembles a brilliant and somewhat opaque Indian yellow.
A gorgeous and durable substitute for that fugitive pigment
is produced by compounding the orient with aureolin, or by
using the latter as a glaze. Being more transparent than
the cadmiums, and less obtrusive, this yellow is adapted


for mellow sunset and sunrise clouds, as for instance, sun-
shine on distant mountains. With French blue it affords a
beautiful sea-green, and, mixed with aureolin, gives fine
green tints. It is. also eligible for draperies and illumina-
tion. For enamelling it is inadmissible, the colour being
destroyed by great heat; but in fresco it may be safely
employed.
Turner Yellow, Gassel Yellow, Montpellier Yellow,
Vienna YellO'ftr, Minera} •yellow . —These various names
belong to quite a number of colours, the composition of
which is not properly established. Nevertheless they appear
to result from the combination of a protochloride of lead
with variable proportions of oxide of lead, and consequently
suffer the disadvantages of lead pigments.


CHAPTER V.
RED PIGMENTS.
CADMIUM RED.
Chemical Names and Composition, —ls a simple original
pigment containing no base but cadmium.
Artistic Qualities. —Approaches an orange scarlet tone;
has great depth; works and dries well. Gives delicate
washes, and is useful where opacity is undesirable.
Conditions of Permanency. —Mixes readily and safely with
other colours. Not affected by light, impure air, or ex-
posure to atmosphere.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Must not be used for
enamel painting.
General Adulterations. —lf adulterated will be with red
lead or vermilion.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for
lead. Boil in water, and add SH 2 to solution. A dark
precipitate indicates lead. To test for vermilion, heat a
little in test-tube; the mercury will volatilise and condense
in metallic globules on sides of tube.
Remarks. —Useful for all kinds of work but enamel.
Compounded with white, this red yields a series of fine
flesh tints.


,* *w aM
45 ' THE ARTISTS’ MANUAL OF MOMENTS. // *' J
/
CHINESE VERMILION/ or Carmine Vermilion.
Chemical Nayies a,
sometimes a/ / sulp,hide
—This pigment was
is now obtained from
meicury.
Artistic Qualities. —Has a somewhat crimson hue not at
all inclined to orange. Mixed with white is useful for rose
and lilac tints of some complexions.
Conditions of Permanency. —Safe to use with madder lakes.
Conditions of Non : Permanency. —Unsafe in combination
with the lakes of cochineal.
General Adulterations. —See Vermilion.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Same as for
vermilion.
Remarks. —Scarlet and extract of vermilion are synony-
mous terms. Orange vermilion gives delicate carnations,
and is durable in oil and water.
CRIMSON LAKE.
Chemical Names and Composition. —ls an extract frotn the
“ coccus cacti ” insect fixed to oxide of iron or aluminous
base, and -contains more of this aluminous base than car-,
mine does. The colour of this lake should be imparted to
it during the process of manufacture, and not by subse-
quent mechanical mixture.
Artistic Qualities. —Not so deep nor brilliant as carmine.
More useful in water than in oil, and useful for glazing ; over
vermilion it produces a most brilliant scarlet; but is apt to
vanish therefrom. Poppy oil is the best vehicle to use with
cochineal lakes.


Condition}’of Permanency . —More valuable and durable in
4 water than in oil.
Conditiotts of Non-Permanency. —Unstable'either alone or
combination. Strong light renders crimson lake fugacious,
whether in water or in oil; white lead and other lead pig-
X >, ments, Naples yellow, and arsenical colours, destroy its hue.
\ f lakes mixed with linseed oil turn livery.
General Adulterations. —lf made from an inferior insect,
i ■ S heavy spar, carbonate of lead, and Venice talc are some-
times added to give it the silvery-grey reflection that is
always to be met with on the best insect. Logwood and
f chalk are also sometimes added.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. A solu-
tion of ammonia will purple the lakes made with logwSb“d,
Brazil wood? and others, but will not dissolve the colours
produced from*tfeemV''To distinguish other adulterants, use
the respective tests for chalk, heavy spar, carbonate of lead,
&c., given under white lead.
Remarks. —Gives richness in flower painting and in illu-
mination. It forms excellent greys with cobalt and gam-
boge, and as a foreground colour it should with
Vandyke brown. Useless for frescoes, as alkaline bodies
pnrplS'flie tones of lakes. A cochineal lake.
CARMINE LAKE.
Chemical Names and Composition. —A cochineal lake.
Artistic Qualities. Has great power in full touches;
possesses clearness in the pale washes ; works well. Seldom
used in landscape painting.
Conditions of Permaiimtcy. —Carmine, containing less base


and most colouring matter, is the most permanent of the
cochineal lakes. Oil or varnish as vehicles protect it. Im-
pure air has little effect on it.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —ln glazing, strong light
causes the glaze to vanish, and in tint with white lead it is
fugacious.
General Adulterations. —Starch, vermilion, and alumina
are occasionally added as adulterants.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —These may
be detected by the tests given for cochineal lakes in general,
or by adding liquid ammonia and then heating. The colour-
ing matter is entirely dissolved, while the impurities remain
insoluble.
Remarks. —The name was formerly confined to the fine
feculences of the Kermes and cochineal tinctures, but now
includes any pigment which is like them in beauty and
powdery texture (as blue carmines), though the term is
usually confined to crimson and scarlet lakes of cochineal.
INDIAN LAZE, or Lae Lake.
Chetnical Names and Composition. —A resinous secretion
of the “ coccus ficus ” deposited on twigs and branches of
plants.
Artistic Qualities. —Is a good deep colour, hard and nearly
transparent.
Conditions of Permanency. —Used thickly or in strong
glazing, as a shadow colour, it is of great body and much
permanence. (Salter.)
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Not thoroughly per-


manent, but still more so than the other cochineal lakes.
Is fugitive with white lead and in thin glazing.
General Adulterations. —The most usual are chalk and
sulphate of lime (plaster of Paris) and silica.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The native
variety has a brilliant conchoidal fracture.
Remarks. —lnferior in brilliancy and durability to madder
lakes.
INDIAN RED and PERSIAN RED.
Chemical Names and Composition. —lndian red is a hema-
tite or peroxide of iron containing oxygen, iron, and earthy
matters. Besides the Persian red obtained from the ochres,
there is another which is a chromate of lead.
Artistic Qualities. —Indian red has good body, of a purple
russet hue, and is useful for fresco and silicious painting
provided lime is not present. Goes well into combination.
Conditions of Permanency, —Permanent.
Conditions of Non-Permatmicy. —Contains much oxygen,
and when mixed with lakes and pigments, abstracting oxy-
gen, its stability is weakened.
General Adulterations —Chromates of lead and red ochres.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —To dis-
tinguish Persian red from other reds, if pounded in a mortar
it assumes an orange hue. To test for chromates of lead
use SH 2 .
Remarks. —Persian red is sometimes used to adulterate
vermilion, light and other reds. Chromate of lead in its
natural state was known as Siberian red lead.


lODINE SCARLET, or lodide of Mercury.
Chemical Names and Composition. —lodide of mercury
or mercuric iodide. 200 equivalents of mercury and 254
equivalents of iodine.
Artistic Qualities. —Good body and opacity. A mag-
nificent scarlet, unequalled by any other pigment.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Not permanent. It is
subject to evanescence by slight influences. Is easily de-
composed by other pigments ; pure atmosphere renders its
colour fugacious; foul air destroys its scarlet hue ; light
causes it to vanish.
General Adulterations. —Many adulterants which affect its
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. — The best
quality is of the finest colour. Soluble in alcohol and in
excess of potassic iodide.
Remarks. —Although useless as a pigment, it is mentioned
here that its employment may be guarded against.
MADDER LAKES (Madder Carmine or Tinted Carmine,
Pink Madder, Rose Rubiate or Liquid Madder, Lake
or Rose Madder).
Chemical Names and Composition. —These lakes are ex-
tracted from the root of the “ Rubia Tinctorum.”
Artistic Qualities. —Brown and Purple Madder Lakes are
useful in landscapes for cattle, draperies and mossy stones j
and thatch near the foreground. Madder Carmine is the
richest and deepest, and contains more colouring matter
than base. It varies in hue according to the mode of pre-


paration. Madder Lake, useful for purples when mixed with
indigo and Prussian blue; the last should be used prin-
cipally for distant hills and mountains. This mixture is also
useful for the shadows of nearer but not yet distant hills.
It makes a grey or neutral tint when mixed with gamboge
and Prussian blue or cobalt. Madder lake is bright, rubs
up easily, and with a better body of colour than the bright
madders of cochineal, and lies more evenly. May be
mixed with yellow ochre for the warm tint of skies instead
of Venetian red. Pink Madder is a weaker preparation of
this, paler in hue, and possessing less colour. Rose Madder
is not as intense as madder carmine. It gives the most
perfect carnation tints known. Does not rapidly dry in oil j
is less easy to work in water than cochineal. With cadmium
yellow and Chinese white it is invaluable for glazing. The
red portion of a sunset sky may be improved with a thin
wash of this pigment. Rose Rubiate is a concentrated tinc-
ture of a beautiful and perfect rose-colour and transparency.
In its simple state it is used as a watercolour with or with-
out gum. In oil it dries by acting as a siccative.
Conditions of Permanency. —Madder lakes are the only
thoroughly permanen tlakes of the pajette. Madder carmine
is the only desirable carmine for painting in oil or water.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —When adulterated their
permanency is affected in respect of the nature of the adul-
terations used.
General Adulterations. —Madders are often adulterated
with brickdust, red ochre, red sand, clay, mahogany saw-
dust, logwood, sandal and Japan wood, and bran ; whilst
the French madders have gum, sugar, salts, and other


soluble bodies, as likewise lac, cochineal, and carthamus or
safflower.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Liquid
ammonia or alkalies generally dissolve the colours of cochi-
neal, lac, and safflower, so their detection is easy. If the
liquid remains uncoloured on adding ammonia to an as-
sumed madder lake, in .all probability the pigment is
genuine.
Remarks. —“ Lake ”is a term applied either to red, yel-
low, or blue pigments formed by precipitating colouring
matters, as tinctures, on to some metallic oxide, alumina or
other earth. All vegetable lakes should be regarded with
suspicion if used in thinning, glazing, or delicate flesh or sky
tints. Pink madder is now almost obsolete; the name is
given to rose madder, which is also called madder lake.
In using these lakes a little of the dry colour should be
crushed with the muller and made up into a thick paste with
a few drops of poppy oil, drying oil being used to thin it as
it is wanted for use. By thus omitting the drying oil the
pigment will remain moist for days.
RED LEAD (Minium, or Saturnine Red).
Chemical Names and Composition. —An oxide of lead. It
is generally a mixture of two oxides of lead not chemically
compounded, and is of an uncertain composition.
Artistic Qualities. —Of a scarlet colour, heavy and opaque
in body. Is an excellent drier with other colours, but being
lead it cannot he safely employed except with the ochres,
earths, and blacks in general.
Conditions of Permanency. —When pure or alone it is not


affected by light, and in simple varnish or oil not rendered
drying by any metallic oxide it may stand a long time under
favourable circumstances.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. — VyhitQ lead destroy ll its
colour. SH 2 blackens it, and when mixed with it red lead
undergoes a rapid oxidation. CJIbiG--aei4-4«rns'
Red lead follows white lead in saponifying with the oil, and
so in time loses its opacity, and allows the background to
appear through.
General Adulterations. —Badly made red lead is of a
brownish colour.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —To dis-
tinguish red lead from vermilion or iron reds (as the ochres)
add a solution of SH 2 and a black precipitate of lead sul-
phide will indicate the leaden nature of the pigment.
Remarks. —Altogether unsuitable for the artist’s palette.
RED OCHRE (Indian Ochre, Scarlet Ochre, or Light
Red).
Chemical Names and Composition. —ls usually a sulphate
of iron calcined into an oxide. Sometimes it is one of the
yellow oxides of iron calcined.
Artistic Qualities. —It is less harsh to the eye than ver-
milion, and more harmonious in certain combinations.
Conditions of Permanency. —The ochres are permanent
when well prepared. Should not be mixed with those pig-
ments likely to be affected by iron.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Should sulphate of lime
be present, it is unsuitable for silicious painting, since sili-


cate of lime is formed by union with the silicate of potash,
and the pigments become hard and lumpy.
General Adulterations. —The native pigment is mixed
with earthy substances.
Remarks. —With vermilion or madder lake it is useful for
the shadows of light red draperies.
RED. ORPIMENT, orJLaalgar.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Diarsenious disul-
phide ; i.e. a compound of arsenic and sulphur.
Artistic Qualities. —Red orpiment, which is an orange
colour, contains most arsenic, whereas yellow orpiment con-
tains most sulphur. Poisonous.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —A dangerous body to use,
since it destroys other pigments and absorbs the colour of
the ground, especially so if the latter contain lead.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Arsenic ■ is
volatilised like the mercury in vermilion when heated in a
narrow test-tube, and only a small portion of the realgar
should be used. This arsenic pigment gives off an odour
similar to garlic when heated in a test-tube.
Remarks. —BotiutJiis..pigmeiiTaad .its well-known yellow
companion should be excluded from the palette.
VENETIAN, ENGLISH, or PRUSSIAN RED, or Scarlet
Ochre.
Chemical Names and Composition. —AfWdxjde obtained
from iron. Prepared by sulphate,of iron, to
which a little nffrir poid, may be advafiSgetmsly added.
The result is a peroxide of iron more powerful and of a
more scarlet tone than light red.


Artistic Qualities. —With cobalt or French blue, with
which it mixes well, it gives fine pearly greys. Heightened
in tone by admixture with madder lake. Saddened by black,
it gives low-toned reds useful for buildings. Compounded
with aureolin, yields a clear orange. Useful for the red
horizon tints of skies, and to make a neutral tint when
mixed with indigo and a very little lake, and is most
excellent for its quality of mixing well with all colours
(Indian ink not excepted), and lying evenly and smoothly
on the paper, with less trouble than light red, for which
it is a valuable substitute. It is preferable to indigo
red, which is too heavy and purple, and is very good to
mix with yellow ochre for general tints used in bricks,
tiles, &c.
Conditions of Permanency. —When well prepared it is
permanent, but since it contains iron it should not-be mixed
with pigments affected by that metal. It is apparently not
affected by SH 2 , light, damp, or foul air.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Sometimes unsuitable
for silicious painting (see red ochre).
General Adulterations. —ln the manufacture of Venetian
red, lime sometimes becomes mixed with it, and as the
pigment is made from the sulphate of iron, sulphate of lime
is formed. The presence of this impurity prevents the use
of Venetian red in silicious painting.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Test for
presence of alumina, chalk, and gypsum. If pure no reac-
tion will take place with the tests. Hydrochloric acid com-
pletely dissolves pure oxide of iron.
Remarks. —A good all-round pigment.


VERMILION (also called Cinnabar).
Chemical Name and Composition. —Sulphide 'of mercury.
Is obtained native, or is produced artificially by heating
together 200 equivalents of mercury with 32 equivalents of
sulphur.
Artistic Qualities. —Has good body, due to its opacity;
is useful in oil, water, and fresco. It must not be used
with iodine, since it does not dry quickly. Compounded
with whites, it forms delicate flesh tints, and with cobalt or
French blue and white tender aerial greys. This is the
brightest of reds ; is useful in flesh and drapery, and in
painted objects, such as flags, boats, &c., being of that de-
gree of brightness which will, by contrast, send back many
other reds into distances.
Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent under all ordinary
conditions. Being a sulphide, it is unaffected by 'SH 2 ,
and should not be brought into contact with a pigment on
which sulphur acts injuriously. Vermilion in the course of
time turns slightly brown.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —When heated to, a very
high temperature with compounds of tin, iron, and anti-
mony, it is decomposed. Unfitted for enamel painting,
since alkalies and alkaline carbonates decompose it when at
a red heat. Unstable with lakes. Becomes denser with
age.
General Adulterations. —Red lead, brickdust, oxide of
iron, or Persian red (a peculiar chrom'ate of lead). Some-
times iodine scarlet is added to give extraordinary brilliancy.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —lf pure will


be decomposed into metallic mercury and sulphur, and dis-
sipated, when heated in test-tube. Hydrochloric acid and
caustic alkalies do not affect it. Oxide of iron may be
detected by hydrochloric acid. If lead be present a metal-
lic bead of it will be formed if vermilion be fused on char-
coal with carbonate of soda, the metallic mercury passing
off as a vapour. If brickdust be present, heat the pigment
in long narrow tube ; the mercury will volatilise and brick-
dust remain at the bottom of the tube. lodine is dissolved
by carbon disulphide, which assumes a fine violet colour.
Remarks. —Field’s orange vermilion is less opaque and
also brighter, clearer, and purer than the ordinary vermilion.
Scarlet vermilion possesses a more scarlet hue than vermilion
proper.
Mars Red, or Rouge de Mars, is an artificial iron ochre,
similar in subdued tint and permanence to the native umber.
Its chemical affinities, however, are greater than those of the
latter, and it therefore requires to be employed cautiously
with pigments affected by iron. In this respect the red
resembles its compeers—Mars yellow, orange, violet and
brown—all of which are iron ochres artificially prepared.
Possessing the richness and depth of Indian red, it is dis-
tinguished by a russet orange hue of light red. Its pale
washes are marked by considerable clearness.
Purple Lake is a species of crimson lake with a purple
cast, transparent and deep toned and useful in shadows ; in
other respects resembling that pigment. More durable than
crimson lakes.


CHAPTER M.
BROWN AND BLACK PIGMENTS.
ASPHALTUM or BITUMEN (Antwerp Brown, or Bitu-
men Judaicum).
Chemical Names and Composition. —A mineral pitch of
resin. The native asphalt is non-secure; the artificial is the
residue of various resins and bituminous matters distilled
for the sake of their essential oils.
Artistic Qualities. —Is a rich brown. Has a powerful
body, but is useless, as it liquefies and cracks unless mixed
with an unctuous vehicle. It is dissolved in oil of turpen-
tine. The native is superior to the artificial asphaltum
when it is used as a permanent brown in water.
Conditions of Non-Bermanency. —ls a most destructive
pigment, since it contracts and cracks by atmospheric and
caloric changes.
General Adulterations. —Asphaltum is often adulterated
with foreign matters, all of which render it still more destruc-
tive in use.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —lf pure it
should present a glossy fracture, smooth and nearly black
and brilliant. This fracture also has the appearance of un-
dulations, arising, in fact, from the movement it experienced,
whilst yet liquid,, on the surface of the sea, and in its con-
crete state it retains this form.


Remarks. —The solution of asphalte in turpentine is com-
monly called “ asphaltum,” and the mixture with drying
oils “bitumen.” Liquid asphaltum is a preparation made
for use in water colours.
BISTRE.
Chemical Names and Composition,— The finer parts of
beechwood soot extracted by a watery solution.
Artistic Qualities. —Not used in oil, as it dries with diffi-
culty therein ; only in water. It has a powerful citrine brown
colour, and washes well.
Conditions of Permanency.—K permanent colour.
Conditions of NonrPermanency. —lt attracts moisture from
the atmosphere, and is therefore liable to engender mildew
in water colours.
General Adulterations. —Accidental impurities, as coarse
particles of soot, wood-ashes, &c.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —A gritty
solution will at once show these impurities.
Remarks. —Used in water like China ink, and has the
same effect as brown pink has in oil.
BROWN PINK.
Chemical Names and Composition. —A vegetable lake
made from dye woods and French berries by precipitation
with fkm.
Artistic Qualities. —Great depth and transparency in
water colour. All berry varieties dry badly. Works well
both in water and in oil.
Conditions of Permanency. —More permanent when worked


in full body than in thin glazings. The quercitron bark
variety is semi-stable.
Conditions of Non-Per.manency. —When in combination
with white lead it fades. The berry variety is fugitive.
General Adulterations. —May accidentally possess an ex-
cess of soda or potash from careless manufacture.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —lf the
alkali be in excess, the pigment possesses a brown hue
instead of that of a citron hue.
Remarks. —Should be used carefully in combination.
Produces fine greens with Prussian or indigo blue.
BLUE or FRANKFURT BLACK.
Chemical Names and Composition. Charcoal and cal-
cined Prussian blue; also burnt vine-twigs, cOcoanut
shells, &c.
Artistic Qualities. —A most useful colour, and dries well
in oil. In mixture with white, produces bluish tints.
Conditions of Permanency. —Permanent.
General Adulterations. —Common black mixed with blues.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —lt should be
free from lumps and of fine texture.
Remarks. —The blue-black of the ancients was made
from the lees of wine.
INDIAN INK and CHINESE INK.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Shell-lac 10 parts,
borax 20 parts, lampblack and water 40 parts. Chinese ink
is the finest lampblack mixed with the oil of sesame and a
little camphor.


Artistic Qualities. —Finely opaque in body. When dry
on the paper will not yield to the action of water, owing to
its combining with the components of the paper.
Conditions of Permanency. — lt is thoroughly permanent.
General Adulterations. —Earthy matters and inferior soots.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants.— ls homoge-
neous when rubbed in water. When diluted with much water
will leave no precipitate after evaporation. When dry its
surface is covered with a pellicle of a metallic appearance.
.Remarks. —Chinese ink may be distinguished by its being
dissolved in vinegar without any precipitate.
LAMPBLACK, or Lamblack.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Smoke black. It is a
pure vegetable carbon of fine texture, obtained by burning
resins or resinous woods, turpentine, or camphor ; or made
from the imperfect combustion of bone, oil, coal-tar, and
the products of the petroleum stills.
Artistic Qualities. —Is not so intense nor so transparent
as ivory black but less brown in its pale tones. It has a
very strong body which covers every underlay of colour ;
works well; it dries badly, but unites well in oil. Since it
is a dense solid colour, it must be used sparingly.
Conditions of Permanency. —lt is durable.
General Adulterations. —lnferior soot and earthy matters.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Lampblack
is intense in colour and of light weight, the black obtained
from coal-smoke being much heavier and coarser; it con-
tains a large quantity of ammonia.
Remarks. —Salter says : —“ Mixed with French blue or


cobalt it gives good cloudy greys. With light red and
cobalt in different proportions it yields most serviceable
silvery tones. In the dark marking of murky and dirty
clouds, a compound of lampblack and light red is particu-
larly suited, while a mixture of it with cobalt and purple
madder is adapted for slate-coloured sunset and sunrise
clouds. In seas the colour is useful with raw sienna.”
MANGANESE BROWN.
Chemical Names and Composition. —A deuteroxide of man-
ganese. A native product.
Artistic Qualities. —A useful semi-opaque colour; has such
good drying powers that it is often used as a siccative for
oils and dark pigments.
Conditions of Permanency. —Quite durable in water and oils.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. — Organic matters decom-
pose manganates, so this should be used cautiously in pre-
sence of animal and vegetable lakes.
Getieral Adidterations. —Various kinds of earths.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Heated in
outer flame (blowpipe test) the borax bead is of an amethyst
colour; in inner or reducing flame this bead becomes colour-
less. This test distinguishes manganese brown from other
browns.
Remarks. —The peroxide of manganese forms the man
ganese black.
MUMMY or EGYPTIAN BROWN.
Chemical Names and Composition. —White pitch and
myrrh combined with animal matter.


Artistic Qualities. —A rich transparent colour.
Conditions of Permanency.— lt is less liable to crack and
move on the canvas than asphaltum.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —lt is a substance^'better
rejected from the palette, as no reliance can be placed on it.
General Adulterations. —lts organic origin renders it liable
to contain ammonia and particles of fat in a concrete state,
which are undesirable.
Remarks. —Bodies were embalmed 3,000 years ago in
liquid bitumen. It is this bitumen, combined with parts of
the body, that compose mummy brown.
PRUSSIAN BROWN, or Iron Brown.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Calcined Prussian
blue, or an iron oxide with alumina. French Prussian blue,
as it contains more alumina, is better than the English
Prussian blue.
Artistic Qualities. —It is of great transparency, of a most
harmonious tone, and dries well. When asphaltum woulcf
be used this should replace it. As good in water as in oil.
Produces fine glazes with burnt sienna.
Conditions of Permanency.— Perfectly permanent, and un-
dergoes no change.
General Adulterations. —Harmful chemical constituents are
liable to be present from careless manufacture. The iron
browns vary in colour according to method of, or careless-
ness in, preparation.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The brown,
made from the English Prussian blue is of a golden yellow-
ish brown. Another Prussian brown, a ferro-cyanide of


copper, can be detected by SH 2 and is totally destroyed by
the alkaline solutions used in picture-cleaning.
Remarks. —lf the calcination of Prussian blue be carried
on in closed vessels, a deep black is procured possessing
the properties of this brown. The copper Prussian brown
is of a rich chocolate colour.
SEPIA.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Extract of cuttle-fish."
Consisting of carbonaceous particles and animal gelatine.
Artistic Qualities. —A dusky brown and transparent colour,
# s badly in oil.
Conditions of Permanency.— Permanent in oil and water.
General Adulterations.- —Earthy particles may be present.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The pure
sepia should be free from gritty particles when dissolved in
water.
Remarks. —Very pleasant working colour.
JMBER, RAW and BURNT.
Chemical Names and Composition. —A native ore of iron
and manganese, mixed with silex and alumina. Also arti-
ficially made.
Artistic Qualities. —Possesses strong drying powers, works
and washes well in water. Eligible in fresco, and has good
body. Is useful as shadows to warm tints of earth and
burnt sienna, and near foregrounds, and for the colour of
earth. Useful also for small dark touches of shadow to
pebbles, &c., in foreground.
Conditions of Permanency. —Durable in oil and* watery
grows darker with age.


General Adulterations. —Ochreous or earthy matters, or a
too great preponderance of some one of its constituents in
a free state.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —Browns are
best when deep, rich, and transparent.
Remarks. —An olive brown colour, useful both raw and
calcined. Should be used with white and other colours tp
form greys.
VANDYKE, CAPPAH, RUBENS, CASSEL, and
COLOGNE BROWN.
Chemical Names and Composition. —Cappa h.isaAniugauesd',
peat. Rubens brown is a native earth of an ochrSotts-cha-
racter. Cassel brown is a native earthy brown. Cologne
brown is an ochreous deep violaceous earth.
Artistic Qualities. —A deep semi-transparent colour, good
for glazing. Cassel earth compounded with burnt lake and
a little Prussian blue gives a profound black.
Conditions of Permanency. —Nearly permanent. To com-
pensate for the action of strong light, should be mixed with
permanent colours, such as umber, Chinese black, and oxide
of iron.
Conditions of Non-Permanency. —Strong light affects them.
Cologne brown is fugacious.
General Adulterations. —From their earthy nature these
browns are liable to possess an unwonted quantity of much
undesirable substance.
Tests for Purity and Nature of Adulterants. —The methods
of distinguishing these browns, or separating these earthy
matters, are too complex for ordinary practice.


Remarks. —All peaty browns, probably from their vege-
table colouring, have a slight tendency to become paler
when washed very thinly. Use the strongest drying oils
with them.
Mars Brown, or Brim do Mars, is either a natural or
artificial ochre, containing iron, or iron and manganese ; of
much richness and strict permanence. It resembles raw
umber in being a brown with a citrine cast, but is generally
marked by a flash of orange which is not observable in the
latter pigment.
Mineral Gray* is obtained from the lapis lazuli, after the
refuse and ash has been worked out. It is a pigment
peculiar to oil paints; it is admirably adapted to that gray
semi-neutrality prevalent in nature in atmospheres. In
misty mornings, cloudy skies, and the like, this gray will be
found useful.
Neutral Tint is a compound shadow colour of a cool
character. It is permanent except that, on exposure, the
gray is apt to become grey—a change which may be pre-
vented by a slight addition of ultramarine ash. So pro-
tected, it becomes serviceable in landscape for the extreme
distance, which, it may be laid down as a general principle,
should be painted rather cold than otherwise.
Payne’s Gray resembles neutral tint in being a compound
colour, and liable to assume a grey cast by time, but differs
from it in having more lilac in its hue, and being, therefore,
* Grey is a grey compounded with black and white ; gray is a gray
with the blue replacing the black.


of a warmer tone. Giving by itself a clear violet shadow,
it may be rendered more neutral by a small portion of burnt
sienna, an admixture which, whether the gray or sienna
predominates, affords useful tints. Compounded with light
red or Vandyke brown, the gray is good for shipping and
sails or the stems and branches of trees, while, with gam-
boge or aureolin, it is suited to glossy leaves in high lights,
also to vary cold tones in foreground, herbage, &c. Yellow
ochre, light red, and Payne’s gray form a mixture for banks
and roads; the gray ochre and sepia, a most beautiful tint
for stones; and brown madder and the gray a fine shade for
the black heads and feet of cattle. Alone the gray is service-
able for slates, and, compounded with light red, for bricks
or tiles in shadow.
Bubens Madder, otherwise known as Orange Russet,
Russet Rubiate, or Field’s Russet. This is a very rich
crimson russet with a flash of orange; pure, transparent,
and of a madder hue between orange and purple. It is a
good glazing colour; its thin washes afford fine flesh tints
in water; and, as an oil pigment, it dries indifferently and
requires to be forced by the addition of a little gold-size or
varnish. It is not subiecj._tQ.jchaage.-by- light, time, or
mixture of other pigments.


TABLE OF REFERENCE.
WHITE PIGMENTS.
Baryta w.
Blanc d’argent
Body w. (see white lead)
Ceruse (see di to)
Chinese w. (see zinc w.)
Common w. (see flake w.)
Constant w. (see baryta w.)
Cremnitz w. (see white lead)
Dutch w. (see ditto)
Flake w.
Flemish w. (see white lead)
French w. (see blanc d’argent)
Hamburg w. (see white lead)
Permanent w. (see baryta w.)
Roman w. (see white lead)
Silver w. (see blanc d’argent)
Venetian w. (see white lead)
Whi'e Lead
Zinc w.
GREEN PIGMENTS.
Bladder g. (see sap g.)
Brunswick g. (see emerald g.)
Burnt Verdigris (see verdigris)
Chrome Greens
Chrome Oxide (see native g.)
Cobalt g. (see zinc g.)
Emerald g
Green Bice (see terra verte)
Green Earth (see ditto)
Green Oxide of Chron.ium
Holly g. (see terra verte)
Hungary g. (see malachite)
Imperial g. (see emerald g.)
hi alachite
Mitis g. (see emerald g.)
Mountain g. (see malachite)
Native g.
Opaque Oxide Chromium (see na-
tive g.)
Pure Chrome g. (see native g.)
Rinman’s g. (see zinc g.)
Sap g.
Scheele’s g.
Schweinfurt g. (see emerald g.
Swedish g. (see sap g.)
Terra Verte
Transparent Oxide of Chromium
Verde Vessie (see sap g.)
Verdetta (see terra verte)
Verdigris
Viride ZEris (see verdigris)
Verona Brown (see terra verte)
Verona g. (see ditto)
Vienna g. (see emerald g.)
Viridian
BLUE PIGMENTS.
Antwerp b.
Artificial Ultramarine
Azure (see ultramarine, smalt, and
cobalt)
Berlin b. (seeAntwe’p&Prussianb.)
Bleu de Garance (see artificial ult.)
Blue and Ultramarine Ash (see
ditto)
Cobalt b.
Cobalt Ultramarine (see cobalt b.)
Cerulian (see cmruleum
Dumont’s b. (see smalt)
Enamel b. (see ditto)


Egyptian b. (see cteruleum)
Factitious Ultramarine (see art. alt.)
French b. (see ditto)
GraTin’s b. (see ditto)
Haarlem b. (see Antwerp b.)
Indian b. (see indigo)
Indigo
Lazurline (see ultramarine)
Metz b. (see artificial ultramarine)
Mineral b. (see Antwerp b.)
Mineral Grey (see artificial ult.)
New Blue
Outremer (see ultramarine)
Outremer de Guimet (see art. ult.)
Parisian b. (see Prussian b.)
Permanent Blue
Prussian b.
Royal b. (see smalt)
Smalt
Thenard’s b. (see cobalt b.)
Turnbull’s b. (see Prussian b.)
Ultramarine
Vienna b. (see cobalt b.)
YELLOW PIGMENTS.
Aureolin
Cobalt y. (see aureolin)
Auripigmentura (see king’s y.)
Baryta y.
Gamboge (see Gamboge)
Cadmia (see cadmium y.)
Chinese y. (see king’s y.)
Citron y. (see chrome ys.)
Cologne y. (see ditto)
Deep Chrome (see ditto)
Dutch Pink (see yellow lakes)
English Pink (see ditto)
Gamboge
£!Z,
Giallolino (see Naples y.)
Indian y.
Italian Pink (see yellow lakes)
Jaime Brillant (see cadmium y.)
Jaune de Fer (see yellow ochres)
Jaune de Mars (see ditto)
Jaune Mineral (see chrome ys.)
King’s y.
Leipzig y. (=ee chrome ys.)
Lemon y. (see baryta y.)
Mars Orange
Mars Yellow
Madder y. (see yellow lakes)
Masticot (see massicot)
Naples y.
Orange chrome (see chrome ys.)
Orient Yellow
Orpiment (see king’s y.)
Pale Chrome (see chrome ys.)
Paris y. (see ditto)
Powre or Purree (see Indian y.)
Quercitron y. or lake (see y. lakes)
Raw Sienna (see yellow ochres)
Siberian Red Lead (see chrome )s.)
Sienna (see yellow ochres)
Turner Yellow
Yellow Ultramatine (see baryta y.)
RED PIGMENTS.
Cadmium r.
Carmine Lake
Carmine Vermilion (see Chinese v.)
Chinese Vermilion
Cinnabar (see vermilion)
Crimson Lake
English r. (see Venetian r.)
Field’s OrangeVer. (see vermilion)
Indian Lake
Indian Ochre (see red ochre)
Indian r.
lodine Scarlet
lodide of Mercury (see iodine s.)
Lac Lake (see Indian lake)
Light r. (see red ochre)
Liquid Madder (see madder lakes)
Mars Red
Madder Carmine (see madder lakes)
Minium (see red lead)
Pink madder (see madder lakes)
Persian r. (see Indian r.)
Purple Lake
Prussian r. (see Venetian r.)
Realgar (see red orpiment)
Red Orpiment
Rose Madder (see madder lakes)
Saturnine r.


Scarlet Ochre (see Venetian r.)
Scarlet Vermilion (see vermilion)
Tinted Carmine (see madder lakes)
Venetian r.
Vermilion
BROWN AND BLACK
PIGMENTS.
Antwerp. Brown (see asphaltum)
Asphaltum
Blue Black
Brown Pink
Bitumen (see asphaltum)
Bitumen Judaicum (see ditto)
Burnt Umber (see umber)
Cappah Brown (see Vandyke b.)
Cassel Brown (see ditto.)
Chinese Ink (see Indian ink)
Cologne Brown
Egyptian Brown (see mummy b.)
Frankfurt Black (see blue black)
Indian Ink
Iron Brown (see Prussian brown)
Lamblack (see lampblack)
Mars Brown
Manganese Brown
Mineral Red
Mummy Brown
Neutral Tint
Payne’s Gray
Prussian Brown
Raw Umber (see umber)
Rubens Brown (see Vandyke b.)
Rubens Madder
Vandyke brown


CHAPTER VII.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS OCCURRING BE-
TWEEN TWO OR MORE PIGMENTS,
BETWEEN PIGMENT AND VEHICLE, &c.
The question of the chemical reactions that take place
between pigments is one that practically embraces the
chemistry of painting. The scope of the present work pre-
cludes the possibility of going deeply into this interesting
subject, yet it will be of incalculable use both to artist
and student to point out some few of the chemical changes
that occur between the materials he uses when painting a
picture.
Action of Lead and Sulphur. —The reactions that occur
between pigments possessing a lead base and pigments pos-
sessing sulphur as a component are some of the most destruc-
tive, and disastrous to the future permanency of the painting.
Briefly the action is this : lead possesses a great affinity for
sulphur, consequently these two elements forsake the other
components of their respective pigments, unite, and form a
new compound—sulphide of lead—which is of a black hue.
To take an example : a yellow chromate of lead {i.e. ordi-
nary chrome yellow) is mixed with cadmium yellow {i.e. the
sulphide of cadmium). Watch the result. The lead forsakes
the chromate of lead, the sulphur forsakes the cadmium sul-


phide, and they unite together and form the black sulphide
of lead. This action is graphically depicted below.
Chemical formula Chem. form, of
of chromate of lead. cadmium sulphide.
Chromium !Cr ) , set free Cd )
Oxygen O 4 j set free '
Lead (Pb . unites with . S ) =PbS., i.e. lead sulphide.
Now both pigments were yellow previous to the formation
of this black sulphide of lead, but since a black and yellow
produce a green, this will be the resulting hue of the mixture
of these two pigments, the greenish tinge becoming stronger
and of a deeper green in proportion to the amount of lead
converted into sulphide.
Although the chemical change brought about by the union
of a lead pigment and one containing sulphur is always the
same {i.e. the production of lead sulphide), the visual phy-
sical change varies. Thus, with the above case of two yellow
pigments, we have a visual change into a green hue ; this
is so, because side by side with the particles of chrome
yellow and cadmium yellow there are also particles of black
sulphide of lead, and the physical incorporation (for it is
not a chemical one, like the union of the lead with the
sulphur) of yellow and black particles is the production of
a green.
Now it is easily conceivable that a red sulphide, as that of
mercury {i.e. vermilion) may be mixed with a chrome yellow
of lead, whence, after the production of the yellow sulphide,
we shall not get a greenish hue, but something different.
Thus :
Yellow chrome and red vermilion will produce an orange
hue, but as soon as the sulphur in the vermilion unites with


the lead in the chrome yellow, we get the black particles of
lead sulphide produced, and these commingling with the
yellow and red policies of the above pigments change the
orange hue into an auburn or brown hue, or to a brownish
red, in proportion to the amount of black particles propor-
tionately to the yellow and red ones.
Take another case of this visual physical change. Say a
lead chrome is mixed with artificially made ultramarine, and
that there is some free sulphur in the ultramarine {i.e. that this
pigment has been carelessly made, and consequently not
entirely freed from this sulphur). The mixture of the yellow
chrome and blue ultramarine will produce a green, but in time,
as the free sulphur unites with the lead in the chrome, black
sulphide of lead appears, and we then get yellow, blue, and
black particles heterogeneously mixed, with the result that
the visual impression produced by these three colours will
no longer be the bright green formed by the blue and yellow,
but will be a dark green, approaching black.*
Action of Oxygen amongst Pigments. Oxygen is an
element of much importance as a component of pigments.
Its addition to many mineral colours heighten or darken
their tone, while its addition to several vegetable colours
lessen their tone, or bleach them. Likewise the abstraction
of oxygen {i.e. deoxidation of a pigment) from a mineral
pigment weakens its tone.
Let us take some examples. Take chrome yellow of lead
again. So long as this yellow remains intact {i.e. not decom-
posed by the influence of other pigments), there is little risk
• The precise hue can be seen by mixing yellow and blue powders,
and then adding black powder in various quantities.


of the oxygen in the chrome yellow acting on a pigment
affected by oxygen; but suppose, as in the first example, a
mixture of lead, chrome, and cadmium yellow is made, the
reaction already specified takes place, and consequently the
oxygen in the chrome yellow is set free to unite with any
other body. This oxygen does enter into union with other
bodies, chiefly with the oil used as a vehicle to help dry or
harden the oil, and also physically acts on other pigments
that are brought within its influence; e.g. suppose the mix-
ture of chrome yellow and yellow cadmium glazed with yellow-
lake, the last pigment will lose its colour, because the oxygen
from the chrome will bleach the colour in the yellow lake.
If, instead of yellow lake, cochineal lake be glazed over the
yellow mixture of l«d and cadmium, this crimson colour will
in time flee, leaving simply the hue of the yellow beneath.
Again, the abstraction of oxygen from a mineral pigment
lessens its tone, while its addition to an animal pigment
deepens it; e.g. mix an ochre (which has iron as a base)
with Naples yellow (which contains oxygen), the iron in the
ochre will abstract oxygen from the Naples yellow, and
become deeper in tone, due to the oxidation of the iron;
whilst its abstraction from the Naples yellow will leave
that pigment much weakened in colour, the visual result
being a hue totally different to that when the ochre and
Naples yellow were first compounded.
There are several other ways in which oxygen plays an
important part in the disintegration of paintings, notably
in the abstraction of the oxygen from pigments by the oil
in drying. Such depletion of oxygen from a pigment leaves
that colour an easy prey to injurious influences that would


not otherwise act on it, for the simple reason that a partially
decayed object is never so sound as a wholly healthy one.
Action of Alkalies on Pigments. Some pigments are
obtained artificially which possess such alkalies as pearlash
and soda in their composition; now some few pigments,
notably Prussian and Antwerp blues, have their colour de-
stroyed by the action on them of alkalies, consequently they
should not be brought into connection with those pigments
that have an alkaline base, or which are likely, from their
method of manufacture, to possess any free alkali.
The blues above mentioned are turned a buff or tawny
drab by the action of alkalies, while yet, again, their colour
is restored by any weak acid. Such being the delicacy of
Prussian and Antwerp blues, the painter must be very
in regard to what other pigments he incorporates with them
or glazes over them. To know what pigments to avoid in
this respect, the painter should consult the chemical powers
and composition of the pigments stated in the chapters on
pigments given in the first part of this work.
The alkali ammonia is likely to be present in very few
pigments, but it is often present in the artist’s painting-room
or its vicinity. I know one painter whose studio is next
door to a stable —in fact, his door opens at right angles to
the stable door; consequently it is impossible for him to
keep out such ammoniacal fumes as arise from the decaying
stable refuse. The action of the fumes of ammonia is not
at once apparent, but it is, nevertheless, silently at work, for
the fumes insidiously act on the varnish laid on the paint-
ings, disintegrating the varnish; ammonia likewise acts
on oils.


There are many other outside influences at work —enemies
to the painter and his picture —but in these pages we cannot
well discuss them, so I must refer my readers to other works
of mine for such information, as it is more properly treated
of in those articles from my pen which take up the subject
of artists’ vehicles. There is one subject, however, that is
intimately connected with the pigment and vehicle, and that
is loss of opacity. This is a term applied to pigments opaque
jn themselves, but which in time lose their opaqueness, and
become so transparent as to allow any colour laid beneath
them to become visible. This loss of opacity is notably a
characteristic of pigments having lead as a base. The action
is a very interesting one.
We have already spoken about the giving up of oxygen
from white lead to linseed oil, thus parting with one of its
constituents. Oxygen leaves the white lead in a very un-
stable condition, so much so that the lead particles them-
selves are at liberty to unite with the linseed oil (other
fixed oils have not this effect), and they naturally do so,
forming the compound known as linoleate of lead. Now
this linoleate of lead (a lead soap, as it is usually called)
is easily washed away by sulphuric acid. “ But how,” ray
readers will exclaim, “ can sulphuric acid get near the paint-
ing?” Avery natural question, and one easily answered.
In this way; sulphur in some form or other is present in
vitiated atmospheres, especially so where there is a fire or
gas. These sulphurous fumes settle as an opaque film of
sooty dust on the painting, and afterwards, from alterations
of temperature, moisture settles on the picture also. Now
the particles of moisture unite with the sulphurous grime,


and form sulphuric acid. The artist, eager to let his picture
be seen in all its brilliancy, seizes his silk handkerchief,
breathes on the picture, and rubs olf the dirt. At the very
same operation he is rubbing off some of the lead pigment,
because the film of sulphuric acid under his handkerchief
unites with the linoleate of lead (that has been produced
wherever a lead pigment and linseed oil have been em-
ployed) and carries off a thin pellicle of the compound each
time he rubs. The amount taken off each time is very
minute, but it is none the less surely carried away. We all
know how the lacquer on the brass handle of a door will in
time wear away by the mere grasping of it in turning the
handle. If this hard lacquer can do so, we must readily
grant that the more delicate, tender pigment will do so
under the rubbing of the handkerchief. The artist, unknow-
ingly, takes a delight in rubbing out his picture, for the
more obdurate and obstinate the grime is, the harder and
brisker he rubs. The moral to this is, not to use lead pig-
ments in a painting; they are, in fact, the bete-tioire of the
painter. If he, however, will be obstinate and continue their
employment after this warning, let him at least use an oil
(walnut or poppy) that will not form this inimical linoleate
of lead.
On the many other changes effected on paintings by the
action of oils and other vehicles, the reader is finally referred
to “ Chats with Artists on the Use of their Materials,” and
to the articles in the Art Journal on the “ Chemistry of the
Palette.”


CHAPTER VIII.
COLOUR NAMES AND DEFINITIONS.
The names of colours are still as indefinitely and con-
fusedly used as when Dr. Johnson defined Brown as being
the “ name of a colour composed of black and any other
colour,” “ Puce, of a dark brown colour,” and “ Pink, a
colour used by painters.”
It is truly unfortunate that there is no universal scale of
colours. In a letter some years ago to the “ Society of Arts
Journal,” I pointed out the great diversity of names by
which colours and pigments are known to the dyer, artist,
and ordinary house-painter, and while even authorities on
the science of colour disagree as to the so-called primaries,
we may expect confusion still to reign. Consequently
colours can only be spoken of relatively; e.g. we have the
blue of cobalt and of the indigo-plant, yet how different in
tone, yet both are “ blues.” If we assume carmine to be
the type of pure red, vermilion becomes an orange; and if,
on the reverse, we consider vermilion as red, carmine
changes to crimson, or belongs to the purple class. The
same relation will be found in the tints of gamboge with
ochre or yellow cadmium. The purest unmixed primitive
colours are to be found in flowers. There can, strictly
speaking, be only delicate and full tints of the primary and


secondary classes, as the less positive hues being caused by
the mixture of the positive colours with their “ complemen-
tary ” hues, are tertiaries and quaternaries.
Positive Colours. —We are accustomed to give the names
of positive colours to hues varying from the fullest or
brightest tints to very subdued shades.
A Primary colour is one that cannot be compounded by
mixture of other colours. I cannot here enter into the
question of which colours should be considered as true
primaries, but from my own knowledge of colour science I
remain steadfast to the old original theory of red, yellow,
and blue being the three primaries.
Secondary colours are those produced by mixture of any
two primaries. They are orange, green, and purple,
orange being produced by mixture of red and yellow (paints
or powders, not coloured lights), green of yellow and blue
and purple of red and blue.
Tertiary colours are produced by a mixture of a primary
and secondary with one of the colours predominating. They
are olive, citrine, and russet. “ Complementary ” colours
is a term interchangeable with the primaries and secondaries.
Thus, it is theoretically supposed (although in my study of
the subject I have failed to come across any scientific reason
for this fanciful theory) that complete harmony of colouring
is obtained only when the three primaries are present, in
proportions varying with their intensity of colour. Conse-
quently blue is said to be complementary to orange because
it completes the triad of primaries (and, vice versa, orange is
complementary to blue); red is complementary to green, and
yellow to purple.


Tint is a term used for gradations or mixtures of colours
with white.
Hues for mixtures of primary colours with a secondary, or
for variations of colour independent of strength, light or
dark.
Shade is a term used for the mixtures of colours or hues
with black. This term is too often improperly used, when
tone should be employed ; e.g., many persons in speaking of
a lighter tone of, say, a red ribbon, will exclaim, “ Oh, what
a delicate light shade! ” when there is not a particle of black
in the tone of the red ribbon, but it is, in fact, lighter than
the primitive colour. “ Shade ” should never be used
unless black is present in the hue or tone. But the word
Tone should replace it, for this term is applied to any hue,
whether it be lighter or darker than the colour of the base ;
e.g. take ultramarine blue as the base colour blue, we
should then speak of cobalt as of a lighter tone of blue, and
Prussian blue as a darker tone of blue, but we could not
properly call Prussian blue a darker shade of the blue base
ultramarine. Tone expresses the predominant ruling colour
or hue in a combination.
Grey. —This is another word improperly applied. When
spelt with an e the word, amongst colour scientists, refers to
a mixture made with black and white, or black and any
other colour, bearing in mind that if the two colours do not
equally balance to produce the normal grey of the mixture,
but that the black predominates and obtrudes itself, the
mixture at once becomes a shade ; at the same time it does
not lose its title to grey.
Gray is a term used for a mixture of white and blue, or


when blue replaces black in producing the grayish hue ; then
we say a bluish gray and a blackish grey.
As a foundation for a colour scale I would beg to suggest
that colours should be named after some well-known flowers,
taking the deep yellow of the sunflower as the base for the
yellow scale, the poppy or red gladiolus for the base of the
red scale, the blue cornflower as the base for the blue scale,
and ordinary grass as the base of the green scale.
These bases would not suffice for all the yellow, red, blue,
and green tones to be referred to as a “ light sunflower yel-
low,” or “dark poppy red,” &c., for a lemon yellow could not
properly be referred to as a “light sunflower yellow” ; but
for such pale yellows we could take the primrose as the base,
and for the orange hues the skin of the Tangerine orange ; for
scarlet reds the old standard red geranium, and for the crim-
son red series we have the deep velvety toned “ coxcomb ”
plant; for the base of the light blue series we could refer to
so-and-so lighter tone of the cornflower, because white and
a blue of the intensity of this flower would produce a series
of true blues varying in tint only in proportion to the
amount of white mixed with the blue ; for the base colour
of the dark series of blues we could not take this flower
mixed with black, because black and a blue this colour
mixed would produce an indigo hue. We should therefore
want to seek some primitive base, as, for insfance, the deep,
intense blue in the old-fashioned pansy ; while for the lighter
tones of the green scale we could take the colour of the
pyrethrum or featherfew plant as a base, and the dark green
leaves of the ivy as a base for the dark series of this scale. I
have named these plants, as their colours have up to the


present remained constant in hue, and are therefore fitly
suited as a standard of reference. It must be borne in mind
that the above remarks are only offered suggestively; the
scope of such a work as this precludes any lengthened
discursive treatment of the question. Yet, nevertheless, it
is a work that should not be devoid of any reference to the
subject, and any suggestion thrown out may, let me hope,
be the means of rousing attention to the question. In a
work I have in contemplation on the subject of colour
science, I hope to treat fully of these points.
The following tabular analysis of the primaries, second-
aries, tertiaries, and quaternaries will render it clear to
students what colours form the components of some of the
complex hues.
Primary Positive Colours.
White.
Yellow. —There are no distinct general terms for the
delicate tints, those in use being borrowed from objects
containing them; e.g. lemon yellow, straw yellow, prim-
rose.
Red. —The delicate tints, pinks, carnations, rosy.
Blue.
Secondary Positive Colours, composed of two primaries.
Orange, composed of yellow and red; comprehending
crimson when the red is in excess.
Purple, composed of red and blue. Violet lilac when
the red and blue are balanced.


Green, composed of yellow and blue. Blue purple
when the blue is in excess.
Tertiary Hues, composed of the three primaries with one
primary predominating.
Citrine, where yellow predominates ; buff in the lighter
hues, tawny or dun in the deeper.
Russet, where red predominates; maroon, chocolate.
Grey, where blue predominates.
Quaternary Hues , composed of the primaries with two
primaries or a secondary colour predominating.
Auburn, where orange predominates; brown in the
deeper hues.
Puce, where purple predominates ; lavender for the
lighter hues, where violet predominates, or the red and
blue are balanced.
Olive, where the green predominates.
Neutral Tints.
Where the three primaries are in proportion to balance
or neutralise each other of which the deeper shade is
black.


CHAPTER IX.*
TABLE OF MIXTURES OF PIGMENTS TO
PRODUCE BLUES, BUFFS, BROWNS,
GREENS, GREYS, PURPLES, AND MA-
ROONS.
Table of Mixtures of Pigments to produce Blues.
Cobalt Green, Cyanine Bine. —ln series of blues of the tur-
quoise tint, sparkling and tender, both beautiful and useful.
Table of Mixtures to produce Browns, Buffs,
and Yellows.
Chocolate Brown. —Add lake or carmine to burnt umber,
or take Indian red and black to form a brown; then add
yellow to bring about the desired shade.
Olive Brown. —Mix i part of Saxony blue with 3 parts of
burnt umber. Change proportions for different shades.
Snuff Brown. —Yellow, 4 parts ; Vandyke brown, 2 parts.
Ordinary Brown. —Red, 3 parts; black, 2 parts ; yellow,
1 part.
Chestnut Brown. —Red, 2 parts; black, 1 part; Chinese
yellow, 2 parts.
Light Buff. —Yellow ochre lightened with white,
* The mixtures named in this chapter are artistically good, but not
always so chemically ; for their chemical values the reader is referred
to the chemical nature of the several pigments named in each mixture.


Deep Buff. —Yellow ochre, white, and a little red.
Oak Colour. —White, 8 parts; yellow ochre, i part.
Fawn Colour. —White, 8 parts; red, i part; yellow, 2
parts; unjber, 1 part.
Tan Colour. —Burnt sienna, 5 parts ; yellow, 2 parts; raw
umber, 1 part.
Stone Colour. —White, 5 parts; yellow, 2 parts; burnt
umber, 1 part.
Brick Colour. —Yellow ochre, 2 parts; red, 1 part; white,
1 part.
Portland Stone Colour. —Raw umber, 3 parts; yellow
ochre, 3 parts; white, 1 part.
Yellow Lake. —Umber and white, equal parts ; add Naples
yellow and scarlet lake; glaze with yellow lake.
Jonquil \ellow. —Mix flake white and Chinese yellow, and
add vermilion to carmine.
Golden Yellow. —White and yellow, tinted with red and
Canary Yellow. —White and lemon yellow.
Lemon Colour. —Lemon yellow, 5 parts; white, 2 parts.
Straw Yellow. —Yellow, 5 parts; white, 2 parts ; red, 1
Citron. —Red, 3 parts; yellow, 2 parts ; blue, 1 part.
Clay Drab. —Raw sienna, raw umber, and white lead,
equal parts, and then tint with chrome green.
Ordinary Drab. —White, 9 parts; umber, 1 part.
Cream Colour. —White, 5 parts; yellow, 2 parts; red, 1
part.
Orange. —Made with gamboge and burnt sienna. Useful
for the autumnal tints, and to mix with the other greens in


order to vary their tone and depth, but not to be used in
very warm sky tints.
Table of Mixtures of Pigments to produce Greys.
Indigo, lampblack, and madder lake.
Indigo and Indian red.
Indigo and light red.
Indigo, lake, and gamboge.
Indigo, lake, and Roman ochre.
Indigo and Venetian red.
Indigo, raw sienna, and lake.
Indigo, sepia, and lake.
Indigo and purple madder.
Indigo, light red, and lampblack.
Indigo, burnt umber, and lake.
Indigo, madder purple, and burnt umber.
Lampblack and madder lake.
Lampblack and burnt madder.
Lampblack and light red.
Lampblack and lake.
Cobalt green, cyanine blue, carmine madder, for silvery
greys, through lilacs to the richest purple.
White, 8 parts; black, 2 parts —for medium grey.
White, 8 parts; blue, 1 part; black, 1 part —lead grey.
White, tinted with ivory black, produces French grey.
White, black, and red, in proportion to suit lustre, for a
pearl grey.
Dove Grey. —Red, white, blue, and yellow.
Warm grey is made with Venetian red and indigo. Use-


ful for shadows to warm-coloured objects, and for the colour
of earth and mould, and for a tint to put round drawings
when mounted.
Purple grey is made with lake and lampblack. Very use-
ful in the grey bark of trees and for rocks ; makes various
browns mixed with burnt umber and a grey when mixed
with Prussian blue or indigo, but not equal to the greys
made with lake, gamboge, and indigo, for Prussian blue and
lampblack is rather heavy.
Neutral Tint. —Made with Venetian red and indigo and a
very little lake. It is a very good tint for cloudy skies,
and with the addition of a little blue and lake it makes a
pearly grey useful for the shadows to clouds in general.
Table of Mixtures to produce Greens.
Indigo, light red, and gamboge.
Indigo and gamboge, with either burnt sienna, light red,
or Vandyke brown.
Indigo and gamboge.
Indigo, madder purple, and brown pink.
Indigo, burnt umber, and Italian pink.
Indigo and gamboge, with either Roman ochre or lamp-
black, or raw sienna or lake.
Indigo, Vandyke brown, and yellow ochre.
Indigo and raw sienna.
Indigo and Roman ochre.
Indigo, madder brown, and Indian yellow,
The following for shadows of green ; —lndigo and burnt


umber, indigo and Venetian red, indigo and light red,
indigo and lake, and gamboge, lampblack, and light red.
Transparent oxide of chromium and cadmium yellow, deep,
for the deep rich green and russets of autumn.
Transparent oxide of chromium and aureolin, for the
more sunny autumn greens.
Permanent yellow and cobalt green, for the tender spring
greens.
Permanent scarlet, carmine madder, for flower painting
the crimson-scarlet autumn effects, &c., &c.
Cadmium yellow and Prussian blue or black, for the light,
when vivid, of foliage in masses.
Naples yellow, with blue or black, for the grey-greens
produced by reflection. Use some white in these tints.
Yellow ochre and blue ; where the leaves are brown, the
ochres and burnt sienna may be used.
Naples yellow and terra verte is a very useful mixture
for the cold greens.
Dutch pink and Prussian blue, foreground glazed with
yellow lake, for bottle green.
Pea Green. —White, 5 parts; chrome green, 1 part.
Bronze Green. —Chrome green, 5 parts; black, 1 part;
umber, 1 part.
Grass Green. —Yellow, 3 parts; Prussian blue, 1 part.
Willow Gi-een. —White, 5 parts; verdigris, 2 parts.
Olive Green. —Yellow, 8 parts; blue, 1 part; black, 1 part.
Dark Warm Green.— Made with burnt sienna, gamboge,
and indigo, is useful for the tints of trees and shadows for
grasses, &c., and particularly near foreground.


Warm Green . —Made with the above colours, but differ-
ently proportioned, is useful for grass and weeds.
Olive Green. —Made with more burnt sienna and gamboge
added to the blue, is very useful for shadows to bright and
warmish yellow' green.
Table of Mixtures to produce Maroons, Purples,
and Pinks.
Wine Colour. —Ultramarine, 2 parts; carmine, 3 parts.
Maroon Colour. —Carmine, 3 parts; yellow, 2 parts.
Carnation Red. —Lake, 3 parts; white, 1 part.
Plum Colour. —White, 2 parts; blue, 1 part; red, 1 part.
Claret Colour. —Red and black, or carmine and blue.
Purple. —Red, white, and blue, variously proportioned.
Lilac. —Red, 4 parts; white, 3 parts; blue, r part.
Violet. —Similar to lilac, but bluer than lilac and more red
than in purple.
Peach Blossom. —White, 8 parts; red, 1 part; blue, 1
part; yellow, 1 part.
Flesh Colour. —White, 8 parts; red, 3 parts; cadmium, or
Naples yellow, 3 parts.
Copper Red. —Red, x part; yellow, 2 parts; black, 1
part.
Salmon Pink. —White, 5 parts; yellow, 1 part; umber,
1 part; red, 1 part.
Rose Colour. —White, 5 parts; carmine, 2 parts.


CHAPTER X.
ARTISTIC QUALITIES OF PIGMENTS USED
IN PORTRAIT, FLOWER, AND MARINE
PAINTING IN WATER COLOURS.
The Colours for Flesh are—
Brown madder, burnt sienna, cobalt blue, Indian red,
Indian yellow, pink madder (rose madder), Van-
dyke brown, Venetian red (or light red) vermilion,
zinc white {i.e. Chinese white).
The Colours for Draperies and Body Washes besides
THE ABOVE LIST ARE—
Carmine, gamboge, French ultramarine, indigo, lake,
Prussian blue, sepia, smalt, yellow ochre.
Burnt sienna serves for the shadow tints of amber-coloured
draperies; it is also used in some flesh tints.
Brown madder used alone may be used to lower red
curtains or draperies, and for the darkest touches in flesh.
Carmine should not be used in flesh, but pink madder
is used for the carnation tints in flesh, and for pink draperies.
Cobalt is the best blue pigment for producing the silvery


COLOURS IN FLESH AND FLOWER PAINTING.
tints on flesh in painting in water-colours • alone it forms the
blue tints, and with Indian red the shadow colour for flesh.
French ultramarine is used only in draperies.
Indian rea makes an excellent shadow colour for flesh,
both alone and mixed with blue.
Sepia is used for the shadows of white linen and white
draperies.
Venetian red is a serviceable colour for general purposes;
its tints, though bright, are dear and are very permanent.
This pigment is valuable as a general tint for flesh.
Vermilions afford a fine tint for the carnations of flesh.
Vandyke brown gives with lake a fine warm transparent
tint which is much used as a warm shadow colour.
Yelloiu ochre is a useful local colour for light hair.
Colours chiefly used- in 'Flower Painting in Water
Colours.
The colours of flowers are so numerous, and the number of
tints so indefinite, varying in each particular case with the
colour of the flower being copied, that it is almost irnpos-.
sible to set forth a list of tints and mixtures for the flower-
painter’s use. It is therefore only possible to specify the
pigments chiefly used. These are—
Carmine, Chinese white, chrome yellow, cobalt, crimson
lake, gamboge, Indian yellow, Indian red, indigo,
pink madder, sepia, Vandyke brown.


The following colours are seldom used :
Chrome yellow deep, French blue, lemon yellow, scarlet,
The following table comprises the list of opaque colours
used in flower painting ;
Reds. —Vermilion, Indian red.
Yellows. —Chrome of various depths, yellow ochre.
The following list gives the semi-opaque pigments :
Reds. —Venetian red.
Yellows. —Raw sienna.
Blues. —Cobalt blue, French blue, ultramarine.
Browns. —Burnt umber, madder brown.
The following list comprises the transparent pigments:—
Reds. —Extract of madder, carmine, pink madder, lake.
Yellows. —Gamboge, Indian yellow.
Blues. —Antwerp blue, indigo.
Browns. —Vandyke brown, burnt sienna, violet, carmine,
madder purple (semi-transparent).
In painting Sea Views in Water Colours, many of
the Colours already mentioned are very use-
ful ; thus —
Cohalt is useful for skies and the remote points of sea and
low lands; and a mixture of cobalt, vermilion, madder lake,
and yellow ochre may be used for the sky and the clouds in
calm weather.


Burnt sientia is an excellent useful colour for the warm
tints in rocks, mud, boats, and buildings. For the foresea,
whether calm or broken by waves, it is employed with a
little madder; and mixed with lampblack and a little madder
it makes the tints of old posts, boats, and a variety of near
objects ; and the tints may be varied by modifying the pro-
portions of the component colours.
Indigo is employed for moonlights, and when mixed with
a little lampblack it is well suited for night clouds, distant
cliffs, &c. With a little raw umber and madder it may be
used for water in night effects. With madder and burnt
sienna it is useful for dark rocks and skies, and mixed with
raw sienna may also be employed for boats.
Lampblack is a colour which, when mixed with madder
and burnt sienna, may be used for dark foreground objects.
Light red is employed with cobalt for the dark tints of the
clouds; a thin wash of light red in the lights of the clouds
produces mellowness. It is effective as shadow tints, and
with indigo makes a good grey.
. Madder , with cobalt and a very little yellow ochre, meets
the airy tint of the remotest distances, and with burnt sienna
and Prussian blue it is well adapted for the shadows of
boats, figures, distant hills, and near water.
Madder brown. —Mixed with cobalt this is a valuable
shadow colour for distant objects. With indigo it is valuable
for shades of objects nearer the foreground. It is a good
shade colour when mixed with lampblack, and it is advan-
tageous in rusty iron, as anchors, chains, &c., and in all reds
it forms a good shade tint, but for distant red flags it would
be advantageous to qualify it with a blue, and for the deepest


and reddest part of foreground it may be employed alone, as
also for all deep and dark cracks and fissures,' or stony
markings, in all near objects, as boats, figures, &c.
Sepia is sometimes used alone and sometimes mixed with
lampblack or indigo and madder, for dark foregrounds,
boats, near rocks, seaweed, &c.
Vermilion is useful for morning and evening skies, whether
stormy or tranquil. Vermilion with yellow ochre and cobalt
will produce a very pure effect. In the darker grounds of
the clouds a little light red may be added. Vermilion, with
burnt sienna and madder, is a valuable tint in old houses,
piers, &c., and also for shipping and boats in the middle
and extreme distances.
Yellow ochre is valuable in warm skies, the sails of ships
and boats, sandstone rocks and cliffs, buildings, &c. It
does not mix kindly with any of the cold colours, and
should therefore be used as a wash over other colours that
are dry, when required to qualify their tints.


CHAPTER XI.
ARTISTIC QUALITIES OF COLOURS USED IN
LANDSCAPE PAINTING IN OILS.
Colours for Foliage, —For the darker greens, terra verte,
black, and Naples yellow, or raw sienna with black and
Naples yellow, may be used, as well as the mixtures named
in the table of “Green Mixtures.”
Colours for Fields. —For the cold greenish grey of unripe
oats, use blue, black, and Naples yellow, with, perhaps, a
little blue. In ripe oats, use white and Naples yellow, varied
by a little yellow ochre. The rich golden hue of ripe wheat
will require Naples yellow, with raw and burnt sienna; and
for grasses the various greens given in “ Green Mixtures ”
will be found useful.
In Heaths and such-like coloured lands.—Lake with white
for the lights, and rich brown for the dark background.
For purple heath, French ultramarine, lake, and white. For
broom and furze, chrome yellow, reddened with burnt sienna
or Naples yellow, as occasion requires, will give the yellow
blossom of the broom and furze.
For Birch and Beech. —The silvery greys of the birch or
beech may be obtained by black and white, broken, as
occasion requires, by a little red or brown. The rich warm
browns in the trunks of the birch may be made by burnt
sienna and lake, or raw sienna.


Colours for Skies. —-These are white, ultramarine, or the
permanent blues, blue-black, Indian red, light red, or Mars
orange, with light Naples yellow. In deep sunset effects,
cadmium yellow and vermilion or carmine may be required.
For Roads. —The various colours of roads may be obtained
by mixtures of Indian red, broken with (white in all cases)
umber (and lake, as in some of the roads where the old-
Devonian rocks abound, as in Devonshire); yellow ochre,;
varied with red, white, or with Naples yellow ; burnt sienna,
with white broken by umber; grey, broken with red and
white; Indian red, black and white, and burnt sienna.
Indeed, almost every colour may be mixed with white, so
varied are the colour-tones of the earth.
Sir F. Leighton’s (P.R.A.) Palette. Ivory black,
cappah brown, burnt sienna, raw sienna, Roman ochre,
yellow ochre, jaune de Naples (French Naples yellow),
aureolin, cadmium. The following are supplementary;
Lemon yellow, pale and dark, flake white, vermilion, Vene-
tian red, Indian red, rose madder, cobalt, emerald, Oxide of
chromium. For skies. Cobalt, pale lemon, vermilion. For
flesh. Cobalt and emerald, oxides of chromium (mixed
with white in gradations), vermilion and lake (mixed with
white in gradations), yellow ochre, Roman ochre, burnt
sienna.
Alma-Tadema’s (R.A.) Palette. White, Naples
yellow, yellow ochre, raw sienna, brown ochre, cadmium
(rarely), orange vermilion, Chinese vermilion, light red or


burnt yellow ochres, madder lake (seldom used), burnt sienna,
cobalt green, oxide of chromium, ivory black.
Armitage’s (R.A.) Palette. —White, Naples yellow,
yellow ochre, raw sienna, light red, burnt sienna, vermilion,
oxide of chromium, cobalt, madder lake, black.
Orchardson’s (R.A.) Palette. —White, lemon yellow,
yellow ochre, vermilion, Indian red, crimson lake or madder,
Vandyke brown, Antwerp blue. The following are supple-
mentary : Cadmium, raw sienna, light red, gold ochre, black.
Pettie’s (R.A.) Palette. —White, lemon or yellow, raw
sienna, yellow ochre, cadmium, vermilion, crimson madder,
cobalt, Vandyke brown, ivory black. The following are
supplementary : Purple madder, French ultramarine, Ant-
werp or Prussian blue, Caledonian brown.
Colin Hunter’s Palette. —White, Naples yellow, lemon
yellow, yellow ochre, raw sienna, cadmium, pale and deep
vermilion, rose madder, cobalt, Antwerp blue, burnt sienna,
madder brown, Vandyke brown, Caledonian brown, or
cappah brown.


CHAPTER XII.
QUESTIONS SET AT THE SOUTH KENSING-
TON SCHOOL OF ART EXAMINATIONS
IN PAINTING .
The following are some few of the questions that are
asked in Group 2, subject Painting. The questions are so
asked as to compel the student to make himself acquainted
with more than a mere superficial knowledge of the old
methods of painting. Such being the case, it would be
manifestly unfair for me to answer the questions here, and
it would be of little service to the student were I to do so,
because, although I answered all these, perhaps at the next
examination in the subject, totally different questions, al-
though in kindred topics, might be asked ; moreover, the
answers that would be given in this work would be little
better than would suffice for “ cram work,” which is a sys-
tem of learning I am strongly against. I have seen students,
a few days before the examination, get the papers of questions
set at previous examinations, take the questions seriatim,
and then vainly endeavour to find answers in some ele-
mentary text-book on art. In such a work they get a mere
toutline of the various modes of painting, &c., and the subjects
are probably so baldly treated that there is nothing tangible
he student can digest, so he endeavours to repeat, parrot-


like, what he finds set forth ; but the outline is so bare that
it is a mere skeleton of an answer he can give, a skeleton
that can fit into more than one suit of clothes (i.e. answer
questions in a general way), but yet do duty to none. Such
cramming is highly injurious to the students, and is pro-
ductive of ludicrous answers to the examination questions.
Rather than help towards such a system of cramming, I
have determined not to give here the answers to these ques-
tions, but prefer to direct the student to the fountain-head.
This I do because I have noticed many students know not
in the least what authority to consult, and also because I feel
sure that by directing them to the right authority, irrespec-
tive of the special place in such work, the student will inci-
dentally be induced to dip deeper into the subject by
perhaps reading through, if not studying, those works, than
he would do were he to find the answers cut and dried ready
to hand.
Questions i, 2,3, 4, 5 and 6 can be readily answered by
consulting the paragraphs on the “Chemical Names and
Composition,” and the paragraphs on “ Permanency ” and
“ Non-Permanency,” in the chapters on the various pigments
given in the first part of this book.
To answer question 7, see “ Cennini Cennino’s Treatise
on Painting” (translated by Mrs. Merrifield, 1844), chapter
67, “ The manner of painting on walls, that is, in Fresco,
and of colouring the faces of young persons,” pages
39—44-
.Questions 8,9, 10, 11, 12 can be answered by studying
the information given in Mrs. Merrifield’s work on “ Fresco
Painting ” (1846), in the pages 18 to 23 :—“How to lay on


the coats of plaster, the various kinds of intonochi , and the
preparation of the mortars.”
See also “ Of painting on walls, and why it is called
Fresco,” pages 30, 31, same book.
See also “ Of preparing the walls,” pages 45 —51, ibid.
See also “ Inquiry whether the ancients painted in
Fresco,” page 62, ibid.
See also “The execution of frescoes,” page 63, and of the
colours, cartoons, and painting, page 65, ibid.
Likewise see “The practice of fresco painting” (according
to the directions and observations of Palomino) at page 70
of above book, and also “ Of preparing the stucco,” page
71;“ Preparation of the walls,” page 72; “Of laying on the
inlcnaco,” page 72 ; “On using the cartoons,” pages 73 —
76; “Of the colours used,” pages 76 —81. See also page
xi. of Introduction, “ Colours used in fresco.”
Reference to the above sections of this work and to the
following in Cennini’s treatise, “ How to colour walls in
secco, and what tempera is proper for that purpose,”
pages 47 —49, chap. 72; and also “ How to colour pictures
and to temper the colours,” page 87, chap. 145, same work ;
together with a perusal of the section on “ Fresco " in Mr.
Cave Thomas’s work on “ Mural Decoration,” and the article
“ Fresco,” in the “ English Encyclopaedia,” vol. xiv., page
240 (iB6O ed.), will give the student so much information
on fresco, and so well ground him in the practice of the old
masters, that he will be able to answer any question set
relative to this style of painting.
To answer questions 13 and 14, refer to Cennini’s treatise,
pages 9, x 6, 32, 128, and xiv. of Introduction: “Bkcca_


(white lead): its nature, properties, and use ; ” “ Bianco San-
Giovanni: its nature, properties, and use,” see pages 31, 127,
128, ibid.
See also pages 41,53, of “ Verdaccio, a compound colour,”
in above work.
To answer question 15, refer to Cennini, pages 43, 44,
“ To paint the head of a young person as taught by Giotto.”
Questions 16 and 17 may be answered by reading up
“Painting in distemper; its advantages and disadvantages,”
pages xvi. and 156 of Cennini.
See also, page 87, “ How to temper the colour for dis-
temper,” and “ How to paint in distemper,” page 87.
“ Directions for softening the tint,” page 156, and “ Where
distemper cannot be employed,” page 56 ; and “ Distemper
invented by Ludius, in the time of Augustus,” page 144.
See also pages 47, 87, 96 of Cennini; and see also Mrs.
Merrifield’s book on “ Fresco Painting," pages 77, 78.
Question 18 may .be answered by reading through
“ Hogarth’s Analysis of Beauty.”
All, or almost all, the other questions usually set at this
examination may be answered by consulting Eastlake's
“ Materials for a History of Oil Painting.”
Question 1. —Describe the relative durability of the fol-
lowing colours and their chemical ingredients respectively ;
zinc white, flake white, cadmium yellow, vermilion, col-
cothar, cobalt blue, cappah brown, Cologne earth, masticot,
chrome yellow.
Question 2.—Lemon yellow, orpiment, yellow ochre,


Roman ochre, chrome yellow, cadmium. State which of
these colours is considered durable.
Question 3. —Describe the chemical properties and the
comparative durability or otherwise of the following colours:
terra verde, chrome green, malachite green, verdigris,
Naples yellow, orpiment.
Question 4. —Describe the chemical constituents and the
comparative durability or otherwise of vermilion, light red,
Indian red, cadmium, lemon yellow, cobalt, indigo, verdi-
gris, scarlet lake.
Question 5. —Mention the principal colours derived from
the following substances, and their comparative dura-
bility; 1, copper; 2, arsenic; 3, mercury; 4, sodium; 5,
lead.
Question 6. —What were the grounds for oil painting used
by the early Flemings? Were they absorbent, and of what
colour ?
Question 7. —Describe the difference between “fresco
secco ” and “ fresco buono,” and detail the principal pro-
cesses employed in each.
Question B.—What colours are chiefly employed in fresco
buono? Describe in detail the processes of painting during
the day. What is the effect of mixing terra verde with
lime?
Question 9. —How is the cartoon prepared for fresco
painting and transferred to the “intonaco”? In what
state should the latter be (as to moisture) on commencing
each day’s work ?
Question 10.—Describe the various ingredients and the
proportions of each for preparing the “ intonaco ” in fresco


painting. Is there any time during which lime may be kept
for the purpose of tresco painting ? If so, state the reasons
for the limitation.
Question 11. —For what reason is it necessary to keep
lime before using it in fresco painting ? Describe the pre-
paration of the walls and the work to be done by the
plasterer before commencing the operation which causes the
colour to adhere to its surface, and what prevents its ad-
hesion.
Question 12. —Why was terra verde so much used by
fresco painters, and what effect has it on lime whites ?
Question 13. —What are the pigments called by Cennini
biacco and bianco di San-Giovanni ?
Question 14. — What is biacca, bianco, San-Giovanni,
verdacio as described by Cennini ?
Question 15.— How did Giotto paint a head in fresco as
described by Cennini ?
Question 16. —How were the walls (1), panels (2), pre-
pared for painting on in distemper during the sixteenth
century ?
Question 17. —What is the process of tempera painting :
(1) the panel and its preparation, (2) the vehicle, (3) the
procedure ? Was oil varnish ever employed in connection
with tempera painting?
Question 18.—What qualities does Hogarth say are essen-
tial to beauty?
Question ig.—Who were the earliest artists to practise
oil painting in Italy ? From whom did they derive the
knowledge, and when and where did they flourish ?
Question 20. —What method did the first colourists adopt


to secure richness of effect in pictures when seen at a con-
siderable distance, as in churches ?
Question 21. —Describe Van Eyck’s supposed method of
painting, from the design to the completion of a picture, and
his vehicle. What portion of a picture did he usually com-
mence to paint in colour ?
Question 22. —Did Rubens avail himself of much pre-
paratory labours in commencing his pictures? Describe
his usual mode of practice.
Question 23. —In what particulars did the Venetian
method differ from that of Rubens ?
Question 24. —What opinion did Rubens hold about the
necessity of studying the antique marbles and bronzes?
Question 25. —What was the method of painting said to
have been adopted by the ancient Greeks, and with what
vehicles, and were the pictures so executed durable ?
Question 26. —Who principally originated the Florentine
method of painting, and in what respects did it vary from
the method taught by the Flemings ?
Question 27. —In what method are the works of Giotto
and his school usually executed ?
Qieestion 28. —What were the relations existing between
L. da Vinci and Michael Angelo ? Was there any instance
of pictorial rivalry ?
Question 29.—Who were the principal painters of the
later Flemish school (seventeenth century) ? Describe the
usual methods of painting, (1) as to the material or ground,
(2) as to practice.
Question 30. —What vehicle is said to have been adopted
by Van Dyke in oil painting?


Question 31. —State which of the schools of art (in the
sixteenth century) made many drawings for their pictures,
and who. Give examples of varieties of process, and trace
their different results.
Question 32. —State the methods of preparing grounds for
oil painting employed by the early Flemish and Italian
painters, the various modifications in later practice, and the
comparative advantages and disadvantages of each.
Question 33. —What causes cracks in painting ? What
causes a wrinkled surface ?
Question 34. —Describe the various “ media ” or vehicles
used in pictures by (1) the ancient Greeks, (2) the tempera
painters during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
(3) in the transition period, (4) by the Van Eycks.
Question 35. —Did Cennini know the uses of varnish?
Question 36. —Were resinous vehicles ever varied accord-
ing to the colours in the same picture, or was it usual to
adopt one uniform vehicle throughout, during the sixteenth
century ?
Question 37. —What proportions did the various resins
bear to the oil in making varnishes for painting ?
Question 38. —What is the method supposed to have been
adopted by the great Venetian painters in commencing
their pfctures, and in what respect was it different from the
Florentine and Roman schools ?
Question 39. —What were the grounds for oil painting used
by the early Flemings ? Were they absorbent, and of what
colour ?
Question 40. —To what school did Sebastian del Piombo
belong ? Who were his masters ?


Question 41. —What evidence can you give of the practice
of modelling figures, in wax or clay, by any of the great
colourists before commencing their pictures ?
Question 42. —Describe the gradual change of method
from tempera to oil painting, the vehicles employed, and
their composition. Was more than one vehicle employed
in the same picture ?
Question 43. —What were the methods of oil painting in
the Venetian School in Bellini’s time, what changes did
they undergo, and to whom were the changes attributed ?
Question 44. —Who was the master of Giovanni Bellini ?
Question 45. —Who was Michael Angelo’s first master in
painting ? Relate some of the circumstances connected
with his first attempts in sculpture.
Question 46. —Trace slightly the course of art from its
revival in the thirteenth century; the various schools, and
the names of the founders or principal painters in each
school, down to the end of the sixteenth century.


INDEX
of lead and sulphur, 73 [ pADMIA 35
» of oxygen amongst pig- I Cadmium red, 47
melUS ’ 75 , „ yellow, 35
Alkalies on pigments, action of, 77 Gamboge, 38
Answers to Art Examination ques- Cambogia 38
tion.i, 100-2 Cappah brown, 67
Antwerp nine, 25 Carbonate,normal, bade, and acid,9
” brown, 60 Carmine vermilion, 48
Art Examination questions, 102-7
Artificial ultrama ine, 3 1 Cassel 67
Asphaltum, 60 „ ye n 0W) 46
Aureolm ’ 33 Cseruleum, 25
Azure ’ 26 > 2 9 Cerulian, 25
gARYXA yellow, 34 Ceruse, 5
~ white, 1 Chinese ink, 62
Beech, colours for, 97 „ vermilion, 48
Berlin blue, 25, 28 ~ white, 8
Birch, colours for, 97 ~ yellow, 40
Bistre, 61 Chrome greens, 12
Bitumen, 60 ~ oxide, 13
Bitumen Judaicum, 60 „ pale and deep, 36
Bladder green, 18 ~ yellow, 36
Blanc d’arfent, 3 Cinnabar, 59
Bleu de garance, 31 Cioon yellow, 36
Blowpipe testing, 11 Cobalt blue, 26
Blue black, 62 „ green, 22
Body washes, colours for, 92 „ ultramarine, 26
~ white, 4 Cologne brown, 67
Brown, mixtures to produce, 86 ~ earth, 38
Brown pink, 61 ~ yellow, 36
Brun de Mars, 68 Constant white, 1
Brunswick green, 16, 22 Cremnitz white, 5
Buffs, mixtures to produce, 86 Crimson lake, 48


DRAPERIES, colours ibr, 92
Dumont’s blue, 29
Dutch pink, 43
~ white, $
J7GYPTIAN green, 25
~ brown, 64
Emerald green, 16
Enamel blue, 29
English pink, 43
„ red, 56
JTACTITIOUS ultramarine, 31
Fields, colours for, 97
Flake white, 4
Flemish white, 5
Flesh, colours for, 92
Flower painting, colours for, 93
Foliage, colours for, 97
Frankfurt black, 62
French blue, 31
„ white, 3
QAMBOAGE, 38
Gambodium, 38
Gamboge, 38
Giallolino, 42
Gmelin’s blue, 31
Gray, 82
Green Bice, 19
~ earth, 19
„ oxide of chromium, 13
Greens, mixtures to produce, 89
Grey, 82
Greys, mixtures to produce, 88
Guignet’s green, 22
J-JAARLEM blue, 25
Hamburg white, 5
Heaths, colours for, 97
Holly green, 19
Hues, 82
Hungary green, 17
JMPERIAL green, 16
Indian blue, 27
~ ink, 62
„ lake, 50
„ ochre, 55
„ red, 51
» yellow, 39
Indigo, 27
lodine scarlet (iodide of mercury),
52
Iris green, 18
Iron brown, 65
„ yellow, 45
Italian pink, 43
TAUNE brillant, 35
„ de Fer, 43, 45
„ de Mars 43. 45
~ mineral, 36
RING'S yellow, 40
LAC lake, 50
Lampblack (lamblack), 63
Lazuline blue, 30
Lazurstein, 30
Lead and sulphur, action of, 73
Leipzig yellow, 36
Lemon yellow, 34, 41
Light red, 55
Liquid madder lake, 52
Loss of opacity, 78
JyJ ADDER carmine, 52
„ lakes, 52
„ yellow, 43
Malachite green, 17


Manganese brown, 64
Maroons, mixtures to produce, qi
Mars brown, 68
„ orange, 45
red, 59
~ yellow, 45
Massicot (masticot), 41
Mineral blue, 25
„ gray, 68
~ yellow, 46
Minium, 54
Mitis green, 16
Montpellier yellow, 46
Mountain green, 17
Mummy brown, 64
yellow, 42
Native green, 13
Neutral tint, 68, 85
New blue, 32
OPACITY, loss of, 78
Opaque oxide of chromium, 13
Orange chrome, 36
Orient yellow, 45
Orpiment, 40
Outremer de Guimet, 31
~ lazurline, 30
Oxygen amongst pigments, action
of. 75
pAßlSyellow, 36
Parisian blue, 28
Payne’s gray, 68
Permanent blue, 32
„ white, I
Pigments, action of alkalies on, 77
~ action of oxygen amongst,
75
Pink madder, 52
Pinks, mixtures to produce, 91
Positive colour?, 8l
Primary colours, 81
~ positive colours, 84
Prussian blue, 28
~ brown, 65
» r e d , 5 6
Pure chrome green, 13
Purple lake, 59
Purples, mixtures to produce, 91
Purree, or powre, 39
QUARTERNARY hues, 85
Quercitron yellow, or lake, 43
sienna, 43
Red lead, 54
„ ochre, 55
~ orpiment (realgar), 56
Reference, table of, 70
Rinman’s green, 23
Roads, colours for, 98
Roman white, J
Rose madder, 52
„ rubiate, 32
Rouge de Mars, 59
Royal blue, 29
Rubens brown, 67
„ madder, 69
gAP green, 18
Saturnine red, 54
Scarlet ochre, 55, 56
Scheele’s, or Swedish green, 18
Schweinfurt green, 16, 22
Sea views, colours for, 94
Secondary colours, 81
Second ry positive colours, 84
Sepia, 66
Shade, 82
Sienna, 43
Silver white, 3


Skies, colours for, 98 Ver de vessie, 18
Smalt, 29 Verdetta, 19
Sulphur and lead, action of, 73 Verdigris, 20
Vermilion, 58
Verona green, iq
TABLE of reference, 70 Vienna blue> 2f)
Terra verte 19 „ green, 16, 22
Ternary colours, 81 yellow, 46
Tertiary hues, 8 S yiride reris, 20
Tmt ’ 82 . Viridian, 22
Tinted carmine, 52
Tone, 82
Transparent oxide of chromium, 16 'WHITE lead, 5
Turner yellow, 46
YELLOW lakes, 43
ULTRAMARINE, 30 ~ ultramarine, 34
Umber, raw and burnt, 65 Yellows, mixtures to produce, 86
YANDYKE brown, 67 g reen > 2 3
Venetian red, 56 „ white, 8
THE END.
PRINTED BY J. S. VIRTUE AND CO., LIMITED, CITY ROAD LONDON.


USEFUL BOOKS FOR ART STUDENTS , &C.
PAINTING POPULARLY EXPLAINED; including ’ Fresco
Oil, Mosaic, Water-colour, Water-glass, Tempera, Encaustic
Miniature, Painting on Ivory, Vellum, Potteiy, Porcelain, Enamel
Glass, &c. With Historical Sketches of the Progress of the Art.
By Thomas John Gullick, assisted by John Times, F.S.A.
Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. ss. 6d., cloth boards.
“Much maybe learned, even by those who fancy they do not require to be
taught, from the careful perusal ot this unpretending but comprehensive treatise.”
Art Journal.
“ A manual suitable for acquiring a good book knowledge of painting; it is one
of the best in circulation for informing the young student on fine art processes
and their history, and is officially included by the Science and Art Department in
their list of authorized art prizes, no doubt for its merits in this respect I’—Artist.
“ Contains a large amount of original matter agreeably conveyed, and will be
found of value, as well by the young artist seeking information as by the general
reader.”— Builder.
A GRAMMAR OF COLOURING, applied to Decorative Painting
and the Arts. By George Field. Third Edition, Revised,
Enlarged, and adapted to the use of the Ornamental Painter
and Designer, with additional Sections on Painting in Sepia,
Water-colours, and Oils, and the History and Characteristics of
the Various Styles of Ornament ; by Ellis A. Davidson.
With Coloured Diagrams and numerous Woodcuts. 3s. 6d.
cloth.
“ An entirely practical treatise on the varieties and qualities of the pigments
used in colouring, and the media and the processes ol manipulation employed,
&c. ” —Bu ilder.
“ One of the most useful of students* books, and probably the best known of the
few we have on the subject.”— Architect.
“'this treatise forms a most mecum for the ornamental painter
and designer. The method and stylo of the book are as thoroughly purpose-like,
as its contents bear in every lino the stamp of practical utility.”— Scotsman.
“ A practical and clear manual, which applies the art of colouring to painting,
decoration, and the arts generally.”— Standard.
A DICTIONARY OF PAINTERS, AND HANDBOOK FOR
PICTURE AMATEURS; being a Guide for Visitors to Public
and Pirate Picture Galleries, aud for Art Students ; including an
Explanation of the various Methods of Painting ; Instructions for
Cleaning, Re-lining, and Restoring Oil Paintings; a Glossary of
Terms; and Historical Sketch of the Principal Schools of Paint-
ing ; and a Dictionary of Painters, giving the Copyists and Imita-
tors of each Master. By Philippe Daryl, B.A. 35., cloth.
“ The dictionary is the most complete thing of its kind we have ever seen, and
will prove a valuable work of reference, not only for the number of obscure as well
as famous artists named, but for the critical remarks which accompany the mention
of those whose works are widely known.”— Magazine of Art.
London: CROSBY LOCKWOOD & CO., 7, Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C.


USEFUL BOOKS FOR DECORATIVE ARTISTS,
ELEMENTARY DECORATION. A Guide to the Simpler Forms
of every-day Art, as applied to the Interior and Exterior Decora-
tion of Dwelling Houses, &c. By James William Facey, Junr.
Illustrated with 68 Explanatory Engravings, principally fiom
Designs by the Author. 2s. cloth.
A PRIMER OF TEE ART OF ILLUMINATION; for the Use
of Beginners : with a Rudimentary Treatise on the Art, Practical
Directions for its Exercise, and numerous Examples taken from
Illuminated MSS., printed in Gold and Colours. By F. Dela-
motte. Small 4to, 65., ornamental boards.
MEDIEVAL ALPHABETS AND INITIALS FOR ILLU-
MINATORS. By F. Delamottk. Containing 21 Plates and
Illuminated Title, printed in Gold and Colours. Small 4to, 45.,
ornamental boards.
OPvNAMENTAL ALPHABETS, ANCIENT & MEDIEVAL,
from the Eighth Century, with Numerals; including Gothic,
Church Text, large and small, Geiman, Italian, Arabesque,
Initials for Illumination, Monograms, Crosses, &c. See., for the
use of Architectural and Engineering Draughtsmen, Missal
Painters, Masons, Decorative Painters, Engravers, Lithographeis,
Carvers, &c. Collected and Engraved by F. Delamotte, and
printed in Colours. New and cheaper Edition, royal Bvo, oblong,
2s. 6d. boards.
EXAMPLES OF MODERN ALPHABETS, PLAIN AND
ORNAMENTAL; including German, Old English, Saxon, Italic,
Perspective, Greek, Hebrew, Court Hand, Engrossing, Tuscan,
Riband, Gothic, Rustic, and Arabesque; with several Original
Designs, and an Analysis of the Roman and Old English Alpha-
bets, large and small, Numerals, &c., for the use of Draughtsmen,
Surveyors, Masons, Decorative Painters, Lithographers, Engravers,
Carvers, &c. Collected and Engraved by F. Delamotte, and
printed in Colours. New and cheaper Edition, royal Bvo, oblong,
2s. 6d. boards.
GLASS STAINING, AND THE ART OF PAINTING ON
GLASS. From the German of Dr. Gessert and Emanuel
Otto Fromberg. With an Appendix on the Art of Enamel-
ling. 2s. 6d. cloth.
INSTRUCTIONS IN WOOD-CARVING, FOR AMATEURS ;
with Hints on Design. By A Lady. With 10 large Plates,
2s. 6d., in emblematic wrapper.
SCHOOL OF PAINTING FOR THE IMITATION OF WOODS
AND MARBLES, as taught and practised by A. R. Van der
Burg and P. Van der Burg, Directors of the Rotterdam Paint-
ing Institution. Royal folio, 18-J- by 12 \ in., Illustrated with 24
full-size Coloured Plates ; also 12 plain Plates, comprising 154
Figures, price £2 12s. 6d.
Lonuox : CROSBY LOCKWOOD & CO., 7, Siaiioners’ Halt. Court E.C,
