



H -. . £
' : tf


THE DISCOVERY AND EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF
THE DARLING DOWNS. *
the Hon..ARTHUR, MORGAN, M.L.A., Vice-President, R.G.S.A.Q.
“ I hear the tread of Pioneers
Of Nations yet to be;
The first low wash of waves, where soon
Shall roll a human sea.”
Whittier.
The paper which I have prepared deals, in the main, not with the
Darling Downs as we know it to-day, but with the Darling Downs
of Allan Cunningham. The country on which Cunningham bestowed
the name of Darling Downs was the valley of Glengallan Creek; but
he also discovered Canning Downs, to' the south-east, and Peel’s
Plains, to north-west; and it is of these districts—forming together
what is now generally spoken of as the Southern Downs—that the
paper prepared for tov-night’s meeting treats, leaving for some future
occasion, and to some other member of the Society, the task of re-
lating the story of the early settlement and later progress of the
Northern or Toowoomba end of the Downs.
PHYSICAL FEATURES.
The Darling Downs District, as at present known, is one of the
most fertile, as well as the most interesting and healthful tracts of
country in Queensland. Its historical associations are no less fascinat-
ing to the historiographer than its physical and geological features
are to the modern geographer, or the vast importance of its post-
Pliocene deposits to the science of Zoology. Certain it is that no
other region in the whole of Australia has yielded more important
fossdliferous deposits, or contributed more largely to our knowledge
-of the extinct fauna of past ages.
Geographically considered, the physical structure of the district
is simple, and easily understood. An inland region, forming a fringe,
as it were, of the great central basin of the Continent, it possesses
no important streams, no greatly elevated internal features, and few
deep and rugged glens. In area, it comprises some five thousand
nine hundred square miles of alluvial plains, forming the basin of the
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, at
Warwick, May 7, 1902.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVII.


Upper Condamine River, with its numerous tributary streams that
carry the drainage waters from the mountain ranges by which it is
almost enclosed. There are the Bunya Bunya Mountains on the
North; the Main Range, with Cunningham’s Gap, on the East; the
Great Dividing Range on the South; and Henries Range, stretching
far away north-westerly in the general direction of the river which
drains the basin. These simulating ranges culminate in numerous
lofty peaks, that stand out in bold and beautiful relief above the
rugged landscape in the immediate neighbourhood. Those which
cleave the sky-line from Cunningham’s Gap round to Killarney—
Mount Cordeaux (4,100 feet), the double-peaked Mount Mitchell
(3,751 feet), Spicer’s Peak, Mount Huntley (4,153 feet), Wilson’s
Peak, and Mount Leslie—are especially precipitous and picturesque
as they shoot up from the general outline of the main mass of ranges.
Essentially a fiuviatile region, with all the chief features that
characterise the action of an extensive denudation of the surrounding
highlands in remote ages, the Darling Downs country possesses some
general aspects of a specially interesting and instructive geographical
nature. Here we find an extensive alluvial plain, dotted over with
numerous isolated peaks that shoot up like volcano cones, suggesting
to the physical geographer the existence of some remote subterranean
disturbances that have thrown up these sharply-defined mountain
masses; or the erosive action of water, which, carrying away the
softer material, has left the harder substances in their present shape.
We know that these vast alluvial plains are mostly composed of the
detritus washed down from the mountain-slopes, and deposited on
the top of the basalts which are spread over the bottom of the valley
now forming the basin of the Condamine. The soils are in consequence
very deep and extremely fertile over a large proportion of the area
under consideration; hence the heavy yields of grain and other crops,
and the nutritious grasses and herbage, which the Downs produces
under normal climatic conditions.
From a Geological standpoint, the district possesses some typical
features that have made it famous in the history of the country. For
years past the Darling Downs has enjoyed a reputation extending o T er
the entire world for the numerous fossil bones of extinct animals
that have been discovered in the post-Pliocene drifts there, indicating
that in past ages the vegetation and climate contributed to the
development of a vigorous marsupial fauna that disappeared when
the conditions of life were no longer favourable to existence. Chief
among the remarkable types of gigantic animals that at one time,
far back in the remote ages of antiquity, roamed this part of the
country, may be mentioned the great Diprotodon Australis; the
Marsupial Lion (Thylacoleo); the Giant Kangaroo (Macropus Titan);
an enormous Wombat, an immense Alligator, and other associated


fauna which rendered the post-Tertiary period wonderfully interesting
in the diversity And magnitude of its animal forms, as well as in the
luxuriance of its rank vegetation and excessively moist climate.
Fossil kangaroo-bones have been found in the neighbourhood of Roma
embedded in the earth about one hundred feet below the surface,
and in most of the numerous watercourses all over the Downs abundant
evidence has been found of the former existence of giant marsupial
life as indicated by the fossiliferous deposits so largely distributed there.
The basis of the Downs formation is carboniferous rocks, on which
the Walloon coal measures are largely developed, and these are over-
laid bv the basalts and Pliocene strata, wherein are deposited all that
now remains of the life of a by-gone period when marsupial giants
predominated, and prehistoric man held undisputed possession of the
Victorian plains in the soum-east corner of Continental Australia.
DISCOVERY OF THE DOWNS.
To Allan Cunningham, a copy of whose portrait has been printed
for circulation amongst you this evening, belongs the credit of having
discovered the district of which one of the early explorers is reported
to have said, “ You may discover another Australia, but you will
never discover another Darling Downs.” Cunningham was an
Englishman. Born at Wimbledon, Surrey, in 1791, after completing
his education near London, he was placed in a conveyancer’s office;
but the dull duties and prolix technicalities of the law were subjects
ill-fitted for his investigating mind, and, fortunately for Science, an
introduction to botanical pursuits was placed in his path, which led
to his receiving an appointment in connection with the Royal Gardens
at Kew. In 1814, when the subject of sending out botanical collectors
was revived, the Imperial Government acceded to the suggestions made
to them by Sir Joseph Banks, and arrangements were completed for
despatching two such collectors to tlie Southern Hemisphere. On the
nomination of sir Joseph, Cunningham was chosen to collect for the
Kew Gardens, and on the 3rd October, 1814, he embarked, in company
with Mr. James Bowie, at Spithead, on board the “ Duncan/ 74,
sailing from Plymouth on the 29th of that month. The whole of
1815, and the first seven months of 1816 were spent by Cunningham
and his companion in Brazil, and it was not until August of the latter
year that instructions were received from Sir Joseph directing Bowie
to embark for the Cape of Good Hope, and Cunningham to proceed
to New South Wales. Cunningham arrived in Sydney Cove on the
■2oth of December in the convict ship “ Surrey,” and on the following
day reported himself to Governor Macquarie at Parramatta. During
the next twenty years —with the exception of the time occupied in
paying a visit to England, and short periods of rest between his many
expeditions —Cunningham’s life was devoted to the work of examining


the coasts and pushing into the interior of the new continent. Early
in 1817, he explored the Lachlan, in company with Oxley. During
the five years following he made four voyages in the “ Mermaid," and
one in the “Bathurst,” being employed in surveying the East, North,
and West coasts of Australia. Circumnavigating the continent, and
■pursuing at every opportunity his study of the botany of the main-
land and islands, his indomitable zeal and energy in the work to
which he had devoted himself on more than one occasion endangered
his life, and, in the end, left him in a very debilitated condition. In
1822 he made an excursion across the Blue Mountains into the Bath-
urst district, returning early in the following year. Three months
Allan Cunningham.
later he was out again in the effort to find a practicable pass to Liver-
pool Plains, and, after weeks of repeated disappointments, his labours
were rewarded by the discovery of the crossing, which he called
“ Pandora’s Pass.” After a few months devoted to trips to his
favourite field for botanising—the Illawarra district—he set out in
September, 1824, for Moreton Bay, in company with Oxley, with whom
he surveyed the Brisbane River to the head of boat navigation. In
tjje following year he made an excursion, by way of “ Pandora’s Pass,”
to the back country beyond Bathurst, and twelve months later paid
his first visit to New Zealand.
The year 1827 witnessed the conception and completion of Cunning-
ham’s most important work—the work in which we in Queensland are


more particularly interested—the discovery of the Darling Downs.
Understanding that it was the wish of the New South Wales Government
that a more extended journey of exploration should be made into the
northern and north-western interior, for the purpose of investigating the
capabilities of the country for agricultural and other purposes, Cunning-
ham communicated with the Governor (Lieut.-General Darling), intimat-
ing his desire to conduct an expedition in the direction, and for the
purposes, indicated. He said he proposed to proceed from Parramatta to
the Peel River, and penetrate North to the parallel of Cape Moreton.
His object was to ascertain the general features of portion of the interior
comprehending four degrees of latitude, the geological structure of the
country, the nature of its soil, the importance and value of its timbers,
and the number, magnitude, and velocity of the streams by which it was
watered. And he added: “In this excursion, moreover, would be
determined how far the Brisbane River is to be considered as originating
in the high lands near the coast, or whether the opinion that has prevailed
is correct, of the identity of its stream with some presumed outlet from
the eastern margin of our interior marshes.” Cunningham intended,
should the dry season favour him, to make a western excursion along the
27th parallel, with a view to determining the character of the country
for pastoral purposes ; but he said that, if the season proved wet, he would
return along the high land to the eastward of his outward track. His
offer was accepted, and he took his departure on the 30th of April from
Segenhoe, a station on the Upper Hunter, accompanied by six men and
eleven heavily laden pack-horses. Three weeks later he crossed the Peel,
and continued northward to the Gwydir River country, hitherto un-
trodden by white men. Of the country, as he saw it, he says : “ The eye
sought anxiously for a rising smoke, as indicative of the presence of the
wandering aborigines, but in vain; for, excepting in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of a river of the larger magnitude, these vast solitudes may be
fairly said to be almost without inhabitants.” He had left the coast
range well away to his right, and intended to continue almost due north-
ward to the parallel of 27 degrees South; but this purpose was frustrated
by the arid country he soon got into, and, after crossing the 29th parallel,
he was compelled to alter his course to the north-east and eastward—a
happy accident which led to the important result which attended his ex- j
plorations in that direction, the discovery of the Darling Downs. Soon-
after changing his course, he reached the Severn (or Dumaresq) River, at
a point between Texas and Bengalla. On the sth of June, he observed
the smoke of numerous fires from blacks’ camps, and heard the screeching
of many flocks of white cockatoos, signs which satisfied him that he was
on the verge of desirable country; and he pursued his way in an E.N.E.
direction. Crossing a rocky creek, and ascending a ridge upon its eastern
bank, the explorer had “a most agreeable, though confined view of an
extensive range of open country, which from its ample features and


prospect he doubted not would, in its examination, abundantly reward all
his labours.” He perceived right ahead, at a distance of eight or nine
miles, open plains or downs of great extent, which appeared to extend
easterly to the base of a lofty range of mountains lying North and South,
the distance, by estimation, being about thirty miles. This was Cunning-
ham’s first glimpse of the Downs, obtained from one of the highest points
of the elevated land lying between the headwaters of Thane’s Creek and
Sandy Creek. A noble view of a magnificent country —what wonder that
he was delighted at the prospect of the splendid results which promised
to crown his efforts ! Pushing on with quickened steps, the party arrived
early in the afternoon on the left bank of a small river, having in all
parts of its channel deep pools of excellent water. Cunningham bestowed
upon the stream the name of “ Condamine’s River,” in compliment to
Mr. T. de la Condamine, aide-de-camp to His Excellency the Governor.
Blacks were seen here, but they evinced little fear, and, having fired the
grass opposite the camp, walked leisurely away on the approach of the
intruders. Fishing was good in the Condamine waters, and several fine
cod were landed during the afternoon. About noon on the 6th, Cunning-
ham proceeded, up-stream for half a mile, crossed to the North bank by
a ford previously discovered by one of his men, quitted the river, and
entered upon the Downs country, pursuing his way E.N.E. along the
southern margin of the valley which lay smiling before him. “ During
the afternoon of the 6th and the following day,” he says, ‘ ‘ we travelled
throughout the whole length of the Downs to the base of the mountainous
land which bounds them on the eastern extreme.” It should be remem-
bered that the narrow tract of land to which Ctinningham gave the name
of Darling Downs—bestowing it, by permission, in honour of the
Governor —embraced but a fraction of the country which is so known
now; it, indeed, included only the narrow valley of Glengallan Creek.
It was this fertile valley he traversed during the 6th and 7th of June,
1827, from the Condamine below Toolburra to the foot of the mountain,
which he used a few days later as a lookout, with the object of discovering
a pass through the coast range. “ These extensive tracts of open country,”
he informed Governor Darling, “are situated in or about the mean
parallel 28 degrees 8 minutes S., along which they extend East 18 miles.
On their northern side they are bounded by a very gentle rise of lightly-
wooded ridge, and on their opposite margin by a forest of box and gum
of ordinary timber. A chain of deep ponds, supported by streams from
the lofty ranges immediately to the eastward, passes along the central
lower flats of these Downs throughout their whole length; and these
(ponds) uniting in seasons of heavy rains, fall westerly into Condamine’s
River. Their breadth varies in different parts of their lengthened surface,
appearing at their western extremity not to exceed one and a half miles.
The lower parts, deeply grooved by watercourses, form flats which, in
consequence of their permanent moisture, furnish a very considerable


range of cattle pasture at all seasons of the year—the grasses and herbage
exhibiting in the depth of winter extraordinary luxuriance of growth.
.. . From these central grounds rise downs of a rich black and dry
soil, which extend several miles to the eastward; and, as they furnish
abundance of grass and are conveniently watered, yet perfectly beyond
the reach of those irrigations which take place on the flats in wet seasons,
they constitute a most valuable sound sheep pasture, the permanently
dry nature of which may be inferred from the fact' of there being a. differ-
ence of three hundred feet between their upper or eastern limits, and
Condamine’s River.” By the afternoon of the 7th, Cunningham had
reached the forest ground on the eastern verge of the plain; but he con-
tinued his course for about a mile and a half through “ a truly beautiful
apple forest, abounding in kangaroos.” Having reached the base of a
remarkable flat-topped mountain, forming the termination of a portion of
the lateral range to which he had taken a bearing when 25 miles to the
south-west, he encamped on the bank of Freestone Creek, where his
wearied horses enjoyed “ the finest meadow pasture he had seen in New
South Wales.” Here he gave his animals a couple of days’ rest, spending
the time meanwhile in examining the luxuriant vegetation of the scrub
“ which clothed the adjacent mountain from its base almost to its very
summit.” On the morning of the Bth, accompanied by one of his party,
he ascended the table mountain above the tents, from the lofty summit of
which he had promised himself an extensive prospect. Reaching the top
two hours later, he was gratified exceedingly by the extensive view
afforded of the country to the North, West, and South. The large cleared
patches of land lying to the North of his Darling Downs— i.e., the Clifton
country—he named “ Peel’s Plains,” while the open spaces to the South
and South-east were entitled “ Canning Downs,” in honour of the Right
Hon. George Canning. The extent of the downs easterly he was unable
from the point on which he stood to observe, but on the South they were
bounded by a lofty range of hills, lying nearly East and West, which he
named “ Harris Range ” —the Herries Range of the maps of to-day,
which forms the divide between the Condamine and Mclntyre watersheds.
But, extremely gratifying as it was to the explorer to' survey such a vast
expanse of magnificent country, the discovery of which he says com-
pensated him for all the privations met with in his journey of 340 miles
from the Hunter, the question that arose in his mind now was—From
what point could so fine a territory be approached, seeing that the route
towards Moreton Bay was barred by a range of rugged mountains, whose-
lowest gaps were quite 2,500 feet above sea level. Having sought in vain
for a solution of the problem from the flat-topped eminence on which he
stood, and upon which he bestowed the name of “ Mount Dumaresq,”
while he christened the grassy glen stretching along its northerly side
“ Millar’s Valley,” Cunningham descended to his camp, and, after a delay
of 48 hours, due to heavy rains, started with the intention of penetrating.


towards the highest points of the Main Range, from the summit of which
he expected to obtain bearings to fixed points on the coast. Taking a
southerly course, running down Jack Smith’s Gully, and skirting Mount
Sturt, he proceeded nor’-easterly to “ a very beautiful grassy vale,
bounded by lofty lateral ridges, and, like Millar’s Valley, leading directly
to the base of the principal range.”. This lovely region, now one of the
most populous, as it is certainly one of the most pro-
ductive farming centres in Southern Queensland, he named
“ Logan’s Yale,” after the then Commandant of Moreton Bay. Cunning-
ham had entered the Yangan Valley, along which the party advanced for
about five miles, halting on the bank of Upper Swan Creek. For the eye
of the botanist there was much of interest in the dense scrubs clothing the
bases of the ranges surrounding the camp, and it was here that, for the
first time on the western side of the range, Cunningham recognised the
stately “ hoop pine ” which now bears his name, but which he had pre-
viously observed in great numbers in the dark brushes of the coastal
streams. Some days were spent in taking observations and in exploring
the ranges, with the view of discovering a practicable pass to Brisbane
Town and Moreton Bay. Ascending the highest points at the head of
Swan Creek, Cunningham was enabled to overlook portions of the country
in the vicinity of Moreton Bay; but heavy rain set in from the coast, and,
driving billowy clouds on to the summit of the mountains, he was unable
to push his observations to the point of actual success. Before descending,
however, he descried a very singular deeply excavated gap to the N.N.E.,
“ to the pitch of which,” he says, “ the acclivity from the head of Millar’s
Valley seemed very moderate ”; and he employed the following day in
exploring in that direction. The gap itself was found to be very rugged
and difficult, but to the South the range presented a very moderate sur-
face over which he thought a line of road might be constructed without
much labour, as the rise from Millar’s Valley proved by no means
abrupt, and the fall easterly from the range to the forest land at its
base appeared of easy declivity. Looking in the direction of Fassifern
and Normanby, his eye wandered with pleasure over a fine open country,
very moderately timbered, with patches of clear plain, and detached
wooded ridges to diversify the surface; and in no part did there appear
any obstacle to prevent communication either with the southern shores of
Moreton Bay or the banks of the Brisbane River.
The summit of the range at the head of the Yangan Valley was the
furthest point of the 1827 trip. In taking a general view of the results
of the expedition, Cunningham specially mentions the luxuriant pastur-
age of the plains, rising downs, open woodlands, valleys, and elevated
forest ranges, which his discovery had thrown open to the flocks and herds
of Australia. He saw neither coal nor limestone in his journey, though
both have since been found within sight of his lookout from Mount
Dumaresq. But he notes that “ a quarry of freestone, seemingly well


adapted for building, could be easily opened on the bank of a creek about
two miles South of Logan Vale.” This quarry is now supplying building
stone to the city of Brisbane. “In fine,” he continues in his report to
Governor Darling, “ upon consideration that we are occupying a country
in which, in the absence of navigable rivers l , an expensive land carriage
must ever be resorted to in the conveyance of produce from the inland to
the coast, the value of this extensive range of pastoral country is not a
little enhanced by its proximity to the seashore, and the seeming facility
with which the fleeces of its growth, as well as the general produce of its
soil, will at some future time be borne down to the shores of Moreton
Bay.”
Cunningham started on his return journey on the 16th of June, and,
crossing Canning Downs and the heads of the Severn, arrived at his start-
ing point, Segenhoe, on the 28th of the following month, having, in an
absence of thirteen weeks, travelled a distance of 800 miles. On his return
to Parramatta., he waited upon the Governor, and laid before His Ex-
cellency a rough outline'of the country through which he had penetrated,
later on delivering a report in which he described his experiences in
detail, and a map showing his route and discoveries. He subsequently
received an official letter conveying “ His Excellency’s pleasure at being
able to bear testimony to the zeal and enterprise with which Mr. Cunning-
ham’s journey was undertaken, and the judgment and success with which
it had been performed.”
Anxious to complete his work of the previous year, Cunningham
set out in 1828 to find a practicable route from Brisbane to the Downs.
Mr. Fraser, the Colonial Botanist, accompanied him, and they landed
at Brisbane on the Ist July. The Commandant, Captain Logan, had
recently discovered the mouth of the river which now bears his name,
and it was decided to make an effort to reach the gap by that route;
the attempt failed, however, for the party got “ bushed ” in the
vicinity of Mount Lindsay. Returning, Cunningham and his people
struck off for Limestone Station, on the Bremer, while Logan and
Fraser returned direct to Brisbane. Cunningham encountered many
difficulties in his efforts to reach the summit of the pass which he had
observed from Logan Vale, but by pluck and determination suc-
ceeded in doing so on the 25th of August. As he looked over the
magnificent stretch of country at which his labours of the previous year
had closed, portions of Canning Downs and patches of Peel’s Plains
were distinctly recognised at a distance of from 20 to 30 miles. H©
looked down on Millar’s Valley, located Mount Dumaresq and Mount
Sturt, and was enabled to connect on the map of the country the
northern points of his last year’s journey with the settlement on the
Brisbane River.
ihus was his great work completed. In 1827, he discovered the
finest tract of land the Continent contains, and in 1828 he found and


marked a route by which the produce of its pastures might be sent to
the seaboard and the markets of the world.
Cunningham, whose industry was unflagging, no matter how his
health suffered, continued his explorations in various directions until
1831, when he left Sydney for the old country, arriving in London in
July, after an absence of fifteen years. In the following year, a
vacancy occiu’ring in the office of Colonial Botanist, Richard Cunning-
ham, Allan’s brother, was appointed to the post; but he was killed
bv the Bogan blacks a few years later, and Allan Cunningham re-
turned to Australia, to succeed him, only however to hold office for a
little more than a year. Discovering, to his bitter disappointment, that
the duties required of him were not those that a botanist should be
expected to perform, he resigned, refusing to allow himself to be con-
verted into a mere cultivator of vegetables for the private tables of
public officials. “ Tell all that I have discharged the Government cab-
bage-garden in disgust,’’ were the bitter words in which, in a letter to
a friend, he announced the severance of his connection with the Sydney
gardens. Subsequently he spent some months collecting in New
Zealand, returning to Sydney towards the end of 1838, with his health
completely undermined. He passed away, in the cottage in the Botanic
Gardens, on the 27th of June, 1839, at the age of 48, leaving behind him
an undying name. “He was a ‘ rare specimen,’ ” says his friend and
executor, Captain Philip Parker King, R.N., “quite a genus of him-
self ; an enthusiast in Australian geography; a warm friend, and an
honest man; and, to crown all, when the time came, he resigned him-
self into the arms of his Saviour without a murmur.” His remains
were deposited in the grounds of St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church,
Sydney, and a statuary marble tablet, suitably inscribed, paid all too
brief tribute to his worth. A monument to perpetuate his memory
was subsequently erected in the Sydney Gardens, and within this —
thanks to the kindly efforts of Mr. J. H. Maiden, the present Super-
intendent of the Garden&i—there is now a. leaden casket containing all
that could be found of the botanist’s remains when, quite recently, the
Devonshire street Cemetery was abolished to make room for the new
Redfern Railway Station. “ But,” says Heward, “ while sculptured
marble may tell to the cold ear of posterity the science and virtues of
the departed botanist, the greatest debt of gratitude to his memory is
due from the agriculturist, who owes so much to the indefatigable per-
severance and research of the explorer of the vast pastoral country to
the north-west and north of New South Wales.” Queensland has paid
a far from adequate tribute to Cunningham’s work by naming after
him the electorate that embraces the territory he discovered, and the
municipal authorities of Warwick have followed the State example by
adopting Cunningham as the name of one of their handsome parks,


equally appropriately conferring the name of Leslie on another. But
have we, who enjoy the fruits of his labour, done all that duty demands
we should do to perpetuate his memory? Surely not.
THE EARLY SQUATTERS.
Thirteen years elapsed before Cunningham’s great discovery was
turned to practical account. Then came Patrick Leslie—first of the
Downs squatters—and later his brother Walter, guided to the new
pastoral El Uorado by a rough copy of the discoverer’s map and by
directions obtained from his friends. The Leslies were Aberdonians;
they were financed by their uncle, a London JbanKer named Davidson,
father of Gilbert and Walter Davidson, to whom they sold Canning
Downs fourteen years after first “ sitting down ” upon it. After the
Leslies, in quick succession, came a number of equally bold and enter-
prising young men; and thereafter “ the sound of occupying footsteps
fell continuously upon the ear of the dismayed savage’, until he had
no longer a spot on all those fertile plains which he could look upon
as his own.”
In March, 1840—nine months after Cunningham had gone to his
rest—Patrick Leslie came across from the outposts of settlement in
northern New England, and pitched his camp on the pretty knoll on
which now stands North Toolburra head station. He was accompanied
by Peter Murphy, an assigned servant, whom he described as “ about
the best plucked fellow I ever came across in my life, as good a ser-
vant as master ever had.” Leslie travelled by way of Texas, on the
Severn, Pike's Creek, and Upper Sandy Creek, making the Downs
about four miles from Toolburra. He had come to spy out the land.
Poliowing the Condamine valley up to Canning Downs, and then cross-
ing over to Glengallan Creek, he ran that stream down to its junction
with the Condamine, making his way back by Canal Creek and the
heads of the Severn to Falkncr’s Plains, his original starting point.
Here he was joined by his brother Walter, who had been following
with their sheep. They had two bullock teams (each drawn by twelve
animals), a horse team, and ten saddle horses. In addition to Patrick
and Walter Leslie, there were 22 ticket-of-leave men—“ as good and
game a lot as ever existed, who never gave their employers a moment’s
trouble; worth, ’ says Patrick Leslie, “any 40 men I have ever seen
since.”
A day or two later the party set out for the Downs, arriving at
“Leslie’s Crossing-place ” on the Condamine, between Talgai and Tool-
burra, on 4th June, without the loss of a single animal. Leaving the
stock and drays in charge of the men, the Leslies, accompanied by
Murphy, examined the valley of the Condamine as far east as Kil-
larney, crossing thence to Glengallan and Dalrymple creeks, and re-
turn:ng to camp on the 13th. On the following day camp was moved


to the junction of Sandy Creek with the Condamine, where they
formed what was intended to be their first sheep station, every precau-
tion being taken against attack bv the blacks. On the 21st the Leslies,
again accompanied by the faithful Murphy, struck across the Downs by
way of Allcra, Spring Creek, King’s Creek, and Hodgson’s Creek to
Cowrie, but “ finding nothing they liked so much as Canning Downs,’
they returned as far as Glengallan Creek, which they followed up
through Millar’s Valley to Cunningham’s Gap. Crossing the range,
they got down as far as the Bremer, intending to go on to Brisbane;
but, not being provided with the permit necessary to enable them to
enter the Settlement, they thought better of it, turned back, and once
Patrick Leslie.
more reached their Condamine camp on the Ist of July. The day fol-
lowing they moved to the site of North Toolburra, and there formed
their first “ station.” They afterwards sold Toolburra to Gordon, and
made Canning Downs their head station. They were modest men, and
contented themselves with ttie country “ from the bottom of Toolburra
to the head of the Condamine, including all tributaries” —a vast, tract
of country, embracing many hundreds of thousands of acres. Subse-
quently they “ gave up the lovely valley now known as Glengallan to
the Campbells, the “ German’s Creek ” ( i.e ., Rosenthal Creek) to Fred
Bracker, and Sandy Creek —the Rosenthal country—to the Aberdeen


Company (the North British Australasian Company). Thus were
formed the first stations on the Darling Downs. Toolburra was actu-
ally the first occupied, but Canning Downs was the first formed and
stocked. Patrick and George Leslie married sisters of John McArthur,
formerly of Glenelg, on the Mclntyre Brook, and while those ladies re-
sided at Canning Downs the old station was the centre of social life and
hospitality in that part of the colony, as indeed it has been ever since.
Patrick Leslie was a man of great courage, and he enjoyed the respect
and good-will of his neighbours from New England to Brisbane. But
his firmness and determination earned for him the bitter enmity of the
blacks, and on more than one occasion he and his brother Walter
narrowly escaped murder at their hands.
Canning Downs passed from the Leslies to the Davidsons in 1854,
and Captain Daveney, still a well-known resident of the Warwick
district, managed for the new owners from 1855 to 1866. The
Davidsons sold to Wildash, from whom the station passed in 1875 to
the late John Donald Macansh, in whose family it remained until a few
months ago, when the residue, some 33,000 acres (a like area having
been already disposed of in small areas for farm settlement) was sold
to a Scottish Company, whose representative is continuing the same
wise policy, with every prospect that, within the next few years, the
last block of the first Darling Downs sheep station will have passed for
ever from the purely pastoral to the agricultural stage of development.
North Toolburra (the Toolburra of the Leslies, originally a very
much larger holding than the estate known by that name in later
times) was sold by its first occupiers to Gordon, from whom it passed
very quickly to Fairholm and Hay. Then came John and George
Gammie, Hood and Douglas, Massie, and Thomas Courts. In 1895, half
of the estate was sold by the Courts family to the Government for close
settlement, and the balance to the late Mr. Matthew Swinburne, of
whose estate it still forms part.
Eton Yale was taken up by Arthur Hodgson, who met Patrick
Leslie in New England on the return of the latter from his first hurried
visit to the Downs. Hodgson, who was accompanied by Gilbert Elidtt
(afterwards first Speaker of the Queensland Legislative Assembly), was
in doubt whether he should go to the Clarence or to the Darling Downs,
but Leslie persuaded him to take the latter course, and told him of fine
country and how to reach it from “Leslie’s Crossing ” on the Oonda-
mine.* The country referred to was Eton Yale. Hodgson made his
way there without delay, secured the country, and has ever since
retained it. Hodgson (now Sir Arthur) is one of the few pioneer
* In the subsequent discussion, the President, quoting from a letter from Sir
Arthur Hodgson, showed that the statement that Sir Arthur’s first partner at Eton
Vale afterwards became First Speaker of the Queensland Lecnslative Assembly, was
erroneous.—A.M •


squatters of the Downs who can be said to have made a competency
out of his first venture, and is almost the only one who still owns his-
original station. It was at Eton Yale that the distinguished President
of the Queensland Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia gained his first Downs experience, in the year 1855.
Glengallan, the pick of Cunningham’s “ Darling Downs,” also'
formed part of the Leslies’ “ first choice.” According to Patrick Leslie’s
journal, they “ gave it up ” to the Campbells, who were amongst the
earliest Downs pioneers. Colin Campbell and his brothers, John and
Archibald, arrived on the Downs soon after the Leslies; their party
included the late Allan Mclnnes, of Glencoe, and his wife—whose
children were among the first Europeans born in the new territory —
Le Porte and Le Martin, natives of Martinique, in the French West
Indies, and a number of iicket-of-leave men. They pitched tbeir camp
on Freestone Creek, close to the point at which the main road from.
Warwick to Cunningham’s Gap crosses that stream, but quickly re-
moved to the southern slope of Mount Marshall, on which Glengallan
head station now stands. The estate passed from the hands of the
Campbells to C. H. Marshall, then to the firm of Marshall and Deuchar,
and still later to Marshall and Slade, the present holders, as a result of
whose labours Glengallan has become and is known far and wide as one
of the foremost stud-breeding establishments in Australia. In 1895
and subsequent years the present proprietors sold some 16,000 acres of
the estate to the Government for close settlement. The whole of this
has been selected, the bulk of it is already highly cultivated, and the
probabilities are that the balance of the estate will, in the not far
distant future, share the same fate.
The Rosenthal property passed from the possession of the Leslies to
the Aberdeen Company (the North British Australasian Company),
for whom John Deuchar, Frederick Bracker, Buckland, Lester, and
Augustus Evans managed in succession. Originally a very large hold-
ing devoted mainly to sheep, it passed, as the leases of the several
blocks expired, into the hands of grazing selectors, ana only a few
thousand acres of freehold remain in the possession of the company.
Goomburra, another of the out-stations of the original Canning
Downs, passed from the Leslies to Ernest Elphinstone Dalrymple, after
whom the creek on which the town of Allora now stands was named.
Dalrymple sold it to the Aberdeen Company, for whom John Deuchar
managed in the early forties. From the company it reverted to its
original owner (Patrick Leslie), who sold it in the middle of the fifties
to Robert Tooth, a Sydney brewer, who was succeeded in turn by
Charles H. Green, Edward Wienholt, and F. W. Donkin. Like many
more of the first-choice stations of the Downs pioneers, Goomburra has
been acquired by the Government for close settlement. (It was thrown'.


.open to agricultural farm selection on the Ist inst., and within 48
hours' every acre had passed into the hands of farmers).
The Talgai of the early days embraced portions of more than one of
the off-shoot properties which now bear the same name, while North and
South and East its boundaries extended far beyond their present limits—
including at one period Glenelg, Toolburra, and part of Clifton. It was
taken up by John and George Gammie, and was held and worked by them
for about fifteen years. The late James Morgan managed the property
from 1849 to 1854, and his letter-books show that 60,000 sheep were
shorn on the station in 1853. The following extract from the same source
may be quoted, by reason of the coincidence of dates —it was written
on the 7th of May, 1852, just fifty years ago to-day—and also because of
the contrast between the conditions which it describes and those prevail-
ing on the Downs just now: —“ Copious showers at regular intervals
during the past month have given this fine district all the appearance and
■freshness of a luxuriant spring. Stock of all kinds are in tip-top condition,
and no doubt is entertained by the sheep-owners of a first-rate clip next
season. They are, and have good reason to be, satisfied with the favour-
able prospects of their grazing pursuits.” Would that we could say the
:6ame to-day!
Ellangowan was taken up by John Thane, who came to the Downs
with George Gammie in 1840-1. He is popularly supposed to have been
drowned in Thane’s Creek, which was named after him ; but, as a matter
of fact, he met his death in 1843 while endeavouring to cross the Conda-
mine, in flood at the time, at the “ Talgai Crossing.” Arthur Hodgson
came over from Eton Vale, held a magisterial inquiry into the circum-
stances, and read the burial service over the grave. The station, with
nearly 5,000 sheep, horses, bullocks, all improvements, ten bales of wool,
implements, etc., was sold immediately after for £650 cash.
The belt of country embracing part of what is now Ellangowan. and
■’Clifton, Headington Hill, Pilton, and West Haldane, was early occupied
by the Forbeses, the Gammies, King and Sibley, and Joshua John Whit-
ting. W. B. Tooth was the last of the squatters who owned Clifton, which,
with Headington Hill, has since reverted to the Crown, and been parcelled
out among the farmers almost as rapidly as it was acquired by the
squatters 60 years ago.
Westbrook Station, which, like so many of its neighbours, has in
recent years been cut up for close settlement, was first selected by John
•Campbell, who claims that he was the first man to take up pastoral
country and form a cattle camp in what is now Queensland territory. He
had originally settled on the North bank of the Severn River —the
Dumaresq of Cunningham —bringing his cattle from the Gwydir district
of New South Wales, and building his stock yards and huts at a place
.called by the blacks Kittah-Kittah, on Beebo, one of the blocks now form-


ing part of Bengalla Station, the property of the Lalors. He says he was
there when the first squatters came over from New England to the
Downs; but very soon he, too, joined the “ rush” northward.
Warroo was taken up by Frederick Bracker, and is still the property
of his family. Bracker was one of the best judges of sheep and wool on
tho Downs in his day, and his memory is still held in kindly recollection
by the few surviving members of the gallant band of pioneers of which he
was one.
Nestling between Glengallan and Maryvale, on the first high-road
from the new territory to Brisbane Town and Moreton Bay, lay Gfladfield,
which has long since been divided between the adjoining stations or
parcelled out into farms. The Leslies were the first occupiers of Gladfield,
but they early “gave it up” to McDonald Bros., from whom it passed
in succession to Neil Ross (whence it derived the name of Ross’ Corner,
on the Gap Road), Fred. Bracker, Francis Robert Chester Master (after-
wards Usher of the Black Rod in the Legislative Council), and finally
back to the Leslies again.
Maryvale Station, most famous of Queensland horse-breeding estab-
lishments, possesses a history full of interest to old hands. It embraces
the whole of Millar’s Valley. Hard by the homestead runs the road that
in the early days led through Cunningham’s Gap, but which in later year*
was diverted to the easier pass between Spicer’s Peak and the southern
slope of Mount Mitchell. A few miles distant is the site of Jubb’s hotel,
a well-known wayside hostelry in the pre-railway days, where lively
squatters and burly bullock-drivers often foregathered and occasionally
came to blows. The run was taken over from the Leslies by Walter Far-
quharson, who seems to have found it anything but a profitable possession.
He offered it, with 700 sheep, to Mr. Edward Anderson, now of Allora, in
payment of an account for £34—less than a shilling per head for the
sheep, with the station given in. Anderson, however, declined the bar-
gain, and a little later Maryvale was sold to Walter Leslie for a “ song ”
or, rather, for an old stock-horse. It subsequently became the property
of “ Bush ” Hay, who sold it to Arnold Wienholt, and it now forms part
of the Wienholt Estate. (Mr. Edward Anderson, to whom reference has
just been made, is, lam glad to say, with us this evening. He is one of
the few Downs pioneers who remain to connect the present with the
past. He came to Queensland in 1843, making the voyage from Sydney
to Brisbane in the steamer “Sovereign,” which was wrecked, with terrible
loss of life, on the South Passage bar four years later. Anderson came
on to the Downs almost immediately, and has been a resident of the
district ever since. He knew most of the early squatters intimately, and
enjoyed a full measure of their respect.)
Other early Downs settlers were Messrs. Hughes and Isaac, at Gowrie ;
the Gores, at Yandilla; Stuart Russell, at Cecil Plains; and Henry


Dennis, who took up Jimbour for Scougall, Myall Creek for Coxen, Warra
for Irving, and Jondaryan in his own name ; but many of these properties
wetre not stocked until long after.
Many places familiar to residents of the Downs to-day bear the names
of the pioneers, as for example : —■
“ Mount Leslie,” near Killarney ; “ Leslie’s Crossing,” on the Conda-
mine below Toolburra; and “Hodgson’s Creek,” near Cambooya.
On the Western road from Warwick there is “ Mocatta’s Creek,”
called after the original selector of Grantham; “ Rodger’s Creek,” after
“ Cocky ” Rodger, at whose expense Stuart Russell makes merry; and
“Thane’s Creek,” called after John Thane, of Ellangowan.
In the Pratten country we have “ Gammie’s Mountain,” and on the
other side of the Range, near the Peak Mountain, “ Gammie’s Camp, on
the old main road.
Then there are “ Bracker’s Creek,” “ Deuchar’s Creek,” “Campbell’s
Plain,” “ Gore’s Range,” “ Mount Marshall,” “ Dalrymple Creek,”
“ Elphinstone,” and “ Mount Sibley.”
“ Perrott’s Gap,” on the road from New England to the Downs,
usually miscalled “ Parrots’ Gap,” is said to have been named after
William Stafford Perrott, one of the first “ supers ” of Maryland Station.
Tradition says Perrott was the last Earl of Stafford. He died at a public-
house in Deniliquin, where he was employed as “ boots ” and groom.
Can anyone say whence come those singular names, “ Lord John
Swamp ” and “ The Jew’s Retreat? ”
WORK OF THE PIONEERS.
These were the men who pioneered the Downs, and paved the way for
the steadily swelling tide of settlement which very soon followed in their
footsteps. A sturdy band of enterprising spirits, alike remarkable for
courage, self-reliance, and energy, they have laid their successors under
an everlasting debt of gratitude. Leading a semi-nomadic life in a newly
discovered country, they were daily subjected to hardships and dangers of
which the present generation can have little conception. Sheltered by
tents or rude bark huts, these young men—most of them highly educated,
and many of them tenderly nurtured in their early years —had none of the
luxuries and comparatively few of the necessaries of life; salt beef and
mutton, damper and tea, formed their usual fare. John Campbell says
that when he first visited the Downs, early in 1841, there was but one
bark humpy in that part of the colony. Sibley was camped under a tar-
paulin, whilst Hodgson and Eliott had a cloth tent, where the latter, the
son of a British admiral, was found trying his hand at a damper, with
sleeves rolled up, and in flour to the elbows. Yet these pioneers, living
a life of freedom in a glorious climate, amid surroundings of great beauty,
and engaged in work that promised ultimate profit to themselves and
rich reward to those who might come after them, were generally happy


and contented. They are certainly entitled to a full share of the admira-
tion which has been expressed for the spirit of independence that charac-
terised Noah and his sons when they set about the task of building the
Ark “ without asking for a penny of aid from the Government of the
day.” They had brought their flocks and herds to the new territory,
and it was essential to the success of the enterprise in which they had
embarked that means should be provided for getting their supplies from
and their produce to port. But the frowning coast range barred the way,
and though Cunningham had found a pass across one of its lower alti-
tudes, and similar discoveries were made elsewhere later, much hard
work, demanding unflinching determination, had to be done before the
roads could be made practicable for vehicular traffic. The squatters pos-
sessed the determination, and were equal to the work—they formed
themselves into road-parties, and drawing help in the shape of men
and teams from stations all over the Downs, entered upon the task of
clearing tracks across the range. The work was arduous, and some-
thing more than a spice of danger was added by the presence of bands
•of hostile blacks, who made occasional attacks upon stragglers from the
working parties; but it was accomplished.
The first supplies for the Downs, brought- up by dray, passed through
’Cunningham’s Gap in October, 1840. But owing to the steepness of
the eastern approach, the route proved a bad one, and it was soon
abandoned in favour of the easier track through what is known as the
Spicer’s Peak Gap. The Ctmningham’s Gap track, now so overgrown
with dense vine-scrub as to be almost impassable even for equestrian
traffic, crosses between Mount Cordeaux and the northern peak of
Mount Mitchell; the route by Spicer follows the pass between the
frowning peak of that name and the southern slope of Mount Mitchell.
It is said to have been discovered and marked by Harry Alphen, a
stockman in the employ of the Leslies, who was for a considerable time
in charge of their cattle station at Mount Sturt, where he no doubt ac-
quired his knowledge of the hill country. He received a reward from
the Government for discovering the new track; and this he invested
in a public-house, located at the western approach to the Gap. He
made a good deal of money, which he spent in erecting boiling-down
works on the Condamine near Warwick, at a point about a mile from
Millhill Railway Station. He engaged “ Tinker ” Campbell, the
original selector of Westbrook, as manager, but the venture failed owing
to the difficulties encountered in getting the tallow over the range to
port.
The Government authorised the employment of a few men to open
the Spicer’s Peak Gap track, money to defray their wages being sent up
from Sydney as opportunity offered to Patrick Leslie, who was en-
trusted with its disbursement. Later on, in the fifties, the late Mr. H.
E. Clinton, District Road Engineer, was transferred from the Too-


woomba end to the new track, and charged with the duty of making a
road over the range. He did his work admirably, and some miles of
the macadam on the summit section—laid down forty-five years ago —
may even now be cited as an example worthy of emulation by divisional
boards and municipal councils. A couple of days may be pleasantly
and profitably spent in a riding trip from Warwick to Ipswich by the
Gap road; recollections of the pioneers are revived at every mile,,
the scenery is charming, and some of the views magnificent
—notably that obtained from the “ Governor’s Chair ” (on the summit
of the Pass), so-called since Lord Lamington paid a visit to the spot
shortly before his departure from Queensland last year. Before
Queensland became a separate colony the Government of New South'
Wales had made a feature survev for a line of railway from Moreton
Bay through the Gap to the Downs, and the Spicer’s Peak route will
probably in due time again become the Via Recta.
FIRST WHITE WOMAN ON THE DOWNS.
In a paper dealing with the pioneering days, it will not be out of
place to devote a few moments to an effort to establish the identity of the
first white woman who came to the Downs, though it must be admitted
the evidence is not convincing. The honour is claimed for the late
Lady Hodgson, wife of Sir Arthur, who was formerly Miss Eliza Dowl-
ing, daughter of Sir James Dowling, at one time Chief Justice of New
South Wales; for Mrs. Patrick Leslie, who, as already stated, was a
Miss McArthur, and who Forbes says was “ the pioneer lady ”; and!
for Mrs. Allan Mclnnes, of Glencoe, near Warwick, who with her hus-
band came out with the Campbells from Scotland and accompanied
them to the Darling Downs, arriving soon after the Leslies. Sir Arthur
Hodgson, speaking at the dinner tendered to the present Governor of
Queensland on his departure from London, said that Lady Hodgson —
who came up after her marriage—was the first white woman who
reached the Downs; adding that, if they lived until the 30th of March
(1902), they would have reached 60 years of married life. That would
make April, 1842, the earliest possible date of Lady Hodgson’s arrival
on the Downs. Patrick Leslie’s Journal contains the following pas-
sage :—“On the 9th of September (1840) I was ‘spliced,’ and that is-
a day one does not forget.” It is hardly likely that he and his wife
came on to Canning Downs sooner than a month after that date; so
that Mrs. Patrick Leslie could scarcely have arrived before October,.
1840. Now, the Campbells, with whom were Allan Mclnnes and his-
wife, while crossing New England on their way to the Downs, met
Patrick Leslie on his way back to Sydney—probably on the trip which
resulted in his getting “ spliced.” This must have been prior to the
27th of July, 1840, the date on which Leslie left Maitland by steamer


for Sydney, and would seem to indicate that the Campbells’ party
arrived on the Downs during the latter half of 1840, in which event
Mrs. Mclnnes must necessarily have preceded Hodgson and his wife,
and in all probability Mrs. Leslie also.
THE ABORIGINES.
Though perhaps no finer hunting grounds could be found on the
western slopes of the coast range, the Darling Downs of Cunningham’s
time does not seem to have supported a very large aboriginal population.
The explorer saw frequent indications of the presence of blacks, but only
encountered them at occasional intervals'—on the banks of the Severn,
the Condamine, and Swan Creek. Of war or hunting parties or large
tribes he saw none, possibly because they were temporarily absent from
the narrow belt of country which he traversed, or because, in fear of their
strange visitors, they hid themselves in the forests and scrubs Those
who came later had closer contact with the blacks, who were found to be
more numerous than Cunningham supposed. They were crafty, but not
conspicuous for bravery. The tribes inhabiting the western side of the
district were the boldest; but as a rule they made war only upon shop-
herds and stockmen, very seldom venturing an organised attack against
station homesteads. The nameless graves of many scores of their victims
dot the Downs, but on the whole it may be said that they were more
sinned against than sinning, and when treated kindly they usually
respected the property of the settlers. Game of all kinds was plentiful
all over the Downs, so that there was little temptation, other than a desire
for change of diet', to interfere with the flocks and herds of the squatters.
Like most of the Queensland aborigines, from Killarney to Cape York,
coastal and inland, the Downs blacks were cannibals, and some at least of
the pioneers were afforded opportunities of acquiring a taste for human
flesh; the weight of credible testimony, however, goes to show that only
children were eaten. Tribal fights were frequent between the blacks in-
habiting the Eastern Downs country and those from the Mclntyre dis-
tricts to the westward, and the immediate neighbourhood of the spot on
which Warwick now stands was often chosen as the battle ground. Their
weapons were the spear, boomerang, stone-tomahawk, and nullarnulla for
attack, while they used a shield for defence ; the woomera was not used on
the Downs. Like the civilized warfai'e with which Britons have recently
been made familiar, the battles of the braves who sought glory on the
early fields of the Downs were fought at long range; and the casualty
lists were seldom alarming, often indeed being confined to the carrying-off
of a few lubras and the loss of more or less blood from wounds which as a
rule did not terminate fatally. The aboriginal warrior entertained a
wholesome respect for his enemy, and a still more wholesome respect for
his own skin, which he seemed anxious to preserve for the attentions of


the tattoo-artists of his tribe. Physically they were a fine race of
well formed, well fed, and free from the diseases and vices which quickly
followed upon contact with the whites. “ Old hands,” whose memory
carries them back to the time when, 40 years ago, tribes were still to be
seen in the vigour of health, will agree with the descriptions of those early
explorers who spoke of the blacks of what is now South Queensland as
“stout, clean-skinned, well made people”; . . . “tall, fine-per-
soned ” ; . . . “a fine, stately, well-formed race ; some of both sexes
good-looking, and many of the men 6 feet high.” In the early days the
blacks did good service for the squatters in many capacities, but they
rapidly disappeared before the onward march of civilisation ; and, though
not much more than half a century has elapsed since Cunningham’s im-
mediate successor first set foot on the Downs, the period has witnessed
the total disappearance of its original inhabitants. Scarcely one of the
Eastern Downs blacks survives to-day, a fact worthy of note—and, it
should be added, of some reflection.
THE EARLY TOWNS.
Warwick was one of the first Downs towns to spring into existence.
It dates back to 1847. Leslie was instructed by the Government of New
South Wales to select a spot for a township on the Condamine, below
Canning Downs. He did so, but he says, “it must have been in 1848
when the first settlement took place.” “ The Pocket,” under Summerhill,
then a Canning Downs horse-paddock, was first suggested as a suitable
site; but it was not approved. George Leslie had a sheep station where
Warwick now stands. The native name of the locality was Gooragooby,
while the racecourse reserve was called Toongooroo. The first sale of
Warwick town lots was held in 1848, and Patrick Leslie was the first pur-
chaser. He was instigated thereto, he says, by a sawyer named John
Russell, a well-known character in those days, who, when the first lot was
put up, addressed him in these words : —“ Come, Mr. Patrick Leslie, buy
the lot for luck; you were the first man here, be the first to buy.”
And Leslie bought the first allotment for £4. It was proposed to call
the place Canningtown, but the residents very properly objected, and at
their suggestion the name was changed to Warwick. The original town-
ship, a collection of rude bark and slab huts, was built on Hudson’s Hill
and the flat to the northward; and the line of what is now Alberhstreet—
then the main street—was the track on which were run the frequent
races peculiar to a young bush town in a “ horsey ” community. “ The
Flat ” proving subject to floods, the town gradually shifted to its present
situation on the higher ground to the westward. Dr. Lang, who in 1854,
crossed the Downs from Warwick to Drayton, described Warwick as
“ occupying a beautiful situation, and possessing all the requisites for a
first-class inland colonial town, including one of the finest climates irn-


aginable.” Sir George Bowen, Queensland’s pioneer Governor, paid bis
first official visit to Warwick in 1860, crossing the Main Range on horse-
back by the rough bridle-track through Cunningham’s Gap. The citizens
presented him with the inevitable address, couched in the florid
phraseology peculiar to such documents; and His Excellency proved
himself equal to the occasion. Having referred to the splendid welcome
they had given him to their “ rich and beautiful district,” and declared
that the numerous cavalcade of well-mounted horsemen which met and
escorted him into town presented a spectacle “ such as could be exhibited
in only two countries in the world—-England and Australia”—he went on
to refer to the “lovely scenery” and the “delicious climate” of the
place, and so laid the foundations of the loyalty which has ever since
been one of young Warwick’s most marked characteristics. But Sir
George Bowen was not the first Australian Governor who visited War-
wick. Six years previously Sir Charles Fitzroy came on to the Downs by
way of Drayton. He was the guest of Arthur Hodgson at Eton Yale,
Whitting at Pilton, and Patrick Leslie at Goomburra, on his way across
the Downs. His Excellency attended Divine service in Warwick, on Sun-
day, April Ist, 1854, and later lunched with Dr. Labatt, in the cottage
known as Canning Lodge, near Bracker’s Creek, overlooking what was
then the main road from New England across Canning Downs to the
Gap. Next day he set out for Brisbane by the Cunningham's Gap route,
stopping at Jubb’s for the night, and crossing the range on the Tuesday.
The first church service (Anglican) was held in Warwick on the 9th of
September, 1849, by good Canon (then the Rev. Benjamin) Glennie,
whose “ parish,” in the Diocese of Newcastle, embraced practically the
whole of what is now Queensland. The service was held in the old Horse
and Jockey Inn, which stood upon the site now occupied by the Com-
mercial Hotel, at the corner of Victoria and Palmerin streets. The first
newspaper was called the “ Warwick Mail ” ; it was l published in a build-
ing, long since demolished, at the south-east corner of Palmerin and Vic-
toria Streets. It survived only a few months, and Mr. Patrick Ritchie
then started the “ Warwick Argus,” the first issue of which appeared on
2nd November, 1864. The “ Examiner ” was established in 1867.
Drayton, first known as “ The Springs,” was founded about the
same time as Warwick, but was quickly overtaken and out-stripped by
its younger and more vigorous rival, Toowoomba, to-day the capital of
the Darling Downs, and one of the most- populous, as it is certainly one
of the most progressive of Queensland provincial towns. “ Too-
woomba” is said by some to be an aboriginal term signifying “ great in
the future,” while others declare it is the European corruption of a
blackfellow’s effort to pronounce the original name of the place—“ The
Swamp.” With its splendid position on the summit of the range, its
salubrious climate, the magnificent district by which it is surrounded,


its contiguitv to the metropolis, and the advantage it possesses in being
the point of junction of two main trunk lines of railway intersecting
the southern and western interior, it has but one drawback—a water-
supply insufficient for the needs of a town so populous as it is destined
to become before it marks its first century. Already its population is
some 15,000, and of late years the rate of progress has been far above
the average of Queensland towns generally. With the transition of the
Downs from the pastoral to tne agricultural stage of development, now
in rapid progress everywhere between Toowoomba and Warwick, the
former town mav hope to become ere long the capital of provincial
Queensland; but the hopes which its citizens cherished 40 years ago,
and gave expression to in the address which they presented to Governor
Bowen on his first visit—that Toowoomba might be chosen as the
political capital of the State—are hardly likely to be realised. The
oldest Toowoomba newspaper is the “ Darling Downs Gazette,"’ which
first saw the light in Drayton on the ilth of June, 1858.
Dalby, the town of next importance on the Downs, has made less
satisfactory progress than its eastern neighbours. Originally depen-
dent upon station trade, it is only now beginning to draw vitality from
the gradual spread of agricultural settlement in the surrounding dis-
trict; and there is reason for anticipating that there, too, the trans-
formation from pastoral to agricultural settlement will be attended
with results as beneficial to Dalby as they have been to Toowoomba
and Warwick.
Away back in the year 1844, there was one house where Allora
now stands —the residence of Neil Rosa and his family —but some years
later this was removed to Gladfield; and it was not until 1859 or 1860
that the town was established. To-day it is the centre of the largest
wheat-growing district in the State.
Cambooya was the administrative headquarters on the Downs in
1844, and it was there the Commissioner of Crown Lands, Mr.
Christopher Rolleston, resided. The place was then little better than
the hamlet it remains to this day.
Nearly all the other Downs towns belong to a later generation.
It is interesting to note that to the first Queensland Legislative
Assembly (which consisted of 26 members representing 16 electorates)
the Downs constituencies sent six members, or nearly one-fourth of the
House. The late St. George R. Gore was first member for Warwick;
he was elected by a majority of 13 votes over his opponent, Arnold
Wienholt, the numbers poned being—Gore 71, Wienholt 58. War-
wick’s first representative was Secretary for Lands and Works in the
first Ministry, formed by R. G. W. Herbert; he also held office later
under Macalister and Lilley. Gore died in 1872, and a monument to
his memory now stands in Cunningham Park.


John Watts was first member for Drayton and Toowoomba, Charles
Coxen for Northern Downs, and Pxfing for Eastern Downs, while
Moffat and Taylor sat for Western Downs.
PROGRESS OF DEVELOPMENT.
Half a century of pastoral occupation, one of the most remarkable
characteristics of which was the unwise policy of overstocking, wrought
a deplorable change in the condition of the Downs pastures. Cunning-
ham, Leslie, Leichhardt, Lang, and many others speak in enthusiastic
language of the incomparable luxuriance and richness of the grasses
which clothed the country when they first saw it, and which, indeed,
continued to flourish until 25 or 30 years ago ; but these have now
almost entirely disappeared, and are only seen in good seasons in pro-
tected strips within the railway fences. In such a pastoral paradise
cattle and sheep multiplied amazingly and fattened rapidly, and soon
the finding of markets for stock became a question of first importance
to station-owners. Curing and packing beef for export, and boiling
down for tallow were tried, but with scant success, and the ups and
downs continued till the discovery of gold in New South Wales and
Victoria sent values up to the levels recently unhoped for. Soon there
was ample money available for all classes of enterprise, and pastoral
occupation, theretofore confined to the Darling Downs and the southern
coast belt, quickly spread to the northward and westward. But other
causes were co-operating to bring about a change in the condition of
settlement on the Darling Downs, which up to the foundation of
Queensland as a separate colony, and indeed for some time after, had
been devoted almost exclusively to the feeding and breeding of sheep
and cattle, with isolated unsuccessful experiments (at Canning Downs
and East Talgai) in the direction of acclimatising the South American
llama and the Angora goat. Purely pastoral occupation was neces-
sarily the first stage of Darling Downs development. But with the
discovery of gold in Queensland, there followed a rapid accession of
wealth and population, and this brought with it conditions which called
into existence the second stage of development—the pastoral-agri-
cultural period —by creating such a demand for fan'll products as in-
duced many men, hitherto employed in the towns or on the stations, to
turn their attention to the cultivation of the soil. The rich land of
the Downs could not fail to attract notice; such areas as were available
for close settlement gave generous return for the labours of the hus-
bandman, and slowly, yet none the less surely, agriculture became not
only an established but even a popular industry. The cultivation of
maize, which had been grown with marked success in the rich lands of
the Condamine valley about Killarney from the time of the Leslies,
spread all over the Downs; wheat (first grown at Rosenthal by Bracker


and at Canning Downs by the Leslies in 1843) was cultivated in com-
mercial areas in the early sixties, and, was steadily persevered with
despite the ravages of rust and other scourges, until varieties suited to
the soil and climate were found or obtained by selection; lucerne (first
grown at Warroo in 1849) was cultivated in steady increasing areas ;
while other crops also claimed attention in suitable localities. Flour
mills were erected in Warwick and other centres, and settlement and
production progressed steadily until the needs of producer and con-
sumer alike called for the facilities for commerce and development
which railways alone can supply in a country devoid of navigable
waterways. These, giving agriculturists easy access to markets, and
opening up the cheaper pastoral country of the west, heralded the next
step in the development of the Downs l —the transition from the agri-
cultural-pastoral to the purely agricultural period. The bulk of the
best lands were parted with to the early squatters, but are being re-
acquired by the ocate to meet the necessities of the new conditions, and
already innumerable farm houses are to be seen now where but a little
while ago only an occasional boundary rider’s hut was encountered.
But hundreds of thousands of acres still remain to be similarly dealt
with before the full fruits of Cunningham's discovery are enjoyed by
.the people of Australia.
CONCLUSION.
This hasty survey of a period of history so interesting to us is mainly a
record of the doings of some of those who helped, more or less, to bring
about the progress we have made and the prosperity we enjoy. How far
any one man is entitled to the credit of that progress and that prosperity
is a question upon which people may differ. Indeed, one set of philoso-
phers holds that the influence of this or that individual on social develop-
ment is, in all cases, more apparent than real. But this teaching has not
been accepted by the world; for the world loves to connect great men
with important movements and mighty events, and to think that, but for
those men, the movements and events would not have taken place.
Hero-worship, it is well to be able to say, has not yet become unfashion-
able, for a nation would be poor indeed without its idols, even though
mankind be only too much disposed to lay incense upon unworthy
shrines. Consequently I make no apology for asserting that, among the
many men I have mentioned, there is one at least who should never
be spoken of unless with gratitude and reverence —Allan Cunningham ;
and so great is the admiration I have for his merits and achievements
that I am prepared to abide by the maxim that the idol is the measure
of the worshipper. He is by far the most conspicuous figure ini our
unpretentious annals, and it was through him in the first place that the
Darling Downs is now the home of a. prosperous and con-


tented people of his own speech and blood. Had he never been born,
it is true, this fair region would in time have been discovered and oc-
cupied. But many years might have elapsed before such an event
came to pass, and perhaps many more before a route was found across
the mountains from the new territory to the sea.
It has been said that if any one of the illustrious dead were permitted
to return to earth he would revisit first the scene of the greatest moment
of his life. There can be no difficulty in deciding what that moment was in
the life of Allan Cunningham. It was on that day, seventy-five years
ago, when he stood on Mount Dumaresq, looking down on an endless suc-
cession of hills and dales, watered by many streamlets, rivalling in loveli-
ness the glories of landscape Nature and Art had combined to produce in
the most favoured portions of his native country. A man of cultivated
mind and poetic temperament, he must have had, at that moment,
thoughts not shared by his companions; though they, too, must have
been stirred by unwonted emotions at a sight so long unfamiliar to them —
“ the living gleam of rustling woods, and the glint of laughing waters.”
Did he foresee, or see as in a vision, the marvels that were to be wrought
in that beautiful region by his own race, prompted by his words and en-
couraged by his example ? Did he foresee that the tract, now observedl
for the first time by European eyes, was about to pass quickly through all
the stages by which nations ordinarily proceed, painfully and slowly, from
primitive barbarism to civilisation ? Did he foresee that within the life-
time of some who were his intimate friends, the land he knew to be only
the hunting-ground of thinly-scattered savage tribes would become the
home of “ shepherd-kings,” with their countless flocks and herds ? Did he*
foresee that at a later period this useful and necessary class would, in
turn, give place slowly and perhaps unwillingly, yet inevitably, to cul-
tivators of the soil who would make the Darling Downs both the gar-
den and the granary of Queensland ?
Let us hope that some such thoughts as these passed through his mind;
for his was a nature which would be solaced by such reflections, and in
truth was sadly in need of such consolation. For it must be confessed
that, splendid as were his services, they were never adequately rewarded
by his contemporaries. For great conquerors and devastators the world
has meed enough and to spare; but, it deigned to bestow little attention
on this ardent and intrepid explorer—who, too, was a. soldier, but a peace-
ful soldier of civilisation, perpetually incurring the risks and hardships of
the battle-field without reaping its glory or its reward. It behoves us, as
residents of the Darling Downs, to endeavour to make some atonement,
tardy though it be, for this neglect of a truly great man; and not to
content ourselves with naming a square here, and a street there, and an
electoral division elsewhere, after our benefactor. Every important town
on the Downs ought to have some visible memorial of him. Above all,
the centenary of the event which has made him famous, which some of us


may hope to take part in, ought not to ba allowed to pass without due
•observance and fitting ceremonial. When that day comes, the Darling
Downs will in all probability be one of the most populous and flourishing
districts of Australia., exhibiting a quick succession of wheat-fields and
orchards, interrupted only by thriving towns, renowned, let us hope, no
less as intellectual than as great industrial centres; it will certainly be in
a much better position than now to do honour to its discoverer.
Whatever shape the celebration may take, let me express the hope
that Warwick will play a conspicuous part therein, and that, in even a
finer hall than this, before as distinguished an audience as the present one,
a more eloquent voice than mine will do ampler justice to the high cour-
age, the resolute spirit, the noble ideals of duty, and the eminent
public services of Allan Cunningham.
Before the reading of the paper, the President (Right Hon. Sir Hugh M. Nelson,
K.C.M.G., D.C.L.) said it had been contemplated for some time past, with a view to
more effectively carry out the objects of the Society—viz., the spreading of geo-
graphical knowledge—to hold meetings in some of the provincial towns of the State.
Hitherto the meetings had always been held in Brisbane, and he thought it very
appropriate, in making a departure from their old-time custom, that they should have
chosen, as the scene of their first country meeting, the oldest inland town in the colony
■of Queensland. They were particularly fortunate also in having enlisted
the endeavours of the Hon. A. Morgan—a gentleman who had been born on the spot,
who was justly proud of his native land, and who was to favour them during the even-
ing with a paper on the history of the Darling Downs. The object for which
the Society existed was one now attracting the attention of the whole civilized
world, for it was one of the main factors in the great scheme of education ; in fact,
the Society regarded itself a-> a part of the Education Department. The object of its
members was to induce their fellow-colonists to take an interest in the great science
of geography. The old system of teaching geography—the system that obtained in
the days of his youth—was now entirely obsolete, and had been superseded by the
modern system of a qualified teacher taking his pupils to the country, leaving aside
book and map knowledge, and confronting them with the country in all the aspects
depicted by Nature. This system had been in vogue ir Germany and America, and
was now being adopted in England and Scotland. It seemed strange how very little
most people knew respecting the country in which they were privileged to live. The
country they (his hearers) inhabited was scarcely two generations old; in fact, the
period from the time it was first settled until now could be comprised in the lifetime
of some still living. Yet how few of them knew what had taken place in those early
days! After paying a tribute to the work of those who had pioneered the country,
the speaker said he thought it was a duty they owed not only to themselves, but also
to the rising generation, to have recorded and brought to mind the achievements of
the early settlers. That was the object of the present meeting. Mr. Morgan would
deal with the historical aspect of the great science of geography, as affecting this
particular portion of the State, and he anticipated, therefore, that what they would
hear that night would prove instructive and most interesting. The Society intended
treating this as one of its ordinary meetings. It was certainly one of the largest they
had held, and he was glad to note that the new departure had brought together such
R brilliant and intelligent audience. (Applause.)


After the reading of the paper, His Excellency the Governor (Major-General
Sir Herbert Chermside, G.C.M.G., C. 8., Patron) said he had been asked by the
President to add a few remarks on the subject of the meeting. He congratulated the
President and Secretary of the Society on the success attending the experiment of
holding meetings away from the city. The great merit of these societies was their
popularity and universality, and it was of the greatest interest to see geography
making its way as a popular science. The able and interesting paper just read by
Mr. Morgan had proved very edifying to the members, and was particularly so to the
inhabitants of Warwick. He had ventured on the making of these remarks,
not with the intention of dealing in detail with that paper, but rather as a
means of introducing himself to his hearers. Unfortunately, the present
moment was one of such distress in all conditions of life throughout the
State that it was hardly a time when one could wish to travel and look at things in a
light-hearted way. But at some opportune time he hoped to come amongst them
again. He had had an opportunity that night of hearing the genesis of
the settlement of this splendid Darling Downs district traced so ably from the
beginning—its discovery by Allan Cunningham, the experiences of the pioneers who
followed him, and the development now taking place. To him it had been of the
highest interest to observe that every allusion made by Mr. Morgan to the transition
from pastoral to agricultural occupation should have met with their approval. He
had read of the early remark that the country was only fit for the raising of sheep,
but what a triumphant contradiction to that belief was the present condition of the
Downs ! The story he had heard traced that night was the history of only one dis-
trict in these colonies, but in essence they were all the same ; the enterprising
achievements of the pioneers, and their overcoming of all obstacles, were an example
to the whole world. The development of the pastoral, agricultural and mineral
industries of Queensland had taken place in a short space of time—almost in the
lifetime of some men now present. Mr. Morgan had alluded in his paper to what had
been done in the past, to what was now being done, and to the possibilities of the
future. But it struck him that the future of this continent, the future of this State,
depended on the practical application of engineering science, and he hoped the
greatest attention would be paid by the rising generation to that subject, and to the
development of the soil of the country. Ultimately the wealth of the country would
be in proportion to its production. But while they possessed the soil and the
climate, they had no control over the third great agent necessary, viz., water. In
this connection, His Excellency instanced the benefits of storage and irrigation in
sub-tropical lands elsewhere, and hoped that in the future the subject would have the
early attention of those who directed the fortunes of the State. He concluded by
thanking his hearers for their kind reception of his remarks.
The Hon. John Murray, Minister for Public Instruction (who represented the
Government), in alluding to Mr. Morgan’s interesting and instructive paper, referred
to the great future in store for the Darling Downs, and the progress now being made
in agriculture. The Government fully recognised the wisdom of continuing its policy
of buying up the large estates. The success attending that policy so far had been
encouraging, and soon the whole of the large Downs estates would be bought up and
settled upon. He concluded by tendering an apology for the absence of the Premier.
On the motion of Mr. R. M. Collins (Past President), a very cordial vote of
thanks was tendered to Mr. Morgan for his valuable paper.
The President said it was usual at their meetings to have discussion or
criticism on the subjects brought forward, and he hoped he would not be considered
hypercritical if he dealt with some of the facts in the paper just read. In the first
place they knew that he (the speaker) was a Queenslander, but he was also a
Scotchman ; they also knew that, whenever any man distinguished himself, he was


almost invariably claimed as one of Scotland’s sons. Now, he was going to claim
Allan Cunningham as a Scotchman. (Laughter.) Mr. Morgan had told them that
Allan Cunningham was born in England; but if a man was born in a stable it did
not follow that he was a horse. Allan’s father was a Scotchman who emigrated to
England and married an English wife ; they had two sons—Allan and Richard. The
second point to which he would allude was Mr. Morgan’s reference to Mr. Elliot,
the partner of Sir Arthur Hodgson at Eton Vale, as the first Speaker of the
Queensland Assembly. Having seen this statement mentioned by one of their
distinguished writers, and also included in the official “ Year Book,” he had made
inquiries with a view to verifying it. He would quote from a letter he had received
from Sir Arthur Hodgson to show that that gentleman’s partner was not
identical with the first Speaker of the Assembly ; in fact they spelt their
names differently. Sir Arthur said: “My first partner was Gilbert Elliot;
he joined me in 1840, having up to that date been A.D.C. to Sir George
Gipps. He was a son of the Admiral, who was a brother of Earl Minto. Elliot
married a sister of St. George and Ralph Gore. He died at Kangaroo Point from
consumption—such a nice fellow. His widow is still alive at Torquay. Gilbert
Elliot’s father and our late Speaker’s (Eliott) were connected, but not very nearly
related. The Speaker’s brother was a Baronet, of Stobbs, Roxburghshire. You are
of course perfectly right in assuming that my late partner was not our first Speaker 1
he was P.M. at Parramatta previous to his coming to Brisbane. He once had a
small station in New England.” The third point was a rather delicate one—as to
who was entitled to the honour of being the pioneer lady of the Darling Downs.
Notwithstanding Mr. Morgan’s facts—which were undoubtedly the best he had been
enabled to collect —he (the speaker) claimed that the late Lady Hodgson, whose
death they had read of only last week, was entitled to that honour. And he would
quote from another of Sir Arthur’s letters in support of his contention. Sir Arthur
wrote : “ Lady Hodgson was the first lady on the Downs, Mrs. St. George Gore (Yan-
dilla) the second, Mrs. Holland (Tummaville) the third; Mrs. Patrick Leslie (longo
intervallo ) at Canning Downs. The first squatters were Patrick, Walter and George
Leslie, Hodgson and Elliot, Sibley and King ; about ten months later George Gammie,
Dalrymple. Shaw, ‘ Tinker ’ Campbell, and the Campbells (3) of Glengallan appeared
on the scene. By looking at her journal Lady Hodgson tells me that ‘we arrived at
Eton Vale as a newly-married couple on May 29th, 1842.’” He had to thank Mr.
Morgan for his interesting address, showing evidence of extensive research, and
which the Society would print and publish through all kindred societies over the
civilized world. He thought the paper was a splendid contribution to their historical
records, seeing that the Darling Downs was the first part of the State settled by
free men. Also it was gratifying to all the members to have met such a magnificent
gathering in Warwick, and he hoped the society would continue with its country
meetings.
Hon. A. Morgan, in acknowledging the vote of thanks, said he felt bound to say a
word or two on the three points of the President’s indictment. First: In regard to
the nationality of Allan Cunningham, as to parentage honours were easy, for Allan’s
father was Scotch, while his mother was English. But Allan was born in England.
Sir Hugh had pointed out that there were two sons; he (the speaker) would
give him Richard, and take Allan. Second: In having described Sir Arthur
Hodgson’s partner as the first Speaker he had done some service to the accuracy of
history. The authority upon which he made the statement was the historical section
of the “ Year Book of Queensland,” an official publication. They knew now that the
authority erred in that particular respect. Third : He was sure, now that he had the
dates and order of Mrs. Hodgson’s and Mrs. P. Leslie’s arrival on the Downs, that
his case was stronger than that of the other side, and was more than ever satisfied


that the first white woman on the Darling Downs was Kate MTnnes. The last
extract from Sir Arthur Hodgson’s letter, read by the President, taken in connection
with the facts he had supplied as to Colin Campbell’s party, and the date
of their arrival on the Downs, made it pretty clear. On behalf of the
audience, he. expressed the pleasure they all felt at seeing His Excellency
amongst them. (Applause.) In honouring the Society with his presence he had also
honoured the town of Warwick ; and they hoped that, notwithstanding the distressful
state of the country, he would find here something to interest and something to
admire, that he would enjoy his visit, and that at no very distant date they would
have the honour and pleasure of welcoming His Excellency on his first official visit to
Warwick. (Applause.)


Outridge Printing Co., 398 Queen Street, Brisbane.






