

THE QUEEN
The Archbishop of Canterbury crowns
The Queen with St. Edward’s Crown, but
when Her Majesty leaves Westminster
Abbey she wears the Imperial State Crown,
which was made for Queen Victoria. The
Orb is the symbol of Royal Power under the
Cross. During the Coronation Service Her
Majesty carries two sceptres: the Royal
Sceptre with the Cross, which has in its head
the Star of Africa, cut from the magnificent
Cullinan diamond, and the Sceptre with the
Dove, which signifies justice and mercy. The
oil with which The Queen is anointed is
poured into the spoon from the Ampulla,
which is in the form of a golden eagle. The
Ring, which is put on The Queen’s finger,
is known as ‘The Wedding Ring of Eng-
land’. The Jewelled Sword, one of the five
Swords of State, is said to be the most
beautiful and valuable sword in the world.
St. George’s Spurs, made of gold, symbolize
chivalry.
ST. EDWARD S
CROWN
IS CROWNED
THE QUEEN
The ancient Abbey of Westminster, crowning-place
for nine hundred years of the Kings and Queens of
England, today holds a glittering array of thousands of
people. They come from all parts of the British
Commonwealth and countries beyond, and many of them
wear bright robes and flashing jewels. The Queen is
acclaimed by her subjects, led by the boys of West-
minster School. Her Majesty takes the Coronation Oath,
is anointed with oil, and presented with Spurs, the
Sword of State, the Sceptres, the Orb and the Ring.
Now, as she sits on King Edward’s Chair, which con-
tains the Stone of Destiny, the Archbishop of Canter-
bury solemnly places the Crown upon her head. On
seeing this The Queen’s subjects cry out ‘God Save the
Queen!’ again and again. Silver trumpets sound, and
from the Tower of London and St. James’s Park guns
fire in salute to our gracious Queen. As the bells ring
from London to Canberra, Westminster Abbey resounds
with joyful shouts:
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
came to the throne when her well-
beloved father King George VI died
on February 6, 1952. Many parts IJ»
of the Commonwealth heard the mfj JtKa Ilf
Proclamation. In London heralds
proclaimed to the people: ‘The High pip
and Mighty Princess Elizabeth Alex- j
andra Mary is now become Queen \ \\ y.
Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace \\\ wmmv
of God Queen of this Realm and of ML
all her other Realms and Territories,
Head of the Commonwealth’. Now XL } V/ r
after many months of preparation
comes the magnificent ceremony of
Her Majesty’s Coronation. The
splendid pageantry which has grown up with the crowning of the long line of
Kings and Queens again blazes forth in the streets of London and in West-
minster Abbey. Near and far the peoples of the British Commonwealth join
together in joyful celebration of this memorable and glorious day.
THE ORB OF ENGLAND
IMPERIAL
STATE CROWN
St. George’s Spurs, made of gold, symbolize SX -
Rivalry y mar
THE ROYAL SCEPTRES
Buckingham Palace —Home Again
GOD SAVE QUEEN ELIZABETH!
LONG LIVE QUEEN ELIZABETH!


Admiralty Arch and Captain Cook’s statue
The Horse Guards
Piccadilly C ire us
Buckingham Palace
Trafalgar Square
Australia House
Westminster Abbey
Houses of Parliament
tM-
iS'
