

LAWS OF LIFE AID DEATH,
1 DISCODESE AND SKETCH
Delivered in St. Enoch's United Presbyterian Chiirch, Melbourne , on the
<)th January , 1870,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
REV. A. M. RAMSAY,
ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Chtirch, Fitzroy, Melhmirnc.
Httlbonitu :
PUBLISHED BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXX.


-■
.
,


LAWS OF LIFE AID DEATH,
A DISCOURSE AND SKETCH
Delivered in St. Enoch's United Presbyterian Church , Melbourne , on the
gth January , 1870,
ON THE OCCASION OP THE DEATH OF THE
REV. A. M. RAMSAY,
ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Church, Fitzroy, Melbourne.
UHlbottmt:
PUBLISHED BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCOCIXX.


MKL.BOURNE :
PRINTED BV WAU.KER, MAY AND CO.,
99 BOURKIE STREET WEST.


NOTE.
The following sermon and sketch are published to meet the felt
want of the relatives, members of the bereaved church, and
friends of the deceased pastor. It ought to he mentioned that
they are committed to the press with great diffidence, owing to
their preparation in the midst of scenes of sorrow, and while
suffering under severe personal depression. Let them prove
only a memento of departed worth, and be the means of awaken-
ing and perpetuating the recollections not only of Christian and
ministerial excellence, but of simple and soul-saving gospel truth,
then an object is gained, in which angels themselves can rejoice.
They form a poor and inadequate tribute to one, whose graces shone
with no ordinary lustre, and if they will aid even in a small degree
in soothing and cheering the sorrowing heart of the bereaved
wife, family, and friends, and helping any one forward, amid
the briars and thorns of life, in the journey to a better land, then
glory will accrue to God, and duty to man will not have been
discharged altogether in vain.
E. H.


REST UN HEAVEN.
My rest is in heaven, my 7 rest is not here,
Then why should I murmrar when trials are near ?
Be hushed, my sad spirit;, the worst that can come
But shortens my journey, and hastens me home.
It is not for me to he seelking my hliss,
And building my hopes iin a region like this;
I look for a city which hiands have not piled,
I pant for a country by sin undefiled.
The thorn and the thistle: around me may grow,
I would not sit down upmn roses below ;
I ask not my portion, I s<eek not my rest,
Until I shall find them im Jesus’ kind breast.
Afflictions may damp me—they cannot destroy,
One glimpse of His love turns them all into joy ;
And the bitterest tears, if He smile but on them,
Like dew in the sunshine, grow diamond and gem.
With a scrip on my back, and a staff in my hand,
I am marching on to Immanuel’s land ;
The way may be rough, hut it cannot be long,
So I’ll smooth it with hope, and I’ll cheer it with song.


THE LAWS OF LIFE AND DEATH.
“ Our Saviour Jesus Christ hath abolished death.”—2 Tim. i. 10.
Death to the natural mind presents a subject of intense and
awful gloom. The powers of reason fail to unravel the mystery,
or dispel the darkness which hangs around the mansions of the
dead. Man may moralise on that law of nature, under which
his race are cut down and laid prostrate in the dust, like the
wrain of the harvest-field, under the reaper’s sickle, but his
speculations bring him to no satisfactory conclusions. That,
which the unaided power of the human mind cannot teach, on the
subject of mortality, the revelation of God can illustrate. The
glorious gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ sheds a flood of light, on
man’s present condition and his future destiny. It is in the
Bible alone, we find information, respecting the character and
government of God, which at once removes perplexity, and brings
peace and comfort to our minds. In the Scriptures we ascertain,
that while God is infinitely good, wise, and beneficent, yet He
can, in perfect consistency, send death to ravage the earth and
crush the human family. ’From the words of inspiration, we
learn, that the nature and perfections of Jehovah require,
imperatively, that death should be executed as a penalty
against the transgression of His law. The order, peace,
and safety of the universe make the same demand. Death
is a vindication of divine law,—a solemn protest against
the sin of man, an alarming announcement from the
eternal world, that the harmony of God’s universal govern-
ment, has been seriously disturbed, by the proceedings of
this world’s inhabitants. At the same time, under the same
authoritative teaching, we find, that through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus, there has been made an astonishing display of
wisdom and power, love and mercy, on the part of God, whereby
the lost harmony of the divine dominion may be restored, and the
human family may be rescued from the cruel tyranny of death.
The purpose of the Almighty is, that in His own time and way,
“ death shall be swallowed up of victory.” The gospel of the
blessed Jesus, then, unlocks the mysterious dispensations of divine
providence. The law is maintained, and yet death overcome.
Justice and grace act in harmony. There is no collision between
judicial authority and sovereign mercy. We need have no


hesitation in believing, that it cannot be from any pleasure in the
miseries of mankind, that God permits death to reign. We have
overwhelming evidence of this, in the mission and work of His
only begotten and well-beloved Son. The great task which
Christ was appointed to accomplish, through His incarnation,
sufferings, and crucifixion, was that of overthrowing the awful
empire of the King of terrors. The Redeemer who interposed
in His grace, “to take the prey from the mighty,” has achieved
the victory. The old enemy of man lies chained at His feet.
“ He who liveth was dead, and behold, is alive for evermore, and
has the keys of hell and of death.” Jesus conquered, for the
express purpose of delivering man. He now waits, therefore, to
pardon, bless, and save sinners who come to Him. On behalf of
all who believe, renounce the world, and live to His glory, He
will triumph over the full power of the enemy. That this is the
mighty purpose of His grace, towards believing and penitent
sinners, is manifest from the whole character and work of Christ
Jesus, especially from His resurrection, and exaltation to power
and glory in the highest heavens. He is therefore competent to
say to all men, “ Him that cometh to me I shall in no wise
cast out,” for “He hath abolished death.” Consider —
I.—THE LAW OP DEATH under which mankind have been placed.
Under the guidance of mere reason, it seems mysterious that
it should have been possible for death to find room, any where,
in the dominions of the Most High. The inspired volume,
however, has been given in order to throw light on the dark
subject. And, although all may not be revealed which natural
curiosity would like to ascertain, yet there is certainly a sufficient
amount of clear testimony given, to enable us to determine, that
the character and government of God do not suffer, in the least
degree, by the permission of the reign of death in our world. So
far from the perfections of the Eternal being stained by the
existence of the dominion of mortality amongst men, they are
made to shine forth with a vast enhancement of lustre, through
the victorious achievements of mercy, in the scheme of redemption.
It is of the highest consequence, then, to look to the witness
which God bears with regard to the fearful rule of death to which
men are subject.
This Law is the effect of six. —“ By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death has passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned.” If man had not sinned, certainly
the great destroyer of life would not have been allowed to enter
the fair and blessed domain, which God originally assigned to
him, and his race in this world. The foul track of this terrible
foe would never have been seen in the inheritance given to man.
Life in all its highest conditions of health and happiness, with-
out any sad and sorrowful modifications, would have been his
portion.


And it is not simply the stroke that severs the tie between
body and soul that has resulted from sin. The law of dissolution
embraces the whole train of sighs and tears, sorrows and suffer-
ings, which are man’s lot from the cradle to the grave. These,
viewed in connection with the more repulsive features
connected with the immediate breaking up of the
earthly tabernacle, render the final execution of the
law of mortality, an object of great and general dread.
Contemplating this terrible law in a wider aspect, it includes all
that fearful variety of physical and mental, personal and social
ills, to which flesh is heir. The more extraordinary evils, as well
as the less, are equally embraced. Famine, earthquakes, and
plagues —or disasters by war, on land and sea —or wreck and ruin
by tempest, fire, and flood, are bitter burning elements, which enter
into the dark reign of terror, that is ever spreading its wasting
shadow over the earth. Every pain is a symptom of coming
doom ; every sigh is a signal of distress ; every tear is the wail
of impending destruction ; and when the fiery law has given its
last shock to the frail house, in which the soul is tenanted, how
appalling the effect! The strongest arm is weakness, the boldest
heart cowardice, the stoutest frame helplessness, the most shining
beauty loathsomeness. This monstrous power laughs to scorn
the profoundest skill, the most heroic efforts, and the richest bribes
to arrest his stroke.
And what is it that arms death with such power ? What is it
that invests the death-bed with such repulsiveness ? What is it,
in the pale face, the sunken eye, the wasted frame, the last
breath, the shroud, the pall, the funeral march, the grave, that
inspire with so much dismay ? Undoubtedly, it is sin. “ The
sting of death,” says the holy oracle, “is sin.” Were it not for
moral guilt, death would be harmless. If it were possible for
this ghastly dominion to exist in a world of innocence and
purity, it would doubtless be divested of its terrors. It -would
be no longer painful, loathsome, and an object of fear. It is sin,
that gives death power to hurt and destroy, renders it a penal
law, and surrounds it with all the terrific aspects of a malignant
and desolating reign.
This Law is ieeesistible in its opeeation.- —How utterly
helpless is man in the presence of this conqueror ! Ho skill or
forethought, no health or happiness, no wealth or power, no
panoply or fortress, no artillery or bulwark, can avail against his
deadly thrusts. He is an enemy that no bribe can disarm, a
monster no power can crush, a tyrant no hero can vanquish.
Amid all the changes of dynasties that occur amongst men—
amid the rise and fall of the mighty empires of the world, his
iron rule seems to remain unbroken. And why is it
that death is irresistible? Just because of sin. Man being a
breaker of law, this penal power seizes him as its legal victim.
Sin is the sword of punishment, the law of Hod is the authority,
man is the criminal, death is the executioner, and ruin is the result.


Sin lias made man chaff, which death sweeps away—stubble,
which death consumes—a frail, rotten vessel, which death
dashes to pieces on the rocks. No wonder, then, that sinful man
cannot parry his blows, or, by any possible means of his own
contrivance, survive his assaults ; and, until he is delivered by a
power superior to his own, yea, superior to that by which he is
oppressed—until he is saved by an almighty arm, by sovereign
mercy, and by boundless love, he must lie for ever crushed under
the tremendous weight of death’s dominion.
This Law is universal nr its action. The Word of God
plainly declares that the universality of the death-law is on
account of the universality of sin. “ Death has passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned.” In Adam all sin, and in Adam
all die. If there ever had been an individual member of the
family of man who had been in all respects perfectly free
from sin, he could not have died. It is no doubt within
the province of Jehovah to take the life, which He origin-
ally created, from any intelligence, though remaining perfectly
sinless. But, from the Revelation, which He has given us of His
will, it does not appear ever to be His pleasure, to destroy the
being of any pure rational creature that He has formed, or
subject any holy spirit, by an arbitrary act of His will, to the
change involved in death. The law of life, we may presume,
reigns universally, among faultless subjects of the Divine govern-
ment ; while the law of death pervades the whole realm of sin.
As all mankind, then, have broken the moral law, no one can be
exempted from the visitation of the penal consequences. It is
in vain we search the records of history to find even one who has
escaped the stroke of the avenger. Notwithstanding the extreme
age of the antideluvian patriarchs, they died. No matter how
favourable the circumstances for longevity, in which any indi-
vidual, family, or tribe has been placed, by reason of climate,
medicine, food or clothing; all have, without one exception, come
under the law of death. Under every dispensation, under every
form of government, under every system of philosophy and
religion, not one of the mighty myriads who have composed the
human family, has ever survived. The tradition respecting one
of Judah’s descendants resisting the assaults of the great
arch foe, and wandering to and fro on the face of the
earth, without ever being seen is, of course, mere fable.
It is true that the most ancient book in the world tells us of
two of Adam’s descendants, ‘ who were not, because God took
them,’ ‘ who were translated that they should not see death.’
It is plain, however, that they did not form exceptions, in the full
meaning of the term. They certainly did not retain life in this
sinful world, resisting all the encroachments of disease and the
assaults of the great enemy, and exhibiting themselves to all suc-
ceeding generations as successful rivals to the mighty potentate.
According to the declarations that “ flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God,” “we shall not all sleep, but we shall all


be changed,” there can be no doubtthat Enoch and Elijah under-
went a transformation equivalent to death. If they had not been
translated they must have died. It was by almighty power and
sovereign mercy, that they were exempted from the law of mor-
tality, operating in the usual manner. These extraordinary and
exceptional cases was intended to prove, that, through the re-
deeming love of God, death’s dominion could be overthrown, and
immortal life secured in another and better world. And it was
also designed to illustrate the final victory of God’s people, “when
the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed,”
and “ the saying shall be brought to pass that is written, Death is
swallowed up in victory, —0 death, where is thy sting ? 0 grave,
where is thy victory ?”
The law of death, then, is universal. The breath of sin, like the
atmosphere, encircles the earth, entering into all the pulsations
of human life, affecting all the operations of human society, and
withering and blasting every aspiration after a deathless being.
No rank or class—no generation, ancient or modern, has ever
escaped, or ever can escape, the influence of the sceptre that is
swayed over the earth by the grim monarch of the grave. The
palaces of royalty, and the huts of poverty are alike subjected to
the visitations of the enemy. On everyone is inscribed the in-
evitable sentence, “ Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return.”
This Law is a vikbxcation of Divihe authority. —ln the
connection subsisting between sin and death, we are called to
witness the manifestation of sovereign power, and righteous
judgment. The reign of death over a sinful race, is a necessity of
wise and holy government.' Sin is not only a violation of law, it
is also to be regarded as a criminal offence, against the infinite
Majesty of Heaven. It was absolutely required, therefore, that
the heinousness of sin should be clearly marked, by the tremen-
dous awfulness of its consequences. If supreme government
were not decisive in dealing with crime, the results would be
fatal to its own stability. Any slackness displayed in punishing
rebellion would amount to a patronising of wickedness, and an
encouragement offered to treason. Now sin is an extreme evil,
and requires to be visited with an extreme penalty. Viewing sin
as an offence committed against reason and revelation; against
the goodness, the power and the majesty of God; against the
interests of mankind and the glory of Divine government;
against the purity and peace, the harmony and blessedness of the
universe, —it must be acknowledged that death is nothing more
than the adequate penalty. Every sin regarded in its proper
light, is insurrection against the throne of the Eternal —aims at
overturning the moral government of heaven,—is a declaration of
war against all the principles of stable, wise and blissful authority.
Sin on the part of man is an alliance formed with the rebellion of
hell. It is a wicked combination of spiritual and earthly forces,
to baffle and destroy the infinite supremacy of God, in ruling


heaven and earth. A radical evil like sin requires a radical
remedy. It would he impossible to find in equity a milder
penalty than death, in order to meet the necessities of G-od’s
government. As we mournfully gaze, then, on the widespread
and awful desolation which death has occasioned among the
human race, during the past ages of the world, we simply see
the righteousness, and goodness, as well as sternness, and severity
of the divine law, for the punishment of evil, and the protection
of the interests of universal being.
This law affects both body and soul. —Death viewed as a
penalty cannot be confined to man’s material part. It is with the
powers of the immortal mind that sin is committed by man
against his Maker. If death, therefore, affected simply his
physical constitution, it would not be a full or an efficient
punishment,—it would not be a thorough vindication of govern-
ment. Supposing the dissolution of the body, were all that is
involved in the penalty attached to sin, then the soul, which is
indestructible, would doubtless go on for ever, in a career of
rebellion, and being unpunished, would riot, through the ceaseless
ages of its being, in the gratification of its malignant propensities ;
and its destructive rage would remain unchecked and free, as if
it were perfectly holy and harmless. Were death nothing more
than the termination of earthly being, the disruption of temporal
ties, the endurance of pain, or a coming under the power of
physical corruption,—then the dread of the last enemy would
easily be dispelled. But death is to be regarded as an evil of
comprehensive and tremendous intensity, not only wrenching
asunder the union existing between the corporeal, and the
spiritual parts, but seizing on the soul in its separate condition,
punishing it according to its nature and capacities, thrusting it
away from the life and happiness which are inseparable from
holiness, filling it with the horror, suffering, and anguish, which
constitute the ruin of a lost, and yet deathless spirit, arousing
the conscience to a full sense of its enormous guilt, and over-
whelming the whole being with the storms and waves of an
everlasting tribulation.
We are not able to describe, because it is impossible to
imagine, in what way an undying soul is affected by death in the
invisible world. It is evident, that the language employed in
Scripture to express the punishment of sin, by what is called
death, in that future state in which the soul is, fully, not partially,
as in this life, subjected to suffering, is of the most descriptive,
solemn, and awful character. “ The wrath of God,” “ the wrath
of the Lamb,” are some of the expressions which are employed
to convey anidea of divine judgment, inflicted on unpardoned man.
And the effects produced by that wrath on the frail body, in the
event of dissolution, must be well fitted to convey an idea of the
disastrous results, which shall be produced on the soul, in the spirit-
world. We have also first-fruits, faintly set forth, in the mental
distress, the excruciating spiritual anguish, the delirium and


madness, the suicides and murders, which many times preseht
themselves in human experience. “If they do these things in
the green tree, what shall be done in the dry ? ” The ideas, we can
form of the spiritual nature, when fully subjected to the agency of
death, are necessarily vague. Certainly there is not the slightest
warrant from Scripture, to regard the punishment by death as an
absolute blotting out of being,—as annihilation. We know
nothing in nature of an entire abolition of existence. Time, fire,
death, the great destroyers, so far as their effects come under our
notice, abolish nothing utterly. They only change the substances
on which they act. Death, therefore, in its application to body
and soul, may be regarded as destruction without annihilation;
burning without consumption ; crushing into ruin without being
erased from existence; overwhelming in infinite depths, without
putting beyond the reach of the avenging arm of justice.
Our ignorance of the nature of the soul, of its capacities
for enjoyment, and its powers of endurance, and of the mode by
which death can act on its sensibilities, has sometimes prompted
the question, “ Will there never come a period throughout the
vast ages of the future when its consciousness shall cease, when
the horrors of despair shall end, when anguish shall be no longer
felt, when punishment shall terminate?” With Scripture for
our guide, we can only reply in the negative. The language
employed in the Bible, that has a bearing on the duration of
punishment, is of the most explicit character. On this point, we
read of the wicked being cast into “ hell, into the fire that never
shall be quenched ; where their worm dieth not, and the fire is
not quenched —of “the smoke of their torment which ascendeth
up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night
of “everlasting punishment;” of “ weeping and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth.” When we reflect on the nature of sin
and punishment; on human guilt and divine justice; on the
imperishable soul of man, and the infinite God who is his
Maker and Judge; on the present life as sowing time, and the
future life as reaping time; on the boundless mercy of the
Almighty, and the unpardonable guilt of rejecting that mercy, —
we are forced to the conclusion that death affects the unpardoned
and impenitent man, in body and soul, through the ages of
eternity.
Blessed be God, there is a law of life as well as a law of
death. “ Our Saviour Jesus Christ hath abolished death.” A
glorious victory over death has been achieved by the Son of God
on behalf of men. Consider then—
lI.—THE LAW OE LIFE in Christ Jesus, under which we are placed.
When we think of the tremendous power with which death
has been armed, the destructive energy which the enemy has
exercised for ages past, and the strength of government, under
which, the reign of desolation has been sanctioned, we are forced


to conclude that He who vanquishes . the. mighty foe, and rescues
man, must be a personage of no ordinary character, rank, and
ability. The Lord Jesus Christ has undertaken the task and
carried it into effect-—“ He has abolished death.” He has
displayed his superiority to this great potentate of evil. He
entered the lists with the enemy, and came off the field crowned
with glory and victory. Tinder the grace, the protection, and
the majesty of Jesus Christ, death is as good as abolished. The
doom of death’s dominion is sealed. To all who believe, love,
and obey the Saviour, the law of death is nullified, and though
their bodies may lie in the corruption of the tomb, as if they
were effectually crushed, yet it is only for a time. The resurrec-
tion, transformation, and glorification of believing and
regenerated sinners, is as sure as if it were past.
So certain is it, that the pen of inspiration writes
it as already done. Heath shall as surely be swal-
lowed up of victory, as if it were now a matter of history.
Christ delivers those who trust Him, even from that instinctive
dread of entering the unseen world, which all mankind experience.
At the hour of dissolution, He removes the soul of the sanctified
sinner to a clime, where the breath of corruption, and the pre-
sence of death are perfectly, and for ever, unknown. In a short
time the Christian shall, body and soul, be introduced into realms
of infinite life and joy, where the great enemy shall never appear,
and the fear of him shall never be felt. The sinner therefore
who confides in Christ, and is sustained by the Holy Spirit, is
enabled, in the very agonies of dissolution, to triumph. He knows
and feels that death is, by the Redeemer, rendered ineffectual, —
inoperative,—completely deprived of all power to injure, and
he expires with the song of victory on his lips.
Before Christ could abolish death, and establish the law of life
for man, it is necessary that we look to the mighty work which
He accomplished.
He gave Himself a Saceificb to Justice foe oue sins.—
It is doubtless to convey this idea, that Jesus Christ is called in
Scripture, “ the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the
world.” He is also represented as “ the propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.”
Even in the eternal state He is presented to view as, “ the Lamb in
the midst of the throne.” Having given Himself as a sin-
offering to justice, He thereby qualified Himself to abolish
death, and provide life everlasting to man. Taking away sin by
the sacrifice of Himself, he took away all power from death to
do harm, and pointed the way to eternal life and happiness.
Undertaking to save us from death, it behoved Him to endure
our penalty, and yet prove Himself stronger than the foe, who
seemed for the time to triumph. He laid down His life on
the accursed tree, becoming a curse for us, and thereby paid the
ransom due, that we, the captives, might go free. He stood forth
as our substitute, and suffered our punishment, that the law


might be vindicated, and we might be saved, without any
sacrifice, of holiness or power, in the Divine government. He
could not die for any sin of His own, because He was sinless.
But He bore our sins in His body on the tree. “He was
woundedfor our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities.”
“ The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.” He has
therefore acquired the right, and power, according to Law to
“ destroy him who had the power of death, that is the devil, and
deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life-time
subject to bondage.” How He unlocks the mysteries of death
and the grave. Though not exempted from the stroke of the
great enemy, He yet survives, and triumphs, and becomes able to
rescue all, who honour Him, from the dark realm of death.
It might be a question: whence has the sacrifice of Christ its
efficacy? How can we be assured that there is no hidden
defect and no failure in the work of sacrifice, which He finished
on the cross ? There could not be failure, if you consider, —
the eternity of His being. “In the beginning was the Word and
the Word was with God and the Word was God.” “ All things
were made by Him and without Him was not anything made
that was made.” “ Unto the Son, God the Lather saith, Thy
throne, 0 God, is for ever and ever.” “And Thou Lord in the begin-
ning hast laid the foundation of the earth and the heavens are the
works of thine hands.” In the strength of His prerogatives as
the infinite God He declared, in the days of His incarnation, “ I
have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up
again.” It could only be in His character as “ the mighty God,”
and “ the everlasting Lather,” that His life, in human
flesh, was His own peculiar and absolute property, which He
might lay down and take up as He pleased. Ho created power
could control Him in the matter. Christ’s sacrifice was that of
a divine person, and could not fail in its object. His life could
not be extorted from Him, as if there were a power superior to
His. In surrendering Himself to the power of man to nail His
body to the tree, to the devils to assail and distress His spirit,
and to the justice of God to punish Him for the sins which He
assumed, He acted freely, with a full consciousness of His infinite
greatness.
In His omnipotence there was a perfect security against failure.
Death was an enemy of inconceivable power, but Christ Jesus
was inexpressibly superior. Death was simply an officer of His
Government, and could have exercised no dominion at all without
His permission. The power of death was derived and dependent;
the power of the Redeemer was inherent and independent. This
enemy was a thing created —an instrument made for punishment
—a sword formed to cut and kill. But Christ was the creator
of the weapon, that He might wield it for the purposes of His
own sovereign and gracious will. In submitting Himself, there-
fore, to be slain by the tool of His own formation, He acted not
from a necessity of inferiority, but that He might honour His


own law by making an atonement for man’s sin, and thereby
become legally qualified, to destroy tbe instrument of punishment,
and save those who believe and obey the gospel.
In His unspotted holiness, too, there was a further pledge of
success in His sacrificial work. “He did no sin, neither was
guile found in His lips.” He was “ holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners.” If there had been the slightest flaw in
His obedience, He must have fallen a helpless prey to the
destroyer. Death would have triumphed, and mankind would
have perished. The testimony of His enemies was : “ Certainly
this was a righteous man ; ” “I find no fault in Him “ Never
man spake like this man.” In virtue of the perfection of His
righteousness, He became the conqueror of death, and could
defy the power of the grave to hold Him. “He has
magnified the law, and made it honourable.” Hence the
triumphs of His resurrection and His ascension to power
and glory. When He puts forth His power in saving
sinners who believe, He does it not at the expense either of His
justice or holimess. “Be has brought in everlasting righteous-
ness.” Had there been the slightest defect in His work—the
smallest taint of sin, He could not have risen from the dead.
Having become surety for the guilty, He made Himself amenable
to justice. And if there had been any imperfection in the ransom,
death would have held Him as its rightful victim. Though con-
demned, however, at a human tribunal, it was without evidence—
it was in innocence. His power, for that reason, was unimpaired.
He triumphed gloriously over every foe.
His merits were ' boundless, and His work, therefore, necessarily
efficacious. In the dying of Jesus there was infinite merit. By
His humiliation and death He acquired the right to pardon sinners
of mankind who come to Him. He has legal power to disannul
the covenant which man, in his folly and wickedness, made with
death. He is able to be “ the plague of death.” He can dis-
pense the boon of a perfect righteousness, to every sinner trusting
in Him, so that death can find nothing in the believer on account
of which to destroy him. Being divine, His work is meritorious,
and He is able, under the sanction of the highest law, to clothe
the returning prodigal with the wedding robe, and fit him for all
the privileges, and joys, and honours of a son. In anticipation of
His full and final victory, He could raise the widow’s son to life,
and say to Lazarus in the grave, “ Come forth.” Death and hell
are under His control. He holds the keys, and opens when none
can shut, and shuts when none can open.
Jesus destroys Him who has the power op death. — The
devil has the power of death, not from any absolute right he has
to exercise dominion, but, because he was instrumental, in intro-
ducing death’s reign into the world. Christ came from Heaven,
on purpose, to destroy the works of the devil. The seed of the
woman bruises the serpent’s head; and when the kingdom of
Satan shall be demolished, the rule of death shall cease, and the


reign of life begin. It is not to be supposed, that the devil has
power to destroy human life, when or where, in any way, or in the
experience of whomsoever, he pleases, without control. He may
be said to have the power of death, because it forms an inevitable
result of his usurpation, and, because it is in entire harmony with
his malignant nature, to glory in the ravages of death. He is
therefore described as “ a murderer from the beginning.” Now
Christ Jesus, in resisting while on earth, the temptations of the
Evil One; in casting out devils from those who were possessed;
in raising the dead to life; and especially in raising up the
temple of His body within three days after it was destroyed,—
gave convincing demonstration, that He was able effectually to
crush the empire of Satan, and thereby to counteract all that
series of troubles and woes, which culminates in death. "What a
grand and glorious accomplishment! How joyful the news !
How enrapturing the tidings; “He that believeth on me,” says
Christ, “ though he were dead, yet shall he live.”
Christ hath changed the Nature oe Death to His
People. —ln virtue of His atoning death on the Cross, he has
taken away sin, and thereby has extracted the sting out of death.
The aspect of the enemy is completely changed to the believer.
He may still appear a king, but he is dethroned ; a conqueror,
but he is stripped of his armour; a destroyer, but he is divested
of all power to injure. He may foam and rage, and gnash his
teeth; but he cannot hurt a hair of our heads, so long as we trust
in the merits of Emanuel. He is a gigantic enemy, but shorn of
his strength; without the ability even to inspire with dismay.
When he comes he may put on the array of terrific power, inflict-
ing on the poor body a whole host of evils, as the dire accom-
paniments of his presence. But the Christian, while still hating
death as an enemy, regarding it with repulsive feelings, and it
may be in some degree fearing the pangs of dissolution, is yet
enabled to look beyond the limits of this present being, to see in
Christ “ the resurrection and the life ” and to “rejoice in hope of the
glory of God.” Death becomes, in the hand of the Saviour, to
every believer, a friendly message to leave this world of sin and
darkness, suffering and woe, to enter a kingdom where no one shall
ever die; where no one shall ever heave a sigh, or shed a tear; where
no cry of distress shall ever be heard ; where no inhabitant shall
ever say, “ I am weary,” or, “I am sick ; ” where the voices of the
conqueror and the conquered, the slayer and the slain, shall never
be blended; where no grave shall ever be opened, and no funeral
ever conducted ; where peace and harmony, life and love eternal,
shall reign triumphant. The child of God cannot be exempted
from the pain and conflict of dying, but he finds grace sufficient
for his need, and strength made perfect in weakness, so that he
becomes ‘ a conqueror, and more than a conqueror through Him
who loves him.’ He must go through the dark valley, for flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of incorruption and im-
mortality above, but the conquering Redeemer cheers him by His


presence, and, with His rod and staff, guides him safe to glory-land.
“ Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours,
whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas or the world, or life or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye
are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.”
Christ elevates His people above the pear op Death.—
Men have often attempted to face death with the force of natural
courage, and in a spirit of levity have rushed into the arms of
the great Destroyer. But, instead of bravery, it would be more
appropriately called, reckless and daring impiety. The most of
mankind, if not all, have a natural enslaving fear of dying. This
reluctance to encounter death has been wisely implanted within
man for good ends. The love of life is a principle strong within
every one. The nervous energy with which men shun whatever
would impair or injure, endanger or destroy life, is proverbial.
Everything about death is most repulsive. There is the breaking
up of tender and strongly cherished ties ; the pain or the uncon-
sciousness, therefore the gloom and horror, which, more or less,
are mixed up with dying; the dismal paraphernalia of burial,
and the loneliness, darkness, and corruption of the grave ; the
ten thousand strange and solemn realities connected with the
unseen world; the voice of conscience whispering within of time
wasted, talents buried, and privileges misimproved, thereby filling
with alarm, in the prospect of the judgment bar of heaven, and
exciting fearful apprehensions, regarding future condemnation and
unutterable woe,—all surround the last crisis of life, with such
hateful features, as have filled mankind with a universal repudia-
tion of any sympathy with death.
Now, the knowledge and faith of Christ alone, can enable a
man to encounter all the terrors of death, with genuine courage.
Those who have naturally the strongest dread of coming dissolu-
tion, by believing the gospel, may be taught to look for the great
crisis, not only without alarm, but with undisturbed peace, solid
joy, and victorious hope. Persons of a weak and nervous tem-
perament, emaciated in body by disease, weak in mental power,
and timid in disposition, can be brought to face_ the great
destroyer without the least anxiety, nay, to long for his approach
as for the hour of emancipation, and to rejoice with unfeigned
satisfaction at the nearness of his fatal stroke. And while the
Gospel teaches man to be perfectly submissive and calmly recon-
ciled to the evils of dying, it equally enables him to be resigned
to all the ills of living. Infidel philosophers, like Hume, may
be taught by mere reason to meet death sometimes with a cold
and stoical firmness, but they have been led also to the conclu-
sion that it would be right and proper for a man, in very trying
circumstances, to put an end to his life.
The Christian, however, by faith in Jesus, knows to exercise
patience under the severest tribulations, not daring to hasten the
close of life, by the use of criminal means. He is equally
.elevated above the horror of dying, and the hatred of suffering.


What he dreads most is sinning, and his respect, for the will and
the authority of his great Eedeemer, ever prompt him, in all the
sorrows and tribulations of time, up till the moment of decease,
to say, “Thy will be done.” It is the bright prospect beyond, that
animates and sustains him. He believes that his Saviour lives,
and he accepts with all his heart the assurance, that where He is,
there also will the soul of every departed disciple be. He knows
that his Redeemer lives, and though his body moulders into dust, he
shall in his resurrection flesh see Grod. He is sustained with the
hope of rising from the dead and reigning with Christ. He has
nothing to fear in death, for to die is gain. Believing in Jesus,
he is at once pardoned and blessed ; and wherever he is, and in
whatever circumstances, whether in prosperity or adversity, in
health or sickness, in honour or dishonour, in life or in death, in
the grave or at the judgment-seat, he is under the watchful eye
and almighty protection of Him who has conquered the great
enemy.
Strange to say, it is the Christian, who has the most alarming
views of death, and yet, who is delivered most effectually from its
terrors. When his conscience was first aroused to a sense of guilt
and danger, he felt it to be indeed “ a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living Grod.” The terrors of judgment, and the
pangs of hell seized him. The law and justice of Grod seemed
let loose against him, as if to lash him with the fury of a tempest.
As he viewed grim death, and anticipated the horrors beyond,
his hair stood on end, his whole frame shook, and he cried out in
excruciating distress, “ Grod be merciful to me a sinner.” But
he looked to Christ crucified, and he saw, how to enter the dark
shades, without a pang, and how to receive the last destructive
shocks of temporal evil with the shout of triumph. The gospel
of the grace of Grod in Christ entered his heart, and he beheld
the law vindicated, sin atoned for, justice satisfied, pardon
procured, death destroyed,, hell extinguished, and the whole
empire of Satan overthrown. And in the consciousness that, by a
firm faith in Jesus, by an unrestricted dependence on the
merits of Emmanuel, salvation in all its fulness becomes his
own, through the marvellous grace of Grod, he is enabled calmly,
humbly, and confidently to say, “ Though I w'alk through the
valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for Thou art
with me, Thy rod and staff they comfort me,” —my “ Saviour
Jesus Christ hath abolished death.”
In conclusion, Christian friends, let me entreat you, personally,
to embrace the Saviour, as at once the Conqueror of death and
the Author of eternallife. Resting on Him with the whole heart,
you have not only nothing to fear from dissolution, but every-
thing to rejoice you in its approach. It is not in your own
strength you are called to face the foe. The same redeeming
power that procured pardon through the shedding of blood, also
removes the barriers which block up the passage to immortality,
and opens the gates which admit to everlasting joy. You must


trust in grace for entrance into glory as well as introduction to
blessing and privilege on earth. Tour Redeemer lives, and waits
to receive your departing soul. His exaltation is a pledge of
yours. His victory is a guarantee of your triumph. As to the
pains and difficulties, the darkness and trial, the time and place of
your removal, as well as the mysteries of your transit
from earth to heaven, —leave all to Him. “He lives :
you shall live also.” “Absent from the body, present with the
Lord.” Let the sorrowful bereavement which has called forth
your tenderest emotions at this time, awaken you to the necessity
of more strenuous and self-denying energy in the service of
Christ, and more lively hope of coming glory. Let time appear
in its proper insignificance, and eternity in its infinite importance.
Be ye followers of your pastor who, through faith and patience,
inherits the promises. The reign of death shall not be long.
You shall soon meet with him who is gone. “ The Lord my God
shall come, and all the saints with thee.” “ The ransomed of the
Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs and everlasting
joy upon their heads ; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” May every one present, by
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, be prepared for that glorious
consummation! The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you. Amen.
THE NEW JEETJSALEM.
Jerusalem, my happy Home!
Name ever dear to me !
When shall my labours have an end,
In joy, and peace, and thee ?
When shall these eyes thy heav’n built walls
And pearly gates behold!
Thy bulwarks with salvation strong,
And streets of shining gold ?
O when, thou City of my G-od,
Shall I thy courts ascend,
Where congregations ne’er break up,
And Sabbaths have no end P
There happier bowers than Eden’s bloom;
Nor sin nor sorrow know ;
Bless’d seats! through rude and stormy scenes
I onward press to you.
Why should I shrink at pain and woe.
Or feel at death dismay,
With Canaan’s goodly land in view,
And realms of endless day ?
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, there
Around my Saviour stand;
And soon my friends in Christ below
Will join the glorious hand.
Jerusalem! my happy Home !
My soul still pants for thee ;
Then shall my sorrows have an end,
When I thy joys shall see.


Tour pastor, the Eev. Andrew Mitchell Bamsat, whose
remains were so recently conveyed to their last resting place,
was horn in Shettlestone, near Glasgow, Lanarkshire, Scotland,
on the sth March, 1809. He was brought up in his early years
under the ministry of the Eev. Mr. Mcllquham, of Tollcross
Belief Church, in which his father filled the office of the elder-
ship. Having been the subject of divine influence in his youth,
he resolved on prosecuting His studies with a view to the office of
the holy ministry. Accordingly he entered the junior classes of
the Glasgow University in 1825, where he followed the usual
curriculum of study in the classics, philosophy, and science, and
where he acquired honourable distinction. His theological
studies were pursued under the late Eev. Professor Thomson, of
Paisley, of the Belief Denomination. In the end of 1832 he
was licensed, to preach the everlasting gospel, by the Glasgow
Belief Presbytery, and in the following year, on the 29th May,
he was solemnly ordained to the pastorate of the Belief Congre-
gation, Hawick, by the Kelso Presbytery. He held his charge
in this place for a period of thirteen years. He entered the
marriage relationship in 1840. The most notable circumstance
in connection with his ministerial work, in the South of Scot-
land, was a remarkable revival, which commenced in Denholm,
in 1839, and spread over a great portion of Eoxburgh-
shire, and even beyond its limits, producing the most decided
results in the conversion of sinners, and in the quickening of
God’s people. In this spiritual movement, he took a most lively
interest, and acted a very distinguished part. It was at this
time that my own acquaintance with him began, soon after my
ordination to the ministry, and I remember still, with a pleasing
satisfaction, the clear, and persuasive manner of his
address in the pulpit. His views of the Gospel were scriptural,
and were expressed in forcible terms. He had evidently received
a fresh baptism of the Holy Spirit, and his soul seemed on fire for
the salvation of sinners. He put forth the most untiring and
self-denying efforts that he might be honoured in saving his fellow
men from the wrath to come. He was often called away from
home, to engage in special religious services, through the sur-
rounding country, and crowded audiences hung’ on his lips with
breathless interest, as he unfolded the scheme of redemption by
Christ Jesus. His own congregation was awakened in a remark-
able degree. Some of his office-bearers and members, when called
to conduct devotional exercises, seemed to be filled with an apos-
tolic spirit; and multitudes, besides crowding the week night
services, in his own place of worship, would be seen eagerly
wending their way to church in early morn, in winter, while it
was yet dark, before the hours of labour began, to engage in the
worship of God.


In the year 1846, guided, as he believed, by the over-ruling
providence of G-od, he resigned his charge into the hands of the
Presbytery, with a view to emigrate to this colony. He left his
sphere of labour at home, amid the deep regrets of his people,
and, by a united effort, they gave him a handsome testimonial of
their regards. He arrived at Melbourne on the 4th January,
1847, by the Ann Milne, with his wife, two children, and a sister.
His first act, after his arrival, was to commit to the grave the
remains of an infant, that died during the voyage. His appear-
ance in Melbourne, at that time, seemed providential and
opportune, in the interests of Presbyterianism in the colony. A
public meeting had been held, shortly before, in the town attended
by a number of colonists of eminent standing, at which, various
resolutions were passed in favour of inviting Presbyterian
ministers from Scotland. He therefore stepped on the field
apparently to supply, in some degree, the lack that had been
strongly felt and emphatically expressed. His first ministerial
duties were discharged in the Scots’ Church, Collins-street, where
he officiated by special request for three months, the pulpit
having recently become vacant, through the disruption in the
Church of Scotland. On account of his decided views, against all
establishments of religion by the civil power, he could not accept
of a pressing invitation to assume the pastorate of the Church.
Therefore, those who were willing to join him in the formation of
a Presbyterian Church which should be voluntary, at once in
theory and practice, commenced religious worship in a school-
room in Little Collins-street. After a time they removed to the
Temperance Hall, and thence to the Protestant Hall, a Church
havingbeen duly organised on the basis of the United Presbyterian
Body in Scotland. Within a short time, after the commencement
of his ministerial and pastoral labours, several other ministers
holding the same views with himself, in reference to the province of
the civil magistrate inmattersofreligion, arrived in the colony, and
begantoformcongregations,basedon the purelyvoluntary principle,
indifferentdistricts of the country, with his advice and co-operation.
It was deemed advisable, without much delay, that these brethren
should unite in a closer bond for mutual encouragement, strength,
and co-operation according to the Presbyterian Constitution.
The Synod accordingly was formed, consisting of four ministers,
on the 18th January, 1850.
During the progress of his ministry, in the temporary places of
worship, the congregation put forth strenuous efforts to secure a
site, and begin building operations. All idea of accepting a
grant of land from Government, was effectually discouraged, and
the ground where we are now assembled, was obtained as a free
purchase, and as the most suitable of any within reach. The
building was, in due time, erected ; and it was opened for Divine
service on 30th March, 1851. It was then in an unfinished state,
and remained so till 1864, when after various efforts on the part
of minister and people, the spire was erected in front, and it was


brought to the state of completeness, comfort, and elegance,
which it now presents.
It may be mentioned, in proof of the important part which our
deceased friend and brother has acted in his day, in promoting the
spiritual interests of the colony, that in the course of twelve
years from the time of his arrival, he was honoured in being,
more or less, intimately concerned in the formation of fifteen
churches, several of which were offshoots of his own, having all
the same voluntary constitution. In advancing the interests of
those churches, which were planted in the interior, it cannot be
told, what an amount of fatiguing, and expensive labour was
endured. But all was cheerfully, and generously borne for the
sake of Christ, of immortal souls, and of principles that were dear
to his heart.
It was not only by pulpit ministrations, and personal sacrifices,
he sought to promote the prosperity of the Denomination, he
endeavoured also, though in a limited degree, to do good by his
pen. At an early period, after his arrival, he started a monthly
periodical for the maintenance of Scriptural principles, and the
diffusion of gospel truth. In 1849, after a terrific tempest and
flood, which occasioned the destruction of a great amount of life
and property, he published a pamphlet entitled “ The Voice of
the Storm.” When his congregation first discussed the question
of a site, he published his views in a paper regarding the connec-
tion- between Church and State, which secured perfect unanimity
of operation among his people. At a subsequent period, when
the voluntary question appeared to have a most important
bearing on the interests of truth, and vital godliness in the land,
he published the largest of his pamphlets. He was a frequent
contributor, when at home, to the periodical of the Denomination.
One of his papers was an able and interesting sketch of a godly
minister, who died at a good old age, but who was comparatively
unknown. Another gave a graphic account of the extraordinary
conversion, and happy death of a man, who had left the district
and gone to live in England, and who, according to his own
confession, had plunged into awful excesses of sin. Earnest
prayer had been offered for him in the church, during the revival
services. It may be interesting to notice that on one of the last
Thursday evening services which your deceased pastor conducted,
he read that solemn and awakening sketch. Various religious
magazines, indeed, were enriched by his contributions, which
were always read with interest and profit. But his life, dis-
tinguished as it was by incessant activity, and anxious work, did
not admit of much time for writing and publishing. The ability,
however, displayed in what he has given to the press, his classical
taste, his clear style, his power of condensation, and especially
his good judgment, large experience and sound doctrinal views, has
rendered it a matter of regret, that he has not left behind him
some more permanent, and substantial records of his talents and
acquirements. One of the questions affecting the morals of


the community, in the advocacy of which, in his earlier colonial
career, lie lent eifectual aid, was that of temperance. His
influence with members of the Legislature was not inconsiderable,
and he gave most valuable assistance when the work of making
laws was new, in various important measures which have been
enacted, and preventing others from passing, which, it was appre-
hended, would lead to evil consequences. He had a keen and
ready appreciation of principles, which had an intimate bearing,
on the civil and religious liberties of the people.
The great rush of population, which set in after the discovery
of gold, involved him in a large amount of care, expense, and toil.
He was incessantly besieged, with numbers of friends from home,
or acquaintances of friends, soliciting the benefit of his counsel
and experience. His heart, his hand, his home, his means were
all at their command. His labours for their good were most
arduous, self-denying, and generous. The amount of benefit
which he was the means of conferring in these circumstances, it
is impossible to estimate. Brought into contact with a great
variety of character, the counsels which he had so many oppor-
tunities of tendering were, it may safely be affirmed, instru-
mental, under God, in restraining much evil, and in advancing
much good. Many youths, doubtless, have, by his faithful
counsels, been kept out of the way of temptation, and guided in
the path of sobriety, honour, and piety. It was not only by
verbal advice he benefited many, at a period of peculiar embar-
rassment, and abounding temptation to all classes; the cor-
respondence into which he was led also afforded him, in an
eminent degree, the means of sowing a large amount of good
seed, the results of which shall not be known till the revelations
of the great day. The friends, at home, of the emigrants, whose
interests he had kindly promoted, were so impressed with the
debt of obligation under which he had laid them, that a spirited
contribution was made in the sphere of his former labours, and
a valuable mark, of their thankfulness and love, was transmitted
for his acceptance.
Time, however, would fail to enumerate the many and eminent
features of Christian character that adorned his life. Whether
we view him as a husband, a father, a pastor, or a patriot; a
friend to all in need, who came within his reach, or a Christian
who felt and acted as a citizen of the world—he is equally entitled
to praise and emulation. A prominent point in his life, was his
tenacity of principle. Having found a fundamental and
unchangeable truth, he was firm as a rock in its maintenance.
Hence the strength of his convictions, and his uncompromising
faithfulness in their exemplification. He was a great admirer of
consistency, singleness of motive, rectitude of aim, and unswerv-
ing perseverance in seeking the attainment of a good and worthy
object, while he had a decided abhorrence of all meanness,
selfishness, or hypocrisy. That which gave complexion to his
whole character was his genuine piety. The fear of God was


certainly always before his eyes. No one who knew him
could doubt that he was a true and sincere Christian. Love
to the Redeemer was the governing principle of his life. Nor
was his Christianity of a morose description. Resting on the
merits of Christ for pardon, and having an assured confidence
in the riches of divine grace, revealed in the Gospel to man
as a sinner, he endeavoured to exemplify the apostolic injunc-
tion, “ Rejoice in the Lord always.” His knowledge of the Gospel
plan of mercy was not a mere theory, but a blessed experience,
and a thing of daily life.
His preaching, therefore, was plain and faithful, evangelical
and practical. He gave great prominence to the doctrines of
grace. A favourite theme with him, was “justification by faith
without the works of the law,”—a point which concentrates
the glory of divine revelation, and which lies at the foundation
of the sinner’s peace, and the Church’s stability. He sought
both to warn the unbelieving and undecided sinner, and to
encourage the anxious inquirer and sorrowing penitent.
In speaking of the manner in which he discharged his duties
as a minister of Christ, a chord is touched which is fitted to
sound a note of solemn responsibility, and to summon you to sit
in judgment on yourselves. Although, in the latter years of his
life, he could not, through declining strength, speak as he was wont
to do in the former years, yet there was the same clear exhibition
of truth, the same earnest exhortation, the same solemn warning,
and consequently the same accountability resting on his hearers.
The offers of a free salvation, through the Redeemer’s blood, are
equally precious, equally stamped with divine authority, equally
fraught with issues of eternal moment, whatever be the channel
through which they are communicated, and however feeble be the
instrument of presenting them to your minds. 0, how trans-
porting the thought that those who have been brought to the
Saviour, through his instrumentality, and are going forward
in a career of sanctification, shall be presented by him at
the great day, as so many jewels, to adorn the Redeemer’s crown !
And, on the other hand, how awakening the idea, of the faithful
and affectionate pastor appearing at the judgment bar, to testify
against those of his hearers, who, in spite of all his instruction and
example, have continued in unbelief, without Christ, and without
holiness, without God and without hope.
In his visitations of the sick, he was peculiarly at home.
Having, naturally, feelings of tender sympathy with those who
were in any distress, he was all the better qualified by grace for
pouring a rich stream of spiritual consolation into the bosom of
the afflicted Christian. On these occasions, it was his habit to
bring the wounded spirit, at once, to the fountain head of blessing
in the Lord Jesus Christ, to encourage faith in the exceeding
great and precious promises, that have been sealed with the blood
of the all-sufficient Sacrifice of Calvary, and to animate the
humble and penitent believer with the bright, celestial prospects


which are set forth in the Gospel. With unwearied ardour, and
without any regard to personal convenience or comfort, he would
visit the house of mourning. The sick, he patiently and efficiently
tended, and the dying he brought in the arms of a loving faith, to
the presence and power of Jesus. To those, on whom the stroke
of bereavement fell, he was of eminent service in cheering and
sustaining. The poor backslider, when he had opportunity, he
sought most faithfully, tenderly, and prayerfully to reclaim.
And when, with the blessing of God, he was successful in his
efforts, he was like the man in the parable of the lost sheep,
rejoicing with all his house.
The young, in his visits, engaged a large share of his attention.
He was always mindful of the lambs of his flock, and was well
fitted, by his kind and condescending manner, to engage their
attention, and to convey, by homely illustration, important truth
to their tender minds. And, as he everywhere manifested an
affectionate interest in the temporal and eternal welfare of the
young, he was amply rewarded by kind and loving regards in return.
His charities to the poor and distressed were so many, and of
such a self-denying character, as to form a prominent feature of
his life. The tale of woe ever found in him, a willing ear and a
ready hand. Notwithstanding many and grievous instances of the
abuse of his bounty, he was ever ready, to the fullest extent of
his ability, to the end of his life, to relieve the necessities and
mitigate the privations of others. No manifestation of unthank-
fulness ever hindered him, from persevering in his career of "warm-
hearted beneficence, so long as the means of relief were within
his power. He knew nothing of the grudging, grasping, or
selfish spirit. His happiness seemed to consist in his being
instrumental in rendering others happy. And it was im-
possible for him, to have rest or contentment, so long as he
knew of any one who was subjected to want or suffering, till he
did what he was able with a helping hand.
This spirit of benevolence was not owing merely to natural
temperament. He had, doubtless, an enlarged view of the infinite
sufficiency of God’s love in Christ, to satisfy the wants of confiding
sinners, not only for the world to come but also for the present
life. He was, therefore, never haunted with the fear of want.
His faith in a gracious Providence, through the fulness revealed
in Christ, was unwavering and unlimited. He ever regarded
distrust, worldly care, and unbelieving fear as unworthy and
wrong, inconsistent and dishonouring to the God of salvation.
Hence he was generous, as some might say, to a fault. Never-
theless, in those cases in which he might be supposed to have
gone to extremes in the luxury of doing good, to the praise of
the divine faithfulness be it spoken, his principle of trust never
put him to shame. Not a few are the remarkable instances in
which, in his extremities, God honoured him by unexpected
deliverances, according to His promise, because he honoured
God by a faith, firm and unshaken, in the midst of trial.


Animated by the spirit of Lis Lord and Master, he ever
cherished a thoroughly catholic regard to all who loved the
Saviour. Some of his most dearly cherished friendships, were
among the members of other denominations. He loved the
brotherhood in the widest sense of the term. Hence the strong
attachment he ever manifested to the last, to those institutions
which are based on general principles. The Bible Society, the
City Mission, the Tract Society, the Hornbrook Scripture Tree
School Association, the Benevolent Asylum, the Hospital, and the
Immigrant’s Aid Society, have all shared largely in his sympathies
and efforts. While the Evangelical Alliance existed he was an
earnest member. For a number of years, he was a devoted atten-
dant at a general union prayer meeting, held in the Protestant
Hall, and only withdrew his presence, when the meeting itself
came to a close.
Having known him so long and so thoroughly, I have every
confidence in declaring that his declining, along with a number of
his brethren, to enter into an incorporated Presbyterian union in
1859, was not by any means a violation of Christian catholicity,
but simply an uncompromising adherence to principle. Viewing
the matter in his light, union was precious, but truth and consis-
tency, conscience and conviction were dearer still. Along with out-
ward separation, he ever cherished, the loving spirit of the Christian,
to those from whom he differed. It was not in his nature to
harbour a feeling of enmity, even against one who might have
injured him. Ho one ever heard him speak evil, or unkind things
of an enemy. He was most prompt to forgive a wrong. The
milk of loving-kindness flowed too strongly throughout his moral
system, to allow the elements of hate or revenge, to have any
place in his heart. It would have been, lam sure, a sincere
gratification, had he been spared to see the consummation of a
union with his brethren, which he long expected. It pleased
the sovereign Lord of all above, however, to order otherwise.
At length his energies gave indication of failure. For
a considerable time, he has suffered a gradual decay of vital
power. Every new sign of failing health, he regarded as a pre-
monition of his approaching end. Changes of residence, medical
skill, and every other means failed. But he was not disturbed
at the prospect, except that he grieved for the friends he was
leaving behind.
There cannot be a shadow of doubt, that he died at
peace with all men, as we thoroughly believe that he died
at peace with God. From the nature of his trouble, he
was not permitted to bear vocal testimony in his last
hours to the feelings that animated his soul, as he lingered on
the brink of the eternal world. He had borne witness, with
sufficient clearness and force during a lengthened probation as
to his real feelings, both towards God and towards man;
and it pleased the Almighty to remove him to Himself,
without granting us the privilege of recording his dying


experience. The smile that played on his features, as he
recognised one and another around his death-bed indicated
as clearly as words could have expressed, that his end was
peace,—that he had gained by the blood of the Lamb the
victory over the last enemy. The enraptured gaze with which he
looked upwards seemed to speak of joys and visions of glory,
which only he could behold. The entire absence of fear, anxiety,
or doubt, in his conscious hours, proved that his house was set in
order for the Master’s coming,—that he was not found asleep
when the Bridegroom made His appearance,—that he was ready
to enter into the joys of his Lord, —that he received “an
abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.” With the close of the year, he closed his
labours. On the evening of 31st December, 1869, he breathed
his last in his 61st year. “ May we die the death of the righteous
and may our latter end be like his!”
I beseech every one to seek to learn lessons of heavenly
wisdom from the loss of him who has long ministered in this
place. He has gone to his rest. The same blissful portion
awaits you who are faithful in your Lord’s service unto the
death, and follow his faith ; imitate him in so far as he resembled
Christ. How glorious his portion now, after the conflicts and
toils and sufferings of earth ! He will not come back to you, you
must go to him. Your eyes too must soon open upon the
solemnities of that other world. Would, you meet him at the
right hand of the Eternal Father, —would you be arrayed in
white robes like the one he wears, —would you join with him in
the song, “ Hallelujah to the Lamb,” —would you walk the golden
streets, eat the fruit of the tree of life, wear the palms of victory,
and with harps of celestial form celebrate the praises of redeeming
love and mercy,—you must, like him, while on earth, have faith in
Jesus, walk humbly with your G-od, take up the cross, renounce
the world as your portion, lay up treasures in heaven, and wait
your appointed time, till, in your happy experience, death is
abolished and life and immortality become your rightful pos-
session. 0, unbelieving sinner, lay hold on Christ, or death
will crush you. There is no escape from the avenging power
but in Jesus. He is the way to the Father. Embrace Him, and
pardon is yours. Trust Him, and eternal life is now bestowed
upon you. Flee into the arms of His love, ere death comes and
puts everlasting salvation beyond ‘your reach. He waits to be
gracious. He wills not you should perish. He ever calls to the
unworthy and guilty, “ Come unto me ! ” Cast in your lot with
the ransomed band. Become a pilgrim, journeying to
Emmanuel’s land. Remember the teaching and example of the
departed servant of Christ. Beware, lest he should appear in the
judgment against you. The blood of Jesus is your only security.
“ How to Him that is of power to establish you according to my
Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the
revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world


began, but now is made manifest, and by tbe Scriptures of tbe
prophets, according to tbe commandment of the everlasting God,
made known to all nations for the obedience of faith—to God
only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.”
THE FAITHFUL PASTOK.
Shall we not miss him—miss his kindly greeting,
His true, paternal smile,
His warmth of welcome in the social meeting,
Enjoyed and prized long while ?
Shall we not miss his words of consolation,
In time of sickness given;
When hy the languid couch he took his station,
A messenger from heaven ?
Will they not miss his watchful love to hless them,
The young lambs of his fold ?
Was he not wont to smile on and caress them,
As did his Lord of old ?
In the world’s vineyard he was up and doing,
From morn till evening grey ;
Faint—oh, how often ! —and yet still pursuing,
Through all the weary day.
Telling the wretched in the crowded alley
Of happier homes above ;
Lighting the dying through the darksome valley,
With Christ’s sweet lamp of love.
Patiently toiling—oft in pain and Weakness—
Yet asking no reward,
Contented ever to await, in meekness,
The “ well done ” of his Lord.
There was no threshold in the sphere assigned him
His footstep did not cross ;
Well may such faithful pastor leave behind him
A sense of heavy loss.
Yes, we must miss him, but our consolation
Standeth secure and great;
For the glad day of earth’s regeneration,
In certain hope we wait.
Assured that in the blood-bought restitution
Of paradise to men,
Among the white-robed, spotless from pollution,
We shall not miss him then.


The following are a few testimonies out of many borne
spontaneously to the worth of the deceased pastor, and sent in
sympathy and condolence to the bereaved wife and family.
Liberty is taken to add these, in order to render this passing
tribute to his memory more complete.
St. Enoch’s United Presbyterian Church,
Collins-street, Melbourne,
10 th January, 1870.
Dear Mrs. Ramsay,
It is my sad yet pleasing duty to inform you, tlxat at a meeting of the
above congregation, held in the church last evening, when the death of
your dear and saintly husband, our lamented pastor, was under consideration,
the following resolution was unanimously agreed to, viz. ;
“ That this congregation record its deep sense of the irreparable loss it
has sustained by the removal from amongst us of our late beloved pastor, the
Rev. A. M. Ramsay, and would further express its heartfelt condolence
with Mrs. Ramsay and family in their sorrowful bereavement, and that a
letter in terms of the above resolution be sent to Mrs. Ramsay.”
Mr. Ramsay was the founder and father of the United Presbyterian
body in the Southern Hemisphere, and our pastor for the long period of
twenty-three years. We now feel, as a congregation and as individuals, that
we have lost in our beloved pastor truly a man of God, of rare and unaffected
piety, who led his flock faithfully and tenderly by the still waters and
through the green pastures of righteousness, always anxious about and
rejoicing in their welfare, in every sense devoted to the salvation of souls and
the glory of his heavenly Father whom he so fondly and so faithfully served.
His departure has created a void which cannot be filled. Certainly “He
being dead yet speaketh ” and will speak perhaps, to many yet unborn,
through those who owe their conversion to his instrumentality, and have had
the benefit of his ministrations. We have assurance in saying of him,
“ Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; yea, saith the Spirit, henceforth
they rest from their labours and their works do follow them.”
The world has lost in him a friend and a brother, and the Church an
exalted Christian—a father in the Lord. The loss to yourself and family is
doubtless beyond expression, and causes our hearts to swell with unfeigned
regret.
His disinterested and self-sacrificing life, and his generous and tender
affection for all, won the esteem and love of members of every denomination
and class. His memory will be fragrant in the Church generally and
associated with all that is good.
While sorrowing for your and our 'great loss, yet we feel consoled
in a great measure with the assurance that he has received the welcome
“Well done, good and faithful servant,” and now reigns a king and a
priest to God.
We pray that the Lord will be a Husband to you and a Father to
your children —that He will make all your wants His peculiar care—that
He will support and sustain you in this your hour of trial, and at last in
His eternal home introduce you all to the beloved society of him who
was so justly dear on the earth, to dwell with him through eternity.
On behalf of the congregation,
I am, Dear Mrs. Ramsay,
Truly yours in the Lord,
WILLIAM DALL,
Chairman of the Congregation.


FROM THE PRESBYTERY OF THE UNITED PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH.
“ The Presbytery agree to place on record their deep sense of the loss they
have sustained in the decease of their brother, the Rev. A. M. Ramsay. As a
member of the Presbytery, he was of eminent service in advancing the
interests of the denomination by his clear and decided views of duty, by his
conscientiousness, by his long experience, by his uprightness, candour, and
sincere regard to the glory of God, and the true prosperity of the Church of
Christ. Having been the first minister of the U. P. Church of Scotland
.who preached the Gospel in this colony, and having been instrumental in
founding the U. P. Church of Victoria, his memory is entitled to be held in
the highest respect. His sound views of the Gospel, and his faithfulness in
preaching the words of eternal life; his eminent spirituality of mind
and holiness of life; his enlarged Christian sympathies with suffering
humanity in all its varied aspects, and his energies so thoroughly
devoted to the last as a patriot, a Christian, and an ambassador of Christ, to
the application of the divinely appointed remedy in the Gospel, all spread
around his name a hallowed fragrance. ‘ Blessed are the dead who die in
the Lord ; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and
their works do follow them.’
“ The Presbytery further agree to express their sincere condolence with the
bereaved wife and family, and to transmit a copy of the above minute to Mrs.
Ramsay.”
D. CHAPMAN, Moderator p. t.
R. HAMILTON, F. 0.
FROM THE REV. ADAM THOMSON, SYDNEY.
I have known him too well for nearly forty years, and have known
throughout all that time, his eminent and yet ever-growing Christian worth’
to have any doubt as to his latter end being peace. But, yet the heart clings to
one whom it has long esteemed and loved, and it yearns for all that can be
told of him as his departure drew near, and he fell asleep in Jesus. Very
calm, it seems, his falling asleep was ; and yet, though to us it was as a falling
asleep, to himself it was a glorious awaking. The shadows amid which he
gently closed his eyes were only the deep parting shadows of this world, and
then came the waking up of his spirit to a new and immortal life in the
presence of his God and Saviour, where eternal light compasses him about.
The animating anticipation of the Psalmist has been fulfilled in him ; “As for
me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake
with thy likeness.” We can little conceive of the glories on which he has
entered; but how soothing it is to know that he has “ entered into rest ”
that all weakness, and weariness, and trials, and fears, and sorrow, are now
over with him,—that he has overcome through the blood of the Lamb, and
has been “ presented faultless in the presence of God’s glory with exceeding
joy-”
Your dear husband’s was one of the most spotless, consistent, and exemplary
Christian lives I ever knew. His amiable temper and disposition, his pure
and warm affections, his transparent simplicity of character, his guilelessness
and sincerity, his immovable tenacity of conviction and purpose wherever
duty was concerned; the absence with him of everything mean or selfish or
sordid ; his high sense of honour ; his noble disinterestedness and generosity
—these, and other kindred qualities, given to him more largely than to most
men by nature, but in his case, brightened and sanctified by the grace of


God, manifested in a singularly unaffected, but deep and fervent piety, went
together to form a character such as is rarely to he met with—a character
which had a peculiar attractive and sacred charm about it, and one which
I can truly say for myself, I often felt it elevating to contemplate, and which
it will be refreshing for me to recall while I can remember anything. And
then there was the deep, affectionate, devout interest he took in everything
tending to the good of his fellow-men, alike temporally or spiritually, and
that alongside of the labours of a long and eminently earnest ministry on this
side of the world and the other, the fruits of which the great day will declare.
Sydney, January 10, 1870.
FBOM THE MELBOURNE AND SUBURBAN CITY MISSION, PRE-
PARED BY REV. A. D. KININMONT AND REV. R. LALSHLEY.
“ The Reverend Andrew Mitchell Ramsay having been removed by death
since last meeting, this Committee of which he was long a member, hereby
record their testimony to the warm interest he took in the prosperity of this
Mission, which was evinced by his regular attendance on its meetings, and
by his earnest advocacy of its claims ; their deep sorrow at the loss this and
kindred societies have sustained by his death ; their high appreciation of the
excellencies that adorned his character; their tender sympathy with his
bereaved widow and family, and their fervent prayer that the Lord would
be her Husband and their Father, supply all their need, and abundantly
comfort, enrich, and bless them.”
Extracts prom a Letter dated Melbourne, 13th January, 1870, and
ADDRESSED TO THIS COMMITTEE BY HeNRY CoOKE, EsQ,, AND Dr. John
Singleton, Members of the Melbourne and Suburban City Mission
Committee.
“ It affords us a very sincere though mournful pleasure to bear our testimony
to the many Christian excellencies of our late esteemed friend and brother
in Christ, the Rev. A. M. Ramsay. It was our happiness to have been
associated with him in several religious and benevolent enterprises, extending
over a period of about sixteen years. We always found him ready and
willing to help forward every good work. We love to recall the remem-
brance of his cheerful kindly greeting, his quiet genial disposition and loving
spirit, and that large warm-hearted sympathy which so readily flowed to all
who needed his willing service and aid. Whilst his sincere and uncompro-
mising fidelity to principle elicited our respect, his Christian courtesy and
catholic spirit (uniformly exhibited to all who advocated views opposed to
those he held) won our esteem and love.
“He truly loved all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and did
much by his personal influence and example to strengthen the bonds of
Christian love and fellowship amongst the true followers of Christ associated
with other_ churches. His memory is dear to us, and he will ever retain a
high place in our esteem and affectionate remembrance. We can, therefore,
most sincerely join you in conveying to the bereaved family of our dear
departed friend an expression of our sympathy.
“We join in asking his Saviour and our Saviour to be a Father to the
fatherless, and a Husband to the widow, and
When soon or late they reach the coast,
O’er life’s rough ocean driven,
May they be found no wanderer lost,
A family in Heaven.”
Walker, May & Co., 99 Bourke Street West, Melbourne.




