

13 § Bmm
l f f / 9 \ S v £ i V- H « 8 j 81
! fl : Jr| ..* I
■ 1
■ . I * .*-»
x 1 A j
If PX / _ ■ ,_J
_>’* pfcpft.3^,
jSSSL I /
y i
vi —t. ■ -
'■j




THE LOST EXPLORERS


♦




— _
"* “*'--■ ‘
■ J £> ->/
B 607
“and all this time the happy-go-lucky shadow was
PLUGGING ALONG OVER THE THIRSTY DESERT SANDS”


THE LOST EXPLORERS
A STORY OF THE TRACKLESS DESERT
ALEXANDER MACDONALD
F.R.G.S., F.R.S.G.S., F.R.C.I.
Author of j
“In Search of El Dorado"
“The Trail of the Pioneer"
“Pioneering in Klondike”
ILLUSTRATED BY ARTHUR H. BUCKLAND
BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW DUBLIN BOMBAY


Copyrighted in the United States, America
by Blackie & Son, Limited


c Ticffq/^
DEDICATED TO
B. B.




PREFACE
In this work I have endeavoured to portray a phase of
life in a far-away land, a land concerning which we have
only too little knowledge at the present time, though it is
one of our Empire’s greatest colonies. lam aware that
to make a book composed largely of real happenings—
especially when one writes for the youth of the nation—
is a somewhat unusual thing to do. In The Lost Explorers
I have given a tale of gold-digging and of exploration—
a tale, for the most part, of events that have actually
happened. My characters are all drawn—however crudely
—from life; my descriptions are those of one who has
seen and felt in a similar environment. My boys in the
story were real boys, and they dared and suffered and
accomplished together. As for Mack ay, he is still a
power in the land, ready and willing always, as he said
to his young companions, “ to shed the light of his great
knowledge abroad for the benefit of mankind in general”.
The last few chapters of the book are based on an
explorer’s natural deductions. We all, who have forced
a painful path over Central Australia’s arid sands, hope
—ay, believe —in the existence of a wonderful region in
the vague mists of the Never Never Land. Perhaps the
(B 607 )


Preface
very strenuonsness of the wish brings about the belief.
Who can say ? My descriptions of the strange aborigines
beyond the mystic mountains are not altogether fanciful.
In my own wanderings I have encountered more than
one tribe whose mental development was far in advance
of that usually credited to the untutored savage of the
great Island Continent. What I have written, I have
written faithfully, and to the best of my ability. If The
Lost Explorers gives pleasure to my readers, I shall
indeed be more than content.
ALEXANDER MACDONALD,


CONTENTS
I. A Momentous Decision H
11. Outward Bound 29
111. Golden Flat 46
IV. The Treasure of the Mine 66
V. The Rush at Gulden Flat 93
VI. The Shadow’s Great Effort 112
VII. Bob’s Triumph 131
VIII. Macguire’s Threat 151
IX. Into the Unknown
X. An Awkward Predicament 207
XI. The Finding of Fortunate Spring 227
XII. A Night Attack 244
XIII. The Mystic Mountain 267
XIV. The Struggle by the Mountain 285
XV. The Secret of the Mountain 3^4
XVI. The Prisoners by the Mount 3 42


\


ILLUSTRATIONS
“And all this Time the Happy-go-lucky Shadow was
PLUGGING ALONG OVER THE THIRSTY DESERT SaNDS”
Frontispiece 116
“Look what’s coming, Boys” 48
“ Jack felt a Ball graze his Temple ; then his own
Rifle spoke” 173
“He unfolded a Long Track Chart which he carried in
his hand ” 207
“It looked as if Nothing could stand against that
Maddened Rush” 255
“Emu Bill gently pillowed his Dying Comrade’s Head
upon ms Knee” 292
“ Mackay rushed to meet the New-comer ” 341
“Mackay, clutching fast to the Armoury of the Expe-
dition, WAS HAULED TO THE SURFACE ” 370


«


THE LOST EXPLORERS
CHAPTER 1
A Momentous Decision
“ T’M full up of this ceaseless grind, Jack,” suddenly broke
out Robert Wentworth, a tall, slenderly built young
man of about eighteen years of age, throwing down the
paper he had been reading with unnecessary energy.
Jack Armstrong aroused himself from a reverie, and
looked up with an amused gleam in his grey eyes. He
was a medium-sized, squarely built youth about two years
the junior of the first speaker.
“ I believe I have heard you say that before, Bob,” he
said; “ but all the same you echo my sentiments exactly.
Still, what can we do ? Our munificent salaries do little
more than pay for our board in these digs ” —he waved his
hand comprehensively around the little room which they
shared together —“ and consequently we haven’t saved
enough to buy our steam yacht yet! ” He laughed with
affected cheerfulness.
Wentworth’s strong, studious-looking face clouded
momentarily.
“ That’s all very well, Jack,” he answered severely;
“ but you know that there is little chance of our present


positions improving to any extent. Engineering is good
enough for the few; but I can plainly see that life
is too short for us to make a fortune at the game. The
fact is,” he added, in a more moderate tone, “ this country
is too crowded for us, and too old. Everything is stan-
dardized so accurately that we are little more than
machines; and we must exist on our paltry pittances,
seeing nothing but grime and smoke and rain and fogs,
until we become old and brain-sodden, with never a hope
beyond the morrow. No, lam tired of it—absolutely full
up of it.” He picked up the discarded paper once more,
and directed Armstrong’s attention to a paragraph under
the heading of General News, and this was what the
younger man read —
“Mr. James Mackay, who was the only survivor of
the ill-fated Bentley Exploring Expedition in Central
Australia, arrived in the city last night, and is staying
at the Central Hotel. It will be remembered that Mr.
Bentley’s party was massacred by the blacks some months
ago, the only man escaping being Mr. Mackay, chief bush-
man to the expedition, who, fortunately, was not with the
others when they were attacked. It is generally supposed
that the unknown tracks in Western and Central Australia
hold vast treasure of gold and gems in their keeping, and
they provide the incentive which sends the explorer across
these trackless wastes.”
“ So that’s the country you would like to go to, Bob,”
he said quizzically, “ where explorers get killed by the
natives ? ”
“Not exactly,” replied Wentworth; “but it attracts
me all the same. My only uncle went out to Australia
about ten years ago, and we never heard of him again; I


suppose that has given me an interest in the country, for
I remember him well as one of the finest men one could
wish to meet. Anyhow, there can be no gain without risk,
Jack, and I have often thought of trying my luck at the
goldfields in Australia, though I don’t suppose there can
be much danger from the natives where they are.”
“ But there is time enough yet,” ventured Armstrong.
“We are not so very old ”
“ All the more reason,” returned his companion, quickly,
“ that we should decide on our future while our brains are
fresh. If we continue on in the same groove here, we’ll
get so accustomed to it that we won’t want to leave it.
No, Jack, I am in earnest. I have decided to get out
of it.”
“ You can’t get out of it without me, Bob,” said Arm-
strong, quietly. “ You know Igo with you. We haven’t
been chums these two years for nothing. And,” he added
proudly, “ I am as strong as most men, and able to take
care of myself in any part of the world.”
Wentworth laughed grimly. “We’ll face it together,
Jack,” said he.
“And we’ll carve our way in it successfully, too,”
cried the boy, enthusiastically, now completely won over.
“ Hurrah for Australia, the land of gold! ”
They arose and clasped hands, Wentworth’s face
expressing determined resolve, Armstrong’s shining with
the light of eagerness and hope.
Robert Wentworth and Jack Armstrong were chums
in the truest sense of the word. They had been attracted
to each other from their first day of meeting, when Arm-
strong, whose father had just died leaving him an orphan,
homeless and well-nigh penniless, arrived at the Clyde


Engineering Works, to take up the post secured for him by
a thoughtful friend who understood the boy’s independent
spirit. Wentworth had by this time served a year at his
profession, but had made few friends, being too reserved
and distant by nature to please the other apprentices;
indeed, these unthinking, though well-meaning, individuals
had grown inclined to misconstrue his quiet demeanour,
until they got a rude awakening. A few of the rowdier
spirits had surrounded Armstrong during the luncheon
hour of his first day among them, and were endeavouring
to get as much fun as they could at the new-comer’s
expense; and he, poor fellow, fresh from his sad bereave-
ment, was in no mood to appreciate their witticisms.
“ Can’t you let the youngster alone ? ” said Wentworth,
approaching the group.
They turned in amazement at his interruption; and one
of them, a thick-set, pugnacious lad, inquired contemp-
tuously, if irrelevantly—
“ Well, and what could you do, anyhow, Mr. Philoso-
pher ? I didn’t think you would care to risk a fight.”
“ Didn’t you ? ” came the cool response, as the young
engineer calmly doffed his coat. “You will think differ-
ently in a few minutes.”
And when he had polished off his antagonist in a
scientific manner that delighted the hearts of the beholders,
even the defeated champion could not forbear his tribute.
“You are too much for me, Wentworth,” he said feel-
ingly, when he had recovered himself. “ But I think it
was mighty mean of you deceiving us so long.”
After that Wentworth and Armstrong were always
together; a bond of sympathy had sprung up between
them, and before long they were sharing the same room,


and were known as David and Jonathan by their engineer-
ing associates. Wentworth’s history was none of the
brightest. His father had been a sea captain, and though
ten years had elapsed since he and his ship had gone to
the bottom in the China seas, Bob’s memory easily carried
him back to their last parting; and he recalled how, child-
like, he had volunteered to take of his mother until
the captain came back —and he never came back. The
widowed mother, left with her two children—Bob, and his
sister Lucy, two years younger than himself—knowing
how the roaming nature of the father had been repeated
in the son, sought a home as far away from the sea as
possible, and did her utmost on the scanty income left
her to give them both the best of education. But Bob,
old beyond his years, knew more of his mother’s struggle
than she guessed, and at fourteen he quietly seized an
opportunity that offered, and apprenticed himself to the
well-known firm of engineers already mentioned—and told
his mother afterwards. And the discontent which he felt
with his somewhat grimy surroundings, though hidden from
his mother and sister, was often and often poured into the
ears of his companion, whose sympathy was ever ready and
sincere, and found culmination in the expression which
opens this chapter.
And now that they had decided on a definite plan of
action, they lost no time in carrying it into effect. So, a
few days later, having called on their employer and explained
their reasons for leaving his service, they directed their
steps towards a general shipping office in order to procure
full information concerning the vessels and routes of sailing
to Australia,
When they entered the doorway there were no intending


voyagers engaging the attention of the clerk; but while
Wentworth was making inquiries, some one entered and
stood a little way behind the pair, and beguiled his time
while he waited by whistling, most horribly out of tune,
that familiar ballad, “ Home, Sweet Home! ”
“You can go to Australia by P. and 0. or Orient
Line, via the Suez Canal,” the clerk reeled off glibly.
“ Or you may avoid the heat of the Eed Sea by travelling
round the Cape in a Shaw Savill, or New Zealand
Shipping Company’s boat. To what port do you wish
to sail ? ”
“ I think,” said Bob, after a hurried consultation with
Armstrong, “ I think the port nearest the goldfields.”
“That will be Melbourne,” said the spruce shipping
clerk, after some consideration. “ Melbourne is the port
for Ballarat.”
“ Go awa’ and bile your held or study geography,” came
a gruff voice from behind. “ You’re an old fossil, you are,
or you would ken that the laddies mean Western Australia.
Ballarat has seen its day, but the West is still a land o’
promise.”
The two boys turned abruptly, while the clerk
endeavoured to cough down his discomfiture. They saw
beside them a burly middle-aged man with a deeply
bronzed face, over which the shadow of a smile was steal-
ing. Even at that moment, as they admitted afterwards,
they both thought they had never seen a more kindly
countenance, in spite of the grim lines around the mouth,
which were only half concealed by a spiky red moustache.
But immediately the interrupter saw the elder lad’s face
he started back as if shot, and a tremor seemed to run
through his stalwart frame. “As like as twa peas,” he
16 (B 607)


muttered hoarsely, and only Armstrong, who was close
beside him, heard the words.
“And have ye decided to go out to Australia, my
lads ? ” he inquired kindly, after a moment’s pause. “ Now,
dinna get your backs up,” he reproved mildly, as Went-
worth seemed about to resent his interference, “ I like you
the better for your independence, but Australia’s a place
that is no very weel kent even at this period o’ civilization,
and maist certainly ye’ll get nae reliable information from
that wooden-heided mummy—ye’ll pardon the gentle
inseenuation,” he said, with elaborate politeness, nodding
to his victim behind the desk. “Now, I should ken
Australia better than maist men,” he continued, “ an’ it’s
my weakness that I should wish to shed my information
abroad for the benefit o’ mankind in general, but mair
particularly ” —here he laid a hand on each of the young
men’s shoulders—“ would I like to assist young laddies
like yoursel’s wha are aboot to venture on so long a
journey.”
“We are obliged to you, sir,” said Wentworth, gravely
and distantly. “We certainly should like to know some-
thing of Australia.”
“We would, indeed,” supplemented Armstrong, im-
pulsively holding out his hand.
The brawny Scot returned the grip; then, addressing
himself more directly to Wentworth, said —
“ I can see, my lad, that your head’s screwed on the
richt way, and I admire you for it; but you’re a vera bad
judge o’ character, I’m thinkin’, if ye canna distinguish
between the spontaneous flow o’ the milk o’ human kind-
ness, and the fause remarks o’ an interested indiveedual.
My name is Mackay,” he concluded with dignity, “ Big
(B 60") 17 B


Mackay they call me in Australia.” He paused, and gazed
searchingly at Wentworth. “ Now,” he added, and strangely
enough there was no trace of the Doric in his language,
“ you may come and lunch with me at the Central if you
wish, and I’ll tell you about Australia, and if you prefer
otherwise, why, there’s no harm done.”
He wheeled quickly and strode to the door, but the
boys were by a common impulse at his side before he was
half a dozen yards down the street.
“ I am sorry if I appeared to doubt your good intentions,
Mr. Mackay,” said Wentworth, “ but we are ignorant of
the bigger world which you know so well, and kindnesses
from strangers have not often come our way. But we
have heard of you, sir; why, I believe it was through
reading of you in the Herald some days ago that we
decided to go to Australia.”
The big man laughed good-naturedly. “ You were quite
right, my boy,” said he, “ but you may ken me better in
future. It’s no’ so long since I was young mysel’,” he
concluded with a sigh.
By this time they were entering the hotel, and the
boys were much impressed to observe the many tributes of
respect which greeted their guide. Evidently his strange
personality had become well known during his brief
sojourn in the land of his fathers. Soon they were seated
in the dining-room at a table conveniently remote from
the others, and before the meal was finished Mackay was
in possession of the lads’ brief histories, and had been
informed of their uncontrollable longing to get away to a
new country.
“ And your uncle went oot to Australia ten years ago ? ”
he repeated musingly, when Wentworth told him his


story. “ Well, well, Australia is a big country, and it’s
no likely ye’ll meet him there. Why canna ye content
yersel’s where ye are ? ” he demanded brusquely.
“We can never hope for much if we remain here,
argued Wentworth. “And we should like to have a
chance ”
H Just so,” gravely said Mackay, “just so, my young
shavers. Well, I can tell ye this, some folk can do well
in any part o’ this wee planet, and others and they aie
in the majority—are never much good. Energy and enter-
prise are what is wanted, and nae whining after hame ”
“ I thought,” interjected Armstrong, slyly, “ that I
heard you whistling ‘ Home, Sweet Home! ’ m the ship-
ping office ? ” „
Mackay beamed. “ It’s very kind of ye to say so, he
replied. “ Maist o’ my acquaintances asseverate that my
whustle is like a deein’ dug’s lament, an’ no fit to be
translated into any tune whatsoever. But, all the same
Jack, my man, that’s a tune I can only whustle when I
am at hame ; it makes me think things are no’ as meeser-
able as they seem. Why, you young scamps, a man should
be at hame anywhere. As for me I’m maist at hame when
I’m awa’ from hame, which is what I call a paradoxical
statement o’ fact for ye to moralize on. Many years ago,”
he went on, “ I sailed oot o’ the Clyde as chief engineer on
one o’ the finest boats that was ever launched, but when I
got to Australia and fell in touch wi’ Bentley’s exploring
expedition, my good resolutions for a quiet ordmar’ exist-
ence squelched oot o’ me like the wind frae a punctured
bicycle tyre. ‘ I want ye, Mac,’ said Bentley, ‘to cross the
Never Never wi’ me.’ He had another rusty-heided Scots-
man in his company, an auld friend o’ mine, an’ I said,
19


‘ Well, if it’s only to keep that gorilla-faced Pharisee oot
o’ mischief, I’ll come.’ An’—an’ I went, an’ I’ve been
living like an aboriginal ever since ; an’ now that I’ve come
back to look at my ain country, I feel like a pelican in the
wilderness. I came awa’ to try and forget aboot things,
an’—an’ it’s no’ possible.”
Mackay ceased; his eyes seemed to gaze into the
distance, and his good-humoured countenance for the
moment became drawn and haggard. His eager listeners
too, felt the spell of his sadness, and for some minutes
there was a sympathetic silence; then Armstrong spoke.
“ Will you tell us about it, Mr. Mackay,” he asked gently,
and without a word of introduction the big man began his
story —
“ We were three mouths oot on our exploring journey
into Central Australia, and had come through the usual
amount o’ hardships —suffering from want o’ water,
occasional skirmishes wi’ the niggers, and other similar
trifles, and at this time the Chief was considerin’ that we
had a good chance o’ cuttiu’ through a maist promisin’
lookin’ tract o’ country which had never before been
reached. As it was, we were further into the heart o’
Australia than any explorer had ever penetrated, and every
one o’ us was fu’ o’ enthusiasm aboot our prospects, and
dreamed o’ findin’ a new Eldorado in this far back
country we were enterin’ upon. But one morning, when
we were east o’ the 125 th longitude, one of the pack
camels grew obstreperous, and broke away into the bush to
the nor’-east. We couldn’t afford to lose the cantankerous
animal; besides, he carried a fair amount o’ our stores on
his back. To make a long story short, I volunteered to
track him up and fetch him back. ‘ Don’t go too far, Mac,’


said Bentley to me as I was starting out, ‘ I’m none too
sure of this district, there may be natives about. _
“But what did I care about a wheen niggers \e
needna wait for me/ I shouted back. 'IU fetch he
beastie a’ richt. and cut your trail afore you ve travelle
a dozen miles.’ ’’ Mackay stopped and sighed deeply.
“ And what happened 1 ” asked Wentworth and Arm-
strong almost with one breath.
“ Heaven only knows, my lads. I never saw any o
the party again. I tracked up Misery that was re
camel’s name-hut he took me a gey long travel and i
was late at night when I started to go back, hut though 1
pushed hard to the south’ard until well into the next day,
I couldna pick up a sign o’ a track. A camel s pad is no
easily missed, and though the ground was more broken
and hilly than usual, I felt sure I couldna have crossed
their route o’ march. Back I went again, examining the
ground maist carefully, then a’ at once I got a sair shoe .
I came on a soft patch o’ sand, and every bit o it was
marked wi’ natives’ footprints. I could see the marks o
their big, fiat feet everywhere round aboot, and they te t
me as plainly as if I had seen the niggers themselves that
they had come in from the east, and had gone back over
their ain tracks within the last half-dozen hours,
needna tell ye what I feared then. Though I hadna had
a drink o’ water nor a bite to eat since I left the camp, a
thought o’ hunger or thirst left me, as I traced the nigger
tracks backwards to the west. They took me straight to
our old camp where Misery had broken away, and what do
you think I saw there ?
The boys shook their heads wonderingly.
“Only bones; bones, in the middle o’ a lot o ashes
21


which were still warm, and the smell o’ bnrnin’ was like
the stench o’ a nigger corroboree. I turned again on then-
tracks. I must have been mad, for one man could do
little against a tribe that had wiped out one of the finest
expeditions that ever ventured into the Never Never Land,
but I was desperate, and I tracked the skunks like a
bloodhound. My throat was parched, my tongue was too
big for my jaws, but I felt that I would gang under wi’
pleasure if I could only get my rifle sights on the brutes
first. But I couldna get even that satisfaction. Before
I had gone far I was stopped by a mountain that seemed
to rise like a wall straight from the flats. I hadn’t seen
it before, so I may have followed further than I thought,
or maybe the sand haze had hidden it from our view. No
one has ever believed that a mountain like it exists in
that country, and I’m the only white man that knows it
to be there. I was too weak to climb it, and after three
or four tries I sat at the bottom and just raved.
“ How I returned beats me yet to understand. The
water-bag on Misery’s back was empty, and our last
spring charted was fifty miles to westward, wi’ five
hundred miles beyond that again to a mining camp. I’m
no navigator, only a bushman, but somehow I got back,
the only survivor of the party, and I felt like a murderer
cornin’ in alone. I was the Chief’s righthand man for
ten years, my lads, and a straighter or better-hearted
leader never lived. Then there was my old comrade
Stewart wi’ the red hair, wha I used to misca’ so sairly;
Pioneer Bill the bushman, and young Morris the geologist
—they’re a’ gone, and I’m the puir unfortunate that’s
left. , . . I came home here wi’ the intention o’ stoppin’
if I could; but the bush draws me back and I must go.”


■■ I am very, very sorry," said Wentworth, breaking
the pause that followed; “ I can appreciate your feelings
most deeply. It must be a vast country, that Never
Never Land.” „ A
“It has claimed many a victim, my boy, answered
Mackay. “ But Western Australia is not all the same
he hastened to add cheerfully. “ Around Kalgoorlie and
north into Pilbarra the richest gold mines in the world
have been found, and it’s the thought that there s a
treasure-house o’ gold and gems in the far-back land that
makes explorers risk their lives in that awtul desert It s
the chance o’ striking Eldorado that sends us wanderers
into such out o’ way corners o’ the world. But I didna
ask ye here to tell ye my experiences. If you have real y
made up your minds to go to Australia, an I honestly
believe it’s the best country tor any young man, 111 no
only advise you, but I'll accompany you, and I can say
this, that what I dinna know about gold mining is no
worth knowing. I have never made a fortune at the
oame, but there's no denyin’ that fortunes have been
made. I’ve taken a fancy to you, my laddies, and IU see
that you come to no harm. If ye’re short o’ lucre, e
continued. “ I’ll advance ye anything ye need."
Even Wentworth’s reserve utterly broke down after
this thank you for your goodness ? ” he said
oratefully “ I for one shall be glad to go with you
& « And’ I feel that I could follow you anywhere, Mr.
Mackay,” broke in Armstrong, eagerly. .
The elder man smiled grimly. “Maybe yell thin
more seriously o’ these words some day,” he replied
enigmatically. “Meanwhile, get awa’ hame and ma-e


your arrangements without any unnecessary delay, for we
must catch the P. and 0. Mongolia at London next Friday.
Like enough,” he concluded, with a laugh, “we’ll hae
mutual cause for congratulation over our partnership.”
He shook hands heartily with each of the lads, and
accompanying them downstairs, watched them disappear
into the street.
“ Poor young fellows,” he said musingly, as he turned
away, “ I was just the same mysel’ at that age, discon-
tented, ambitious. . , . But the likeness canna be doubted.
Ah, well, I’ve just done what the Chief himsel’ would have
done had he been here.”
“Well, Jack, what do you think of him?” asked
Wentworth, as he and his companion walked homewards.
“ I think he is the kindest-hearted man I have ever
met,” was Armstrong’s enthusiastic response.
“ I like him, too,” admitted Wentworth, “ and I expect
to like him more when I know him better. What a
strong man he must be; why, his chest measurement
must be nearly fifty! ”
“ Only a strong man could have endured what he has
suffered, Bob,” said Armstrong, “ and,” with boyish
delight, “he must be a real beauty in a scrimmage. His
wrists seemed like bars of steel.”
“He just bears out my opinion,” spoke Wentworth,
thoughtfully, “ that travel broadens the mind more than is
generally allowed, and destroys all trace of parochialism
in a man’s nature. I don’t think, for instance,” he
declared, “ that that man would care two straws whether
we were Scotch, English, or Irish; it’s humanity that
counts with him ”
“Please don’t wander me with philosophical reasoning


just now, Bob,” pleaded Armstrong. “All lean say is,
that I liked the man immediately I saw him, and I think
we were very lucky in meeting him.”
Never for a moment did these two think of drawing
back from the projected journey. It was characteristic of
them to accept their first decision as final, and the near-
ness of the day for sailing, as fixed by Mackay, in no wise
appalled them. Neither of them was given to noisy
exuberance.
“Environment has done it, Jack,” said Wentworth,
sagely. “ You see we have been so much together, and
have had so little time for amusement; then my tempera-
ment was always a bit studious, and, consequently, you
have suffered ”
“ Don’t, Bob,” interjected Armstrong; “ you talk like
an old man, and you are not nineteen yet. When we get
under the sunny skies of Australia, we’ll view things
differently, and, who knows, we may come back with a
fortune in a year or two.”
“ Who knows, indeed ? ” repeated Wentworth, absently
gripping the boy’s arm, and in this way they proceeded
until they arrived at their little room on the top flat of
No. 590, Great Southern Eoad.
That evening they broke the news of their early
departure to their amiable landlady, Mrs. Campbell, much
to that worthy woman’s dismay.
“ Eh, but, laddies, ye canna mean it! ” she exclaimed.
“Ye would gang to that awfu’ country whaur the black
bodies live ”
“ But they are not all black, Mrs. Campbell,” said
Wentworth, soothingly. “In fact, the aborigines are
becoming an extinct race.”


“ I dinna care what sort o’ race they are becoming,”
moaned she, beginning to apply her apron to her eyes.
“ An’ forbye, what dae ye want to gang oot there for ? Ye
baith are daein’ sae weel in the engineerin’ office, and in
time ye micht be managers.”
“ That’s a period too far distant for us to calculate on,
Mrs. Campbell,” said Armstrong, cheerily, though he was
much distressed by the good woman’s genuine emotion.
“ And our ambitions are giving us a shove along ”
“Ambitions, ambitions,” wailed poor Mrs. Campbell.
“ And what should ye want wi’ ambitions, at your age ?
They are nae guid to ye; in fact it’s doonricht wrang
for ye to hae them; they’ve never brocht happiness to
ony man yet! ” And she rushed from the room much
affected.
“ She’s a real good sort,” said Wentworth, “ but very
unreasonable,” w r ith which mature reflection he reached
down a copy of “ Eaper’s Navigation ” from a shelf, and
began to read assiduously, while Armstrong, with a
whistle of relief, started to overhaul his wardrobe in
preparation for their ocean trip.
The following day was a very busy one for the boys.
After packing their most necessary belongings, they called
on Mr. Mackay to receive his advice as to the outfit re-
quired. That gentleman met them, genial as ever.
“ Ocean travel is no the same as it used to be,” said
he; “ an’ a’ you’ll need is twa or three light suits for the
tropics. It’s no’ as if you were to be months at sea,” he
explained, “an’ you may leave your West Australian
wardrobe to take care o’ itself —it will no be much o’ a
consideration.”
But he was not satisfied, nevertheless, until he went


round the shops with them, and saw them fitted out with
all that was needful.
“ And now, my lad,” he said, when they had finished,
addressing himself to Wentworth, “if you 11 tak my
advice, you’ll gang hame and break the news as gently as
ye can to your mother, for I can see ye havena telt her o
yer new plans yet. I’m a great believer in young fellows
shouldering their ain responsibilities as early as possible,
but ye can never get a truer friend than yer mother, an
I hope ye’ll no forget that. I’m a rough hand at preaching,
being mair used wi’ other sort o language, and, and
Here Mackay’s usually eloquent verbiage failed him, and
he floundered hopelessly. “Be back in good time to leave
wi’ me for London on Thursday morning,” he finished,
recovering himself quickly, and they turned to go. But
Mackay suddenly seemed to remember something, and he
called them back.
“ I was thinkin’ o’ buyin’ you some books to read on the
ship,” said he, “ and I was wondering how your tastes
might lie. I don’t mean novels,” he hastened to add,
“ but books that might serve as a study.”
“Well leave the choice to you, Mr. Mackay,” said
Wentworth, with a smile; and again they departed, yet
once more they were called back. Mackay was evidently
ill at ease, for he hesitated in his speech, and, if possible,
his bronzed cheeks became a shade deeper in colour.
“ I’ve arranged aboot the tickets, he said at length,
“ so you’ll hae no need to trouble in that direction.
Without waiting for a reply he wheeled suddenly, and
strode down the street, leaving the boys rooted to the spot
wholly overcome by the generous speech.
“He must have guessed our one great difficulty, said


Wentworth, flushing deeply. “ Well, Jack, our obligations
to Mr. Mackay will take some wiping out.”
Later on in the evening, when the boys were talking
over the events of the day in their little room, the land-
lady entered with a heavy parcel of books.
“A messenger has just brocht these,” said she, “wi’
Mr. Mackay’s compliments.”
“ He is a gem,” spoke Jack, emphatically, as he cut
the string of the package, whereupon half a dozen hand-
some volumes were disclosed, three for Bob, and three for
himself. They seized their possessions with avidity.
Leckie’s Navigation,’ ‘ Nautical Almanac,’ and
‘ Burns’s Poems,’ ” announced Wentworth, gleefully, gazing
at his treasures. “ Now, how could he have known that I
wanted these so much ? ”
“ ‘ Mining Engineer’s Handbook,’ ‘ Metallurgy of Gold,’
and ‘Shakespeare,’ ” read out Jack, handling the volumes
reverently, “ Now, how could he have guessed our pet
studies ? ”
“It beats me,” said Bob. “ I won’t be surprised at
anything Mackay knows after this. He is a conundrum.”
“ He is the decentest sort we have ever met,” cried
Jack, warmly.
“ We agree on that,” concurred Bob, gravely.


CHAPTER II
Outward Bound
THE few days preceding the sailing of the Mongolia
passed very quickly; Wentworth, accompanied by
Armstrong, spent most of the time at Mrs. Wentworth’s
home in Lincolnshire. Strangely enough, Bob’s mother
did not, in any way, try to dissuade them from their
journey.
“ You have the roving instinct of your father, Robert,”
she said, with pensive calmness. “ I have expected this,
and can only pray that you may be kept safe in the
guiding care of the All Wise Providence which watches
over the wanderer on land as on sea.”
But his sister had not the same restraint, and it made
Armstrong’s tender heart sore to witness the grief of the
girl.
“You may be killed —you may both be killed,” she
sobbed.
“ There is no fear of that, Lucy,” laughed Bob.
“ I’ll take care of him, Miss Lucy,” said Jack,
hesitatingly, almost equally affected.
“ Why, you are just a boy,” she exclaimed, smiling at
him through her tears.
“ I’m only a year younger than Bob,” he protested
stoutly, drawing himself up to his full height of five feet


seven and a half inches, and looking at her reproachfully ;
at which, to Jack’s dismay, she gave way again to her
emotion, her beautiful brown hair falling over her face
like a glorious mantle.
“ It’s for you, too,” she murmured brokenly. “Oh,
Jack, you are Bob’s chum, and I shall miss you too.”
Wherepon the usually light-hearted boy seemed to become
a man at once.
“ I have no other friends,” he said quietly; then he
stammered, “ I did not think any one could miss me,” he
concluded, with just a trace of pathos in his voice. And
at that moment his friendship for Bob seemed to be riveted
afresh, so keenly did the kindly word of sympathy from
the girl appeal to his generous nature.
Prompt to the advertised hour, the P. and 0. Mongolia
cast off her moorings and steamed out of Tilbury Docks,
and on the upper deck of the splendid vessel, among the
assembled crowd of passengers, stood Mackay and the
two youthful adventurers. They had arrived in London
the night before, and had spent a very pleasant evening
listening to a classic concert in the Queen’s Hall which
Mackay had insisted on them hearing. Bob thought
their patron and friend was once more sacrificing himself
to what he imagined was their particular taste; but, to
his surprise, that worthy individual had taken a strong
interest in the entire programme, and especially applauded
the young soprano who sang so magnificently a very
difficult Italian aria.
“ It’s no because I’m a singer myseT,” he explained
apologetically, “ and I dinna understan’ a word o’ the
song, but I’m a wonderfu’ lover o’ guid music all the same.
I think it’s sort o’ soothing to my mental faculties.”


Jack grinned and looked incredulous, but at that
moment the young lady reappeared in answer to the
vociferous demand for an encore, and soon the haunting
strains of “ Home, Sweet Home! ” filled the vast hall.
Again the doubting youngster looked at his stalwart
neighbour, and lo! the eyes of the ex-bushman were
wet.
Now all three watched the receding shores of England
with somewhat sad eyes, and when at last night had
fallen, and the vessel was cautiously feeling her way
towards the Bay of Biscay through a murky fog, they
descended to their cabin and began to arrange their
baggage and make preparations for dinner. The next
three days were uneventful, though Jack insisted that
his sufferings in the dreaded Bay were severe enough to
warrant mention in the ship’s log. He only of the trio
was affected by the rolling and pitching of the ship,
though he had goodly company among the rest of the
passengers. As for Bob and Mackay, they walked the
deck through it all. But even sea-sickness comes to an
end, and before the Mongolia reached Gibraltar Jack was
feeling himself again, and his boisterous spirits did much
to infuse a sympathetic cheerfulness among the rest of
the passengers, whose reserve was beginning to break
away as they entered the sunny waters of the blue
Mediterranean. Bob had found endless interest in watch-
ing the various headlands sighted on the Portuguese and
Spanish coasts, and when the frowning Eock of Gibraltar
was in sight, his eagerness became intense. To him
history became almost a living thing when he gazed at
the grim monuments of a glorious past. And Mackay
was ever near to instruct and to interest by the narration


of more or less personal experiences of his own in the
various ports visited. Indeed, Mackay’s knowledge was
little short of marvellous, and the boys saw many phases
of his character during their first week at sea. The
general passengers too soon became interesting to them.
The Mongolia had on board a very representative com-
munity. Some were going to India, not a few to China
and Japan, while the remainder comprised principally
Australians from the different states of the Common-
wealth returning home after a visit to the Old Country.
Before Aden had been reached, owing to the genial
influence of the captain, a feeling of good fellowship
pervaded the ship, and the entire company became as
one huge family. Deck sports were a daily occurrence,
and concerts and dances took place every other evening.
The sea was calm as glass, flying fish rose in scattering
clouds from the surging wavelets created by the ship’s
bows, and porpoises played merrily around the vessel as
it dashed on its unerring course. But on the upper deck
the double awning scarcely obscured the penetrating rays
of the scorching sun, and the close sweltering heat in the
cabins below was almost unbearable. At Aden all the
India bound passengers disembarked and changed into
an awaiting vessel which connected with Bombay, and
the time allowed before the Mongolia resumed her course
was amply sufficient to permit of Mackay and his proteges
going ashore.
There is not much to attract at this port. It is
simply a military barracks and coaling-station, with an
enormous importance, of course, as a British naval base.
Mackay explained this at length to Jack, who was always
eager for information.


Outward Bound
“ It’s the key o’ the Red Sea,” he announced, “ just in
the same degree as Gib. is the key o’ the Mediterranean.”
“ But the Red Sea is not of very much interest to
Britain, is it ? ” said Bob, questioningly.
“ Maybe no, though I canna allow that any part o’ His
Majesty s ocean is without its due importance; but, ye
see, Aden protects India by watching the ships that come
through the Red Sea, and forby there’s no vessel o’ war
belonging to another nation could steam past withoot
comin in for coal ’ This in a burst of patriotic
fervour. “ Why, when the German Emperor’s brother
went oot to China, a year or so back, in his big gun-
boat, he touched at nothing but British ports all the way.”
Mackay chuckled with amusement at the recollection.
“ There used to be a tree growing at Aden,” he said again,
when they recovered themselves, “ but some one that
doesn’t believe in oddities has evidently cut it down.”
Nothing but sand and bare rocks could be seen all
around, so his surmise was probably quite accurate.
“ Aren’t there some huge tanks near here ? ” asked Bob.
" 1 heard they were the only sight worth seeincr in
Aden.”
“ You’re quite richt; they’re no exactly in Aden, being
about five miles back in the hills. But we have just time
to visit them.”
He called a waiting garry at once, and directing the
Somali driver, they set out to view the giant reservoirs
which date their origin away back in the mists of antiquity.
Bob and Jack looked very different individuals from what
they were a few weeks before. Dressed in whites, and
v earing sun-helmets, they seemed already to be quite
accustomed to the heat; the old tired look had vanished
(b 607> 33 c


from their faces, and the light of awakening interest was
in their eyes. As for Mackay, under his big, umbrella-
shaped head-covering, the same kindly face was visible,
perhaps a little redder than it was before, but, as he said
himself, it was regaining its natural tan.
“I believe in harmony o’ colour,” he gravely said,
“ and there should be nae contrast between my moustache
and its surrounding beauties.”
When they reached the tanks, which in appearance were
as huge caverns graven out of the solid rock, the engineeiing
training of the boys was at once evident by their remarks.
“ What a mighty work it must have been,” mused Bob.
“ King Solomon’s Tanks,” announced Mackay, taking
upon himself the onus of dispensing knowledge, “were
built, or rather excavated, about three thousand years ago.
You will observe that they are so situated as to catch the
natural drainage o’ the surrounding country, and when
rain fell, which was seldom, the tanks got filled, and—and
when it didna fall—of course, they remained empty ! ”
“ Of course,” agreed they both, promptly.
Mackay looked pained.
“Ye shouldna concur wi’ my statements so sudden
like,” said he. Then he endeavoured to get on to the rails
again. “They got silted up wi’ the sand after long
disuse,” he continued. “ and they were only discovered and
re-excavated some years back; but they are of service to
show what an old civilization could do, and to prove that
the climate was different then, for now ye could hardly
droon a mosquito in a’ the water they collect. He
ceased, then murmured blandly, “ This country is too hot
for me to wax eloquent wi’ ony modicum o pleasure, or I
wad go into geo-logical details concerning it.


“Is there anything you don’t know, Mr. Mackay ? ”
inquired Bob, with a smile.
“No’ a thing. I’m a walkin’ Encyclopaedia—just
burstin’ wi’ knowledge. No, I’m wrang; there’s ane or
twa metapheesical matters that beat me. I’ll own to that
frankly.”
Then they returned to the ship, and amused them-
selves watching the dusky patriarchal vendors of ostrich
feathers who had come on hoard, endeavouring to sell
their wares. It particularly interested them to notice
how cheerfully these dealers accepted finally less than
a half of their first demands. The Somali diving hoys
with the strange yellow hair and the glistening teeth also
attracted their attention. These youngsters, some of them
maimed in horrible fashion, appealed to the sympathy of
the passengers by singing in raucous chorus an aged and
once popular London song. The authorities by this time
had forbidden their wonted occupation owing to the
multitudes of sharks infesting the exposed harbour.
Early in the evening the Mongolia once more got under
way, and, with her reduced passenger-list, headed for
Colombo, the port of the spicy Isle of Ceylon.
Among the passengers bound for Australia was a
middle-aged, wiry-looking personage named Carew, whose
deeply browned face bore the unmistakable evidence of
long years’ sojourn in the tropics. Mackay had recognized
him on the day of embarkation, but had studiously avoided
him ever since.
“He’s a famous New Guinea explorer,” he informed
Bob and Jack, “ but he’s a terrible talker, and I’m no
vera willin’ to be afflicted wi’ his remarks.”
Several times, nevertheless, the boys noticed that Carew


always gazed doubtfully at Mackay when they chanced to
meet on deck, and on each occasion that individual would
reply with a stare of studied nonchalance. However, after
leaving Aden, the passengers were so much reduced that
they were all thrown into daily contact with each other,
and occasionally Mackay found himself on the same side
as Carew in the course of a cricket-match. But it was
after they had left the Island of Socotra two days astern
that any definite conversation passed between them; A
match had just been concluded between the “Weary
Wayfarers” and “The Hew Chums,” two delightfully
named opposing teams made up from the greatest travellers
on board and the more or less untravelled community,
and the “ Weary Wayfarers ” had been summarily defeated.
Bob and Jack were shining lights at such contests, and
Bob’s bowling had on this occasion been mainly responsible
for the downfall of the Wayfarers, while Jack on his part
had made the top score of his side. Carew and Mackay
were making a straight course for the smoke-room when
the former gentleman broke out abruptly—
“ I’ve been trying a long time to remember, Mackay,
where I met you before, and now I’ve got it. There
couldn’t be another phiz like yours in the whole of this
wretched planet.”
“ I ken my personal adornments are a rare gift,”
placidly returned the Scot, “ and, to return the compliment,
I may say I’ve never been surprised at your many
marvellous escapes from the New Guinean cannibals.
“ And why so ? ” queried Carew, much pleased.
“ Because a sicht o’ your figure-head would destroy
any nigger’s appetite, an’ ”
I give you best, Mackay; I give you best,” hastily


interposed the other. “ But weren’t you with Bentley’s
Expedition in New Guinea four years ago ? Oh, I’m sure
of you now. Where did you leave Bentley ? ”
By this time they were snugly ensconced in a corner
of the smoke-room. Mackay solemnly rang the bell.
“ He went under on the last expedition in the West,”
he said grimly, when the steward had attended to their
requests, —“ I was the only one that escaped.”
Carew gave a cry of genuine pain. “ Poor Bentley,”
he muttered brokenly, “ another one gone in that accursed
country, and I never knew. We pioneers don’t get much
of an obituary notice, Mackay.”
Mackay silently agreed. “ Don’t speak about it before
these youngsters of mine,” he said. “ They’re going out
to the West with me, and I don’t want them to be
discouraged.”
He rose to go, but just then Bob appeared. “ There’s
a small island on the port how, Mackay,” he announced.
“ Can you tell me anything about it ? I can’t find it on
the chart.”
“ It's the coral isle called Minacoy,” volunteered Carew,
looking out. “ It’s the most southerly atoll of the Laccadive
group of islands, and when the sea is rough it is almost
invisible.”
They all went out to have a look. The Mongolia
passed quite close to the coral beach, and though the sea
was calm the roar of the surge beating on the shallows
was plainly heard. A tall lighthouse with a background
of palms was observable, and a solitary watcher came out
while they gazed and waved a friendly greeting.
“ Vt hat a lonely life the lighthouse keeper’s must be ! ”
said Jack, and he expressed the sentiments of all.


The next day the Mongolia arrived at Colombo, and
here the boys saw much to interest them. The spacious
harbour with its huge artificial breakwater was in itself a
great attraction, and they watched the clouds of spray
that dashed full fifty feet into the air all along the guard-
ing barrier with keen delight. But on shore the rickshaw
rides surpassed all other forms of amusement. They
visited the far-famed Cinnamon gardens in these strange
vehicles, they tried races along the Galle Face road, and
lastly rickshawed with Mackay to Mount Lavinia some
five miles distant from the town. The Cingalese gem
merchants who swarmed everywhere were a source of
wonder to them. They marvelled how so many seemingly
needy individuals possessed such stores of rubies, diamonds,
sapphires, and pearls, and which, according to their
demands, were worth a prince’s ransom. Mackay only
laughed when Jack mentioned his surprise at their
apparent affluence.
“ You want to develop your powers o’ observation, my
laddie,” said he, enigmatically ; and Jack, not quite under-
standing the rebuke, was in no wise edified. Bob, too,
was rather impressed by the courtesy of the same
fraternity.
“ Master,” an odd-looking personage in flowing garb
and with plaited hair would say, “ Master, you buy goodie
ruby from me ? ” and at once a string of somewhat
similarly attired merchants would gather round and watch
the expected process of bargaining silently. But they
were not quite as innocent and free from guile as they
looked.
“ What do you think of this, Bob ? ” cried Jack, hold-
ing up a huge crystal, which a smiling Cingalee with a


strange little basket for a cap had proffered him for sale.
They were sitting under the revolving fans in the Hotel
Bristol, watching the gay panorama of colour that con-
stantly flitted before them. Mackay had left them to
their own devices for an hour or so, and they were now
awaiting his return.
Bob examined the gaudy crystal with pretended
keenness.
“No good; it’s only glass,” he said shortly, never
dreaming that his idle statement was correct.
“No glass! no glass! ” earnestly asserted the Cin-
galee. “ White sapphire, goodie stone. You try,” he
added, as a final proof of his honesty; “ you tramp so.”
He placed the stone under his slippered foot, and pressed
ever so lightly. “ You try,” he implored, handing the
stone to Bob, whom he now regarded as the one obstacle
to the sale of his treasure. “If glass it break.”
“ The poor beggar seems honest,” said Jack, feeling
quite sorry for the man. “ How much ?” he asked.
“ Five pounds, master,”
“I don’t want the stone,” said Jack, “and anyhow I
haven’t got five pounds in my pocket. I’ll give you one
pound for it,” he concluded jokingly. Before he had
fully realized it the gem was his, and the late owner was
exhorting him to secrecy concerning the sacrificial price it
had commanded. “ Other men no like me selling so cheap,”
he explained, then vanished hurriedly as Mackay entered.
“ And so you’ve bought a sapphire,” he said with a
chuckle, when Jack proudly displayed his purchase. “ How
much did ye gie for it ? Sixpence ? ”
“ Isn’t it genuine ? ” asked Bob. “ I said it was glass;
but he asked me to stamp on it.


“ Ay, ay, that’s an old trick; he chanced ye no’ takin’
him at his word.” He placed the doubtful stone beneath
the toe of his shoe, and in an instant nothing remained but
powdered glass. Jack’s dismay was great, and noting it,
Mackay patted the boy cheerily on the back. “ It’s a
grand thing to have faith in human nature,” he said
kindly. “ And I’d rather see you mak’ a mistake that
way than the other way. A’ the same when you go
oot into the world it’s surprising how much deceit
you see.”
After a stay of a day and a half the Mongolia entered
upon the longest phase of her journey across the equator
and down by the north-western coast of Australia to
Fremantle. Several more passengers had been left at
Colombo including those bound for the farther East, who
continued their journey by connecting boat, so that the
ship’s party was now very small indeed. To the boys’
surprise the heat experienced when crossing the line was
nothing compared with that already felt in the Ked Sea;
but Mackay was not wanting with his explanation.
“ The desert sands on both sides o’ the Eed Sea absorb
the heat and intensify it,” explained he, “so that the
winds that blow from either east or west are like blasts
oot o’ a furnace, while here the winds are tempered by
passing over hundreds o’ miles o’ sea.”
“In any case,” added Carew, who was standing near,
“ there are no sandy stretches in this part of the world,
and the prevailing breezes blow in from the sweet-scented
islands of Java and New Guinea.”
“ I was o’ the opinion,” began Mackay, after some
thought, severely eyeing the last speaker, “ that this
information bureau was my funeral. I was aboot to send


oot twa or three chunks o’ knowledge when you interrupted,
and noo my inspiration’s vanished.”
Carew laughed good-naturedly. “Never mind, Mackay,
said he; “I will relieve you for a bit, and entertain Went-
worth and Armstrong by spinning them a true yarn. Get
your deck-chairs all, and prepare for something thrilling.
By the time Carew was ready to start nearly every
passenger on board was clustered round him in eager
expectation.
“ Two years ago,” he began, in reminiscent tones, “ I
was camped on a tributary of the Fly Fiver in New
Guinea, which was a most unhealthy district to camp in,
owm o- to the fact that two rival cannibal tribes had their
O
quarters close handy. However, I wanted to prospect for
gold and gems in the surrounding country, and so decided
to take all risks. But in order to minimize these risks as
much as possible, I paid a visit to the chief or Mamoose
of what I imagined to be the more powerful of the two
tribes, and presented him with the only article in my
camp I had no use for—an alarm clock. The old boy
was quite delighted with it, and promptly insisted on
wearing it hung from a chain around his neck; not only
that, but when I showed him how to wind it up and ring
the alarm, he immediately informed his 'warriors that it
was a charm which would ensure success in all battles.
Indeed, he wanted to start right then and march against
the Tugeris, his warlike neighbours, but while I was
arguing the point with him —I didn t w T ant any circus in
the vicinity at that time —the ‘ Che-ep ! Che-ep! of these
wretched Tugeris sounded through the trees. They had
evidently anticipated attack at this period and so were
taking time by the forelock. On they came, shouting that


peculiar battle-cry of theirs which gets on one’s nerves so
quickly. The old Mamoose, with the clock anchored firmly
round his neck, sailed in to meet them at the head of his
warriors, and I made lightning tracks in the opposite
direction. All next day I waited down the river with my
canoe in readiness. If the clock Mamoose won, I was
safe as a house; if he didn’t I was as good as cold meat if
I didn’t get out lively. I was getting mighty nervous, and
couldn’t quite see how I was to know which side won,
when, all of a sudden, a huge crocodile hove out of the
water close beside me, and at that instant the noise of an
alarm clock going off sounded out of his gaping mouth
like a piano prelude through a gramophone trumpet. That
fixed it, gentlemen. I won’t go into my theories as to how
the clock got there. They were strong enough for me,
and I scooted, and a good job too, for when I was at Port
Moresby some weeks later I was told that the Tugeris had
fairly swept the country.”
“Ye certainly had a maist providential warning,”
spoke Mackay, dryly, breaking the dubious silence that
followed.
“ Come on, Mackay,” said Carew, leading the way to
the smoke-room.
“ Eight you are,” retorted the other; and they departed
arm in arm, much to the amusement of the assembly.
Three days later they sighted the Cocos group of
islands on the horizon, and in a very short time were
passing quite close to the largest of them. Nothing but a
forest of palms could be seen at first, then a slight in-
dentation on the coast line revealed a schooner and several
smaller craft lying at anchor in front of a row of native
dwellings.


« The first king of these islands,” Mackay informed the
lads, “was a Glasgow Scotsman. Old King Boss did a
wonderful amount o’ pioneering work in these seas, and
hoisted the British flag here without the assistance of a
crunhoat. He was a strange man, and knew well how to
handle the natives.”
“ But what do they do ? ” asked Jack.
“ They grow cocoanuts and make copra, my lad ; they
find a good market for it in Colombo and Singapore.
“ Are all the islands in this part of the Indian Ocean
of coral formation ? ” asked Bob, looking at the white low-
lying shores with interest.
« Oh no,” laughed Mackay, “ there’s Christmas Island,
for instance, about five hundred odd miles east of these,
and it is nothing short of a mountain, and its shores go
down into the water almost as steep as the side of a
house ’ {( ,
“ I say, Mackay,” interrupted Carew, petulantly, now
do you know anything about Christmas Island ? It’s the
most ungetatable place on the face of the earth, l\ e
heard that very few white men have ever been there.
«I’m one of the few,” imperturbably answered Mackay.
“ I sailed there from North Australia in a pearling lugger,”
he condescended to explain. # .
“ And do they grow copra there too ? ” inquired an
interested bystander. ,
“Oh no; it’s a guano island and belongs to 1 1
Christmas Island syndicate. A very fine paying concern
it is too, though the island is not more than twenty miles
or so in circumference.”
“ I didn’t think guano islands were much good to any
one,” hazarded Bob.


Didn t you ? Well, that’s no’ sin-prisin’, seein’ that
we don’t hear much about them; but I know a man who
has a steam yacht, and he keeps constantly explorin’ the
ocean for guano islands. It’s a good payin’ business right
enough, though I wouldna care much aboot diggin’ phos-
phates mysel’, gold bein’ more my attraction.”
To the boys the idea of unknown islands in these
latitudes was distinctly pleasing. The world to them was
taking on a less crowded aspect. The smiling sea still
held her unknown Crusoe islands. The romance had not
all gone from the earth. The days were passing very
quickly now, soon Fremantle would be reached, and then
who knew what good fortune might speedily be theirs ?
Bob and Jack looked into the future with unhesitating
e} es Theirs had been no boyish whim, and as they
neared Australia’s coast their pulses quickened, the sense
of freedom was in their blood, the spirit of conquest
surged through their hearts; and Mackay, noting then-
steady courage, felt strangely cheered. On the evening
before the Mongolia was expected to reach Fremantle a
concert was held in the saloon, in order to bring together
lor the last time the entire assembly, for quite a number
were disembarking at Fremantle; and Bob and Jack were
ed out foi special adulation by the chairman—none
other than Mr. Carew—who warmly wished them God-
speed m the new country they were entering upon.
They, like us all,” he said in his laudatory address
seek their Eldorado. To them it is something real’
tangible; to us who have chased the elusive phantom it
has somewhat lost its zest. But youth and courage shall
conquer where the weary wanderer must fail, and I fully
expect our boys to attain their ambition by sheer manly


grit before they have time to grow weary of the pioneer’s
life. They are especially fortunate,” he continued, looking
towards Mackay, “ in having the guiding care of an old
and experienced traveller —one whose deeds always speak
louder than his words, but whose speech when occasion
demands is forcible and conclusive. Only an explorer
can fully appreciate a brother explorer’s work; I take off
my hat to you, Mackay ” his hat was already off, but
that didn’t matter —“ and when we meet again, I trust it
may be in some cheerful spot in this little planet and not
in the wilds of an unknown land.”


CHAPTER 111
Golden Flat
rnHE small settlement of Golden Flat was situated
away out on the desert’s fringe beyond Kalgoorlie,
and beyond the reach of any civilizing railway. It was
essentially a pioneer’s field, for no deep lodes had yet been
discovered; indeed, at this time the history of Golden
Elat was but a few days old. Nuggety Dick, a roving
prospector and miner, had been lucky enough to find rich
specimens of the coveted metal on the surface of the flat
during one of his perambulating journeys through the
silent bush, and instead of wildly rushing back to Kal-
goorlie to proclaim his “ strike,” he had quietly taken a
note of the place and gone his way to inform his old
associates, who were toiling with but little success on a
worked-out alluvial patch near Coolgardie.
Such is the spirit of the bush; comradeship comes
before all, and happy-go-lucky Dick had never once
thought of applying for the standing reward which a shrewd
Government had promised for discoveries of gold in such
remote districts. Had he claimed it, a rush would have
been the immediate consequence, and the chances of
Dick’s companions securing a favourable claim would
have been reduced to a minimum; so he set out on his


high-backed camel and rounded up the “boys,” as he
affectionately called them, and steered them back to the
ironshot plain among the mulga scrub, which he had
euphoniously, if ambitiously, termed “ Golden Flat.”
And now, within a week after their arrival, the Flat
presented every appearance of industrious energy. Further
nuggets had been found all along the line of a scarcely
perceptible depression in the land surface, which, never-
theless, most evidently marked the course of a very
ancient waterway, long since silted up.
“ It’ll be an alluvial wash, boys,” remarked Dick, with
happy satisfaction.
“ It certainly looks mighty promising,” agreed a lanky
and lean individual, who rejoiced in the cognomen of the
Shadow. The Shadow, so called because of his rather
fine outline, was the youngest of the party; indeed, he
was little more than a boy in years, yet his reputation as
a skilled bushman and rough rider was great, and the
strength concealed in his spare figure was marvellous.
“ I say, mates,” broke out another typical bushman,
Never Never Dave by name, popping his head out of a
shaft near by, “ I do believe I’ve struck the stuff on the
ten-foot level.”
He clambered out of his excavation and approached
the party, who were at this moment assembled for the
purpose of preparing lunch, displaying in his hand a white
sugary-looking substance which he had evidently broken
from the supposed wash. The Shadow gave a whoop of
delight, but was immediately checked by an old miner
beside him, whose keen eyes and heavily furrowed face
bespoke the hardy pioneer.
“ Don’t yell out so soon, young ’un,” he reproved


sternly. “ Gold is a most deceitful phantom, and it’s
when you’re sartin you’ve got it, that it ain’t there.”
“ Right 0 ! ” sang out the irrepressible one, rushing to
get a pan of water from the soak near by. “ Eight 0.
Dead Broke.”
When he reappeared he found them all examining
the sample wash with critical interest; and as it was
handed round for inspection, not a word was spoken; not
a trace of joy or emotion showed in the rugged features of
the men who depended so much on the result, and even
the Shadow, when he handled the specimen, felt con-
strained to copy the tactics of his neighbours. The con-
glomerate stone was literally studded with gold; it
required neither the pan test nor the magnifying glass to
prove that.
“It’s too good to last, boys,” commented Nuggety
Dick, with a sigh.
That broke the spell.
“I’ve never seen anything like it,” grunted Dead
Broke Dan, blinking furiously.
“ Hoorah for Golden Flat! ” broke out the Shadow,
tossing his tattered hat into the air. “Hip, hip, hip,
hoorah ! ”
And, taking his lead, the silent group of a few
minutes before broke into a lusty cheer that echoed and
re-echoed over the plains. But it had scarcely died away
when Emu Bill, a somewhat silent member of the party,
astonished his associates by giving vent to a groan of deep
disgust.
“ Look what’s coming, boys,” said he, nodding his
head toward the west. “ Hang me if it isn’t the beginning
of a regular rush ! ”


V lifli \^J
fmjiwfe
LOOK WHAT’S COMING, BOYS!”




All looked in the direction indicated, and sure enough
there appeared to be ample reason for annoyance. Crest-
ing a slight eminence surrounding the Flat, three figures
hove into sight, pacing slowly alongside a heavily laden
camel, and that they were coming to Golden Flat camp
there could be no room for doubt.
“After me bein’ so careful, too,” complained Dick,
sorrowfully. “Now I suppose we’ll have all Kalgoorlie
sprinting up before sundown.”
“Look to your boundary-pegs, mates,” warned Dead
Broke Dan, “an’ stick up your miners’ rights on the
corner posts. They may be bush-lawyers for all we
know.”
In an instant the camp awoke to action, axes and
spades were seized, measuring tapes were run along the
boundary lines of their holdings, new pegs were driven
into position, and miners’ rights flaunted in the sunshine,
marking a fluttering course of six hundred yards along
the auriferous bed. In the midst of the confusion the
three travellers arrived, and one of them, a strongly built
individual, whose entire wardrobe consisted only of an
open-necked shirt, and nether garments held in position
by a well-filled cartridge belt, leaving his companions by
the camel, stepped forward.
“ Hullo, boys,” he grunted affably, addressing every
one in general who was disposed to hear. “I said
‘ Hallo,’ ” he repeated sternly, after a moment’s pause.
The rebuke was too much for Emu Bill, who had
been calmly and leisurely engaged cutting his initials in
his corner boundary-peg. He came forward quickly.
“ Hallo, mate,” he said, eyeing the new-comer keenly.
“ Mebbe ye’ll excoose the boys for attendin’ to Government
(B 607) 49 j)


regulations afore rushin’ to say how mighty glad they
are to see ye ”
“Ye insignificant son o’ a gun,” came the prompt
interruption, “ if ye dinna modify your insinuations, I’ll
—l’ll, swipe the head off ye, an’ it would hurt me sair to
destroy ane o’ my old comrades in cauld blood.”
Bill, at the dire threat against his person, had languidly
begun t(5 prepare for mortal combat, but on hearing the
last part of the aggressive speech, he gazed at the stranger
in incredulous amazement.
“By the Great Howling Billy it’s Mackay! ” he
yelled, seizing his erstwhile enemy’s hand and shaking it
vigorously. “ I thought you had gone home to the old
country, you tough old rooster.”
“ I did have a trip home,” said Mackay, for it was he,
smiling grimly. “ But I discovered that civilization didna
agree wi’ me, so I came back.”
By this time the rest of the miners had hastened up,
and Emu Bill addressed them excitedly.
“ Boys, it’s Mackay ! ” he cried.
Nuggety Dick and his satellites hesitated a moment,
then rushed forward with outstretched hands.
“ What have you done with your whiskers, Mac ? ”
they cried almost in unison.
“That’s it,” roared Emu Bill, looking questioningly
into the now welcome visitor’s face, “ and it nearly caused
a funeral. Hang it all, why didn’t ye say who ye was ?
We thought you was the beginning of a rush, we did.
Fetch your mates along and let us have lunch at once.
After that you may stake out where you like.”
“ Beggin’ your pardon, Emu,” broke in Nuggety Dick,
“ I has a double-barrelled-nineteen-carat-pleasant dooty to


perform.” He turned to Mackay, and with grave dignity
proceeded. “As discoverer o' this here Golden Flat, an’
representin’ the interests o’ every scarecrow present,
I say we welcome you and your mates wi’ tearful
emotion. Am I right, boys ?” he demanded confidently,
looking at his companions.
“ Hoo-rah! ” came the unanimous response.
Mackay smiled just a trifle strangely, and beckoned to
Bob and Jack, who had been watching the trend of events
with somewhat anxious eyes.
It would have been hard to recognize in the two who
now came forward the same young men who had inveighed
so strongly against their restricted lot in the Old Country.
Dressed in the negligent attire of the bush, with broad
brimmed hats shading their eyes from the scorching sun,
they looked like young Colonials fresh and fit for any
effort that might be required of them. Their journey
from the coast to Kalgoorlie had interested them ex-
ceedingly; the wide tracts of lonely bush land which
stretched to north and south of the single line, gave them
an impression of boundless scope which was dear to their
hearts. Here surely was a country where no man need
jostle his neighbour. Coming as they did from a tightly
packed centre of commerce, it was little wonder that a
sense of freedom entered their beings. And when they
arrived at the strange hustling gold-mining city of the
plains, their enthusiasm was great. Mackay had been
wonderfully reticent as to his immediate plans. “Even
here nothing stands still,” said he, “ and there may have
been new gold discoveries since I left.” But his inquiries
in Kalgoorlie seemed to please him greatly, “ It’s all
right, my lads,” he announced to them with great good


humour when he returned to the Exchange Hotel where
they were staying pending his investigations.
“ The fact is,” he whispered mysteriously, drawing the
boys aside, “ I found gold on one o’ our last expeditions
before we tackled the Never Never, a good bit to the east
o’ this, and though we never said a word aboot it to any
one when we got back, I w 7 as afraid some sandgroping
fossicker had bumped across the place while I was awa’.
Hooever, I’ve made judicious inquiry, and find there’s
been nary a rush in that direction, so we’ll outfit at once
and get a move on. I’ve been lucky enough to buy back
my old camel, Misery, for the journey.”
So they arrived at Golden Flat, Mackay never once
hesitating in his course, though there w’ere no landmarks
to guide. The bushman’s instinct was strong, unerringly
it lead them to their goal; and now that they had reached
the scene they had been picturing in their minds, the
unexpected meeting with earlier arrivals disconcerted
them not a little. They advanced at Mackay’s call some-
w T hat sharply; they had not quite understood the wnrdy
discourses of the miners, and they were aggressively pre-
pared to stand by their friend should occasion arise.
“ Boys,” said Mackay, addressing the odd assembly,
“ allow me to introduce two young friends of mine from
old England—Eobert Wentworth and Jack Armstrong,
Bob and Jack for short—they’ve come out here to make
their fortune, and by the Lord Harry! they’ll do it or I’m
a Dutchman.”
With honest welcome beaming in their eyes, the
rugged miners advanced one by one to greet their visitors,
but Nuggety Dick must needs call them to order.
“ Can’t ye wait fur me to interdooce ye in civilized


Golden Flat
manner, ye howlin’ galoots,” he admonished severely. “ I
hiv to blush fur yer ignorance, I has,” Then he hitched
up his nether garments, ejected a quid of tobacco from his
mouth, coughed discreetly, and began—
“ As discoverer o’ this ’ere Golden Flat
“ You stop right there, Nuggety,” interjected Mackay.
“If ye’ll take the trouble to look at the side o’ that tree
ahint your tent you’ll observe that my autograph is carved
thereon, together with the date of discovery. Now, while
you go and satisfy yoursel’, I’ll dae the introducin’. Emu
Bill”—the tall bushman stepped forward and shook
hands with the lads—“ is a very decent sort o’ indiveedual.
A bit cantankerous, saving wu’ his speech, and I would
hae some hope for him if he wasna sae perneeciously given
to makin’ poetry ”
“ Get out, Mac
“ Dead Broke Dan! ” The veteran of the camp strode
forward. “ A guid solid and straight man who has done
his best to mak’ every man’s fortune but his ain. Never
Never Dave ” —that individual with the Shadow had
already anticipated the formal introduction, and was
listening with delight for his qualifications—“ is a weary
wanderer, like mysel’, only withoot my unquestionable
abilities. And the Shadow ” —that guileful youth
suddenly became engaged in earnest conversation with
Bob—“ the Shadow, I say, is a youth wha’s greatest mis-
fortune is his extraordinar’ habit o’ neglectin’ the com-
mandment which says, youngsters should he seen but
never heard. For a’ that he’s a guid laddie ”
“ Say, boss,” ejaculated the victim, smilingly, “ if ye’ll
write that down I’ll send it to my Sunday-school teacher
in Melbourne.”


At this point Nuggety Dick returned somewhat crest-
fallen.
“You were quite right, Mackay,” said he. “Is there
any other place in the whole country you hasn t struck
your name on ? ”
Mackay’s face relaxed into a broad smile.
“We’ll divide the honours, Nuggety, my man,” he
answered magnanimously; and with one accord they all
made their way to the tree behind Nuggety’s tent to gaze
at the symbol which justified Mackay’s claim. There it
was, cut deeply into the hard wood, and almost obliterated
with enclustering moss, “ J. M. 1898.”
Bob examined the letters with something akin to awe.
Jack laughed gleefully ; the others crowding round seemed
ill at ease. Mackay guessed their thoughts intuitively.
“ My claim has lapsed, boys,” he said quietly.
“Not by a single peg,” protested NuggetyDick. “We
don’t need no Government to tell us what to do. We
know the ground is yours by the all-fired right o’
discovery, a right which touches us right down on our
most tender feelings.”
“ We’ve just struck it rich, but we’ll git all the same,”
said Never Never Dave; and a sympathetic murmur of
approval greeted his words. The bushman’s code of
honour is Spartan in its simplicity.
Again Mackay smiled, and all trace of hardness had
gone out of his voice when he made answer,
“ Boys, ye have spoken as I knew ye would speak, and
it does my heart good to look at you all again, and feel
that the same old sympathies are with us still. But the
true discoverer of Golden Flat was the leader of the
expedition who piloted his party so well until the end,


and I ken he wouldna have me turn you away. No, boys,
there’s room enough for us all; my mates an’ me will peg
out claims at the end o’ the lead; the chances o’ strikin’
the wash are a’ equal.” He paused, and gazed sadly at the
half-obliterated inscription on the tree, unheedful of the
deep appreciation with which his words were received.
“ If it’s my good fortune to make a rise on Golden Flat,”
he continued, with grave solemnity, “ I mean to devote it
a’ on an expedition into the Never Never. I want to see
that mountain which kept me back. I want to
have a word with the tribe that lives behind it. . . .
“I’ll be with you, Mac,” quietly spoke Emu Bill.
“ And me, fur a dead cert! ” said Nuggety Dick.
“ Put Never Never Dave’s name on the programme,”
grunted that worthy.
“ And mine,” echoed Dead Broke Dan
“ You can bet your shirt I’ll be with you,” cried the
Shadow.
“There’s only you and me left, Jack,” said Bob, “ But
we’ll be there too.”
“ And now let us have lunch, boys,” suggested Nuggety
Dick, breaking the odd silence that ensued; and they
walked away, leaving Mackay still gazing at the fateful
tree with unseeing eyes.
“ Poor old Mac,” muttered the Shadow, sympathetically.
“ Did you know him before ? ” asked Jack.
“ I should say I did. Why, he put me on to the only
paying gold show I ever worked. That was two years
back. He was one o’ the Coolgardie pioneers too, and, of
course, every one who was there knows him.”
“Ah, that was a great old time,” mused Emu Bill,
entering into the conversation. “ Mackay made a bit o’ a


rise then, and he might have been a rich man now if he
hadn’t taken the Never Never fever.”
“ I’ll tell you what, boys,” said Nuggety Dick, hastily
adding a handful of tea to the boiling billy, “ Mackay is
the straightest man that ever chased nuggets, and this
here camp will see that he doesn’t tackle that miserable
desert again without us skirmishin’ alongside.”
“ Let us drink good luck to Golden Flat, boys,” cried
the individual in question cheerily, coming up from
behind, and seizing a pannikin of tea.
“ Good luck to Golden Flat—and to its discoverer! ”
replied they all, standing up and drinking the toast
heartily.
Shortly afterwards the three new-comers set off to peg
out their claims on the golden channel, and erect their
tent. The others would have accompanied them in a body
to assist in the work, but Mackay, while thanking them,
firmly refused their services.
“ I want to initiate my partners into the rules o’ the
business,” he explained, “an’ the best way/to teach them
is by showing the way and watching them do it. No, no,
boys, you had better go and burrow in your shafts, we’ll
engineer our own funeral.”
The slight depression which indicated the presence of
the golden channel below, ran in a north and southerly
direction, and could be traced without difficulty for fully
five hundred yards, after which it merged into the open
plain, but the line of workings did not extend much more
than halfway down this length.
“ These old water-courses,” said Bob, who had been
thinking deeply, “ must have belonged to a very ancient
period, when the whole aspect of the country was different.”


“ And how so ? ” queried Mackay,
“ Because,” returned Bob, hesitatingly, “ there are no
mountains here now, no water-sheds at all, and the gold
must have been carried by a flow of water from somewhere.
The whole country must have been sunk under the sea,
then, after a long time, upheaved again higher than it was
before. The volcanic disturbances must have destroyed
all its original features.”
“Do you ken, Bob, my lad,” said Mackay, earnestly,
“ I like to hear you speak like that. It shows ye’ve got
some pro-fundity o’ thought, an’ I quite agree wi your
argument.”
A cry of delight from Jack broke in on their geological
discussion. That very eager youth had unconsciously
adopted the tactics of the experienced prospector by eyeing
the ground closely as he walked, and his keenness had not
gone unrewarded, for he now displayed a dull yellow
specimen between his finger and thumb.
“Ay, it’s gold, sure enough,” was Mackay’s verdict,
when he had glanced at it, “ and it weighs fully an ounce
if I’m any judge. Jack, my boy, ye’ll beat us a’ at this
game yet. That’s five pounds ye’ve made in the time it
would take to blink an eye. You’ll mak’ a grand
prospector, Jack. Put that bit in your pocket, and keep
it aye as a memento; you’ll think a lot o’ it afterwards.”
“ But it’s really yours,” said the lad, refusing to take
it back. “ I’m not going to take everything of yours and
keep all I get too.”
Poor Jack was embarrassed. His was one of those
generous natures which can never forget a kindness, and
Mackay had behaved more like a brother than a mere
friend.


“I agree with you, Jack,” ventured Bob.
“ Tut, tut, laddies,” grunted Mackay, “ we’re goin’ to
be partners wi’ equal shares —and from what I can see
already I think I’m vera fortunate in having you wi’ me
but first specimens should be ootside the arrangement
altogether. Take the bittie gold, Jack, and I hope I’ll
live to see it in your ain home years after this.”
They had by this time reached the end of the channel,
at least so far as surface indications were concerned, and
Boh once more propounded a theory.
“ Is it not right to assume,” said he, “ that though we
cannot trace the water-course any further on the surface,
it must be there all the same ? ”
“ Quite correct,” answered Mackay; “ but it may have
changed its direction, an’ it may have divided into smaller
channels.”
“ just here where it apparently disappears,” per-
sisted Bob, “ may not some obstacle have deflected the
current, or made the sand pile up and so raised the true
bed upwards, making the original sides of the gully
shallower at this point, and accounting for its being filled
up level with the surrounding country before the deeper
parts got wholly silted up ? ”
‘‘Go on, my lad,” prompted Mackay, patting the
young man’s shoulder, “ allowin’ what ye say to be right;
what sort o’ deduction do you arrive at ? ”
“ I should think,” said Bob, with growing eagerness,
" that the gold would stick on the rise more than on the
level, and that if we sank our shaft just over the apparent
break of the channel we would most likely strike it rich.”
“ It seems good sound logic, Bob,” commented Mackay,
in reflective mood, “but as I’m a practical man and no’


much o’ a theorist, I’ll no’ venture to say whether ye are
richt or wrang. One matter, however, must be deter-
mined afore I can completely side wi’ ye, and that is in
what direction was the creek flowing ? ”
Bob was for the moment nonplussed, and observing
his hesitation, the man of practice seemed to be suddenly
amused.
“ That appears to be a tough proposition, doesn’t it ? ”
said he.
“ It does,” agreed Bob, still pondering over a solution
to the question.
“ Well, it isn’t, my lad. The creek just flowed as
you first allowed, in orthodox manner, from north to
south. I’m vera pleased to notice how quickly you have
got a grip o’ things, an’ I only asked the question so as to
direct your attention to what must be the base o your
theory, for if the flow had been in the opposite direction
the bottom would have been completely knocked oot o’
your argument.”
“ But how can you tell how it was flowing ? ” asked
Bob, still somewhat mystified.
« Easily enough; I had a look at Never Never Dave’s
shaft and paid particular - attention to the nature o’ the
gold wash below. Every pebble o’ the conglomerate stuff
was water worn and mair or less wedge-shaped wi the
blunt ends facing in this direction. Now do you savvy ?
Observation is a grand virtue, Bob ”
«I am afraid you have been laughing at me,” spoke
the young man, gravely.
“ i’ll prove to you that 1 havena,” came the quick
response. “Jack, come here and do your geometry
lesson.”


Jack had been industriously searching for further
treasure, but he hastened up at once.
“ Now ” said his mentor, “ I want you to mark out a
rectangle five feet six inches by two feet six inches just
on the break o that meeserable apology for a creek.
We’ll start sinkin’ our shaft there in the mornin’.”
So it came about that Bob planned the position of
their first shaft, with Jack assisting; and Mackay walking
a little way apart surveyed the pair with deep satisfaction.
“ I can see,” he soliloquized, “ that my young friend,
Bob, is goin’ to be a vera useful acquisition, and if Jack
develops along the lines in which his tastes lie, I have
much need to congratulate mysel’. Who would have
thought it ? . .
Next after the lining out of the projected shaft came
the pegging of the claims. For this four stout posts were
required, thick enough when faced with an axe to present
a surface at least four inches square. These were soon
forthcoming, the mulga shrubs growing around being just
of sufficient girth to meet with official requirements.
} now, my lads, ’ said Mackay, in sprightly tones,
we re going to mark out three men’s ground, a hundred
feet by a hundred is the allowance per man, so that means
we can take a hundred yards along the creek and one
hundred feet across.” He began to pace off the ground as
he spoke. “We can check it with a tape after,” said he,
“ but I have done this so often that I’m no’ likely to be
faur oot in my calculations.”
Soon the four pegs were sunk into position by Jack
and Mackay, Bob at the same time scooping out with
pick and shovel short rectangular trenches at each corner
to indicate plainly to any subsequent observer the


position of the outlying boundaries. This done they
crazed at their handiwork with serene contentment. The
O
mercurial Mackay was once more in the clutches of the
gold fever, and his companions were no whit less affected.
“ Let us call it Mackay’s Eeward,” cried Jack, at
length.
That gentleman shook his head. “This claim shall
henceforth be known as The Golden Promise,” he said.
Next on the afternoon’s programme was the erection of
the tent, and Jack at once volunteered to search the scrub
for the two forked upright posts required to support the
ridge or roof pole of the calico structure, Mackay and
Bob meanwhile arranging the various stores and mining
implements which they had unloaded from the camel.
That wiry animal itself was not far off assiduously chewing
clumps of saltbush and spinifex grass, varying this some-
what monotonous fare by occasional mouthfuls of the
mulga twigs within its reach. Five minutes, ten minutes
passed, and no Jack reappeared, nor was the sound of his
axe heard in the near distance. Mackay became uneasy.
“ I do hope the laddie hasna gone far,” he muttered,
throwing down the pick handle he was fitting to the steel
and looking around anxiously.
“ But he’ll know how to get back,” reassured Bob.
Mackay grunted unbelievingly. “ That’s aye the way
wi’ new chums in the bush,” he declared. “ They never
remember that everything is alike in this country, an’ that
only the sun can be taken as a guide.” Seizing his rifle
he set off in the direction Jack had taken, Bob hastening
at his heels; but they had not gone far before they were
gazing at a most extraordinary spectacle. There was the
delinquent indulging in fierce chase after a great yellow


ungainly creature which scrambled around in a narrow
circle, turning at intervals to snap savagely at its tormentor,
who was aiming numerous but ineffective blows at his
quarry with the axe he carried. Round and round they
went, and Jack’s energy seemed all but spent when
Mackay’s hearty laugh attracted his attention.
“ Ho! ho! ho! ”he chuckled, walking leisurely forward
and interrupting the performance. Bob at the moment
could not see any reason for this display of humour, and
certainly Jack did not.
“ It attacked me when I was cutting a tree,” explained
the baffled warrior, “ and every time I stopped chasing it,
it turned and chased me. I suppose the brute’s tired now,
or it would be at me again.” He wiped the perspiration
from his forehead, and eyed his enemy malevolently.
The object of his wrath was a peculiar crocodile-like
creature with an enormously long tail, short thick-set
legs, and a narrow venomous-looking head. It must have
measured fully five feet in length, and certainly
ugly enough to disconcert any one who did not know
the nature of the beast. Now it rested calmly by the
foot of a tree, its head swaying gently and its abnor-
mally elongated tongue shooting out and in with lightning
rapidity.
“ It’s only a poor wee iguana, Jack,” consoled Mackay.
“ It would dae you no harm, though I will admit it doesna
look as peaceably inclined as it might; but watch me
whistle to it.” He strode forward, and kneeling beside the
huge iguana—but as the boys noticed, beyond the reach of
its sturdy claws —whistled unmelodiously a selection from
a popular opera, and lo! ere the first two bars had been
negotiated, Jack’s recent enemy’s head began to nod


rhythmically with the music I and its whole body took on
an attitude of satisfied repose.
“Well, I’m jiggered!” was all that Jack could say,
while Bob exploded into uncontrollable mirth. Then the
musician ceased his labours.
“ I’m no sayin’ that anybody could charm the beastie
like me,” he admitted with exceeding modesty. “My
whustle’s got a wonderfu’ movin’ element in it ”
“ It has,” agreed the pair, with unanimous promptitude,
shuddering with painful emotion. The big man laughed.
“ I was sure ye would coincide wi’ my statement,” he
blandly said. “ And now let us get the happy home fixed
afore sundown. The darkness will be on in two shakes o’
a kangaroo’s tail.”
On returning with the necessary saplings to the
clearing they had prepared as a site for their future
dwelling, they found the Shadow awaiting them somewhat
anxiously.
“ I was wondering where ye had got to,” he remarked,
apparently much relieved, “ I saw some nigs in the district
a couple o’ days ago, and I was afraid they had scooped
ye in.”
“ Niggers, here ? ” cried Mackay.
“ They were both out watching me try to kill an
iguana,” said Jack, with a laugh.
“ But you shouldn’t kill iguanas,” reproved the Shadow.
“ They never mean no harm, and they does wonderful good
around a camp, killing snakes and centipedes and other
crawlers,”
“ Oh, I’ll remember next time,” assured Jack; “ I’ll
remember to run like smoke when I see one like the
brute I tackled to-day. An ugly wobbly monster over


five feet long, harmless! ” It was clear that Jack was by
no means convinced.
That evening the entire population of Golden Flat
gathered around the new-comers’ camp fire, and did much
to entertain the boys with their various anecdotes and
reminiscences. Desperate encounters with natives, thrill-
ing tales of the early Coolgardie days, and narratives of
prospecting journeys through the waterless bush regions
followed each other in quick succession. The intense heat
of the day had now given place to an extraordinarily chill
atmosphere, which was the more noticeable because of the
sudden change, and all huddled closely to the glowing logs.
But it soon became apparent that the cheerful warmth of
the fire was attracting other and by no means welcome
visitors, and though no one seemed to be in any way con-
cerned, Jack viewed the innumerable pests and crawling
creatures that kept forcing their way into the flames with
some apprehension. The conversation had narrowed down
to a wordy discussion on the possibilities of gold being
found in the far interior.
“ Every bushman believes that there’s bound to be gold
in the Never Never,” reiterated Emu Bill, assisting a large-
sized centipede into the fire with a sang froid that aroused
Jack’s horror. But he was yet to be more surprised.
“Don’t move, Jack,” said the Shadow’s voice from
somewhere behind him. “ There’s a black snake trying to
snuggle into your trousers pocket. I’ll spifflicate him in a
jiff; ” and he promptly gripped the intruding reptile by the
tail, swung it once round his head, then cracked it as one
might the lash of a whip, breaking its back in an instant.
“ I suppose I’ll get accustomed to it,” said Jack, with
a shudder.


Golden Flat
“I’ll show you how to slaughter them yourself to-
morrow,” comforted the Shadow.
“ 1 sa 7. Mackay,” said Nuggety Dick, from his distant
corner, “ye haven’t told us about your trip to the old
country yet! How did ye take to it after your ten years'
Australian experience ? ”
But Mackay would only commit himself to one state-
ment. “ It’s a grand country, Huggety,” said he, with
impressive earnestness; “ but it belongs to too few folk.”
Which enigmatical reflection seemed to give his hearers
some food for thought.


CHAPTER IV
The Treasure of the Mine
DURING the week that followed, the work at Golden
Plat proceeded apace. Sinking operations were
being conducted all along the line of the auriferous wash
from Never Never Dave’s shaft down to the Golden
Promise Claim, and red-coloured flags were almost daily
making their appearance on the various windlass heads,
indicating that the fortunate owners of the claims had
bottomed on gold. Never Never Dave’s excavation, as
has been already mentioned, struck the pay gravel at
the ten-foot level, and that easy-going individual was
leisurely engaged scooping out the rich conglomerate-
looking cement while his neighbours were yet industri-
ously seeking for the golden channel. Nuggety Dick was
the next to reach it; his ground was directly adjacent to
Dave’s, yet his shaft was down fifteen feet before the
welcome red symbol showed at his workings, thus indi-
cating the gradual dip of the ancient waterway. Before
the week was out, however, every shaft had bottomed on
the golden gravel excepting that which Mackay, Bob, and
Jack were sinking. But this delay in reaching the longed-
for stratum in no way disconcerted Mackay.
“ The chances are,” said he, “ that, when we do strike it
at the lower level, the wash itself will be deeper and wider.”


This thought was a wonderful incentive to them all,
for the gold-carrying gravel laid bare in the other work-
ings was scarcely two feet in thickness, and, though its
richness was unquestionable, its limited nature was only
too apparent. Bob and Jack took their turns in the shaft
with great good humour and enthusiasm, and though at
first their efforts to penetrate the flinty formations en-
countered were almost unavailing, they quickly acquired
the science of the work under the constant guidance of
Mackay, who also taught them how to temper their tools
for the different kinds of strata, how to drill holes for the
gelignite charges so as to obtain the most efficient results.
Their early training especially fitted them for this kind
of tuition, and they proved very apt pupils. Mackay,
though such a strong man himself, was no advocate of
the supremacy of muscle even in shaft-sinking.
“ Science beats it every time,” said he. “Of course,
I’m no denyin’ that, where baith strength and science are
combined there’s a wonderfu’ advantage, but it doesna
often happen that a strong man physically is blessed wi’
a superabundity o’ mental gifts ”
Jack, of course, could not resist the interruption.
“We can’t allow that from you, sir,” in his most sedate
tones.
Mackay smiled. “ I’m vera pleased to have your
implied testimonial, Jack,” he returned, with twinkling
eyes; “ but then I was aboot to remark that an exception
was needed to prove any rule, an’ I was to assume mysel’
to be the exception in this case. Xo, no, mind conquers
matter, and that is why you two are just as fitted to pit
doon a shaft as the strongest navvy in the country.”
All of which the boys found to be quite in accordance


with facts when they got accustomed to wielding the pick,
hammer, and drill.
“ Observe any cracks in the formation,” their kindly
instructor would call down to them; “attack everything
in the lines o’ least resistance,” And by following his
advice to the letter they quickly discovered that gold-
mining was by no means as difficult as they had imagined.
Now, just when the first week of their labours had
concluded, the shaft was sunk twenty feet; a few more
feet would decide whether or not Bob’s theory would
prove correct.
“ I tell you what, mates,” said Nuggety Dick that
evening, “ you were just a bit venturesome in sinking so
far from the main workings.”
“ I don’t think so,” returned Bob, confidently. “ We’ll
get there all right, Nuggety. Another five feet should do
it.” And another five feet did do it. Two days later
Mackay’s pick broke through the covering layer of diorite
in the bottom of the shaft, and with a grunt of satisfaction
he called on Jack, who was at the windlass, to lower the
bucket.
“ I’m sending up some specimens,” he cried.
Jack gave a howl of delight; hearing which, Bob, who
had been reading in the tent, rushed out, and with eyes
gleaming with suppressed excitement, hurried to the shaft
mouth. He was just in time to assist in the raising of
the heavily laden bucket. Nearer and nearer it came to
the surface. Would the wash be gold-bearing or would
it be barren ? The boys’ agitation was intense. Their
limbs trembled and their hands could scarcely retain
their grip on the windlass arms, Down below stood
Mackay, perspiring with his arduous toil, watching the


The Treasure of the Mine
bucket ascend with somewhat anxious eyes. The glare
of the sun across the shaft’s mouth made everything
apparent to him, while he himself was obscured from
view in the shadows. The bucket had almost reached
the top ; already Bob had stretched out his hand to grasp
it, when a stentorian shout from below arrested the
movement, and, for a space, the fateful harbinger of good
or evil tidings hung motionless.
“ Keep a good grip o’ your nerves—an’ the windlass,
lads. Heave away ! ”
The caution came in time. It suddenly flashed upon
them both that a single slip on their part, a momentary
hesitation, might prove disastrous to them friend below.
Again Bob stretched out his hand, his eyes caught the
glisten of gold, but his grip was sure. Next instant he
and Jack were gazing at a whitish mass, through which
shone myriad dazzling particles of the yellow metal. A
few minutes later Mackay was j erked to the surface ;
there was no hesitancy in the movement of the windlass
now; the moment of extreme tension had come and gone.
Together they sat down on the sand and examined the
specimens one by one without speaking. Then Mackay
rose to his feet.
“ The theory,was right, Bob,” he said calmly. “ This
is the richest stuff on the lead. I don’t know how much
there is of it yet, but there’s enough to make you glad
you came out to Australia, anyhow, Piun up the flag,
Jack,” he directed, turning to that youth, who was still
joyously examining his treasures, “ Let Golden Flat know
that we three are right here every time.” He spoke
jovially, yet so quietly, that his words exercised a kind
of restraint over his hearers, which he was quick to notice.


“ Never mind me, my lads,” he said, “ You’ve got
every reason to rejoice, but you must remember that I’m
an old hand at gold digging, an’ the yellow dirt doesna
mak’ me enthuse like it aince did.” Truly enough, to
this strange Scot of many moods, the excitement and
risk attending discovery was everything; he viewed the
rich reward likely to be his with almost stoical indiffer-
ence. Indeed, he was engaged in a deep philosophical
argument with Bob concerning the uses and abuses of
O O
gold as a factor in the world’s history, when the popula-
tion of Golden Flat arrived in a body to tender their
congratulations.
“ But in these days,” Bob was saying, “ not to have
gold is held to be almost a proof of one’s inferiority. The
world does not judge from an intellectual standpoint. It
demands wealth. No matter what brains a young man
may have at home, the chances are against his ever coming
to the front unaided. Gold ” Bob stopped suddenly,
having become aware of a growing audience behind him.
From the group old battered Dead Broke made grave
utterance.
“ I believe your ideas are kerect, Bob; but from what
I sees here you can thank your lucky stars that the gold
has come to you early in life. Look at me an’
Nuggety ”
“ An’ me,” broke in the youthful Shadow, with affected
mournfulness.
At this stage Jack came forward with a handful of fine
gold slugs and coarse dust.
“ I’ve just dollied a few samples,” said he, handing his
treasure to Mackay. “ That should go about twenty ounces
to the ton, shouldn’t it ? ”


“ Nearer two hundred, Jack,” returned Mackay, smiling
at his eagerness.
“We’re jolly glad to know you’ve struck it, boys,”
said Nuggety Dick, earnestly. “And we hopes it will be
a thicker patch than ours, for, from what I sees, we can
work out our claims in less than a month,”
“Well, we sunk here on the spec, o’ striking it bigger
on the rise,” said Mackay. “ But whether or no we’ve been
successful I canna say just yet.”
“ I’m going to sink for a deeper patch,” growled Emu
Bill. “ I believe we’ve only got a floater in our claims, an’
the true bottom should be further down.”
“ I’d advise you to work out all the shallow ground
first,” said Mackay. “You never know when a rush may
come sailin’ along. Keep stackin’ the stuff until we get
a battery up; don’t trouble dollyin’ it—it’s only wasting
time.”
His advice was soimd, and was greeted with murmurs
of assent. The water supply at the camp was daily be-
coming less and less; no doubt more could be tapped by
sinking a deep shaft, but this would involve considerable
delay, and the citizens of Golden Flat were by no means
anxious to leave their congenial occupation at so early a
period. By roughly grinding the cement-like wash, and
rinsing off the lighter sands, fairly accurate assays could be
obtained from sample specimens; but to continue such a
work on a large scale would drain the soak within a week.
The only feasible plan was to excavate as much of the
gravel as possible in anticipation of a crushing battery
arriving on the ground, which would surely be there imme-
diately news of the Flat’s richness spread abroad. And so
the days passed, and the sun beat down fiercely on the


toiling band who strove with grim Nature for her treasure.
Ever and anon the dull roar of exploding gelignite indicated
how man was using the utmost help civilization could give
in order to shatter the many refractory obstacles in his
path.
At the Golden Promise Mine sinking operations were
going on very successfully; three feet of the golden con-
glomerate had been penetrated, and still there were no signs
of the dreaded barren pipe-clay formation appearing. Bob’s
theory had already been proved to be correct. Tons
upon tons of rich stone had been raised to the surface.
The actual width of the channel was but eight feet; but
the amount of cubic contents held in the claim was bound
to be several hundred of tons at least, even supposing the
drift went no deeper than the already known three feet.
Covered with dust and grime, and blackened by powder
smoke, Bob and Jack were working together one morning
in the large chamber they had made in the lower workings,
and Mackay stood patiently by the windlass awaiting the
call to raise the boys from the danger below, for they were
firing a difficult charge. They had grown quite accus-
tomed to the use of gelignite by this time, and, as Mackay
proudly informed Emu Bill, they never once had had a
misfire.
On this occasion, however, some delay had occurred
owing to the fuse which Mackay had sent down becoming
detached from the cap. He always arranged the charges on
the surface, calculating the number of plugs required, and
the length of fuse necessary, when he finished drilling the
holes below, leaving the boys to insert the charges and see
them properly fired. At last came the warning from Jack
•“ All ready! ” —as he slipped his foot in the loop of the


wire rope which was hanging in readiness. In a few
seconds he was on the surface, while the rope was again
rapidly lowered for Bob, who was even then lighting a
match to apply to the fuse. The two on top heard the
match scratch on the box, and immediately thereafter the
familiar sputtering of the fuse echoed to their ears, but
still no sound from Bob! Yet the faint, insidious odour
of the burning fuse crept up to their nostrils, and they
knew that something had happened. Mackay’s face grew
livid.
“ It’s only a sixty seconds’ fuse,” he muttered hoarsely.
“ Stand by the windlass, Jack, I’ll slide down the rope.”
Jack seemed to awake from a stupor. “ I’m lightest,”
he cried; and threw himself at the rope without waiting
for Mackay to brake the windlass barrel.
The iron arms of the windlass spun round, a few more
loose coils only remained on the barrel. The brawny Scot
hesitated not an instant. He rushed at the gyrating bar,
and received the shock of the descending steel on his bared
chest. The windlass rope held firm. Another revolution,
and it would have run off the barrel and dashed the boy
who clung to its strands to a certain death beside his
companion. It was all over in a few seconds. Hot know-
ing how his impetuous action had nearly caused certain
disaster, Jack slid down the rope with lightning speed, and
almost immediately his steady call —* Heave away! ” —was
heard. And now came the trial of strength where all the
science in the world could not assist; only twenty seconds’
grace, a double load on the windlass, and twelve plugs of
one of the most powerful explosives known beneath! But
Mackay was equal to the task. The windlass arm spun
round once again, and on the fifteenth second Jack swung


into view, his foot resting in the loop, one lacerated hand
grasping tightly at the rope, and supporting in his right
arm the blood-dripping form of Bob, his comrade. Mackay
reached out his strong arm, and drew them both to safety
just as a thunderous explosion occurred which hurled tons
of massive rocks to the shaft mouth and beyond.
Five minutes later all three were seated in the tent
repairing them bruises, and making sundry comments on
the occurrence. Bob’s face was almost deathly pallid, and
the blood still trickled from a deep gash in the back of
his head; it appeared that just after he had applied
the match to the fuse a portion of the iron roof of the
excavation had given way, hurling him unconscious to
the ground.
“I remembered no more,” said he, “until I found
myself in the tent here.”
“ It was a vera close shave, my lad,” said Mackay, with
suppressed emotion. “ I’m no goin’ to expatiate on Jack’s
quick action in the matter, but he maist certainly saved
your life. It needed some nerve to gang doon on top o’ a
bumin’ charge o’ dynamite.”
Bob smiled affectionately at his companion, and reached
out his hand; and Jack, flushing almost guiltily, was forced
to show his cruelly tom fingers.
“And, Bob,” said he, almost tearfully, “it was
Mackay ”
“You stop, right there, youngster,” interrupted that
gentleman, “ 111 tak’ nane o’ the credit from you. You
deserve it a’, my lad. I’m proud o’ you, I am. Now, I
think you’d both be the better o’ a rest. I’ll go up and
see how the other boys ar£ getting on. I hope none o’
the grinning hyenas noticed anything.”


But the “ grinning hyenas ” had noticed, and Mackay
met them in a body immediately he went out of the tent.
There was the Shadow, Nuggety, Emu Bill, and company
hastening forward, dismay showing plainly on their
features. , , ~
“What’s happened, Mac? Any one killed?” they
shouted. ~ ,
“ Calm yoursel’s, boys, calm yoursel’s,” adjured Mackay,
“there’s been no serious damage done. But 111 need to
timber the roof o’ the drive before we do any more work
below; a bit o’ it fell and gave young Bob a nasty crack
on the cranium just as he fired a heavy charge. Jack got
him out a’ richt, but it vera nearly was a funeral.”
Very sincere were the sympathetic expressions of the
group. The unassuming attitude of Mackay s mates, as
the boys were called, their happy temperament, had en-
deared them to the dwellers on Golden Flat, and now
they trooped into the tent, and, in their rough kindly way,
congratulated the pair on their escape, much to Jack’s
confusion. No truer-hearted men could be found than
those battered pioneers of the desert land. Their life
amid Nature’s grim solitudes is one filled with unceasing
cares, unseen dangers lurk for ever in their lonely path,
their stern, set faces are but the result of bush environ-
ment which insidiously yet surely marks its v ictims with
her stamp of immobility.
“You’ll be all right in a day or so, Bob,” spoke
Nuggety Dick, cheerily, after examining the wound.
«If ye’ll let me, I’ll take your shift until ye’re better,”
said the Shadow, hesitatingly; “ I can’t do much in my
own shaft now without a mate, it’s too deep for me to
work alone.”


Bob thanked him gratefully. “ I hate to keep things
back,” said he, “ and if Mackay has no objections ”
“ Don ’t won 7 about that, Bob,” broke in Mackay; “HI
mak’ use o’ the Shadow until ye are well again, unless he
misbehaves vera badly.”
That same afternoon a new discovery was made by
Emu Bill, which had the effect of raising the excitement
of the camp to fever heat. Having continued his shaft
down through the supposed bottom of the golden wash in
his claim, he suddenly came upon a strange soapy grey
deposit, not unlike putty in appearance.
“ That proves we hasn’t struck bottom yet,” was
his % erdict, as he examined the odd formation keenly;
“ there’s no pipeclay about that, there isn’t.” Then his
eyes blinked and stared and blinked again. “Howlin’
blazes,” he murmured gently to himself, “this will <nve
the boys a shock, it will.” He had carelessly broken a
piece of the clayey mass between his finger and thumb,
and behold, the line of fracture showed golden yellow, and
in the dim candle-light innumerable dazzling pin-points
of colour gleamed throughout the entire specimen. In a
few moments he was on the surface, bearing the cherished
find in his hand. “ I have got something, Huggety,” said
he, addressing his partner, «that shid make ye gasp.”
Huggety gasped in anticipation, then uttered a yell of
delight as his eyes beheld the glittering specimen.
“ Is it; a new level, Emu ?” he asked eagerly.
Emu Bill nodded. “Bound up the boys,” said he.
“ lt>]l gi ve them mighty encouragement to hiv’ a look at
this here bonanza.” Huggety rushed away at once, and
Bill ventured another gaze at his treasure. But somehow
he did not seem to derive as much satisfaction from this


observation. "Hang it,” be growled, closing his hands
tightly over the specimen, “ I could ha’ sworn I saw more
gold than that in it at first.”
In a few short minutes he was surrounded by an
enthusiastic throng.
“ Nuggety says you’ve struck a new level, Bill,” they
cried almost with one voice.
“ I hiv’ that,” said Bill, with calm satisfaction, “ an’
from what I can see, there’ll be thousands o’ tons o’ the
stuff in our grounds, an’ it’s just crammed wi’ gold.”
He cautiously unclosed his hand, and proffered the
wonderful stone to Never Never Dave, who examined it
keenly, then passed it on to his next neighbour without a
word, eyeing Emu Bill reproachfully the while. Strangely
enough, no one seemed to appreciate Emu’s find but him-
self ; but he smiled and chuckled enough for them all. The
last man to examine the specimen was Mackay; he was
the latest arrival, having been down below, timbering the
tunnel in the shaft which had given way so inopportunely,
when the great news reached him.
“ An’ what’s this ye’ve got, Bill ? ” he said, receiving
the fateful fragment from old Dead Broke Dan, who
sighed deeply as he handed it over. “ What is it you’re
playin’ at ? ” he demanded, after a first cursory glance.
“ It’s all straight, Mac,” broke in Bill, eagerly, “ It’s a
fair sample, an’ there’ lots more o’ it, too.”
Mackay eyed the speaker with fast-rising disgust,
“ Dae you ken, Emu,” said he, slowly, “ if it werena for the
fact that I got a’ the wind squelched oot o’ me the day,
I would lay violent hands on ye for puttin’ up such a
meeserable joke on your friends.”
Poor Emu Bill looked dazed. “ Why, what’s wrong wi’


the gold ?” he asked feebly. “ Surely you ain’t goin’ to tell
me I doesn’t know gold from iron pyrites ”
“ Poor old Emu must ha’ got a touch o’ the sun to-day,”
grunted Never Never, sympathetically.
With a snort of indignation, Bill clutched back his
specimen from Mackay, gave one glance at it, then
subsided in the sand.
“ You’re right, boys,” he announced from his lowly
position in weary dejected tones; “ I’m as mad as a
hatter.”
Not a trace of the yellow metal showed in the stone he
now held in his hand.
“ I would ha’ sworn I saw gold in that stuff,” he con-
tinued pathetically. “ No, no, Emu Bill’s finished. Crack
me on the head, boys, for Heaven’s sake, an’ bury me
quick,”
“An’ me too,” groaned Nuggety. “ I saw the gold, as
I’m a livin’ sinner, I did.”
A glint of joy flashed into Bill’s eyes at the words,
and he struggled to his feet.
“ Come down into the shaft, Mackay, and have a look
for yourself,” he said. “I do believe the curious stuff is so
delicate it can’t stand the light.”
Still somewhat dubious about Emu Bill’s professed
honesty of purpose, Mackay was not slow to avail himself of
the opportunity of judging for himself whether or not the
new formation really did carry visible gold. Then, noting
the truly distressed countenance of his old acquaintance, he
relented.
“ I believe ye did think ye saw gold, Emu,” said he,
before placing his foot in the sling preparatory to descend-
ing the shaft, “ an’ though I dinna expect to see any


glittering bonanza down below here, I’m sort o’ convinced
you saw it right enough. It’s the sun, Emu, my man;
that’s what it is.”
Bill shook his head feebly; it was all beyond his
comprehension.
“ I’ll come down after you, Mac,” he said. “ It’s a
mighty funny stuff, and you need to break it before it
shows colour.”
By this time every man in the camp was around the
windlass; even Bob, with his bandaged head, had put in
appearance, and Jack and the Shadow were also there.
Quickly the windlass ran out, and deposited Mackay at
the new level exposed, and while the rope went up again
for Bill he lit a candle and peered cautiously around. He
was looking for snakes, the bite of a certain variety of
which induces strange hallucinations. Observing nothing
in the shape he dreaded, he heaved a sigh of relief, and
turned his attention to the soapy-like stratum from which
Bill had broken his wonderful specimen. Only a dull
grey muddy deposit was visible. With a jerk and a rattle
the haulage rope came down again, and Emu Bill arrived
at his side.
“ I see nothing, Bill, my man,” grunted Mackay.
Bill said not a word, but, taking his pick, smote
furiously at the deceiving substance, and as it be-
came disintegrated great gleaming streaks and sheets
and scintillating points of gold seemed to show all
over it.
“ Can ye see anything, Mac ? ” inquired the wielder of
the pick, pausing in his labours, and glancing eagerly at
his companion.
“I’m simply flabbergasted,” came the slow response.


“ There seems to be enough gold there to stock a second
Bank o’ England.”
He picked up a piece of the strange formation which
showed dazzling yellow lines across its newly broken face,
and examined it closely and intently; he rubbed it with
his finger, and the brilliance vanished.
“We’d better take up some o’ the best-looking bits,”
he suggested.
Bill laughed. “ Why, the hanged stuff won’t show a
colour on top,” he said.
But they decided to chance it all the same, and accord-
ingly Mackay arrived on the surface bearing the result of
his investigations tightly wrapped in an old handkerchief,
and when the package was opened up a cry of admiration
broke from all beholders, so beautiful, indeed, did the
specimens appear.
A hoarse call from the underground interrupted their
scrutiny.
“ For Heaven’s sake, boys, put a chain on that there
mirage, until I get a look at it.”
And while two men went to the windlass and began to
haul Bill to the surface, a gradual change began to take
place in the nature of the specimens. The yellow sheen
grew darker and darker imtil it shone like bronze, and in
this state Bill viewed them on his arrival. Slowly yet
surely the bronze shades merged into a strangely variegated
purple hue, and, while the onlookers stared aghast, this
gradually evolved into the original clayey aspect of the
formation surrounding it.
“ Well, I’ll be jiggered! ” ejaculated the Shadow.
“ It’s just a mirage,” said Bill, grimly.
The rest of the miners did not care to place on record


the state of their feelings, their usually fluent enough
speech failed them on this trying occasion. Mackay
broke the silence.
“ There can be no doubt aboot the gold being there,
boys,” said he, “ an’ in sufficient quantities to make a’ oor
fortunes —if we could only catch it before it vanished.”
He stopped, absolutely nonplussed.
Bob, who had not yet spoken, advanced and scrutinized
the now wholly dulled ore fragments with alert eyes.
“ I don’t know that I can help you,” he said quietly,
“ but I should like to try. Anyhow, it’s more in my line
than yours, for I’ve studied chemistry a bit.”
“What do you make of it, Bob?” asked Mackay,
quickly.
The reply came promptly from the lips of the thought-
ful student.
“ The formation contains gold in an unstable state, but
more so gold in solution, both of which oxidize on contact
with the air.”
To say that Bob’s words created extreme interest
would be a very mild statement of fact. His audience
was comprised of gold-miners of very varied experi-
ence and knowledge, yet none of them had ever heard
of such a tantalizing deposit as that they had now
encountered.
“ 1 may be wrong,” continued Bob, “ but I don’t think
there was any mistaking the colours on the stones before
they regained their normal aspect. I’ve seen the same
thing often in the laboratory. It was simply Purple of
Cassius, and you 11 get the same result by dissolving a small
piece of gold in nitric and hydrochloric acids.”
“ But what about the real gold which was there at
(B 607) si F


first ? ” inquired Emu Bill. “It was yellow enough, or
I’m colour blind.”
Bob looked a trifle puzzled. “ I should say it was an
unstable chloride or sulphide of the metal,” he ventured
at length. “ A combination which very seldom occurs in
Nature.”
“ I’m o’ the opinion that Bob’s right,” spoke Mackay.
“ This country’s full o’ odd formations and no one has ever
bothered studying them yet.”
“If you can save this stuff afore it melts, Bob,”
grunted Nuggety Dick, “ there’s bound to be a fortune
waiting for you right here; for the clay most likely
covers the whole flat.”
“ I’ll take these specimens with me now,” decided Bob,
“ and try some experiments with them; ” and he gathered
up the deceptive samples and made his way back to the
tent, leaving the wondering assembly still in a maze of
doubt.
“ I do believe he can do it,” grunted Emu Bill.
“ He’s got the finest balanced brain-box I’ve seen since
I struck this howling ■wilderness,” commented Never
Never Dave.
“Bob can do anything with chemistry,” said Jack,
proudly. Then they went their several ways, all pondering
deeply.
No more work was done that day: it would have
seemed like tempting Providence to continue further
operations after two such thrilling happenings had taken
place. Bob quietly set about his task of analyzing the
troublesome specimens, then quickly discovered that he
required a stock of various acids and alkalis to aid him in
his efforts.


“ We’re a’ running short of stores anyhow,” said
Mackay. “ We’d better send some one into the township
with the camels, and you could get the chemicals required
at the same time.”
He straightway went and broached the matter to
Huggety Dick and his satellites, and it was promptly
arranged that old Dead Broke Dan should be despatched
with the team at once. It was by this time near the hour
of sundown, and the various camel bells of the party could
be heard faintly tinkling in the eastward distance.
“ I’ll round them up in a jiff,” volunteered the Shadow,
starting off at a jog trot.
“ I’m coming too, Shad ! ” shouted Jack, and together
they entered the scrub, and were soon lost to sight. They
had not gone far, however, before the Shadow stopped and
listened with something like dismay showing in his face.
The bells seemed to be receding into the distance rather
than coming nearer.
“ I’ve never heard o’ them brutes travelling so fast,”
he said discontentedly, and they increased their pace
to a determined run, which they kept up for fully ten
minutes. The bells sounded distinctly nearer now, but
that the camels were on the march was plainly evident to
the Shadow, whose ear was acutely trained to judging
distances by sound.
“I reckon I know what’s wrong, Jack,” said he.
“ Some wretched niggers have got them in tow. It’s very
lucky we came out to-night.”
“ Is it ? ” asked Jack, doubtfully.
The Shadow laughed joyously. “ We’ll have a grand
circus on our own to-night, if there ain’t too many of
them.”


“ But,” said Jack, “ we haven’t even a rifle with us,
and they’ll have their spears and boomerangs, won’t
they?”
“ I’ve got something that will skeer the beggars
quicker than any shooting-iron,” replied the Shadow.
“ See, look at this ”
He extracted from some secret recess in his meaore
O
wardrobe a small curiously shaped piece of wood, about
six inches long and two inches or so broad, tapering to a
fine edge all round.
“That’s a ghingi, Jack; I just hitch a bit o’ string on
to the end, and whizz it round in the air, an’ it howls like
a dyiu’ dingo.”
“ But what good does that do ? ” Jack persisted, by no
means enlightened.
“ What good does it do ? ” echoed the Shadow. “ Why,
when they hear the screech o’ the ghingi-ghingi, they’ll
either vanish right away or come to hear what it says.
The ghingi is their devil, you know, but only the sorcerers
o’ the tribes can make it speak. I made this here ghingi
myself, and, by thunder ! it can yell like a good ’un, it
can.”
The Shadow was evidently quite delighted at the
prospect of making use of his handiwork, and as they
strode along he managed to infuse Jack with a considerable
amount of his enthusiasm. It was now as dark as an
Australian night could be, but the steadfast radiance of
the myriad stars somewhat neutralized the gloom of the
shadows and reflected an eerie sort of half light over the
motionless tips of the mulga scrub. At last they were
almost up on the clanging bells, and if there had been any
doubt in Jack’s mind concerning the accuracy of his


The Treasure of the Mine
companion’s surmise as to their unusual clangour it dis-
appeared utterly when he heard the droning chant of the
aborigines mingle with the rhythmic peals. They had
reached a small clearing in the scrub which permitted an
uninterrupted line of vision for nearly half a mile, but
before leaving the sheltering timber they hesitated,’ and
peered anxiously across the intervening sand plain, and
there in the midst of it, darkly discernible, moved the
ghostly camel train.
“ Now for it,” muttered the Shadow, getting the ghingi
ready for action. “TV e must round up them camels afore
they get into the bush country again.”
He whirled his device quickly around his head, and at
once a strange moaning broke upon the air. Faster and
fastei he spun it round, and the moaning increased to a
weird wailing shriek which penetrated across the plain
with shivering intensity. At once the bells ceased their
clamour and vague cries of alarm echoed back to the boys.
“ Let us chase ’em up with it,” exclaimed the Shadow,
throwing all caution aside. “ When they hear the ghingi
cornin’ nearer they won’t wait to argue long.”
Together they made a wild burst over the ironshot flat,
the ghingi sending forth varying notes of wailing tenor as
they ran. In their excitement they had not calculated on
the nearness of the natives, the silence of the bells perhaps
somewhat confused them, but they halted when they found
themselves almost on the tail of the last camel, a huge
animal which the Shadow had no difficulty in recognizing
b} its unusual size. All this time the harsh unmusical
cries of the disquieted aborigines rent their ears, but
apparently the dusky band had not yet decided to give up
their stolen charges.


“ Judging from the volume o’ music let loose they’re
must he 'bout half a dozen o’ the beggars,” whispered the
Shadow, " Here, Jack, take this blooming ghingi, and let
her rip. My arms are about busted. I’ll do a bit o’ a
yell myself and see what happens.”
Jack seized the string of the syren and whirled with a
will, and from the lips of the Shadow there issued a most
lugubrious "roan, which seemed to combine in it all the
O O'
horrors that any demon of darkness could have conjured
up. That seemed to decide matters; with screams of
terror seven or eight stalwart blacks broke away from a
point where they had been huddled ahead of the camels;
their dark forms were just visible as they fled, and they
made a somewhat ghost-like spectacle. Jack gave a low
chuckle of delight.
“Your voice fetched them, Shadow,” said he.
“Keep the ghingi whizzing, Jack, keep it whizzing!”
came the agonized reply. “ I couldn’t do it again for all
the gold in Australia. My throat’s burst, it is.”
Their concerted action was now prompt and effective.
In a trice the Shadow had a grip of the nose-rope of the
leading camel, and had turned the unwieldly train on a
backward course. Once more the bells rang out their
noisy clamour, yet still the ghingi sounded loud and shrill,
and still the jarring cries of the stricken warriors echoed in
reply from a not too remote distance. The adventuresome
pair were not yet out of all danger. Indeed it soon
became evident to them that the mystified aborigines
were not altogether willing to accept the warning call
of the ghingi as a reason for the total abdication of their
plunder. Their discordant cries were just a bit too close
to be pleasant.


“If they rush us, Jack,” the Shadow hoarsely whis-
pered, as he tugged at Misery’s nose-rope, “ we’ll have to
make a bolt for it.”
Jack grunted a sympathetic affirmative. “ I can’t
swing this wretched old ghingi much longer,” he said.
Even while he spoke the savages seemed to decide on
a definite course of action; their yells suddenly grew
louder and nearer. It was very probable they had
observed the boys through the gloom, and were thus
awakened to a knowledge of the ruse by which they had
been deceived. Anyhow there could be no doubt as to
their intentions ; they meant to recapture the camels, and
that right speedily, and yet the Shadow was loth to leave
his charges.
“ They’ll get us when we enter the scrub,” said he,
with dismal resignation. “ The beggars won’t tackle us in
the open. I reckon we’ll have to do a scoot. Jack.”
Jack had already arrived at that conclusion; but
now, as he rested from his labours for an instant, a
bright idea seized him. They were scarcely a hundred
yards from the edge of the timber; whatever was to be
done must be done quickly. Without a word he rushed
back to the rearmost camel, and hastily secured the
tongue of the bell encircling its neck by passing it through
a loop in the leathern thong which hung loose for that
purpose. Moving hurriedly on he silenced each of the
jangling bells in the same way, and for a short space the
cumbrous train proceeded in absolute quiet.
“ They’ll think we’ve stopped, and it may keep them
back for a bit,” Jack whispered.
The Shadow nodded comprehensively. It had come
as a shock to him that this new chum companion of his


should have thought of the simple plan first, and he felt
somewhat aggrieved in consequence. Surely enough the
yells of the natives seemed to recede into the distance ; the
silence of the hells had certainly confused them.
“ They’ll be with us in a jiff,” calmly said the Shadow,
as they entered the scrub, in which prognostication he was
quite correct.
A chorus of fiercer yells than before suddenly broke
upon the still air, then came the angry beating of spears
upon shields, and the pat-pat of many feet on the sand.
But now came another unexpected diversion. Away
in the distance a heavy report boomed out; again and
again the thunderous echoes of exploding cordite crashed
through the night.
The Shadow chuckled long and joyously. “ That’s
Mackay’s new rifle,” he said. “ I would know the crack
of it anywhere.”
Other and varying discharges quickly followed, making
it plain that the entire community at Golden Flat had
grown alarmed at the prolonged absence of the boys, and
were signalling in order to guide their return in the dark-
ness. The yelling horde at the first ominous sound had
ceased their clamour, but soon they broke out afresh and
with renewed energy. They meant to make one more
effort to recover their prize before it was hopelessly beyond
their reach. With appalling shouts they quickly drew near.
“ It’s hard luck to be forced to clear out now,” com-
plained Jack, marvelling much at his companion’s un-
subdued joy.
That wily youth quietly unhitched the bells from the
necks of the three leading camels.
“I think we’ll best the niggers after all, Jack,” he


said. “ I wasn’t exactly willing to let you risk it before;
but you can steer by the gunshots, can’t you ? ”
“Of course,” replied Jack, clutching at the nose-rope
of Misery which the Shadow had relinquished.
“ Well, you take the team into camp, and I’ll run the
niggers a bit o’ a circus dance.” He was gone at once, but
not an instant too soon ; the blacks were already within a
hundred yards of them.
Jack continued his course guided by the reports which
now rang out at regular intervals, and he smiled quietly
to himself when a confused jangle of bells sounded
away to the southward, and his smile developed into a
hearty laugh when, with howls presumably of delight, the
warrior band stampeded in that direction.
“ I think the Shadow knows how to take care of him-
self,” he reflected contentedly, as he continued his course
in peace.
The Shadow’s trick was certainly effective. It was
also risky, but that feature seemed rather enjoyable than
otherwise to the impetuous young Australian. Far to the
south he sped, jangling the bells at intervals to draw his
pursuers on, and when their noisy yelling sounded too
close for his liking, he silenced the tell-tale alarms and
veered off in a different direction, always taking care to
work in towards the camp. A veritable will-o’-the-wisp
he was, and the baffled natives soon tired of their hopeless
chase, no doubt marvelling much at the extraordinary
activity shown by the fleeing camel train!
At the camp considerable consternation was felt over
the non-return of the camel hunters. They had been gone
over two hours, before Mackay ventured to express his
fears for their safety.


“ The Shadow must have got twisted in his bearings/'
he said. “ The bells were within a couple o’ miles off when
they started, and they seem to have gone further away
instead o’ cornin’ nearer.”
“Mebbe the cantankerous brutes bolted,” suggested
Nuggety Dick. “The Shadow couldn’t bush hissel’ in
creation wi’ the old Cross showin’ in the sky.”
So, indeed, they all thought, but each of them felt
strangely anxious nevertheless, and when Mackay fetched
his rifle from his tent and began to blaze away methodi-
cally, they were not long in following his lead. The bells
had been some time out of range when the first shot was
fired, but suddenly their harsh jangling burst afresh on
their ears, and to their surprise and dismay they seemed
to be heading towards the south.
“ Keep your popguns going,” said Mackay. “ The
Shadow must have lost his nerve and got slewed.”
So was the young bushman condemned and abused
while he pursued his erratic course, and Jack came in for
more sympathy than he would have appreciated had he
been within hearing.
“ What in thunder can the howlin’ idiot mean by zig-
zagging like that ? ” exclaimed Never Never Dave, listening
to the intermittent peals of the bells with deep concern.
Then faintly over the mulga scrub came the yells of the
discomfited blacks, and at once Golden Flat camp was
aroused to strenuous action; scarcely a word was spoken,
each man gripped his rifle, and almost as one body, they
made a wild burst in the direction from which the alarm-
ing sounds had come. And Bob, though almost in a high
fever from the effects of the wound in his head, entirely
forgot his weakness, and kept pace with Mackay.


Silent and grim, like a raging Nemesis, the small
company hurried on their vengeful way; but they had not
gone far when they became aware of a slight commotion in
the bush directly in their path, and almost before they
could realize it, the great hulking forms of the camels
loomed out through the darkness, with Jack at their
head.
“ Well, I’ll be kicked ! And why isn’t ye slaughtered,
young feller?” demanded Nuggety Dick, in helpless
amazement. “We never dreamt o’ seein’ ye alive
again— — ”
“ Where’s the Shadow, Jack ? ” interrupted Mackay.
Jack laughed, “ He’s acting decoy for the blacks, he
said.
The big man seemed to tremble with suppiessed
emotion.
“ And I was blaming him for getting bushed! ” he said,
in a tone of deep self-reproach.
A 'harsh jangle of bells close at hand intenupted
further speech, and a cheery voice spoke from the gloom.
“ Say, boss, ye needn’t ever be skeerd bout me gettin
bushed]; but them camel bells are mighty heavy, an’ I’m
just about blown out waltzing them around.”
The Shadow approached, gave the bells a final shake,
then flung them with a clatter to the ground. A few
words served to explain matters, and it was w itb a feeling
of devout thankfulness that the party returned slowly to
camp.
« You must never run risks like that again, my laddies,”
Mackay admonished quietly, in the midst of the general
rejoicings over the plucky rescue of the camel tiain.
“ Jack and me didn’t take no risks, came the gay


reply. “We always knew by their howling when the
beggars were coming too close. It’s been a grand picnic
for us both, hasn’t it, Jack ? ”
“ 1 wouldn ’ fc have missed it for anything,” answered
Jack, with a chuckle of keen delight.


CHAPTER V
The Rush at Golden Flat
lAEAD BROKE DAN had been gone a week from
Golden Flat on his errand for stores, and in this
time the extent of the “ pay gravel ” in the different mines
had been fairly accurately estimated. Developments all
along the line proved the existence of a rich but limited
layer of the gold-carrying wash from end to end of the
workings. At the Golden Promise mine the auriferous
deposit, as had been anticipated, had occurred in a con-
siderably deeper drift than in any of the others, the reason
of course, being in accordance with Bob’s theory that the
sudden uprise of the old channel would cause an accumu-
lation of the wash directly on the incline, and so it had
happened; the thickness of the stratum was here nearly
four feet, or almost twice that in all the other claims.
Beyond this, however, no direct trace of the ancient water-
way could be discovered; a broad lagoon-like mass of the
tantalizing clay which had so mystified Emu Bill inter-
vened, sparkling and gleaming in its deceptive beauty
until raised to the surface when it unfailingly relapsed
into its muddy, sordid state, to the disgust of all beholders.
This odd formation was found to underlie the genuine
gold-carrying cement in all the shafts, and its presence
provided a topic for much vituperative language.


Until the various chemicals arrived Bob was unable to
make any analysis of the much-abused deposit, but he
was never tired of examining samples of it, powdering
them up and applying the fire test in the hope that what-
ever refractory gas or element was present, and binding the
gold in an invisible state, might be driven off. He never
cared to say much concerning the results of these experi-
ments, but that he received undoubted satisfaction from
his labours was very evident. He was engaged roasting
some of the fine grains of the clay in a crucible when
Mackay entered the tent on this morning in search of a
pick-handle he had mislaid.
“ Well, Bob,” said he, “ an’ are ye gettin’ any nearer
a solution to that mystery of Nature ? ”
Bob silently pointed to the crucible on the small
Primus stove from which dense yellow fumes were issuing.
“ Smell that,” he said.
Mackay sniffed right heartily, and nearly choked in
consequence.
“ An’ what sort o’ a perfume do ye call that ? ” he
demanded, when he had regained his composure.
“ Chlorine,” smilingly returned the chemist. “ The
clay is soaked in it, and any text-book will tell you that
chlorine has a great affinity for gold.”
Mackay became interested at once. “ Let me hear
your line o’ argument, Bob,” he grunted. “ This is a
matter o’ vera considerable importance, an’ I’ll be the last
to discourage ye in your efforts.”
Bob smiled just a trifle sadly. “ I haven’t been able
to work in the shaft for a week,” he began.
“ An’ ye’ll no work in the shaft until that head o
yours is richt better,” interrupted Mackay. “I m no’ so


sure,” he continued, “ whether I should alloo ye to worry
as you’re doin’ aboot that wretched stuff.”
The young man looked gratefully at the speaker, then
turned his gaze once more to the smoking crucible.
“ I think I have discovered how to treat it,” he said
slowly. “ The chlorine must be brought into contact with
another gas offering a greater affinity than gold: on their
combination the gold will be set free in a metallic state,
and can be saved in the ordinary way. All we have to do
is to pump hydrogen gas into a vat containing a solution
of the clayey mixture, keep emptying off the slimes, and
in time the residue must be a highly concentrated gold
wash. It’s not very difficult, is it ? I only need those
acids to prove the practical working of the scheme.”
Mackay remained silent for a moment, apparently deep
in thought.
“ You’ll do it, Bob,” he broke out eagerly. “ Dead
Broke should be back wi’ the acids any time now, an’
you’ll be able to finish your tests; but I hae no doubt
ye’ll accomplish what we all wish, an’ ye’ll deserve your
reward, my laddie.”
About noon of the same day Dead Broke Dan was
sighted in the distance, returning with the camel team,
much to the relief of all in camp, for he was already a full
day overdue.
“ I was a bit skeert that ole Dead Broke had anchored
himself in the township,” growled Nuggety Dick, as they
all congregated at his shaft to watch the lumbering train
approach.
“If he drove the animals like that all the way”
hazarded Never Never Dave, “ he could hiv been here two
days ago. Why, the old heathen is forcing the pace.”


The camels were certainly travelling at an unusually
rapid rate; heavily laden as they were, they were actually
ambling over the sand, and old Dead Broke Dan was
running energetically alongside, plying his long whip with
a will.
“ I can’t make it out,” said Mackay. “ Dead Broke
knows well enough that it’s dangerous to rush those brutes
in that fashion. There must be something wrong.”
Something apparently was wrong, for when the great
hulking beasts staggered into camp, their flanks were
heaving convulsively, and their mouths were flecked with
foam. Their driver, too, seemed in the last stage of
collapse.
“ There’s a rush cornin’, mates,” he panted. “ Macguire’s
gang followed me out from Kalgoorlie. I tried to shake
them off an’ doubled back on my own tracks, but they’ve
got horses and buggies, an’ I couldn’t lose them, no matter
how I dodged. They camped less’n a mile from me last
night; but I didn’t unload the camels, an’ scooted about one
o'clock in the morning so as to get in ahead to tell you.”
“ We couldn’t have kept it quiet much longer anyhow,
boys,” said ISTuggety Dick. “ An’ I don’t think we’d have
minded a decent crowd cornin’ to the flat, but Macguire’s a
holy terror, and his gang are a tough party to handle.”
“ There’s one howlin’ satisfaction, mates,” laughed Emu
Bill. “ They’ll get nothin’ but that miserable miradgy clay
outside our pegs. I kin just fancy I hear Macguire’s words
when he sees his gold vanish.” He grinned delightedly at
the thought.
Mackay did not say much, he knew that a rush was
inevitable, but Macguire was not exactly the kind of man
he would care to have as a near neighbour. He was a


noted bully, card-sharper, and mine-jumper, though he
ostensibly kept an hotel in the township where men of a
similar fraternity were wont to congregate.
“ How many are in the crowd, Dead Broke ? ” he asked.
“ ’Bout a dozen, I calc’late.”
“ And we are only eight,” mused Mackay.
“ You don’t think the sneakin’ thief will try to jump
this here circus ? ” ejaculated Nuggety Dick.
“ You may just bet your boots the same individual ’ll
no work himsel’ if he can find it already done for him,”
came the answer. “ I shouldua wonder a bit if we have
some trouble. What are you grinning at, you young
baboon ? ” he demanded, turning to the Shadow, who
appeared to find much cause for merriment in the doubtful
state of things.
The Shadow subsided at once. “ Man boss,” he com-
plained reproachfully, “does ye think we is a gentle
little Sunday-school party, just waiting to be swallowed ? ”
Mackay snorted in disgust. “If it werena for these
laddies,” he said to himself, “I would dearly enjoy a
scrimmage; but I seem to have become mair cautious
since they’ve been wi’ me. It’s no richt that they should
see the wickedness o’ human nature in its worst aspect a’
at aince.”
“ I see them coming! ” cried Bob, who was scanning
the horizon closely, and a dim sand cloud in the far east-
ward distance was sure enough evidence that the rush
would ere long be in their midst. Soon the various
outlines of horsemen and buggies could be traced amid
the enveloping dust; quickly the frenzied gold-seekers
drew near, and wild halloos mingled with the cracking
of whips, and the laboured plunging of horses’ hoofs
(B 607) 97 g


on the ironshot sand plain. Ahead of the main party,
mounted on a powerful bay horse, which he was cruelly
spurring on to its last effort, rode Macguire, a tall,
awkward brute of a man, whose heavy countenance as he
came near, bore the exulting leer of the professional
braggart and bully. At a mad gallop he forced his jaded
beast right up to Nuggety Dick’s shaft, then halted with
a vicious jerk on the curb rein, and surveyed the awaiting
group with a triumphant grin.
“So you thought you were goin’ to run this show
yourselves,” he sneered from his position in the saddle.
“ I guess you’ve struck it plumb first shot,” calmly
returned Emu Bill, rolling his quid in his mouth with
evident relish, and ejecting a streak of tobacco juice which
came dangerously near to finding a resting-place on the
new-comer’s boots.
Macguire snarled, and looked round to see if his
satellites were near at hand, and, noting their close
proximity, he jumped from his horse, threw the reins
carelessly over a mulga sapling, and examined the stacked
wash on the surface with unconcealed joy.
“ An’ who was the discoverer o’ this bonanza ? ” he
demanded, aggressively, addressing every one in general.
Nuggety Dick gave a snort of annoyance. “ Eor a
mean impertinent swab ye beat anything I’ve ever met,”
said he, in his politest tones. “ An’ if ye doesn’t take yer
miserable carcase clear o’ my pegs instanter, ye’ll find what
ye’re lookin’ for in about two shakes o’ a muskittie’s eyelid.”
At that moment the rest of Macguire’s Rush appeared
on the scene, and with boisterous laughter hurried to
range themselves by their chiefs side. They were a
motley crew, comprising the very worst product of the


goldfields, and they glared at the owners of Golden Flat
with uncontrolled malevolence. Macguire eyed his choice
associates with satisfaction, before responding to Nuggety
Dick’s peremptory request, then he turned the flood-gates
of his wrath loose on that amiable gentleman, who listened
with dangerous sang froid. War was certainly imminent,
but before the actual outbreak had occurred, Mackay left
his position beside Jack, and stepped forward.
“ This is my quarrel, Nuggety,” said he. “ The gentle-
man was looking for the discoverer o’ the flat, an’ I should
be sorry if he went away before makin’ my acquaintance.”
The tone was quiet almost to mildness, and Jack and
Bob marvelled much thereat; but the Shadow laughed
9 O
softly to himself.
“ Oh, it was you, was it ? ” blustered Macguire. “ An’
why in thunder didn’t ye report to me ? We might have
come peaceably at first, but now we mean to boost ye out
of it. I know ye hasn’t registered yer find, for I has
watched the Warden’s office ever since you an’ them
youngsters passed through the township, an’ there’s been
no notices posted. Now I calc’late we’ll just begin where
you leave off, an’ we are obliged to ye for doin’ so much
work for us. Ain’t that right, boys ? ”
A yell of approbation greeted his words.
“ You’ve made a vera serious error,” said Mackay,
with unruffled serenity. “ You’ve neglected to consider
that we keep guns in camp, an’ there’s twa or three o’
them lookin’ at ye now. Furthermore, we were just dyin’
for a scrimmage when you popped your ugly head along,
an’, though ye beat us by two in numbers, I dinna just
feel tremblin’ wi’ anxiety over the finish o’ the circus.
No, no, Macguire, ye canna bluff this crowd ”


“ Does ye know who lam ? ” howled Macguire. “I m
the champion bruiser o’ the fields, I is.”
“ And ye look it every time,” retorted Mackay. “ But
before we gang in for wholesale bloodshed, we d better
settle our personal differences. I hae objected strongly to
your unmannerly inceevility ”
“Ho! ho! ho!” roared the bruiser, rolling up his
shirt-sleeves with professional exactitude. “ Now, boys,
the funeral is off until I knock this rooster out.
“ Eight 0! ” came the ready response from the hired
ruffians, who never doubted for a moment the all-conquering
prowess of their chief.
Nuggety Dick, Emu Bill, Jack, the Shadow, and Bob,
quietly ranged themselves on one side, their hands gripping
the butts of the revolvers in their belts. In the near
distance, beyond the windlass, with rifles resting on the
timber for greater steadiness, Never Never Dave and
Dead Broke Dan kept the deadly tubes gazing at
Macguire’s band, much to these warriors’ disquietude. It
had been Mackay’s idea to have them thus prepared; the
wisdom of it was already clearly evidenced.
And now Bob and Jack trembled for the safety of their
friend. Macguire was both taller and broader than Mackay,
and his short bull neck and bjoated features gave him a
decidedly repulsive appearance. But to their astonish-
ment Mackay’s face betrayed not the slightest trace of
concern, though his eyes shone with a strange light. He
had taken upon himself the battle of the entire camp, and
he knew it.
With a yell Macguire rushed to the attack, and his
right'hand lunged ponderously forward, only to find itself
warded lightly aside. Wildly he attempted to guard with


his left; but Mackay’s blow came like a lightning stroke,
straight from the shoulder, and was not to be denied.
Macguire staggered under the shock of the concussion, but
recovered himself, and with savage rage struck blindly
again and again at his antagonist’s head, only to find his
great fists beat the empty air. Mackay simply warded off
the vain strokes, and stood his ground, a grim smile begin-
ning to dawn on his features. He had discovered the
weakness of his opponent; Macguire’s strength was his
whole support —one of his terrible blows would have
proved fatal to most men —and so had his reputation
grown! But Mackay’s anger burned fierce within him,
and he waited his chance; it soon came. Macguire,
aroused to an extraordinary pitch of ferocity, made again
a desperate swinging stroke at his enemy’s head with the
usual futile result; but ere he could recover from the
impetus of his foolish action Mackay’s great fists caught
him full in the face, one after the other, with a force that
hurled the bully over in the sand. But all was not over
yet; the bruiser had evidently no lack of animal courage.
He picked himself up slowly, peered through his fast closing
eyes to locate his enemy, and leaped like a demoniacal
savage once more to the fray. Disdaining to strike the
half-blind wretch, Mackay stood unmoved, and so gave
the cunning trickster the chance he desired. The long,
octopus arms of Macguire gripped him tight, and his breath
spurted forth in fierce gasps. A groan of dismay broke
from Jack, and a yell of delight from Macguire’s supporters
greeted this action. Now, indeed, it was to be a trial of
strength. Backwards and forwards they swayed, bending,
twisting, writhing, stumbling, but through it all the Shadow
noticed with joy how gradually, yet surely, Mackay’s


brawny arms were tightening over the great bulk of his
antagonist. For a moment there was a lull, the crucial
point had come, and the combatants stood immovable; the
muscles of Mackay’s arms strained out like whipcords.
Crack! crack! something seemed to have given way.
Mackay relaxed his hold, and with a groan and a shiver
the towering form of Macguire subsided in the sand and
lay inert. Both sides had watched the last struggle of the
mants with breathless interest; and the final collapse of
Macguire aroused from his supporters only a hushed
exclamation of awe. The victor stepped forward to them
at once.
“Now, boys,” he said pleasantly, “if you like, we’ll
begin the circus. Your leader has got a couple or so ribs
broken, so you’d better not count on him much ”
“ No! no! ” they shouted in unison; and one of them,
constituting himself spokesman for the party, gave vent to
their impressions.
“ After that,” he said weakly, “ we don’t want no more
fight. Let us peg alongside somewheres. We promise to
act straight with you,”
A shuddering murmur of approval followed his words.
Mackay had indeed done battle for the entire camp that
day.
Then the Shadow broke out. “ Didn’t I tell you,
Jack ? ” cried he, prancing around gleefully.
“By the Great Howlin’ Billy, I’ve never seen a fight
like that—no, never,” impressively spoke Never Never,
coming forward.
Neither Bob nor Jack said a word, their hearts seemed
too full for speech; but Mackay guessed their thoughts.
“ It had to be done, my laddies,” said he, kindly. “ I


thought my fighting days were over; but it wasna to be —
it wasna to be.”
After that order reigned. Some of Macguire’s gang
sullenly went off to peg out claims beyond the Golden
Promise Mine; others busied themselves erecting a huge
tent into which their fallen chief was carried, groaning and
cursing by turns. Then the holders of Golden Plat returned
to their labours with buoyant energy, and continued ex-
cavating the golden wash as if nothing untoward had
happened to mar the even tenor of their way. Bob having
received the acids he had so eagerly awaited, was soon lost
in the mazes of calculative experiments beside his crucibles
and test-tubes. The Shadow and Jack slogged away with
steady persistency at the bottom of the shaft. Mackay
calmly smoked the pipe of peace at the windlass head, now
and again breaking out into unmelodious song to the great
discomfort of all within hearing distance. Indeed, since
his desperate encounter he seemed to have become unusually
cheerful; and Bob, hearing the distracting strains, laughed
softly to himself and pondered deeply on this further illus-
tration of a many-sided nature. That evening, however,
he was destined to be further surprised, for Mackay, having
finished his tea, went quietly to a small mysterious-looking
box which he kept under his bunk, and which neither of
the boys had ever seen him open before, and from a recess
within the lid he extracted—a flute.
“ Heavens! ” feebly murmured the Shadow, who was
present, glaring at the instrument with exaggerated horror.
Jack laughed outright, but checked himself suddenly
when the big man began to play. Never had he heard
sweeter music; the mellow notes rang out with exceeding
softness as the great and somewhat battered fingers of the


musician strayed over the keys. No paltry tune this,
no music-hall ditty; it was the “Miserere” from II
Trovatore he played, and with such haunting sweetness
that Bob rubbed his eyes and looked at him in amazement.
It was no joke, then, this strange man’s professed love of
music, and his thoughts went back to the evening they
had spent in London. The last long-drawn-out note
trembled to a finish; and Mackay’s voice broke in on
his reverie.
“ What do you think o’ that, Bob ? ”
“ It was beautiful,” said Bob, soberly.
“Ah, my ain whustle canna compare wi’ the flute,”
sighed Mackay, dolorously, applying his mouth once more
to his treasure. Then he hesitated. “ I think 111 play ye
that bonnie tune we heard at the Queen’s Hall, said he,
reflectively. “ D’ye mind what it was, Jack ?
“ Of course I do,” responded that youth, with alacrity.
“ It was ‘ Home, Sweet Home ! ’ ”
The questioner looked grieved. “ That sang doesna
come into my repertoire when I m oot in the bush, he
reproved sternly.
« i i l 11 • 1 T» 1
“ You meant, ‘ Lo, hear the gentle lark,’ ” said Bob.
The flautist nodded. “One, two, three, and off she
goes,” said he; and at once the liquid strains of Bishop’s
wonderful music echoed through the tent, with its trills
and cadenzas, and with, it must be confessed, many
variations from the original melody. Ere he had finished
nearly all the camp were clustered at the door; even
Macguire’s party was represented. Then the spell was
broken. Evidently the volume of sound created by the
flute did not quite satisfy the player’s desire for a fuller
burden of song. Ho laid down the flute. “ Watch me


catch that top note,” said he, and, with grim desperation,
he opened his month and began, “ ‘ Lo! hear the gentle
la-a-a-a-ark
A yell of horror from the doorway, and a sudden
trampling of feet intimated that the bulk of his audience
had taken flight. The Shadow squirmed in agony, Jack
shuddered, and Bob looked pained.
“ Ah, weel,” grunted the singer apologetically, pausing
in his valiant effort, “ I couldna expect ye to appreciate
such vera high-class music, but hand on a bit an 111
gie ye a verse o’ my ain construction, set to music o
my vera ain composition; it is called 1 The Muskittie s
Lament.’ ”
Straightway he started, and bellowed out this touching
little story, in a voice so raucous that even the panots
fluttering in the scrub around screamed out noisily in
protest* When he had finished, the Shadow and Jack
had vanished, and Bob alone was left to thank him as
best he could.
But he w'as happily spared this call on his prevarica-
tive powers, for the vocalist did not give him an oppor-
tunity of expressing his opinion.
“Ye dinna look exactly overjoyed wi’ my singin’,” said
he, quizzically, “ but ye must admit it s vera effective.
* Bob laughed, but did not venture to disagree.
“ Ay,” continued Mackay, with a chuckle, “ my voice
has wonderfu’ movin’ powers, though, like my whustle, it s
* “THE MUSKITTIE’S LAMENT.
“ A bright wee muskittie sat on a tree,
An’ 0, it was hungry as hungry could be,
An’ the tears drappit doon frae its bonnie blue ee,
As it sighed and looked sad for Australia.”


mebbe a wee bit trying at close quarters.” He proceeded
to the box once more, and, to Bob’s surprise, extricated a
sextant from its depths. He gazed at it tenderly for a
few moments, then handed it to his companion, who seized
it eagerly, and examined it with deep interest. It was
an instrument which had, apparently, seen considerable
service, for the handle was grooved by much fingering, and
the lacquer on the framework was blistered by the sun’s
rays, and altogether bare in places. But the silvered arc
itself was in perfect condition, and the thin coating of
vaseline over it showed that its present owner knew how
to take care of the delicate fabric. Mackay gazed
curiously on during the young man’s work of inspection.
It was almost dark now in the tent, the last glimmering
rays of the setting sun alighted on the reflecting glasses of
the sextant and danced thereon joyously for a moment,
then the heavy gloom of night fell, and still Bob clutched
the symbol of his unuttered desire, while Mackay seemed
wrapt in silent meditation. At length the elder man
spoke.
“ That was the chief’s sextant, Bob,” said he, gravely.
“ It was the only thing I found near the camp where he
and his expedition were murdered.”
“ I almost guessed that,” answered Bob; then he
hesitated. “ I wish you would let me try an observation
with it,” he concluded with earnestness.
“ Let you ? ” cried Mackay. “ I want you to do it.
Do ye remember,” he continued musingly, “o’ me send-
ing you a book on navigation; well, that was because I
wanted to influence your studies in that direction. I
canna say whether I have succeeded or no’ ”
Bob laughed grimly. “My father was a sailor,” said


he. “ His brother was a navigator; and I—l would dearly
like to be able to steer a course as well.”
“ My lad,” said Mackay, “ you’ll maybe get your wish
sooner than you expect. I brought out the sextant just to
sound you, for nae man can say that Mackay persuaded
him against his will; but I see that the same blood runs
in the family. Take the sextant, Bob; I give it to you,
though it is my dearest possession. Handle it carefully,
it has proved true on mony a long weary journey. But
mind, I may ask ye to use it in earnest soon.”
Without another word he arose and walked from the
tent, leaving Bob alone in the darkness, his mind filled
with rushing thoughts. When Jack came in, about half
an hour later, and lit a candle, he found him in the same
place. Truly the touch of the mystic emblem had aroused
in him the uncontrollable indefinite longing which is the
sure birthright of the wanderer. The call of the bush
seemed to echo through his brain, the boundless horizon
beckoned him.
Jack’s entry helped to throw off the spell which had
gripped him. He arose and placed the sextant carefully
back in its case beside the flute.
“ What on earth is that, Bob ? ” asked Jack, anxiously.
“Not another musical instrument, surely.”
“ We’ll have a look at it to-morrow, Jack,” answered
Bob. “ It’s a sextant which Mackay has given me.”
“Great Scot!” ejaculated the irrepressible youth,
“ can he use a sextant too ? ”
Bob smiled. “ I don’t know,” said he, “ but I wouldn’t
be too sure.”
“He is a regular daisy,” commented Jack, enthusi-
astically. “ Why, up at Nuggety’s camp, he’s explaining


to them the theories of music, and I’m hanged if he
hasn’t got them half convinced that it is their uncul-
ti\ ated ear that is at fault when they don’t appreciate
his singing.”
A commotion from without the tent interrupted them,
and the Shadow’s voice shouted loudly on Jack.
“ I’ve just rounded up a real beauty o’ a snake at my
camp, said he, when they appeared. “ Come along, an’
I’ll show ye how to crack him like a whip.” And the
three departed.
On the following morning Macguire’s followers con-
sidered it advisable that their damaged leader should be
taken, without further delay, to the township hospital,
and shortly after daybreak a buggy and a couple of horses
were waiting in readiness for the journey. This sudden
decision on the matter was by no means agreeable to
Mackay, and he hastily called a meeting of the claim-
holders in order to state his fears.
“Tou know, boys,” said he, “we’ve never registered
these mines at the Warden’s office, as that bully Macguire
seems to know, an’ our miners’ rights are only good
enough so long as we are the strongest party.”
“Well, we don’t need to try and keep the Flat a secret
now,” growled Emu Bill. “We’re bound to have half
Kalgoorlie alongside us in a day or so.”
“Ye don’t seem to catch on to our difficulty, boys,”
continued Mackay. “If Macguire gets into the Warden’s
office first, he can simply register these mines in his own
ugly name, along wi’ his partners, of course, an’ then, all
they’ve got to do is swear we jumped them, an’ well get
fired out o’ our own claims wi’ a squad o’ mounted
police! ”


Simple and open-minded bushmen, they had never
thought of this.
“By Jupiter! I believe you’re right,” cried old Dead
Broke Dan.
“ But what in thunder is we to do ? ” complained
Nuggety Dick. “If we had a horse we could beat him;
but the camels are too mighty slow.”
“ Ah, now you’ve struck it,” agreed Mackay. “ But ye
must remember it’s a seventy-mile dry stretch from here
to Kalgoorlie, an’ their horses are pretty well knocked up
now. It should take them a good two days to do it, even
if they force for all they’re worth.”
At this stage the Shadow pushed his way forward. “I
knows what Mackay is thinking,” said he; “ but I’m the
man for the job, an’ I’m goin’ to do it too.”
“ Do ye think ye could manage, Shad ? ” asked Mackay,
earnestly. “ I’m no goin’ to mak’ a single remark aboot
your bushmanship, for you’ve well proved your abilities
in that direction, but, my lad, it’s a job for a strong man,
an’ I meant to tak’ it on mysel’.”
“Ye doesn’t know how powerful I is on the trot,” said
the lithe young bushman; “ an’ if it comes to strength, I
reckon I is no chicken, either.”
He bared his right arm proudly, and showed the swell-
ing muscles which his tattered shirt-sleeve covered.
“ Why, what does ye mean to do ? ” demanded Nuggety,
like his near neighbours, somewhat bewildered. “ Does ye
mean to walk ? ”
“ Give me a water-bag in my fist, and I’ll pretty soon
show you,” came the quick retort. “ I’ll bet a tug at old
Dead Broke’s whiskers that I’m in before the buggy all
right.”


It seemed a hopeless plan, yet, owing to the arid and
sandy nature of the country to be traversed, it was not
as hopeless as it looked.
; we them get away first,” said Mackay, “ they
won’t think there’s any need to hurry. Go an’ swallow as
much water as you can, an get your water-bag primed up
to the muzzle. Jack, you’d better make enough sand-
wiches from that damper of yours to cany the Shadow a
couple o’ days.”
Couldn t I go too, Shad ? ” said Jack, anxiously,
loure a bit too fresh yet, Jack; you’d want too
much water,” was the sententious reply.
Jack turned away without a word to prepare the
sandwiches.
. few scutes later the buggy containing Mac-
guire and one of his chosen associates drove up,
and stopped opposite the party, so that the depart-
ing bully might get rid of some of his vituperative
eloquence. When he saw Mackay, his raging mad-
ness was painful to witness. Clearly his enmity,
instead of dissolving, had been magnified tenfold by his
humiliation.
111 get even with you for this,” he yelled, shaking
his fist at the object of his fury; “ an’ ye won’t live long
before ye knows it too.”
Mackay stepped menacingly towards the buggy. “ I
ought to have killed ye, ye meeserable thief,” he said;
but the man holding the reins was too terrified to wait
longer. With a wild slash of the whip he set the horses
plunging madly across the sand on the back track to the
township, and Macguire, leaning back with livid face,
hurled his last shot.


“ This country won’t be big enough to hold us two 1 ”
he bellowed.
Mackay smiled a hard smile. “Then I reckon ye’d
better get out of it while you’re healthy,” he murmured, as
he turned to rejoin his companions.


CHAPTER VI
The Shadow’s Great Effort
THE grinding rush of the wheels in the sand had
scarcely died away when the Shadow appeared
ready for his journey. He canned a water-bag in his
hand, and his meagre commissariat outfit was tied up in a
glazed cloth slung over his shoulder. He was not impeded
by a superabundance of garments ; a torn shirt flung open
at the neck, a much frayed soft hat turned down all around
the brim to keep the scorching sun from his eyes, and a
light pair of much-worn khaki pants, held in position by a
narrow belt, completed his sartorial glory. His sockless
feet were thrust loosely into shoes that had, by their
appearance, seen considerable service; he had chosen them
because of their once heavy soles being ground down to
comparative lightness. He waited impatiently while
Mackay drew out a rough sketch of the mines and their
position, which was to give the Warden the necessary
information for registration.
“ And mind, Shadow/' said Mackay, handing him the
paper amid an impressive silence, “ ye must steer in by
the south; it will mean a longer journey, but if you don’t
go wide o’ Macguire to the extent o’ five miles or so, he’s
DO
bound to see you, and you could never hope to get in afore
him then.”


The Shadow tucked the note carefully away in a lurk-
ing comer of his flowing shirt.
“ You leave the circus to me, an’ don’t worry,” he said,
with a grin. “ Ta, ta, boys, I’m off. How’s this for the
Flying Dutchman?” He set his face to the west and
dashed away into the desert at an odd uneven trot.
“ He can’t keep that up, surely ? ” said Bob, watching
the runner in astonishment.
“ I’ll bet he jig-jogs like that all day,” said Emu Bill.
“ He’s got the real bushman’s style o’ gettin’ over ground,
he has.”
Mackay watched the fleeing figure doubtfully for a
time, then a satisfied look lit up his face as he noted the
unerring course the Shadow was making.
“He’ll hit the township straight as a die,” said he.
“ That ugly sinner, Macguire, was heading too far to
north’ard or I’m very much mistaken.”
Macguire’s associates at the end of the Flat were now
observed to be in a state of considerable confusion. They
could not fail to realize that the mission had been dis-
patched for one purpose, and they glared after the dis-
appearing messenger with anger and dismay on their
hardened countenances.
“ Keep an eye on them, boys,” warned Mackay. “ We’ll
soon know whether we were richt in our ideas.”
He walked back to the tent with Bob, and when
they arrived there two of the suspected gang approached
apparently in deep sorrow.
“ Why didn’t you give your message to Hawkins ? ”
said one. “ Though he’s driving Macguire, he’d have done
anything you wanted in the township. We doesn’t bear
no grudge, we don’t.”
(B60T) IX3 H


“ The fact is, we don’t trust you worth a cent,” answered
Mackay, shortly.
At this stage Emu Bill hurried up in a state of some
perturbation. Wholly ignoring the presence of the innocent
twain, he burst out —
“ There’s wan o’ them cusses just dodged into the bush
carrying a saddle an’ bridle ! ”
At this the protesting pair seemed to realize that their
cunning ruse was up.
“ An’ ye can bet,” cried the one who had not yet spoken,
“ that Harkins ’ll catch up on the boss afore sundown,
an’ they’ll be in Kalgoorlie by mornin’. He’s goin’ to ride
Macguire’s Furious, he is,” he snarled triumphantly.
He hopped out of the way just in time to avoid being
gripped in the clutches of the man he so wholesomely
dreaded; but his neighbour was not quite so alert, and, as
he turned to run, a well-directed kick lent impetus to his
flight.
“ I suppose the skunks ’ll beat us, after all,” said
Mackay, grimly, “ Their horse bells are sounding quite
close. Where’s Jack ? ”
Emu Bill grinned. “ I think the young ’im anticipated
you, Mac,” said he. “He vanished into the bush when he
noticed the cuss walking off wi’ the saddle.”
“ If he can unhitch the bells and drive the horses north
a bit, it’ll take friend Harkins a day to find them,”
grunted Mackay, in great good humour.
“ You can rely on Jack,” said Bob, decisively ; and just
then a confused jangling of the horse bells rang out,
followed by an absolute stillness.
A few moments later the crackling of the bush in
the far distance, and the thudding of many hoofs in


the sand, intimated that Jack knew his work to the
letter.
“By thunder! ” roared Emu Bill, excitedly. “ The
youngster has taken off their hobbles,”
So it turned out. Jack had grasped the situation at
once when he saw the man slink off with saddle and bridle
in the direction of the horses. His intuitive powers were
wonderfully bright, and his actions followed quickly on his
thoughts.
“ I’ve got to get there first,” he muttered to himself, as
he dashed impetuously through the bush.
He found the horses clustered together under the shade of
a coolibah tree. Poor animals, their owners had hobbled
their forefeet very tightly in order to keep them from straying
far, and after vainly trying to find some edible substance amid
the inhospitable sands, they huddled together in a piteous
group, and bit nervously at the parched eucalyptus twigs
over their heads. It was a country for camels only these
wirj brutes can eat anything; but for horses it was a
barren wilderness. Jack had no difficulty in approaching
them, and he quickly undid their bell straps and flung the
noisy tell-tales on the ground, but when he attempted to
drive the tired creatures they simply would not move, their
hobble straps were too closely fixed to allow of them even
making much of an effort. There was little time for
delay, already the confident whistle of Harkins sounded
perilously near. Jack would have no half measures, un-
hesitatingly he undid the binding thongs, and at once the
entire mob with wild neighs galloped off.
As Mackay would say, it won’t be judicious forme to
wait here long,” the wily youth soliloquized. “ Let me
see, the sun was on my right hand when I left camp ; that


means I’ve got to keep it on my left now.” And he
vanished speedily, missing Harkins, the horse hunter, by
but a few yards. His welcome when he returned was
hearty in the extreme.
Nuggety Dick laughed uproariously. “ Why, look at
the brutes,” said he, pointing westward across the plain
where the still galloping horses were visible. “ They’re
right off home, they are. Blow me tight, Jack, I’ll give
you one of my best nuggets for that when the battery
comes along.”
Mackay’s tribute was characteristic. “Your power o’
observation is developing real well, my laddie,” he said,
“ an’ your calculative propensities are grand. It’s a great
thing to hae the gift o’ initiative, Jack. You see, if you
had waited to tell me about your plan, it would hae been
too late to act on it. I’ll gie ye a tootle on the flute for
that the nicht, I will.” And Jack felt more than amply
repaid for his adventure.
Ere long the weary Harkins returned to his associ-
ates, still carrying the saddle and bridle, and feeling very
wroth indeed. The disgust and chagrin of the check-
mated crew was full and deep, and they sulked in their
tent all day, nor once again ventured to approach their
smiling neighbours.
And all this time the happy-go-lucky Shadow was
plugging along over the thirsty desert sands, looking
neither'to the right nor left, yet instinctively steering
a straight course for his goal beyond the distant horizon.
Mile after mile he traversed with dogged determination,
nor did he once falter in his peculiar ambling gait. And
the sun rose high in the heavens, and the burning rays
smote fiercely on the crown of the Shadow’s dilapidated


hat, while the roasting sands scorched through his flimsy
shoes. Yet still he never halted.
“ I’ll show them what I kin do,” he repeated to him-
self as he ran, with savage joy. “ I’ll show them that the
knockabout, hard-up, down-on-his-uppers Shadow can
keep his end up wi’ any one.” Then the finer trait would
show itself in his musings. “ It’s Mackay’s last rise. I
knows he is all broke up since Bentley went under, an’
he’s been good to me. Hang it! I must get in before
that cross-eyed, lop-eared bully,” and his lithe body
would spring forward with renewed energy. A long pull
at the water-bag, and a hasty bite at the unpalatable
damper he carried in his little wallet, delayed him scarce
five minutes. But when, crossing a dry gully, a long
sand snake wriggled across his path, he could not resist
the temptation of slaying it. “ There’s two things I never
sees use for in this world,” he ruminated, as he set down
to work again, “ an’ these is snakes an’ muskitties. I
wonder what old Hoah T meant by putting them in the
ark. ... I must have covered ’bout thirty miles by now.
I wonder if I kin keep it up all night, an’—an’ I
wonder if my boots ’ll hold out.”
At sundown he halted to fix his bearings afresh. “ I’m
afraid I is gettin’ too far north,” said he, “ an’ Mackay
warned me to keep to south’ard. I’d better wait till the
Cross gets up. I feel sort o’ bushed without the sun, an’
them hanged little stars never seem to be in the same
place. Ho, I’d be safer to sit tight an’ wait for the
Cross.” He had another drink from the water-bag, and
munched contentedly at his hard damper for a while;
then his head began to nod drowsily, and in a few
moments the Shadow was fast asleep in the sand, his


face upturned to the myriad stars which now began to
twinkle in the sky.
How long he slept he knew not, but he awoke with a
start, vaguely conscious of some disturbing element in the
air. The Southern Cross shone radiantly far over the
horizon, and the constellation of Orion glittered placidly in
the eastern sky. “ I ought to be kicked,” said the Shadow,
in intense disgust with himself. “ I calc’late it must be
after midnight now, an’ I has lost four hours ; bother my
sleepy old hide.” He arose wearily, and gripped the
precious water-bag, but he was no sooner on his feet than
he dropped again with alacrity, and lay flat on the sand,
the muffled sound of hoof-beats had reached his ear, and
coming in his direction.
“ I’m a gone coon if they see me,” he murmured.
“ Why in blazes didn’t I keep further to the south ? ” The
Shadow did not doubt for a moment that it was Macguire
and his buggy which was approaching. “ The miserable
sweep must have camped to give the horses a spell,” he
reasoned with sinking heart. Nearer and nearer came the
ghost-like echoes, then suddenly they stopped, and a
plaintive whinny rang out through the night. It was
answered by another, and yet another, but no sound of
voices came to the eager listener’s ears. “ That is mighty
strange,” thought he. “ Macguire should be cursing like a
bullock-driver by now. I wonder wdiat’s happened ? ”
He raised himself cautiously on hands and knees and
peered into the eerie gloom, and as he gazed, half a dozen
or so riderless horses came forward at a gentle trot.
“ Brumbies! ” grunted the Shadow. “ Wo-ah, my beauties! ”
To his surprise they halted, and whinnied feebly, and the
Shadow continued addressing endearing words to them


while he cautiously struggled to his feet. They were not
brumbies, that was certain, or they would have shied off in
affright at once ; but the weary youth was not long in dis-
covering what they were, and a chuckle of huge delight
issued from his lips as he at last got his hand on the mane
of one of his midnight visitors, and patted its trembling
nostrils. Indeed he could scarcely contain himself, so deep
was the joy he felt; he wanted to roll over in the sand
and howl in his ecstasy, but he could not very well do
that and still keep a grip of his charger’s mane, so he
contented himself by indulging in a running commentary
on his extraordinary luck while he quickly unslipped the
thin belt from his waist and deftly insinuated the same
into the wondering animal’s mouth. “ I wonder how
they managed to break their hobbles,” said he. Then a
light seemed to dawn on him. “ I’ll swear Mackay had
something to do wi’ it. Or Jack —Jack’s got some savvy,
he has. The animals was goin’ straight home, they was.
Well, I reckon Macguire’s Furious will carry the poor
weary blown-out Shadow, whether he wants to or no.”
To his annoyance his improvised bridle proved too
short to join over the high arched neck of the com-
mandeered steed, and with a rueful sigh the resourceful
lad proceeded to rip off the sleeves of his shirt and cut
them into ribbons. This operation was conducted under
great difficulties, for Furious now seemed to regret his
former weakness, and was making strenuous efforts to
justify its name. He plunged and reared and kicked
viciously, with the result that he startled the other horses
into flight. Then ensued a tug of war; in vain the
frantic horse strove to follow its neighbours; the Shadow’s
grip on the leathern thongs was vice-like in its tenacity.


Round and round they struggled, but the odd bridle held
fast, and at length the fiery steed was brought to a
standstill. In a trice a thick stranded cord of shirt ribbons
was added to the novel reins, then with a whoop of
triumph the daring youngster leaped to Furious’s back
and clutched like a limpet.
To ride an intractable horse, bareback, is at no time a
very easy matter, and to ride a noted buckjumper like
Furious with a makeshift bridle and no saddle was a feat
which few of the finest horsemen in Australia would have
cared to attempt. But lightly recked the Shadow of
disaster. Born and brought up on a far back station in
Victoria, he had been accustomed to horses since his child-
hood, and no more daring rider could be found throughout
the length and breadth of the land. Down went Furious’s
head between his knees, and his high back curved con-
vulsively, as he strove by all his fiery tactics to rid him-
self of his encumbrance. But the Shadow rocked easily in
his perch throughout it all; then, suddenly asserting the
mastery, he took his battered hat from his head, and with
it smote the beast lightly across the ears. For a moment
the infuriated animal stood stock still, trembling in every
fibre, then, with a snort of rage, he stretched out his long
neck and, like an arrow from the bow, darted off across
the desert, taking the interposing giulies at a leap, and
crashing through narrow timber belts like a thing
possessed. The Shadow did not once attempt to break its
headlong pace, he knew the weakness of his bridle too well
for that; gently, insidiously, he tightened the pressure on
the off rein and brought his charger round on to the course
he wished to go.
“ Now I reckon I’m on the rails all right,” he said at


length, when the Southern Cross shone brightly on his left,
and slightly behind; “ but blow me for a cross-eyed jackass
if I haven’t forgotten the water-bag ! ”
His annoyance at this neglect was keen, though he did
not seem to consider that he could not have carried it with
him in any case, both of his hands having been very much
occupied at the start in controlling his unwilling mount.
They had cleared the softer desert country now, and had
entered upon the hard-baked, ironshot plains which
frequently intervene in these latitudes, and now Furious
showed signs of failing in his stride, his unshod hoofs were
ill able to bear the pressing contact of the rounded diorite
pebbles. Then for the first time the Shadow tested the
strength of the doubtful reins, and pulled steadily and
strongly. They held firm, and the weary steed slowed
down to an easy canter, and finally to a walk.
“ Whew! ” ejaculated the reckless rider, mopping his
damp brow. “ I reckon this one-man circus is a bit trying
on the nerves. If the hanged brute had tripped on a stump,
or dived into a snag hole, it would have been * Good-bye,
Shadow, and the crows will weep for ye in the morning.'
But it’s a jolly long sight better’n walkin’. Hillo,
hillo! what has we struck now ? Wo-ah, my pet lamb,
wo-ah.”
Out of the darkness, almost straight ahead, the red
glow of hot ashes had become visible. While he watched
the gentle night breezes fanned the dying embers into feeble
momentary flame, and there, silhouetted against the black-
ness, was the buggy which had left Golden Flat imme-
diately in advance of the Shadow. The two horses were
dimly observable standing motionless and asleep among
the sparse scrub some little way off, while, wrapped in


their blankets beside the fire lay the huddled figures of
Macguire and Hawkins evidently also in deep slumber.
The watcher whistled softly to himself.
“ By smoke,” he murmured, “ them beggars must have
covered fifty miles yesterday. The howlin’ sneak has been
skeert o’ some one cornin’ after. Gee whiz! What a
be-eautiful shock he’ll get ”
His reflections were arrested by a sudden movement of
one of the reclining men, and the harsh voice of Macguire
reached his ears as he strove to awaken his associate.
“ Get up, ye dream in’ idiot, an' see if the horses are
keepin’ handy, I want to get in when the Warden’s
office opens in the mornin’.”
A drowsy protesting murmur was all the Shadow could
hear of the reply. Then Macguire’s unmusical accents
were raised in angry abuse.
“Ye doesn’t think we can do it ?” he snarled. “ But I
say we shall, though the horses drop dead when we get
there. I’ll show that infernal Scotsman what it means to
run up agin Macguire. We’ll get a move on by sunrise,
that’ll give us three hours to get in by nine o’clock.”
He arose painfully to throw some brushwood on the
fire, while Hawkins, grumbling heartily, went in search of
the horses. Silently the Shadow swung Furious’s head
round, and made a wide detour.
“ I reckon ye’ll get left this time, ye yelping baboons,”
he muttered, when he considered himself well out of range
of the now spreading firelight. “ Ye’ll move out by sun-
rise, will ye ? I wonder what time it is now.” He sur-
veyed the heavens intently; then his gaze rested on a star
of exceeding brilliance which had made its appearance just
over the horizon. “ I calc’late that there shiner is the


star Mackay called Canopus,” he said, “ an’ that means
I’ve just an hour afore the old sun pops his head up.
Now, old thunder and lightning, ye bold bad quadruped,
ye hustled along fur yer own pleasure, I reckon ye can do
a bit of a spurt for mine.” He leaned forward and dug
his heels into Furious’s flanks; with a bound the noble
animal started forward, and once again the twain proceeded
on their headlong course.
The stars one by one vanished from the sky, and a
wonderful rosy glow gradually enveloped the silent
bushland; it heralded the approach of dawn. And now
far in the western sky the watchful rider began to perceive
the smoke of the ever active smelters near the township,
and soon the white-roofed houses of the settlement were
plainly visible. Sure enough the Shadow had steered an
unerring course. He slowed down to a walk, and looked
cautiously all round. Nothing in the shape of man or
beast was observable in the near distance, but far off in
the township the little street was crowded with miners
coming from and going to their work in the shafts.
“ Shadow,” murmured the contemplative youth, “ I
reckon ye’d better get off an’ walk if ye doesn’t want to
get collared for horse stealing.”
He prepared to slide down from his perch, but just
then Furious, having recognized his own stable so com-
paratively close at hand, felt imbued with fresh energy.
He pricked up his ears, gathered his feet together for one
ferocious buck, and was off like the wind. The Shadow
sat in the sand where he had been unceremoniously
deposited, still gripping fast the broken ribbons of the
bridle which had served him so well, and gazed reproach-
fully at the departing steed.


“ Ye’re a mean, ungrateful boss,” he cried after it,
severely. “After me takin’ ye back to your own stable,
too, an’—an’ I didn’t think there was a kick left in you.”
Words failed him, and he gathered himself up, and weary
and sore and stiff walked slowly into the township.
It was about eight o’clock when he entered the main
street which was still an hour before the Warden’s office
opened; but the Shadow had no intention of delaying his
mission an instant longer than he could help. A lively
memory of Macguire’s emphatically spoken resolve to
arrive at nine compelled him to adopt unusual tactics.
Heedless of the strange glances cast at him by the ultra
respectable gold-mining fraternity, he made his way to the
Exchange Hotel, where, as every one knew, the Warden
was in the habit of breakfasting, and hesitating not an
instant, he entered the doorway and turned into the
fashionable room reserved for the cream of the goldfields’
aristocracy.
But his dilapidated attire and general aspect was too
much for the proprietor of the establishment, for it must
be remembered that the Shadow’s shirt had already been
largely used in the manufacture of bridle reins. His toes,
too, were peeping from sundry crevices in his boots, and
from head to foot he was covered ■with the grime and dust
of his long desert journey.
“ What do ye want in here, ye young scarecrow ? ”
demanded that important personage, laying an unfriendly
grasp on his visitor’s shoulder.
The Shadow sidled round, leaving another part of his
unfortunate garment in the hands of the spoiler.
“ I want to see the Warden,” he cried loudly, his
temper considerably ruffled, “ an’ I’ll flatten ye out if ye


try to stop me. . . . It’s a matter o’ life an’ death,” he
added impressively.
“ I am the Warden, my lad,” spoke a kindly voice
from the end of the room, “ but I’m not a doctor. Let the
boy come up, Jackson ” —this to the proprietor. “ Good
honest sand won’t hurt any one, and you know water is
scarce in this drought-stricken country. Why, the man’s
hurt! ” The kindly official was gazing at a nasty gash on
his visitor’s bare arm from which the blood was slowly
trickling.
The Shadow looked and noticed his wound for the
first time.
“It must have been that buster I got that did it,”
he reflected quickly; “ but I can’t very well bring the
horse into this here conversation.” Aloud he said,
“ Oh, that’s nothin’; I tripped on a stump in the dark,
that’s all.”
The Warden examined the rent again closely and
smiled incredulously.
“ All right, young man,” said he; “ now fire along with
your story, for I must be over at the office in half an
hour.”
There was no one else in the room at the moment, so
pulling Mackay’s sketch plan of the mines from its hiding-
place and putting it on the table before the Warden, he
reeled off the story of the finding of Golden Flat and the
attempted jumping of the mines by Macguire and his
party. The Warden listened patiently through it all, nor
did he once interrupt the narrator.
“ So that’s where the redoubtable Macguire went the
other day,” he commented, when the Shadow had finished.
“ And Mackay dished him at his own game, did he ? I


tell you what, young fellow, I’d have given a fiver to see
that fight, I would.”
“ An’ it would hiv been worth it,” agreed the Shadow,
complacently. “ But say, is ye goin’ to make the claims
right for the boys at Golden Flat ? Macguire’ll be along
in a minute ”
“ Stop right there, my lad. You’ve done your mates a
great sendee by getting in first, for if Macguire had seen
me before you I would have had no option but to make
out the leases in his name. But when you come to me
from men like Mackay, Emu Bill, and Nuggety Dick,
pioneers every one, and tell me the story you have done, I
feel that my language won’t be full enough to express my
feelings when I see that scoundrelly trickster, Macguire.
But come, tell me how you managed to get in ahead of
him. You know I can scarcely swallow that yarn about
walking all the way. Why, it must be close on an
eighty-mile trail! ”
Then the Shadow unburdened himself. “ I was a bit
skeert o’ bein’ boosted up for horse stealin’,” he explained
finally, “ so I climbed off the savage critter ’bout half a
mile back, an’ blow me, if he didn’t do a buck at the last
minute an’ landed me on my back instead o’ my feet. I
reckon that’s how I got this here scratch.”
The Warden rang a small handbell on the table, and
in due course the landlord appeared.
“Jackson, let this young man have breakfast. He’s
come a long way, and I guess he needs it.” Then, when
the man departed, “ How were you to know they weren’t
brumbies ? ” said he, quizzically.
A noisy demonstration in the street now attracted their
attention, and looking out through the window, behold,


there was Macguire’s buggy proceeding past at a walk,
though the lather of foam on the horses’ heaving flanks
showed at what pace they had been driven. Eound the
slowly moving conveyance several men were clustered,
and to them Macguire was talking eagerly, and apparently
much to their satisfaction, for at intervals they broke into
lusty cheers.
“ These are some more of the loafers and deadbeats of the
place,” said the Warden. “ Macguire will be telling them
of his new discovery. Well, it’s nearly nine o’clock, I
must be off. Just sign your name across this plan of
yours; yes, that’s right. Now I’ll just scribble a line
underneath.” He took a blue pencil from his pocket and
wrote hastily, “ Handed to me, the Warden of the Eastern
Goldfields District, duly certified, at 8 a.m., August —th,
1899.” This he signed. “ Now, I guess that’s all right,”
he said cheerily, reaching for his hat, “ and I don’t suppose
I need tell you, young man, that some one may be
thirsting for your gore before long.”
The Shadow grinned, “ Let him thirst,” said he. “ I
reckon I kin bounce any man o’ the crowd exceptin’ the
boss bruiser hissel’, and I calc’late Mackay’s fixed him safe
enough for a day or so.”
The Warden departed, and the light-hearted youth
attacked the breakfast which was brought to him with
the ardour borne of a long fast and an extremely hearty
appetite.
While he was thus engaged, his erstwhile enemy, in the
shape of Jackson the hotel proprietor, came in and sat
down beside him.
“ I say, young ’un,” he began in amiable tones, “ did I
hear you say you were one of Mackay’s party ? ”


“ You didn’t, unless you were listening at the door,”
came the quick response.
Jackson’s brows contracted; but he laughed not
unpleasantly.
“ There’s no call for you to be so mighty slick wi’ your
speech,” he said. “ I was in the passage way, and heard
you mention the name of an old friend of mine, but I was
not listening at the door. Why, Mackay stayed with me
a night when he passed through about a month or so ago.
He and I were mates in the good old roaring days.”
The Shadow’s face assumed an expression of grave
concern.
“ I climbs down, boss,” said he, contritely. “ I thought
you might have been trying to pump me for Macguire’s
benefit.”
Jackson uttered an expression of deep disgust. “Why,
that skunk! I wouldn’t be seen dead alongside o’ him.
He’s the meanest, rottenest ”
The Shadow bolted the final portion of his breakfast in
a hurry, and held out a grimy paw. “ Shake, boss,” he
said laconically. They shook; and the now refreshed
youth went once more into the history of Golden Flat,
retailing with gusto the wonderful encounter between
Macguire and Mackay. “ His silly old bones cracked
like pipe shanks,” he concluded, with reminiscent
accurateness.
“By thunder! ” ejaculated the appreciative listener,
aroused to a sudden sense of duty. “ That broken-ribbed
bruiser will have your life if he sees you now. How do
you mean to get back ? ”
“ Walk,” answered the Shadow, shortly.
“ Walk be hanged. I’U lend you a horse; but you


must look slippy an’ get away. I will come out myself
an’ see if I can get a decent claim before the whole
population rushes you; I can fetch the horse back when
I come.” He arose hurriedly, evidently intent on seeking
out a steed right away, but at the door he stopped and
looked back. “ What was that life-and-death racquet you
worked on my tender feelings ? ” he asked sternly.
“ Dead sure thing,” returned the Shadow, unabashed.
“ If Macguire had got ahead o’ me, Mackay would have
squelched the life outen him first chance. See ? ”
Jackson evidently saw, for he departed on his quest,
laughing heartily.
Left to himself the Shadow carelessly walked out into
the street, and as luck would have it blundered right into
the trouble his friends had been so anxious for him to
avoid. Returning from the Warden’s office came Macguire
and his aide-de-camp driving furiously, and the roar of
pent-up anger which burst from the bully’s lips on seeing
the imperturbable Shadow step forth from the hotel would
have done credit to a full-grown grizzly bear that had just
been cheated of its supper. The buggy stopped with a
jerk, and as if by magic a motley throng crowded round.
“ That’s him! that’s the young demon ! ” howled the
discomfited man in a perfect paroxysm of rage. “He
stole my horse, he—he—get out and kill the young cub,
Hawkins. Get out I say ! ”
“If I were you I reckon I’d sit tight,” advised the
Shadow, serenely. “ I could pretty well squash you in
one act, I could.”
And Hawkins was evidently of the same opinion, for
he absolutely refused to make any movement. With a
baleful glitter in his bloodshot eyes, Macguire himself
CB 607) J29 I


stepped down ; had the great hulking brute but known it,
he was at that moment no match for his lithe and muscular
adversary, who, in his conscious strength, stood his ground
unafraid. But there came a sudden interruption from the
outside of the interested crowd.
“ None of that, Macguire, or 111 be forced to explain
some things you won’t like.”
It was a sharp authoritative warning, and it issued from
the Warden who now pushed his way to the front.
“ He stole my horse,” began the baulked ruffian in a
voice hoarse with suppressed passion.
“ That’s too thin, sir. From what I have heard, all
your horses returned home of their own accord this
morning. In any case, if you have a complaint to make,
the public street is not a court house.”
A suppressed cheer broke from some of the bystanders,
who had no cause to love Macguire. He scowled fiercely
at them as he climbed back to his seat.
“ I’ll get even with you, you young thief, when there
are no interferin’ Wardens about,” he cried as he drove
away, glaring with impotent rage at the object of his
exceeding wrath.
The Shadow smilingly waved him a polite adieu.


CHAPTER VII
Bob’s Triumph
IT was three days after the Shadow’s departure. The
sun was shining fiercely on Golden Flat, and its
scintillating rays reflected from the white mullock heaps
at the various workings caused the eyes of the miners
when they came to the surface to quiver and close
painfully. The air was filled with dancing sand particles,
and they shimmered kaleidoscope-like in the intense heat
haze which rose and fell on the surface of the land like
the waters of a boundless ethereal sea. The regular thud,
thud of picks resounded loudly from the end of the lead
where Xuggety Dick and his brawny compatriots were
doggedly digging out the golden gravel, and away at the
other end of the field Maguire’s satellites made noisy
din as they busied themselves sinking several shafts
over the supposed trend of the mysterious channel.
The weather had been excessively hot since the
Shadow left, and this fact had done much to restore the
spirits of the gang, for, judging from their own feelings,
they considered that the energy of Mackay’s messenger
would be spent long before he could hope to reach
the township. At the Golden Promise the windlass
was deserted, and the red symbol hung limp overhead.
But it was not lack of energy that had occasioned this


apparent lapse of duty. Mackay and Jack had been in
the tent all morning watching Bob’s final experiments
with the refractory clay formation which were to decide
whether or no the great bulk of the Flat’s treasure could
be saved to them. Bob’s head was now quite better, but
prolonged study in a clime which is not adapted for acute
mental effort had made his young face appear drawn and
haggard, yet his eyes shone with the light of enthusiasm
as he busied himself with his rather crude appliances and
set them in order for a last conclusive test. Mackay had
hastily constructed a small vat for him, made from the
hardest wood to be found in the bush, with an overflow
tap some halfway up its height. This the young chemist
now quarter filled with the crushed compound to be
tested, and made up the level with water, to which he
afterwards added some salt.
“It will ensure its conductivity,” he explained; but
neither Mackay nor Jack were much enlightened, so they
held their peace. Next a rubber tube, with an oddly-
conceived wooden shield on its exposed extremity was
thrust into the receptacle, then a small bottle containing
some liquid which bubbled and effervesced alarmingly, was
brought forward, and its loose nozzle connected to the free
end of the tube.
“ A simple method of generating hydrogen,” said Bob
dreamily, “just iron pebbles and very dilute sulphuric
acid.” Mackay ventured a non-committal grunt, but Jack’s
face now showed keen appreciation. Lastly the two wires
of a very small electric battery—Bob’s own manufacture —
were connected to corresponding metallic sheets lining the
opposing ends of the vat. “ That is merely as an added
assistance to help the decomposing of the stuff into its


elements,” muttered Bob; then he fixed the nozzle of the
hydrogen generator tightly and stepped back.
At once a gurgling boiling sound arose from the vat,
and its contents swelled up in bubbling circles of slime
and soapy ooze. Mackay, obeying a motion from Bob,
hastily pulled out the overflow tap, and so caused the
more solid matter within to subside. Again Bob loaded
the vat, and again Mackay allowed the foaming mass to
overflow, and. never a word was spoken. The operation
was repeated until fully a hundredweight of the refractory
substance had been utilized, and by this time the floor
of the tent was aswim with the dense oily scum let
loose.
“That should be enough to calculate on,” said Bob.
“ And now comes the crucial point.” He undid all con-
nections and handed the muddy box to Mackay, who took
it silently, and emptied the coarse sandy residue into an
awaiting gold-pan.
“ It’s lost its puggy nature, anyway,” he commented,
pouring on it some water from a kerosene tin. He gave
the pan a rapid swirl, then an oblique turn, and gasped.
The bottom of the basin was literally covered with a thin
film of the finest imaginable golden grains, which blazed
and sparkled in the penetrating sunlight!
Bob looked and heaved a sigh of profound thankfulness.
Jack looked, and celebrated his joy by whooping like a
red Indian. Mackay looked and looked, indeed, he did
not once take his eyes off the dazzling spectacle. Bob
guessed his fears, and at once dispersed them.
“ It’s the genuine article this time,” he said with
assurance. “If it was going to melt away it would have
done so in the acid solution ; but the fact is it has just


been set free from the solution, and so is now as stable
and tangible as the sands of the desert.”
The rough, horny handed pioneer set the pan down on
the floor, and wiped the beaded perspiration from his
forehead, then he reached out his great fist and took Bob’s
hand in a fervent grasp.
“ It’s no’ often I have to acknowledge a better man
than mysel’,” he said grimly; “ but I must admit you’ve
knocked the wind clean out o’ me wi’ this grand process o’
yours. Why, my laddie, it means fortune for you in the
years to come, an ever growin’ fortune, for ye can charge
what ye like for your discovery. An’ you little mair than
a youngster, too! Man, Bob, you’ve got a heid that any
professor might well envy.”
Bob laughed right heartily as he returned the elder
man’s grip. The tension on his nerves had gone, and he
felt almost constrained, like Jack, to shout in his gladness.
“ If it means fortune, I shall refuse to take more than
my third of it,” he said, with grave emphasis. “ This is a
partnership affair, I’d rather break the whole concern up
now than make a halfpenny that you two didn’t share.”
Then he gave utterance to a firm, fixed belief, which had
done much to sustain him during his intricate studies of
the deceptive formation. “As for my youth,” he con-
tinued, with a smile, and addressing himself more directly
to Mackay, “ I won’t allow that that should entitle me to
any credit, for the same brain is with us always, and,
surely, when it is young, and fully developed, it should be
able to grasp and evolve theories which, when older, it
would hesitate to accept. The beaten track is so hard to
forsake when one grows old in text-book experience. If
the ordinary science professor came along here now and


examined my theories concerning this stuff and its treat-
ment, without being shown their proof in practice, he
would call them absurd and irrational. And why ? Because
I have gone wide of all precedent and text-book knowledge,
and treated the compound for gold in an unstable state,
and in that unstable state it is not supposed to exist.”
The young man spoke clearly and logically, yet with an
unusual twinkle in his keen blue eyes.
When he had finished, Mackay ventured a word of
admonition.
“ Too much study when the brain is young, Bob,” said
he, “is vera dangerous indeed, though I quite agree wi’
you in your line o’ argument. Young genius, hooever,
blossoms an’ dees like the flowers of the spring—they
never reach their summer; so the auld fossilized, follow-
my-leader blockheads exist and flourish an’ are aye wi us.
But I’ll see that ye dinna work oot any more scientific
problems for a bit. It’ll be a grand relaxation after this
for you to study the beauties o’ Nature as shown in the
Never Never country back here.” He laughed sardonically,
and waved his hand towards the unknown east.
“ m be with you whenever you are ready,” answered
Bob, eagerly.
“And I’ll bet you won’t shake me out of it,” spoke up
Jack ; and Mackay was comforted.
The sound of approaching footsteps was now heard out-
side the tent. Mackay hastily seized the gold pan, and
placed it out of sight.
“ Not a word aboot the discovery,” he advised. “It
will keep for a bit, until we hear what Macguire’s tactics
are.”
A second more, and Emu Bill popped his head inside.


Hang ye, Mac,” said he, “ I’ve nearly burst myself hol-
lerin’ down that shaft o’ yours. I didn’t think you’d be
loafin’ round at this time o’ day, I didn’t.”
“ What’s that you’ve got in your fist ? ” asked Mackay,
evading all explanations, and glancing at a huge, greyish
fragment which Emu Bill was carrying abstractedlv
about.
“ Oh—that ? That’s another specimen I wanted to
show ye. The gold in it fairly howled at me down the
shaft; but there ain’t enough in it now to fill a muskittie’s
eye. All my wash has made into the humbuggin’ stuff
now. I’ll have to give it best, boys, I will.”
The resigned melancholy of his voice worked strangely
on the feelings of Bob and Jack, and they gazed question-
ingly at Mackay, who nodded.
“ Ay, show it to him, Bob,” said he. “ I think the Emu
kens well enough hoo to baud his tongue.”
“ My goodness, mates,” faltered Bill, in an awed whisper,
when he saw the pan, “ that is an almighty fine prospect.
I reckon it must be twenty-ounce stuff. WTiere in thunder
did ye get it ? ”
“It came from your shaft, Emu,” said Bob. “ It’s the
same deceiving miradgy humbugging material as that
you’ve got in your hand. I’ve just found out how to bring
back the gold after it fades away.”
Emu Bill stared in amazement. “Will somebody
kindly kick me ? ” he murmured feebly. “Is my sight
goin’ back on me again, or is it a real honest fact that hits
me on the optic nerve ? ”
But he was soon led to understand that the gold in the
pan was no delusion of the senses—that it was indeed a
solid, substantial quantity.


“ I takes off my hat to you, Bob,” he said, with a little
catch in his usually strong voice; and he suited the action
to the word. “ This’ll mean new life to the whole Flat;
an’ I hope it’ll spell fortune to you, my lad. What a pity
Macguire’s crowd got hitched on alongside the Golden
Promise. They’ll hit it every time, most likely; an’, hang
me! if they deserve it,”
“ We’ll keep quiet aboot this discovery until we see how
the bold Macguire tackles on to the mirage,” said Mackay.
“ The meeserable thief may have jumped our ground in the
Warden’s office, for a’ we know.”
Emu Bill grasped the situation at once. “ I’m a thick-
head,” said he. “Of course that bounder doesn’t know;
an’ he won’t know from me nuther. Mums the word, it
is; an’ what a howlin’ joy it will be to see Macguire clutch
on to the mirage. But I’ll bet my boots, Mac, that the
Shadow has busted up his claim-jumping game. I knows
the young beggar, I does.”
“ An’ so do I,” said Mackay. “ But I’ll no blame
him all the same if he canna accomplish the impossible.”
It was now well after midday, and Emu Bill departed
to prepare his lunch.
“ I guess it’s about time we had something to eat too,”
said Jack, who had been of that opinion for over an hour,
and the three sallied out.
Jack was an expert at boiling the billy and making tea,
and Mackay had a wonderful knowledge of the art of bush
cookery, so that between them they always contrived to
make a fairly palatable repast, notwithstanding the un-
varied nature of their stores. Bob generally carried the
water, or unearthed from their hiding-place the few
enamelled cups and plates necessary; but, as he said


himself, his assistance in matters culinary •would never have
been missed. On this occasion he amused himself taking
altitudes of the sun with his cherished sextant, while his
companions attended to the more practical affairs. In one
direction—slightly north of west from the camp—the open
desert could be traced without interruption in the shape of
scrub or hillocks, until it merged into the distant horizon.
Bob had discovered this two days before, when he first
endeavoured to make use of Mackay’s gift, and he knew
that it was just about one o’clock in the afternoon that the
sextant reflectors would bring the sun down to this level
line, and so give a true declination without the use of an
artificial horizon. He ogled away in this direction now,
keeping time by Mackay’s old but trusty chronometer which
lay on the sand before him, until Jack’s call of “tucker”
—which is the bush synonym for all sorts and conditions
of meals —caused him to seek his wonted place at the open-
air table.
“There is a dot or speck on the sky-line which I
can’t make out,” he said, placing the sextant down care-
fully at his side. “ I don’t remember of it being there
yesterday.”
“ Perhaps it's a tree grown up like Jonah’s gourd,”
laughed Jack. “ Have some more tea, Bob; and you’ll
see two trees next time you look! ”
A little later Mackay lolled back in lazy satis-
faction. “ I believe,” he said with a chuckle, “ that I’m
just in the mood to gie ye another verse o’ ‘ The Muskittie’s
Lament.’ I see Jack’s no feenished, so I’ll be sure o’ him
listening to my masterpiece this time.” He lifted up his
voice and sent forth a doleful wail as a preliminary;
then, noting the grieved countenances of his audience,


he relented. “ I’ll get my flute an’ play ye a bit frae
the ‘ Bohemian Girl ’ instead. I’m no’ so sure that I could
tackle that high note in ‘ The Muskittie’s Lament ’ on a fu’
stomach.”
He arose and walked to the tent, returning almost
immediately with his instrument. But before he sat
down his eye happened to glance over the unbroken
track towards the west, and a frown settled over his
features.
“Your obstruction on the sky-line was a man on horse-
back, Bob,” said he; “I hope he’s no’ another professional
fighter, wha wants me to chastise him into a humbler
spirit.”
Since the arrival of Macguire’s party a further influx
from the outside world had been daily expected, for news
of gold “ strikes ” travels quickly, and the sudden exodus
of nearly a dozen men from a comparatively small centre
could only be construed in one way. Therefore, little
more than passing interest was paid to the approaching
horseman, who was yet a considerable way off, and Mackay,
squatting down on the sand, blew at his flute right merrily,
and promptly forgot all about him. The boys, too, quickly
became enthralled with his melody, though with them
there was always the shivering dread that the flautist
would burst into song, and so break the spell that bound
them. Many and various were the airs he played, but at
last he sought solace in the old Scotch song, “Ye Banks
and Braes o’ Bonnie Boon,” and the feeling which he
managed to infuse into the instrument was simply
wonderful.
“Ay, my lads,” said Mackay, when he had finished,
“ there’s naething like the auld Scots sangs for awakenin’


kindly memories o’ the land we’re aye so glad to get away
from. I’m no so sure, mind you, that it isna good fur us
whiles to have a wholesome, tender sentiment gruppin’ at
the strings o’ oor cauld hearts, an’ playing strange music
thereon; it straightens oor backs, an’ gies us a grander
sympathy ”
He ceased his flow of eloquence, and assumed a
listening attitude of intense eagerness. Faintly over the
plains had come the sound of a voice raised in cheerful
song.
“ Our visitor seems in a happy mood,” said Bob, turn-
ing to look.
Mackay grunted, Jack laughed outright, for distinctly
through the still air came the staccato refrain—
“ A—bright—wee—muskittie—sat —on —a —tree.”
The horseman was coming forward at an easy trot, jerking
out the plaintive strains of Mackay’s pet ditty to the novel
time of his steed’s clattering hoof-beats. As yet he was
too far distant to be plainly distinguishable, but the song
was enough for Mackay.
“It’s that confounded Shadow wha’s murderin’ that
bonnie verse,” said he; “ but how in the name o’ goodness
can he be back already ? An’ he’s got a horse, too. A
good hundred and fifty miles in three days. Well,
well ”
At this stage, Nuggety Dick, Emu Bill, Dead Broke
Dan, and Never Never Dave made their hasty appearance,
all in a state of extreme excitement.
“ I do believe it’s the Shadow! ” cried Nuggety
“It’s the Shad, right enough,” grinned Jack; “don’t
you hear him ? ”


Louder swelled the melancholy chorus—
“ A bright wee muskittie
“Confound that pestilential muskittie! ” roared Mackay,
in high dudgeon, amid the laughter of his companions.
“ My poetic inspiration will be fair destroyed after bearin’
my gem o’ beauty abused in such a manner.”
But his wrath simmered down speedily as the redoubt-
able Shadow rode up, travel-stained and weary, his sole
upper vestment still further torn and bedraggled, so that it
clung to him only in shreds and patches.
“ I reckon I has had a daisy time,” he said lightly,
slipping from the saddle. But the effort of his long journey
had told on his numbed limbs, and he staggered and
would have fallen had not Mackay’s ready grip supported
him.
“ Come and have something to eat, you young rascal,”
said the aggrieved composer. “ You can tell us your news
afterwards.”
Jack even now had tea ready for the wayfarer, but the
wiry youth refused to be pampered.
“ Well, boss,” said he, “ I’m only a bit stiff, that’s all.
Everything s all right. I got in ahead o’ Macguire by an
hour, an’ fixed up with the Warden like a streak. I has had
a great time And he would have begun a narration
of his experiences right then, had not Jack insisted on
liis having his tea while it was warm.
It would be difficult to express the satisfaction that was
felt over the Shadow’s successful journey, and when the lad
had finished his meal, and told of his numerous adventures
on the route and in the township, not one among them but
felt that the young bushman had proved his worth in no


uncertain degree. But it was Mackay’s hearty “ "Well
done, my laddie,” that seemed to give him greatest
pleasure, and he cast about him for some means of show-
ing his gladness.
“I was practisin’ your song as I came along,” he
announced brightly. “ It’s a rattlin’ fine song, it is. I like
it best where the muskittie ”
He opened his mouth for a preparatory howl, then,
noting the stern glance cast at him by the man he
desired to propitiate, he subsided in dismay.
“Ye dinna need to intensify your original offence,
young man,” quoth the aggrieved one, solemnly. “ I heard
ye slaughterin’ that puir wee muskittie about a mile off.
There’s 1 an auld and true proverb which says: ‘ Fools rush
in whaur angels fear to pit doon their feet.’ Are ye no
aware that that song is set for an angelic tenor voice like
mine, an’ no at a’ suited for that bark o’ yours, which is
like the laboured croak o’ a burst bassoon ? Hever mind,”
he continued magnanimously, “ I’ll forgie ye, an’ I’ll
mak’ ye up a touching wee song for yerseT some o’ these
days,”
The culprit shuddered at the terrible threat, then
hastily departed with Bob and Jack to talk of subjects
more pleasing to their common fancy.
All this time Macguire’s motley crew had been eyeing
the group from the vantage-point of one of their shafts,
and that their feelings were anything but pleasurable was
very plainly evident. They could not understand the early
return of the messenger, but they guessed correctly enough
that he must in some way have baulked their chiefs plans,
and their disappointment was keen.
Events in the history of Golden Flat happened quickly


now. Early next morning, Jackson, of the Exchange
Hotel, weighed in with several horses and a buggy. He
was accompanied by three well-known prospectors, whom
Mackay and his companions welcomed heartily.
“We need a few decent miners here badly,” said he
to them. “Just peg out at the end o’ the lead; your
chances are pretty good there yet.” To Jackson he
whispered a word of advice. “I’ve an idea,” said he,
mysteriously, “ that the ground next the Golden Promise
will be abandoned in a day or so. I should like to do
ye a good turn, if only because o’ your kindness to the
Shadow, so I’m givin’ ye the hint.”
A suggestion on such an important matter connected
with a new field was as good as a law unto Jackson.
“ I’ll wait about then, Mac,” said he, “ and if I can do
anything in your interest afterwards, you can bet your
shirt it shall be done.”
Another day brought a fresh number of excited gold-
seekers to the Flat, and then they came so regularly that
a plainly marked track quickly connected the camp with
Kalgoorlie. Before the week was out, the population of
Golden Flat had increased to a hundred, and still gaunt,
bearded miners came trooping in, and spread themselves
promiscuously throughout the surrounding country in the
hope of being able to catch on to the invisible channel.
Some arrived on foot, many having merely the uppers of
their boots left to them, on reaching their destination; and
to see these men marching stubbornly onward over the
burning desert, carrying their entire paraphernalia on their
backs, and their eyes agleam with hungry desire, affected
Bob strangely. His extremely sensitive nature quailed at
the thought of such indomitable energy being rewarded


only by bitter disappointment, for he knew well that only
a small proportion of their number could hope to benefit.
Buggies, bicycles, and horses all rolled up; and then came
a great heavy waggon, drawn by a tugging, straining
camel team. It stopped opposite the Golden Promise
mine, and one of the twain who accompanied it, a lean
and lanky corrugated-faced individual, stepped forward
and interviewed Mackay.
“ Any use stickin’ up a battery here, mate ? ”
“ Well, I calculate between us we can give you nearly
a thousand tons o’ wash, but I couldn’t promise what
more,”
“ That’s good enough for us,” responded the sprightly
battery owner, and he turned to his awaiting companion,
“Up she goes, Jim,” said he.
They sought a suitable site some little way off, where
the chances of striking water at no great depth promised
favourably, and before the day was done Golden Flat
battery was almost ready to begin work.
“ They’ll get a bit o’ a shock when they tackle the
miradgy clayey stuff,” Mackay murmured, as he watched
the enterprising builders, “ but I don’t suppose they d
believe me if I told them about it. Anyhow, we can
realize now on what we’ve got on the surface. For the
rest, we must trust to Bob’s discovery.”
It would be difficult to imagine the metamorphosis the
quiet Flat underwent in that short week. Tents scattered
everywhere, and the air was never free from the shattering
roar of exploding gelignite, which indicated how earnestly
the new-comers were endeavouring to bottom on their
claims.
During this strenuous period in the life of the Flat,


work at the Golden Promise mine proceeded surely and
steadily, and the wash-dirt was accumulating in great
piles at the shaft head. In view of the watchful eyes of
a section of the community given to legitimate claim
jumping, the Shadow had gone back to his own work-
ings, where, by the occasional assistance of Emu Bill, he
succeeded in excavating his ground to excellent pur-
pose. Bob now took his old place in the subterranean
chamber of the mine, though Mackay was loth indeed to
permit it.
“ I would rather see ye riggin’ up the process on a big
scale,” he said. “ Still, it’s maybe just as well to keep it
quiet for a bit, until we see what happens when the
loafing gang next us bottoms on the mirage.”
Bob thought so too. His sympathies were all indeed
with the hard-working miners who were battling away so
persistently at the remote ends of the Flat; but to confer
a benefit on the men who would so meanly have stolen his
own and companions holdings ! It was scarcely natural
that he should view such an idea with any favour,
especially when there were many honest toilers around
who might have a chance to secure a portion of the ground
held by the gang should they decide to abandon it, for
their pegs confined a nine-man allotment, an area which,
with the claims of their own party, practically covered
the known auriferous ground of the Flat.
“ If the beggars once bottomed on that deceptive com-
pound,” said he, grimly, to himself, “ I don’t think they
would wait much longer. The gold that vanisheth would
be too much for them.”
But Macguire’s satellites in no way hurried the
sinking of their many shafts, indeed, it soon became
607 > 145 K


apparent that they were rather retarding operations for
a purpose. Jack was one of the first to notice this odd
dilatoriness.
“They’ve had three misfires in the shaft next to us
to-day,” said he, as Mackay and Bob emerged from their
labours one evening. Jack had been on windlass duty,
and so from his high post could not fail to observe the
progress made during the day on the mines in his near
vicinity.
“ I wonder what they are up to ? ” remarked Bob,
thoughtfully. “ They ought to have bottomed some days
ago, judging by the level and trend of the drift in the
Golden Promise.”
But their scheme was simple enough, as it turned out.
Jackson unconsciously explained it away that same night
while he was talking to Bob by the camp-fire.
“ Your neighbours have offered to sell me one of their
claims for £1000,” said he. “They haven’t struck the
wash yet, but they say, judgin’ from your ore on the
surface, theirs must be as good, if not better, when they
hit it.”
“Oh, that’s their idea, is it?” commented Mackay,
who had been listening. “ I’m no’ denyin’ that it s a
good plan in some cases for both sides, an I believe
they are perfectly honest accordin’ to their calculations,
but ”
He shook his head decisively.
“Why, what do you think is the matter?” asked
Jackson. “Haven’t they a good chance of striking the
channel ? ”
Mackay laughed. “ They’ll hit the channel plumb
enough,” said he ; then he hesitated. “ You haven’t been


down our shaft yet?” he added. “But I’ll take you
below in the morning, and show ye something that’ll
surprise you. You’re no’ half a bad sort, Jackson, and
you and me have worked together before, otherwise I
wouldna say a single word aboot the concern, though I
admit freely I have no goodwill towards the meeserable
crowd next to us,”
The tactics of the objectionable party were, after all,
but the tactics of the non-mining element on all goldfields,
who invariably prefer to sell a chance rather than take
even remote risk of disaster. The true gold-miner is
built differently; to him his chance is everything, the
whole glamour of his life lies in its tantalizing un-
certainty, and poor and needy though he may be, he
must pursue Nature’s elusive treasure to the end, be it
bitter or sweet.
A fortnight had elapsed since the Shadow’s return, and
Golden Flat thrived and grew apace. The crashing rattle
of the ever-active stamping-battery made day and night
alike hideous. A saw-mill, too, had appeared on the scene,
and its characteristic din was added to the prevailing dis-
cords. Deep wells had been sunk, tapping only strongly
brackish water, but a condensing plant was almost im-
mediately established to purify this sufficiently for culinary
purposes, and the far-seeing proprietor was reaping a goodly
harvest from the sale of the warm fluid, sparingly dispensed
at a shilling a gallon.
From the Golden Promise mine, nearly two hundred
tons of the valuable wash had been raised to the surface
and this was being regularly conveyed to the greedy
battery, which consumed it at the rate of twenty tons a
day, and rendered the resultant bullion to the happy


owners of the mine. But the partners of the Golden
Promise knew well that their claim would yield little
more of the same material; another fifty tons at the utmost
was Mackay’s computation, and then—then the deceptive
under-stratum would have to be considered. Meanwhile,
the news of the Golden Promise’s richness spread like
wildfire throughout the Flat; the battery returns on the
first day of treatment gave the exceptionally high result of
one hundred and twenty ounces of gold from the twenty
tons of ore crushed.
“ That means, wi’ gold at £4 an ounce, £4BO between
the three o’ us, my lads,” said Mackay, when he heard
the news. “An’ we can calculate on twelve times that
amount afore we’re on to the mirage stuff.”
“How does that compare with our home earnings,
Jack ?” laughed Bob.
“I think the steam yacht is coming a bit nearer,”
admitted that youth, lightly. “ But,” and his voice grew
sorrowful, “ isn’t it a pity that we haven’t two or three
thousand tons ”
“ Now, now, young ’un,” Mackay interrupted sternly,
“ you must never give way to useless reflections. What
is, is, and let us be thankful. The future is before ye, my
lad, look to it for your Eldorado.”
“ After all,” reasoned Bob, “ we are never really con-
tented. Our ideas of happiness seem to change so much;
we are always seeking what we imagine to be a definite
object, and when we reach it, another and apparently
far greater incentive beckons us on —on to what ? ”
“ There you go,” grumbled Jack, “ preaching a first-
class sermon when we ought to be slogging away down in
the shaft.”


Bob started to his feet at once. “ I clean forgot, Jack,”
said he; ‘ your mention of the steam yacht which we used
to talk about in the old days set me thinking.”
They disappeared together, engaged in earnest conver-
sation. A rough ladder-way had been fixed in the shaft
by this time, so that it was not necessary for the windlass
to be called into requisition every time an ascent or descent
vas made. Mackay, who had just been returning from his
labours below when he received the information about the
battery results, sat musing on the edge of his bunk for
some minutes after the boys had departed. Bob’s words
had aroused in him a strange feeling of restlessness
and discontent, which, try as he might, he could not
shake off.
It s the call of the Never Never gripping me
again,” he muttered hoarsely. “ I wonder what °great
secret that terrible country holds as a recompense for all
the lives it has taken. Is it only a shadow that attracts
after all ? ”
He arose wearily, and went back to the shaft he had
so recently vacated, and, notwithstanding the protests of
his young associates, took up his pick and worked with
fierce energy.
“ It’s a wee bit o’ mental depression that’s dropped on
me sudden-like, explained he; “ an’ there’s nothing like
hard graft for bringing the balance true quickly.”
The time passed, and still he smote away with un-
tiring persistency. Then Jack seized the pick from his
hand.
“ It’s time to go aloft and have supper,” said he, “ then
I want to hear you play the flute for a bit. I’m just dying
to hear some decent music,”


Mackay smiled kindly at the boy. “ You’ve hit
me on my tender spot,” he made reply. “Do yon
think you could appreciate ‘ The Muskittie s Lament the
nicht?”
“Even ‘The Muskittie’s Lament,’” Jack added
valorously.


CHAPTER VIII
Macguire’s Threat
IT was about this time that Macguire thought it necessary
to return to the scene of his discomfiture, and view
for himself the progress made by his worthy confreres.
His arrangement with his men was the not uncommon
one of “ grubstaking ” for half the profits; that is, he kept
them in food, and supplied them with all necessary tools
in return for a half interest in the wealth of the mines
so worked. It is a sufficiently equitable understanding
when made between an honestly intentioned capitalist
and a down-on-his-luck miner over the development of a
wholly questionable prospect; but it is rarely successful
on a proved mineral area, and when it is attempted in
such a case, it invariably leaks out that those so employed
are strongly in the clutches of the “ grubstaker,” who is
usually the local publican. There was a curious rude
kind of honour among these men. They respected their
chief principally because of his great bodily strength, and
if there was an element of fear mixed with this respect,
who could blame them ? But they admired his sharpness,
too; few men could get the better of Macguire; and so
these wretched creatures chuckled at the fact that their
patron was a power in the land, and could do much to


influence their several careers when he wished. Never-
theless, their leanings towards hard manual labour were
not of the strongest; their usual routine in the past
had been “jumping” mines when the bulk of the work
thereon had been done, but on this occasion their amiable
intentions in that direction had received a rude check,
and base toil must now be their portion, unless some
purchaser for their claims could be found. So it happened
that their excavations progressed with exceeding slowness,
and Macguire, growing wroth at their failure to strike the
wash in a reasonable time, and having now recovered his
wonted energy, determined to proceed again to the Flat
and direct operations in person. He arrived at a very
early hour in the morning, riding Furious. Few of the
camp were about, but the übiquitous Shadow was of
course in evidence, seated at his solitary breakfast outside
his tent door.
“ Blow me,” murmured that gentle youth, “if it ain’t
Macguire.”
The recognition was mutual.
“So you got back, you young ruffian ? ” came the
new-comer’s greeting, and the Shadow’s ire was aroused
at once.
“I hope the Warden didn’t say nothin’ unkind to
you when you called on him that morning,” said he, with
exaggerated solicitude. “ I should just hate to think yer
feelin’s had been hurt.”
The horseman’s eyes blazed angrily; then, all of a
sudden, he threw himself from the saddle and made a
rush at his enemy, who agilely dodged at the last moment,
with the result that Macguire’s great bulk hurled itself
against the tent.


“ I reckon that’s as good as house-breakin’, it is,” pro-
tested the Shadow, in injured tones.
With rage in his heart, Macguire made another wild
dash at the mocking youngster, who took refuge behind
the windlass on his shaft, and eyed his panting aggressor
cheerfully. In this position of antagonism, Emu Bill,
who had been awakened from his slumbers by the strange
sounds without, found them. He took in the scene at a
glance, but his set bronzed face did not move a muscle.
O 7
“I reckon you has just about met your match this
time, Macguire,” said he, calmly. “ A boy is about your
size every time, he is.”
Without a word Macguire got back on his horse.
“ I’ll settle you too,” he hissed. “ You won’t know what’s
struck you when I’m done with you ”
“ A bit o’ rock, most likely, if you are about,” retorted
Emu Bill, with grave contempt.
Macguire galloped off.
“Despite his faults, the man’s a born hustler,” Mackay
remarked that same day to his two companions.
They were engaged on the surface, levelling off their
ore dump from the shaft mouth, and could scarcely fail to
note the unwonted activity shown on the adjoining claim.
“He certainly does make them shift around,” agreed
Bob. “ I suppose long experience has taught him how to
handle his type of followers.”
Very shortly afterwards it became evident that some
unusual excitement prevailed at Number 2 shaft, which
adjoined the Golden Promise towards the south. The
official numbers of the various claims ran consecutively
north and south of the Golden Promise, which was known
as the Discovery shaft, though, indeed, Nuggety Dick’s


excavation, which was now called Number 4 above
Discovery, should have claimed that honour.
This Number 2 was the main hope of Macguire’s party,
for by it alone could they hope to trace the direction of
the golden leader. Now it seemed as if they had at last
broken through to the golden stratum, men rushed hither
and thither carrying gold-pans and dollying-hammers, some
clustered around the shaft mouth, then Macguire himself
was seen to descend the workings. A hushed air of
expectation spread over the whole flat, and for a brief
space all work was suspended. A few minutes passed
in anxious silence, then a bellow of joy from Macguire
reached the surface; at once one of his waiting aides-de-
camp extracted a red flag of huge proportions from a
convenient niche near the windlass, where it had been
lying in readiness, and its dropping folds soon flaunted
in the sunshine, proclaiming to all whom it might concern
that X umber 2 had bottomed on gold. Almost im-
mediately Macguire ascended to the surface, carrying a
large-sized specimen in his hand, the sight of which
caused Jack to be convulsed with inward laughter, for
its greyish colour proclaimed it at once to be of the same
deceptive material which had first been discovered in
Emu Bill’s claim.
“I’m half inclined to be sorry for the man,” spoke
Mackay, with some feeling.
Bob had been experiencing a pang or two himself.
“ It does seem hard lines,” he said.
et even while they were considering on a magnani-
mous course of action, the object of their sympathy turned
his leering eyes upon them.
“ b est je yet! ”he cried triumphantly, holding his


treasure at arm’s length that all might look. “ I’ve got
as much of this stuff as’ll keep the battery going for
six months. I’ll see that Roxton closes down on your
wash to-night, I will. I’ll starve you out o’ the Flat like
rats, quick an’ lively too.”
Now Roxton, the battery owner, was like many other
humbler men, heavily in debt to the publican, who along
with his other duties acted the part of money-lender
in the township. It was quite possible therefore that
Macguire could make good his threat about the closing
down of the battery, though had he known it, that would
at this time scarcely have affected the partners of the
Golden Promise to any extent, the bulk of their visible
wash having been already treated. Still, the brutal
malignancy of the man’s intentions was unmistakable,
and a shudder of disgust seized Bob, nipping effectually
the finer sentiments he had harboured but a moment
before. Mackay eyed the jeering man with a look in
which a just anger and a wholesome contempt were
struggling for mastery.
“ You’re nothing but a sneaking thief, Macguire,” he
said, with forced calmness. “ An’ for twa pins I’d come
doon an’ burst in a few mair o’ your ribs. I’ll certainly
hae to settle you when I am forced to tackle you again.
But what are ye makin’ a’ the fuss aboot, anyhow ?
You’re clutching to a bit o’ clay as if it were a golden
nugget. Your battery wouldna thrive vera weel on that
sort o’ stuff, I’m thinkin’.”
Macguire was on the point of launching out into
further invective, when his eye happened to glance at
his treasure. He hesitated, stammered, and his rotund
face grew livid.


“ Put the water you have ready on your heid instead
o’ into the gold-pan,” advised Mackay, kindly, “ it’ll maybe
keep ye from gettin’ apoplexy.”
An inarticulate yell of mingled dismay and fury broke
from the |ips of the too-previous exulter. Hurling the
stone from him, he turned and rushed blindly into his tent.
Eagerly his followers picked up the rejected specimen;
it was dull and dead clay, showing no trace of the pre-
cious metal. Muttering maledictions, they fled after their
leader.
It quickly became whispered about that all was not
as had been hoped at Number 2 shaft, and despite the re-
ticence of those principally concerned, strange rumours
were soon current regarding the extraordinary phantom
gold formation which had just been struck. Then Macguire
raved more wildly than ever, for his chances of disposing
of the mine on a sight valuation to some innocent buyer
were now hopelessly ruined. He railed savagely against
Is ature, and all mankind in general; even his own alike
suffering and yet sympathetic followers were not spared
the flood of his abuse. A trial parcel of the ore was sent
to the battery in the hope that whatever free gold con-
tained in the substance might be saved by the mercury
but only further disappointment resulted. Its cohesive
nature was such that the stamps merely flattened it like
putty, and the whole went over the sluice-box in a dense
mass of coagulated slimes, leaving not a trace of gold
behind in the riffles.
M hen Mackay heard this he was filled with misgivings;
he had never doubted the efficacy of the stamps as a
crushing agency, and he feared for the working of Bob’s
process on a large scale when hand manipulation would


be impossible. Bob, however, seemed in no way
disturbed.
“ Crushing is unnecessary with the process,” said he.
“ The ore will dissolve in the vat; indeed, it would reduce
itself to slime in ordinary water if puddled occasionally,
or it would disintegrate very rapidly on exposure to the
sun, though that plan would be rather risky, owing to the
excessive oxidization which might take place. But in
every case the slimes would remain unaffected by battery
treatment, and for this one reason which was the basis
of all my experiments—the clayey material is a chemical
compound, and not a mechanical mixture like ordinary
alluvial wash, consequently it will only answer to chemical
treatment.”
“ But,” interjected Jack, “ there is most likely free
gold in the stuff as well as the—the other kind.”
“ Probably enough, but, as you see, even that cannot
be saved by ordinary methods; the soapy nature of the
composition, I imagine, is the cause. Oily globules will
form around the gold particles and insulate them, so that
the mercury on the plates never really gets a chance to
exert its power.”
Apparently Bob’s studies had been complete and ex-
haustive ; his knowledge of his subject impressed Mackay
deeply.
“ I can follow your reasoning there, Bob,” said he,
“ for the overflow even of the small vat in the tent was
more like engine-grease than anything else, an’ I can
testify that the residue I washed in the pan was a pure
and free sand.”
The Shadow here broke in on their conversation; he
had been away at the other end of the Flat on a tour of


investigation, for it was known that several shafts were
nearing the dreaded bottom.
“ The whole circus is goin’ to break up,” he announced
sorrowfully. “ There’s nothin’ but Emu Bill’s miradgy
stuff down there, an’ the miners are thinkin’ o’ giving it
best.”
The Shadow was not aware that Bob’s experiment
had proved successful; Emu Bill alone of the original
group had been informed, and he certainly had not spoken
of it.
“ I’ll go down and advise them to hang on for a bit,”
said Mackay, after some deliberation. “ An’ Bob, you
can tell the Shadow anything you like, provided he promises
to keep his mouth shut.”
“ Say boss, does I deserve that ? ” complained the
injured youth, reproachfully.
Jack hastened to assuage his grief. “No one knows
yet,” said he, “ but Emu Bill and ourselves; we didn’t
want Macguire’s crowd to hear that Bob could tackle the
mirage.”
“ An’ did ye think that I would give it away ? ”
murmured the Shadow, with emotion, and for a long time
he refused to be comforted.
That day six shafts penetrated into the refractory
formation, and loud were the lamentations that arose
throughout the camp. Surely never was a more scurvy
trick played by Dame Fortune upon her toiling votaries.
Macguire laughed heartily at the misfortunes of his neigh-
bours ; it was as balm to his soul that others should
experience the pangs of disappointment as he did, and
in the evening he gave the lead to the others by dismantling
his windlasses and preparing for departure, having done


not a stroke of work on his claims since the eventful day
of his own hitter chagrin. On the following morning he
and his associates took their leave of the Flat, and almost
as soon as they were out of sight, the abandoned claims
were being taken up afresh by a number of hard-working
miners, who had before been sinking vain shafts well
without the auriferous belt. Jackson had quietly annexed
Number 2 shaft, though he was somewhat dubious about it
proving of any service to him, and fully a dozen honest
toilers swarmed over the remainder of the ground vacated.
There was no need to keep the secret longer, and before
noon all the Flat had been made aware of Bob’s dis-
covery, and excitement was again raised to fever heat. A
deputation from among the miners was formed at once
to make inquiry into the matter, for news of a scheme
of such far-reaching importance could not be received
lightly.
They approached the Golden Promise mine shortly
after midday, followed en masse by the entire population
of the camp.
“We wants to see the inventor o’ the process,” said
the spokesman, addressing Mackay, who was at the wind-
lass, “ we wants to ask him if it are a fact that he can
save the gold in this stuff.” He displayed a piece of the
refractory ore in his hand.
Mackay gazed at the speaker kindly, then at the sea
of upturned faces in the background.
“I reckon you’ve come to the right street for your
information, boys,” he replied, and he shouted down to
his companion in the depths below: “ Bob, there’s a few
gentlemen wi’ some interest in the welfare o’ Golden Flat
wanting to speak to you.”


A minute later and Bob arrived on the surface, and at
his appearance a faint cheer swept over the awaiting
crowd. The young man started in amazement; he could
not understand this demonstration, but he quickly
recovered himself, and then the speaker of the deputation
began his oration afresh, ending with the earnest words :
“ We are miners every one o’ us, with not much to spare
in the way o’ cash; but if you can help us, and ain’t
unwilling to help us, you may ask what you like from the
returns o’ the mines, an’ we won’t refuse.”
Bob was touched, and for the first time a surging
' O O
feeling of Ids power came over him, yet when he spoke his
voice was calm and even. Briefly he recounted his
experiments with the tantalizing material, concluding
with the results of the last and final test; then, suddenly,
he entered upon a keen technical description of the ore
and its peculiarities, dealing with its scientific aspect at
critical length. Jack nudged Mackay, who coughed
loudly, and Bob, interrupted, lost the theme of his
argument, and incidentally remembered that he was not
addressing a class of trained mineralogists. He hesitated,
and turned to Mackay.
“ You can make them understand better,” he said.
“ I can that,” responded that individual, promptly; and
he disappeared into the tent, issuing forth immediately
with the gold-pan, which still contained the results of the
important experiment. He thrust the pan with its
gleaming treasure into the hands of one of the deputation.
“ I saw that go through mysel’,” said he. “ There’s no
much o’ a phantom aboot that, is there ? ”
The crowd behind caught a glitter of the gold as the
pan was passed round, and now there was no mistake


about the energy of their cheer—a hundred throats echoed
it forth. When it had subsided, Mackay again made
felicitous utterance.
“ Well have a ten-ton vat rigged up within a couple
o’ days,” he announced, in stentorian tones. ‘'An’ Bob,
here, wishes me to say that the charges for treatment will
no’ be in any way extravagant.”
A yell of approval rewarded his effort, yet still the
assembly showed no signs of departing.
“ I think you should sing the ‘ Muskittie ’ to them,”
suggested Jack, “ then you’d see them rim.”
He had to run himself after that, and when he
returned, the conclusion of the meeting was near. The
leader of the deputation was making strenuous endeavour
to justify his position. He harangued the congregated
miners with forceful eloquence, pointing out what an
inestimable service the young inventor would confer upon
the country and themselves.
“And now, boys,” he concluded, “let her go again.
Three cheers for the discoverer of the process. Hurrah!
hurrah! hurrah! ” And the Flat thundered with their
hearty applause.
When they had gone, Mackay heaved a hearty sigh of
relief.
“You’re far too open-hearted for this pairt o’ the
world, Bob,” he said dryly. “If there had been one
among that crowd wha kent anything aboot chemistry, he
would have got as big a knowledge o’ your process as you
have yourself.”
Bob flushed. “I forgot,” said he, “that there was
any reason for keeping it secret.”
The elder man laughed grimly. “My laddie,” he
( B 607) 161 l


began, with grave earnestness, “ are ye no’ aware that there
should be a fortune in this for you. There may be
tens o’ thousands o’ tons o’ the stuff in this Flat, and
allowin’ ye made a charge of, say, £2 a ton —which is
little more than battery price—don’t you see what a
tremendous profit would be made ? You canna patent a
discovery, Bob; and your only safety is in keeping it
secret. The great danger lies in the simplicity o’ the
process. We must be vera careful, my lad, vera careful
indeed.”
“ But did I really tell them everything ? ” said Bob,
abashed; for in truth he had forgotten the presence of his
audience, so wrapped up had he been in the interest of his
subject.
“Oh yes, you telt them richt enough ; but you clothed
your observations in such elegant scientific language that
I’m sure not a man among them kent what ye were talkin’
aboot.”
“ You did give them a pretty bad time,” grinned Jack.
“It was a treat to see them wrestling with hydro-
carbonaceous compounds, and electrolytical principles;
but didn’t they howl when they saw the gold ! ”
“ I reckon that talks every time,” said Mackay.
No time was now lost in erecting the vat and other
appliances necessary for the bulk treatment of the strange
deposit. Wood was obtained from the saw mill, and
Mackay, assisted by Jack and the Shadow, started to
build the giant trough for the retention of the ore. Only
half-sawn, rounded timber was used, for that alone could
support the strain that must finally be put upon the
structure; a movable bottom was also fixed to allow of
the ultimate residue being drawn off easily, and the whole


was mounted on a stout standard of logs raised about five
feet from the ground.
As may be imagined, a constant stream of visitors
came to view the peculiar erection before it was nearly
half completed; but when Bob’s important chemical and
electrical arrangements were ready to be fitted, Mackay,
much to the disgust of the beholders, screened the entire
plant from their gaze by building a tall canvas wall
around it. By the end of the week everything was in
readiness for the trial, which was given out to take place
in the evening, and a vast assembly gathered to witness
the inauguration of what was now known as the “ Hope
of Golden Flat.” So speedily had the news travelled
concerning it, and so vastly interested had even the
outside world become in the problematical future of the
Flat’s odd formation, that by Saturday morning quite a
number of men from Kalgoorlie and far outlying town-
ships made their appearance, and a steady stream of
buggies and horsemen poured in along the track all day.
Indeed, it seemed as if a fresh rush had set in, so keen
was the excitement.
But Mackay was ill at ease. Among the throng of
new-comers he had recognized several of the cleverest
mining engineers in the State, and none of them had
reputations for being over-scrupulous.
“ There’ll be a careful eye kept on us to-night, Bob,”
said he. “ An’ I’m just a wee bit dubious o’ the intentions
o’ some o’ our visitors.”
Bob looked thoughtful. “ I’ll fix up a dummy battery
and an extra generator for their special benefit,” he
suggested.
“ A good idea, my lad, and I’ll see that Emu Bill and


the boys are close handy in case o’ accident. Jack can
stand by an’ help you. I’ll attend to the dumping o’ the
ore, and the overflow arrangements, an’ flatten out any
man wha’s troubled wi’ an excess o’ inquisitiveness.”
“An’ I,” spoke the Shadow, “I reckons 111 keep my
blinkers open for any suspicious-lookin’ cusses, an’
Howlin’ centipedes! there’s one now! Blow me if it ain’t
that pestiferous son o’ a gun back again.”
They looked and saw Macguire in close conversation
with a short, nattily dressed man of about middle age.
Then the crowd closed up again, and hid the plotters—for
such they undoubtedly were—from view.
The trial had been arranged to take place at seven
o’clock in the evening, chiefly because the great heat of
the sun at an earlier period would have been most trying
for the spectators and experimentalists alike, but Mackay
had also the idea that at such a time the working
arrangements would be less visible to the onlookers, and
though he did not then think that any danger was likely
to arise in this respect, he now congratulated himself on
his cautionary scruples. Indeed, if the three partners
could have foreseen that so many outsiders were to be
present, no public exhibition of the process would have
been promised. But it was too late now to alter their
plans; the test must go on, come what may; and though
Bob was confident of success, his mind was somewhat
troubled by the appearance on the scene of so many
strangers, and the arrival of Macguire added much to his
apprehensions. An hour before the stated time all was in
readiness for the ordeal. The gas generators and batteries
were placed behind the vat and loosely covered by some
old ore-bags, then the enclosing canvas screen was pulled


away. A number of oil lamps hung around gave ample
light, while at the same time their reflectors were so
arranged as to cast a deep shadow over the lowly placed
chemical plant. Every safeguard against prying eyes had
been employed before the curtain was taken down, and
now the interested spectators gazed curiously on the
huge wooden structure which revealed itself to them.
Ten tons of the ore to be treated rested on a platform
built at the top of the vat; it was all neatly arranged in
bags, each of ten claims having provided a ton, while an
extra half-dozen tons taken from the Golden Promise lay
conveniently near at hand.
Bob stepped with apparent carelessness to the concealed
batteries and made the connections secure; Mackay
moimted the platform to tip in the ore, and Jack casually
stood guard in front of the hidden plant. Then Macguire’s
harsh voice cackled out in protest—
“We want to see the inside o’ the concern before you
start; you may have salted it for all we knows.”
Bob’s lips compressed tightly at the words. “ I am
not a professional conjurer,” he said with dignity, “ and I
have nothing to gain one way or another from any of you.
If you represent the feelings of the miners here, I shall go
no further.”
A cry of dissent at once arose, and Macguire’s safety
seemed for the moment imperilled; but in the midst of the
uproar, Bob calmly unscrewed the bottom from the vat
and pulled it forth for inspection, and he noted that
those who came forward at his request were without
exception the men whose good intentions Mackay had so
much doubted. The interruption did not delay matters
for more than a minute or so, then Mackay began to load


the vat, and in a short space the onlookers were listening
to its turbulent outbursts in amazed silence. At this
stage, Macguire, accompanied by the man he had been seen
with earlier in the evening, pushed his way forward until
he was almost touching the foaming caldron. But they
did not escape the lynx eyes of Emu Bill and the Shadow,
whose stern grips were on their shoulders at once.
“ Let them stay, Bill, if they want,” said Bob, quietly.
“ I should just reckon we would, young feller,” rasped
Macguire, though even as he spoke his companion was
whisked abruptly to the rear by the inflexible Shadow.
Bob smiled, and nodded to Mackay, who at once opened
the overflow tap, and a spouting rush of oily slimes
descended on the bully’s head, saturating him in an
odoriferous flood. The bystanders roared with glee, and
made way hurriedly to allow the chipping man an open
passage for his now frenzied retreat. The suddenness of
the deluge had utterly taken away his power of speech,
and the smarting pain of the saline fluid in his eyes made
him howl like a dingo. However, he recovered himself
somewhat when he got clear of the jeering crowd. “ I’ll
pay ye back for this! he snarled ; 111 IU
Then his more fortunate companion took him by the arm
and led him away.'
The drastic lesson had considerable effect on several
other over-inquisitive individuals, and their haste to retire
whenever they saw Mackay’s hand reach towards the tap
was ludicrous in its earnestness.
Again and again the overflow belched out, until it
seemed as if nothing solid could have remained. And all
this time the assembled miners looked on in silent wonder.
At last Bob intimated that the operation was completed.


“ The vat was built to hold ten tons,” he said, “ but it
could treat fifty tons in a day easily enough ”
“ How do you make that out ? ” interrupted a mining
engineer close at hand.
“ Why, all you have to do is to keep filling up the vat
as the overflow exhausts it. The gold will always be
foimd at the bottom.”
Mackay and Jack now busied themselves unscrewing
the movable bottom, and the crowd surged round in
breathless expectation. Quickly the screws relaxed, a
stream of yellow ooze gurgled out, but the only solid
matter retained was that which lay encompassed within
the flanged edges of the detached wood. It was not
inspiring to look upon, merely a layer about two inches
deep of a dull gravelly sediment.
Then Bob spoke again. “If the process were kept
going long enough,” said he, “ there would be scarcely any
residue other than the gold itself.”
“ An’ does ye think thar’s any gold there, mate ? ”
asked a stalwart miner, anxiously.
Bob nodded with easy confidence, “You’ll very soon
see,” he replied.
Mackay was already engaged in the work of demon-
stration. Eaising the shallow receptacle until it lay at a
easy incline, he next gently tilted the contents of a
kerosene tin full of water over the slope, and behold the
muddy casing dissolved away, revealing a rich spangling
yellow underneath. A roar of fierce joy burst from nigh
on two hundred throats, and for about a minute pande-
monium reigned. Hats were tossed into the air, and
huzzahs long and loud echoed over the plains. The suc-
cess of the process had been established beyond all doubt.


One of the first to congratulate the young discoverer
was Nuggety Dick, but Never Never Dave and old Dead
Broke were at his heels.
“ You’ve saved the Flat, Bob! ” cried Nuggety.
“ An’ you’ve saved us too,” murmured Dead Broke,
with emotion.
“What I want to know, young man, is by what
means do you bring about the expulsion of the oily
matter in the compound ? ”
The voice was patronizing in the extreme: the speaker
was the erstwhile associate of Macguire.
Then Mackay’s pent-up rage broke forth. “An’ are
ye sure that is all ye would like to know?” he stormed.
“ You mean, snivelling sneak, do ye think I don’t know
who ye are an’ what ye’re here for ? Get out o’ my sight,
afore I do you damage.”
To Bob’s surprise, the man fled at once. Emu Bill
laughed.
“ I’d have liked a word with the skunk myself,” said
he. “ He’s one of the measliest rats in the West, he is.”
Then Jack added his testimony. “ He’s been dodging
around trying to get a look at the battery all evening.”
The sound of a strenuous scuffle from behind the vat
at this moment drew their attention. With a bound
Mackay rushed to investigate, and there he beheld the
Shadow engaged in silent conflict with the man they had
just been discussing. The crowd had by this time drawn
away from the scene of operations, and were talking
excitedly among themselves over their now rosy future
prospects.
Mackay snorted savagely. “ Let me get a crack at
him, Shadow,” he said, hastening to the fray. But the


struggling man, already safe in the Shadow’s sinewy grip,
on hearing the new-comer’s voice, made a desperate effort
to free himself, and literally tore himself from his enemy’s
grasp, and sped off into the night.
The Shadow gazed ruefully after the vanishing figure.
“It was your fault,” he said reproachfully to Mackay.
“When you chased him away ’bout a minute ago I was
watching him, an’ saw him do a slide round by the back,
so I just sat tight an’ waited for the dodger. He was
pulling the cover from that there fizzing concern when I
gripped him by the neck.”
“ But who is he, anyhow ? ” asked Bob, who, with the
others, had come to inquire the cause of the disturbance.
“ He’s a most dangerous man, Bob,” answered Mackay,
grimly. “ His name is Wynberg, an’ he’s the chief chemist
and assayer o’ one o’ the crookest mining companies in
Australia, a clever man in his way, no doubt, but his
cleverness seems aye to develop in the wrong direction,
as the shareholders o’ the company he represents should
well ken by this time. He came here wi’ that thief
Macguire on purpose to steal your brains, Bob—for
nothing else.”
“Well, I scarcely think he has succeeded,” laughed
Bob.
The crowd was by this time beginning to disperse, and
a number of the miners came up to say good night.
“Why,” exclaimed Jack, “we haven’t weighed the
gold yet! ” And neither they had ; so keen had been the
excitement at seeing the welcome metal that no one had
given a thought to estimating its quantity.
“ We’ll soon make that right,” said Mackay, seizing
the pair of gold-scales, that had been lying in readiness


beside the generator. He quickly emptied the gleaming
dust on to a sheet of calico, which Jack hastily drew
forward, and commenced weighing it carefully in ounces.
“ I reckon,” said one of the men, who had sent a ton
for treatment, “ I reckon if it goes an ounce we should be
mighty well pleased.”
“ In that case there should be ten ounces saved, then,”
said Bob, “ allowing for no loss.”
“ There’s three times that here,” said Mackay, “ or my
judgment is very far oot.” And, indeed, so it proved.
Mackay filled the tiny scales exactly thirty-one times,
and yet there were some grains over. “ Thirty-one
ounces,” said he, “an’ belted out o’ the deceivin’ stuff
inside an hour.” A murmur of astonishment ran
through the group. This result surpassed even their
wildest hopes.
“ That means that each man who sent along a ton is
entitled to three odd ounces,” reflected Bob. “ Better
weigh it off and let them have it now.”
The ten men concerned held a hurried consultation,
then one of their number advanced, and laid his hand
kindly on Bob’s shoulder.
“There’s nary one o’ us wfill take an ounce o’ the
stuff,” said he. “ Keep the gold, my boy ; you’re heartily
welcome to it. It’s the first return o’ the discovery, an’
it’s yours by right. We only hopes you’ll get oceans
more o’ it afore very long.”
A babel of concurring voices answered for his com-
rades, and before Bob could reply the men had gone.
Mackay gravely handed a well-filled gold-bag to the
hesitating youth.
“They’re quite right, Bob,” he commented quietly.


“ The gold is yours by right—by right o’ discovery. Keep
it, my laddie —keep it and treasure it, as Jack treasures the
first nugget he found. In after years, if you re spared, }e 11
maybe remember this night as a vera wonderful experience.
Bob was silent; somehow his companion’s words
affected him deeply. There was a note of foreboding in
them, as if the speaker saw into the future clearly, and
was saddened by what he saw. Together they joined the
camp-fire circle, where the rest of their acquaintances were
gathered; then Mackay appeared to remember something,
and hastened back to the vat, and when Jack and the
Shadow went in search of him, they found him quietly
refixing the canvas wall around the whole structure.
That night Bob and Mackay slept deeply; the strain
of the evening and of the proceeding days had told upon
them. Jack, on the other hand, tossed about restlessly;
his active brain refused to be still, and the events of the
last crowded epoch in his life flitted before his unseeing
gaze. He awoke from a troubled sleep shortly after
midnight, and a vague uneasiness seemed to take posses-
sion of him. The moon had just risen, and her pale eerie
light penetrated into the tent and illumined it with a
ghostly radiance; it shone on the faces of the two
recumbent figures near, and Jack for the moment became
interested in watching the different expressions of the
sleepers. Bob slept deep and peacefully, a restful smile
on his clear-cut features, but Mackay’s rugged visage
looked grim and careworn, and ever and anon a faint
groan broke from his lips, while his breath came in quick,
laboured gasps. Jack was amazed. To him the brawny
bushman was still somewhat of an enigma, and each new
phase of his startled, even while it interested him. “ He’ll


be back in the Never Never again,” thought he, pityingly.
Then all at once his heart gave a violent bound. A shadow
had suddenly fallen aslant the tent; some moving body
had intervened to shut out the rising rays of the moon.
He glanced around with an almost imperceptible move-
ment through his half-closed eyelids, and there at the
door stood a bulky figure gazing in on them intently.
For fully a minute he stood thus, then he turned silently,
and the moon shone on his face, revealing the hateful
features of Macguire; it shone also on something which
glittered brightly in his upraised hand: it was a
revolver.
Almost at the same instant Jack became conscious of
another intruder being near; his sensitive ear caught the
sound of light shuffling footsteps in the sand, and a dark
form loomed up briefly by the side of the tent; the image
reflected plainly through the thin calico wall, then quickly
disappeared. Immediately afterwards there came a sharp
rasping tear from the near vicinity, followed by a
muttered curse, A cold sweat broke out on the boy’s
forehead; some one had cut the canvas screen enclosing
the vat • and batteries \ At the disturbing sound the
watcher at the door started slightly, then his demoniacal
face peered again into the tent, and the shining barrel of
his weapon was levelled straight at Mackay’s heaving
chest; but apparently satisfied that the man whom he so
much dreaded was still asleep, he hastened to join his
marauding companion.
Jack’s action was prompt and impulsive; he leaped
up,’ seized his Winchester repeater, w'hich was lying on
the ground at his side, and without a moment’s hesitation
rushed after Macguire. As in a dream he saw two dark


I > #v J - i Jjj
jjjSS i
/ lJ.
‘ahhm|BV
; capt.-. 1 .
l| lit
. -
/ / I
B 607
“JACK FELT A BALL GRAZE HIS TEMPLE; THEN HIS
OWN RIFLE SPOKE




figures lifting something out from the torn curtain
surrounding the secret process; at his approach they
dropped their encumbrance, there came a loud report, and
Jack felt a ball graze his temple; then his own rifle
spoke, and a yell of pain answered its heavy discharge. A
perfect fusillade of revolver-shots now echoed through the
night, and Jack felt the leaden messengers whistle about
his ears. With a just rage in his heart he dashed right at
the ruffianly pair; almost before lie knew, he was on top
of them, and his clubbed rifle whirled through the air,
descending with a crash on Macguire’s head. So severe
was the stroke that the stock of his weapon shivered into
fragments; but Macguire’s skull was like iron; though
the blow felled him like a stricken ox, he struggled to his
feet at once and staggered off into the night, just as
Mackay and Bob appeared on the scene. It had all
happened in a few moments, and when his comrades
arrived, the boy was standing with the shattered rifle still
in his hands, gazing with dazed eyes all around.
“ Well done, Jack ! ” said Mackay, heartily, guessing at
once what had happened.
“ But—but where’s the other one ? ” faltered Jack.
“ There were two of them a minute ago. Look for the
battery, Bob; look ”
“ It’s gone,” said Bob, quietly.
And so it was. Macguire’s villainous associate had
disappeared, and with him the battery. He had left his
hard-headed partner to bear the brunt of Jack’s vengeful
blow, probably by a preconceived arrangement, and, as
Macguire most likely reasoned, a crack on the head with
a rifle was better for him than the bullet which he would
assuredly have received had he ventured flight at the same


moment. They had trusted to the boy’s unwillingness to
shoot—after emptying their own firearms with deadly
intent. They had pitted their murderous cunning against
the lad’s humane judgment, and they had succeeded in
their nefarious plan.
“ I ought to have fired ; I ought to have killed them,”
muttered Jack, despairingly. “ I knew their revolvers
were empty at the last, only I didn’t—like—to—
shoot ”
“You did well, my lad,” spoke Mackay, encouragingly.
“ I wouldua have cared for the blood o’ even twa such
scoundrels to be on your young heid, though had they
killed you, I would have chased them up an’ choked the
breath oot o’ them baith afore morning.”
Very few of the tent dwellers around appeared to
have been disturbed by the heavy firing. Only the
Shadow and Emu Bill made their appearance to investigate
the cause, and when they learned what had taken place,
their language was full and eloquent.
“ I’ll twist that dandy chemist’s neck in the morning,”
quoth the Shadow, with earnestness.
Mackay laughed mirthlessly. “ They’ll both probably
stay in hiding for a bit,” he said, “and the first thing
we’ll know is another process being stuck up on the Flat.
They’ll crowd us out, right enough, and we’ll get nothing
but what’s in our own claims to put through.”
“ But won’t the miners stand by us ? ” suggested Jack,
hopefully.
“ The miners, my laddie! The miners, especially on a
new field such as this is, are like sheep. They’ll gang the
way o’ least resistance, an’ we canna afford to run a
philanthropic concern for their benefit altogether. It’s


Bob I’m sorry for—Bob whose brain has done the
work ”
“ We’ll let that go,” said Bob, gently. “As you said
last night, I’ll have at least a vivid experience to
remember.”
Next morning news of the theft of Bob’s secret
appliances spread rapidly over the Flat. Mackay con-
sidered it advisable to let the affair be known ere some
“ new ” discovery became heralded abroad by the per-
petrators of the outrage.
“ It will at least ensure the laddie’s name as that o’
the true inventor o’ the process,” he reasoned, and so the
report became noised about.
At first the miners were indignant, and aggressively
disposed towards the two men who had so meanly
defrauded a mere boy, yet soon they calmed down.
“ If there’s more than one plant on the field we’ll get
the work done cheaper,” argued some one, and of course
this placed the matter in a new light as far as they
were concerned.
There was no doubt as to the personality of the thieves.
Early that same morning, Macguire and Wynberg, the
chemist, had been seen driving off towards Kalgoorlie, and
it had been observed also that the publican’s head was
swathed in bandages, while his companion’s left arm w T as
secured in a sling. Jack had certainly given them more
than they bargained for, and the knowledge was a source
of much joy to that youth, whose keen regret now was
that he had not done them greater hurt.
The days slipped by, and the incident was almost
forgotten before a week had passed; but the owners of
the Golden Promise mine knew well what to expect.


They continued their work in the shaft, digging out the
refractory ore which now alone was left to them, and
regularly each evening Bob kept pace with results by
treating in the vat the entire amount raised in the dav,
and the exploitation of the mine proceeded; a little more
than another week would suffice to exhaust the stratum
within their boundary pegs, and then —Bob wondered
vaguely whether, after all, the process had baffled the
discerning powers of the chemist, and so would allow
them to profit by the discovery on a larger scale.
“ You need scarcely hope for that. Bob,” said Mackay,
“as I said before, the danger o’ the discovery lay in its
simplicity, and Wynberg is a man wha has had a’ the
qualifications his university in Germany could give him.
They’re vera smart mineralogists, those Germans, Bob,
and nothing much will pass them. A’ the same, when I
get a grip o’ the man I’ll alter the state o’ Ids health for a
week or so. I’ll ”
Mackay’s anger overcame him, and he turned away
abruptly to hide his annoyance.
Events soon proved how clearly he had foreseen the
plans of the conspirators. That very night, Eockson, the
battery proprietor, came over to the Golden Promise
evidently much perturbed.
“I’ve got a letter from Macguire, boys,” he said
hesitatingly. “ An’ he gives me instructions to fit up a
twenty-ton vat close to my stamping-mill. He says
Wynberg will be out in a day or so to see it completed.
I feel inclined to throw up the sponge, boys, I do ; I know
it is your discovery he means to work. If the black-
guard didn’t own so much o’ the battery, I’d have
nothing more to do with him ; but I’m in his power,


an’ I must either throw everything up or do what he
says.”
“Don’t worry about my feelings, Eockson,” replied
Bob, with an effort, for indeed the news had hurt him
deeply. “ I know you have been straight with us from the
first, and if I have to lose the process I’d sooner see you
work it than any one else on the Flat.”
“ But say the word, an’ I’ll fix the thing up for you ”
Eockson exclaimed eagerly, “there’ll be next to nothing
for the mill to do after this, and I might as well have it
out with Macguire now as afterwards. You know the
secret, and there’s room for two plants on Golden Flat.”
Bob pondered for a moment, then slowly shook his
head. “ I’ll share my rights with no man unwillingly,” he
said firmly. “ Macguire can set up my process, but I, the
inventor of it, will not compete against him. I’m not
commercial enough to beat him in the struggle for popular
favour. Besides, he owns a hotel, and I don’t. Why, he
would get all the trade if only because of that. No, I
won’t strive with him for what should surely be my own,
but I’ll make every man on the field his rival. I’ll give
the secret away so that each individual may work it for
himself. Put up the vat, Eockson; it may hurt me, but
I’ll see that it doesn’t help him.”
A quiet chuckle broke from the lips of Mackay, who
had been listening in silence. He had never seen Bob
thoroughly angry before, and the lad’s display of temper
on this occasion met with his full approval.
“You have spoken well, Bob,” he said!; “we didna
come out to Australia to run a cut-price establishment
alongside a gorilla-faced purveyor o’ bad whisky an’ a
thievin’ German Jew. The country is wide, Eockson, and
(s 607) 177 M


there are more Golden Flats than one in it. Anyhow, a
golden mountain will serve us just as well, and we
may even be contented wi’ diamonds an’ rubies for a
change.”
He spoke lightly, but Eockson thought he saw something
other than mere banter in his words, and he departed
wondering much what new scheme Mackay had in view.
Bob and Jack too were rather surprised at their comrade’s
strange remark, and noting their look of interrogation,
Mackay gave a rather reluctant explanation.
“ I was thinking o’ the Never Never land,” he admitted,
with a far-away expression in his eyes. “ You know every
kind of wealth is supposed to be hidden out there.”
“ Then why shouldn’t we go ? ” asked Bob, promptly.
“ Yes, why not ? ” Jack supplemented with ill-concealed
eagerness.
The big man gazed into the burning logs of the camp-
fire, around which they were seated, for several minutes
before he made answer.
“I’ve thought o’ it often,” said he, at length, “and
Bob kens that it is my dearest wish to go back on the old
track . . . back to the mountain . . . and beyond. But
there’s danger in it, laddies; many a strong man has gone
under wi’ thirst while crossin’ the great desert. Then
there’s the natives, savage and bloodthirsty, an’ filled wi’
the awfullest cunning. It’s a’ vera well for me to go.
My interest in life was crushed clean oot o’ me when I
had to come back alone last year, an’ I havena much to
lose now ”
“ You can’t dissuade me by picturing the dangers of
the trail,” interrupted Bob, quietly. “ I know you want to
go, you’ve said as much to me many times; and I tell you


frankly I’m going with you. What did you give me the
sextant for ? ”
“ I’m to blame, Bob; vera much to blame. I forgot
whiles that Jack an’ you were young, wi’ a’ the world
before ye, but the reaction when I saw that I was infusing
into you only my ain restless spirit was cruel, cruel.”
Mackay’s emotion overcame him, and he buried his
face in his hands. Bob spoke again with forced calmness,
“ A restless spirit was my birthright, and I am thankful
for it. Why,” he continued passionately, “without it I
might never have known you. I might never have seen
this great country where out of your goodness Jack and I
have made as much money in a few months as we could
hope to make in a lifetime at home. Let dangers come,
you will find us at your side ready and eager to meet them.
Xo, we simply won’t let you go without us.”
“ Bob speaks for me every time,” added Jack, promptly.
Mackay arose, straightened out his stalwart figure, and
eyed the boys with an expression of mingled gravity and
happy appreciation.
“So be it,” he said, and there was an inflection of
finality in his tones. Then his voice became cheerful,
almost joyous. “ The fact is, my lads,” he added, “ I
ha's ea} e unconsciously been considering your vera tender
youth, an feelin that I was like the bold bad giant in the
story-books wha enticed wee bairns awa’ to their doom in
the desert. No, Jack, I canna exactly say what book it
was, my memory is gettin’ a bit defective, I’m thinkin’.
Hove\ ei, Bob has shown that he is a man every inch o’
him, baith in biain and muscle development, while you,
Jack, you’ve got savvy enough for anything, and did ye no’
nearly kill twa o’ the maist desperate men in the country


the other night, single handed ? I'll no’ say another word
against you goin’ into the Never Never wi’ me. I have
wished it from the first, an’ though I tried no’ to influence
ye, there were times when I couldna help mysel’, when
the spirit o’ the lonely desert sent her uncanny cry ringin’
through my brain—that cry which I ken so well by this
time, ‘ Mackay come back to your comrades; they wait
for you by the mountain . . Ay, they wait for me,
their bleaching bones wait for me to hide them from the
carrion crows. But Mackay comes—he comes .. . Get
me the flute, Jack, an’ let me play something cheery. I
think I’ll gie ye a selection from the ‘ Geisha ’ for a change.”
“ And I reckon I’ll sing ‘ The Muskittie’s Lament,’ or
burst,” said the Shadow, who just then approached. “ I
reckon my voice has stretched a bit taller since I tackled
it last.”
Shortly afterwards the residenters of Golden Flat had
cause to marvel at the unwonted music, and succeeding
outbursts of hilarity which emanated from the head of
the field.
A few days later Eockson’s vat was completed, and
that evening "Wynberg arrived by the mail coach, which
now connected with Kalgoorlie twice weekly, to arrange
the final fixtures. He was accompanied by three of
Macguire’s satellites, a most truculent trio indeed they
were, whose presence no doubt was for the purpose of
safeguarding Wynberg from being roughly handled by the
men he had wronged, but the dapper little German seemed
nevertheless very ill at ease. He alighted from the con-
veyance, which stopped just beside Nuggety Dick’s claim,
and gazed around him anxiously, then suddenly catching
a glimpse of Mackay in the near distance, he made a wild


break for Eockson’s camp, and never stopped until he was
safe in the manager’s assay office, which was the only
wooden structure in the district that boasted a lock
and key. His three followers, grinning broadly, proceeded
after him at a much more leisurely pace. After that
nothing was seen of the chemist for two full days, in
which time a heavily logged hut was erected beside the
huge vat, presumably for the purpose of containing the
secret appliances; assuredly Macguire and Wynberg in-
tended to run no risks of having the stolen process in
turn stolen from them.
Then when he observed that the partners of the
Golden Promise were paying little attention towards his
movements a feeling of extreme bravery swelled in the
little German’s heart, and he boldly made his appearance
in the open, and swaggered about most manfully when
he noticed that Mackay was not in sight. His hearty
fear of the one man made him forget that there were
others who bore him no good will, and this oversight soon
brought about the calamity which he had daily dreaded.
It happened late in the afternoon when Bob and Jack
were busy on the surface preparing the battery and gas
generator for their final effort, for the Golden Promise
Mine had at last cut out, and only ten tons of ore now
remained to be treated. Mackay was on the platform
above the vat, shovelling in the clayey mixture with great
gusto, and whistling merrily to himself the while. Indeed,
from the happy countenances of the three partners, it
might ha\e been judged that they had only at this period
struck the auriferous wash instead of having exhausted it.
The Shadow, looking somewhat melancholy, stood a
little vay off, his hands deep in his pockets, and his eyes


fixed on the distant horizon. He knew very well that
Mackay’s plans for journeying across into the Never Never
land would soon be put into action, and }et the matter
had not been mentioned to him. The Shadow felt forlorn
and miserable at the prospect of being left alone. “It s
all owing to that wretched German thief,” he muttered
savagely, “ Macguire was too fat-headed to do anything
on his own.” Unconsciously, he turned his gaze in the
direction of the newly erected process, and a gleam of
unholy joy lit up his features. Wynberg stood there
alone fondly surveying a legend which had just been
painted on the huge wooden tank. So large was the
lettering that the Shadow could read it without difficulty,
“ Wynberg’s Discovery.”
« x don’t see any o’ his policemen around, I reckon
I’ll risk it,” he murmured, and he strolled carelessly over
as if it were his intention to view the inscription at closer
range.
The unsuspecting man turned as he approached; at
that moment his pride and delight in himself left no room
for other emotions. “ Ha, ha! ” he cried; “so you have
come over to pay your respects to the disco's ery, have
you? Well, well, you are quite right. Honour brains,
young fellow, honour brains,” he tapped his little bald
cranium significantly, and struck an attitude as dignified
as his rotund carcase would permit. Then he began
again, “There ees none other process like mine; that
young man—what’s his name? —could never do what I,
Carl Wynberg, of the Heidelbrughen University, have
accomplished. I Ah ! Ough! Murder! Police!
Thieves! ”
The Shadow had suddenly gripped him by the back of


the neck, and lending impetus to his forward movement
by a hearty application of his heavily booted pedal ex-
tremities, he impelled him forward at a run in the direction
of the Golden Promise Mine. “ I reckon you ain’t far out
when you yell thieves,” commented the Shadow, “ for you
are about the worst thief in the country, you are;
you wanted me to pay my respects to the discovery, did
you ? Well, I reckon you is now on the road to pay your
respects to the discoverer.”
- In vain the German shrieked and expostulated; his
captor’s grip was as a vice, and an honest indignation lent
added strength to his long sinewy arms. The din let
loose drew the attention of Eockson, who was in his assay
office, and he bounded out.
“ Come and pull this savage man away! Come at
once, Rockson! ” cried Wynberg, twisting his head round
appealingly.
“Not much, I don’t,” came the quick response; “you
fight your own quarrels,” and he turned calmly and
went back to his work. But now Macguire’s police-
men came speeding up from the bottom of the Flat, and
as they came nearer and saw that the Shadow only was
to be pitted against them, their warlike threats against
that young man’s person filled the air, and Wynberg,
hearing their coming, struggled and kicked and raved the
more. But the Shadow did not once relax his hold; he
had by this time got his prisoner halfway towards the
camp, and he knew that prompt assistance from that
quarter would soon reach him.
Nor was he mistaken. Bob and Jack had been watch-
ing the affray with keen amusement, and Mackay, -who
had observed the whole scene from his elevated position,


laughed so heartily that he had difficulty in keeping his
footing, but immediately Macguire’s followers hove in
sight he checked his merriment, and made as if to go to
the Shadow’s assistance. He thought better of it, however;
“ I might brak’ the mannie’s back if I grippit him ower
hard,” said he. “ You go, Bob, and help the Shadow to
bring him in.”
Bob was off on that mission before the words were
spoken, and Jack too; but Mackay called the latter back
before he had gone far. “Two’s enough, Jack, he said.
“ I want the beggar brought to me hale, no’ in scattered
bits, an’ Bob has a right to the job,”
In a brief space the raging Teuton was dragged along-
side the vat, while the three fire-eaters, whose duty it
was to protect him from such ungentle treatment, contented
themselves by hurling defiance at Mackay and his com-
panions from a conveniently remote distance. But their
wordy vapourings fell on deaf ears. The chief object
of their wrath seemed wholly unconscious of their
presence.
“ An’ so you’ve come to see the working arrangements
of the process again,” he said to his unwilling visitor with
a grim smile; but there was a steely glitter in his eyes
which alarmed Wynberg amazingly.
“ I’ll have you put in prison for this! ” he yelled.
“To prison you shall go! ”
His enemy was unimpressed. “ Humph! ”he snorted.
“ Hoch der Kaiser! Ease him up an’ let me get a nice
canny grip o’ him somewhere, my lads. Ay, that’s near
enough. Up she goes! ” He swooped down his great
paw, seized the unfortunate man by the slack of his wide
riding-breeches, and, with scarcely an effort, hoisted him


up struggling like a sportive fish on a hook, and yelling
loud enough to waken the seven sleepers, over the ore
platform, then he calmly dumped him into the vat amid
the bubbling slimes.
“You’ll be in a position to observe a’ the working
arrangements now,” he bellowed. “Mak’ the maist o’
yer chance, you yelpin’ hyena.”
The shrieks of Wynberg had by this time caused a
large number of miners to hasten up. “ Great centipedes!
ye ain’t murderin’ any one, are ye, Mackay ? ” cried the
foremost of them.
Mackay smiled blandly, and descended from his perch,
leaving the dripping specimen of humanity to crawl out
from his unpleasant environment as best he could. “ I’m
merely givin’ the discoverer o’ Wynberg’s Process an
inside knowledge o’ the work, an’ he’s howlin’ wi’ joy an’
gratitude, that’s a’.”
Then a great roar of laughter broke forth as a be-
draggled figure scrambled over the edge of the vat, shaking
the clinging ooze from his head like a water dog, and
sputtering out mouthfuls of saline fluid. Seeing the
crowd assembled, and feeling safe from further molesta-
tion, he gathered courage, and sitting down on the plat-
form he shrilled forth his denunciation of Mackay in the
choicest vituperative phrases of two languages. When
sheer lack of breath had pulled him up, Bob began to
address the miners in even dispassionate tones —
“Men, you know that I am the discoverer of the
original process, and you also know that my batteries
and generator were stolen on the night of the public trial
by two men. Jack surprised them while they were
carrying them away, and they tried their best to murder


him, I say this man,” and he pointed contemptuously at
Wynherg, “ was one of the thieves.”
“ It’s a lie! It’s a lie! ” screamed the German.
“Get the beggar to roll up his sleeves,” spoke Jack.
“ I guess he’s got the mark of my ride bullet somewhere
on his left arm.”
“Yes, roll them up, Wynberg,” came the stern chorus
from the crowd.
But this the muddy little man absolutely refused to
do. “ I’m not on my trial,” he sneered insolently.
“I reckon that’s just where you is wrong,” growled
the deep voice of Never Never Dave. “This here is a
regular roll up, an’ in the absence o’ official representatives
from the township, we, the miners o’ Golden Flat, stand
for the law every time. When we says hitch up your
sleeves, then by the howlin’ wilderness you’ve got to do
it, quick an’ lively too! ”
Yet still the request of the multitude remained un-
obeyed. Then Mackay reached forth his hand and grasped
the dangling legs of the “Discoverer of Wynberg’s Process,”
and hauled him ingloriously to the earth. In a trice the
slime-covered sleeve w’as pulled back, and there slantwise
across the forearm was the long red graze mark of a bullet.
The wound, though slight, was unmistakable.
Only a smothered expression of disgust showed the
feelings of the mining tribunal; they had never doubted
Wynberg’s complicity in the theft, and by this time had
almost forgotten about the affair which indeed they had
partly condoned as being a probable development in their
favour.
That matter settled, Bob continued his remarks:
“ The erecting of Wynberg’s Process, which of course is


just my process, will certainly serve the purpose intended
in one sense. It destroys our chance of making more
than just a trace over cost price for treating your ores,
though I know well you would not have grudged paying
a small tribute extra for the inventor ” A unanimous
shout of assent here greeted the speaker. “ All the same,
I cannot blame you for welcoming another plant on the
ground, but I do blame the methods of the men who stole
the idea, although I do not feel nearly as bitter towards
this man as I do towards the one who prompted the action,
and who has schemed against us from the first. And now,
after considering the matter over with my companions, I
have decided to give up my right to the discovery in your
interest; for the welfare of the country generally, and in
the cause of justice, I cannot allow Wynberg’s Process to
remain alone on the field to make wealth for Macguire
and Wynberg. No, I will defeat their ends in a way they
least expect. I will make the secret public property! ”
There was absolute silence for an instant, then came
a roaring tumult of applause. The miners could scarce
realize for the moment the magnitude of what had been
promised; it staggered them, and aroused their better
feelings, but as the full meaning of what had been said
dawned on them, cheer upon cheer rent the air, in the
midst of which clamour Wynberg slunk off unobserved.
“By Jove! young man,” cried one burly miner, “ you’ve
planted your name on this here Flat for all time, for blow
me if there’s any other title than Wentworth’s Process ’ll
get leave to live here. You may not make wealth o’ your
discovery, but I reckon you’ll have a name in the gold-
mining history o’ Australia that wealth couldn’t buy.”
That the speaker represented the feelings of the


multitude was evidenced by the rousing appreciation with
which the speech was received.
“Let’s go and wipe out Wynberg’s Process,” cried
some one, and at once there was a rush in the direction of
the flaunting sign.
But Mackay restrained them. “Leave the miserable
man’s property alone, boys,” he said. “ You have promised
a’ that I wished, an’ I’ll hold you to your promise that the
young laddie will aye get the credit o’ his own discovery.
We’re goin’ away vera soon on a new trail, an’ may never
see any o’ ye again, but Wentworth’s Process will be wi’
ye in oor absence to make you remember how much you
owe to a laddie’s energy an’ brains.”
Then the crowd broke up amid noisy protestations of
everlasting good will, and the original group who held
Golden Flat were left alone. It was apparent that Emu
Bill, Nuggety Dick, and their boon comrades, Never
Never Dave and Dead Broke Dan, were considerably
exercised over Mackay’s statement about going away in
the near future.
“ I reckon you hasn’t given us too much notice,” com-
plained old Dead Broke, reproachfully; “ it’ll take us a bit
o’ time to clean up yet.”
“But I don’t want you to come with me, boys,” re-
monstrated Mackay. “ I didna expect ”
“Well, I calc’late you made a mistake if you thought
you were to leave me,” hastily interjected Emu Bill.
“ An’ me ! an’ me! ” came the cry. The Shadow
alone made no remark. He knew that all present could
not go, and he naturally reasoned that he, as the youngest
next to Jack, would be left.
Mackay, after a pause, appealed to them in logical


language. “ You can’t all leave your claims for the sake
o’ cornin’ wi’ me on what may be only a wild-goose chase,”
he said, “ an’ besides, six in the party is quite enough. I
think Nuggety there, who is the maist capable gold-miner
o’ the lot o’ us; an’ Dead Broke, who has the chance o’
doin’ vera well wi’ his mine,—l think they should both wait
an’ look after things while we are away. It would never
do to leave your mines half worked out. They would be
jumped before we got out o’ sight.”
“ I believe that is just right,” agreed Emu Bill.
“Nuggety can hang on to my interest for me; he’s my
partner, anyway.”
“ An’ Dead Broke can do the same for me,” cried
Never Never Dave. “ The workings are shallow, and one
man can easily get along on his own, an’ nary galoot
can jump them neither, for the wash is pretty well
scraped out already, an’ one man’s pegs would hold what’s
left.”
In vain Nuggety and Ms approved companion protested
against this apportionment of their duties; innumerable
reasons were advanced to show how essential it was that
they should remain, and ultimately they agreed to the
inevitable. Mackay had spoken truly when he said that
Nuggety Dick was a most accomplished miner; he had
been stricken with the gold fever in Ms early youth, and
had never recovered. It was almost a mania with him to
discover new fields; Ms aptitude for locating the powerful
talisman was notMng short of marvellous. But Emu Bill,
though he chased up the golden gleam with hopeful per-
sistency, really, like all restless natures, found Ms pleasure
in the seeking rather than in the finding. He was a
bushman every inch of him, and no more valuable associate


for a risky journey into the heart of Australia could be
found, as Mackay well knew. As for Never Never Dave,
his name had been earned for him by his wide perambula-
tions over the untrodden tracts; his worth as a bushman
was known throughout the land.
“ But what about me ? ” pleaded the Shadow. “ I has
no one to look after my claim, for I hasn’t had no mate,
but I reckon the old mine has done pretty well by me,
an’ I won’t kick about leaving it.”
“ How much o’ the stuff do ye think is left in your
shaft ? ” demanded Mackay,
“ About thirty tons, I reckon.”
“ Why, we’ll go and help you to dig that out,” cried
Jack,
“ And I’ll run it through the vat in a couple of days,”
added Boh.
“You see, Shadow,” said Mackay, quizzically, “we
canna vera weel do without you.”
“Then I’ll be the sixth man?” cried the youth,
delighted beyond measure.
“ You will that if ye promise never to sing 1 The Mus-
kittie’s Lament’ without givin’ due warning. You’d mak’
us think the niggers were cornin’ for us every time ye
tackled that high note.”
“ I reckon I’ll get an accordion ” But the Shadow
got no further.
O _
Wrathfully came the rebuke, “If ye dare purpose
desecratin’ oor peaceful evenings wi’ such an un-
ceevilized device, I’ll mak’ a present o ye to the first
hungry cannibal we meet, I will.” Then, when peace was
restored, Mackay summed up the respective responsibilities
of the projected expedition’s members. “ Lou, Jack, and


the Shadow, have shown that you can handle camels in a
circumspect way, therefore you will have charge o’ the
team. Emu Bill and Never Never Dave will assist when
they are no’ too busy lookin’ for water or fightin’ niggers.
Bob will he navigator; and as for me—l’ll be the pilot o’
the craft, and will do my best to guide you to the hidden
treasure o’ the Never Never, to the land o’ rubies, an’
diamonds, and gold, which lies beyond the mountain.”


CHAPTER IX
Into the Unknown
A FULL week was occupied in settling up affairs and
making final preparations for the journey across
the wilderness. The question of transport was speedily
arranged. Three camels were necessary to carry stores
and sundry mining appliances, and a fourth would be
advisable to hear the heavy water-bags of the expedition,
as it was not wuse policy to burden the animals unduly.
Mackay’s wiry “Misery” was selected at once as the
leader of the team, and two other great leathery hided
creatures belonging to Emu Bill and Never Never Dave,
named respectively “ Repentance ” and “ Remorse,” were
called into requisition as being well fitted for the stern
work before them. A strong young beast was secured by
Mackay from an Afghan trader who called around oppor-
tunely, to make up the quartet. This last addition to the
outfit, which Jack promptly dubbed “Fireworks, was
inclined to be rather vicious in temperament, and after
seeing him buck two pack saddles off as a preliminary,
Mackay mentally resolved to trust the carriage of the
precious water-bags to the more patient “ Remorse,’’ and
allow “ Fireworks ” to cool down under more solid freight.
The stores of the expedition were not difficult to
obtain; by this time agencies of the large mercantile


houses in Kalgoorlie had been established on the Flat,
and the} were well able to provide all necessary supplies.
But the commissariat department of the Australian ex-
plorer is never famed for his lavishness; in it luxuries
find no part, for here the ship of the desert is the mainstay
of the traveller, and on its cumbrous back only room can
be found for the bare essentials of life. Flour and tea,
tinned beef and various “extracts,” these are the sum
total of the wanderer’s requirements in the Australian
wilderness, and with these he would usually be more than
content if water could be found to quench his thirst.
But this is too often denied, the arid wastes of the great
Austral land contain few oases. The scanty rains collected
in reluctant drops in some deep rock hole, perhaps for
years, are his only hope. Yet these grim forbidding
tracts allure the roving spirit if only because of their very
grimness. Across their scintillating sands what wonderful
haven may be hid ? Surely it is not all desert, something
must lie beyond the far horizon. Nature’s compensating
law must hold some reward for the weary pioneer who
gropes so desperately onward and ever onward into the
rising sun. Such is the hope, the belief, of those who
venture forth into the Never Never. With Mackay, who
had already followed the beckoning phantom far back
into an unknown mountain, the belief had become almost
reality. The spirit of the bush enthralled him, its spell
was ever over him. His young companions too were
influenced by the air of mystery surrounding their distant
goal. The unknown has ever exercised a powerful fasci-
nation oyer the Anglo-Saxon youth, and the two boys
revelled in the thought of penetrating untrodden tracts,
and rejoiced in their quest of El Dorado.
CB 607) 193 N


'When all was ready for a start Mackay called them
together for earnest consultation.
°« I don’t want to shout much about the dangers o’ the
trail, my lads,” said he. “ But it is as well to understand
that* the risks are there a’ the same, an’ it would only be
richt for you both to mak’ a sort o’ statement, an’ leave
it wi’ the Warden. I—l ”
“ I know what you mean,” said Bob, smiling; “ you
want us to make our wills —in case of accident.
Mackay looked relieved. “It would be better,” he
admitted quietly, “or send your money home. Don’t think
I want to force my advice on you, but I think—l think
that would be the better plan.”
« x’ve done that ever since we started to get returns
from the battery,” answered Bob. “I only have kept
what I thought I would owe you for my share of the
expedition.”
«Mine has been sent home too,” murmured Jack,
diffidently; “but I’ve kept two hundred pounds for the
expedition.”
“ \n 1 mine has gone home too, added Mackay, slowly.
“ But the expedition is my consideration, and I must bear
the expense alone. It’s a duty, my dear young lads, it’s
a duty.” , _ . .
No amount of persuasion would shake his decision m
this respect. , .
“It’s a journey that’s lain on my conscience for
some time," he argued. “ I have a mission to fulfil
which I hope may be outside the other object o the
expedition altogether, though it’s possible we may achieve
the one while in pursuit o’ the other.” He chuckled
dryly at the thought, then well pleased that his


young friends had disposed of their worldly goods to his
liking, he went off to give some instructions to Emu Bill
about the loading of the camels.
The process had been left in charge of Nuggety Dick,
who had received full information from Bob concerning its
proper working. It had been open for public inspection
all the week, and already many similar vats were being
erected on the field ; and Wynberg’s discovery lay idle—
its owner had vanished back whence he came.
The unfortunately placed Eockson, however, was soon
given a position more to his liking than the control of a
useless stamping mill. Jackson, whose time was required
in Kalgoorlie, at Mackay’s request, offered him the
management of his mine, which was now turning out large
quantities of the refractory ore, and this he gladly accepted
under the generous arrangement of a fair salary and a
considerable interest in the profits. It was Mackay’s
strange weakness that he could not allow another man
undeservedly to suffer, even indirectly, through any action
of his or his partners, and hence the exceptional terms
offered by Jackson for his services; he had only been too
willing to oblige Mackay in the matter as a slight return
for the great favour he had received.
Bob and Jack were amazed when, after the Golden
Promise had closed down, they counted up the amount
with which the Bank at Kalgoorlie had credited them for
their share in the gold sent in. They found that they had
each realized over a thousand pounds for their few months’
labour; the last two weeks’ results had swelled up their
profits wonderfully, to Bob’s deep satisfaction.
“ I’m very glad,” he said to Jack, “ that Mackay will
benefit a little by the process; it means that we have


made some slight return for his goodness to us, though
money can never pay for all that he has done.”
“ He doesn’t seem to value money as some people do,”
observed Jack. “ I don’t understand him yet, I don’t.”
It was after this that Mackay had ventured to express
his views to them on private concerns, and when he went
away he left the boys no little moved by his well-meant
advice; the solemn note of warning in his tones, even
when he touched so lightly on the dangers of the desert,
had not escaped them.
“ I do hope,” said Bob, fervently, “ that he may never
have to take the sextant from me. I—l get nervous when
I think of the responsibility he has given me. I wish
too,” he continued gravely, “ that I had some news from
home before we start, I haven’t heard a word since we
left. Of course they couldn’t write until they knew where
we were, but I think there is time for an answer to my
first letter by now.”
Jack calculated it up hurriedly. “It would come in
by to-night’s mail,” he said sadly, “ and Mackay said we
were to start after lunch. I think we should tell him, and
ask him to wait.”
But this Bob would not hear of for a moment.
“ Certainly not,” he cried. “He treats us as men, not
children, and I am not going to worry him with home
affairs. All the same,” he reflected calmly, “if I had
thought of it before I would have mentioned it to him;
but now that everything is in readiness for the start —no,
I cannot.”
“ All aboard, boys ; all aboard for the Never Never! ”
It was the Shadow’s voice, and they rushed out at
once, turning to cast one look at the dismantled tent


which had been their home during these eventful months.
No tent or shelter of any kind was being carried by the
expedition. The starry heavens must now be their sole
roof at night.
They found the camel team waiting the signal to move
ahead, and Jack at once stepped to his position alongside
Misery, the Shadow having for the time taken charge of
bireworks, who was promising to give trouble,
Mackay stood a little way off, and surveyed the team
critically.
“ Tighten up Fireworks’ girth, Emu,” he cried. “ He’ll
slip his saddle in a minute.”
Emu Bill proceeded deftly to obey the instruction,
annoyed with himself because of having overlooked the
defect.
“ I’ll swear the cunning brute has shrunk hissel’ on
purpose,” he growled. “ I pulled him in as tight as a
windlass barrel just a second ago. Woah, Fireworks,
woah! ye cantankerous son o’ a gun.”
But Fireworks was intent on creating a diversion.
For some time he had been allowed to roam the desert at
his own sweet will, and probably his memory of pack-
saddles and such like encumbrances had faded into happy
oblivion, but now that he felt the old galling weight on
his back his vicious temper was aroused to fury, and he
stood waving his weird-looking head about in savage
sweeps, and ever and again essayed to roll over, pack-
saddle and all. When Emu Bill approached him now, the
recalcitrant animal suddenly began a series of frisky
antics, pulling wildly at the nose rope which the Shadow
clutched firmly, and twisting its huge bulk into all sorts of
contortions.


“ Woah, hang ye! ” shouted Bill, again striving to get
near.
In reply Fireworks snorted defiance, then bent himself
almost double; a sharp crack sounded out as the girths
burst, and in a moment the sand was strewn with his
load.
«So that was your little trick, was it ?ye measly
old quadrooped! ” cried Emu Bill, in disgust. Well, I
reckon you kin try it over again.”
He gathered up the saddle for another effort, but
Mackay intervened.
“It won’t do, Bill,” he said. “We’ll just have the
circus repeated. We’d better postpone the start until the
morning, an’ meanwhile we’ll put Fireworks through
his paces. I didna think the beastie would be so
obstreperous.”
And, indeed, to look at the animal now, no one would
have thought that such a fiery temper lurked in that
cumbrous body. Fireworks, after his unruly performance,
stood gazing meekly at the wreckage he had created, the
very picture of innocence. Yet it was a wise policy to
break him in to a more fitting tolerance with his burden
before venturing into the great desert, where mishaps
would cause more vexatious delays, and probably occasion
damage which could not then be easily rectified.
Thus it was that the whole team was unloaded, and
the remainder of the day spent in coaxing the one
refractory camel into a more tractable spirit, a result
which Emu Bill and his companion bushman seemed to
have thoroughly accomplished before sundown, and high
hopes were entertained of making an early departure next
morning.


The mail arrived somewhat earlier than usual that
night, a fact which did not surprise any one when they
saw Macguire sitting on the box-seat beside the driver.
Mackay sighed wearily when he observed his old enemy.
“ I had hoped I had seen the last o’ him,” he said to
Bob; “ but I suppose the misguided man is looking for
trouble, as usual.” To his astonishment, however, Macguire
purposely evaded him, and disappeared rapidly down the
workings to where some of his old gang were still employed
on none too lucrative holdings.
“ Perhaps he’s got tired of running up against us,” said
Bob. “ I don’t think the game has paid him too well, and
he may be turning over the proverbial new leaf now.”
“ Umph! ” Mackay’s monosyllabic utterance was non-
committal, but it was plain that his faith in that new leaf
in the present instance was none of the strongest.
The mail brought a letter for each of the boys and one
for Mackay, and on glancing at the handwriting on his
envelope Bob was satisfied; the expected news from home
had reached him, after all. Hurriedly he tore it open, and
read the closely written sheets which a fond mother had
penned. He smiled brightly at the anxious opening
phrases, which inquired so minutely about his health
and general welfare. “ I have heard,” she wrote, “ that
fever often breaks out in a gold-mining camp—malaria
or gold fever, I think—and I am sending you a small
bottle of quinine, which I want you to promise to take
regularly ” Bob thought that rather good, and read
the sentence aloud to Mackay, who had mastered the
contents of his epistle at a hasty glance. That gentleman
was gravely amused. “ She’s richt about the gold fever,”
said he, with a short laugh, “ an’ it’s a terribly rampagin’


disease in its way, though I dinna think quinine would
affect it much. Prussic acid or some such deadly poison
would be the only cure, for once a man gets the gold fever
it remains in his blood a’ his life, ready to be stirred up to
violent action at the sight o’ a nugget. Ay, it’s a bad
fever, Bob, an’ we’ve a’ got it in some degree. However,
your guid mother needna fear aboot the other plague —
malaria—for neither it nor any other disease o’ the kind
can live in Western Australia. You must just write a
note an’ tell her that. The air o’ this country is too dry
an’ clear for any microbe to fancy.”
Bob continued his silent perusal of the letter, and as
he got towards the end a puzzled expression came into his
features; it was clear that the letter from home contained
something of more striking import than the warning
against pernicious fevers. The intelligence which dis-
turbed him was conveyed on the last two sheets, and
this was how it ran;—
“ I know you will be grieved to hear that your uncle
Dick is dead. Since your father was drowned I have
never had a line from him; he was the first to bring the
sad news to me, and his own sorrow seemed greater than
lie could bear. Your father and he had been inseparable
companions in their youth, and many times before the
Sea King sailed on her last cruise I used to hear them
planning out their great schemes for the future, for your
uncle had ever been a wanderer, and was filled with
strange ideas about the riches of some parts of the world
he had visited. He went off to Australia after arranging
your poor father’s affairs, and nothing was ever heard of
him again. All along I fancied that it was his money
which provided the little income left to us, for your


father’s savings could not have been much; sailors are so
poorly paid. The solicitors always put me off when I
inquired about it, but now I know that it was his great
kindly heart which went out to the widow and the father-
less, and caused provision to be made for them out of his
own scanty means. On the morning after you left I
received a letter from a gentleman who had just returned
from Australia, and who had been with him when he died,
enclosing a draft for two hundred pounds, and saying that
that was the sum realized by the sale of your uncle’s
effects, and that he had been entrusted to send it to me.
No other information was given, and no address was on
the letter. When I showed it to my solicitors they told
me the truth of what I had guessed from the first. My
boy, you were always uncle Dick’s favourite, and you
have every cause to remember him gratefully. If you
can find out where he died, erect a little cross over his
resting-place for me. I would so much like to have it
done.”
Bob read and re-read the strange story which brought
back the past so vividly to his mind, and his eyes grew
moist in spite of himself.
“ No bad news, I hope, lad,” spoke Mackay, kindly.
Bob struggled with his emotion for a moment without
success, then handed the pages to his interrogator in
silence. Mackay read them over carefully, with a face
showing keen concern; indeed, he seemed even more
moved than Bob when he had finished. “Ay, ay,” he
said huskily, “he was a good man, an’ there’s too few o’
his sort in the world. But you’ll dae what your mother
bids you. You will put up that cross afore you leave
Australia. I’ll—l’ll help you to find the place.” Then


he turned abruptly to Jack, who had read his letter, and
was now gazing at the envelope with profound content.
“ You’ve been gloatin’ over your billy doo for some
time, Jack,” he said lightly. “ I don’t suppose your news
has affected your appetite.”
Jack flushed, and made haste to secrete his precious
missive; but in his hurry the envelope fell to the floor,
and it was observed that it bore the same peculiar post-
mark as Bob’s, The boy grabbed it up in confusion, while
the big man laughed. Whereupon Jack waxed indignant.
“ What about your own billet-doux ? ” he asked mis-
chievously. “ I think I noticed you got a letter too.”
“ Here it is, young Lochinvar, here it is,” and Mackay
flung an open sheet at the youth. “ Bead it, read it;
don’t mind me. I’m sort o’ pleased to mak’ it known that
somebody thinks o’ me.”
Obeying his request, Jack cleared his throat and read
aloud the following:—
“Dear Mr. Mackay.—
“ I have just heard that you are about to start
out on a journey into the interior, and I thought I would
remind you of a little account I have against you for
several items you sent for last week. The amount is
£lO 17s. 6d. I’ll let you off the odd sixpence, but please
send your cheque for the remainder before you start. The
Never Never is such an uncertain country —to get out of.
Best wishes.
“ Yours sincerely,
“J. Eannigan.”
“Now, that is what I call a thoughtful letter,” com-
mented Jack, when he had finished.


“ A vera thoughtful letter indeed,” agreed Mackay,
dryiy. ~
Then they set about preparing tea, and while they
were thus engaged the Shadow made his appearance,
evidently in great good humour. He carried something
concealed in his hand which he gazed at tenderly as he
entered, then consigned it to some secret recess in his
scanty wardrobe.
“ I reckon,” said he, “ that I want an invite to your
banquet to-night. I hasn’t even an inch o’ damper left
in my tent. I broke up the happy home too soon, I
calc’late.”
Mackay laughed. “ I ken you’re a grand cook,
Shadow,” said he, “ an’, providin’ ye behave, we’ll be glad
to have your company. Ye’ll get flour in that bag at
your feet, an’ water in the kerosene-tin beside ye. Now
ye can take my place an’ mak’ wi’ these ingredients
something nice an’ tasty. 111 even gie ye a tootle on the
flute to inspire ye in yer efforts.”
The lad’s countenance fell. “ I see I has come along
too soon,” he grumbled. Then he fished about in the folds
of his shirt and drew forth the treasure he had secreted.
In the quickly fading light it was not easily observable
what he held in his hand; but when the wondering trio
saw him convey the same to his mouth their worst fears
were realized. Before they could protest, the wailing of a
mouth-organ filled the tent. The Shadow blew with might
and main, an ecstatic joy illuminating his features, his foot
keeping time to the music he perpetrated, and sending up
clouds of dust from the sandy floor. That he anticipated
a sudden closure was very apparent by the fierce energy
he displayed, yet, strangely enough, he was allowed to
203


finish the first tune without mishap ; it was only when he
adroitly essayed to glide off into a fresh outburst that
Mackay intervened.
“Ye should play that first spasm mair pianissimo,” he
ventured mildly, while Jack sprinkled water about to
allay the dust. “ Now, put that orchestra in your pocket,
an’ keep it there until we get far oot into the bush. Then
ye can kill the crows wi’ it if ye like.”
“ Eight 0! ” responded the Shadow, seemingly dehghted
to have escaped so easily. “Now, I reckon I’ll bake a
real bowser brownie for tea, an’ we’ll have a real ole blow
out, we will.”
“ Let us eat, drink, and be merry,” remarked Bob,
thoughtfully, “ for to-morrow we ”
“ Start for the Never Never,” prompted Jack.
Shortly after sunrise the camel team was once more
loaded up, and now Fireworks’ demeanour was beyond
reproach ; he submitted to his burden with philosophic
calm, and only once showed his playful disposition by
tearing the sleeve from Emu Bill’s shirt while that gentle-
man was standing too conveniently near his head. By
eight o’clock all was ready for the start, the last breakfast
in camp had been partaken of, and the various members
of the expedition were standing at their posts awaiting the
signal for advance. The population of Golden Flat had
turned out en masse to witness the denarture. It was not
x.
every day that an expedition left for the distant Never
Never. Nuggety Dick and Dead Broke Dan were there
looking anything but happy ; one word from Mackay even
now would have made them join the party but the leader
of the expedition sternly refused to meet their appealing
eyes. Once more he glanced over the team critically, as


if mentally weighing up the amount of endurance contained
in the four powerful animals. His scrutiny seemed to give
him much satisfaction, and he smiled grimly as he turned
his face to the east.
“ All ready, boys ? ” he cried.
“ All ready! ” came the unanimous reply.
Then, just as he was about to signal “ Eight away,”
the crowd parted, and Macguire struggled to the front.
“ Hold on a minute, boys ! ” he shouted. “ I want a
word with Mackay.”
As for Mackay, he viewed the interrupter with
considerable disfavour.
“If you had any differences to settle, you might have
come along last night,” he said. “ What’s the trouble wi’
you ? ”
“Why, man, I just want to say that I bear no ill
feeling, an’ that I hope you’ll be successful, that’s all.
What course are ye making ? ”
Mackay gazed at the questioner in puzzled wonderment.
“ I’m glad to have your good wishes, Macguire,” he said
slowly. “ Our course is east by north to a place that’s a
bit harder to find than Golden Flat. Let her go, boys ! ”
The long whips cracked, Misery’s bell began to chime;
the crowd stepped back to give the ponderous team free
passage, uniting as they did so in a stentorian Coo-ee, that
strange call of the bush which combines in its notes the
acme of feeling and good fellowship. Bob and Jack
coo-eed lustily in return, Mackay waved a cheery good-
bye, Emu Bill and Never Never Dave chaffed their
sorrowing acquaintances with tender affection as they
passed along the line, and the Shadow, pulling at Fire-
works’ nose-rope with one hand contrived to unearth his


mouth-organ with the other. Strongly he blew, and
stepped forth jauntily to the stirring time of “The Girl I
left Behind Me,” but his charge steadfastly refused to
accelerate his gait in such undignified fashion, and the
Shadow had perforce to seek around in his repertoire for a
more suitable march, which he soon found in “ There is a
Happy Land,” and he kept up his melancholy dirge until
he heard Never Never’s voice raised in dire threat against
his person. Then there was silence, broken only by the
tinkling bell of the leading camel, and the vague echoes of
Golden Flat’s farewells.
Thus they headed out towards the desert, into the land
of the Never Never.


K: :M \,i f-v | . J V ft
■». |p Jv* ■%BT'
K 1 3^
- P-.- ».
■ Ui»
B 607
“ HE UNFOLDED A LONG TRACK CHART WHICH
HE CARRIED IN HIS HAND 55


.


CHAPTER X
An Awkward Predicament
THE first halt was made at noon when little more than
eight miles had been traversed. The country en-
countered from the start had been a soft powdery sand
formation, with occasional belts of dwarfed eucalypti, which
intervened from the north. Progress was necessarily slow
at this early stage of the journey, for it was advisable to
allow the camels to harden to their work gradually.
Mackay had so far led the march, steering an approxi-
mate course by the sun, but immediately they stopped, he
called Bob aside for a conference.
“You see,” he said, “when we went out before we
started from a more northerly latitude, an’ I calculate we
should hit our old track in another hundred and eighty
miles if we keep angling in a wee bit north o’ east. I’ve
got a copy o’ the log up to pretty near the —the finish, an’
here’s where I think we ought to join on to Bentley’s
route.” He unfolded a long track chart which he carried
in his hand; it was made up of several sheets of ordinary
note-paper, gummed laterally together, and on its much
faded surface several inky hieroglyphics stood out bravely.
He pointed to a besmeared cross nearly halfway over the
chart, and Bob, looking closely, read the printed lettering


beside it: “Fortunate Spring, lat. 28° 17' 5", long. 125°
19' 6".”
“We are somewhere under the twenty-fifth parallel
just now,” reflected Bob. “That means we are about
120 miles south of your old track. I’d better draw out
our present position on my own chart and mark a compass
course for Fortunate Spring.”
Mackay looked relieved, “Be vera exact wi’ your
calculations, my lad,” he said earnestly, as he walked
away.
Bob took the sun’s altitude three times while a
hasty lunch was being prepared, and laboriously checked
each result to five places of decimals, then he carefully
marked .their temporary camp’s position on his still bare
chart, and drew a dotted line thence to the location of
Fortunate Spring.
“We’ll have to travel nor’-east half north to make
it,” said he.
Mackay nodded cheerfully. “ I hope we are lucky in
strikin’ water,” he observed. “About ten days is our
stretch without it, for the camels can’t stand more, and
they can’t stand that often either.”
“We’ll hit it right enough,” commented Emu Bill,
hopefully.
“If it’s in the country, you kin bet I’ll smell it,”
grunted Never Never. “I’m strong at nosin’ out water,
I am.”
“ Oh, after that one hundred and eighty miles, I’ll
know where we are,” said Mackay; “but there’s always
some little uncertainty as we understood from the first,
an’ it won’t be outside o’ our calculations if we do go
thirsty a bit.”


“ T °t a blessed fraction! ” cried the Shadow, decanting
the boiling tea from the billy into the enamelled cups°
“ Who says sugar ? You, Emu ? Well, there ain’t none;
ha\ e a try at saccharine, an be happy.” He gulped down
his own portion hurriedly, then ran off to round up
Fireworks, which was beginning to stray too far from his
neighbours, and ten minutes later the expedition was once
more on the move.
The next several days passed uneventfully; the same
uninspiring desert sands prevailed, and the intense heat
haze radiating from its shimmering surface affected the
eyes of the travellers, causing them to quiver and blink
painfully, while overhead the sun stared down from a
cloudless sky. Hot a trace of moisture was visible any-
v here, certainly no water could exist amid these barren
wastes, and all hoped most anxiously that a change in the
monotonous landscape might soon take place.
,l It’s a pretty thirsty lookin’ start we’ve made,” said
Mackay, when a week had elapsed, and they still struggled
along ankle deep in the burning sands. Bob was walking
by his side keeping an eager eye on what appeared to be
a light cloud-patch on the far horizon. He had noticed it
for some time, but was unwilling to mention his hopes in
case they might be doomed to early disappointment. How,
however, he felt pretty sure that his eyes had not deceived
him.
“ There’s a belt of timber straight ahead,” he announced
quietly, after Mackay had spoken. The elder man shifted
his gaze somewhat, and with puckered eyes surveyed the
slight break on the horizon’s even curve.
“lou’re quite richt, Bob,” he remarked, with a sigh of
relief. Ive been steerin’ by the shadow o’ the sun
(6 607) 209 0


across the camels, an’ I’ve almost mesmerized mysel, I
think, or I should have seen those trees earlier. It’s a
hard course for a bushman, Bob, that fractional nor -easier
you gave me.”
Emu Bill and Never Never Dave had by this time
found it necessary to assist in pulling the camels through
the sand. Jack, leading Misery, had not much difficulty
with his charge, for that wiry animal plodded steadily
onward with ponderous movement despite all obstacles,
but Fireworks was by no means as energetic as he once
was, and the Shadow anathematized him roundly as he,
with bent shoulders, strained at the nose-rope of the
reluctant beast, a proceeding which the two bushmen had
soon to emulate. Now, when these weary individuals
heard of the impending change in the land surface, they
gave vent to their joy in sundry whoops of delight.
“ It looks likely country for water, Mac,” cried Never
Never, as they drew nearer, and could plainly distinguish
the feathery scrub in their course. The sand too as they
advanced, hardened considerably, and here and there
great dioritic blows reared their heads above the plain.
“ You’re right there, Dave,” responded Mackay, after a
while, “ if there’s been any rain in the district for the last
year or two we ought to find a rock hole—Hillo! Easy
boys, and get your rifles ready. I see a wheen niggers
dodgin’ aboot among the scrub.”
« Nigs ! ” echoed Emu Bill and Never Never almost
with one voice. There was an inflection of decided
pleasure in the exclamation, as if these two had longed for
a skirmish to ease the routine of their journey. Mackay
himself seemed in no way displeased, yet he took care to
impress caution on his impetuous associates. ° A spear or


boomerang can kill as well’s a bullet,” he warned, while
each man examined his rifle. “ Now, Jack, don’t be so
anxious to get forrit, an’ keep on the lee side o’ Misery an’
no’ at his head when we get near.”
As yet Bob was unable to distinguish any aborigines
among the sparse scrub, but as they continued their wary
advance he soon perceived several dusky forms crouching
amid the timber, and his heart gave a bound when the
savage creatures suddenly stood up and united in a shrill
yell of defiance. He had never dreamt that these wild
denizens of the bush could be so hideous; they seemed
more ape than man, their faces were covered by long
tangling hair black as jet, and only white gleaming eyes
were visible; their bodies were repulsively scarred and
painted. This much Bob had time to notice, then a hail
of spears rustled out from the scrub, fell short, and buried
their barbed tips in the sand at their feet. And now the
bush seemed alive with blacks; uncouth forms sprang
from the side of each tiny sapling where they had been
standing motionless, and harsh guttural screams filled
the air.
“ They’re a bit more numerous than I thought,”
muttered Mackay, calling a halt, “ an’ I’ve an idea that if
we dinua rush them pretty quick, they’ll rush us. Now,
Jack, swing Misery round an’ let him stand, then grab
your rifle.” Jack obeyed promptly, and at that moment
another shower of spears hurtled overhead.
“By gum ! ” growled Never Never, “ they’ll get our
range next try.”
“They’re cornin’ for us now, I reckon!” cried the
Shadow, and of that there could be no doubt; the shriekino-
' O
horde had evidently decided to exterminate the invaders of


their domain without further delay. On they came, bran-
dishing their waddies and boomerangs, a compact mass of
blood-thirsty black fury.
«Now, boys! ” roared Mackay, “ Aim low and stop
them.” A thunderous discharge followed his words, and
six rifles spat out their leaden challenge to the foe. The
wonderful din created by the exploding cordite apparently
stupefied the blacks for a moment; they ceased their wild
rush, and gazed with astonishment at those of their
number who had fallen. Despite Mackay’s oft-repeated
animosity towards the aborigines in general, he could not
countenance wholesale slaughter. “ They re a poor lot,
boys,” said he ; yet even while he commiserated with them
the savages joined in another determined rush. There
must have been over twenty of them, and so impetuously
did they come that they were within twenty yards of the
white defenders before a second volley made them hesitate,
and even now they did not all stop ; a few stalwart warriors
kept on their mad course, and hurled themselves almost
upon the reeking rifle muzzles. If the attack had been
made in full force things would have gone hard with the
expedition. As it was, however, the little group had no
difficulty in beating back the frenzied band. The Shadow
and Jack were in their element; they little recked of
danger when plying their heated weapons, though the
vengeful club of one of the natives had missed Jack’s head
by little more than a hair’s breadth, and the Shadow s face
had been severely gashed by a flying boomerang. Bob
could not fail to observe how serious matters would have
been had the natives made their onrush in skirmishing
order; their close blocked formation made it impossible
for even the most random shots to miss their billet, and


now as the savage and discomfited creatures sullenly
withdrew, they dragged with them many maimed and
wounded comrades.
“ I can’t understand why the beggars are so stupid,”
said Bob, watching the last of them disappear in the
distance.
“ Ye may learn more o’ their tactics before our journey
is finished,” Mackay observed quietly; “at the same time,
there is a wonderful difference among the tribes, an’ that
is where the explorer’s danger lies. He may judge from a
nomadic spiritless lot which he may chance to meet that a’
natives are the same, and he may gie his life for the
mistake later on.”
By this time the team was again on the move, and
within a few minutes a halt was made in the densest part
of the scrub, while Never Never and Emu Bill searched
around for water. But the search was vain, no welcome
spring or rock-hole could he found, and a heavy gloom
began to affect the spirits of the party whose hopes had
been raised so high only to be thus rudely dashed. Even
Mackay, usually most cheerful in times of stress and
danger, looked grave as he reflected upon their somewhat
unenviable position. He knew what the others had not
calculated upon. He knew that the camels were already
at their last extremity of endurance; accustomed as they
had been while at G-oldeu Flat to drink every few days,
they had not absorbed their full supply before starting.
Misery alone, hardened veteran of many desert journeys
that he was, had drunk his fill, and now his great reserve
of strength showed plainly over the other beasts.
“ I reckon them nigs had a mighty cheek to make such
a howlin’ fight for nothin’,” complained the Shadow. “ One


would have thought they was protectin’ a lake o’ cool
crystal water ”
“ Slow up on that, Shad, or I’ll squelch ye wi’ an
empty water-bag,” warned Emu Bill, who could not stand
reference to such an unlimited supply of the precious
fluid at this moment.
“ There must be water about, all the same,” said Bob.
“ These natives, I suppose, get thirsty, like other people.
I’m off to have a look round myself,” and he sped away.
“ Be vera careful, Bob, be careful
But Bob was already out of earshot, pursuing a dogged
course eastward in the wake of the retreating blacks. In
his hand he grasped a heavy Colt revolver, which he had
extricated from the holster on his belt. A wild idea had
seized him ; he meant, if possible, to capture one of the
blacks and make him disclose the treasure they had
guarded so fiercely. It was a foolhardy plan which had
so hastily formulated in his brain, and in his calmer
moments Bob would have been quick to realize what
a desperate venture was that which he had now so lightly
undertaken. But the urgent necessity of finding water
was powerfully impressed upon him, and caution for the
time being was thrown to the winds. Eagerly he rushed
along, and in a few minutes had passed out of sight of his
companions; then suddenly two ebony-skinned warriors
barred his path ; he had blundered right on to them by
the merest accident. At a glance he saw that they were
armed with waddies and boomerangs only, their spears
having probably been discharged in the fray from which
they had fled. Yet a waddie at close quarters is no mean
weapon, and Bob pulled himself up promptly, and with a
stern smile levelled his revolver. His astonishment was


threat when, with a curious gurgle of mingled surprise and
fear, the dusky twain dropped their weapons and incon-
tinently fled before him. And now Bob’s heart was filled
with wrath because of the cowardice of the pair. Had they
only waited and surrendered quietly to his request —though
how he could have made them understand his wishes he
did not stop to think—all might have been well. With
scarce a pause he gave chase, covering the ground in long
impetuous strides, but it soon became evident that unless
something unforeseen occurred to check the flight of the
fugitives, he could never hope to overtake them. On
they sped, clearing the sand in great bounds, even
stopping at intervals to gaze back at their pursuer. Bob s
chagrin was deep, and he sent one or two revolver bullets
crashing after the disappearing couple which had the effect
of making them rim the faster, while far in the rear the
excited cries of his anxious comrades showed that they
were now concerning themselves over his prolonged absence.
Yet the ardour of the pursuit had taken possession of
Bob; with a mighty effort he managed to quicken his
pace so that he actually drew up considerably on the
fleet-footed pah’ scarce fifty yards divided them.
“Another spurt and I’ve got them,” thought Bob, and
he clenched his teeth and strove boldly in the attempt.
Now thirty yards only separated them, now twenty, now
ten. Bob chuckled grimly to himself at the prospect of
after all being successful in the chase, and stretched out
his hand, then in an instant the hitherto level course
came to an abrupt stop, a layer of branches and spinifex
grass spread right across the track. The blacks had
cleared it at a leap, but before Bob had time to prepare
for a spring he had staggered into the midst of the cut


brushwood, and at once felt himself sinking down into
space. It all occurred in a second or so. He clutched
wildly at the pigmy branches as he descended through
them, but they broke in his hands, and with a rush and a
plunge he fell downwards into an unknown depth.
When he recovered himself, about a minute later, he
became aware that he was standing, considerably shaken
and bruised, waist deep in some semi-solid fluid at the
bottom of a natural shaft, which he mentally calculated to
be at least twenty feet deep. He had found water for a
surety, and now would have given much to get out of its
slimy embrace, but the steep dioritic walls were quite
unscalable. Bob was hopelessly a prisoner. Then did
he blame himself most bitterly for his mistaken ardour
and lack of perception. The wily natives had but
pretended to be overcome at the last wild rush so as
to lead him directly over the subterranean trap.
“ Mackay was certainly right,” he muttered. “ Their
cunning is nothing short of devilish; and after being told
of that, here I go like a fool and prove it for myself.”
He had little time, however, for unprofitable
moralizings, and he peered up and around his strange
prison-house with anxious eyes, yet his surroundings were
of so murky a nature that he could only vaguely guess
the description of the trap into which he had fallen.
His gaze was instinctively directed toward the gaping
hole in the brushwood through which he had fallen,
though what he expected to see there he did not very
well know. But he now realized the nature of the blacks
too fully to believe for a moment that they intended to
leave him to his fate without further molestation.
“ Why, the water is bad enough as it is,” he said,


with a forced attempt at pleasantry. “ They’ll certainly
come to fish me out before long.”
He had not been in his awkward predicament many
minutes when a black grinning face stared down at
him. Bob shuddered and crouched closer to the damp
rocks; he was half prepared for a stone to be thrown or
a spear to be poked tantalizingly in his direction, but no
such proceedings were taken. The demoniacally leering
face continued to look down at him without movement
for several seconds, when it was joined by another equally
hideous; they belonged to the two savages who had led
him such an unfortunate chase. They had now returned
to view their victim after having probably given the
alarm to their fellows. Bob groaned in dismay, but
returned their gaze with stoical complacency, having not
yet fully comprehended his true position.
At length, however, his strange gaolers, with many
guttural exclamations, began to cover up the tell-tale gap
in the layer of furze; then their prisoner’s senses returned
to him with a rush, and his emotions almost overwhelmed
him. The blacks surely meant to cover up the hole so
that his companions might not find him, and when they
would depart after vain searchings, he would be left to
the tender mercies of the “ stupid ” natives he had so
commiserated! In truth Bob’s cup of bitterness was
filled to overflowing.
But he decided, nevertheless, to do his best to prevent
the success of their scheme. His revolver was still dry,
for he had by some odd instinct clung to it tenaciously
despite his demoralizing downfall, and now he became
aware for the first time that he held it in his hand. He
tired two shots upwards in rapid succession. Operations


ceased on the instant, and Bob felt comforted. He knew
that Mackay would soon seek him out if any clue as
to his whereabouts was left. His rejoicings, however,
were premature, and very speedily checked. As he gazed
at the sky through the gap which gave him light, he
noticed the aperture slowly yet surely grow narrower and
narrower. The blacks were pushing the superfluous brush
over the opening by the aid of long sticks! Bob shouted
with the full force of his lungs and discharged the re-
maining shots in his revolver upwards, but only a hoarse
cackle of satisfaction from the natives answered his
attempts at communication with the outside world, and
soon—as the last glimpse of sky was shut out—he was
enveloped in absolute darkness.
“ Well, I assuredly could not have landed myself in
a worse fix if I had tried,” he soliloquized with wonderful
calm. “ Here I am, shut up in a twenty-feet water-hole
in the middle of the Australian desert and surrounded by
hostile savages. That’s pretty good for a start —and, I’m
afraid, for a finish too.” He continued his unpleasant
musings, while he carefully reloaded his revolver. Then
he wondered what his companions would do when he failed
to appear, and a ray of hope flashed across his sorely tried
brain. Mackay and Emu Bill were expert bushmen, and
indeed so was Never Never Dave. He had often heard them
speak of tracking up clues of even the very flimsiest
nature; might they not, after all, be able to follow the
slight impressions left by his footsteps on the sandy gravel ?
. . . What a cruel irony of Fate to plunge him head-
long into what he most desired to find —water. Had he
been caught in a sand-hole he would not have felt so
much aggrieved ; but water, of all things! While thinking


in this strain, he remembered that, though he had been
extremely thirsty all day, he had not yet tasted of his
find. But his thirst had effectually gone from him, and
he abhorred the slimy touch of the fluid which encircled
his limbs. Suddenly he felt some huge creature brush
against his knee, and then climb up against him with
many a wriggle and splutter. What new horror was this ?
Bob was anything but timid in temperament, yet he
shivered at the sinuous contact of this unknown thine:,
O'
and endeavoured frantically to shake it off, but it only
clung the tighter.
Some little time now elapsed, to Bob it seemed like
half an hour, for the moments dragged like ages, though
five minutes would have been a nearer estimate. Then a
subdued muttering was heard above, and he expected
every instant to see more hideous faces grinning at him
through the bushy covering. He guessed that the whole
tribe had now arrived to witness his plight; and he was
not far wrong, for nearly all the warriors whose powers
of locomotion had not been interfered with earlier in the
day had assembled overhead. The weary sojourner in the
depths kept his gaze fixed on the roof of the shaft where
one or two gleams of light filtered through the last un-
evenly laid scrub; his eyes had by this time grown
accustomed to the gloom of his environment, and while
he watched he carefully cocked his revolver, and adjusted
it to fire on the hair trigger, so that his aim might not
be disturbed at a critical juncture. Soon a gaunt black
hand drew aside the branches; Bob’s haste was his own
undoing. Had he waited long enough the oily-skinned
savage might have let in the light more fully, but as it
was he fired, and a howl of pain told him he had not fired


in vain; but the brushwood fell back into position, and
his prison was left as dark as ever. He now made an effort
to climb up the walls of the dank and evil-smelling pit in
which he was immured; but the flinty formations exposed
were dripping with moisture, and slippery, and offered no
place for foothold. Bob would have given much then for
a match, there were a few in the pockets of his nether
garments, but they were well submerged beneath the level
of the water, and consequently useless. The floundering
animal that had climbed against his legs next aroused his
curiosity; he could not imagine what sort of creature it
might be, and his courage was not sufficient to prompt
his making a practical investigation as to its form or
temper with his hand, which, as it afterwards turned out,
was just as well for the hand. Another lull ensued, and
he began to be alarmed at the silence of his dusky gaolers.
Were they premeditating some sudden and novel doom
for himself, or had they indeed abandoned him to die
in this horrible water-trap ? And where were his com-
panions all the time ? To relieve the monotony he fired
two more shots upwards at random and was rejoiced to
hear another yell of pain from outside, but a retaliation
in the shape of a fusillade of stones came crashing down,
missing him by a few inches only. Again he fired, and
again. Bob had grown desperate, he did not much care
what form the reply of the natives would take, but now
he heard an answering shot in the distance, while near
at hand the Shadow’s well-known voice hilloed out lustily.
There now appeared to be considerable agitation among
the blacks above; their feet pattered on the sand con-
fusedly, and then a shrill yell intimated to Bob clearly
enough that his tormentors had taken flight.


He was about to congratulate himself heartily on
escaping so opportunely from a distinctly awkward pre-
dicament, when he heard the sand crunch under hurrying
footsteps, and the Shadow, now close above, commenced
to shout his name. He was evidently bent on following
the retreating natives, for he halted not a moment, but
kept up his mad rush forward. Before the horrified
prisoner below could raise an alarm, he had jumped im-
petuously into the snare which had already done its work
so well, and a moment later he tumbled down heavily
head over heels by Bob’s side. The spray he threw up
almost blinded Bob, and the fetid odours that were thus
again let loose, caused him to gasp wildly. His comrade
in misfortune struggled to his feet with eloquent male-
dictions, and his amazement when he recognized Bob—the
light was now streaming down through the gap he had
made —was very genuine indeed.
“ What in thunder is you doing here ? ” he cried.
Bob considered the question rather superfluous under
the circumstances.
“Me ? Oh, I’m fishing! ”he replied laconically.
The Shadow ceased his flow of language for a moment,
and examined the walls of his gloomy habitation with
interest. It did not take him long to grasp the situation.
“ Hang it, that was a tidy trick to play on a peaceable
sort o’ cuss like me. They’ve bagged the pair of us, an’
if we’d had the savvy o’ a mosquito, we didn’t oughter be
here,” he snorted in extreme disgust.
“ It is a bit humiliating,” admitted Bob, not at all
displeased that the wonderfully acute Shadow had
blundered into the trap as easily as himself. It tended
to soothe his wounded feelings in no little degree. “ But


all the same,” he added brightly, " we’ve found water, and
that’s worth some inconvenience, isn’t it ? ”
The Shadow grunted something unintelligible and
began to prospect in the almost viscous fluid with both
hands.
“ There’s some slimy crawler shoved up against me,”
he growled, “ an’ I reckon I’m goin’ to break his little back,
so that he won’t have no appetite to feed on us afterwards.”
He groped around viciously.
“ I have had a good half hour of its company, what-
ever it is,” remarked Bob. “ But the splash you made
frightened him off for a bit. But hold hard ! Shadow, hold
hard, man ! Don’t you see what it is ? ”
Bob s eyes, more accustomed to the dull environment
than his companion’s, had now detected an unusually large-
sized iguana struggling in the water; it had apparently
fallen in from above, as they had done, and its snapping
jaws looked decidedly dangerous. The Shadow ceased his
investigations with remarkable celerity, then lifted up his
voice in fluent condemnation of all sorts and conditions
of crawling creatures. When he had exhausted his store
of expletives, he made a vain effort to climb the oozy
walls of the cavern, and succeeded only in getting a fresh
douche for his pains.
“ I wonder who’ll come first,” he murmured feebly,
“Mackay or them savages? I reckon we shid know
pretty sudden.”
They were not left much longer in doubt. The report
of Mackay’s powerful rifle broke the silence, they recog-
nized it by the heavy charge of powder it fired and the
series of shrill yells which answered it showed that the
natives were still in the vicinity. Anon the anxious


pair heard the scrub break before the advance of some
hurrying person, and the crunch, crunch of feet in the
sand.
“Go back and mind the camels, Jack,” they heard
Mackay’s decisive voice ring out. “ I’ll find Bob, if he’s
above ground, an’ that reckless young rascal o’ a Shadow
too.”
“ But we ain’t above ground! ” roared the last-named
youth, forgetting that his voice would be absorbed in the
echoes of the shaft before it reached the surface. On came
the stalwart bushman, and the fierce invective against the
blacks in general, and these savages in particular, which
issued from his lips as he ran, came as a revelation to Bob,
who had never heard his friend so moved.
In a few moments he had reached the vicinity of the
pit wherein the adventurous pair were entombed, and Bob
made ready to signal once more with his revolver, but
such action was unnecessary. The experienced eye of
Mackay had quickly noticed the cut brushwood, and he
bore down towards it without hesitation. Then, thrusting
his head through the opening in the bushy covering, he
surveyed the captives below with a grim smile of amuse-
ment. “So this is where you are, my lads,” said he. His
relief was so evident that Bob and the Shadow felt even
more ashamed because of the trouble they had caused than
there was any need for. Then Bob found his speech.
“ There’s water here,” he cried.
“ Water! ” Mackay’s ruddy features positively glowed
with pleasure. “Well, well, I shouldna wonder but what
you’ve taken the only means o’ finding it, an’ though it
was a novel sort o’ method, an’ just a trifle dangerous, we
canna be too thankful that it has succeeded. Now, you’ll


hae to content yoursel’s a bit longer while I see aboot
gettin’ a rope to pu’ ye up ”
“ Don’t go away, boss ! ” howled the Shadow. “ Them
yelpin’ baboons’ll be back in two shakes if ye does.”
But Mackay had no intention of going away ; he
proceeded to signal with his rifle, and soon the entire
camp, camels and all, arrived in answer to his call. Great
was the hilarity of Jack and the two bushmen when they
learned of the strange position in which Bob and the
Shadow had been found ; but their joy was real indeed that
water had been discovered, after all, and when they raised
their dripping comrades to the surface they embarrassed
them more by their expressions of gratitude than by their
display of what under the circumstances would surely
have been but a pardonable levity.
Now came the tedious process of drawing water for the
camels to drink, and also for refilling the almost dry
canvas bags which Eemorse earned. For the latter pur-
pose the thick sand-impregnated fluid was laboriously
filtered through a sheet of calico, so that a fair amount
of its solid matter was eliminated. But it was not the
sediment that was the most objectionable feature of the
liquid; it simply stank with vile odours, so that Emu
Bill and Never Never Dave, who had undertaken the
duty of hauling up the buckets, had anything but a
pleasant time while they were so engaged. The boys
marvelled at the extraordinary capacity of the camels
for the uninviting solution ; between them they managed
to absorb well over a hundred gallons, and when at length
they were satisfied, very little save mud remained at the
bottom of the shaft.
“ I would never have believed these natives capable


Boh u ti, a rr. trick as that they piayed ° u me ."
„ T b ' ho had been ™usually silent since his rescue
up "toe ‘f 6 “ H f ht of the Aggers in covering
on tort!” ’ aDd ‘ hen lMing me directl .v
“ Tlieyre no' so deficient in gumption as you at first
considered, Bob, my lad,” answered Mackay, with a
f mhls e 3’ e - “However, I don’t think they
the shaft exactly for your benefit. Just
drew Bob’s k !° ked * eW ° f th 6 b *' anches “Me and
"Tle-e 1 t0 thdr wholl >' “Pleas nature
loni dav am Tl tWigS bave done dut >’ many a
° da}. The natives cover the water principally to
r:;z::r t,on i much as l
1“ I 1 ™ *
r me navour. Ihe water has veia likplv lain
m that rock-hole for vear<? i ■ 7 k lam
on rW n Q ft T J ’ only such judicious economy
pait has left us enough for our needs.”
J reckon they’ll have to shift their- lodgings pretty
oon, laughed the Shadow, -for they’ll hare a pretty
a > JU gettm a drink when we leave, an’ the next
man that does a dive into the reservoir as Bob an’ me
d d, T? ld f " ke s °mcthing hard at the bottom ”
Never ™ S **** * advaDced ’ but
® er Never Dave suggested that they should cam,,
where they were until morning, Mackay would not hear
of such a proceeding. eai
it, W’ sdd he° Üb ‘aa’TAr 0, ' gh ' rith ° nt lo ° kiu ’ for
lV _ . 11 ’ an lf there s one tiling I dislike
Z .T7r 1 ' 3 Cr ° Wd “ ‘ke night
ey would try to swipe us out before mornim- for the
miserable vermin get vera bra™ oft , c ’ Ime
(b 6 07) brave after sundovm. No,
225 p


boys we’ll head out right now for Fortunate Spring.
Fetch out the compass, Jack, an’ let me have a look at
that course again. The sun has shifted a bit since I
worked out the correct shadow to steer by.
Immediately afterwards Misery’s bell began to chime,
and the camel team moved on its weary way.


CHAPTER XI
The Finding of Fortunate Spring
several days after leaving the scene of Bel’s
adventure the travellers struggled over a most
wWch ti mUg , Tv ° f CoUntry ' The timber belt amid
h the - v had discovered water proved to he but a
narrow strip, extending down from the north-west; it
iidently marked the course of an ancient river-bed for
immediately beyond its scope the sullen desert appeared
ie of all vegetation, save for occasional clumps of
saltbush and tufts of spinifex grass. Over this barren
waste they forced their dogged course, starting at sunrise
and halting towards noon, when the heat became too
terribly oppressive both for man and beast; then in
mamhTuoTi T COUtiDHe tbe retimes
archm late into the night. It was well for them that
water had been found so opportunely, for assuredly none
Tl, oUJ «frl d i“ ‘l*® md Sands the 5’ ' vere uow encountering
e fifth day, however, brought with it the hope of better
things. Away to the east the landscape took on a much
• °,** r0 en aspect, a featme which gradually extended
ig across the line of travel. Great dry gullies, starting
rom apparent nothingness, tore up the plain in aR
directions, and giant boulders of desert sandstone out-
cropped in prodigal profusion. And this drastic change
227


in the land surface cheered the wanderers mightil}, for
though in itself it offered greater obstacles to progress
than the weary sand-flats, it relieved the eyes, which had
become so weary of gazing at the seemingly everlasting
monotonous desert, and uplifted their hearts strangely.
Another day, and several mouldering ridges surrounded
them ; mere hillocks of sand they were, yet, rising as they
did abruptly from an even expanse, they appeared in the
distance as precipitous mountain steeps, and it was hard
to believe that their grandeur would fade away at a closer
view. Within these guarding barriers, a beautiful white
tableland lay spread, so white and pure that it glittered
like marble in the sun’s rays. The sight was a dazzlingly
splendid one, and Jack, who had been the first to climb
the gentle elevation hiding the valley from the south, had
exclaimed in delight —
“ What a huge lake we are coming to ; it looks like a
areat frosted Christmas card! ”
“ Lake ! ” Mackay had answered, almost sorrowfully.
« Ay, it’s a lake that will give us a maist desperate thirst,
instead o’ quenching what we’ve got.”
And soon the truth of this remark was borne painfull}
on them all, for the lake was a mass of crusted and
crystallized salt, that crushed like tinder beneath their feet
and showered over the heads of the voyagers in sparkling
clouds of finest dust. It filled their ears and eyes and
nostrils; they inhaled the minute grains with every
breath; it covered their tattered clothing in a gauzy film
of white.
“ Well, I’m blest! ” ejaculated Emu Bill, “if this am t
the cruellest joke to play on sinner, an’ nary a
drink within hundreds o’ miles!


“ Sllut ll P> Bill, an’ ye won’t swallow so much of it,”
retorted Never Never Dave, unsympathetically. Then he
was moved to further speech. “Bless yer soul! It’s a
whole brewery we’ll want afore we gets through this,
I'm thinking.”
" I had an idea,” observed Mackay, blandly, “ that you
two had joined the temperance party a week or so before
we left, so as to get accustomed to a bit o’ a drought.”
Tempeiance party! stormed the unusually loquacious
Never Never, “I reckon this here circus would break up
an} anti-thirst campaign in less’n five minutes.”
He would have continued, but his companion sternly
rebuked him by casting at him the words with which he
had himself been silenced. After that not a word was
spoken for fully ten minutes, and the camel team staggered
blindly on, floundering through intervening salt wreaths
like ships in a heavy sea. The lake appeared to be nearly
six miles in length, which meant that at least two hours
would be spent in the crossing, for their rate of travel
seldom exceeded three miles an hour, and was more often
considerably less. In that time, if each man satisfied his
craving for water from their very limited store, there
would be but little left, and by Bob’s calculations they
were yet about thirty miles from the location of Fortunate
Spring. But though each of the little party suffered
severely, not one of them made other than jocular mention
of his longing, and Mackay felt proud of the fortitude and
reserve they displayed. He was especially concerned for
Bob and Jack, for they, not having been hardened to such
experiences, must have felt the influence of their salt bath
most keenly; but if they were in any way incommoded
they showed no sign. Bob walked by Mackay’s side,


talking at intervals concerning the probable geological
history of interior Australia —a subject of endless interest
to him. Jack and the Shadow strode at Misery’s head,
for now Fireworks needed no guiding hand at his nose-
rope, hut followed submissively in the rear of Eepentance,
and from snatches of their conversation, which floated to
Mackay’s ears, he gathered that Jack was giving his
Australian comrade a description of the snows and frosts
of the old country as a set-off to the blazing heat they
were now experiencing.
“ Yes, I reckon I’ll go home with you, the Shadow
was saying. “It must be a grand country, wi’ no snakes
nor centipedes nor other crawlers, an’ nary muskittie to
nibble you in your sleep.”
Bob laughed. “I’m afraid the confined spaces at
home would hardly suit him after this, he said. I don t
think I could stand the nature of things on the other side
myself now.”
“ Because you’re a born wanderer, Bob,” smiled Mackay;
“ an’ the world itself will soon be too small for you.”
At last the end of the salt lake was reached, and cheer-
fully a path was forced over the encircling ridges, for all
had high hopes of what might lie beyond. But disappoint-
ment again was their portion : the grim, unbroken desert
stretched before them in all its hideous dreariness; the land
of beau desire had not yet come.
“ X remember well,” said Mackay, “ that Fortunate
Spring was in a pretty bare sort o’ country, but it certainly
wasna as bad as this, although we had a hard tussle before
we came to it.”
On, on, they struggled; but, if anything, their course
became more difficult as they proceeded. On the following


morning a gentle wavy outline against the sky in the
northerly distance warned them of some impending change,
hut by this time the members of the expedition had become
resigned to their comfortless lot, and scarce dared hope for
an improvement until they neared the portals of their
goal, their shadowy land of El Dorado.
Gradually the sinuous curves on the horizon loomed up
plainer to the view, and lo! as they crested an intervening
sand hillock, a strange sight met their gaze. As far as
the eye could reach west or north, a sea of undulating sand
ridges appeared, rolling down like gigantic breakers from
the dim north-west, the mighty valleys between each
swelling sand-wave being over a hundred yards apart and
fully thirty feet deep. Capping these wonderful billows
were regular rows of saltbush and spinifex, so regularly
spread, indeed, that in the rosy morning light the whole
scene was like some Brobdingnagian field, with furrows
bearing luxurious vegetation.
“ I reckon we has struck the land o’ Goschen at last,”
said the Shadow, joyously.
“It does look pretty,” Jack allowed hesitatingly, as
they stood to take in the view, and waited for the others to
come up. Indeed, so unaccustomed had they grown to
seeing such close array of even the wiry desert growths
that for the moment all imagined they looked upon a
"ildering forest. The saltbush was by the fantasy of
mirage exalted to lordly proportions, and the spiky
spinifex patches drooped in the sun’s rays like the
spreading fronds of the stately palm.
Mackay dispelled the illusion; he of all the party
seemed ill at ease.
“ I didna think the sand-waves extended so far back,”


he muttered, half to himself. Then he added, aloud, “It s
no’ a land o’ promise you’re lookin’ at, hoys ; it’s a deceiving
land o’ misery an’ dispair, where many a good man has lost
his life.”
“But what about the beautiful trees and shrubs?'’
asked Bob, in wonderment. “ They seem to stretch back
for miles and miles.”
“ It’s only another case where distance lends enchant-
ment, as the poet says, my lad. Your trees are only
saltbush, and instead o’ growin’ closely, there’s over fifty
yards between each o’ them; it’s those behind that fill
in the gaps. The eye can never understand the per-
spective o’ this country, the air is so clear that distant
objects almost blend wi’ what is close at hand.”
He spoke truly. When they forced them way at a
difficult angle across the vast undulations, they discovered
to their sorrow that only the sparsest of vegetation found
root on the hill crests, while the long interstices were
absolutely barren. Not only this, but the sand on the
inclines and declivities was so loosely packed that the
camels sank to the knees in their strenuous efforts to
scale them, and had to be pulled over the barring obstacles
by sheer force.
“ A day of this will just about finish Eemorse,” said
Mackay, noting how that meek yet willing animal was
labouring under its load. “ I think, Bob, we’d better keep
in the trough o’ these confounded waves until we run
oot o’ them, I ken we must be near the edge as it is, for
I mind that Fortunate Spring was a good day’s travel
past their eastern limit. That was why the chief called
it by that name. We were vera nearly lost on those
same ridges; we didna find a drop o’ water for over a


hundred miles, and we were just about dead beat when we
came upon it.”
“ How far do they run towards the north ? ” questioned
Bob.
“ Well, Carnegie, who was one o’ the finest explorers
that ever handled a sextant, calculated they covered nearly
three hundred miles o’ West Australia. What their area
is God only knows, yet it must be over fifty thousand
square miles.”
“I should think this would be nearly as bad as the
Sahara,” said Jack, as he tugged at Misery’s rope. “ I
haven’t seen a drop of water since we started, unless that
which Bob fell into.”
“ The Sahara ? ” echoed Mackay. “ Why, we wouldn’t
ca’ it a desert at all. It’s only because it’s so near the
old country that it is considered to be anything extra-
ordinary, This country, Jack, wouldna be an explorer’s
preserve if it contained as much water as the Sahara. It
would be overrun in every direction by gold-miners.”
Then Jack was silent, marvelling greatly that in his
earlier youth at school he had learned so little concerning
the vast sandy wastes of Australia. Soon, as they kept
on their altered course, the retarding undulations began to
grow less and less high, and by late afternoon they had
merged into the monotonous plains, now welcome indeed
to the travellers after their encounter with the formidable
sand-ridges. But their progress that day had barely
totalled ten miles, and the camels were well-nigh ex-
hausted after their extreme exertions. The poor brutes
had had a severe experience from the beginning, and the
rough usage was telling heavily upon their strength.
That night they could scarcely muster up sufficient


spirit to chew their usual meal of saltbush tips, and,
after a few weak efforts, Eemorse and Eepentance lay-
down in the sand, while Misery and Fireworks gazed
at the little group around the camp-fire with mute,
appealing eyes.
“ I hope we don’t have any trouble finding that
spring,” said Mackay, anxiously, and instinctively they
all turned to Bob with a questioning look. The young
navigator winced as he took out his notebook and
hurriedly checked his previous calculations.
“ We were in latitude 28° 24’ 7" at noon to-day,” he said
quietly; “that should make us about seven miles only
from the location of Fortunate Spring, allowing we made
five miles since lunch.”
“ But the longitude, Bob ? ” asked Mackay. “ How
do we stand for that ? ”
Bob again examined his log-book. “ I have it marked
at 125° 11'17",” he answered, “but we came a good bit
easterly since that. I’ll try it again in the morning,
though I think we’re almost on the correct line now,
and should hit the Spring by going due north.”
He handed the book to Mackay, who glanced at the
figures and mentally checked the simpler calculations,
but he did not ask for Bob’s table of logarithms, and the
young man felt satisfied. Bob, indeed, was sure of his
positions; they had been worked out with painful
exactitude, but he could not help feeling anxious about
the morrow. The country in the vicinity seemed so utterly
arid and barren. Could the original figures he received be
correct ? Might not possibly some mistake have crept
into Bentley’s estimates ? He shuddered at the thought,
then was immediately sorry for the passing doubt. Who


was he who dared question the accuracy of an old and
tried explorer’s chart ? Yet Bob went to sleep that night
feeling vaguely uneasy, and by early sunrise he was up
taking altitudes, Jack and the Shadow attending him to
mark the time of his observations. It was nearly nine
o’clock before they were ready to move out that morning ;
the camels had for a long time refused to be loaded, and
when loaded they could not be prevailed upon to arise
to their feet, until forced to do so by the necessarily cruel
expedient of lighting fires under their noses.
“ That’s nothing, Jack,” Mackay said with a laugh,
for he had noticed the look of pain on the boy’s face.
“ They get up long before they’re hurt; their hide is like
leather, you know, and camels are vera often stubborn
and annoying when there’s really no occasion for it.”
But he knew well that the poor animals were not
refractory without reason on this morning, though he
endeavoured to make light of the fact. Wearily the
heavily laden beasts trudged along, and when the first
hour passed, and the sand showed signs of hardening,
the Shadow made a valiant effort to infuse life into their
hulking movements by blowing at his long-unused mouth-
organ vociferously, and making the air resound with
discordant notes, for his cracked lips could ill glide along
the reeds with any degree of certainty. Bob, who was
striding along well in advance, smiled as he heard the
concert thus let loose, and he smiled the more when the
dismal voices of Emu Bill and Never Never Dave were
added to the chorus; and, looking back, he observed these
two worthies prancing on with martial steps, though
certainly not with martial grace, for their bodies were
bent as they pulled their reluctant charges onwards,


and their feet, notwithstanding their jaunty uplifting,
went down almost in the same place. And Mackay,
looking back at the perspiring musician, nodded en-
couragingly, much to that alert youth’s amazement, for
he had expected but a rude check as a reward for his
labours. Not only did he thus ostensibly appreciate the
lively music, but he joined in with his comrades lustily
in their vocal exercises; and in this way the labouring
train progressed, and almost unnoticeably a thin, straggling
array of mallee and mulga shrubs began to dot the
hardening sand surface, a slight dip in the land had
obscured them from earlier view. By eleven o’clock the
sand had merged into the longed-for iron-pebble strewn
plains, and now the scrub was comparatively abundant
all around, and the tough, wiry grasses which the camels
loved appeared in greater profusion. Yet no signs of
Fortunate Spring.
“It can’t be far off now,” said Bob, hopefully. “I d
better fix our position again before we go further, in case
we might pass it.”
“ And that would he easily done, my lad,” spoke
Mackay. “ I remember well that the water was in a
mallee flat, just scrubby country like this, but there was
no kind o’ landmark except a fair-sized lime tree which
grew beside it, an’ I canna see any lime trees about
here.”
“ I’ll have another shot at the sun,” decided Bob, and
at once the team came to a halt, while Jack hastily
unstrapped the sextant and chronometer from Misery’s
back.
A few minutes more and Bob had worked out the
necessary calculation.


“ I make the latitude come out exactly,” he said
gravely.
“ Try again, Bob ; try again,” urged Mackay.
With sinking heart Bob once more levelled his
sextant; the horizon was easily discernible through the
scraggy bush, and the flat itself was level as could be.
“ I find the latitude reading correct,” he repeated, with
bloodless lips; “ and the longitude,” he added, after a
pause, “is the same as it was this morning, the same
as is marked on my chart over the location of the Spring.”
“ We’ll soon find it, if it is near abouts,” cried Emu
Bill, cheerily. “ Don’t fret, Bob, them springs have a
habit of getting lost at times. Come on, Never Never,
come an’ help me to smell it out wi’ that tender nose o’
yours.”
And they rushed off into the bush towards the west.
The Shadow and Jack started to follow, but Mackay
recalled them.
“You two had better look around due north,” he
said, “ and I’ll tackle the east myself. Now don’t go
further than a mile, an’ signal wi’ a revolver-shot if ye
find anything.”
Without a word they departed on their quest, and
Mackay and Bob were left alone. Calmly the elder
man interrogated the lad, who was standing in an attitude
of deepest dejection, the sextant hanging loosely in his
hand.
“ And is there no room for a mistake in any o’ your
figures, Bob ? ”
“ None, none, that I can imagine. I have been par-
ticularly careful ”
Bob could not finish his sentence, a flood of emotion


swept over him, and he sat down in the sand and covered
his face with his hands.
“ Why, my laddie, ye mustn’t blame yoursel’ for no
error o’ yours,” spoke Mackay, kindly, gazing at the
despondent youth with a strange light in his keen grey
eyes. “ Brace yoursel’ up, Bob; we’ll likely find the
spring at no great distance, an’ if we don’t, well—we’ll
look for another one if the camels stand by us.”
He hurried away into the eastward scrub. Bob arose
and gazed after him with quivering eyelids.
“ Yes,” he murmured brokenly, “ I have brought you
all to your death, and I can do nothing now to save. . . .
I know the error is not mine, but I cannot and will not
blame a dead man. ... I wonder what can possibly be
wrong.”
He shook his head in utter hopelessness, then he
glanced at the sextant, lying as he had left it, half buried
in the sand. He took it up and brushed the silvered
arc carefully with the ragged sleeve of his shirt, and was
preparing to place it in its case when a new idea seemed
to strike him. He grasped the instrument with a firmer
grip and stood erect, a new light, a light of gladness
shining in his eyes.
“ It’s strange I never thought of it before,” he said
aloud; “ a minute or two either way would make all the
difference.” He picked up the chronometer, which lay
idly at his feet, and examined it critically. “It’s just
possible,” he muttered, “ the jolting of the camel may
have made it go a bit fast; I wonder if I can check it. I
am going to try.”
Long and eagerly he gazed at the sun through the
powerful telescope of the sextant, and every now and then


he would note down his observations, and consult the
Nautical Almanac which lay open before him. In the
midst of these proceedings, Emu Bill and Never Never
Dave returned, after a fruitless search, and while they
stood watching him, Jack and the Shadow also made their
appearance, and lined up beside the other two in solemn
silence. There was no need fo ask them if they had been
successful, their faces plainly indicated disappointment,
though they both strove hard to hide their feelings. As
for the first arrivals, their rugged countenances betrayed
not the slightest trace of emotion. Bill calmly chewed a
quid of tobacco, and Dave reflectively pulled at his pipe.
To them it did not seem to be a matter of much moment
whether they found the spring or not. At length Bob
threw down the sextant with a weary sigh.
“ The chronometer is right,” said he, sadly; then, as his
comrades looked at him questioningly, he faltered: “ I’ve
done my best, boys . . . the fault may not be altogether
mine, but ... I am responsible to you. . . . What can
you think of me ?” He gave way completely.
Then out spoke Emu Bill, and his voice rang firm and
true —
“ Shoot me fur a dingo if I’ll listen to you miscallin’
yourself, Bob. You has shown us afore what ye were
made o’, an’ hang me for a cross-eyed Chinese if I’ll believe
you’ve made the mistake.”
“ I’m right with ye thar, Bill,” grunted Never Never.
Bob looked at them in silent gratitude that was more
potent than words.
“ Blow me! ” blurted out the Shadow, “ this ain’t no
funeral circus.’ He strode aside and examined the canvas
bags overlapping Eemorse’s tough hide; they were flat
239


and empty, the last drop had gone. He rejoined the little
circle quietly, and held out his hand to Bob, who was
gazing with unseeing eyes into the horizon. “ I knows it
ain’t your fault,” he said simply.
Jack alone had not spoken, hut Bob knew his comrade’s
thoughts; he knew the loyal courage and devotion of the
boy’s heart.
And all this time Mackay had not come back, nor had
any welcome signal been heard. Bob commenced to tear
that he would not come back unless he had something to
report.
“What did ye mean by sayin’ the chronometer was
right, Bob ? ” asked Emu Bill, suddenly.
“ If it had gone fast or slow, my longitude, which I
calculated by it, would have been out accordingly,” replied
Boh, listlessly. “I thought the jolting might have
affected it.” , ,
“Why then,” returned Bill, “ain’t it more likely
that Bentley’s time was wrong ? If he came in from the
west across the whole darned stretch o sand-ridges, I
reckon he would bust things up a bit.
Bob was startled into fresh energy. “Of course, you’re
right, Bill! ” he cried excitedly. “ I’ve been so anxiously
looking for a possible error in my own instrument, I never
thought of it occurring with Bentley’s. I believe you ve
hit the solution of the whole difficulty. We’ll find
Fortunate Spring due east of us in that case, for his
latitude would he sure to be right.
“ We’ll get under way at oncet then,” grunted Never
Never Dave. “ We’re bound to meet Mackay comin
back.”
At once Jack rushed to Misery’s head, and the


otbeis hastened to their posts. Bob picked up the sextant
and chronometer, and with a surging hope in his heart
led the way in the direction that Mackay had taken.
Slowly, slowly, they broke through the scrub, Misery’s
bell sending out its melancholy note, and shattering the
oppressive stillness which had prevailed but a few minutes
before. Onward they went and onward, and yet no sign
of Mackay, and no sign of a spring to gladden their weary
e}es. About two miles had been traversed, and the
spirits of the forlorn party were drooping fast, when from
the bush but a few hundred yards ahead a revolver
shot boomed out loudly. With one accord the camels
stopped dead. They seemed to realize that something
was about to happen. Again came the sonorous echoes
of an exploding cartridge, and a hoarse cheer burst from
the eagerly listening quartet.
“Mackay has found it! Hurrah! Hurrah!” roared
the Shadow, and with renewed effort a path was forced
on towards the origin of the welcome sound. Five
minutes more and they broke into a rough clearing in
the bush in the centre of which a tall lime tree reared
high above its dwarfed surroundings; and seated by the
tree gazing at some rude markings that showed faintly
on the gaunt white trunk, was Mackay. At his feet,
sunk among the spreading roots, and half hidden by
enclustering grassy growths, gleamed the water of the
spring. _ Bob gave a gasp of relief and thankfulness.
Emu Bill and Never Never Dave calmly began to unload
the camels, the Shadow after vainly trying to find his
speech, mechanically pulled out his musical instrument
and sought to indicate his joy thereon.
Then Mackay arose to his feet, “ Dinna desecrate the
( B60 ‘) 0 241 Q


place, Shadow,” said he, in gentle reproach. “Eemember
this is a monument to the dead.”
He motioned Bob and Jack to come forward and view
the mossy inscription on the tree, and silently they obeyed
his summons. Deep graven in the wood was the legend:
“Fortunate Spring, 1898. Bentley’s Expedition. Lat.
28° 17'5", long. 125° 19'6” (Dead Beck.) Course E.”
Then followed a list of the initials of the party headed
by those of Mackay: “J. M.”
By this time Emu Bill, Never Never Dave, and the
Shadow had also gathered round to view the symbols left
by Mackay’s old leader, and as each man traced out the
lettering for himself, he doffed his tattered hat reverently.
“ Ay, boys,” spoke Mackay, breaking the solemn hush
that reigned, “ it was a fortunate spring for us then, and
it’s a fortunate spring for this expedition now. But how
did you manage to come straight for it, Bob ? It took me
a good time zig-zagging through the bush before I sighted
the tree.”
In a few words the young navigator explained the
cause of their coming, then he pointed to the inscription
« Dead Reck.” “ That shows that Bentley did not think
his readings altogether accurate,” he said gravely, and
he meant it as a warning to others, though why he didn t
put it on his chart is strange to me,”
Mackay looked at the speaker with a troubled counte-
nance.
“ It’s been my fault, Bob. When I copied the figures
into my own book I didna think it necessary to put the
qualification down.”
“ I wants to say here,” interjected Emu Bill, “ that in
my humble opinion Bob can steer a course wi any man,


an’ my ole carcase is here to prove it. A hundred an’
eighty miles he’s took us across the miserablest country
on God’s earth, an’ nary time has I heard him grumble.”
“I goes nap on Bob every time,” concurred Never
Never.
A light of real happiness overspread Mackay’s bronzed
features.
“What more can you ask, Bob?” he said earnestly,
“ than the testimony o’ the pioneer, wha’ lends his life to
your guidance.”
“ Hurrah for Fortunate Spring! ” shouted Jack, unable
to contain himself longer.
“Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!” roared the answering
chorus.


CHAPTER XII
A Night Attack
THEY lingered for two days by Fortunate Spring in
order to give tbe camels a much-needed rest, then
they proceeded on their march, now steering due east, and
it was strange indeed how this altered course affected the
spirits of the party. They seemed to feel that they were
at last on the straight track towards the mystic land of
their desire. Mackay even more than the others showed
the change in his feelings; he whistled joyously in the
exuberance of his heart, and cheered on the labouring
team with hearty words of praise. And Bob, relieved
considerably of his own vague doubts in himself, had
changed apparently into a new being. The vagaries of
the Shadow called forth his amusement, and the dry wordy
dialogues of the two bushmen never failed to make him
laugh with keenest appreciation, a fact which endeared him
much to that valiant couple. The freedom of the mighty
desert held him in thrall, its dangers were forgotten, the
call of the wild was in his ears, the secret of the Never
Never beckoned him.
“ I told you the sunny skies would alter your tempera-
ment,” said Jack, whose boisterous good nature had never
once deserted him. “ I don’t think a man gets a fair show
in the constantly cloudy weather at home.”


“And yet we always get back to the old country
somehow,” answered Bob, thoughtfully. “ I suppose its
grand history attracts us when the greater world has
palled. I believe I could almost live in history, Jack,
wandering about among the castles and cathedrals that
have seen the centuries pass. What wonderful records
the grim old walls hold. Why, each stone would seem
alive to me.”
“ It would be pleasant to have a big holiday at home,”
admitted Jack, wistfully; “ but our time—and means, for
travelling about was pretty limited when we were
there ”
“ But that will never be again,” cried Bob, gaily; “just
consider what we have already got in this country, and
who knows what may await us out where we are going ? ”
Who knew indeed ? Who ever knows what lies in the
dim distance of untrodden tracts? The days passed
quickly, though the country continued to be barren and
cheerless in aspect, the difficulties of travel were not
nearly what they had been on the first long weary stretch.
More than once a soak was discovered to replenish the
water-bags before they had yet gone dry, and within a
week two new wells had been charted. They were little
more than the muddy residues of a long previous rainfall,
still, the dignity of a Central Australian well as a rule
lies wholly in its title, a fact which is well enough known
to all explorers.
So successful were they in their journeying that after
ten days had elapsed, and they were a hundred and forty
miles east of Fortunate Spring, Mackay considered that
a brief deviation to the north might be ventured upon on
the off chance of evading a long dry stretch which at tin's


stage intervened on Bentley’s route, the next and final
spring charted by that explorer being over seventy miles
distant.
“We had a terribly hard time on that journey,” said
he, as he gazed across the wavy expanse of shifting sands
which spread before them, “ an’ it s just possible the
country to the north’ ard a bit may be better. It canna
be much worse.”
For a long time, however, the varied route showed
little prospect of improvement; sand, sand, everlasting
sand spread everywhere before them, and progress became
dangerously slow. The camels struggled in vain to make
headway; they sank and floundered and stumbled in the
wreathing masses. In five days the distance covered
totalled only forty miles. No wonder Mackay looked
grave as he noticed the water-bags’ woefully flat appearance.
“ I tell you what, boys,” burst out Emu Bill, during
their noonday halt, “it’s mighty sartain we has struck
a snag this time. This is the miserablest patch ”
He broke off abruptly and fell to abusing the flies
besieging his face with remarkable eloquence. No one
seemed disposed to question Bill’s statement in any way,
and shortly afterwards the march was renewed, Bill,
Never Never, and the Shadow alternately lauding the
striving camels for their patient endurance, and bestowing
maledictions upon them for their ponderously slow onward
movement.
Hour after hour the melancholy procession laboured
along. So soon had the grimmer influence of the country
exerted its baleful spell that for a long time each man
feared to speak lest he might betray the growing depression
at his heart. Then, just as the evening shadows were


beginning to close in, a welcome break in the monotonous
landscape appeared to gladden their straining eyes. In
the faint distance a feathery line of scrub stretched across
their path, indicating a decided change in the sand surface,
and the sight added vigour to their failing steps. Eagerly
they strove to reach the inviting mallee coppice before the
thick blackness of night came down to envelop them. But
it was not to be; the stumbling gait of the camels could
not be hastened, though Emu Bill and his compatriots
implored and beseeched the hardy animals with an eloquence
that was touching to hear.
“ One more try, boys,” cried Mackay. “ There’s bound
to be water somewhere among the timber, and we may
save ourselves another night of misery by finding it now.”
He went to Jack’s assistance, and together they tugged at
the leading camel’s nose-rope until the poor brute was
literally being dragged through the yielding sands. This
method of progression not proving very satisfactory, he
next made laudable endeavour to enliven the march by
singing raucously a few bars from that old song, “The
Campbells are Coming.”
“ I just reckon they are cornin’,” Never Never Dave
groaned, somewhat confusing the reference; “but they
need a jolly lot of persuasion, they do. Get up, Re-
pentance, you cross-eyed streak o’ misery. Didn’t I give
ye a drink last week ? ”
At length Mackay saw that they must be content to
halt in the open for one night more.
“We can’t do it, boys,” he said, “ so let us look for a
decent camping-space in the sand; we’ll find water if
there’s any about in the morning.”
They had barely time to gather a few twigs from the


sparse brush now in evidence, and start a feeble fire, before
an impenetrable darkness descended over the desert.
Then they busied themselves unloading the camels and
preparing their frugal meal, the latter an operation which
rarely occupied much time, for obvious reasons. They
were indeed in a very deplorable plight at this period;
the water-bags had given up much of their store by
evaporation, and they now contained but a very meagre
supply of the valuable liquid, and the camels were well-
nigh dying on their feet from sheer exhaustion.
The hour was quite late, and they were about to
roll themselves in their blankets, when suddenly a bright
light flamed up luridly among the trees in their course,
and harshly through the still air rose the strains of a
native chant.
, “By the Great Howlin’ Billy! ” growled Never Never
Dave, “ there’s a corroborree on to-night. It’s mighty
lucky we didn’t reach the timber, after all.”
“ If there’s any nigs about there’s bound to be water,”
asserted the Shadow, with a chuckle of delight, and
certainly his reasoning was sound.
Higher and higher blazed the warning beacon, and
louder and louder sounded the warriors’ dismal wailings,
and through the leafless branches of the eucalypti a
wildly dancing band of ape-like figures could be dis-
tinguished. The little group gazed at the ominous
spectacle in silence and with mingled feelings. The
presence of a native tribe in the neighbourhood was con-
clusive proof that an ample water supply was not far off;
indeed the aborigines of the Interior almost invariably
hold their corroborree ceremonials around the principal
spring of the district, for according to their belief a mighty


spirit has its abode in every desert pool or soak, and from
the slimy depths thereof watches over the welfare of his
people. But when ought displeases this dread “ Wangul ”
—the great Dweller in the Waters —he visits his wrath
upon the land by drying up the springs and betaking
himself elsewhere. It is a wonderfully convenient idea,
for it explains away all droughts and following pestilences,
and it appeals to the simple heathen instinct as no finer
teachings could. To propitiate this god of theirs many
ordinances are performed and numerous sacrifices offered,
and should any wandering members of an alien tribe
happen to be near on such occasions, they are promptly
seized upon to occupy the unenviable position of “ Cor-
roborree mourners,” a post which entails death, preceded
by much horrible suffering.
Mackay was mentally recalling his various experiences
with the natives in different parts of the country, and
with little sense of comfort, when Emu Bill disturbed his
musings by saying suddenly—
“ I wonder what the howling celebration means to-night,
anyway ? ”
The others had by this time gone to sleep, having been
utterly worn out by their trying day’s encounter with the
desert, and these two sat alone by the dying fire.
“ I’m just a wee bit afraid, Bill,” answered Mackay,
dubiously, “that it has some bearing on our arrival. I
never did like to be near the murderous pests in the night-
time.”
Bill stirred about uneasily, and it was clear that he
shared Mackay’s fears.
“ I believe you are right,” he said, after a moment’s
pause. “ The skunks must have seen us a long way off.”


He relapsed into a gloomy silence, and began to draw
with great care sundry diagrams in the sand with the
improvised camp poker.
Meanwhile the whirling figures in the wood continued
their mad career, and the flames from the great fire in
their midst spouted high above the motionless mallee tips.
The myriad stars twinkled merrily in an unclouded sky,
and the Southern Cross constellation shone out brilliantly
almost directly overhead. A slender crescent moon just
above the horizon lent its feeble halo to the scene, so that
a vague, eerie half light seemed to float on the surface of
the land. Faster and still faster the maddened Wangul
worshippers rushed, and the night was filled with their
harsh, unmusical ravings.
Mackay watched the progress of events with quicken-
ing interest, while Emu Bill with many a muttered male-
diction examined the charges in his revolver, and smoked
reflectively. Mackay was very unwilling to awake the
sleepers unless it were absolutely necessary; they needed
all the rest they could get. But Emu Bill recalled him
to a sense of duty.
“ I’ve been watching the circus,” he said quietly, “ an’
I can see nary mourner in the crowd. For a dead cert
they’ll be cornin’ fur us when they’ve worked up enough
enthusiasm. They’ll imagine us to be asleep by now.”
Mackay got up without a word, and shook Bob and
Jack back to consciousness. Never Never Dave was alert
on the instant, but the Shadow slumbered deeply and
refused to be awakened, whereupon Emu Bill aroused
him by rolling him rudely out of his blanket, a proceeding
which almost created a civil war on the spot.
“ You has no right to dislocate my sweet dreams


in such a dingo fashion,” the bellicose Shadow protested
grumpily 5 but when he understood the seriousness of the
position his wrath dissolved speedily. “At the same
time I reckon you is a bit too much skeert about the
antics o’ them muskitties,” he remarked chidingly. “ I
was having a daisy dream, I was; flooded rivers an’ gold
an’ di’monds, an’ ”
« Shut it off, Shad,” unsympathetically interrupted the
object of his disapproval. “ They’re on our track now.
Look! ”
The corroborree fire continued to blaze up vividly, and
the watchers could see numerous naked savages piling
on the logs and dancing amid the showering sparks like
denizens of the nether world. The circling mass of
grotesquely garbed warriors had broken up in apparent
confusion, but quickly they again came into view and
re-formed on the edge of the zone of illumination, then
spreading fan-like to north and south, they came slowly
yet steadily towards the supposed sleeping camp. A
moment more and they were hidden from view in the
intervening shadows.
“Things are beginning to look lively,” said Bob,
adjusting his cartridge-belt.
Jack ranged himself quietly by his comrade’s side, his
rifle gripped in readiness.
“ I don’t know how this is going to turn out, Bob,”
he said slowly ; “ but I mean to shoot straight, to-night.”
“It’s a case 0’ self preservation, my lad,” warned
Mackay; and he closed the breech of his powerful weapon
with a vicious snap. “ You needna think 0’ usin’ the
stock 0’ your gun in this scrimmage. I am just afraid
it’s goin’ to be more serious than I thought.”


There could be little doubt as to the meaning of
the wily natives’ tactics. Assuredly they intended to
surround the little camp, which they considered to be
safely asleep, and spear the party at their leisure.
“ are to be their sacrificial offerings, apparently,”
remarked Bob, with forced calm.
Mackay was aroused to a sudden burst of fury at the
words; his long-smouldering anger against the natives
effervesced to an alarming pitch.
111 give them sacrifices,” he grated, peering into
the darkness with eyes that seemed like glowing coals of
fire over the gleaming barrel of his rifle. “ I’ll make them
think an earthquake has broken loose in their midst
I’ll—l’ll ”
Indignation choked his fiery utterance, and he said no
more, but toyed lingeringly with the trigger of his gun.
A minute elapsed, it seemed an eternity, but no signs
of the enemy could yet be traced. Instinctively Bob’s
e} es returned to the recent centre of affairs where the
impish fire feeders were heaping on the logs with frantic
glee, and he shuddered involuntarily. The suspense was
rapidly becoming unbearable, and the little band expected
every moment to be overwhelmed with flying spears
from some unlooked-for corner. Each pigmy bush around
to their overstrained vision took on the appearance of a
crouching warrior, and it was with the exercise bf great
restraint that Mackay and his comrades refrained from
firing at random into the night. Slowly the seconds
dragged their weary course, then all at once a weird
unearthly chorus reached the ears of the anxiously waiting
group; it seemed to come from everywhere around, and
they turned about in dismay. The attacking horde* were


closing in on them from all points of the compass. Only
when the ring had been completed had they begun their
deadly advance. Neither Mackay nor any of them had
expected this.
“I reckon we is bested, mates,” groaned Emu Bill,
helplessly; and it certainly did seem as if he spoke truly.
Another minute elapsed, then they grounded their
arms in impotent rage; the swelling chant from an
unknown number of throats was drawing insidiously
nearer, and they could only roughly guess the various
origins of sound. Mackay turned to Jack to give a last
word of encouragement, and he was surprised to find the
boy standing by Bob’s side in an attitude of acute attention
—his head was bent forward, and he shielded his ear with
his hand as if he were listening intently.
“ I’ve got them,” he whispered eagerly. “ Unless
there’s a dummy musician in their ranks, there’s a fifty
yards’ blank in the circle straight out by the camel packs.”
“ How many do you make altogether, Jack ? ” inquired
Mackay.
The boy replied promptly, “They seem to be about
thirty yards or so apart. They are nearly two hundred
yards off now, and coming very slowly. There must be
nearly fifty of the beasts.”
“Good for you. Jack,” murmured Mackay, heartily,
a tribute of praise which even at that moment Emu Bill
and the Shadow echoed with characteristic vehemence.
There was no tune to be lost, the fateful ring was
closing every instant; so, gripping his rifle tightly, the
leader of the expedition made a course out in the direction
as indicated by Jack, his comrades following after in
Indian file. And as they passed out by the camels, each


man breathed a prayer for their safety ; then, with the
hideous voices of the approaching warriors ringing in
their ears, they made their way stealthily out through
the saving gap into the freedom beyond.
Surely never before had a course been steered by such
odd reckoning, yet the droning cries on either side of the
escaping party as they neared the edge of the invisible
circle guided them as well as glaring beacons would
have done, and they manoeuvred cautiously through the
midst of the fervently singing band, luckily escaping all
observation.
“It was like navigatin’ through the Heads of Sydney
Harbour,” exclaimed Emu Bill, flinging himself down on
the sand immediately they had cleared the dangerous line.
“ We’ve got to thank our stars the beggars have the
good sense to say grace before supper,” said Jack,
cheerfully.
“We are no’ just altogether out o’ the difficulty yet,”
warned Mackay. “ They’ll be back with a rush when they
find out their mistake.”
“ But you ain’t goin’ to let them run the whole circus,
surely?” complained Emu Bill. “Let’s pepper the
howlin’ dervishes now.”
Mackay seemed to hesitate for a moment, the odds in
numbers were.greatly against them.
“Train your guns on the old camp, boys,” he said
quietly. “ You’ll see their black bodies against the glow
o’ the ashes when they get nearer.” He had scarcely
spoken these words when the dismal chant of the over-
sanguine natives ceased, and with blood curdling yells the
savage horde swept on to their supposed work of extermina-
tion. The onlookers saw a perfect hail of spears strike


B 6U7
“ IT LOOKED AS IF NOTHING COULD STAND AGAINST THAT
MADDENED RUSH


' -


and quiver amid the smouldering ashes; then a fantastical
array of fiend-like forms swarmed before their eyes, and
prolonged shrieks of baffled rage rent the air. Now was
their opportunity. “Fire, boys!” cried Mackay, himself
setting the example; and the death-dealing weapons
thundered out their grim challenge to the foe. When they
looked again only a fiercely struggling mass of black
humanity was visible, and the scattering sparks showed
where the shots had taken effect. Once more a well-
directed volley was poured into the surging crowd; but
this time the flash of the rifles betrayed their presence, and
immediately about a dozen gaunt apparitions charged down
on the little party with vengeful shouts. It looked as if
nothing could stand against that maddened rush. In vain
the rifles spoke, the members of the attacking band
seemed in no wise to diminish, their figures could only be
vaguely traced in the gloom.
“Keep easy, lads; keep easy,” said Mackay, en-
couragingly. “ Load up your magazines, an’ reserve every
bullet until they are close on to us. We can’t miss them
then, and it’s our only hope of stopping them.”
Bob, plying his almost red-hot rifle, checked himself at
the words, and calmly obeyed the instructions given; Jack,
panting furiously with his extreme exertions, grounded his
loaded weapon and waited with something like a gnawing
despair at his heart. The Shadow grumbled incoherently
to himself, Emu Bill and Never Never Dave said not a
word, but stood erect, calm, and motionless beside Mackay,
awaiting the shock. Then a strange thing happened;
while the demoralized natives around the vacated camp
kept up their frenzied rushing hither and thither, seeking
aimlessly their hidden enemy, the four camels of the


expedition, aroused by the unusual sounds prevailing,
stalked slowly forward into the thick of the melee, and
there they stood, their long necks swaying curiously, like
fearsome spectres from an unknown world. A howl of
terror burst from the group who had located the position of
the defenders, they ceased their onward course, hesitated
for a moment, then turned and fled precipitately, an
example which the rest of their stricken brethren speedily
thought fit to copy; and before Mackay or any of his com-
panions could realize what had happened, the entire
assembly were in full retreat, leaving the bulk of their
spears and boomerangs littered on the sand.
“ Good for you, Misery! ” applauded Jack, running
forward, and the leader of the team, hearing the well-known
voice, staggered to meet him and knelt at his feet.
“ I reckon we owes them animiles the price o’ our
carcases,” said Never Never Dave, sententiously, as they
walked quietly back to the deserted camp-fire. They
found their blankets lying f as they had left them, but
transfixed with numberless spears, and after carefully
extracting these crude yet deadly missiles they replenished
the fire with them, and lay down to rest beside the ruddy
glow, for it was now early morning, and the air had
become unpleasantly chill. The corroborree beacon had
been deserted, only occasional scattering sparks showing
where the strange ceremonial had taken place, and away
in the distance the vague crackling of branches indicated
that the would-be annihilators of the camp were already
far from reach.
“ Great Centipedes! That was a close shave,” growled
Emu Bill, before he dropped off to sleep.
“ But we have the advantage of knowing,” returned


Bob, with Ills usual calm philosophy, that we shall find
water near where the beggars held their odd orgy, and
that should recompense for much.” Then his eyes closed
in slumber, and he entered a realm of phantasies where
hostile aborigines and dreary salt plains were alike
unknown. The weary strain of the night was over.
They found water after daybreak as they had antici-
pated. It was contained in a deep sunken rock-hole
with an almost unfathomable bottom, wherein one might
well fancy some dread monster to exist. They refilled
the empty water-bags 'with thankful hearts, and, fearing
another attack in force that night, renewed them march
early in the afternoon. It was soon apparent that a better
country had now been reached; dry it was certainly, yet
the soil showed a considerable improvement over that
already traversed, and the scrub became almost continuous
instead of in sparse and far-divided belts as formerly.
But though all promised well for an unusually favour-
able journey that day and for many days to come, the
presence of hostile bands of aborigines all along the
route of travel was too evident a feature of the landscape
to be overlooked, and the team had perforce to move
onwards warily.
Ido hope, said Mackay, as the evening approached,
“ that the blacks will give us a rest to-night. There’s
more risk in these scrimmages at close quarters than is
healthy.”
Bob had arrived at that conclusion some time before.
“Were not more than fifty miles from the location
you ga\e me of Bentley s last camp,” he observed gravely.
If I sliilt the course slightly to the south to-morrow we
ought to be up at it in three days.”
(B 607) 257


A spasm of pain crossed Mackay s face. Ay, my lad,
we’ll need to be extra cautions now,” be said meaningly.
“We mustna allow oursel’s to be wiped out before we
come to the mountain, I’ve got a bit of a score to settle
in that quarter.”
The sun was now but a few points above the western
horizon, and his fiery radiance bathed the great silent
bushland in golden splendour. The motionless mulga
and mallee shrubs seemed ablaze with ruddy light, and
the wastes of sand shone as a sea of burnished bronze.
Not a sound was heard save the harsh cries of the gaily
plumaged parrots that flitted eerily from tree to tree,
and the occasional dismal monotone of the mopoke.
Then suddenly from the shadow of a thicker clump
of timber than usual a series of yells rang out, and
at the same time a shower of spears whizzed overhead,
and perilously close. Each member of the little group
realized in an instant what had happened, and seized
his rifle.
“Get the camels under cover, boys!” cried Mackay,
from his position well ahead of the main party.
« There’s nary bit o’ cover! ” roared back Emu Bill,
who had diplomatically stretched himself flat on the
ground at the first alarm. Whiz! splash! Even as he
spoke a long quivering missile rushed through the shade-
less branches and penetrated the great water-bag over-
lapping Remorse’s flank. The stout canvas resisted the
shock "sufficiently to save the animal from injury, but
the precious and dearly-hoarded contents gushed from
the rent created in a copious flood. A cry of horroi
broke from Bob, Jack uttered a wail of anguish, and an
expression of much fervour issued from Never Never


Dave’s mouth. With a bound Mackay rushed forward
in vain attempt to save the few remaining drops, but it
was not to be; before they had time to realize the serious-
ness of their loss the gurgling stream had ceased; the
canvas skin had given up its store.
“I’ll pulverize the hyena that did it!” howled the
Shadow, dashing forward through the scrub.
“I’m with you,” cried Jack, following closely at his
heels.
It all happened so quickly that Mackay had no time
to give any directions or restrain the indignant pair.
Several further flights of spears skimmed well overhead,
and one or two barbed darts more surely aimed, whistled
dangerously near to Mackay’s head.
“This is gettin’ mighty monotonous,” growled Emu
Bill, looking around impotently, for as yet not a single
savage was to be seen.
“ There must be water in the district,” said Bob, coolly,
examining his revolver. “ I suppose we’ve got to go on
the hunt again.” Without further remark he turned and
rushed after his companions, whose vehement shouts as
they charged along were mingled with the shrill cries of the
dusky warriors. “ Try and catch one, Shadow,” he loudly
shouted as he ran.
Fearful that disaster might overtake the entire party,
Mackay gripped his rifle and hurried after them, leaving
Emu Bill and Never Never Dave in charge of the team,
a position which they condemned bitterly at such a time!
The shadows of night were fast closing in, and between
the trees of the pigmy forest a heavy gloom had settled
providing excellent cover for the blacks should they have
decided to renew the attack; but these strange creatures.


having discharged their weapons, were now heating a retreat,
yelling most hideously the while.
Scarcely fifty yards before him Mackay could dimly
descry Jack, the Shadow, and Bob leaping on after the
fugitives, and he quickened his pace in order to come up
with them.
“ We’ll catch a specimen,” cried Bob, eagerly, “ if we
have to chase them all night.”
On they raced, while the crackling branches a little
way ahead betokened the nearness of their quarry, whose
shrieks alone would have been an unerring guide. Evidently
the fleeing warriors were just as tired as their pursuers,
for they were gradually losing ground. Suddenly one of
their number screeched out some sort of signal which had
the effect of making the runners scatter in all directions.
Bob could just see their shaggy heads above the bushes
as they diverged on various tacks; then the new order of
things confused them all, and one by one the gorilla-like
figures vanished from their view. Yet still they kept up
the race, loth to return without some satisfaction. The
night was rapidly darkening, obscuring the scrub and
intervening sand wastes in a common pall, so that progress
was made only with great difficulty, and wearily the aimless
search was continued.
“ We’ll have to turn, boys,” said Mackay, at length,
when the stars commenced to glimmer in the heavens.
«We must go back to the camels. To-morrow we’ll have
a look round for water. And to think that we had any
amount of it this morning ”
A hearty exclamation from the Shadow interrupted
him. They were passing under an unusually large lime
tree, and that youthful individual had halted with an


A Night Attack
unrestrained roar of mingled merriment and relief. Looking
up against the stars Mackay could see an awkward figure
scrambling frantically among the higher branches.
“ Treed! By jove! ” cried Bob, gazing upwards also.
“ I reckoned I smelt nigger,” said the Shadow, when he
had recovered his equanimity; “ but if his long legs hadn’t
banged me on the cocoa-nut, I’d never ha’ thought o’ lookin’
in the tree for the skunk.”
“ And now comes the job o’ gettin’ him down,” said
Mackay. “ An’ it won’t be an easy contract either, judgin’
by the way he hangs on to the branches.”
“The Shadow and I will soon attend to him,” said
Jack, with a laugh; and without further ado he commenced
to swarm up the small round trunk of the tree.
Be careful, Jack,” warned Mackay. “He may smash
your head before you reach him.”
“ Will he, though ? ” growled the active climber, already
half-way up.
“Strategy’s the word, Jack,” councilled the Shadow,
as he prepared to ascend to his companion’s assistance.
The lithe tree swayed under its load, then bent until its
lower limbs reached the ground.
“We’d better see that our prisoner doesn’t make his
escape by jumping for it,” remarked Bob, and he and
Mackay therefore stood at opposite sides of the tree,
watching the huddled form with alert eyes. Hearer and
nearer Jack writhed his way to the top, and slowly the
terrified aboriginal retreated to the farthest limit of the
branch on which he rested, until it cracked ominously.
“I guess I’ve got you now,” muttered Jack. “You
just wait till I come to you.”
But the shivering savage had no such intention; and


as Jack approached he began to scream horribly, more
after the manner of a wild beast than a human being.
Then he broke off bits of the lesser branches and twigs,
and showered them down on his implacable enemy.
“Just shake him off the branch an’ 111 catch him,
advised the Shadow, worming his sinewy form along the
limb directly underneath his prey.
In vain Jack endeavoured to grasp his prospective
prisoner, the oily native eluded him every time, and
sorely tried the persistent besieger’s temper by keeping
up a vicious fusillade of wood fragments. He had, how-
ever, completely overlooked the presence of the Shadow
directly below, and when in the midst of a furious assault,
his foot slipped slightly, it was instantly seized by that
watchful gentleman, and held in a ruthless grip.
“ Now, I reckon you’ve got to come,” said he, evading
the free limb’s onslaught with much dexterity. “Now!
Stand from under, boys! ”
Crash! They came down all three together, the top
branch having broken with the strain, but the height was
not very great, and the sand below was loosely packed.
“ It’s a jolly good thing,” quoth the Shadow, “ that
the black beggar was so nice and soft; it was just like
bouncing on top o’ a cushion, it was.”
Jack did not appear to be particularly grateful for
anything as he picked himself up, but he very promptly
took an arm of the captive along with the Shadow.
“Yes, that’s right; take care of your prisoner now
that you’ve got him,” said Mackay, turning to lead the
way back to the spot where the camel team had been
left. “ We’ll have to mak’ the most o’ his knowledge.”
Then he addressed the sullen aboriginal, and by a


constant repetition of the word “ Babba ” (water), sought
to make him understand their needs. But it w T as all to
no purpose. The captive made no sign, and only groaned
horribly when the question was pressed with a show of
anger.
“ All the same,” sternly spoke Bob, “ he’ll have to tell
us what he knows before morning.”
In a short time they had reached the camels, where
Emu Bill and Never Never Dave awaited them with
ill-concealed impatience. But their joy on observing the
aboriginal was great indeed.
“ I reckon he’ll get water for us all right,” said Emu
Bill, as they unloaded the camel. “I just reckon he
win.”
The Shadow now proceeded to build a fire, and soon
the roaring flames leapt up cheerily. Having no water,
they could not make tea, so they contented themselves
with munching some pieces of damper, for which, however,
they had little appetite.
It was at this point that the prisoner showed signs of
interest in the proceedings, and Jack thereupon proffered
him a substantial hunch of the dry fare, which he seized
and ate with avidity.
But still Mackay’s repeated interrogations seemed to
have no effect on the savage, who kept glancing over
to where the Shadow was gingerly slicing up some tinned
conglomeration which is served out to explorers under a
variety of names, and he opened his cavernous orifice
expectantly.
“The poor beggar is hungry,” said Bob. “Let him
have a piece of that unknown substance, Shadow; if it
does not kill him it may arouse some sense of gratitude.”


“ He’d reduce our stores mighty quick,” grumbled the
Shadow, noting with dismay how rapidly his hospitable
offerings disappeared.
“Just hold on a jiff,” murmured Emu Bill, thought-
fully. “I reckon I has struck a daisy idea.” He
hastened over to the many sacks lying on the ground
where the camels had been unloaded, and came back with
a handful of salt. “ When you are as old as I is, Shad,
said he, graciously, “ you will know how to handle blacks,
I calc’late. Does ye savvy ? ”
The Shadow took the salt with humble deference, and
without a word proceeded to mix it lavishly with the
contents of a small tin of the afore-mentioned compound,
which he then handed to the hungry native.
“Eat every bit o’ it, ye howlin’ baboon,” said he,
kindly, “an’ if ye isn’t as thirsty as a camel after it,
I reckon there must be something wrong wi’ your
construction.”
Mackay and Bob listened to the schemers with
amusement, then, as they saw the ravenous heathen bolt
the salt-laden meat with great gusto, they forgot for a
moment their own thirsty condition and indulged in a
paroxysm of laughter.
“ For a certainty our dusky friend will want water
badly soon,” said Bob; and they all sat around the camp
fire and calmly awaited developments. If their prisoner
knew of the presence of water in the vicinity he must
surely endeavour to find it —half a pound of the strongest
salt in his interior might enlighten him as to the meaning
of ‘ Babba Babba/ which Mackay had repeated to him
so persistently. And they were not mistaken. Half an
hour later he began to show unmistakable signs of


uneasiness, and his lips moved like the gills of a fish
out of water. Then he strained at the rope which bound
him to a mulga sapling behind, and rolled his eyes
beseechingly.
“ Better give him a full hour yet,” said Mackay.
“We can thirst just as comfortably as he can now, I
think.”
Emu Bill chuckled dryly.
“I is a grand instructor o’ furrin' languages,” he
said. “ I just reckon that that there nigger knows what
water means now.”
It was nearly midnight, and the slow minutes dragged
like ages as they sat around the fire anxiously watching
the antics of the salt-gorged aboriginal. For a long time
no one spoke, but their basilisk-like glare evidently
disconcerted the sufferer in no little degree, and he
commenced to moan in an exceedingly melancholy
manner, and endeavoured to evade their gaze by every
artifice in his power.
“He thinks we mean to eat him, and have been
feeding him to make him nice and plump! ” hazarded
Bob at length, and he had truly guessed the captive’s
thoughts. However, the tortures of thirst were surely
having due effect on the poor savage, and his cries soon
became most distracting to the listeners’ ears. Suddenly
he broke into a wailing chorus which echoed dismally
through the still air, and caused even the long-suffering
camels to raise their heads in protest.
“ B-bab-ba-bab-ba ! ” he cried, tugging strenuously at
the binding cords.
“ Patience ain’t so bad a virtue, after all,” soliloquized
Emu Bill, calmly slackening the rope from the tree,


and gripping the free end of it tightly. With a bound
the native headed out Into the densest part of the scrub,
almost pulling Bill over the sand in his frantic haste ;
the rest of the party followed at their best speed. Their
now tractable guide did not lead them any distance. He
stopped in a small hollow not far from the scene of his
capture, and with feverish hands scraped away some
covering twigs and branches, revealing to the onlookers’
eager eyes a glittering pool of clearest water.
With a deep gurgle of relief he buried his tangled
visage in the spring, and drank so deeply that the
Shadow felt compelled to jerk him backwards out of sheer
regard for his welfare.
“ It’s mighty stupid o’ ye drinkin’ so much after
a heavy supper,” said he, reprovingly. “ It’s real bad
for your digestion, I reckon.”


“T ATITUDE 27° 42' 10", longitude 128° 7' 11".” It
was noon three days after leaving Thirsty Spring,
as their last strangely-found well had been designated,
and Bob read aloud these observations as he noted them
down in his log-book. They had reached the vicinity of
Bentley’s last camp, and all eyes had been alert for the
melancholy symbols of the ill-fated expedition. Away to
the east the country extended back in a series of rugged
“blows” until they suddenly merged into apparent
nothingness; a swelling, white haze obscured the true
horizon in this direction, but north and south well-wooded
grassy plains stretched into the dim distance. The utter-
most edge of the desert seemed to have been reached at
last.
“Ay, it was just about here that the camel broke
away,” said Mackay, musingly, “and over there”—he
pointed to the east —“ lies the mountain.”
“ It must be a terrible long way over there, Mac,”
commented Emu Bill, “ for we should see it ’bout forty
miles off if it is any size, an’ you said it was a whopper.”
Mackay looked puzzled; certainly no mountain was
visible at this period.
“ It must be there,” he reiterated grimly.


Bob, too, was much exercised over the prolonged
absence of the desert sentinel; it had figured so much in
all their calculations that it had, indeed, been the initial
quest of the expedition.
“ There’s an extraordinary heat haze rising up straight
ahead,” said he. “ Perhaps it hides that shadowy
mountain.”
“ It’s there right enough,” said Mackay, again, “ I
mind well that I didna see it until I was right up
against it.”
“ There’s something mighty uncanny about this place,”
grunted Never Never Dave, who had been gazing around
suspiciously.
A gentle zephyr breeze wafted towards them from the
obscuring mists, and they sniffed the air wonderingly.
“ Blow me tight, boys,” muttered Emu Bill, “ we has
struck old Jimmy Squarefoot’s country.”
“ That are a fact,” concurred Never Never Dave,
solemnly; “we has come a bit too far on this trip. No
wonder poor ole Bentley didn’t get back.”
“Why, what is wrong?” asked Jack, in some
alarm.
“ What is wrong ? ” echoed Never Never, “ Why, we
must be near Hades, my lad; don’t you smell it ? ”
A strong odour of a pungent, sulphurous nature
assuredly filled the air. Mackay was equally mystified
with the others, though he did not give expression to his
thoughts. He was trying to recall to the minutest
incident the happenings of over a year ago in the same
district.
“ I distinctly saw their tracks,” he repeated, half to
himself, “ and the bones ”


“ But there ain’t no bones now,” interrupted Emu Bill.
“ There’s some curious mystery about this here place,
there is.”
A cry from the Shadow, who had gone exploring on
his own account some distance off, drew their attention.
It was plain that he had discovered something important,
for he semaphored to them excitedly as they looked.
Silently they obeyed his summons, and in a few minutes
were gazing at the poor relics of the last expedition, where
they lay half covered in the sand.
There they were beyond a doubt, a mass of bleaching
hones. Eeverently they uncovered their heads, then
Mackay knelt down by the sad litter, and great, dry sobs
shook his breast. His companions turned away with
heavy eyes, all but Bob, who remained to comfort the
grief-stricken man.
“We may at least bury the remains,” he said sadly,
“ and I think we might put up a small mark over the
spot. There are lots of trees about which we could cut
down.”
Mackay looked at him kindly. “Not yet, Bob, not yet,”
he muttered hoarsely; “ not till I have squared accounts
with the wretches who committed this crime. These
poor fellows here were murdered after daring the dangers
o’ the desert; their last mortal remains have awaited my
coming here on the surface o’ the sweltering sands, and
they cry to me for vengeance—and vengeance they shall
have before I cover them from the light o’ a just Heaven.”
He rose with forced calm and linked his arm in Bob’s.
“ You shall help me, Bob,” he said earnestly; “ you of all
people have a reason ”
He ceased abruptly as Emu Bill appeared once more.


The tall hushman was apparently much moved, though he
strove to hide his sorrow.
“ I has just been talkin’ to Never Never,” he began, in
an even voice, “ an’ we has come to the conclusion that
we’ll go an’ wipe out some o’ them skunks who did this.
I reckon well feel better after it.”
Mackay smiled faintly. “ I believe we are near the
end o’ our search for the hidden treasure o’ the Never
Never,” he said quietly. “ The invisible mountain must
mark the entrance to the land we are seeking, but we
may have many a struggle before we triumph, but each
difficulty overcome will bring us nearer our goal. Let
us move on once more, Bill; I must see the other side
o’ the mountain ”
“ An’ nary one o’ us is goin’ back on you,” said Emu
Bill, with a grim laugh. “ Wherever that there perfume
comes from, I reckon Never Never an’ me will see the
end o’ the journey,”
They retraced their way to the camels, and in a short
time were forcing a trail on into the seething mists. And
now the stumbling camel-train experienced great difficulty
in negotiating the many dry ravines that lay in their
course, and they climbed over the basaltic bluffs which
now and as:ain reared their heads above the boulder-strewn
O
expanse, only with the extremest effort. The sun beat
down pitilessly on the wayfarers, and here the heat was,
indeed, overpowering; it seemed to rise in long, pulsating
swells from the bare rocks and hang in a filmy cloud of
vapour, through which the eye could see but vaguely, as in
a dream-picture. On, on, the pioneers struggled, and as
they proceeded, the strange, sulphurous odour became more
and more perceptible, until it assailed the nostrils in sharp,


burning breaths. Yet still the vision ahead was clouded
by dense white vapours, and the horizon remained obscured.
Then suddenly a curious thing happened: the shrouding
curtain in the near distance lifted up like a giant screen
in a theatre, and through the mists of dispelling ether a
dark towering height loomed up vividly.
“ The mountain! the mountain! ” cried Jack; and truly
it was a mountain, and a mountain of so precipitous and
forbidding an aspect that it looked like an immense black
wall rising into the sky.
“That is just how I ran up against it before,” said
Mackay, calmly. “It appeared all at once, and I wondered
why I didna see it earlier.”
“ Well, this beats me,” growled Emu Bill. “ An’ why
in all the world didn't we see such a colossal monument
before? We oughter have sighted that there tower o’
Babel at least two days back.”
Even as he spoke a great white mask rose from the
base of the towering elevation, and in an instant the
mighty landmark had vanished from their view.
“ I reckon we has had a sight o’ ole Jimmy Squarefoot’s
furnace,” remarked Never Never Dave, mysteriously. “ An’
don’t it smell strong ? ”
“It jest howls,” groaned Emu Bill, gasping hard.
Mackay kept an unmoved silence. He apparently
had no intention of being surprised at anything; but Bob
somewhat eased the minds of the twain by endeavouring
to explain the phenomenon they had witnessed.
“ The covering haze is nothing but steam,” said he. “ I
think the mountain must be volcanic.”
Mackay shook his head. “ I shouldna wonder if
it is an extinct volcano,” he said; “but there was no


lava flow that I remember, and it disappeared just the
same.”
Notwithstanding the odd happenings during the last
few minutes, the camels were not permitted to slacken
their pace. Each and all of the party had determined to
probe the mystery to the fullest, and the solution was
soon forthcoming. As they forced their way into the
densest depths of the ghost-like curtain, they became
quickly aware of a gurgling, boiling sound almost at their
feet. Bob’s keen ears were the first to catch the unwonted
echoes; but before he could speak a greenish-yellow cloud
rolled before his eyes, and he staggered back, choking wildly.
“Ease off, boys,” spoke Mackay. “We must scout
around an’ investigate before we go further.
The whole party, camels and all, were now enveloped
in the wreathing smoke-columns, and the sky was hidden
from sight. Blindly Bob made a few steps forward, keep-
ing well to the right of the unseen caldron, which now
bubbled and foamed spasmodically. The Shadow followed,
stumbling and gasping, and within a minute the two
found themselves in a clear and untainted atmosphere, and
but a yard or so from the base of the gloomy mountain.
Loudly they shouted to their companions, and soon the
spectral forms of the camels hove into view, with Mackay
and Jack treading cautiously at their head. But where
were Emu Bill and Never Never Dave ? They seemed to
have vanished completely.
“They were alongside Jack an’ me a minute ago, said
Mackay, gazing wonderingly around.
“ I reckon I’ll go back an’ see if they’ve stopped to look
at the scenery,” grunted the Shadow; and he made a dash
into the heavy fumes once more.


The three who waited by the camels heard a startled
cry, followed by a faint splash, then all was silent. Hastily
Mackay seized a camel pack-rope, and would have rushed
oft after him, but Bob interfered.
“ 1 think 1 can guess where to find them,” he said.
“ Let me go.”
With reluctance Mackay saw him depart; but before
Bob had entered the chaos the swelling mass rose before
him, disclosing in his track a broad, pit-like cavity.
Hurriedly he strode to the edge of the caldron; but ere
he reached it the Shadow climbed out of its seething depths
wet and dripping, and saying strange things to himself.
Immediately behind him Never Never Dave’s head popped
up, and an eloquent flow of language was let loose upon
the air. Lastly, Emu Bill scrambled into the open. He
looked savagely around for a moment, until he caught sight
of the Shadow, and his wrath overflowed in a torrent of
abuse. All three were bedraggled enough looking speci-
mens; but the last arrivals were considerably worse off
than the Shadow in that respect—their hair was covered
with a greenish scum, which spread down over their faces
and almost blinded them.
‘lt was all that wretched young Shadow’s fault i ”
roared Emu Bill.
° U W6re th6re remonstrated Mackay,
“Of course we were. We went plump into the filthy
boilers; but we got a good grip o’ the sides, and were sliding
out qmck an’ lively, when, blow me! if that howlin’ scared
crow didn’t bounce down on top o’ us, an’ sent us swimmin’
like tadpoles to the bottom. Ugh! ”
But their indignation quelled* speedily when they learnt
(B 60:1 273 s


how excellent had been the intentions of the much-maligned
youth.
“ It must be a hot spring,” said Bob.
“ And there are more of them, cried Jack. See,
they are scattered all round the foot of the mountain.
«I reckon it is hot, right enough,” grumbled Emu Bill.
“ j’rn just ’bout turned into a Salamandei, I is.
As Jack had noticed, quite a number of similar indenta-
tions formed a line right along the base of the mountain,
and in each yawning crater examined, a greenish-yellow
fluid bubbled tempestuously. High overhead the smoke-
wreaths dissembled into thin air, and for a brief space all
was beautifully clear. Then a dull rumble like the mutter-
ings of subdued thunder was heard, and immediately snowy
puffs of smoke issued from the strange cavities. The
denser fumes rapidly spread along the ground like a
turbulent, foaming sea; then the whole seemed gradually
to rise upwards and suspend as a filmy pall before the
face of the mountain. Yet, strangely enough, the noxious
odours were now almost absent.
“Ay, it’s vera marvellous,” said Mackay, with a sigh.
« go does Nature protect her treasure-houses.
“ It’s a wonder you managed to get through without
accident when you came,” Bob observed thoughtfully.
“ But, then, it’s possible the line was clear when you
“ A breeze of wind would have lifted that fog, hazarded
Jack. “ I should think that on some days the clouds
would not be nearly so constant nor so thick.
“ You’re possibly right, Jack,” mused Mackay, looking
upwards. “ See how the smoke curls in to the west now.”
They all followed his gaze, and, surely enough, the mists


appeared to bend over before a powerful air current and
break off into numberless flying patches of lambent spray.
Assuredly, a fairly strong blast must be blowing on the
mountain summit, though all was serene and unmoved
below. They now bethought themselves of having an
inspection of the wonderful elevation, which they had
reached after so much weary striving. There it stood,
gaunt and bare, precipitous in outline, and rising almost
sheer to a height of over eight hundred feet, and as far as
the eye could reach in either direction along the base, the
same grim barrier appeared, but it curved in almost
imperceptibly at each limit of observation.
“ The monument might stretch across into Queens-
land,” said Emu Bill, “if we tried to follow it round. I
vote we does a scramble over the top.”
“ I tried that before, Bill,” answered Mackay, “ but
I m going to try it again. Only we 11 look for the easiest
side before we start.”
But what about the camels ? ” asked Jack. “We
can never get them over it.”
“An’ we’ve got to remember that there’s an all-fired
quantity o’ bloodthirsty niggers about,” said Never Never
Dave.
“ Suppose we hobble them out on the other side of the
smoke,” suggested Bob. “If the blacks stay beyond the
mountain they couldn’t very well see them so close in, and
the camels are too tired to wander much.”
“Its a risk, Bob,” said Mackay; “but the whole
journey has been a risk, an’ it’s the best we can do.
We can keep an eye on them from the top—if we oet
there.” b
An our rifles can speak for us from there well


enough,” laughed Emu Bill; u an’ there’s one howlin’
satisfaction about it, there’s nary spear could reach us.”
And so it was arranged; the four tired beasts were
unloaded, the bell was unstrapped from Misery’s neck,
and the Shadow led them out to the plains, manoeuvring
most carefully in his passage between the bubbling
caldrons. In a few minutes he returned, with a somewhat
anxious visage.
“ I is pretty certain I saw a nig on the top o’ the hill
when I was out back a bit,” he announced.
“ On the top o’ the hill ? ” cried Emu Bill, incredulously.
“ Well, if they don’t pop too many spears at us, I don’t
mind if they stay there until we get up.”
“ But you couldn’t see anything through the haze,
Shad,” said Bob.
“ I just did. The top o’ the concern was shining strong
in the sun, an’ I got a sight o’ a big nigger dressed like a
corroborree mourner standin’ looking’ at me.”
It was quite possible that the Shadow’s information
was correct, for the fine haze in the upper air would barely
have obscured the bold ridge of the mountain summit,
especially with the sun’s rays beating strong upon it. Yet
it was evident that the young bushmau’s statement w T as
received with considerable unbelief.
“It’s been a hallucination, Shad,” laughed Jack.
It was already late in the afternoon, and it would have
been useless to attempt the climb that night, so a tour of
investigation was made in order to discover the least im-
pregnable aspect of the frowning barrier, and as the little
party moved along they carried their rifles ready for
immediate action in case of a sudden alarm. But not a
sign of natives was observed, and they tramped mile after


mile over the jagged rocky debris lining the base of the
mountain without once noting an easier place of ascent
than that which they had first gazed upon. Not a trace
of vegetation showed on the steep declivity; the bare rocks
scintillated in the last rays of the setting sun, and showed
up barren and forbidding. Here and there deep clefts
appeared, striating the gloomy formation, and cutting deep
into the heart of the mountain. It was one of these that
drew an exclamation from Mackay.
“ That looks vera like the cap o’ a gold-bearing lode
showing at the bottom o the gully,” he cried. He crept
carefully into the yawning crevice, and broke off a piece of
the supposed auriferous stone with the iron heel of his
boot. “ Decomposed diorite,” he announced, “ and showing
gold all over. Ido believe the whole mountain is just a
mass of gold lodes an’ leaders.”
“ Well, I’m blest,” murmured Emu Bill, “if that don’t
beat everything ”
“ But we can’t carry the hillock away,” said Jack,
hurriedly.
The difficulties of transport had at once appeared to his
practical mind, and his words acted as a restraining tonic
on the exhilarating spirits of the others.
“You’re right there, Jack,” agreed Mackay, with a
smile, “ but if we get plenty of water on the other side,
we could very soon get machinery out here; an’ I’ve a firm
idea that our golden land o’ promise lies just beyond this
barrier. He tapped the rocky surface with his hand
meditatively. “And more than that,” he continued, with
rising excitement, “ I believe we’ll find rubies and diamonds
as well. I mind we picked up some rubies in the gullies
around the last camp when I was here before. At least.


Phil, the geologist, said they were rubies, an’ I’d back his
knowledge in that direction against any man’s. He said
they had been shed from some mountain or other, but, of
course, we hadua seen the mountain at this time \ and pool
Phil never did see it, either.”
They commenced to retrace their steps, for the night
was fast closing in, and as they walked along, Bob stooped
down occasionally to pick up pebbles from the silted
driftage at his feet, and unobtrusively placed them in his
pocket for future inspection. They had almost reached
the place where they had unloaded the camels, when the
Shadow shouted out triumphantly —
“Look, boys! I reckon there ain’t no mistake about
that nigger, is there ? ”
He was gazing at the ridge forming the summit of the
mountain, and looking up, Bob saw a tall, dishevelled
figure standing against the sky-line and waving his arms
energetically.
“By gum, he is wild ! ” laughed Emu Bill; “ an’ what
a dandy outfit he’s got; why, the beggar’s got a ’possum
blanket over him.”
He raised his rifle mechanically, but Mackay had
already levelled his piece at the silhouetted form.
“ Please don’t shoot,” pleaded Bob, staying his hand.
“ It almost seems like murder to kill a man like that.”
Mackay lowered his weapon with a groan, and Bob,
looking upwards once more, was astounded to see the
object of his commiseration extending his hands as if
in benediction. He stood thus for a moment, then,
with a despairing gesture, pointed towards the Western
desert.
“ I’m glad I didna shoot,” said Mackay; “ that’s the


most wonderful savage I’ve seen. He even tried to warn
ns not to come further.”
“ That was out o’ gratitood for us not shootin’,” laughed
Emu Bill; “ but, blow me, I can’t shoot a nig when he
hasn’t a spear or weapon o’ some sort in his hand,”
When they looked again, the strange aboriginal was
gone.
The spirits of the little party were unusually cheerful
that night, as they sat around their camp-fire and talked
eagerly over their prospects on the morrow. Their objective
had been reached at last, the toil and stress of the dreary
journey was over, the reward —and of reward they all
seemed well assured—was now about to be theirs.
“ I reckon I’ll give ye a hymn o’ praise on the
orchestra,” remarked the Shadow, pulling Iris ear-shatter-
ing instrument from the pocket where it had lain silent
since the finding of Fortunate Spring.
“If ye does,” threatened Emu Bill, “ I’ll dump ye in
that there smelling solution right over the head.”
“ Hang it, Bill,” complained the unappreciated
musician, “ I ain’t quite dry yet, as it is. Couldn’t ye
think o’ some happier kind o’ return for my professional
services ? ”
“Anyhow,” consoled Jack, “it wouldn’t do to let the
niggers know we were about; they might come for us when
we were helplessly enslaved with your melody.”
The Shadow grinned. “ Right O,” said he; “ music
is off.”
But Mackay had not seemed at all unwilling to
encourage the youth’s suggestion.
“ The blacks should ken we are about by this time,”
he observed lightly; “ but there are six good rifles in this


camp, an’ we might as well encourage them to come out
now as at any other time. There’s going to be a good
moon up to-night.”
“ You might give us a tootle on the flute,” said Never
Never Dave; “ I hasn’t heard ye play since we left Golden
Mat.”
“ Let us have ‘ The Muskittie’s Lament,’ ” urged the
Shadow; “I is just dyin’ to stretch my voice a bit.”
“ No, Shadow; though you are a budding Sims Eeeves,
I can’t sympathize wi’ you enough just now to listen to
you singing. I must even deny you the pleasure o’ hearing
me warble the old familiar tune to-night, for I’m no’ in
the mood for waxing extravagantly joyous. But seein’
we’ve reached the deceivin’ mountain at last, and without
mishap, I’ll gie ye a blaw on the flute, if only to make
this night something different from other nights.”
Jack fetched the flute with alacrity, and then seated
himself beside Bob, and soon the little group were listen-
ing in hushed silence to the pensive strains of one of
Balfe’s melodies. When it was finished, the man of many
moods paused for a moment, and his eyes roamed in-
stinctively back towards the desert, and though the smoky
cloud still intervened, Bob guessed at once that he was
again filled with swelling memories of the past.
“ Let us have something lively, Mac,” said Emu Bill,
“something that will make us forget them pestiferous
niggers for a bit.”
“ I can’t do it, Bill,” came the husky response; “ not
here, not to-night.” Then he lifted the flute once more.
“ I’ll play you one o’ Bentley’s favourite hymns,” he said
gravely. “ Well do I mind we used a’ to sing it whiles
when we were on the march.”


Softly into the night rose the notes; they lingered by
each deep crevasse on the mountain side, and echoed back
from the rocky steeps. Unspeakably entrancing was the
effect. The musician himself seemed lost in the wonderful
sounds he created, and his hearers, after listening in mute
attention for some time, by a common impulse joined in
with the words, familiar to them all—
“ Lead, kindly Light,
Lead Thou me on.”
And as the rough voices swelled upwards, a weird answer-
ing chorus floated back to them from the summit of the
mountain, and lo! several dark forms appeared outlined
against the starry sky. Emu Bill ceased his vocal
exercises at once, and squirmed about uneasily until the
flute stopped.
“ Say, mates,” said he, anxiously; “ I hope it ain’t no
corroborree song they is singin’.”
Mackay glanced upwards, then hastily grasped liis
rifle, but the vague voices in the air broke afresh upon his
ears just as he was about to pull the trigger, and he laid
the deadly weapon down with a shudder.
“ They are actually mimicking that honnie hymn,” he
said nervously. “ I —l haven’t the heart to shoot ”
“ And aren’t their voices almost musical! ” cried Jack,
whose ear was keenly attuned to melody. “ They make a
very much better attempt than our corroborree savages did
about a week ago ; then’ voices were simply hideous.”
“ The aborigines are horn mimics, Jack,” answered
Mackay; “but, as you say, their song is usually enough
to drive a man to drink—providin’ he can get it. Still
there may he a different sort o’ savage in this mysterious


country. If the land itself is better, it would influence
the people, and who knows maybe they have acquired some
accomplishments unknown to their brethren on the flats.”
“ I can’t make them out at all,” said Bob, quietly.
“ Everything seems so unreal, so —so uncanny about here,
and these niggers singing that hymn have given me the
creeps.”
“ Let me have one go at * The Muskittie’s Lament,’ ”
pleaded the Shadow. “ I reckon it would bust them up
to mimic that high note ”
“ You leave that long-suffering muskittie alone,” said
Mackay. “ We’ll bust them up wi’ something more solid
in the morning. I’ll climb that mountain or go under
trying.”
Conversation somewhat flagged after that. The events
of the day had all been so strange and inexplicable; the
lure of the mountain was becoming oppressively potent,
and each of the staunch little band was filled with his
own secret convictions regarding what might lie beyond.
“ Better turn into your blankets, boys,” said Mackay,
at length. “ You’ll need all your energies in the morn-
ing. I’m going to keep watch and see that nothing
happens while you sleep. I’m not going to risk another
wipe out in this quarter.”
“You ain’t goin’ to do sentry go on your own,” spoke
Never Never Dave. “ I reckon I’ll take my turn.”
“ An’ me, of course! ” cried Emu Bill.
“ And ain’t the poor, low-down Shadow any good ? ”
complained that individual, pathetically. “ Let me do a
prance round, boss. I ain’t a bit sleepy.”
“ Let Jack and me take it for the first night,” said
Bob, quietly.


Mackay laughed. “ I know you are all vera willing,
my lads, but the first night is my care; I’ll ask Bob, who
is next in responsibility, to take part o’ the watch. Jack
and the Shadow will be on duty to-morrow night, and you,
Bill and Never Never, can take the next; ” which equable
arrangement appeared to suit every one.
Then Bob arose, rifle in hand, and stepped forward.
“ No, no, Bob ; not yet,” said Mackay. “ I’ll call you
in three or four hours to take a spell. Lie down and
sleep for a bit, my lad.”
But Bob was obdurate. “ You’ve been wearing your-
self out these last few days,” he said simply. “ You can
surely trust me to fill your place for the first half of the
night, at least. Perhaps I may not need to call you, for I
know I couldn’t sleep if I tried. My brain is buzzing
with odd ideas, which would be bound to keep me
awake.”
The elder man hesitated for a moment, then gave in.
“ But promise to call me at one o’clock, Bob,” he said,
“ otherwise I’ll stay up with you ; ” and Bob promised.
A few minutes and a row of sleeping figures lay out-
stretched around the fire. Bob tightened up his cartridge-
belt, pulled up the heads of several cartridges so that they
might be easily extracted in an emergency, examined the
magazine of his gun, and closed the breech gently, bringing
the trigger to full cock. Then he waited, motionless as a
statue, beside the huddled forms of his comrades, with
rifle upraised, and every nerve strung at highest tension.
Well he knew that danger threatened; he felt it in the
air; an ominous calm prevailed; how soon would it be
broken by the savage yells of the guardians of the
moimtain ? Bob gripped his rifle the tighter, and his


eyes scanned the near distance critically, then roamed
aloft to the now deserted mountain summit. A slight
sound startled him, and his finger closed gently on the
trigger of his weapon, but it was only Mackay toss-
ing restlessly in his blanket. Bob looked pityingly at
the sleepless form, and at that moment Mackay beckoned
him.
“ I canna get it out o’ my mind,” he whispered, “ that
when I followed the tracks o’ the blacks, they led right
into the mountain an’ no’ round.about it, an’ it beats me
to know how they managed to climb over so quickly.
Keep a careful watch, Boh; keep a careful watch.”
Bob nodded silently and returned to his position. He
had unconsciously shared Mackay’s fears before they had
been spoken. Since he first saw the mysterious mount he
had marvelled how it had been scaled, and how descents
had been accomplished.
The Southern Cross slowly sank to rest, and the edge
of the Great Bear constellation peeped above the northern
horizon. Yet still the watcher stood erect at Ms post, and
the camp slumbered.


CHAPTER XIV
The Struggle by the Mountain
T T was well after midnight, and Bob still stood guard
over the sleeping camp with undiminished vigilance.
Not a sound in the air escaped him; he heard the distant
scream of the curlew with a shiver of dread, then nearer
at hand the dull monotone of a mopoke resting on some
rocky ledge overhead would reach his ears as a dismal
calling from a shadowy world. Again would come a
period of silence, broken only by the gurgling echoes from
the sulphur springs, and the regular breathing of the
sleepers. Bob pulled himself together impatiently, he had
felt himself relaxing into a kind of stupor wherein all
things grim and melancholy appeared to him.
“ I wouldn’t have believed,” he muttered, “ what a
shattering influence a night watch has on a man’s nerves.”
The long wailing cry of a dingo now penetrated
piercingly over the desert from the west, and the watcher
stirred uneasily at the mournful sound which seemed to
convey in it all the sadness and despair of a voice from
the nether world.
The weird notes had scarcely died away when he
became conscious of a peculiar tap-tapping almost close
beside him. He could not make it out; the black surface
of the barring range rose before his eyes, but he could


distinguish nothing there, and the moon shone clearly on
the giant rock. Tap ! Tap! Tap ! Softly the echoes came
but imperceptibly growing louder; anxiously he scanned
the bare hillside for some clue to the mystery, and as his
eyes reached the ridge of the mountain he was startled to
see a tall beshrouded figure standing there, and apparently
gazing down upon him. Bob was certain the apparition
had not been in the same place but a minute ago, and
surely he could not be responsible for these strange noises
which seemed to come from the mountain, yet with no
cause showing. Tap! Tap! Tap! Harsher and more
metallic the ghostly reverberations rang, and now a faint
call wafted down from the heights; again and again it
came, gently falling on the mystified listener’s ears like a
voice from the skies, and the strange figure aloft waved his
arms in wild gesticulation. Sharper and still sharper
sounded the demoralizing tapping, and with it now came
a curious shuffling, slight almost to noiselessness, but
Bob’s sensitive ears were not to be deceived. A cold
sweat broke out upon his brow ; the vague disturbances
of the night were issuing not from the side of the
mountain, but from its interior! With a quick stride he
reached Mackay, and at a touch the sleeper awoke.
“ mat is it, lad, what is it ? ” he asked, breathlessly,
his rifle already in his hand.
Bob placed his finger on his lips, and pointed silently
to the mountain.
“ They’re coming through it! ”he whispered, hoarsely.
Mackay nodded briefly, and strode silently over to the
resounding wall, and Bob hastily aroused the sleepers. In
a moment the camp was prepared, and meanwhile Mackay
was walking stealthily along the base of the mount, his


ears bent down to the rock as he strove to locate the
mysterious alarms. And now the distant call from the
hilltop floated down to them once more, and Emu Bill
started at the sound, and looked up wonderingly, for the
faint double note of a coo-ee had this time been plainly
heard, and the tall form on the distant heights was
despairingly pointing outwards across the desert.
“ That nigger can coo-ee like a good ’un,” muttered he,
“ an’ he’s tryin’ to warn us. I reckon that’s because we
didn’t shoot him to-day; but I never believed a nig could
feel any gratitood.”
Suddenly the echoes ceased, and all was silent as a
tomb. Bob looked, and saw Mackay crouched hard against
the rocky wall on the edge of a deep fissure which showed
down half the face of the mountain. He seemed like an
animal preparing for a deadly spring.
“ I reckon we should go ovei beside him,” said Never
Never Dave, but so speedy had been the developments of
e ' ents that there was no time to decide upon a definite
course of action. Indeed, not one of the party guessed
what wild happening was about to take place. Bob some-
how expected to hear the preliminary yells of an attacking
horde, even as they had heard them before, but no such
outcry took place. He saw Mackay beckon wildly with
one hand over his shoulder, and quickly he obeyed the
summons, the others following with silent footsteps.
Then a stone clattered noisily at the bottom of the ravine,
and to Bob s amazement, a swarthy face appeared from the
depths, surmounted by a tall waving head-dress of feathers.
As the warrior emerged further into view, Bob’s astonish-
ment increased, for here was no naked savage, but a
gorgeously arrayed aboriginal, splendidly proportioned, and


carrying in his hand a long curved bow and several arrows.
Bob had just time to note this much and no more, for
Mackay’s rifle belched out almost in the new arrival’s face,
but the shot had been fired with the hands resting loosely
on the ground, and the bullet sped high, scattering the
nodding plumes of the astonished black in all directions.
With a cry of pent-up fury, Mackay lunged forward to
grasp his prey, and at once the stalwart native closed with
him. And now crowding up behind, one by one, a solemn
procession of similarly attired warriors came trooping.
The first of the number without hesitation rushed to the
assistance of his struggling comrade, the others calmly
bore down upon the little group, who, with Bob at their
head, had watched the scene as in a dream. With a
hoarse snarl of rage Never Never Dave opened fire, and
almost at the same instant the entire artillery of the camp
spouted out flame and smoke and leaden hail. In reply,
a cloud of arrows flew about their heads, and Bob felt one
pierce the muscle of his arm, but he pulled out the slender
barb with a wrench, and again his rifle spoke, and the roar
of many reports in his ears told him that liis comrades too
were strenuously engaged. Backwards and forwards the
spectral warriors surged, and yet never a sound escaped
their lips, and they strove with steady effort to come to
close quarters with the camp defenders.
Meanwhile, Mackay was engaged in desperate en-
counter on the edge of the fray. His first antagonist he
had flung from him almost immediately, limp and broken,
from that dreadful clutch. The second he had rendered
hors de combat with a single blow of his mighty fist. Then
two more rushed upon him, but profiting by the experience
of their brethren they evaded his circling arms, and hurled


themselves upon his lower limbs, and there they clutched
leech-like, while others hastened to attack him from
behind. Mackay marvelled for the moment why they had
not shot him down with their arrows; his own rifle had
been thrown aside after the first fruitless shot, but now his
revolver flashed in his hand, and the weighty stock came
down crash on the head of his nearest encumbrance, but
before he could use it again, he was seized from the back
and pulled to the earth, yet even as he fell his revolver
exploded upwards into the faces of his foes, and he chuckled
in grim joy as he felt their relaxing hold. It was at this
stage that Bob missed him from their midst. The attack
had drawn off somewhat, and he glanced around for the
first time in search of his companions. Then he noticed
the seething band standing over the fallen giant, and a
wild fury filled his heart.
“ Come on, boys,” he cried, “Mackay’s down!” and
he dashed to the rescue.
Quick as he was Never Never Dave was quicker, and
his clubbed rifle swung light as a feather in his strong
right hand, but it fell heavy as lead on the heads of the all
too previous natives, who had not looked for further
molestation from that quarter. With a guttural excla-
mation they leaped aside, and Mackay arose bleeding and
scarred. But the end was not yet; even while the
defenders were congratulating themselves on them victory
the natives once more swooped down upon them, and their
arrows whistled loudly through the air. They hid guessed
that the death-dealing weapons of the little party had lost
their power, for indeed there had not been a shot fired
these many minutes, and the magazines of the rifles were
empty. But they still had their revolvers, and at the first
(E 607) 2g9 t


discharge the angry blacks seemed to waver, but still they
came on. As in a dream Bob saw a wild, grinning face
peering into his, while a heavy club was raised to strike;
vainly he tried to lift his revolver, the blood rushed to his
head, his brain reeled, another instant and the blow would
have fallen, when, with a stifled cry, Jack dashed before
him and sprang fiercely at the savage’s throat. The very
force of his onslaught bore back the gloating native, the
club fell, but it fell harmlessly to the ground as Jack’s
fingers closed on its owner’s throat. But the warrior had
had enough; disentangling himself from the youth’s
grasp, with many a wriggle and gasp, he turned and fled,
and when Jack looked round he found that the entire
enemy had vanished.
“ Now, boys,” said Mackay, cheerily, “ let us estimate
the damage. You, Bob, have got an arrow-hole in your
arm, an’ I’m surprised you’ve managed to hold out so
long, but if you had got that crack on the head that was
meant for you, you would never have seen old England
again.
Bob laughed weakly. “ I’m pretty right,” he said.
“ What about yourself ? ”
“ Nothing serious, my lad; and you, Jack ?
“ Not a scratch,” responded that youth, brightly.
“As for me, boys,” echoed out Emu Bill’s voice
dismally, "I’m a regular pin-cushion, I am. I reckon
they’ve ventilated me a bit; but hang it all, them arrows
don’t hurt worth a cent.”
But where were the Shadow and Never Never Dave ?
The former they found sitting moodily by the base of the
mountain, his back propped against it for support.
“ That there last rush ’bout finished me,” he said.


The Struggle by the Mountain
“ A howling gorilla gave me a tender smack on the back
wi’ his club, an’—an’ I believe it’s broken.”
Mackay laughed. “ The back or the club, Shadow ? ”
said he; whereat the sorrowful youngster arose painfully
to his feet, and communed with himself in language deep
and eloquent.
“ Where in thunder has Never Never gone ? ” cried
Emu Bill, anxiously, as they looked in vain for the welb
known figure of the bushman.
“H e was beside me when that last rush came on,” said
Jack, almost tearfully. “I didn’t see what happened to
any one after that.”
“ Dave! Dave! ” cried Emu Bill, and there was a
quiver in his voice which sounded strangely on his lips.
“ Where are you, Dave ? ”
Then a thin, weak voice answered out of the gloom by
the ravine.
“ I is right here, Bill, old man, right here.”
And there they found him, lying aslant on the loose
debris as he had fallen, an inert mass. His face was
upturned to the sky, and his breath issued between his
clenched teeth in long spasmodic jerks. He smiled
feebly as they bent over him.
“ I’m sent for this trip, boys,” he murmured.
“ Don’t say that, Dave,” groaned Emu Bill, in anguish;
“ T ou aiu>t g°in to leave your old comrade, Dave ? ”
Mackay knelt down by the stricken man and placed his
hand over the feebly beating heart, and a hoarse cry of
pain burst from his lips, which was echoed by the sad
little group around.
They must have given you a sair crack, Davie, man,”
said he, “ a sair, sair crack.”


Then he caught sight of the broken butts of two arrows
in the sufferer’s broad chest, and he turned aside with a
heavy sigh.
“ Never Never’s going, lads,” he said, with deep
emotion. “ Say your good-byes before it is too late.”
Emu Bill gently pillowed his dying comrade’s head
upon his knee, and the tears ran down his rugged cheeks
unchecked, and dropped upon Never Never Dave’s pallid
face.
“Couldn’t we carry him over and lay him on the
blankets ? ” whispered Bob.
Mackay sadly shook his head. Then Never Never
Dave opened his eyes and glanced at the sorrowing
assembly, while his old smile struggled to his lips.
“ Good-bye, boys,” he whispered, “ don’t fret ’bout me.
I is goin’ on a long, long trail, where there ain’t no nigs
an’ no snakes. Never Never has made his last bush
journey, I reckon. But—but —we reached the mountain.
He ceased and laboured for breath, while the blood welled
out from his cruel wounds with the exertion. Silently
each pressed round and squeezed the bushman’s rough and
horny hand in a farewell grip. Once more the man whose
life-blood was ebbing so cruelly fast away spoke, but now
he was in the fantasy of delirium. “Well get the spring
all right, Bob. Don’t worry, my lad—and the mountain,
wi’ gold and diamonds—we’ll reach it, after all. Over the
mountain—over —the —mountain.” And so Never Never
Dave went forth himself on a new quest with a smile on
his lips, the smile of a man who knew no fear even at the
end of his earthly pilgrimage. Emu Bill gathered the
stiffening form in his arms, gulping down the great sobs
with an effort, and tenderly he carried his lifeless burden


V-*
p»' Sr: vl|
3?
-ft|Hv '^'
I w. > \ 1 4 I ,_ ■
L —
fm&>‘ j M T, \ I
— : TWir.-^ M «- y&m ' St — ’s, I
“emu bill gently pillowed his dying comrade’s head upon
HIS KNET




over to the camp-fire, and sad indeed were the hearts of
the melancholy procession which followed.
“I reckon Never Never has had his wish, anyhow,”
said Emu Bill, quietly. “He has passed in his checks
with his boots on.”
“ May we a’ go out on the long trail as bravely,” spoke
Mackay, solemnly. “ Dave has gone over the mountain
right enough. Over the mountain o’ earthly difficulty and
down through the valley of the shadow. We should not
pity him now, boys, for he’s free o’ all the sorrows an’
cares, an’ disappointments o’ this vale o’ tears. But we
mustn’t forget the living, lads, though we respect the dead,
or there may be more o’ us starting out on the long trail
before sunrise. Get a lamp, Jack, an’ we ll have a look at
that gully where they came out.”
“You’re right, Mac,” answered Emu Bill; “ I’ll get a
pick too, in case we need it.”
The lamp was speedily brought, and they started over
to the gully whence the natives had emerged, and as they
crossed the scene of their conflict Jack stumbled over the
dead body of one of the warriors. He shuddered painfully,
and Bob, who was at his hand, drew him aside.
“There are three more of them, Jack,” he whispered.
“ Never Never, hasn’t gone under unavenged.”
Mackay heard the words, and he laughed harshly.
“ Ay, there’s three more o’ them, Bob,” he said, “ and
there’s a dozen more who feel a bit mair pained in their
anatomy than we do.”
They reached the treacherous ravine, and Mackay,
taking the lamp in his hand, cautiously moved forwards
and downwards into the deep recess, and gazed at the
rocky rubble there strewn in bewilderment. In a moment


Emu Bill stood beside him, pick in hand, but he too was
nonplussed completely by the very natural appearance of
affairs.
“ I’ll swear I saw them come outen this here hole,” he
said.
“We can’t blame ourselves vera much for neglectin’ to
notice things,” agreed Mackay, with a grim smile.
In the depths of the fissure which striated the moun-
tain, only a number of loose boulders were to be seen.
“ I reckon I’ll try and shift some o’ them,” spoke Emu
Bill. He stooped down and lifted one or two of the
heaviest rock fragments, while Mackay held the light, and
examined the markings on the walls of the cavern with
keen interest.
“ There ain’t no opening here at all,” cried Emu Bill,
looking round fearfully, as if half expecting to find the
savages still close in the vicinity. “ I’m certain sure
they couldn’t get through here.”
Mackay smiled. “ I don’t know what sort o’ blacks
we’ve struck, Bill,” he said earnestly; “ but if they con-
structed this trap-door arrangement they’ve got a wonderful
amount o’ intelligence.”
He traced with his finger an irregularly shaped shelving
crack in the southerly wall. It seemed a perfectly natural
occurrence in every way, as indeed it was, but the edges
gaped considerably towards the top, and Mackay, pressing
lightly against the mossy front, caused the overlapping
rim to close solid into the rock. By this time Bob, Jack,
and the Shadow had scrambled in beside the two.
“ But they couldn’t get through that measly crack,”
protested Emu Bill, not quite understanding.
Mackay reached for the pick, and inserting the sharp


point into the thin, almost unnoticeable crack now show-
ing, pulled gently, and behold, the weighty rock swung
back on end revealing a narrow, tunnel-like entrance
penetrating into the mountain. At the same time a
draught of damp and stifling air issued from the dark and
gloomy passage way, extinguishing the lamp, and before
they could look again, the rock fell softly hack into
position, and this time it closed with a snap. Again
Mackay endeavoured to lever it open, but now the solid
formation refused to be moved ; try as he might, the door-
way into the mountain seemed closed conclusively against
him.
“ Surely it cannot be a natural cave formation ? ” said
Bob.
“ Nary cave, Bob,” returned Emu Bill, decisively.
“ Not in a diorite rock,” added Mackay, much
perplexed.
They stood gazing at the tantalizing face of the pon-
derous doorway for some time without speaking. Then
Mackay was aroused to action.
“ We’ll find out all about it before we go away from
here,” he said, “ but in the meantime we’ll barricade the
swinging rock on this side to prevent any one coming out.
I have an idea that it wasn’t right closed at first or we
would never have been able to find it; the blacks were in
too great a hurry to be cautious, I’m thinking.”
With a will they all set to work and built up a rampart
of massive boulders in the ravine. Then they sadly went
back to the camp-fire to await the coming of the dawn.
All thought of sleep had left them now, and they sat
moodily by the flickering flames for some time without a
word being spoken, then as the chill morning air made


itself felt, Bob’s wounded arm, which he had not yet
examined, began to grow stiff, and his head throbbed
painfully. The Shadow, too, was far from comfortable,
though he made no complaint, and he fought against his
growing weakness manfully but at last, with a weary sigh,
he fell back limp on his blanket. Then Mackay rose with
an exclamation of regret.
“Bill,” he said, “we’ve forgotten that these young
mates of ours are scarcely as tough as we are. We’d
better try an’ doctor up their bruises a bit.”
Emu Bill staggered to his feet with a sympathetic
grunt, and walked blindly towards the camel packs in
search of something that might serve for bandages, and
Mackay stooped over the fallen Shadow and pulled back
the neck of his much-tom shirt. The cause of that
individual’s relapse was not difficult to find, a great jagged
gash on the young bushman’s shoulder showed what a
fierce blow he had received, evidently from a flint-studded
club. Jack hurried to fetch water to lave the bloody
wound, but the Shadow refused to receive any attention.
“Let the thing dry, boss,” he said, sitting up once
more. “ I reckon I ain’t no tender chicken to howl ’bout
a muskittie bite.”
Bob’s memento of the affray was a little more serious;
one of the barbs of the arrow had broken in his arm, keep-
ing the wound open, and the blood was still dripping down
his sleeve in great gouty drops. Mackay carefully cut
out the splintered wood with the point of his sheath-knife,
an acutely painful operation; but the patient never winced.
Then Emu Bill returned. “ I can’t find nary cloth
’ceptin’ flour-bags,” he annoimced. “ Take a bit o’ this
here shirt o’ mine.”


He ripped off a sleeve of his garment and handed it to
Mackay, and with it Bob’s arm was soon tightly dressed.
And now the rosy light of approaching dawn began to
spread over the scene, and the stars faded out one by one
before the radiant sun’s advance. Morning had come at
last. Yes, morning had come, and with it appeared in all
their grim hideousness the evidences of the long night’s
struggle. There was Never Never Dave stretched beside
them, his calm white face gazing peacefully towards the
heavens. A little way off four huddled forms lay bent up
in the dust, then 1 torn plumes scattered around them.
Here and there arrows and clubs were strewn, and gory
tracks marked the way towards the subterranean passage
wherein the warriors had retreated. Bob surveyed the
ghastly relics with a sorrowful countenance. Here to him
was a new aspect of the wanderer’s life. In the pursuit of
Nature’s treasure the risks were many if the rewards -were
great. All was not sunshine and romance and pleasurable
excitement. He stood for some minutes in silent
contemplation.
“ Yes,” he said aloud, “ and I, too, would have been
lying there, had it not been for you, Jack.”
“ Don’t speak about it, Bob,” returned the boy at his
side, with a shudder. “ How could I have gone home
without you ? ”
Mackay had, in the mean time, been examining the
discarded weapons of the aborigines with critical interest.
“ It seems to me,” he said quietly, “ that we might all
have been lying there if the warriors hadn’t imagined us to
be asleep. I can only find about twenty arrows altogether.
I think they could only have carried one or two each,
never dreaming they would have need for more.”


“ I reckon that is why they tried to rush us every time,”
remarked Emu Bill. “They were too cock-sure, they
were; an’ we’ve got to be thankful for it. But ain’t this
a funny get up for nigs, even if they is on for a corro-
borree dance ? ”
He pointed to the strange habiliments of the dead
warriors. Each native was cloaked in a rich opossum
robe, suspended from the shoulders almost down to the
heels.
“ I can’t make them out, Bill,” said Mackay. “ They
are different from any tribe I’ve ever run across before.
They’re bigger than an ordinary native, and their faces
look almost intelligent. But we’ve forgotten about the
mountain passage. Surely the blacks couldn’t have made
that. There’s more o’ a mystery here than I can fathom,
Bill; but we’ll soon know what it all means,”
“I just reckon we will,” grated Emu Bill as they
turned away.
Jack, who was now the most active member of the
party, was not long in preparing breakfast, and the
stimulating influence of the boiling tea did much to
revive their weary spirits.
“ If only Never Never hadn’t gone under,” said the
Shadow, as he munched at his hard, unpalatable damper
fare, “ I could have felt real joyous, I could. I reckon
we has struck the laud o’ gold and di’monds right
enough,”
The mysterious mountain had assuredly grown more
and more mystifying. What wonderful secret could be
hid beyond? What strange people could have made the
tunnel through its mighty heart ?
“ I am convinced we are about to make a wonderful


discovery,” said Bob. “ Ordinary aborigines could never
have constructed that passage ”
“And allowing that they could,” interjected Jack;
“ what purpose is it supposed to serve ? ”
“I reckon it’s the treasure chamber o’ the Never
Never we has struck at last,” observed Emu Bill, with
quiet assurance. “ Nary man ever knew what to expect
in this here country; but we has struck the secret, only
poor old Dave ain’t with us no more.”
There was no doubt that the expedition had reached a
region of strange mystery in the heart of the great un-
known land of the Never Never. Their humble repast
over, there now came the sad duty of interring the body
of their dead comrade. Silently they filed off, armed
with pick and shovel, in search of a soft spot in which to
dig the grave. But no kindly soil was to be found; the
bare rock appeared everywhere immediately below the
surface.
“There’s only one thing we can do,” said Mackay.
“We must drill and shoot a hole down wi’ gelignite, that
is, unless we carry poor Dave out across these springs
into the desert, but for my part I’d rather bury him close
into the mountain. I think he would have liked it
himself. Let us give poor old Dave a big monument,
boys, I’m sure none o’ us will grudge the work.”
Grudge the work ? Not they. It was the last
tribute they could pay to the faithful and brave companion
of their travels, and with heavy hearts they set about
their task. A case of gelignite had been included in the
outfit of the expedition in anticipation of any valuable
ore deposits being foimd which might necessitate blasting
before samples could be obtained, and now for the first


time the deadly explosive was called into requisition, and
for a most melancholy purpose. The long steel drills
which had done such good work in the Golden Promise
Mine were also called into play, and all forenoon Mackay
and Emu Bill laboured at their sad work, relieved
occasionally by Jack, the Shadow, and Bob, for though
the last tw r o were then wholly unfitted for any exertion,
they insisted on taking their turn, Bob swinging the
great hammer with his one free hand, while the Shadow
held and turned the drill. At every half hour or so the
mighty roar of an explosion would burst forth from the
rocky excavation, and a hail of boulders and showers of
iron sand were hurled into the air.
In the midst of this turmoil Bob happened to look up,
and he was scarcely surprised to see the same gloomy
figure on the mountain summit watching then- operations
intently.
“ I can understand his warning now,” he muttered to
himself. “He knew they were going to attack us from
the tunnel. But why should he have wished to save
us?”
The more he considered the matter the more puzzled
he became. Then he observed quite a number of the
oddly garbed natives join their companion on the hilltop.
Again and again the dull boom of the heavy gelignite
charges echoed out on the still air, and after each ponderous
report a fresh group seemed to gather up aloft until Bob
could count fully fifty of them.
“ I reckon tins here circus sort o’ disturbs them,”
grunted Emu Bill.
Mackay looked anxious. “ I hope there’s no more o’
them,” he remarked gravely. “ We’ve struck a bigger-


sized tribe than we calculated on, Bill, an’ we’ll have to
be vera cautious.”
At last the tomb was completed and reverently they
wrapped the dead man in his blanket and carried him to
his last earthly rest. No tears now dimmed their eyes,
their sorrow was deep set in the heart; it had passed
the mere emotional stage, and could find relief only in
strenuous action. Then they stood around the open grave
with bowed heads, while Mackay repeated a brief prayer.
Long afterwards Bob remembered the quiet dignity of his
utterance, the simple eloquence of his tribute, and the
whole pathetic scene would return to him with all its
overwhelming memories. When he had finished, they
shovelled in the loose sand and rubble in solemn silence,
and built up a cairn over the top.
The natives from their position of vantage had gazed
stolidly down on them throughout the entire ceremonial;
but now they dispersed, leaving but one solitary watcher
on the height.
“We’ll have to plant these natives now,” said Mackay;
“ we can’t leave them lying like that.”
They walked over and surveyed the bodies again, and
the Shadow taking the long opossum robe from one of
them, threw it over his own shoulders with a chuckle of
satisfaction.
“ I reckon this here ornament should just fit me,” said
he, turning round for inspection.
Emu Bill laughed hoarsely. “ Throw the wretched thing
away, Shad,” he growled. “Ye doesn’t want to wear a
uig’s wardrobe, does ye ? ”
But a wild idea had just then entered Mackay’s
head; he bent down and gathered several of the emu


feathers lying around; these he stuck in the Shadow’s
hair much to that youth’s disgust.
“ Why, Shad, if your face was blacked you’d pass for
one of the warriors! ” exclaimed Jack, noting the effect at
once.
“We’ll save these decorations for future use,” said
Mackay, quietly.
Emu Bill whistled softly, “ I never thought o’ that,”
said he. “ I reckon it’s a real daisy idea,”
Quickly they despoiled the natives of their gorgeous
trappings, and Bob sighed when the miserable bodies were
revealed in all their savage nakedness, and marvelled at
the unusual muscular development showing in their chest
and limbs.
“Ay, Bob,” said Mackay, guessing his thoughts,
“ one of these fellows is worth two of any other tribe,
I ken. Somehow, though I have a sair grudge against
them, I feel sort o’ sorry to see such bonnie specimens
slaughtered.”
“ But I reckon they would have danced round our
funeral all right,” said Emu Bill, savagely. “ Hang it,
the nigs in this here country ain’t fit to live, they
am t.
“ There are no opossums about here, are there ? ” asked
Jack, suddenly.
“ Nary one,” answered Emu Bill, with a laugh. “ Why,
they couldn’t live on sand, an’ there ain t no trees
around that a muskittie couldn’t bend by sitting on
them.”
“ Then where could these skins come from ? ” cried
the lad.
Bob shook his head dubiously, and Emu Bill seemed to


have thought of the matter for the first time. Mackay
alone seemed confident in his knowledge.
“ It’s a sure proof, Jack,” said he, “ that beyond the
mountain there must be a different kind o country, a
country o’ forests and rivers, maybe, and our Eldorado,”


CHAPTER XV
The Secret of the Mountain
IT was well into the afternoon before their gruesome task
was accomplished, and the sun shone far down in the
Western sky when they returned to the camp. They had
carried the deceased warriors out into the sandy tracts
beyond the boiling springs. It cannot be said that they
were unduly sympathetic with the slain, and certainly
they were anything but enamoured of their self-imposed
contract, hut the alternative would have been extremely
disagreeable.
O
“ I have no doubt their brethren would have come for
them to-night,” said Bob, “ and saved us a good deal of
trouble—if we could only have depended on them going
peaceably away again.”
“ Ay, if,” agreed Mackay, dryly. “ But their coming
would only mean more funerals, Bob, and as for that, 1
believe they’ve been trying to force that patent door of
theirs before now.”
He turned and gazed towards the fissure at the
base of the mountain, and at that moment there dis-
tinctly came a sound therefrom as of the jarring of
rocks under pressure. They all kept perfect silence for
a minute or two, and again the sound was repeated, but


this time it was succeeded by the sharp rattle of falling
boulders.
“ That’s the top o’ our barricade down, I reckon,”
whispered the Shadow, reaching gingerly for his rifle.
“ They would see us go out into the plains,” hazarded
Bob, calmly, “ but the smoke of these very convenient
boilers has kept them from noticing our return.”
Mackay nodded. “ They’ve got about a solid ton to
shift before the door will swing,” he said musingly.
“ Xow I wonder if we should go an’ help them wi’ the
job or no’ ? ”
“ I reckon we has had enough for one day, Mac,”
answered Emu Bill, wearily. “ Let the skunks work their
own passage.”
Another rattle, louder than the first, reached their ears.
“ ’Pears to me they is in a mighty hurry,” grinned the
Shadow.
Bob rose to his feet. “ I’m going to have a look,” he
said. “ Come on, Jack ; ” and they tip-toed over to the
origin of the disturbances, leaving their companions
apparently deeply and solely intent on bringing the billy
on the fire to a boil speedily.
Mackay had examined the barricade once or twice
earlier in the day, and noticed no change in its appearance,
and was convinced that nothing short of gelignite cartridges
could shift their obstruction from the inside. Bob held
the same opinion, but he was nevertheless curious to see
what sort of efforts were being made. Making a short
detour, they silently approached the entrance to the
underground passage from the side farthest from the
movable rocky slab. The interstice had been well-nigh
filled with diorite boulders, leaving only the top of
(B 607) 305 u


the solid panel showing; but when Bob looked now, he
was alarmed to find a considerable shrinkage in the level
of the barricade, and though the noisy echoes of falling
rocks were still plainly heard, it was evident that nothing
was rolling down from the top of the pile. Jack drew a
quick breath of anxiety; Bob was perplexed beyond
measure, but he made no sign, and as he looked, behold!
the boulder stack was gradually, yet surely, sinking—sink-
ing apparently into the earth beneath. Then his eye
noticed some slight change in the position of the rocking
wall; it was thrust up somewhat, and gaped widely. The
solution of the mystery was now made clear: the great
slab moved upwards as well as outwards, and the de-
pletion of the pile was taking place from the bottom; the
rock fragments were rolling inwards to the tunnel!
Hastily he beckoned on his companions, and they
came forward at a run, just as the last stone was dis-
appearing from view. But the natives had now taken
alarm. There came a dull thud as the doorway relapsed
into its accustomed place, and then their rapidly retreating
footsteps were heard as they scurried back into the sub-
terranean channel, and the peculiar tapping of the night
before heralded the direction of their flight.
Mackay took in the position at a glance, and an ex-
pression of grave concern settled on his features.
“ Their resources are positively marvellous,” he groaned
in despair. “ It’s a vera fortunate thing, Bob, that you
werena influenced by my stupid over-confidence, and came
to investigate. We might have been bowled over wi’ their
arrows before we had time to lift a rifle.” He continued
bitterly to abuse himself while he inspected the now bare
cavity in the mountain.


“ I reckon it’s a long sight more fortunate that
they came along in the daytime,” commented Emu Bill,
“ which they likely wouldn’t have done, if they had
thought we were about. Seems to me, that good Samaritan
job o’ ours in planting them nigs nice and comfortable out
in the sand has done us a service right away.”
“ You’ve hit it pretty near, Bill,” Bob agreed. “If
they had done that trick in the night, we should pro-
bably have been wiped out.”
1 “This is a mighty unpleasant climate for us tender
lambs, it is,” wailed the Shadow. “ There’s nary night but
what we may wake up wi’ a screech an’ find ourselves
dead.”
“ There’s one way we can block it for good,” muttered
Mackay, grimly, “ but I’m no vera willing to do it, for it
will block us too, an’ I mean to get inside that mountain
before I’m a couple o’ days older.” He looked towards
the gelignite case, lying near where it had been placed for
safety, and his companions knew his plan at once. “ Yes,
we may well shoot down a bit o’ the mountain big enough
to bar that tunnel safe as a house, but that wouldn’t suit
us afterwards.”
“ If we roll round a few boulders wider than the door
itself, that would keep things pretty safe for a night,”
suggested Jack; and in the end, this was the plan decided
upon, and for half an hour they busied themselves trans-
porting the most unwieldy diorite blocks they could find,
and fixing them securely into the cavity. Then they
returned to partake of their well-earned and belated
dinner of tea and damper.
The last added proof of the blacks’ ingenuity consider-
ably disturbed the members of the little party. It had


been so hard to believe that aborigines could possibly
have constructed the tunnel through the mountain, but
now they were inclined to imagine their savage neighbours
capable of anything.
“I reckon we has got to go slow, boys,” remarked
Emu Bill, with a troubled expression; " them nigs don’t
seem to be the genuine article. They knows a long
sight too much for my liking, they does.”
Mackay, too, was obviously concerned. The mysterious
tunnel mystified him; he could not imagine how it had
been wrought, but there was gradually dawning in him a
vastly increased respect for the natives who lived beyond
the mountain. That they were different from all other
tribes he had encountered was only too evident. The
question was, in how great a degree did they excel their
brethren of the plains ? Judging from his brief experience
of them, Mackay’s estimate of their powers was far higher
than he cared to admit.
“ Of course,” he said, in answer to Emu Bill, “if the
country on the other side is what we expect, the natives
will be of a much more advanced class than any we’ve
met before. You see, it’s the power o’ environment, Bill;
it may have worked marvels here, for a’ we know.”
They ate their unpalatable meal without much further
remark. Then Bob, who had been pondering deeply over
the events of the last twenty-four hours, showed the trend
of his thoughts by asking quietly if any of the aboriginal
tribes had been known to use bows and arrows.
“ I never saw, nor heard tell o’ such a thing before,”
grunted Emu Bill.
“ In that case,” said Bob, “ these natives show that they
have originated that custom here, or have retained it from
308


an earlier period, before the blacks began to degenerate;
and, in either case, it proves them to be an exceptional lot
altogether.”
“ That’s just what’s bothering me, Bob,” admitted
Mackay. “We might well tackle an ordinary tribe, even
though we only numbered five against fifty, but wi’ these
beggars here, I’ll allow we seem to be embarking on a job
that is, to say the least of it, a bit unhealthy. No, no,
don’t think I’m gettin’ nervous, Bill, but we must calculate
the chances before we start. Bob counted fifty niggers on
the hill this morning, so we’ve a fair’ idea o’ what we are
goin’ to run up against.”
“ Hang it, boss,” complained the Shadow; “ you doesn’t
think a crowd o’ nigs is goin’ to hustle us back now, does
ye ? If we kin join their happy family in the daytime
we’ll scatter ’em quick an’ lively, but the night gives me
the creeps, it does. I can never see the sights o’ my rifle
in the dark.”
“ If we were once on the other side of the mountain,”
said Jack, eagerly, “we could soon shift the blacks; it’s
the wretched old tunnel that keeps worrying us here.”
“ Ay, my lad,” said Mackay, dryly; “ the tunnel is a
vera curious construction for a crowd o’ aborigines to make,
an’ the more I think about it, the more puzzled I become.
I was going to suggest that Bill an’ me should force the
passage in the morning, while the three o’ you waited out
by the camels in case o’ accident.”
“ I’m right wi’ you there,” cried Emu Bill. “ I reckon
it ain’t safe for these here young ’uns to come along wi’ us
first ”
A storm of protest greeted his words, and Bob turned
to Mackay reproachfully.


“I know what you mean,” he said; “but neither Jack
nor I will leave unless we all leave together, so that it
anything happened to you we would not escape in any
case. Isn’t it far better to make the most of our strength
instead of dividing it ? ”
" Well, well, perhaps you are right,” returned the big
man, hastily, as if annoyed at his own fears; “ but we’d
better wait until morning before we start the circus. Like
the Shadow, I prefer to meet the natives in daylight, and
anyhow, we’re a’ needing a sleep to-night, so we’d be
better to turn in early and get up by sunrise. It should
take us a good half-hour in the morning blowing out that
tunnel door for a start.”
Certainly nothing further could be done on that day,
for the darkness was already closing in, and each one of
the party was weary and tired from lack of sleep. So
shortly afterwards they lay down in their blankets, though
not before a searching examination had been made of the
new barricade erected at the entrance to the subterranean
passage, and, in spite of the known dangers surrounding
them, they slept soundly, each taking a two hours’ watch
in turn. It was well after midnight when Bob awoke for
the first time, and at once his ears caught the strange
tapping in the mountain which had first heralded the
approach of the natives on the night before. He aroused
himself immediately, and saw Mackay, who was on guard,
listening to the ghostly echoes intently. Slowly they
seemed to pass along the base of the hill, then all was
quiet. Bob got up and joined Mackay, and together they
walked softly towards the fissure, and there in the dull
light they could vaguely see the great boulders move as
if under pressure from beneath, but though they watched


for fully ten minutes in silence, the barricade remained
intact. Jack’s scheme had worked admirably. Then
Mackay turned on his heel with a loud laugh.
“ It’s just as well to let them ken we’re here, Bob,” he
explained; and the sound of scurrying footsteps which
answered him from the concealed passage showed that the
natives had thought fit to retire once more. Then again
the peculiar tapping issued out dully from the great rock,
continuing for nearly a minute before it faded into the
stillness of the night.
“Well, what do you make of it, Bob ?” asked Mackay.
Bob did not hesitate a moment. “ The passage must
lead for some distance along the face of the mountain,
said he. “ But why these strange sounds are heard every
time the blacks come along, I cannot say.”
“Man, Bob,” laughed Mackay, “that’s vera easily
explained. The tunnel must be dark, of course, and the
warriors have to guide themselves along the passage by
feeling the walls wi’ their arrows or clubs as they go. It
just struck me that that was the reason o the uncanny
noises when I heard them come along there to-night.
Simple enough, isn’t it, Bob ? ”
“I’m glad there is nothing approaching the super-
natural about it, anyhow,” replied Bob, soberly. “The
echoes seemed to ring in my ears like a knell of
doom.”
He shuddered as he got back into his blanket. The
others were awake by this time; but when they learned
that an ineffective attempt had been made to destroy the
barricade, they chuckled in rare good-humour, and went
off to sleep again. The remainder of the night passed
without alarm, and the morning broke, calm and serene,


over the little camp, which awoke to life with renewed
vigour after its peaceful slumber. Breakfast was soon
over; then a hurried council of war was held to reason out
the best plan of action. Emu Bill was in favour of insert-
ing a heavy charge of gelignite in the rocking panel which
had defied their gentler efforts on the preceding day; and
Jack and the Shadow supported this proposal vociferously.
Mackay, however, though he had at first advocated this
drastic action, now seemed reluctant to carry it through;
and Bob, too, though he did not say much, was evidently
pondering over some other and better scheme, which he at
last broached hesitatingly.
“If the passage runs parallel with the face of the
mountain for twenty or thirty yards,” he said, “it strikes
me that if we made a fresh entrance to it as far away from
the old one as possible, we could deceive the natives most
completely, and perhaps provide a means of escape in an
emergency.”
“ I don’t quite catch on,” grumbled Emu Bill. “ I’m
hanged if I see what difference it should make; an’
we doesn’t know how far we’d have to dig into the
blasted rock afore we hit the tunnel—if it’s where you
say.”
Mackay took up a pick, and, proceeding along the
base of the mountain away from the fissure, struck at the
rocky wall repeatedly, with the result that a deep, hollow
rumbling issued forth at each stroke, until a point had
been reached some thirty yards distant from the tunnel
entrance, when only the solid diorite formation gave back
the sound.
“I calculate we’d have less than five feet to drive,
Bill,” said he. “ About a couple o’ long shots in from the


top would do it. You can trace the passage as plainly as
if you were looking at it. I don t know what the idea was
in making it like a boomerang ; hut we 11 soon find out.
Now, Bob, you’re better at explaining than me. Try an
convince Bill o’ the advantages we may derive from making
a new hole into the mountain.”
" I reckon I can see it all right,” cried the Shadow.
“ Oh, it are a daisy ”
“ Shut up, Shad,” growled Emu Bill. “ Now, Bob, for
any sake, tell me your plan. Of course I’m with you,
whether I understand or not; but, blow me if I can see
the force o’ doing extra work in the niggers’ mountain fur
nothin’.”
Then Bob endeavoured to elucidate the ideas which had
been taking shape in his brain all tlirough the night, since
Mackay and he had come to a conclusion as to the origin
of the warning sounds and the proximity of the passage for
some distance to the outer air.
“If we don’t tamper with the old door, boys,” said he,
earnestly, “ we can block up the hole we make by some
bagging, and so will always have a chance of escape if the
natives are too many for us. They will guard their own
entrance only, for they probably will never see ours ; and
it’s just as well to take precautions. The darkness of the
tunnel will help our plan ; and if we succeed without
having to trouble about getting back, so much the
better ”
“ And there are a few more arguments in favour o’ the
scheme, Bob,” added Mackay ; “ but we may see the excel-
lence o’ them later.”
“ But they’ll hear us firing the charges, won’t they ? ”
said Jack.


“They heard us doing the same thing yesterday,”
answered Mackay; “ an’ they saw us too, so it’s no vera
likely they’ll trouble us to-day. But if we put the drill-
holes in deep enough, and give the powder plenty work
to do, there shouldna he much noise—in fact, I doubt if
they’ll hear it at a’,”
No time was lost in making the experiment, and the
long steel drills were quickly grinding their way through
the hard outer casing of the rock as nearly as could be
judged opposite the place where the passage took an abrupt
turn inwards. And now the mining knowledge of Mackay
and Emu Bill made their work comparatively easy; they
knew exactly the correct angles at which to drive the drills
so as to obtain the best results when they loaded the holes
so made with the deadly explosive. Steadily they laboured
at their task, Bob, Jack, and the Shadow assisting at inter-
vals, but more often engaged farther out in the open making
a goodly appearance for the benefit of the natives, should
they chance to be watching, and thus drawing attention
away from the great work in hand. For a full hour Mackay
slogged at the steel with his mighty hammer, then gradu-
ally the borings extracted from the deepening hole grew
lighter and redder in colour, and the drill sank inwards
rapidly.
“ That’s a new formation we’ve struck, Bill,” said he,
pausing to examine the edge of his tool. Then an exclama-
tion broke from his lips. “We’re chippin’ through a gold
lode ! ” he cried; “ and it’s so rich that the drill clogs in the
metal.”
“ I reckon there’s nary nig’ll shift us from here now,”
said Emu Bill, examining for himself the gold grains ex-
posed. “ I means to see the other side o’ this here mountain,


or bust. I reckon there must be oceans o’ gold an’ di’monds
over there.”
At this stage Jack called out wamingly, “I see
old Nebuchadnezzar on the top of the mountain
again.
“ It’s the same old nig that we didn’t shoot, ex-
claimed the Shadow j “ an’, blow me! if he ain t goin to
throw stones at us.’*
The tall figure on the summit had certainly attempted
to throw something down ; but it caught on a jutting rock
overhead, and bounded thence into the rising vapours of
the hot springs. Once more he appeared to cast some
projectile into the air; but if he did, it did not reach the
ground in the vicinity of the anxious party beneath. Then
again a visible missile came hurtling down ) but it fell wide,
much to the Shadow’s satisfaction.
“ The old fool can’t throw stones for nuts! ” he cried
delightedly.
“ I don’t think he’ll hurt us much,” said Mackay, "with
a laugh, “ Let him play away, Shadow, if it amuses him ;
it doesn’t do us any damage.”
And the individual aloft continued his strange pranks
for some time, though in no one instance did the stones he
threw alight even moderately near; then he vanished as
suddenly as he had come.
“I think we’re about ready for firing, Bill,” said
Mackay, shortly afterwards. “We’d better hurry up, too,
seeing that there does not seem to be any one about to
watch in the mean time.”
The drill had been driven over eight feet down, at an
angle of somewhat less than forty-five degrees, and Bob,
making a rough calculation, considered that its extremity


was at least four feet away from the surface of the rock in
a straight line.
“ We’ll give it twenty-five cartridges, I think,” mused
Mackay, “ an’ the shock o’ discharge should burst at least
another foot inwards.”
“ I reckon something’s bound to shift,” murmured Emu
Bill, as he deftly prepared the charges, and inserted the
long fuse.
Bob watched the last operation with quiet interest,
but not so Jack and the Shadow. They suddenly pranced
off towards the cooking utensils by the fire, and began to
drag them back out of range.
“ Tea and damper is bad enough,” groaned the Shadow,
tenderly secreting the only two billy cans the expedition
possessed; “ but damper without tea would be howlin’
starvation, it would.”
“You doesn’t need to worry, Shad,” grinned Emu Bill.
“ There won’t be much o’ a scatter here.”
And he calmly applied a lighted match to the end of
the fuse, and stood for almost a minute, listening to its
sputtering as the fire crept slowly down towards the
gelignite, before he turned away. Another minute, two
minutes, three minutes passed.
“ I’m afraid we’ve had a misfire, Bill,” said Mackay.
But just as he spoke the base of the mountain seemed
to quiver and burst forward, then came a dull report, and
when the smoke cleared away, a giant crack showed in the
rock, but otherwise no evidences were left to indicate that
a powerful explosive had been at work.
“ That’s hard lines,” said Emu Bill, stepping forward.
“ It might have shifted that chunk o’ iron out o’ the road,
anyway. Now we’ll need to begin all over again.”


“ I’m no so sure o’ that,” answered Mackay, waving his
hat in the rent created in order to dispel the clinging
white fumes, which obscured all vision.
Then it was made apparent that it was no mere crack
in the formation they gazed upon. The force of explosion
has not only cleft the rock, but had thrust it almost a
yard forward in one unbroken mass, and at the bottom of
the chasm thus made a vague blackness appeared, the
blackness of a void. Mackay bent down his head eagerly,
but hastily withdrew it again; a rush of heavy damp
air, stifling and odorous, had come with a gust in his
face.
“I reckon them powder fumes ’ll make you feel
pretty bad,” sympathized Emu Bill. “Just give the
smoke time to clear, Mac, an’ then we’ll put in another
shot.”
“There’s no need to do any more work here, Bill,”
answered Mackay, recovering himself. “We’ve broken
right into the tunnel first pop ! There it is, too, as natural-
looking an entrance as you could wish to see, wi’ a door—
if we could move it —that weighs five tons if it weighs a
pound.”
Eagerly they all clustered round to look; and now
that the atmosphere had grown less clouded, the dark
shadows of the cavern below were plainly discernible.
Bob gave a sigh of relief. At last the secret of the
mountain was to be revealed.
“ Well, I reckon I’d better get down an’ prospect round
a bit,” said Emu Bill, hitching up his nether garments
preparatory to scrambling down into the uncertain
depths.
“Let me go first,” urged the Shadow. “I’m the


lightest, and it wouldn’t hurt me much if I did go
down a bit further than I expected when I let go the
edge.”
“ We’ll lower a rope wi’ a stone on the end o’ it before
any one goes down,” said Mackay, firmly. “ We’ve got to
engineer this funeral vera cautiously, my lad, an’ mustna
go bouncing ourselves into difficulties, as if there was
a good fairy waiting by us every time to pull us out o’
them.”
A rope was speedily forthcoming, and fastening a
fragment of rock to the end of it, Mackay carefully
allowed it to descend. It came to a standstill in good
time, however, showing that the bottom of the passage
was barely three feet below the point where the rent had
entered its wall. Mackay quickly proceeded to adjust the
rope so that its extremity dangled just on the edge of the
yawning gap, then he made it fast on the outside by
coiling it several times round the top of the sundered
rock.
“ A man could pull himself out in a hurry by getting
something to hold on to,” he remarked, “ an’ it’s just as
well to be prepared.”
This operation completed, Emu Bill wriggled himself
down through the narrow opening, and holding on to the
guiding-rope, quickly disappeared from view, while his
companions on the surface waited expectantly for 'his
report on his surroundings.
“ Well, an’ what do you make of it, Bill ? ” demanded
Mackay, when the tension on the cable had slackened.
“ I can’t see a single thing,” came the response.
“ It’s dark as—as Hades, an’—howlin’ blazes! but it does
smell.”


Without a word Mackay slid down beside his com-
plaining comrade ; the Shadow followed, then Jack, and
lastly Bob squirmed down beside them. All was dark
and oppressively gloomy in the strange passage, and the
thin streak of light from the opening they themselves
had made, only served to intensify the utter black-
ness which prevailed. They stood for a full minute
without speaking, their ears alert for the slightest sound
which might warn them of danger; but all was silent as a
tomb.
“ Now, boys,” whispered Mackay, “we’ll have a look at
the inside o’ that other doorway before we go any further.”
He led the way, staggering and stumbling, and Bob,
following at his heels, became conscious that the floor of
the tunnel was extremely muddy and wet. After a few
steps Mackay paused. “ I’ve got a bit o’ candle in my
pocket,” he said; “ I may as well strike a light.”
The match spluttered feebly in his hand for a moment,
and then went out, but on a second attempt he succeeded
in getting the candle alight, and though it burned with
a dismal blue flame, it illuminated the rocky cavern
sufficiently for the adventurers to observe its structure.
They stood in a longitudinal chamber about eight feet
high, and barely four in width. The roof fairly scintillated
with beaded moisture, and the dank, cold walls were adrip
with ooze. The bottom of the chamber, as they had already
discovered, was a soft and clinging clayey formation.
Mackay’s trained eye immediately grasped the significance
of the scene.
“ This is a most extraordinary thing to find in the heart
o’ Australia,” he said. “ It’s a tunnel driven through an
enormous gold lode, an’ it’s vera evident that the men who


made it knew almost nothing about mining, for the ore
hasn’t been stripped either to the hanging wall or foot
wall. It’s just as if a blind gap had been dug into the
country where it was softest.”
“ i see a nugget shining in the roof,” whispered Jack,
pointing to a yellow splatch showing overhead.
“Ay, my lad, an’ I can see several more,” said
Mackay, surveying the exposed stratum in bewilderment.
“It is a wonderful mine, without a doubt, but what
on earth the natives do with it is more than I can
imagine.
He moved onwards once more, and then he halted
suddenly, and held the candle aloft. The passage had
come to an lend; before him stood the huge stone panel
which had first barred their entrance; at his feet gaped a
deep, pit-like cavity.
“ Come close up here, Bob,” he said quietly. “ Come
an’ have a look at this arrangement o’ tilings; primitive
but effective, eh ? ”
Bob gazed at the sight before him in absolute wonder-
ment. The great stone which marked the end of the
chamber stood upright on an egg-shaped base; it appeared
to be formed like a rude and bluff wedge, the v ider
extremity protruding outwards, where, as had been seen,
it flanged neatly on to the main rock from which it had
sprung. But it was not its shape that surprised Bob: a
massive bar of some gleaming metal was welded into it
fully halfway up its height, and from this U-shaped bar
a rope of extraordinary girth stretched taut into the
depths of the pit, where it could be seen attached to a
ponderous mass of diorite rock, which hung from it like
the weight of a giant clock.


“ It must take more than one man to open that door,”
murmured Jack.
“ They probably always come in force when they use
this passage,” mused Bob; “and see, I suppose that
arrangement is for keeping the stone bent over when they
are out ? ”
He pointed to a short and stout log lying near, which
had apparently been used for preventing a quick rush back
of the weighted panel when the warriors had gone out on
the night of the conflict, Mackay stepped gingerly across
the intervening shaft, and shone his light into its unsavoury
depths as he did so.
“ I see now where our boulder barricade dropped to,” he
said, but I can see also that they can never move our
present obstruction in the same way, the big blocks out-
side will stick them, no matter how they try.”
Emu Bill now tried to find his speech. “How in
thunder is we to account for the rock prizing open wi' us
at first ? ” said he. “ I can’t understand this here concern
yet, I can’t.”
Bob pointed downwards to where the wall of the pit
was deeply scarred and dented.
“Likely enough the weight caught in the side,” he said,
“and so eased off the tension considerably.”
Mackay, who had been keenly scrutinizing the rope and
the stout bar in the stone to which it was connected, now
lifted his head.
“ The ro P e 13 made a grass which doesn’t grow on
our side o’ the mountain, boys,” he said; “ but the bar is
fashioned out o a metal which is known to all of us,
though we’ve never managed to possess it in sufficient
quantities to throw away on a job like this, where
C B 60‘) 32j x


simple iron would be far stronger and better in every
way.” , ,
“ Why 1 ” exclaimed Emu Bill. “ You doesn t mean to
say that they’ve stuck a chunk o’ gold in that there stone,
does ye ? ”
“I just do,” answered Mackay, wearily. Now, 1
think we’d better get out and think over things for a bit.
Two or three shocks o’ that sort would just about destroy
niy nervous system altogether.”
“ But you ain’t goin’ to leave that bonanza in the rock,
surely ? ” cried the Shadow. “ Let me get one tug at it,
boss, I’ll pretty soon yank it out, 111
But here his companions gently but firmly led him
away. , . , „.,
“ There’s bound to be lots more of it lying around, said
Jack, soothingly, as they retraced their steps.
When they reached the exit the light of the candle
showed them that the tunnel here swung off to the left at
a rffiht angle, and at this point the passage was consider-
ably wider than they had at first judged, probably owing
to the difficulty the natives had experienced in making
such a sharp turn. But the eye could distinguish nothing
beyond the radius of the feeble illumination; all was
oppressively murky and damp and repellent.
«That’s our road, boys,” said Mackay, pointing with
his candle into the gloomy cavern which led into the heart
of the mountain. “ But before we start on our journey
we’ll get out an’ make our final arrangements, an’ change
our wardrobe to suit the situation.
In a few minutes they were all on the surface once
more, eagerly talking over their prospects, _ for, strangely
enough, the dangerous aspect of their projected journey


through the mountain was for the moment lost on them, so
completely had the glamour of the golden tunnel exercised
its subtle influence, Mackay, however, quickly regained
his control.
“We must remember, boys,” he cautioned, “that we
have no ordinary natives to contend with, an’ before we
leave this camp it will be necessary to attend to some
details which may be helpful to us afterwards.”
“ "What would you suggest ? ” asked Bob.
“ In the first instance,” Mackay replied, “we should
hide the camel-packs containing our provisions. We can
easily do that out among the sand on the other side o’ the
springs. It won’t take us half an hour altogether,”
“ But what about the camels ? ” interjected Jack.
“ They are a good distance away, my lad, an’ they’re no’
hobbled. They’ll just have to take their chance; but I
don’t think there’s much risk in that direction, after all,
for Misery can’t stand the sight o’ a nigger, an’ if he
bolted, the rest would follow, an’ we could track them up
afterwards just as I had to do before in this same district.”
It was yet early in the day, and though Emu Bill was
loath to delay their tour of discovery even for five minutes,
he was brought to see the wisdom of Mackay’s advice.
Within half an hour the camp had assumed a bare and
desolate appearance, only the heavier mining implements
being left at the base of the mountain. Then they gathered
round the cleft in the rock, and hurriedly prepared for
their work of subterranean exploration. It had been
agreed that the party should don the robes of the deceased
warriors in order to lessen the chances of detection should
any natives be encountered while traversing the mysterious
passage, but now they saw that whereas there were five


persons to transform into savages, there were but four of
the long furry coverings, although the feathered decorations
for completing their sartorial equipment were more
numerous than necessary.
« j believe I saw one o’ them ’possum robes in the pit,
aside the hanging rock,” said Emu Bill, reflectively. 111
go an’ get it in a jiff.” _
He disappeared into the recess immediately, and Bob
heard him feeling his way back towards the old entrance,
muttering and grumbling against the awkward nature of
the dismal, muddy track at each floundering step. Then
for a brief space all was still.
“ A bit o’ charcoal rubbed over the face an neck will
make us more nigger-like, I'm thinkin’,” laughed Mackay,
as he surveyed himself with rueful gaze.
It was no sooner said than done. Jack rushed o\er to
the smouldering fire, and came back with a handful of
charred embers, and with these they smeared their faces
and hands plentifully.
“ An’ I reckon we won’t want our boots,” grunted the
Shadow, discarding his almost soleless shoes, and rolling
up the legs of his much-frayed nether garments.
“That’s right, Shadow,” said Mackay; “you make a
grand nigger, an’ I only hope I don t mistake you in the
dark for a real warrior, an’ slaughter you in error.”
Bob and Jack, when they had finished their toilet,
looked their part to the life; but when Mackay s towering
bulk was arrayed and besplatched to his satisfaction, he
seemed the most fearsome object imaginable, a formidable-
looking savage indeed.
“ How I wonder what’s keeping Bill ? ” broke out Jack,
impatiently. “ This rock here is burning my feet terribly.”


“ He’ll be tryin’ to wrench off that bit o’ gold from the
big stone,” remarked the Shadow, with assurance. “ I
reckon I’ll go down an’ help him.”
“ You’ll do nothing o’ the kind,” said Mackay, firmly,
laying a restraining hand on the youth’s shoulder. “ We’ve
got something else to do in the meantime, my lad. Bill
will be gropin’ in the dark for that nigger dress, an’ he’ll
be here in a minute.”
The Shadow’s feeble smile at being intercepted in his
desire to possess the treasure he so much coveted looked
so malevolent on his besmeared features, that Jack could
not forbear a hearty laugh. Then Bob gave a gasp of
dismay.
“ I can hear natives coming through the passage! ” he
said. “ "What are we to do about Bill ? ”
The vague echoes of shuffling movements were now
quite plainly heard, and still there was no sign from Emu
Bill; probably he had not yet become aware of the
ominous sounds, or perhaps he was, as the Shadow had
suggested, too much engrossed with a congenial task to grasp
their true significance. With a forceful expression on his
lips Mackay insinuated his muscular form into the gap, and
just at that instant a band of savages swept by him so
close that they almost touched him. Then only it seemed
that Emu Bill became aroused to his danger. A hoarse
snarl of rage rang along the passage, and the sounds of a
silent scuffle came to Mackay’s ears as he stood motionless
by the exit. With a stifled groan he pulled himself up,
just as the warriors had evidently accomplished their
work.
“ Have they killed him too ? ” whispered Jack,
nervously.


Mackay did not trust himself to reply. He motioned
Bob to hand him his rifle, and he was sliding back into
the passage with a vengeful rage in his heart when a
stentorian call from Emu Bill made him pause.
“ I’m not dead, boys,” he cried, “ but they’ve got me
trussed up like a prize fowl, an’ I don’t know what they’re
goin’ to do wi’ me. Block the light, or they 11 see where
I came in, an’ don’t try to save me now, for there s over a
score o’ the skunks. It’ll be all right, boys, all right. Ye
are a pack of miserable, sneakin’, howlin’ gorillas
The last phrase, which was continued at some length,
was obviously destined for his captors as they bore him
along. It was evident that Bill had suffered no serious
hurt at their hands, and his warning showed that, even
under such exceptionally trying circumstances, he was not
unmindful of the welfare of his comrades, who would
assuredly have been overcome had they descended to his
assistance. The bushman’s chivalric self-abnegation how-
ever would not have deterred Mackay from taking long odds
at a work of rescue, but in the gloom of the cavern such
action would have been futile, or perhaps worse, because
any shots fired at random might just as easily kill Emu
Bill as any one else, and the resultant chaos could only end
in one way. So Bill was led away by the savage band,
who gave vent to their satisfaction by sending forth shrill,
unmusical shouts, which rang through the vaulted chamber
like the cries of demons in torment. They passed by the
gap in the wall which Mackay’s bulk covered without a
moment’s pause, and marched slowly on into the heart of
the mountain.
When at last all discordant sounds had died away,
Mackay aroused himself with alacrity ; but when his gaze


fell upon the despondent countenances of his companions,
he could not forbear a smile; their dusky aspect and
warrior-like trappings agreed ill with their sorrowful
visages.
“ Now, my young savages,” he cried, “ try an look less
miserable. We’ve got to get through the mountain
somehow now, for I won’t leave Bill over there on his
own. See that you’ve got plenty of cartridges, my lads,
an’ let us go.” -
“ Poor old Bill! ” murmured the Shadow, sadly. “It
was that darned chunk o’ gold that did it, I reckon.
“Now that they’ve found some one in the tunnel,”
said Bob, wearily, “ they’ll most likely come back to set a
guard over the door; and when they find it won t open,
they’ll look around until they get this entrance, so that
we’ll be blocked completely from getting back.
Mackay was already halfway into the passage, hut he
climbed out again quickly on hearing Bob’s words.
“ You’re quite right, Bob,” said he, “ an’ there’s only
one thing to do before we start on Bill’s trail. I don’t
like the idea o’ it, but I believe it’s the best plan.”
They all hurried over to the barricaded entrance of the
fissure, and straightway began to pull aside the great
rocks they had placed there so carefully the night before.
Already Mackay’s forethought in hiding the stores of the
expedition was about to bear good fruit. If the blacks
came out now, as they undoubtedly would, they would
find nothing to destroy of any importance, and it was
extremely unlikely that the natural-looking crack in the
rock further along the hill would receive their attention;
and, even if it did, the adventurous four would run no
more risk than if they had left the barricaded cre\ ice


intact. Mackay calculated much on the blind, unreasoning
ardour of the blacks.
“ They won’t come out in the daytime if they think
we’re about,” said he, grimly, “ and in the night they can
see nothing, anyhow, though I hope we haven’t to dodge
about in that passage for such a length o’ time.”
Jack now bethought himself of a brilliant scheme
whereby the purposes of the free exit would be served
without danger of the blacks profiting much thereby. He
found poor Never Never Dave’s empty rifle lying near,
and this he carefully propped up by the aid of several
boulders with the long barrel directed fairly at the great
stone door.
“ They’ll think there’s a man behind the gun,” said he,
chuckling in boyish glee, “ and whenever they open the
concern they’ll pop back again mighty quick.”
“ It’s a vera excellent idea, Jack,” approved Mackay.
“ Now, surely, we can go our way in peace.”
They returned to the rent in the mountain which the
explosive had made, and without further hesitation stepped
down into the depths below, and Mackay, who was the
last to descend, dragged with him a number of empty
flour bags with which he effectually screened the little
light which filtered between the sundered rocks. All was
still in the passage as they felt then’ way cautiously
forward, hugging the walls for guidance, their bare feet
plashing in the oozy mire. Mackay and Bob led the way,
each pressing against the opposite sides of the passage for
support. Jack and the Shadow followed, more secure of
their steps, knowing that the way was proved before them.
On, on, they struggled; Bob would have dearly liked
to light a match, but that would have been extremely


foolhardy at such a critical juncture of their pilgrimage,
as it would betray their presence to any aboriginal who
might happen to be lurking near.
Already they seemed to have been an age in the stifling
cavern, though but a few minutes had elapsed since their
entry. The tunnel, as nearly as Bob could judge, had
continued on a straight course, but it was hard to estimate
with certainty how great a distance had been traversed.
Suddenly Mackay stopped and clutched Bob’s arm in a
vice-like grip.
“ There’s a hole o’ some sort at our feet,” he whispered,
as the lad stumbled backwards.
Bob put forward one foot gingerly, but it met with no
resistance ; assuredly a dangerous void intervened in their
path. In vain they sought across the full width of the
passage for a foothold; not an inch of solid ground
remained, and the clayey particles dislodged by their
essaying footsteps fell down into an unknown depth, and
sundry gurgles and splashes echoed back as they reached
the bottom.
“ There’s no scarcity o’ water there,” remarked Mackay;
then he felt over as far as he could reach with his rifle,
and at the utmost limit of his stretch something hard
interposed. “ It’s just like a shaft cutting down through
the lode,” he murmured; “ but how the beggars get across
it beats me to understand.”
“We could take it at a jump, I think,” suggested
Jack.
“ I’m afraid we’d slip into the water if we tried, my lad.
It’s no’ easy gettin’ a firm footing in this clay for a start.
No, I think I’ll throw the Shadow across first an’ he can
steady us from the other side.”


“ Say, boss,” said that individual, plaintively, “ I ain’t
no flying machine or human bullet. I reckon my tender
bones won’t get damaged so much if I jump ”
But while they stood thus deliberating as how best to
surmount the difficulty, the dreaded sound of approaching
natives fell dully on their ears. The Shadow uttered a
stifled groan and his rifle-lock clicked under his impetuous
fingers. Jack gave a faint whistle of dismay, and Bob
calmly drew and cocked his revolver. Mackay stood
unmoved, straining his eyes into the gloom; then he gently
pressed Bob back close to the wall.
“ Hug the side,” he whispered; and each one crushed
hard against the slimy rock, and waited.
Pat! pat! pat! came the unwelcome echoes, accom-
panied by an occasional splash, as the oncoming band
floundered in the mire, and the direction from which the
disturbance came was away decidedly to the left, although
it was speedily altering to a point straight ahead. Bob
noted this fact carefully, despite his alarm.
Nearer and nearer the unseen band advanced until but
a few yards separated them from the yawning pit. Bob
held his breath. Would they walk blindly into it ? Had
they miscalculated its position ? He felt Mackay s hand
press lightly on his shoulder as if to give him confidence,
and he marvelled at its steadiness, and braced himself for
the encounter he felt sure was about to begin. He could
hear Jack’s heart throbbing under the severe tension of
the moment, and the Shadow’s quick breaths indicated
how trying was the strain even for that iron-nerved youth.
But now came the crucial moment; the foremost savage
shrieked out a guttural word of warning, as it seemed, and
stopped, apparently on the edge of the chasm. A second


later and his feet alighted with a sharp, sliding sound
close opposite Bob, and with a recovering effort he passed
on. He was followed immediately by another and still
another warrior, whose arrows rustled in their hands as
they cleared the gulf. If one of them had slipped there
could have been little hope of escape for the intrepid
quartet, for assuredly the slightest stumble would have
sent him right into their arms. But no disaster of the
kind occurred, each wildly-leaping figure arrived safely on
the slippery floorway beside them and lunged forward
with the momentum of his flight, and in this way fifteen
warriors passed and proceeded on their way; then all was
quiet again.
Mackay broke the silence. “ That was a close shave,
my lads,” said he, coolly. “ Now, I wonder if any of you
noticed how they got across so sprightly ? ”
“ I reckon they jumped,” grunted the Shadow, “ an’ I
is mighty pleased they jumped so well.”
“It would be a good jump,” whispered Bob; “ but they
cleared it too easily without a run.”
“ I think I’ll risk lighting a match,” said Mackay.
“ There’s a bend in the tunnel straight forward a bit, so
nothing can be seen past that, an’ the niggers that have
passed will probably be dodgin’ the barrel o’ Never Never’s
rifle by this time.”
A howl of terror from that extremity of the tunnel
almost verified his surmise. Mackay calmly struck a
match, held it aloft for an instant, and blew it out
hurriedly, but in that fleeting moment Bob caught sight of
a stout rope suspended from a beam directly over the pit,
and he also observed that at this point the roof of the
tunnel was considerably farther above them than it had


been at the start of their journey. Evidently, greater
work of excavation had been done at this part of the
golden lode. Mackay groped forward and seized the rope,
gave it a tug to test its strength, then swung himself
lightly across the obstacle which had delayed them so
long. Bob went next, then Jack and Shadow trusted their
weight to the flying trapeze.
“ They might just as well have put a log or two across
that shaft,” murmured Mackay.
“ Yes, I reckon it would be a long sight handier for
visitors,” agreed the Shadow; and they plodded on once
more. Slowly, slowly, they advanced, and now Bob
became conscious of a growing change in the atmosphere;
it was surely becoming less and less stifling, and the over-
powering odours which had been with them so long were
gradually dispelling. Bound to the left bore Mackay, and
Bob followed, wondering vaguely if the light of the out-
side world would soon burst upon them, but no sign of
lessening gloom cheered them on their altered course.
Another few minutes passed, then Mackay stopped with
an exclamation of surprise, the solid wall had reared up
before him ; they had been following a blind drive!
“ I’m certain I heard them coming round this way,” he
said, feeling with his hand across the barring rock as if in
search of some clue to the mystery.
“We may have taken a wrong turning,” suggested
Bob, much perplexed. Then he missed Jack beside him,
and the Shadow too had disappeared. “ They’re both
gone,” he muttered anxiously.
“ That shows there must be a branch off somewhere,”
said Mackay, cheerily. “ They must have been hugging
the right wall while we clutched on to the left. We’ll


hang in to the right going hack, Bob, an’ well get back on
to the main passage.”
And back they went, striving vainly to quell the
rising fear in their hearts, for both were more alarmed
than they cared to admit over the absence of then-
comrades. At last they reached the awkward turn, and
almost, at the same moment, floundering footsteps were
heard approaching from a new direction, almost continuous
with the line along which they had just returned. !Not a
word was spoken, and the two stood motionless at the
junction of the ways waiting for some sign which would
indicate to them whether their near neighbours were
friends or foes. And even as they stopped, the sounds
which had attracted their attention ceased abruptly, and
for a short space all was still. But it was only for a
short space; away back in the distance the harsh cries
of the returning warriors thundered along the passage.
Apparently they had not ventured out beyond the
mountain, and that knowledge was satisfactory enough,
but what of the new danger which threatened by their
retreat ? There was no deep chasm to distract the savages’
notice at this point. On they came, their unmusical voices
raised in a droning chant which might equally well have
expressed joy or regret so far as Bob could make out.
Then it suddenly struck him that they would imagine the
white invaders of their domain to be still outside, despite
their capture of Emu Bill in the well-guarded precincts,
and were duly rejoicing in consequence. Over the watery
pit they swung, nearer and nearer they drew. Then out
of the deep gloom opposite clicked the hammer of a rifle,
sure evidence that it was Jack and the Shadow who waited
near. But it was too late now to speak, and the way of


safety was unknown. Mackay and Bob pressed backwards
whence they had last come, and the foremost savage almost
brushed up against them as he felt for the wall. Bob’s
hand was on the trigger of his revolver ready to fire, but
the warrior with a grunt passed over the entrance to their
retreat, and stumbled onwards into the unexplored dark-
ness ahead. And in this way the invisible band trooped
by, nor did they once pause to investigate the openings on
their left or right.
When they had passed out of hearing, a cautious voice
whispered hoarsely from the darkness—
“Is ye there, boss ? Shout out quick, for lis goin’ to
shoot.”
“ Keep your finger off that trigger, you nervous young
rascal,” responded Mackay, sternly; and at the words the
lost pair issued forth from their hiding, and rejoined their
companions.
“It was all owing to our following the right hand
wall,” Jack hastened to explain. “We didn’t know you
weren’t with us until we came to the end.”
“ Another blind drive,” muttered Mackay. “ This is
getting very confusing. It’s just as well the niggers came
back again to show us the way,”
“And it was just as well they came back while we
were off the main track,” said Bob; “ otherwise we might
have had trouble.”
Then they moved on along the middle track which they
had been fortunate not to find at first, and for the space of
several minutes not a word was spoken. There was no
doubt about the hazardous nature of the mission on which
they were employed; and Bob smiled grimly to himself as
he reckoned up the chances against them, yet, strangely


enough, each member of the expedition seemed in no wise
to consider his own safety, and was fully determined to
meet the best or worst that Fate had in store. A period
had come in their lives when the call of the Unknown was
irresistible; and had this for a moment failed them, the
firm desire to rescue Emu Bill from the clutches of the
savages would have sent them steadily onwards, recklessly
ignoring the cost, for the wanderer’s creed is simple and
O O 1
sincere—he may never forsake a comrade in deadly peril.
Their progress was painfully slow, for they knew not
what obstacles might lie in their path, and probably it had
been a miscalculation of their own pace that had led Mackay
into error, when he turned into the drive along which he
fancied he had heard the blacks approaching, for now the
tunnel was distinctly curving to the left, and the occasional
rush of fresh air which swept into their faces told them
quite plainly that they were on the highway to the outside
world. Slowly, too, the darkness began to merge into a
gloom less and less profound, until the floor and sides of
the cavern they traversed became dimly discernible.”
“We won’t be long now, my lads,” encouraged
Mackay.
“ I is gettin’ mighty nervous,” murmured the Shadow,
cheerfully. “I reckon I’ll go back home. This ain’t no
place for a youth o’ tender years, it ain’t.”
Bob laughed quietly at his companion’s happy pessimism,
and was about to make a reply when a faint buzzing sound
in the unseen distance ahead drew his attention. Mackay,
too, had heard it, and he stopped for an instant to listen
more intently.
“ What is it ? ” asked Jack, trying vainly to make out
the cause of the vague noises.


“ It’s natives—at a distance, Jack, my lad,” said Mackay.
“ They’re outside the tunnel; so we’ll be all right if there’s
no’ too many o’ them. I’m just hoping we’ve seen the full
strength o’ the tribe already,”
They resumed their march; and now they had less
difficulty in making progress owing to the continued
increase of light, and as they proceeded the confused babel
of voices became more and more distinct. The tunnel was
by this time veering back towards its original course. Then
suddenly a bright light flashed upon them as through a
giant lens. The exit of the tunnel was in sight at last!
Once more Mackay stopped, and was on the point of making
some cautionary remark ; but even while he turned the
bright circle ahead was darkened, and several natives
entered. A word at that moment might have proved
disastrous, and Bob gripped Mackay’s arm just in time;
scarcely twenty yards separated them from their enemies.
The big man hesitated only for a moment, then quickly
concealed his rifle under his long cloak and walked slowly
forward, his companions copying his example without a
murmur.
The oncoming warriors were now close beside them ;
but in the semi-light of the cavern their dusky faces could
not be distinguished. By this time they had apparently
become aware of the presence of the dauntless four, for they
stepped aside to let them pass, and addressed Mackay in a
series of unintelligible ejaculations—presumably of inquiry
—to which that gentleman answered by a non-committal
grunt, and strode on his way. And for the third time
within an hour the natives brushed by the little group,
and left them unmolested ; but on this occasion it was the
efficacy of their disguise which saved them —a fact which


made the Shadow effervesce with delight. However, it
was yet too early to rejoice, and Bob and Jack restrained
their spirits with an effort. As for Mackay, he made no
sign that anything unusual had happened, and walked on
calmly as before, but a repressed cry of wonder burst from
his lips when he reached the end of the tunnel and gazed
beyond on the land which they had so eagerly sought, and
his companions echoed his cry when they, too, looked on
the scene which lay before them. And little wonder, for
their eyes were drinking in a vision of rare beauty—it was
as if a glimpse of a tropical paradise had been vouchsafed
them. In the near distance the waters of a crystal lake
glistened in the sunshine, and lapped a coral-white beach,
while, fringing its outer edge, and extending back and
upwards, a luxurious forest in miniature lay spread. The
sight was wonderfully cool and exhilarating to the beholders
so long accustomed to the arid desert. Here certainly was
no lack of water, no absence of shade.
But in their first hasty glance at the entrancing picture
none of the watchers had noticed the many bower-like
structures which lined the edge of the abundant foliage;
and now Jack drew attention to this feature of the land-
scape with some concern.
“ There must be quite a population in the valley
said he.
Mackay nodded gravely. “My calculations have been
all out,” he remarked in a subdued voice. Then his rage
rose again. “But I’ll no’ go back,” he added fiercely,
“ until I have avenged my old comrades. I couldna do it,
my lads. But you ”
“ Will stay with you,” interrupted Bob, quietly.
“ I reckon something’s goin’ to happen pretty sudden,”
(B 607) 337 y


grumbled the Shadow, craning his neck out of the tunnel,
and looking all around anxiously.
The voices which they had heard while in the far back
recesses of the passage reached their ears close beside them,
and towards the right. In their eagerness they had over-
looked the near vicinity while absorbed in contemplation
of the tiny lake and forest beyond ; but now the Shadow’s
gaze rested upon a crouching circle of warriors less than
forty yards from him, and it seemed as if each gaudily-
bedecked native was eyeing the figures at the mouth of the
underground passage with the keenest interest.
“ Look, boss,” said the Shadow, “ they seem to be quite
tame. The critters must have seen us all the time.”
Mackay raved silently at his lack of perception, and
drawing back into the recess, examined his rifle, and felt
for his cartridge-belt underneath his furry garb.
“ Why,” said Bob, “ we forget we appear to be savages
too; they won’t think there is anything wrong.”
But in this conjecture Bob was soon proved to be
very much mistaken. Immediately the Shadow with-
drew his head, an animated discussion appeared to take
place among the blacks, and their voices were raised to
an alarming pitch. Bob, though still keeping in the
shade, could see the dusky ring clearly by pressing hard
against the rocky wall on his left, and he noted with
dismay the growing disturbance which followed the
advent and withdrawal of his companion’s befeathered
cranium.
“ It’s no use, Bob,” said Mackay, coming up beside him,
“They know we are not the genuine article apparently,
an’ we’ve got to fight now whether we will or no.”
Yet still no attempt was made on the part of the


natives to come to closer quarters with the intruders,
although many had arisen, bows in hand, as if impatient
for the fray.
“ There’s a curious old chap sitting in the middle,” said
Jack, peering out of his shelter; “I wonder if he has
anything to do with their hesitation ? He seems to have
a lot to say.”
Bob looked again, and caught a glimpse of an odd
wizened figure sitting amid the gesticulating warriors,
and evidently endeavouring to restrain their ardour. He
had not been observable before, but a gap made in the
circle by the sudden movement of the restless hand had
revealed him, as Jack had quickly noticed.
“He must he their king,” remarked Mackay; “ but
it’s vera strange that he should want to delay the
circus.”
The grizzled old native certainly appeared to have
considerable influence over the others; there could be
no doubt that he was a leader of some sort, and his
policy was clearly not the policy of his followers, at
which the watchers by the tunnel marvelled exceedingly.
For several minutes he continued to address the multitude,
glancing occasionally towards the objects of their wrath
and waving his hand as if signalling for some one on the
o o o
heights through which Mackay and his companions had
come. But at last he ceased his wordy exhortations, and
slowly arose to his feet, donning as he did so a gigantic
head-dress fashioned out of the skin of some peculiar
animal, the grinning head of which had been cunningly
retained in its pristine shape, so that the living creature
seemed to glare out savagely over the thick locks of
the wearer; and as he stood thus arrayed a tumultuous


roar issued from the lips of the awaiting horde, and they
turned in a mass and marched straight for the opening to
the underground passage.
“ Old Nebuchadnezzar has put his war-paint on at
last,” muttered Mackay. “Now, my lads, let us rush
them while we can. If we can stop them even for a
minute we’ll win the day in spite o’ their numbers.”
“ Let her go, boss! ” yelled the Shadow from behind,
and Mackay, with a hoarse bellow of anger, dashed for-
ward to meet the foe, his impetuous comrades bounding
closely at his heels. All were filled with the mad desire
to slay until the last. The lust of battle had taken hold
of them completely; no thought of the probable grim
finale was theirs.
Their wild advance caused the blacks to hesitate
momentarily, and the front rank crowded back. Bob
noticed in a flash the advantage which had thus been
given, and he knew why Mackay had so suddenly left the
shelter of the cavern. While the natives hustled together
not a bow could be bent. Quickly he dropped on one
knee beside his leader. Jack and the Shadow falling into
line as if by a preconceived arrangement. Had they dis-
charged their rifles at that crucial moment their enemy
would have been mowed down before the leaden hail.
But ere a finger pressed the trigger, the old chief, with a
shrill cry, which was heard high above the din, leapt in
front of his myrmidons, and, with an almost regal gesture,
waved them back. That he himself escaped being riddled
with bullets was a lasting testimony to the iron nerves of
the dauntless four who, even at such a critical juncture,
disdained to fire on one whose face was turned away from
them. But they recovered themselves promptly and


2fig*J£ A# A¥<'
IASf jfl
' P x w*
** ' 'f*- V"
“ MACK AY RUSHED TO MEET THE NEW-COMER 55


%
<
i


prepared to follow up their apparent triumph, yet the
ancient warrior stayed them with outstretched hand.
“ I’ll soon throw him out of the way,” roared Mackay,
dashing forward.
Before he reached the patriarchal chief, however, a
stentorian call from behind arrested his attention, and he
stood rooted to the spot, dazed and bewildered. Again
the cry sounded in his ears —
“ Come back, Jim ; for God’s sake, come back. There’s
three hundred against you.”
He staggered and would have fallen, had not Bob’s
strong arm supported him; then he turned almost fearfully.
Five tall figures were hastening!, frantically down the hill-
side, and the foremost was the watcher of the summit.
As in a dream Mackay raised his rifle, and he did not
seem to notice when Bob pressed the deadly tube down.
He was gazing with wild staring eyes at the approaching
form.
“ Great Centipedes! ” howled the Shadow, in amaze-
ment. “ It’s a -white man ! ”
That broke the spell. With a hoarse exclamation,
Mackay rushed to meet the new-comer.
“ Dick ! ” he cried.
“Yes, it’s me, Jim,” came the answer. “I knew you
would come.”


CHAPTER XVI
The Prisoners by the Mount
SILENTLY the two men clasped hands. Mackay could
not trust himself to speak, so strong was his emotion
at meeting his old leader in the flesh after ha% ing gL en
him up as dead for over a year.
« Yes, I knew you would come, Jim,” repeated Richard
Bentley, the explorer, “and month after month I have
watched for you on the mountain-top, hoping yet fearing
for your coming.”
“ But the hones ? ” murmured Mackay, questioningly.
“ x—saw —the bones ?
Bentley smiled. “ I wouldn’t have thought it of you,
Jim,” he said, his eyes twinkling with amusement. “ But
I see you must have fallen into the error you used to
preach so much against. Where were your powers of
observation? I am sure you would have known the
difference between camels’ bones and human hones if you
had examined them. But I know how you must have
felt, old man, and I don’t wonder at your mistake at such
a terrible moment. They burnt the camels, Jim, because
they could never take them through the passage in the
mountain ”
“ Wham is ma auld enemy ? ” roared an interrupting
voice, and a lithe figure in savage habiliments spun into the


midst of the group, blowing tempestuously. The impetus
of his flight down the steep hillside was only brought to
a close when he bounced against Mackay like a weighty
stone from a catapult.
“ I kent it was you! I kent it was you ! ” he cried, in
honest delight; “ I couldna mistak’ that sweet visage o’
yours even though it’s half changed its colour.”
“ Stewart, you red-heided rascal, you’ve knocked the
wind clean oot o’ me,” replied Mackay, sternly, shaking his
aggressor’s hand nevertheless with hearty warmth. “ I
might have known that nothing could have killed you.”
Two others now pressed up, their sun-tanned and
bearded features fairly glowing with delight. They were
Phil, the geologist, and Pioneer Bill, the bushman of
Bentley’s party, and their joy at seeing their lost comrade
again was affecting in its sincerity.
Emu Bill was the next to approach. “ I knew you
wouldn’t be long after me, Mac,” he said, “ but I’m blowed
if I expected you to bounce through so sudden. Bentley,
here, mesmerized the nigs that scooped me in, or I should
have been dead meat by this time. They seemed mighty
unwilling to let me go, all the same, an’ I was a bit
anxious ’bout your reception, I was.”
Meanwhile Bob stood a little way apart, his heart
filled with gladness at the happy reunion. Jack and
the Shadow were calmly leaning on their rifles, and
keeping a watchful glance on the old cliief, who in turn
was eyeing the boys with a smile on his wrinkled counte-
nance. About a hundred yards behind him his massed
warriors stood, silent and grim.
“ I reckon we should go an’ wash the filthy black off
our faces,” said the Shadow to Jack; “it feels mighty


uncomfortable, it does.’’ Then he gazed at his companion
in surprise. “Why,” he cried, “you’re face is marked
like the bars o’ a cage. What has you been doin’ to it ? ”
Jack laughed. “ I had forgotten that we ought to be
black,” said he, “ or I could have told you that yours was
like the moon under partial eclipse.”
“ And how about mine ? ” asked Bob.
“Clean washed off,” answered Jack. “But look at
Mackay; isn’t his a treat ? It’s striped like the zebra in
a circus.”
Mackay heard the remark, and put up his hand to his
cheek. “Well, well,” he said, in disgust, “here I was
fancyin’ myself to be black as the ace o’ spades. No
wonder the niggers thought there was something no’
right about our get-up. It must have been j:he water
dripping from the roof o’ the passage.” Then he turned to
Bob. “ It’s a good thing we passed that last batch inside
the tunnel, Bob.”
Bob nodded gravely, then discarded his cumbersome
robe, and straightened out his sinewy form with a sigh of
relief.
“ Now, boys,” said Mackay, quietly, addressing himself
to Bentley and his comrades, “ I want to introduce to you
my three young comrades, who have stuck by me on
a journey that has tried the nerves and beaten some o’ the
finest explorers who ever tackled the desert. Come
forward, Shadow, an’ you, Jack —a pair o’ reckless young
rascals, true as steel, an’ without fear ”
“ I say, boss,” protested the Shadow, “ do let me have
a scrimmage wi’ a nigger or two, just to show how brave I
really is. lis just burstin’ wi’ bravery ”
Jack at this stage dragged him aside.


“ And you, Bob,” continued Mackay, and his voice
unconsciously became softened, “ what can I say for you 1
Only this, my lad, that without you this expedition would
never have reached the mountain. To you belongs a’ the
credit that my auld friends here shower upon me ”
“ No, no,” broke in Bob, hastily; “it is just like you to
say so, but I’ll not allow it. I was only the navigator
under your supervision.”
Mackay placed his hand on the youth’s shoulder.
“ Bob,” he said gently, “ I have a confession to make. I’ll
admit that I ken how to handle a sextant an’ read the
vernier, but beyond that I canna go, I wasna able to
check your observations, my laddie, but I was afraid to
tell you before, lest it might make you nervous to ken
that a’ our lives depended on your skill. Here now,
at the end o’ our journey, 1 wish to give you the credit
which is your due.”
Bentley smiled as he grasped Bob’s hand. “ Sextant
or no sextant,” he said, “you couldn’t go far out in
Mackay’s company, my boy. I know him of old. But
why, your face seems strangely familiar to me;
surely ”
Mackay shrugged his broad shoulders, and smiled a
happy smile.
“You haud on a bit, Dick,” he said. “I have a few
words to say to Bob which I hesitated to speak earlier,
for—for obvious reasons. Do you remember when I first
met Jack and you, Bob ? ” he asked.
“ I should say so,” answered Bob, fervently. “ I have
had cause to thank ”
The big man shook his head deprecatingly. “ And do
you know why I, who am a—a very unsociable individual


at the best, encouraged you in your wish to go out to
Australia, an’ even offered you the extraordinar’ advantage
o’ my company on the journey ? No, of course you don’t.
It was because I knew that uncle you spoke of, my lad.”
“You knew him?” cried Bob. “But you didn’t
say ”
“ I thought he was dead,” broke in Mackay, gravely;
“ but I was mistaken. He was, an’ is, vera much alive—
an’ his name is Richard Bentley Wentworth.”
“ Great Heavens ! ” ejaculated Bentley, gazing at Bob
earnestly. “ Can it be true ? But of course it is. How
could I have been so blind.”
Then the scales fell from Bob’s eyes. “ Uncle Dick ! ”
he cried, rushing forward.
“My dear, dear lad,” murmured the explorer, clasping
him in his arms. “ This is the first happiness I have had
for ten years. You are a worthy son of a worthy father,
ray boy. Thank God I have lived to see you.”
To say that the onlookers to this strange scene were
surprised would ill express the state of their feelings.
They were simply thunderstruck. Then Jack found his
voice. “ Hurrah !” he shouted, in an ecstasy of glee, and
hurried to clasp his comrade’s hand. Eagerly they all
crowded round to offer their congratulations, and Mackay
stood alone, a smile of peaceful contentment stealing
over his grim old features.
“Yes,” he muttered, “there is some satisfaction in
the wanderer’s life after a’. Bob steered us here, which
was right, but Mackay will be the man to lead the back
trail through the mountain.”
“ I fully believe you, Jim,” said a voice at his elbow,
and Bentley laid an affectionate grasp upon his arm.


The whole of the little drama had been enacted within
the space of a few minutes, and the actors theiein had
apparently become oblivious to the fact that a hand of
impatient blacks were drawn up in aggressive order at no
great distance. They were not allowed to remain long in
this blissful state, however, for the aged chief suddenly
hastened forward, and shrilled a few words to Bentley,
which had the effect of arousing that happy man to a true
sense of his responsibilities. He answered the old
warrior in an odd monosyllabic language, which he spoke
with perfect ease, much to the astonishment of the
youthful members of the group, who had never before
heard a white man converse so fluently in the savage
tongue. For some moments they held high consultation
thus, and Bob was quick to observe a shade of dire uneasi-
ness steal over the features of his newly found relative;
and he noticed, too, that the natives in the background
were gradually drawing nearer and nearer, while loud,
angry mutterings filled their ranks.
It was at this stage that Stewart whispered something
into Mackay’s ear which made that gentleman frown
deeply, hesitate for a brief instant, then surreptitiously
remove the magazine of his rifle; and his three companions,
obeying a signal from his eye, quickly unloaded their
weapons and secreted the cartridges. Bentley seemed to
have been conscious of these proceedings, for it was only
when the firearms had been rendered harmless that he
turned and addressed the party.
“ I don’t wish to alarm you, boys,” he said, “ but the
king, who has always been a good friend of mine, tells me
that his warriors are getting beyond his control, and
nothing short of a miracle can save us. You killed four


of them, yon see, and wounded about a dozen more, and,
by their law, a life must pay for a life.”
“ That s vera comforting,” grunted Mackay, preparing
to reload his rifle afresh, and glaring savagely at Stewart
the while.
“Don’t! For Heaven’s sake don’t do that, Jim,” ex-
claimed Bentley. “Lay down your rifles, and I’ll try and
talk them over.”
Reluctantly each proffered his deadly weapon to the
king, who received it with unconcealed joy,
“ We’ve still got our revolvers,” whispered Jack to
Stewart, who was looking very sorrowful indeed.
let still the warriors came surging on, despite their
old king s frenzied expostulations. In vain he displayed
the trophies he had received in proof of the good intentions
of the visitors, and as his followers crowded heedlessly
forward, his wrath at his own impotence was terrible to
witness.
Mackay was deciding on the bold stroke of retaking
the weapons from the king’s grasp, when Bentley stepped
slowly out to meet the angry mob. He was greeted with
shrill yells, the dominant note of which seemed to be fear
and expectancy rather than fury.
“He’ll be killed! he’ll be killed!” cried Jack,
making as if to dash to his assistance.
The Shadow restrained him. “ I reckon he’s all right,”
said he. “ Them nigs is howlin’ wi’ terror, they are.”
“ What power can he have over them ? ” asked Bob, in
awe, as he watched the single man sway the fiery multi-
tude with his calm, words. Phil, the geologist, who was
by his side, answered him.
“Your uncle’s knowledge of aboriginal tribes has


stood us all in good stead before this,” he said quietly.
“ Listen to that cry. Can you make anything of it ? ”
“ It sounds like Bilya Backan,” Bob said, straining his
ears to catch the prevailing shouts.
“ Bilya Backan ! ” exclaimed Mackay. “ Has Dick got
that position here ? Ah, well, it means that we are safe
enough so long as he keeps his power ; but I can see
trouble ahead when he tries to get away.”
“ Why, what does it mean ? ” questioned Bob, in
wonder.
“ Mean ? It means that he is the sorcerer o’ this tribe,
and will be guarded night and day if they think he wants
to clear out. But, hallo ! he doesna seem to be succeed-
ing just as well as he should. It seems to me I’d better
be sorcerer number two, an’ devise an opportune miracle.”
Bentley, indeed, appeared to have great difficulty in
quelling the unruly spirit of the savage warriors. They
crowded around him almost threateningly, and brandished
their bows and clubs in half-restrained fury. The unhappy
king had joined his more powerful friend, and was lending
his high-pitched voice to the uproar. Mackay uncon-
cernedly chipped at something he held in his hand with
the point of his sheath-knife, then stalked jauntily towards
the gesticulating throng.
“ Keep back, Jim! keep back! ” warned Bentley.
“ You are the man they want principally. Keep back, if
you value your life.”
“You canna kill me, Dick,” laughed Mackay. “I’ve
come over to work a miracle to that effect.”
Yet to all appearances it seemed as if the resourceful
Scot was tempting Providence to too great a degree in the
present instance. The blacks redoubled their clamour at


his approach, and one false move on the part of Bentley
at this juncture would assuredly have brought about his
companion’s doom, but he did not once turn his back on
the truculent band.
«What wild idea have you got ? ” he cried over his
shoulder. “I think I’ll manage them all right. I'm
telling them that the spirit of the thunder killed their
brethren for their own misdeeds.”
“ That’s good enough,” said Mackay. “ But you’d
better tell them you’ve decided to slaughter me right off
now, only that you’re afraid Wangul, the maist powerful
god in their calendar’, will protect me, seein I m an auld
friend o’ his. Get my rifle from old Methuselah, Dick;
let me load it, an’ shoot me with the first cartridge.
Savvy ? ”
Bentley pretended not to hear, but he spoke out several
sentences rapidly, which evidently pleased the warriors
mightily, then he signed to the king to fetch the rifles.
“ The long-barrelled one’s mine, Dick,” cautioned
Mackay. “ Ah, that’s right.”
He seized his treasured weapon, and in a trice had
inserted two cartridges, and closed the breech, leaving one
in the barrel. Bentley received back the deadly firearm
with evident trepidation, and once more addressed the
multitude.
“ Hear ye, 0 my people,” he cried, in their own weird
tongue. “ The friend of Wangul, the mighty dweller in
the waters, whose breath dries up the land and makes it
desolate, stands before you and dares the strength of the
big thunder. If it so be that he dies by the spirit which
issueth forth when the thunder speaks, then shall you
work your will upon the others. But if he lives and


defies the spirit, then surely is he indeed in the guarding
care of Wangul, and must be permitted to go unhurt with
his brethren to partake of food with me in my home by
the hillside.”
Mackay smiled grimly as he gathered the text of the
speech, but a great roar from the assembled blacks indi-
cated that the arrangement met with their full approval.
Bentley raised the rifle with an obvious effort, and at the
action a wild cry of alarm broke from the lips of the little
group in the rear, who had never dreamt that Mackay’s
promised miracle was to take on such a deadly aspect of
reality. And now the 'withered old chief created a diver-
sion. With a gurgle of joy he sprang forward and took
the rifle from Bentley’s unresisting hands, and levelling it
almost against Mackay’s broad chest, pulled the trigger.
A terrific explosion followed, and Bentley uttered a groan
of anguish. The miracle, as he had understood it, was to
have been accomplished by Ids firing wide, and he had
relinquished the firearm, never thinking that the wily king
of the savages meant to do other than lay it aside with the
others. To his intense astonishment, however, and to the
amazement of the massed blacks, the “ friend of Wangul ”
stood erect and smiling after the thunderous reverberation
had died away.
A loud cheer from his comrades behind showed how
truly thankful they were at his marvellous escape from
what had looked like certain death, but the most
astounded of all present was, undoubtedly, the dusky
individual who had fired the shot; he pranced about with
the reeking rifle still in his hands, shrieking out all sorts
of incantations. Suddenly he stopped short, opened and
closed the breech of the gun, thereby forcing another


cartridge into position, and, with a crafty smile on his
lips, directed the long tube at a stalwart savage standing
near, and fired. The unoffending victim uttered a yell
like a wounded dingo, and sprang several feet into the
air, then subsided on the ground, and writhed in torment
with a bullet-hole clean through his shoulder. That was
enough. "With droning wails of fear the natives drew
back in alarm, gazing at the man who had withstood a
similar shock with wild, staring eyes. Bentley knelt
down and examined the wounded native, then, calling two
of his brethren, who came forward reluctantly, he gave
them some directions for his treatment. The king mean-
while was grovelling on the ground, his head beating the
dust, and his voice raised in feeble lamentation ; and,
while he was thus prostrated, Jack crept stealthily up
and gathered in the rifles lying near.
“ That will be another miracle for the old beggar to
explain," said he, when he rejoined his companions.
“ You’ve fairly frightened the old fellow to death,
Jim," remarked Bentley, stooping over the fallen
monarch. “ I’ll tell you about him afterwards; but he
was proof against all sorts of sorceries, and now I
shouldn’t wonder if he turns over a new leaf, and goes in
for the extremest forms of savagery. But come with us
to our retreat. There are many things we have to talk
over to-night. This day has been a wonderful one for all
of us.”
“ You might tell me, boss, how you dodged the
bullet ? ” pleaded the Shadow, as they all walked along
together.
“Yes, that is a matter I should like to understand,”
added Bentley.


The big man laughed. “ The explanation is vera
simple,” said he. “ There wasna any bullet in the first
cartridge ; I took it oot aforehand ! ”
“ You’re just the same auld deceitfu’ schemer you
used to be,” murmured Stewart, sorrowfully. “ I’m fair
shocked at your woefu’ depravity. You would actually
bamboozle the puir heathen ! ”
“ What’s that you’ve got inside your cloak ? ” de-
manded Mackay, slyly, noting an odd protuberance in
his corrector’s garment.
Stewart beamed. “ That’s a vera dangerous gun, Mac,
ma man,” he answered solemnly, “ an’ I’m takin’ it awa’
in case the unfortunate niggers might dae themselves
damage wi’ it.”
They had been so engrossed in their mutual recrimi-
nations that Mackay had not noticed the odd logged
structure which now appeared before them; it was half
hidden amid a splendid group of lime and cedar trees
which occurred in the valley, about two hundred yards to
the north of the tunnel entrance, and the waters of the
beautiful lake lapped the white sands within a few paces
of it. Mackay gave a rough glance round to make sure
of his position. The sun had descended behind the
frowning barrier range, and a gloom was settling over
the valley.
Bentley guessed his thoughts. “ I know every foot of
the country, Jim,” he said quietly. “Well talk over
our plans to-night. What have we got in the larder,
Stewart ? ”
I caught ane or twa fish this morning,” answered
that individual, smilingly. “I thought we might have
some visitors to keep us company.”
(B 607) 353 z


“ And there’s bread made from wild bananas,” added
Phil. “ It’s not half bad, though it will take you a little
time to get accustomed to it.
Bentley pushed open the door, which was an airy
contrivance composed of light saplings interlaced with
long tendril forest growths, and it swung from above by
stout plaited grassy cords.
“ Enter, boys,” he said, “ and welcome, most heamiy
welcome, to the white man’s dwelling in the mystic valley
of the Never Never.”
Mackay mechanically raised his hand to his head as he
stepped between the portals, and a grunt of disgust forced
itself from his lips when, instead of the hat he expected
to find, a few muddy feathers broke off in his grasp. The
boys, following close behind, saw the action and laughed,
yet immediately proceeded to copy his example, so strong
was the habit of civilization upon them.
The single large room within was bare, save for a
rough logged table in the middle of the floor, and sundry
rude but comfortable chairs which were scattered abouk
“We sleep on the ground,” explained Bentley; “we ve
never had the heart to attempt building proper bunks.
Have you a match, Jim ? ”
Mackay sought in his pocket and produced the small
corked bottle in which he carried his supply so that it
might be preserved from damp, and Bentley, with a sigh
of thankfulness, applied a light to a torch of fine fibrous
sticks stuck in a crevice in the table. Bob watched him
with many questions surging on his lips.
“ How do you usually get a light ? ” he asked at
length.
“You are anticipating me, Bob,” laughed Bentley.


“ At night we use the flints, in the old primitive way, but
in the daytime I use the lens of my pocket microscope
which was left to me. If I hold it in the sun’s rays it
will light a fire of these twigs in less than sixty seconds.
That was the first thing the natives saw me do that
made them marvel. They couldn’t understand how I
could call down fire from heaven, and it’s one of the few
things which that knowing old king of theirs hasn’t
grasped yet.”
In a few minutes Stewart and Pioneer Bill were busy
preparing supper. There seemed to be no lack of cooking
utensils, and each vessel was most peculiarly marked, as
if it had been stamped out of the solid. Mackay, who
had thrown off his encumbering outer garb, sat gazing
into the fire, apparently lost in the depths of his thoughts ;
Bentley and Phil were talking earnestly together in a
subdued voice; Emu Bill roamed aimlessly about the
room; Bob, Jack, and the Shadow were glaring with
wide-open eyes at the thin metal platters with which
Stewart had adorned the table; —not one of them could
find words to speak.
“ Is —is it another mirage ? ” muttered the Shadow, at
length, stretching out a hesitating hand; then a whoop of
delight burst from his lips. “ Say, boss,” he cried, shaking
Mackay energetically by the shoulder. “ Look ! Look at
this! ”
Mackay awoke from his reverie with a start, and
turned his head.
“ Ay, it’s gold, Shadow,” said he, calmly. “ I am no’
vera surprised.”
Bentley gave a whistle of annoyance. “ Well, boys,”
he explained, “ I absolutely forgot to mention the matter.


but gold is so plentiful in this quarter that I have got
quite accustomed to it, and I do believe I had also for-
gotten that the stuff has such a powerful value ”
“ Spin us your yarn after supper, Dick," said Mackay.
“ I’m as hungry as a starved dingo just now.”
“ I’ve felt a bit sick ever since I saw them plates an’
things,” said Emu Bill, pausing in his perambulations.
“Howlin’ blazes! I wish we could cart the whole
mountain away wi’ us.”
“ I don’t suppose you’ve got a bit o’ tea in your
pocket?” interjected Stewart, eyeing Mackay pathetically.
“Ho? Weel, I’ll just have to mak’ up my ain con-
coction. It’s no’ vera bad when you get accustomed to
it; but I’m sair wearyin’ for a ceevilized drink. I hope
the flavour o’ the leaves winna disagree wi’ ye; I gather
them off a wee bush that grows in the forest, but the
taste is naething like.the real article.”
Stewart’s tea, however, proved to be a wonderfully
palatable beverage, and the accompanying fare of such
a highly appetizing nature that Mackay’s little party soon
felt revived to their fullest energies.
“It will be something to remember that we’ve eaten
out of golden dishes,” Jack remarked with much satis-
faction. “ I think I’ll appropriate a spoon as a memento.”
Bentley sighed wearily. “ You may be tired enough
of these same spoons before you leave here, Jack,” he
said.
Mackay gave a snort of disapproval, and rose from
Iris chair.
“ Load up these rifles, Shadow,” he directed. “ And
now, Dick” —seating himself once more—“fire away wi’
your story. What sort o’ place have we struck, an how


do ye account for the natives being so different from
others ? an’ tell me how in the name o’ a’ that’s wonderful,
you havena escaped long syne wi’ your pockets fu’ o’
nuggets ? ”
Without hesitation, Bentley plunged into his narrative.
“When you had been about an hour away, Jim,” he
began, “chasing up that confounded camel, and while we
were loading the team, we were suddenly surrounded by
an army of the oddest-looking warriors imaginable. They
must have been hiding in the scrub near by us for some
time, for we had no warning whatever of their coming,
and, to make matters worse, not one of us had a rifle
ready. They bore down on us without a word, and, of
course, quickly had the best of it, for they were ten to
one, and were armed with clubs and arrows. They seemed
quite peaceably inclined, however, and did not appear to
be in any way anxious to exterminate us at once, though
Stewart got a crack on the head which nearly finished
him.”
“ I did that,” murmured that individual, patting the
back of his skull tenderly. “ But ye shid mak’ mention
o’ hoo I squelched a wheen o’ them wi’ ma naked fist
aforehand.”
“They carried us aw T ay,” continued Bentley, remi-
niscently, “ though not before they had built a huge fire
beside our camp. I thought they meant it for us; but
when I saw them unloading the poor camels I knew at
once what was going to happen. It is a common custom
among the most knowing savages to burn the bodies of
animals or men so as to give the impression that the
expedition had died of thirst years before. They have
deceived Government search-parties many times by that


ruse, and frightened off explorers from tackling the same
supposedly droughty quarter again. Anyhow, our captors
made short work of the unfortunate camels, scooped up
every bit of our outfit, and marched on. I don’t need to
speak of our surprise when we passed through the choking
fumes of the sulphur springs. We all know about them,
and probably you know more than we do, for you were
camped alongside, and we scarcely got a glimpse of the
wonderful craters. The passage, too, you know possibly
better than we, for we have never been allowed to go back
to the entrance, and twenty warriors guard it night and
day when there are any signs of danger, or a strange tribe is
in the vicinity. But the biggest surprise of all came when
we had an opportunity of studying the valley and its
formations, and we got that very speedily, for that curious
old king of the tribe released us almost as soon as we were
brought in.”
“ I can remember he had some difficulty with his
followers then, too,” interjected Phil, gravely. “ They
weren’t quite so wild as they were to-day, but they
were bad enough until you talked to them in their own
lingo.”
Bentley smiled. “I could see even then,” he said,
“ that their aged leader had some strange scheme in hand,
though it was several weeks later before he laid his views
quite clearly before me.”
“ And do you mean to say that you waited here o’ your
ain free will as prisoners ? ” snorted Mackay.
“For the first little while we were interested to know
what sort of country we had reached, and then, when even
the riches of the valley began to pall on us, we suddenly
realized that we could not help ourselves. The tunnel


was always well w T atched, but even had we got safely
through the mountain, where were we then ? On the edge
of an enormous desert without food or means of transpoit.
You must recollect, Jim, that the camels had been killed,
as probably yours have been by this time,”
Mackay started to his feet, but resumed his seat with
a smile.
«It would be dark before they could venture out,” he
said, musingly. “We have a good ten hours grace jet.
Hurry up wi’ your story, Dick; I want to know whether
we should stay here, an’ get rich quick wi’ the gold oot o
the mountain, or clear out while we have a chance.
“ You forget, Jim,” said Bentlej 7 , quietly, “ that j T our
chance has gone. I tried to warn you from the summit in
every conceivable manner, but j T ou wouldn’t understand.
I even scribbled charcoal messages on pieces of wood and
threw them down, and you paid no attention.”
“We thought you were throwing stones at us,” said
Bob. “You looked so very like a native at that
distance.”
“ It was a miracle we didn’t pop you over with our
rifles,” commented Emu Bill, shortly.
“ I dinna see that our chance has vanished just yet,
if we care to take it,” Mackay observed, with undiminished
assurance. “ But go on wi’ your yarn, Dick; what I’m
anxious to know is, who made that tunnel and for what
purpose ? ”
“ First of all, let me tell you,” said Bentley, “ that this
valley is almost impregnable from every direction but one.
Away to the north-east there is a slight break in the
circular range, but the country in that quarter is so broken
and desolate that it is almost impassable, and certainly no
359


explorer making an east or west course would dream of
altering his route to the south at that point. He would
■rather give the mountain —if he happened to see it then—
as wide a berth as possible. On the west, as you know,
Nature guards her secret very effectually, and it might
have remained undiscovered for another hundred years if
you had not escaped from the expedition as you did, and
so been able to track up the mysterious mountain afresh,
and with greater caution. But now that you are here,
you may take it as a surety that you will never be allowed
to leave with the knowledge you have gained. The fact
is, boys, this valley in the heart of the Never Never land
is a perfect treasure-house of gold and gems, and it is
inhabited by the remnants of a once truly remarkable
tribe. They are still infinitely superior in knowledge and
intellect to any other aboriginal race that I know, but
they have been degenerating slowly these last many
centimes, ever since the upheaval, I should imagine,
which altered the aspect of Central Australia, and
separated it from Polynesia. Their environment has
protected them to an enormous degree, for their home
in this natural paradise is surely all that could be
desired, but, from what I have been able to gather
from the king, they have inherited a policy of isolation,
which is now almost a part of them creed. Any un-
suspecting tribe that wanders near is attacked with
the utmost ferocity, as I have myself witnessed on
more than one occasion. The early rulers of this strange
little kingdom were undoubtedly wise men, and it seems
to me they were struggling towards a kind of civiliza-
tion. The tunnel was driven in their time, but whether
it was intended to provide a means of exterminating


their savage neighbours of the plains, or gradually pushed
through in the course of their excavations for gold, I
haven’t been able to discover, though I rather fancy both
reasons came into play. The gold has been used for all
sorts of purposes, because it can be hammered into any
shape so very easily. Its value in the outside world is
wholly incomprehensible to them.”
“ Do you think they have ever heard of the great world
beyond the desert ? ” asked Bob, who had been listening
with keen interest.
“There can be no doubt about that, my lad. It’s
simply marvellous how remote native races acquire their
news; but they invariably get it, though in this case there
is nothing inexplicable about it, for the cunning old king
has his scouts wandering all over the country. The
dangers of the vast salt tracks have little meaning to
them, for they seem to have cultivated an instinct for
smelling out any water there may be within miles of
them, and they can travel a very long way without it if
necessity arises. Their system of navigation is beyond my
understanding altogether.”
“ An’ what do you think made the old chap so tender-
hearted when you came along, Dick ? ” asked Mackay.
Bentley shook his head. “ I know why he didn’t
demolish us at first,” he said. “ The tunnel had been
commencing to cave in about the centre, where the
dripping water had weakened the walls, and all his
warriors’ efforts at timbering it were without avail. You
see, they hadn’t grasped the necessary principle of locking
the timber to prevent lateral strain. I suppose he thought
the white man could make things right.”
“ An’ it was a terrible hard job too,” grunted Stewart,


“ for we had to do the maist o’ it in the dark. A light
wouldna’ burn five minutes in the place, an’ the air was
enough to poison a nigger.”
“ After that,” continued Bentley, “ I seemed to get
into his good graces somewhat. I talked to him of other
tribes I had met, and generally showed such a keen
interest in the welfare of his kingdom, that I believe he
altered his purpose to kill us, greatly against the wishes
of his subjects. It was then he gave out that I was the
direct representative of one of their most dreaded gods,
and I’ve had to live up to my reputation ever since.
You saw the result of my influence over the king
to-day. Yet I’ve noticed the more I have tried to civilize
him, the less his warriors like him, and, to tell the truth,
I expected an open revolt against his ruling long before
this. If I hadn’t arrived in time to-day I shouldn’t like
to think what might have happened. I didn’t expect you
could possibly get through the passage, for when I rescued
Bill from the warriors they went straight back, and we
climbed the mountain to make another effort to warn you
against trying. They were so savage when I took Bill
from them, that I believe they would have killed you
right away if they had met you. I don’t know yet how
you escaped.”
“As it happened,” said Mackay, dryly, “ the darkness
saved us when they first came through, an’ when they
were returning we had fortunately made a mistake in our
direction, and got into a cross drive.”
“ Thank goodness we made these drives,” cried Bentley,
fervently.
“ You made them ? ” echoed Mackay, incredulously.
“Yes, we made them, Jim. I tried to get the natives


to help, but they very quickly tired of the work, and
contented themselves watching us instead. I felt curious
to know the width of the lode, and we just managed to
strike the walls of the giant fissure, when our picks,
which we had recovered, were worn almost to the wooden
handles. I scarcely fancied continuing operations with
flint-headed implements, such as must have been used in
the main work of excavation, and, besides, I didn t see any
hope of us being able to carry away the gold we got, even
if an opportunity of escape had oftered. We washed
the stuff in the lake here by hand; it decomposed very
rapidly on contact with the air, and hardly required any
crushing. Stewart made all our cooking utensils out of
the results of our work, and I melted what was left. Ton
will see it lying over there in the corner. ’
Mackay looked casually in the direction indicated, but
the three boys made a dash towards the golden treasure,
and after a first glance the usually imperturbable Scot
arose with a bound and followed them. There, lying
carelessly on the damp clay, were half a dozen huge
irregularly shaped masses, which glistened yellow in
the dull light. Jack lifted one in his hand with some
difficulty.
“ I reckon I want to lie down an’ die somewhere,”
muttered Emu Bill, feebly blinking his eyes at the dazzling
spectacle.
“ How much do you think you’ve got here, Dick ?
said Mackay, calmly.
Bentley smiled. “Just about a hundredweight, I
calculate,” he answered. “But it is no earthly good
to us. We can’t cany it away, even if we had the
chance.”


Mackay looked perplexed, and for a few moments
seemed to be struggling with a mighty problem.
“ The weight wouldna’ be much among the lot o’ us,”
he murmured at length, “ but —but it hurts me sair to
think o’ leaving a’ that stuff in the mountain.”
“ Don’t let that worry you, old man,” broke in Bentley
hastily. “If you’ve got a scheme for escape, let us act
upon it without delay; there’s more than any of us will
ever need in this shanty besides gold. Show him the
collection, Phil.”
Without a word Phil drew forth a short, deep case
made of plaited twigs from a recess under the table, and
threw open the lid, exposing a mass of red, blue, and
yellow tinted pebbles.
“ There you are, Mac,” said he, “ they don’t look any-
thing special in their present rough state, but they’re
worth a long way more than a hundredweight of gold, and
certainly very much more portable. They are rubies and
sapphires, and I think there are some diamonds among
them. There’s surely enough here to go round without
bothering about more, though I can show you where to
get them to-morrow if you want a bigger stock.”
“ To-morrow, Phil,” said Mackay, with decision, “ we’ll
be marching along homeward boimd, if we’re no’ lying
perforated wi’ arrows in some corner o’ the tunnel. We’ll
help you to carry the treasure, an’ maybe afterwards we’ll
come back an’ get some for oursel’s. Isn’t that right,
Bob ? ”
Bob nodded, then quickly dived into his pocket, and
extricated therefrom sundry rounded stones, and showed
them to Phil.
“ Are these any good ?” he asked. “ I picked them up


on the other side of the mountain the first day we arrived,
and had forgotten all about them.”
“ They’re exactly the same, Bob,” returned the geologist,
with a smile, “and they come from the same source,
apparently.”
“Let us know your plan, Jim, and we’ll make an
effort to get away if it is possible,” urged Bentley. “ But
I won’t budge unless we agree to make an even divide of
the treasure of the Never Never.” And the sharing of the
spoil was insisted upon with happy unanimity.
It was now about ten o’clock in the evening and
Mackay pushed open the door and looked out; the air was
close and sultry as if presaging a thunderstorm, and a
heavy, dark cloud suspended over the little valley ; in the
gloom near the tunnel several forms were to be seen flitting
about. He returned into the room with a smile on his
lips.
“We’re goin’ to have rain, I think,” he announced,
“ an’ I shouldn’t wonder if there’s a bit o’ thunder along
wi’ it. The elements will fight on our side, boys; we’ll
just give them a bit o’ a start. An’ now, Dick,” he added,
eyeing his old leader quizzically, “ did I no’ see you lookin’
at us when we were blowing chunks o’ Australia into the
ah' this morning ? ”
“I saw you making a tomb for poor Never Never
Dave,” answered Bentley, sadly.
Emu Bill groaned and Mackay sighed deeply.
“ But that was yesterday, Dick. What about this
morning ? ”
“Yes, I noticed you this morning, too; but I only
heard one explosion, and didn’t think anything of it.”
“ Where were your powers o’ observation, Dick ? We


were bursting a new entrance into the mountain.” But
Mackay’s satisfaction at his sally was clouded by the sad
recollections aroused by his friend’s first remark. “ You
tell him, Bob,” he added weakly. “ Tell him o’ our pre-
cautionary arrangements which should stand us in good
stead now.”
A few minutes later a series of great pattering drops
on the bark roof of the dwelling intimated that the
expected storm had burst; slowly they came at first, then
louder and louder hissed the growing deluge until it
seemed as if the floodgates of the heavens had broken
loose, and a dull, tearing roar echoed across the vale as the
thunder-cloud rent in twain.
i “If that doesna frighten the niggers they ought to be
ashamed o’ themselves,” grunted Mackay. “ Now we’ll
go, lads, an’ trust to Providence an’ our rifles for a safe
journey.”
They gathered up their precious freight, each taking a
goodly share so that nothing was left, and silently they
filed out into the raging night, and, with Bentley leading,
groped a cautious course towards the underground passage.
Through the beating torrent they caught glimpses of many
lights in the native camps bordering the lake near at
hand, and the droning intonation of a most melancholy
chant reached their ears in occasional snatches as they
hurried on their way. The natives were invoking the
favour of the mighty thunder-god who that day had
smitten one of their warriors so cruelly. At last they
arrived at the opening from which Mackay and his
companions had first gazed out in wonder, and with a
united breath of thankfulness entered the yawning darkness
of the cavern.


Yet, even as they disappeared, a shrill cry of alarm
sounded out above the storm from the vicinity of the
home they had just vacated, and a chorus of answering
yells showed too truly that their flight had been dis-
covered.
“ That was the old king’s voice,” whispered Bentley,
as the fugitives paused for a moment to listen. “He
probably called to get you to stay the thunder. We just
got away in time.”
“The other end is where our danger lies,” muttered
Mackay. “Now, lads, follow me, an’ be as slippery as
you can. Those howlin’ hyenas will be at our backs in a
minute,”
Blindly they stumbled on, staggering from wall to wall
in their feverish eagerness; but before they had even
reached the cross-drives, the cries of their savage pursuers
were echoing along the passage close in their rear. On,
on they laboured, and now Mackay began to hesitate in
his course, so that his comrades kept pushing up in a
confused mass behind him. In the excitement which
reigned they could not well understand why their doughty
leader should pause at such an inopportune moment. But
that level-headed individual knew exactly what he was
doing ; in another instant he had found the rope which
hung over the treacherous pit.
“ Now, my bonnie boys,” said he, “over you go. You,
Bob, take the lead, and walk quietly on. I’ll be after
you in a jiff.”
“ I never knew of this death-trap,” breathed Bentley,
hoarsely. “ Jim, old man, Heaven knows how you
managed to negotiate this terrible place at first,”
“ My power o’ observation is strong even in the dark,”


chuckled the brawny Scot. “ Now, grip the rope, Dick,
an’ get across. Here’s old Methuselah’s gang almost
beside us, an’ I want to stop their progress a bit.”
Bentley delayed no further, and in a flash Mackay too
had leapt the gully, but, ere he hastened after the others,
he leaned out over the unseen chasm and smote at the
thick cord high overhead with his sheath-knife, then he
gathered up his burden and struggled after his companions.
He overtook them while they were yet some distance from
the sudden bend which occurred just opposite the entrance
the gelignite had made, for Bob was treading cautiously,
expecting each moment to be assailed by the warriors
whose duty it was to abide by the rocking stone. And
that his fears in that direction were by no means groundless
was proved by the excited mutterings wliich at this moment
issued from the end of the passage, and the ominous snap
of the great rock as‘it closed into position was distinctly
heard. The watchful blacks had evidently been investi-
gating matters outside, and had just returned to their post.
The clamour of the pursuing band was now most de-
moralizingly loud and fierce. They seemed to be already
rejoicing at the pleasing prospect before them: their
enemy was neatly caught between two fires; little wonder
that they sent out shriek after shriek of delirious acclama-
tion. And in the mean time the escaping party, trudging
heavily through the mire, rejoiced also that the noisy
exuberance of the warriors so effectually drowned their
own hastening footsteps, and thus prevented their near
approach to safety from being made known to the awaiting
savages.
Then a yell, louder and more dismal than ever, suddenly
echoed through the cavern; it was followed by a dull


plunge, and immediately a succession of similar dis-
turbances intimated that the all too eager warriors had
experienced a rude and ardour-cooling check. Mackay
chuckled right heartily when the success of his scheme
was thus revealed to him.
“ There has been more than one o’ the beggars who has
jumped for the rope an’ missed,” he whispered, with ill-
suppressed mirth; and then only did his comrades guess
the part he had played in the natives’ discomfiture.
By this time they had reached the quick turn of the
passage, and Bob felt carefully for the saving gap that would
lead to freedom. The cries of the baffled warriors in the
rear now rang out through the darkness like the wails of
coyotes cheated of their prey, and their brethren ahead, by
their hoarse exclamations of dismay, were apparently
considerably exercised over the strange happening which
had taken place.
“ Quick, boys,” said Mackay, when Bob had laid bare
the opening. “Up ye go in a hurry, an’ hang on to your
treasure; I’ll send the rifles aloft when you’re a’ through.”
Bentley would have remonstrated, but the imperturbable
director of affairs was obdurate.
“ I’m engineering this circus,” he said sternly. “ Now,
out you go. Whoop-la ! ”
In his own hearty exuberance he seemed utterly to
have forgotten the near presence of a part of the enemy,
and his voice sounded out boisterously as he cheered each
of his companions on his way to the outside world. For
a brief instant there was absolute silence from the extreme
end of the tunnel, and Mackay knew that the inevitable
rush would speedily follow. Nor was he mistaken. With
screams of rage the blacks advanced, and the reckless man
(B 607) 369 2 A


laughed aloud as they came. He caught Jack, who alone
remained, in his powerful arms and literally hurled him
into the embrace of Stewart, who stood ready to receive
him.
“ And now, my lads, here’s the rifles,” he cried, thrust-
ing the collected weapons out through the aperture.
“ Hang the rifles! Come oot yersel ’! ” howled
Stewart, reaching down a massive bony fist, and grasping
his comrade by the shoulder; and in this way Mackay,
clutching fast to the armoury of the expedition, was
hauled to the surface, even as the foremost of the vengeful
warriors dashed their heads impotently into the aperture
through which he had been yanked so rigorously forth.
“ There was no need for you exertin’ your muscular
powers in that vera drastic fashion,” reproved the latest
arrival, turning, and thrusting the stock of his rifle down
into the gap with calm forcefulness.
The response which greeted his action seemed to soothe
him somewhat.
“ All’s well that ends well,” he remarked philosophi-
cally ; “ but before we start congratulating oorsel’s we’d
better lock these twa doors an’ leave the keys on the
ootside.”
In a short time a very effective boulder barricade was
arranged before both entrances, the enormous rocks used
for the purpose being rolled and carried to their positions
by the united strength of the party; only when this work
was completed, when the yells of the baulked warriors
sounded dull and subdued behind the solid barriers, only
then did the earnest toilers pause.
The night was beautifully clear, not a cloud was visible
in the sky, and the stars shone down with steady radiance.


H fa* - /* £ : ',-;;- -
' ■ZSv -• -
“ MACKAY, CLUTCHING FAST TO THE ARMOURY OF THE EXPEDITION,
WAS HAULED TO THE SURFACE ”




The rising mists from the bubbling caldrons spread like a
g ostly white veil in the near westward distance, and ever
and anon a heavy rumbling would run along the line of
the deep cavities, and fresh vapoury puffs from the craters
ascended towards the heavens. For fully a minute no one
spoke; the extreme tension on their nerves for the last
half-hour had been most trying to all, and their silence
was now more eloquent of their thankfulness than
words.
“There has been no rain on this side of the mountain ”
said Bob, at length, examining the rubbly surface of the
ground intently.
It would all condense inside the valley Bob ”
answered Bentley. “We are back once more in the
thirsty desert of the Never Never, and ’’-turning to
Mackay “we owe our escape to you, Jim; we owe°our
lives to you ”
" Well no’ dwell on the subject,” interrupted that
gentleman, cheerily. “ I have no doubt we’ll a’ find oursel’s
in tighter corners on some other expedition. It’s fair sur-
prism how often a man can warstle oot o’ a difficulty by
e skin o his teeth. I’m just a wee bit afraid that the
slon omy teeth is gettm’ sair worn at the v am e but
Wtf aUd fUn ’ a ' the Sam 6' However -” he continued
hastily, as an upward glance revealed to him several dark
rms on the summit outlined against the sky, “ I think I’ll
go and round up the camels now, so that we can start on
the homeward trail without any unnecessary delay. I’ve
a dim idea that the climate o’ the country nearer Fortunate
pnng will be healthier for us than this.”
rtnnvVi! Wi ’ y ° u ’ boss ’” cried the Shadow. “I
-hmk I know where the leather-hided animiles are.”


“All right, my lad; an’ you, Jack, might unearth
the stores an’ the water-bag, so as to be ready when we
come back. Never mind the heavy tools. I see the
niggers have shifted the case o’ gelignite we left in sight.
I hope it gives them indigestion pretty bad.”
“Have ye no’ got an extra pair o’ breeks in the
camp?” inquired Stewart, appealingly. “I dinna like
waltzin’ aboot like a gorilla oot o’ a circus.”
Mackay laughed. “ I’m vera pleased to see you’ve
got some sense o’ shame left in ye, my man,” he said
sternly, “Mak’ free o’ the wardrobe o’ the expedition,
boys, every one o’ you. Bob will dispense it out, though
I don’t think there’s enough to go round. Anyhow, there’s
lots o’ string in the outfit, an’ you can easily mak’ your-
sel’s vera presentable garments out o’ the empty bags
when we get further on; but I can see we’ll a’ be in an
outward state o’ advanced disintegration before we reach
civilization.”
It was nearly two months later, and the sun stared
pitilessly down on a struggling camel-train that was
wearily forcing its way outwards from the grim desert
of the interior. The animals comprising the team were
but four in all, surely much too inadequate a number
to be the mainstay of the nine strangely garbed figures
who accompanied them; yet, judging by the light packs
on their backs, it was very apparent that the outfit of the
returning expedition did not greatly impede their move-
ments. Slowly, slowly the great hulking creatures
laboured on. At the leader’s head strode a youth, who,
every now and again, turned to pat the trembling nos-
trils of his cumbrous charge, and cheer it forward with


endearing words. His face was deeply browned by long
exposure to the scorching sun’s rays. His clothing,
consisting of a few shreds of what had once been a shirt,
and a pair of nether garments so tattered and tom that
they clung by almost miraculous means to his person,
was sufficient to indicate that he had been long on the
march; but if further proof were required, a glance at
his boots would have been more than enough. The
uppers alone were left, and they were tied to his sockless
feet by numberless cords and strips of hessian cloth. But
despite the dilapidated nature of his dress, it was the
acme of respectability, compared with that of some of
his comrades. Indeed, the combined wardrobe of the
party was such that the most abandoned tramp would
have turned aside from it in disgust.
“Keep Misery moving, Jack —keep him moving,”
cried a familiar voice; and a strongly built, yet gaunt-
faced man strode up alongside the young leader of the train,
and patted his shoulder in friendly encouragement.
Then he stopped and awaited the coming of the rear-
most camel, which was lagging painfully, and addressed its
attendant in similar tones.
“An hour or so more will do it, my lad—only an
hour or so more. Golden Flat should be just over the
horizon.”
“ Say, boss,” came the answer, “ this here fiery
animile is ’bout busted; but I reckon I’ll pull him in
somehow.”
He groped about in some hidden recess of his well-
ventilated shirt, and extricated a small shining instrument,
which he placed to his lips with a smile of real joy.
“Now, boys,” he cried, “here we goes again—one, two,


three ! ” and at once the strains of a favourite melody echoed
out in the air.
The bulk of his companions shuddered at the opening
shock, then joined boisterously in the chorus. Loudly,
triumphantly, they bellowed forth in varying voices and
keys, and, lo! the camels pricked up their ears and quick-
ened their steps, and the weary-eyed singers and chief
musician marched to the tune thus grsen with sprightly
step—
“ Soon eve’ll be in London
Sing, my lads, yo ho-o ”
Again and again the cheering refrain was taken up;
then suddenly a cry of astonishment burst from the lips
of a lithe and wiry young man who had been on the point
of consulting his note-book for the twentieth time since he
took his noonday altitude.
“■We’ve missed it!” he cried. “That must be Kal-
goorlie ahead.”
The music stopped at once ; the white, glistening roofs
of a fair-sized township had suddenly appeared to view,
nestling at the foot of a gentle undulation in the land
surface.
“ I’m afraid there has been some mistake made, Bob,”
said a tall, grave-faced, dark-bearded man who walked by
his side. “ Wliat do you make of it, Jim ? ” He addressed
the stalwart individual who had but a moment or so before
been coaxing on the camels.
“ I don’t know, Dick ; it’s hardly big enough for Kal-
goorlie. I canna think what place it is. Bob, my lad,
that’s the first error o’ navigation I’ve known you to make.”
So did Mackay’s expedition, with its augmented numbers


rescued from the far back Never Never Land, yet with one
sad depletion in the original party, see civilization once
more. It would have been hard indeed to recognize them
now, so marked were they by privation. The stores had
been used most sparingly, for the supply had not been
lavish enough to stand the additional strain imposed upon
it by the extra appetites of Bentley’s party. So all had
cheerfully pinched and starved themselves throughout the
long journey. But now their sufferings were nearly over ;
civilization, in the form of some unknown township or city,
was in sight. Bob alone seemed to be grieved. He had
steered an unerring course these many weeks ; and now,
when he fancied he was heading for Golden Flat, it was
humiliating to feel that at the very last he had made some
grave miscalculation.
“ Never mind, Bob,” said Mackay, kindly. “ You knew
you were safe enough in your direction.”
Bob sighed and shook his head, and consulted his log-
book again, but appeared to derive little satisfaction from
his scrutiny. On, on the worn-out team staggered; and
as the welcome settlement loomed up nearer and nearer
the hearts of the wayfarers grew light. Yet the size of the
township confused them ; there were several wide streets
in evidence, and one great building in particular arrested
their attention. And yet withal the whole scene seemed
strangely familiar to Mackay and his young companions,
and Emu Bill, too, looked puzzled as he gazed at the strange
city so revealed.
“ I hope it ain’t no mirage,” he murmured, with vague
discontent.
“ We’ll soon know what we’ve struck,” cried Jack
“ Here’s a horseman coming out to meet us.”


“ I thought I knew every bit o’ this country,” grumbled
Mackay, “ but this certainly beats me, though somehow
everything looks vera like a place I prospected before.
Anyhow, we’ll soon see. Hallo! ” he called out, as the
horseman drew rein in front of him and stared at the
travel-worn company in curious amazement. “ Hallo!
you bold, bad bushman; what township is this ? ”
The man replied only with a gaze of more intense
amazement than before, until he was sternly brought to
his bearings by the now irate questioner.
“ Say, mate,” he protested weakly, “ don’t bounce a
man so sudden. You all look like Eip Van Winkles, you
does, only worse. But you must be strangers in these
parts if you don’t know Wentworth City. Why, it’s the
biggest min ”
“What!”
The cry came like a roar from the lips of the nine men
at once, and the startled individual on the horse jerked
back in alarm; but becoming satisfied that his interrogators
really desired information, he proceeded to give it to them.
“ Wentworth City, mates, ain’t very old, but it has
squatted here to stay. It boomed up like a shot after the
diskivery o’ a process for treating the refractory ores in
the district. There’s simply no end o’ the stuff, an’ we
expect to get a railway along shortly.”
“ How did it get its name ? ” inquired Mackay,
calmly.
“ Well, I has only been a couple o’ weeks here myself,
an’ don’t know exactly how it happened; but every one
will tell you that it is called after the diskiverer o’ the
process which sent it booming. A young chap, I believe
he was, an’ he went out exploring afterwards. But it’s


mighty funny you doesn’t know that much. Say, you
must have come in from out back ? ”
Mackay nodded briefly. “ You’ve struck it,” said he;
“ but now tell me if you know a man called Nuggety
Dick, and where can we find him ? ”
“ Huggety Dick ? ” echoed the horseman. “ Why, you
won’t have any trouble finding him. He’s the mayor, he
is. Go along the main street right in front o’ you —it is
called Mackay Street —an’ turn down Golden Promise
Drive on your right, an’—but I’d better go in front an’
show you ”
“ Yes, you’d better,” murmured Mackay, feebly ; then
he reached out and clasped Bob’s hand.
“ And so you all mean to have a trip to the old
country, boys ? ” said Nuggety Dick.
It was about an hour later, and the wanderers were
seated in the mayor’s dining-room doing ample justice to
the generous fare provided by that hospitable individual,
whose pleasure at meeting his old friends again had been
almost boyish in its glad exuberance.
“ It’s over ten years since I left the dear old land,
Dick,” answered Bentley, “ and now I should like to see it
again. I wanted to persuade every one to come, but I
found they didn’t need any persuading. All but Bill
seemed to have taken it as a foregone conclusion that they
were to have a run home as a reward for their labours.”
“ An’ I would go quick enough, boys,” said Emu Bill,
quietly, “ but I reckon I’d peg out if I lost sight o’ the
Southern Cross. I ain’t no traveller, boys; I is only a
simple bushman, an’ somehow the grim old desert grips
me tight.”


“ I reckon I’ll be able to tell you all about it when I
get back, Bill,” said the Shadow. “I is goin’ with Jack
to see the sights, an’ well have a rare good time ”
“ I hope you’ve made up your mind to behave yoursel' ?
interjected Mackay, severely.
“ Surely, boss, you can trust me. I won’t even squelch a
policeman unless he looks at me cross-eyed. 111 be gentle
as a little lamb, I will, an’ I won’t round up no horses nor
camels nor nothin’.”
“Well, I hope it’s only a trip you’re goin’ to take,
boys, an’ that you’ll all come back an’ look me up in a
month or so,” said Nuggety Dick, earnestly.
They remained talking in this strain for some time; then
Mackay suddenly inquired after his old enemy, Macguire.
“ I don’t bear the man any ill will,” said he. “ I’m
just sort o’ curious to know if he rose wi’ the fortunes o’
Wentworth City; that name must have stuck in his
throat
“ Why, hasn’t you heard ? ” exclaimed Dick ; “ but, of
course, you couldn’t know. Macguire cleared out ’bout
two days after you, an’ every one fancied he meant to follow
you up, because he thought you were goin’ to some new
strike. He had his old crowd wi’ him, an’ a black tracker.
He has never come back yet. I reckon he must have gone
under.”
“ Poor beggar! ” murmured Bob. “ I hope he manages
to come out all right, but ” He shook his head
doubtfully.
“If by any chance he does hit our old trail into the
Never Never, he’ll be mighty sorry for it afterwards,”
spoke Mackay, grimly, with visions of vengeful savages
before his eyes.


That night Bob came into Mackay’s room at the hotel
where they were all staying.
“ I wanted to see you alone,” he said simply, “ so that
I might tell you how truly I have appreciated your great
kindnesses. I know now who it was that sent that letter
to my mother, you dear old humbug.”
Mackay smiled, “My reward is more than I ever
dreamed, my lad. You yourself have given me much
by your friendship. I haven’t been disappointed in
you, Bob, an’ I hope our partnership will no’ finish
here.”
“ I’ll be with you every time,” cried Bob, heartily.
“ I don’t know what it is, but you can count on me,”
came a well-known voice beyond the thin wooden parti-
tion, and immediately afterwards Jack burst into the
room. “I thought I heard about another threatened
expedition,” he said eagerly, “ and I wanted to sign my
name to it right away.”
“ I have an idea,” ventured Mackay, gazing at the boy
with shrewd, twinkling eyes —“ I have an idea, Jack, that
when you get home you’ll find a wonderfu’ magnetic
influence there to restrain your wandering nature. But
all the same, I shouldna wonder but you’ll be allowed to
mak’ just another journey in my good company, for Bob
has promised to say a word or two in my favour, so that I
won’t be judged altogether as an uncouth savage from the
Never Never ”
“Is this a corroborree you’re holding, Jim ? ” said
Bentley, suddenly entering the doorway.
“ No, Dick, nothing so vera desperate; we were sort o’
considerin’ a future expedition, that’s a’.”
“ Already ? ” laughed Bentley. “ Why, man, haven’t


you knocked around this little planet enough to last you a
lifetime ? ”
“ I am afraid there is no such thing as contentment in
the world,” said Bob, gravely. “We have sought fortune,
and we have found it ”
“Ay, an’ we found more than fortune, Bob,” added
Mackay, gazing at his old leader affectionately. “ The
gold and gems are welcome enough, but the lives o’ my
comrades are dearer to me than a’.”
Bentley laid a gentle hand on Mackay’s shoulder, and
his voice was full as he spoke.
“ Yes, my lads,” he said, “ you will find true
happiness, not in riches nor in the fulfilment of worldly
ambition, for our satisfaction is ever in the striving after
rather than in the attainment of our desires; but it will
come to you in the realization of an unerring truth:
greater by far than gold or gems is the love of our
fellow-men.”


*
1


Jflsijxknjxldj oJjt&'K&t; !
'' /35^e,
NCOpj


J
*
(


/
P*
a' ,


«
■ h
5W


