

j
%


07.\
/fey
((2 ( CANBERRA j■ )
V-V JJfJJ






E BUSH RAMBLERS
by Charles Barrett'
A Supplementary Reader, written to meet the
requirements of the Education Department of
Victoria, and published by T. Shaw Fitchett*
GRADE 111.-6 d.


jjU kjV feV kj
£ri *srrs *rn\
WlAWAI
L W^
£/ * fcv y\ / a A Ais. A *£ is. i
LV k'W k?y kVJ S
% srre g 're s reiPira snre i
i % « « «k # 4V #M
sTire gTS IPre gl la Kink i
£Wftt£ Ifi jftt
Bre£V M^re^reP?. 2g>
I i% #i % *d m #i% y f 5% #i
I gT?j gre mre g;re snre i
B ,% 5® 1
vre sn iM; reC' 1
kWt


'f yr ( S~)
vl J
v Tr? I 3.3
vs- /
THE
BUSH RAMBLERS.
S’
A Story for Australian
Children.
GLENR
CHARLES BARRETT.
A**
Illustrated with Photographs by the Author,
> Melbourne:
T. ShaW , Fitchett, 376 Swanston Street
1913.
V


Melbourne.
Printed by
T. Shaw Fltchett,


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER. PAGE
I.—CORINDA VALE 5
lI.—THE BUSH ROAD IS
111. AT WARRAMULGA 23
IV. THE KINGFISHERS 29
V.—AMONG THE WATER BIRDS 37
VI.—MALURO, THE BLUE WREN 42
VII.—THE CREEK 49
VIII.—A BUSH FIRE 57
IX.—BILLY ROWTON 66
X.—VOYAGE OF THE “ SEA SWALLOW ” 73
XI.—THE BOY SCOUTS 84
XII.—WITH THE BIRDMAN 89
XIII. —CITY RAMBLES - 101
XIV. BY THE SEA 112
XV.—PELICAN ISLAND 120


Mother Coachwhip Bird at Her Nest.


The Bush Ramblers.
Charles Barrett.
Chapter I. —Corinda Yale.
Robbie and Jean Douglas were not pleased
when they were told that their parents had
bought a new home in the bush, and that the
family was to go to Corinda Yale and live
there for a whole year. Jean was ten years
old, and Robbie nine. Their lives had
been spent in the great city. They had
heard of the bush, and read about its won-
ders in story books; but that was all. The
parks and gardens, where, on sunny after-
noons, mother took them to play on the lawns
around the old trees, delighted these two
young folk. They loved to lie at ease on the
soft grass, or chase the butterflies, at which
they threw their big straw hats without ever
making a captive. It was good fun for Jean
and Robbie; and, perhaps, the butterflies
enjoyed it, too, as they came to no harm.
On the day they left Melbourne, the chil-
dren had a good talk about the bush and the
new home.
“I don’t like going away,” said Jean.
“We ’ll be all by ourselves, Robbie. We
won’t see the Cadets marching, or the Boy
Scouts, with their broomsticks and funny
little flags. And mother says we’ll have to
do lessons just as if we were going to school.”


Robbie, who thought his sister the
cleverest little girl in Australia, tried to
smile bravely.
“Father told me that we’ll like it, Jean,”
Robbie said, “and I’ll grow a strong boy in
the bush.”
It was for the sake of Robbie, who had
been ill, that Mr. and Mrs. Douglas were
moving from the town to the country, where
he could have plenty of fresh air.
After they had gone to bed, Jean and Rob-
bie lay awake for a long while; and, when
they slept, it was to dream of the big, lonely
bush, and kangaroos and dingoes.
All was bustle in the house, next morning:
and when, at last, the family was seated in
a railway carriage, Jean and Robbie felt
tired, and they began to look out of the
windows. When the endless rows of houses
were left behind, and green paddocks ap-
peared, they almost wished that the train
would stop, so that they might go and
make friends with the sheep and cattle.
It was late in the afternoon when the train
journey came to an end. Corinda Vale sta-
tion, with its open iron shed and bags of
potatoes and onions stacked at one end,
seemed a very queer place to the children.
A double-buggy, drawn by a pair of brown
horses, in charge of a real bushman, was
waiting outside the station. When the lug-
gage had been stowed away, and all members
of the party were seated, the buggy started


oft* down the road, which was full of ruts and
lined with tall gum-trees.
Robbie and Jean were frightened at first
when the buggy bumped over a stump, or
ran into a rut. They soon lost their fear,
and gazed in wonder at the thousands of
trees and the blue mountain-peak which lay
far ahead.
“ Robbie, did you ever think there were
so many trees in the whole world?” said
Jean, her eyes alight with joy.
“No, Jean,” replied her brother. “And
look at the funny old branches, all twisty,
and the bark, like pieces of brown paper,
wriggling about!”
Presently, the bush road became rougher,
and the buggy bumped many times. A sud-
den turn, and the horses swung round into
an open space. The broad road went on
towards the mountain, but a narrow one led
down into a valley, where, peeping through
the trees, the children could see the white
roofs of some houses. Blue smoke was curl-
ing up from the three chimneys in the
village, and the musical sound of a creek
could be heard.
“That is our new home,” said Mr.
Douglas, rising from his seat, and pointing
to one of the little houses among the trees.
Robbie and Jean clapped their hands as
they saw the cottage, with its neat garden
and creepers all about one end of the wide
veranda. They wished to get out of the


buggy and run a race down the road to the
gate. Their fear of the bush was already
forgotten.
“It’s like a story in Hans Andersen,”
Jean whispered to Robbie. Just then, a flock
of gaily coloured parrots flew, screeching,
from a tree a few yards ahead.
“Joeys! Joeys!” cried the young folk in
chorus. “Look at the joeys, father!”
Father looked at mother, and said, “I
think our little ones will like the bush. ’ ’
It was growing dark when the buggy
arrived at Honeysuckle Cottage, which
was the name of the children’s new
home. But they made a tour round the
garden, and the big yard, and even glanced
at the orchard, through which a winding
path led down to the creek.
That night, Jean and Robbie slept soundly.
Their dreams were pleasant, and they were
awakened by the songs of birds. Blue wrens
were warbling in the tangle of honeysuckle
outside the windows, and from the orchard
came the flute-like notes of the grey-thrush.
Three magpies, perched in a gum-tree on the
roadside, sang happily. On the roof of
the cottage, a wise-looking laughing jackass
gurgled and chuckled so merrily that the
children had to laugh too.
Mother came into Jean’s room and
opened the window, through which the
morning sun was shining, making pools
of golden light on the floor. The air


, •
'fw!jj&' ' ’&’&»%** *K<«t
|«g . ' . ",
Kingfishers.
was fresh, and sweet with the scent of
honeysuckle. The outdoor world was
saying good morning to the newcomers.
A spray of honeysuckle was blown over the
window sill, and Jean saw the blue cap of a
wren as it flew up from a rose bush.
It was not long before the brother and
sister were dressed and standing at the back
door. It was spring-time. All the grass
was covered with dew drops. The sun
seemed to turn these into tiny diamonds
and pearls. Down by the creek, which was
hidden by apple and pear and almond-trees
in the orchard, the wattles were in flower;
but the children did not see their “ yellow
tresses” until after breakfast. And what a
breakfast it was! That dip in the morning


air seemed to have given them appetites.
They ate their porridge and milk and a
boiled egg each, and finished with bread and
butter. The food was the same as that
which they had been used to in the
city, but somehow it tasted nicer in
this cottage in the bush. The children
knew that the milk was from their own cow,
and that the eggs had been laid by black
hens, whose cackling they had heard after
the sun rose.
After the meal, Jean and Robbie were
allowed to play about the cottage. The
orchard gate was locked, and they had to
wait for their father to take them to the
creek.
It was noon when Mr. Douglas joined
them, and, by that time, they knew every
part of the garden and the yard. They
had searched among the honeysuckle for the
nests of the small birds which kept darting
in and out of the tangle; they had watched
the bigger birds in the trees along the road.
Robbie had chosen a shady corner of the
garden for his very own; Jean, a nook where
she could make a play-house for her dolls.
As they passed through the white gate of
the orchard and walked down the path with
their tall father, the children asked many
questions. They wished to learn at once the
names of the birds they had seen, and all
about their ways. Jean picked a bunch of
flowers, wild ones, which grew among the
grass along the orchard fence. There were


blue and yellow and scarlet flowers, and Jean
asked for their names.
“A violet for you, father,” said Jean,
holding out one of her flowers, whose colour
was not purple, like that of the garden violet,
but pale lilac. It did not have such a
sweet scent as the flowers which are sold for
sixpence a bunch by little Italian boys in the
city streets. But the bush violets looked
dainty among their small green leaves, and
Jean came to love them more than any
flowers in the garden.
The path to the creek was strewn with
blossom from the fruit trees, petals white
and red, which the wind had blown down
in the night. The branches had such a
wealth of blossom that the little the wind
had taken to play with was not missed. The
orchard was pretty, but the creek, rippling
over the pebbles at the crossing place, seemed
to be calling the children. The trunk of
a giant tree formed a bridge over which
Jean and Robbie walked with care. On
the far side, ferns grew thickly, and
the banks of the creek were draped with
delicate maiden hair. Bluebells hung over
the edge, and the green spear-shaped rushes
seemed to be looking at their reflections in
the water.
The wattles filled the children with
delight. They had seen the blossom in the
city; and some small trees in the parks
and the Botanic Gardens. But here was
Fairyland—green and golden bowers, a


creek which made music, and blue sky above,
with white clouds floating about, like the
sails of boats on the sea. The creek was to
become the children’s friend, and they never
forgot that spring day on which they first
saw it. It was a day of wonder for
Jean and Robbie; and, when at last the
sun went down behind the distant hills, and
they sat beside the great open fireplace,
watching the sparks flying upward from the
logs, all they had seen and heard seemed to
be part of a dream.
Day after day, Jean and Robbie, when
lesson hours were over, rambled about the
cottage, in the orchard, and down the track.
They were not allowed to go far away, for
their parents feared that they might get lost
in the bush. They made friends in the
village with young folk and old; and, when
it was known that they liked birds and in-
sects and flowers, the village people showed
them the best places for such things near
home. But the bush, which lay beyond the
village, seemed to be waiting always for them
to come and make friends with it. Jean was
sure that the flowers were prettier in the
forest behind the blue hills; Robbie longed
to follow the creek to far-off places.
Often, at night, the two children talked
of the bush beyond the hills, and won-
dered whether father would ever take
them there. One day in November, they
set out on the first long ramble to the Land
of Heart’s Desire.


Chapter ll.—The Bush Road.
The Douglas family had been living at
Honeysuckle Cottage for two months when
Jean and Robbie made their first real jour-
ney into the wild bush. Robbie was much
stronger, and Mr. Douglas had promised
the children that he would take them over
the hills to their cousins’ home at Warra-
mulga when his boy’s face was no longer
pale. One night, as they were all gathered
round the table in the living-room, with the
soft light from a swinging lamp upon their
faces, Mr. Douglas looked at Robbie for a
minute, and smiled, as if something had
pleased him very much.
“Mother,” he said, turning to Mrs.
Douglas, who was knitting socks for a child
in the village, “our laddie has the bloom
in his cheeks again. And as for Jean,
why, the lassie is bonnie as a gowan-berry.
Life in the bush is good for our bairns.”
Jean and Robbie, who had been looking
at the coloured pictures of “The Bird
Book,” felt so happy that they jumped up
and kissed their parents in turn.
“Father,” whispered Robbie, “am I well
enough yet to go to Warramulga? You know
Uncle Arthur has asked us to stay with him
for a week. We want to see the big bush,
and Cousin Jim’s pony, and the dogs which
bark at the silly old sheep. Please, father,
let us go to-morrow.”


“Well, we’ll think over it to-night,” was
all that Mr. Douglas would promise. But
Jean and Robbie at once began to make
plans for the happy days to come. They
talked of all the creatures they would see
at their uncle’s farm, and of the fun that
they would have with their young cousins,
who had twice driven over to Honeysuckle
Cottage, and were delightful chums. Jean
and Robbie admired them both. They were
grand at games, and, best of all, seemed to
know so much about the flowers and birds,
and the strange animals of the bush.
To-morrow is a long time coming when
one is looking forward to pleasure. But,
although Jean said, at breakfast next morn-
ing, that the sun was late in rising, it had
really peeped above the hills and coloured
the eastern sky crimson at the right time.
Unknown to the children, Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas had planned the trip to Warra-
mulga some days before. The buggy was
to come at 9 o’clock, and, as the clock
above the big fireplace chimed the hour, the
sound of horses trotting on the roadway was
heard. Mother had packed the trunks over
night, and all was ready for the start before
Jean and Robbie had finished their porridge.
Full of excitement, the children (as soon
as breakfast was over) ran to the door to see
the buggy and the horses, which were to take
them away over the hills to the great bush.
There was Fred, the driver, flicking the
dust with his whip lash; the sun was


shilling from a sky so blue that it hurt
the eyes to look upwards. The wind in the
trees was like a gentle voice, and the songs
of the birds, songs which Jean and Robbie
had heard every morning for weeks past,
seemed sweeter than ever. It was a glad
November day, calm and bright—a glorious
day for a drive through the bush. The
hearts of the children beat fast as they
climbed into the buggy. The whip
cracked, and the horses started off down the
road towards the white bridge over
Corinda Creek. At the turn, where an old
gum-tree stood, the children waved their hats
once more and cried farewell to their mother,
who was still at the cottage gate, shading her
eyes from the sun. She waved her white
handkerchief in return. Then the buggy
swung round into the forest road, and Jean
and Robbie had entered the green mansions
of the bush.
For a few miles, the road wound through
country which was like that near home.
The tall trees were of the same kind as those
which grew on the slopes of the hill at the
far side of the creek; the flowers in the grass,
and the birds which darted away at the
noisy buggy wheels, were all known to
the little travellers, whose eyes were
busy every moment. Jean was coiled
in a nest of cushions on one seat,
while Robbie stood behind his father,
the driver looking ahead as if he expected
to see a wombat or a kangaroo cross


in front of the horses at every turn of the
road. But the bush does not show all her
wonders to newcomers in an hour or two.
Even after one has lived in the country for
years, there are still many secrets to dis-
cover. Nature is like an old nurse, and
the bush is one of her story books, from
which she teaches those who truly love her.
But she will not turn over the pages too
quickly; the lessons on one page must be
learned before the next is shown. Jean and
Robbie, like so many young folk, wished to
read the book of the bush in a hurry. They
loved Nature, but thought that she was
rather unkind not to let them see more won-
derful things than they met with in the first
hour of the drive to Warramulga.
Robbie asked his father and Fred, the
driver, where the kangaroos lived, and other
questions. Jean did not talk much. She
was disappointed, but would not say so.
“I know we’ll see something soon,” she
repeated to herself. “We are only a little
way from home yet. ’ ’
Presently, the road took a turn, and Jean
and Robbie cried out with delight at the
scene before them. About fifty yards ahead,
a small creek sparkled across the way, dis-
appearing again in a clump of ferns. Musk
and hazel-trees made a jungle on either side
of the road, and, high overhead, the boughs
of great gum-trees arched together so that
the sky could scarcely be seen. It was a bit of
fairyland. The scent of musk and sassa-


Nest of the Blue Wrens,


fras floated on the air, and the ringing notes
of a coachwhip bird went echoing along the
creek. Before the sound had died away, an
answering call, shorter and softer than the
other, came from a tangle of ferns and sword
grass nearer the buggy.
“Those are whip birds,” remarked Fred.
“You won’t see them, though. They are
shy chaps, I can tell you. They slink about in
the scrub as if they were afraid of the
light.”
“What are they like, Fred?” asked Jean.
“Tell us all you know about them, please.”
So Fred told the story of the whip bird as
it is known to bush boys. He said that it
was about the size of a blackbird, the feathers
of the body were dark olive green in colour,
the crest black, and there were white
feathers on the sides of the throat. It kept
to the dense scrub. The hen bird was not so
handsome as her mate, and was also smaller.
“Some bushmen say,” continued the
driver, “that the hen coachwhip bird makes
the notes like the sound of a whip crack to
finish oft her mate’s call. But I’ve often
sat in a gully listening to them, and can’t
say that I hold with that idea. The hen
makes those queer little double notes which
you heard just now. I’ve seen her, as well
as heard her. Once I sat on an old log, as
still as a stone, while a pair of coachies
played round. I saw the old chap hop up
on one end of the log and raise his crest.
He called, and his mate came along. They


have big feet and long claws, with which they
scratch up the earth and rotten wood. They
feed on insects. ”
“Did you ever see a nest, Fred*?” asked
Robbie, as the notes of the whip birds again
rang out.
“Only once,” replied Fred. “They are
pretty hard to find. The one I found was
built in a tangle of wire grass on the bank
of a creek. It was only about four feet from
the ground, and was made of thin roots in
the shape of a saucer. There were two eggs,
and such beauties! The colour was sky-blue,
but the shells were covered with queer black
markings, something like Chinese writing.
I never saw any other birds’ eggs like those
of the coachies.”
Jean and Robbie were so interested in
Fred’s account of the whip bird that they
asked Mr. Douglas whether they might
search along the creek for a nest. When
he gave them leave, the two children raced
down the road with Fred, to the creek where
it came bubbling out from the ferns. They
had to walk carefully, for the ground was
swampy, and here and there were small pools
of dark water a foot deep.
“Let us try this bit of scrub,” said Fred,
pointing to a thicket of hazel and wattles
a few yards from the creek. 6i I think I saw
a bird dive in there a moment ago.”
So the children plunged into the tangle
in the wake of the bushman. Here was an


adventure, a search for the nursery of one
of the wonderful bush creatures they so
longed to see.
“Keep close,” said Fred, as he pushed the
boughs aside to make a path for his young
charges, “and look out for cuts.” The
warning came too late, for Jean gave a cry
as she felt a sharp pain in one of her fingers.
Beads of blood appeared, and Jean, in alarm,
showed her finger to Fred.
“ It’s the sword grass. Cuts like a razor, ’ ’
and Fred tenderly bound Jean’s handker-
chief round the tiny wound.
Jean and Robbie were both careful after
this mishap; but they were as eager as ever
to find a nest of the coachwhip bird. Nature
was kind. In the heart of the thicket,
where wire grass climbed all over the trees,
the secret home of the crested birds was dis-
covered. But, instead of a pair of lovely sky-
blue eggs, with “wriggly marks” on them,
the nest held a baby bird. The nest was so
near the ground that even Robbie could, by
standing on tip-toe, look into it, and see the
feathered baby. A helpless little creature it
looked, all beak and legs. When Jean touched
it gently with her hand, the coachwhip chick
turned its head and pecked fiercely.
The old birds had been frightened away
by the cracking of branches, as the bird-
seekers made their way through the scrub.
However, they soon returned, and began
fluttering and hopping round near the nest.
Once or twice, the mother bird called


■’»> Bj •Jv ■ .... fir ■4*_ / ■
.jpJf .. - ik^
Young Wood-Swallow.
in alarm, as a hen in the fowlyard calls to
her chicks when she thinks that they are in
danger. The nestling cheeped faintly at
the sound, and tried to flutter from its cradle.
“Poor wee thing, it’s frightened,” Jean
whispered to Robbie. “But isn’t it a dear*?”
Neither of the children would have harmed
any living thing, and they soon left the fluffy
chick to its parents.
After crossing the creek, the road rose to
the top of a great hill, where the gum-trees
were so straight and tall that they reminded
Jean of the masts of the ships she had seen
in the Melbourne docks. Up here, the wind
was stronger; it moaned through the


branches, and blew Jean’s curls about her
face. She laughed gaily, and tossed them
back, while Robbie clung tightly to his hat,
fearing that the wind would whirl it away.
There were no ferns on this windy hill-top;
but, as soon as the road dipped down again,
they began to appear. One gully was filled
with them; some were over twenty feet in
height, with splendid crowns; others were
no taller than Robbie.
“They look like giants’ umbrellas,” said
Mr. Douglas, “but I do not think that they
keep off the rain well.”
“If you camped in a gully on a wet day,”
remarked Fred, “you would find it pretty
damp under the ferns. The rain pelts be-
tween the fronds, and, when the wind shakes
them, it’s a real shower bath. Gippsland
is a great place for ferns. There are dozens
of different kinds, but I don’t know the
names of all of them. Some of the small,
feathery ones grow among rocks. There’s
one we call the ‘bird’s nest’—it grows on
the trunks of trees in the gullies. I’ve seen
old logs covered with mosses and ferns, like
a green carpet, as pretty as you could wish.”
Mr. Douglas, who was fond of plants, told
the children that the tree ferns of Australia
were among the finest in the world.
Naturalists came from other lands to see
them, and were delighted when they found
themselves in these mountain gullies, where
all the plants were so beautiful and strange.


Chapter 111. — At Wareamijlga.
At noon, the buggy was driven off the road
into a clearing, where the trees had been cut
down by a party of gold-seekers, in the days
of long ago. There were still signs of a
camp —pieces of charred wood, battered tins,
and the marks of an axe on a huge log, which
had been used as a seat. Here the chil-
dren enjoyed their first meal in the open air
of the bushland. Fred made a fire, and
the billy was soon boiling. Jean and
Robbie were hungry after the long drive.
They drank large pannikins of tea, and ate
the sandwiches and cakes which mother had
packed in the hamper. While they were
eating, a number of small birds came hop-
ping about the clearing, as if they wished
for a share of the dainties. So Jean crumbled
a cake, and scattered the fragments over the
grass. The birds tasted the fare, and some
of them found it good. Others, however,
would not touch the cake crumbs, and Jean
wondered why.
Mr. Douglas said that all birds did not eat
the same kinds of food. Some were insect
eaters, others liked berries and seeds, and
many were fond of fruit. Orchardists dis-
liked the fruit-eaters, because they pecked
at apples and pears and peaches. Farmers
shot birds which took some of their
grain. Many kinds of birds were friends to
the farmers and gardeners, and were pro-


tected by law. The insect-eaters destroyed
countless numbers of the grubs and cater-
pillars that attacked crops and fruit trees.
After lunch, the horses were harnessed,
and, when the glowing coals of the fire
had been covered with earth, the buggy
started off again down the road. Soon the
shadows began to grow longer, and the chil-
dren could not help feeling sleepy. But,
suddenly, Fred called out, “ There goes a
kangaroo;” and Jean and Robbie almost
jumped out of the buggy.
“There he is,” said Mr. Douglas, “over
by that old gum-tree with the broken bough. ”
The young folk were still talking of the
kangaroo when the buggy turned off the
main road on to a rough track, at the end
of which was a white bar-gate. When they
reached this, Fred leaned over, and lifted the
catch with the handle of his whip. The gate
swung back, and the buggy passed through
into the paddock of Warramulga. Half a
mile away, the roof of the homestead could
be seen. Then two figures appeared. Soon
Jean and Robbie were chatting with
their cousins. Jim was three years older
than Jean, a sturdy bush boy, with
tanned face and fine brown eyes, which
seemed to have been made for cheery sAiiles.
Margaret, his sister, was just eleven; but
she was taller than Cousin Jean.


“All the birds are nesting,” said Jim, “and
I’ll show you some nests to-morrow. The
swallows build in the stables every year,
little round nests of mud, and there are
young ones now.”
Margaret told Jean that she could pick
flowers in her garden; but that there were
prettier ones in the bush —red and yellow
orchids, shaped like spiders and butterflies,
white clematis blossoms, blue bells, and
purple supple-jack.
Uncle Arthur was waiting on the wide
veranda of the homestead to welcome his
guests. He kissed Jean and Robbie, and
shook hands with Mr. Douglas, who was his
brother. There was no smiling woman’s
face at the door when the little party arrived.
Mrs. Douglas was away in Melbourne, and
would not return to Warramulga for a
month.
The young travellers, tired after their long
journey through the bush, were glad to rest
in easy chairs on the veranda until tea time.
But their tongues were not still. They told
Jim and Margaret about the finding of the
coach whip birds’ nest, how they fed the birds
at lunch in the clearing; and asked so many
questions about kangaroos that Jim said,
with a laugh, that he could not answer them
all in a week.
It was arranged that, in the morning,
Robbie and Jean should be shown all the pets
of Warramulga, and the sheep and cattle
in the home paddocks. In the afternoon,
they would go to the riverside, which Jim


said was a “jolly place.” The children went
to bed early; and Jean and Robbie were
asleep almost as soon as their heads touched
the pillows.
Morning came, and the weather was fine.
It was not long before the cousins were out
of doors. Jean and Robbie were delighted
with the tame wallaby, which hopped up, and
took a cabbage stalk from Jim’s hand. The
doves and pigeons were friendly, too. But
what pleased Robbie most was Jim’s ring-
tail possum, whose home was in a gum sap-
ling, growing at one corner of the veranda.
“Pretty little fellow, isn’t he?” Jim re-
marked, proudly, as the possum climbed
down from the branches, and sprang lightly
on to his shoulder. “There are plenty in
the tea-tree scrub round the lagoon. They
build nests, just like birds, as big as a foot-
ball, and coil up in them so cosily. I ’ll show
you one to-morrow, perhaps. ’ ’
After admiring the horses in the stables,
Jean and Robbie looked up at the rafters in
search of swallows’ nests. They had seen
the little blue-backed birds flying in and out
of the open doorway, and heard them twitter-
ing from their perch on the roof. Jean
thought that she could see a nest; but the
rafters were high, and the light was dim, so
she waited for Jim to speak before telling
Robbie to look.
“Yes, that is a swallow’s nest,” said Jim,
“and there are two more, just over Star-
light’s stall.”


The nests were of mud, hundreds of pellets
plastered together, with a hollow at the top,
lined with feathers and bits of straw and
grass. The children could not peep into
these bird homes; but Jim knew that there
were four fledglings in one and three in each
of the others. He had seen the old swallows
building the nests. They gathered mud from
moist places in the paddocks, flew with it
to the stables, and worked the pellets into the
walls of the nests. The mud dried quickly,
and the birds did their work so cleverly that
the nests were soon ready for eggs.
“Once I climbed up a ladder and looked
into a nest, ” Jim told Robbie. ‘ 1 There were
four tiny, pink-white eggs, speckled with
purple-brown. I did not touch them, but
Mrs. Swallow twittered at me as if I had
stolen her treasures. The swallows leave us
in winter; father says that they fly away to
the far north, where summer is. We love
them to be about the homestead. They are
dear little birds, and, besides, they keep
down the flies and mosquitoes.”
The hours pass quickly when one is happy;
and, as Jim finished his talk about swallows,
the dinner gong sounded. The four chums
were eager for the afternoon excursion to
the riverside, where Jim had promised to find
the nest of a pair of kingfishers. The river
was a mile distant from the house, and the
way to it, after crossing the paddocks, lay
through a patch of scrub. The track
was narrow, so that the ramblers had


to walk in pairs. Fred, the driver, who had,
atone time, been employed on Warramulga
station, went with the young folk, although
Jim was the leader. Passing through the
scrub, they saw a wallaby sleeping beneath
a she-oak. It was like the tame one at the
homestead, and Robbie wondered whether it
could be “Billy’s” brother. Presently, the
scrub began to open out, and, a few minutes
later, the gleam of water was seen ahead.
“There’s the river,” cried Jim. “See
how it curves round the point, where the
hazels are growing. Just on the other side
is my bathing pool. ”
A Daring Climber.—Searching for Parrots’ Nests.


Chapter IV. — The Kingfishers.
Jean and Robbie bad seen lily ponds and
little lakes in the Botanic Gardens. They
had enjoyed rambles along the banks of the
Yarra Yarra, where it flows past golden
wattles near Heidelberg; but this river in the
bush, with the delightful pool where Jim
swam and dived on summer days, was more
beautiful than anything they had yet looked
upon. The pool was so still that a leaf
which fell into it from a hazel bough caused
the water to break into dimples, as a baby
does when some one touches its face gently.
The little ripples, round and wavy, grew
larger and larger, until they died against the
green, sloping banks.
After the ramblers had crossed the river
on an old bridge of logs, Jim led them round
to the grassy flat, from which, he told them,
he made grand dives into the river.
“You see that old log,” said Jim, as they
sat on the turf beside the river. “Well,
blackfish live under it in the dark water.
I Ve caught some big fellows on a night line. ’ ’
It was so pleasant resting on the river
bank, underneath the boughs, that the young
folk were in no hurry to continue their
ramble. They watched the shadows dancing
over the water, and were amused by the ac-
tions of some small, brown beetles, which
seemed to be skating on the surface. Hither


and thither, the insects darted, never con-
tent to rest for long in one spot.
“What are they looking for V 9 asked Jean.
“They don’t seem to be eating.”
Jim could say only that the beetles were
called ‘ ‘ water dodgers ’’ by bush boys. There
were always some to be seen in quiet reaches
of the rivers and creeks, where the long, green
stems of water lilies swayed lazily about.
An hour passed away before the ramblers
left this cool spot to go in search of the
kingfishers. The track to the falls, where
the birds had been noticed by Jim, followed
the river.
Long before the falls were seen, the sound
of the water could be heard. It was like the
voices of children singing far off in the
forest, a soothing lullaby.
Now the track began to widen, and the
trees on either side stood further apart. The
river curved round suddenly, and, as the
ramblers came out into an open space, the
falls appeared in sight. Down through a
rocky cleft, the water tumbled, breaking into
foam below where the current swirled leaves
and twigs in a mad dance, before shooting
them away round the bend. Jets of spray
rose every few moments, and the drops
sparkled in the air like jewels. The noise
of the waters was now so loud that the
children could hardly hear each other speak.
Fred shouted a warning to them not to go
too near the edge; and they stood at a safe
distance. A flash of blue came from the


trees on the opposite bank, and disappeared
down-stream.
“There goes a kingfisher,” cried Jim.
“Let us look for the nest. It cannot be far
away.”
Some kingfishers lay their eggs at the end
of a tunnel in the bank of the river, and
others in hollows in trees. Jim knew the
habits of the birds, for, when fishing, he had
often watched them, while waiting for a tug
at the end of his line.
With one more look at the falls, the party
turned from the river, and went back along
the track for a short distance. Then Jim
led the way through the trees to the water-
side again.
“Now, we must be quiet for a while,” he
said. 1 ‘ I think the kingfishers 9 nest is about
here.”
So the ramblers sat down on the grass,
and waited, with eyes and ears alert. Pre-
sently, a string of niping notes was heard,
and Jim jumped up quickly. The kingfisher
called again, and its mate answered. Then
one of the birds flew across the glade to an
old gum-tree, and came to rest on a dead
bough.
Jim ran over the grass to the tree, and the
others followed. The kingfisher, of course,
had flown, but the young naturalist pointed
to the end of the dead branch, which was
hollow, and his companions guessed that
there was the kingfishers’ home.


“What a queer place for a nest,” re-
marked Jean.
Jim made a little speech about birds ’ nests.
He told them that he had learnt in many a
long ramble through the bush.
“Many birds,” said Jim, “make their
nests in holes in trees. The rosella parrots
do, and cockatoos, and the laughing
jackass. The little, brown tree-creeper
also likes a hollow. When the kingfisher
cannot find a nice hole, he and his
mate make one. They choose a dead bough
which the rain has rotted, and dig the soft
wood out with their strong bills. IVe seen
them at work. One bird flies up and pecks
away for a time, then the other takes its turn.
It’s fun to watch them. When the hole is
deep enough, the round, white eggs are laid
on a bed of soft chips and wood dust at the
end. The little fellows who own this nest
have not finished yet, so there will not be any
eggs until next week. ’ ’
“0, and we shall be home again by then,”
thought Jean. But both she and Robbie felt
happy at having seen a real kingfishers’
nest.
If one had to choose the prettiest birds in
the bush, the sacred kingfisher would be on
the list. The ramblers had seen the birds
at their best, flitting through the forest, with
sunlight glancing upon their bright feathers.
Kingfisher blue is a colour which can be
matched only by the sea and the sky on calm
sunny days.


The ramblers reached the homestead at
milking time, tired, but happy. After tea,
they talked over plans for the coming days.
“I think we should go to the lagoon to-
morrow,” was Jim’s idea. The elders said
that they would come with the young folk,
and make a real picnic. Kate, the cook, was
asked to bake scones and prepare a hamper.
Morning came, and the ramblers were
out of bed long before the usual hour.
The window in Jim’s room, which he
shared with Robbie, looked out on to the gar-
den. As they dressed, the two boys watched
the spine-bill honey-eaters fluttering round
the morning glory which twined over
the veranda rail and round the posts. The
birds were paying great attention to the blue,
bell-shaped flowers. Robbie, who was close
to the window, saw one of the honey-eaters
peck a hole in a flower at the narrow end,
and then thrust in its beak. He asked Jim
why this was done.
“The spine-bills suck nectar from the
tubes of the flowers,” Jim replied, “and I
think that they also eat insects. The boys
at school call the spine-bill ‘Cobbler’s Awl,’
because of its long, curved bill, which goes
through a flower as easily as a needle.”
Robbie thought the spine-bill a clever little
bird, and he liked its colours —light brown
on the back, black wings and tail, white


chest, and chestnut brown patch on the throat.
Later on, when he saw one of the birds closer,
he found that the eyes were scarlet, and glit-
tered like the rubies in his mother’s ring.
The drive to the lagoon in the fresh morn-
ing air was a good beginning for a happy
day. As the buggy passed through Barker’s
Flat, Jim pointed out the State school,
with its tine playground shaded by tall gum
trees, and garden plots along the fence.
Margaret and he, before the governess came
from Melbourne to teach them, had attended
the school, and they knew all the boys and
girls of the township. The head teacher
sometimes rode out to Warramulga to spend
a week-end with Mr. Douglas, and the chil-
dren were always pleased to see him.
Just as the buggy was turning out of the
main street, a boy, about Jim’s age, who was
walking along towards the school, called out
“Hullo!” and waved his hat.
‘ ‘ Hullo, Dick! ’ ’ returned Jim. ‘ ‘ Come up
and see us on Saturday. We’re oft to the
lagoon to look for possums.”
Dick smiled with pleasure, and called out
that he would be glad to visit Warramulga.
“That is Dick Longwood,” Jim explained
to his cousins. “He is a chum of mine.
My word, he can ride and swim! At the
school sports last year, he won the mile race
as easily as a bird, and beat Harry Nelson


by a yard in the 250. He’s no good at foot-
ball, but he can bat like Yerney Ransford. ”
Robbie looked after the young hero, and
felt proud that he was to meet him by and
by.
The miles between Barker’s Flat and the
lagoon were soon passed. From the road,
the water could not be seen, because it was
surrounded by swamp tea-tree, which grows
thickly in moist places. The leaves are
much smaller than those of the tea-tree. They
form pleasant groves along the sea coast.
The buggy was driven to a grassy flat,
one of the picnic spots favoured by the
people of the township; the horses were un-
harnessed and hobbled; and, then, Fred be-
gan to gather wood for a fire. The girls un-
packed the hamper. They spread sheets of
newspaper on the grass, and soon had a jolly
picnic dinner ready.
‘‘The billy’s boiling, ’’ cried Fred. ‘‘Bring
the tea, please.”
The picnickers were merry as the little
wrens that kept hopping over the turf,
w r ith their long tails held perkily over their
backs. Jean noticed that each of the birds
with a blue cap on its head and blue back
and tail had with him four or five brown-
coloured birds of the same size and shape.
Jim explained that the blue wrens always
went about in ‘ ‘ families. ’ ’ The brown birds
were hens.


As Jim was speaking, Fred, who was
sitting beside a clump of bushes, called to
the children to come and see what he had
found.
The ramblers jumped up, and ran across
to the bushes.
“Look in there,” said Fred, pulling the
branches aside.
In the centre of the bush, about two feet
from the ground, was a dome-shaped nest,
made of dried grasses, with an opening at
the top, roofed over.
‘‘ A blue wren’s nest, ’ ’ cried Jim. 1 ‘ Don’t
touch, Robbie; the eggs are so tiny that they
break at a touch.”
This nest did not hold any eggs, but there
was a brood of baby wrens. The faint cheep-
ing could easily be heard. One of the nest-
lings was lifted gently from the cosy nest,
and Jean held it in her hand for a minute.
Jean and Robbie asked many questions
about wrens, and Uncle Arthur, who loved
birds, promised to tell them, on the way
home, the story of “Maluro.”
Leaving Fred to look after the horses and
clear up, the others entered the tea-tree
scrub, taking a track which was not wide
enough for two to walk together.


Chapter V.—Among the Wateb Birds.
The belt of tea-tree round the lagoon was
so thick that the ramblers could not see the
water until they were within a few yards
of the soft mud, which formed the banks.
They had to walk carefully, for their feet
sank if placed too near the edge, and the
dark water came bubbling up. The sun
made the surface of the lagoon shine like a
great mirror. The white clouds and blue sky
and the wall of scrub along the banks were
reflected in the water.
The children could not help looking down
into the strange fairy world that seemed to
lie beneath the still water. Margaret, who
was fond of fairy tales, said that a beautiful
princess must live in that palace of sky and
clouds.
But the birds soon caught the eyes of the
ramblers, and they forgot all about the prin-
cess and her palace when Jim found the
nest of a pair of black swans. There were
large flocks of these birds on the lagoon.
They showed little fear of the newcomers.
The nest was placed in the centre of a
clump of reeds. Jim would not have looked
for it there if he had not seen one of the
old birds swimming up and down near the
hidden nursery. He knew that it was the
habit of nesting swans to guard their homes
in that manner. A native stockman had


told him that, in the days before the white
man came to live in the bush, the blackfellows
gathered thousands of swans’ eggs for food.
They discovered the nests by watching the
birds. While one swan sat snugly on the
eggs, the other would act as sentry.
To reach this nest, Jim had to take off his
boots and stockings, and wade through water
up to the knees. He pushed the reeds aside,
and made a track to the centre of the clump.
The mother bird arched her neck, and pecked
angrily at the air as Jim came near her.
At the same time, she made a strange
whistling sound. Then she slipped off the
nest, and nine big, pale-green eggs were left
shining in the sunlight.
The other ramblers, of course, could not
see the nest, but, as they were waiting on the
bank, Fred came along. Good-naturedly,
he offered to give each of the young folk a
pick-a-back across to the reed islet. Jean
was the first to make the journey, then Mar-
garet had her turn, and Kobbie came last.
Meanwhile, Jim had been paddling round
outside the reeds, and he was lucky enough
to find the nest of a pair of coots. The
swans’ nest was like a platform, made of
reed stems and other water plants. It was
big enough for one of the ramblers to stand
on. The coots’ home, also, was built of dead
reeds and rushes, with a hollow in the middle
about six inches deep. It had seven eggs
of a light-stone colour, with small, purply-
brown spots sprinkled all over. They were


much smaller than the swans’ eggs. After
the others had visited this nest, the party
continued its ramble round the lagoon.
The actions of the water birds made all
the ramblers laugh. It was funny to see
a stately swan suddenly dart its head and
long neck under the water, and remain, for
a minute, with only the tail and feet showing
above the surface. Jim explained that their
food was the soft stems of water plants.
Many swans were seen carrying pieces of
green stuff in their beaks. The coots, too,
were diving for their dinners.
“Oh, look! look!” cried Margaret, as the
ramblers came into view of a quiet arm of
the lagoon, where two swans were paddling
with their young ones.
The cygnets were fluffy little creatures,
covered with grey down.
“A happy family,” said Margaret’s
father.
“What darlings,” Jean whispered to Mar-
garet. “How I would like to hug one!”
There were many ducks near the centre
of the lagoon. They were too far away for
the ramblers to see their beauty. Fred, the
driver, who, like every other bushman, went
out shooting in the proper season, said that
the flocks were made up of wild or
black duck and “hard-heads.” Both kinds
were common on swamps, rivers, and
lagoons in most parts of Australia. The


hard-head, ’ ’ also called the white-eyed
duck, could fly so swiftly that it was not easy
to hit with shot.
While Fred was talking, the ramblers
came to a reedy place. No birds were to
be seen, save a few coots and the ducks, far
out on the lagoon; but there was bird music.
From all parts of the thicket floated cheery
whistling notes, as if a band of fairy players
were blowing on reed flutes with might and
main. The concert pleased the young
people, and they wished to see the per-
formers. Jim was ready to enter the reeds,
and try to flush some of the birds, which he
called reed warblers.
“They make the daintiest little nest,” he
said, “and, if I can find an old one, I’ll bring
it out for you to see.”
After ten minutes, Jim came out of the
reeds, bearing in one hand a reed warbler’s
nest. The ramblers gathered round him
to look at it. It was cup-shaped, and much
deeper than the nests of other small
birds which they had seen. The outer
part was made of the stems of water
plants and roots, cleverly woven to-
gether ; and the inside was neatly lined with
fine grasses and some soft feathers. The
nest was fastened to the stems of four reeds.
Jim explained that the reed warblers’ eggs
were of a greyish green colour, spotted and
blotched with grey and olive.


“There are generally three eggs to a
clutch,” he went on. “The nest is made
deep, so that they cannot fall out when the
reeds sway in the wind. The reed warblers
do not stay with us all the year. We hear
them singing from September till about
Then they start to fly away to
the north.”
Robbie, who had begun to form a museum
at Honeysuckle Cottage, asked whether he
might take the reed warblers’ nest back to
the homestead, and Jim gave it to him.
The ramblers were not able to walk right
round the lagoon, because, at one spot, the
ground was too swampy to be crossed with
safety. So they began the return journey
as the shadows were creeping over the water.
The horses were found cropping grass in
the clearing. Fred soon had them harnessed
to the buggy; and, with the evening chorus
of the tree-frogs sounding in their ears, the
ramblers began the homeward drive. For
a while, the cousins talked of the adventures
of the day. Jim answered questions about
swans and coots and reed warblers; and,
sometimes, Fred was called upon to speak.
At length, Jean remembered the blue
wrens, and her uncle’s promise of a story.
So she asked whether he would tell them
about Alaluro.


Chapter VI. — Maluro, the Blue Week.
“Once upon a time,” began Uncle
Arthur—
“O! a fairy story!” cried Margaret.
“No,” said her father, “not, at least, one
of the kind which you are fond of read-
ing. My story is of the adventures of a
little bird, and all really happened as I shall
tell you.
“Once upon a time, a pair of blue wrens
chose a pleasant spot, and set up housekeep-
ing. The nest was built in a clump of
bracken fern, growing on the bank of a
mountain stream, which, when the eggs were
hatched, sang a cradle song to the baby birds.
The nest was like the one which you saw to-
day, in the clearing, dome-shaped, made of
grasses, and warmly lined with feathers.
The entrance was sheltered by a hood, which
kept all inside cosy, even on a rainy day.
The mother bird did all the work of nest
building. In due time, three tiny, white
eggs, flecked with reddish spots, were
laid. For the next two weeks, the hen bird
sat close on her treasure. Her little
heart beat with love and hope as the
hour drew near when the chicks within the
frail shells should escape. The father
worked hard all this time, catching cater-
pillars and moths, and bringing them to his
small, brown wife as she sat in the nest.


Baby Possum.
Often, too, he sang to her the merry song
which you heard to-day.
“On the fifteenth day after the first egg
was laid, three queer little creatures lay
huddled together in the bottom of the nest.
Of course, the mother thought them the pret-
tiest babies in Birdland, but, really, they
were ugly. They were just shaking atoms of
pink flesh, with goblin heads. Looking at
them, one could hardly believe that they
would ever grow into beautiful birds. The


parents, however, had no doubts. Their
hearts were full of joy at having a family
after all their trouble. But there were now
five mouths to be filled instead of two, and
the parents were busy all day long hunting
for insect food. There was a good supply, but
many other broods were being reared in the
bushes and bracken along the creekside.
Millions of moths and gnats and caterpillars
died to give life to the baby birds. Nestlings,
you know, have dozens of meals a day; in
fact, they are ready to eat at any time. That,
perhaps, is the reason why they grow so
quickly.
‘ 4 On the sixth day after birth, the eyes of
the baby wrens were open, and the plump
little bodies showed signs of becoming
covered with feathers. They were still
funny to the eyes of man. They had stumpy
tails; and the feathers were only tufts. And,
now, a sad thing happened. Two of the
fledglings, from the first, had been weaker
than the other; and, on the ninth day after
hatching, both died. The living chick
chirped softly, but no sound came from the
cold forms of his brothers. The old birds
were greatly disturbed. They fluttered
about the nest. They darted in and out in
turn, but did not seem to know what had
happened to their two dead chicks. Only
one gaping yellow beak was lifted now to
take the food that they brought to the nest.


“I will call the chick that was left alive
Maluro. Well, at length, the day came
when he scrambled out of the nest for the
first time, and saw the great world of trees
and flowers. How strange it must have
seemed to Maluro, whose life, up till then,
had been spent in a cosy nest! Perhaps he
had wondered, if a bird can wonder, where
his father and mother spent the hours when
they were away from home. He had heard
the song of the creek and the notes of other
birds, thrushes and finches, and yellow
robins, but had never before peeped out into
the world. He was fed when hungry, and,
after all, that is the chief thing for a nest-
ling.
“It was a calm, sunny day in October
when Maluro’s mother made up her mind
that it was time for him to come into the
light. Maluro was lying at the bottom of
the nest, asleep, when the old birds began
to call to him. Mother wren poked her head
into the nest, and chirped softly, asking the
chick, in bird language, to crawl up to her.
He dug his claws into the walls, and slowly
reached the ‘doorway.’ He was rather
frightened, and clung tightly to the rim of
the opening for a few minutes. Then he
lost his balance, and fell into the fern below.
His father, who was perched on a dead
branch near by, with his long tail held over
his back, and the blue cap and black velvet
waistcoat shining in the sunlight, fluttered


down to help the poor nestling. He was
so pleased to see his son that he sang
cheerily, and the chick replied with shrill
chirps and squeaks. The mother bird
joined in the chorus.
“Maluro, as I told you, was much afraid
at first. The world seemed such a big place
for a tiny birdling to be in. The light of
the sun, which he had not known before,
made him blink his eyes for a while. He
stayed where he had fallen among the
bracken, expecting that something would
hurt him. His mother and father did not
leave him; and, as the long minutes passed,
Maluro became more used to the outside
world, and felt less afraid. He looked
around him, at the fern fronds, sparkling
with dew-drops, the green rushes along the
creek, the tall gum-trees, with their branches
waving high overhead, as if they were sweep-
ing cobwebs from the blue sky. And the
birdling saw also the bright-coloured par-
rots, robins, and honey-eaters.
“By the time the sun had climbed above
the tree tops, Maluro was tired and hungry;
but he no longer had any fear. He had be-
come a little citizen in Birdland.
“One day, Maluro was chased by a big
black and white bird, with a cruel, hooked
beak, and escaped death only by tumbling
into a thick bush, where he lay, trembling
with fear, for nearly half an hour. This


was the first attack from an enemy.
Summer and autumn passed away; then
came the cold days of winter, when all the
bird foJk found it hard to obtain enough
food. Maluro was a fine bird when spring
arrived once more, with the sunshine to
waken the flowers and leaf buds, and tell
the birds that it was time to begin nest
building.
“Season followed season until Maluro was
three years old. He had helped to rear
two families, and was as wise now as any
bird in the bush. But he was caught nap-
ping one morning, soon after the sun had
risen, and the other birds were singing their
hymn of praise for the light. A big bird,
of the same kind as the one which had
frightened him when he was a wee fledgling,
darted down from a bough, and killed
Maluro with a snap of its sharp, curved
beak.”
The children were quiet for a minute after
hearing the tale of Maluro, the blue wren.
Then Jean spoke.
“It was a pretty story,” she said, “but
I wish that Maluro had not been killed.”
“Was it a butcher bird that killed him,
father?” asked Jim. “I’ve never seen
one, but it says in the bird book that the
butcher bird kills small birds, mice, and
beetles, and hangs them on thorns.”
“Yes,” replied Mr. Douglas, “it was a
butcher bird, and these birds do hang on


thorns the creatures which they km. They
leave them there until they wish to eat
them. ’ ’
Fred, who had listened to the story with
as much pleasure as the young folk, said that
he had once kept a butcher bird in a cage.
He fed it on raw meat. One day, he saw
the captive pick up a piece of meat and push
it on the point of a nail. So he drove
three or four nails through the back of the
cage, and waited to see what would happen.
The butcher bird put a piece of meat on
every nail.
“It was just like a toy butcher’s shop,”
continued Fred, “with joints of beef and
legs of mutton hanging from the hooks.”
“But the butcher bird is a fine whistler,”
Jim broke in. “Dick Longwood had one
which could whistle the ‘Quaker’s Wife.’
In the autumn months, its notes were
lovely.”
It was dark before the buggy passed
through the gate of the home paddock, and
lights were shining through the windows of
the house. The long and happjr day was
over.


Chapter VII. — The Creek.
For a day or two after the drive to the
lagoon, the four cousins rambled round the
homestead. Jim and Margaret each had
favourite spots to which they took their
chums. Many of the happy hours were
spent in the play-paddock. This was a
small piece of the estate which the children
were allowed to call their own. All round
the post and rail fence grew tall gum-trees
and lightwoods, the branches of which were
large and long. In one corner, tea-tree and
hazel formed a little jungle. The most de-
lightful thing of all in the play-paddock
was a real slab hut, built in the middle of
a green space near the slip panels.
Margaret had made a garden in front
of the hut; and honeysuckle and roses
trailed about the walls and along the roof
pole. Inside, the hut was as cosy as the
heart of youth could desire. An open fire-
place spread across one end, and at the
other were two bunks. A plank table stood
in the centre, on the log floor, and three
tree-stump chairs were placed round it.
Coloured pictures were tacked to the
walls; and there were also some boomer-
angs and native spears. On a shelf
above the fireplace rested tins and bottles,
while a cupboard in the corner looked as if
it held all kinds of nice things. It was
not a large hut, not nearly so big as those


which Jean and Robbie had visited at
Corinda Yale. But it was a real slab hut,
with a roof of bark, such as the old settlers
lived in before the sound of a railway en-
gine was heard in the Victorian forests. The
ramblers had games in the paddock. They
played “Scouts” and “Pioneers,” and “In-
dian Camps.” The “jungle” was fine for
lion and tiger hunting, and Jim and Robbie
tracked many wild beasts to their dens in
the dense tea-tree scrub.
When Jean first entered the little hut, she
clapped her hands with pleasure, saying
that it was just like the house which Peter
Pan and the boys built for Wendy on the
Island, in the Never Never Country.
One morning, near the end of the week,
as the cousins were playing in the hut, a
cheery shout came from the slip panels.
“That is Dick Longwood,” said Jim, run-
ning out of the open door.
It was Dick, who had come to keep them
company for the day. He brought with him
his dog Kim, a keen fox terrier, whose
stump of a tail wagged in a friendly man-
ner when he was introduced to Robbie and
Jean.
For the rest of the morning, the children
stayed in the play-paddock. Jean and
Robbie liked Dick Longwood at once, and,
before the bell for dinner rang, they were
firm friends. It had been planned that, in
the afternoon, they should all go to the Junc-
tion, about four miles from the homestead.


where a small creek flowed into the river.
It was too far for the girls to walk there
and back, so they rode on ponies. It
was a pleasant journey along a shady track,
and the riders were in no hurry. Dick
made them laugh at his jokes and quaint
sayings, and he had news for Jim and Mar-
garet of their friends in the township. He
told them, too, of the nature-study lessons
at school, and about Bird Day, when a
gentleman from Melbourne, who had
travelled all over Australia in search of rare
birds, gave an address to the pupils.
“It was grand,” Dick said. “He told
us about an island oft the coast of Queens-
land, where thousands of sea swallows, or
terns, nest in the trees. He camped there
with some other bird-lovers for ten days.
They saw turtles swimming in the sea, and
found their eggs buried in the sand, just
beyond the edge of the forest. It was a
coral island, like the one I’ve read about in
Ballantyne’s story, only very much smaller.
The corals growing in the lagoon were all
colours, pink and yellow and red and purple.
Well, I tell you, I just want to go to one
of those islands of the Barrier Reef as soon
as I get a chance.”
Jim voted that it would be a great adven-
ture ; but the girls asked whether there were
any sharks in the lagoon.
“Yes,” Dick replied, “the Birdman said
that there were plenty of small ones at full
tide. When he stood on the beach, he could


see the fins of six or seven sharks at one
time, cutting through the water like tiny
sails. The campers went in swimming, but
took good care to keep in the shallows, and
make a great splashing with their legs now
and again. It must have been fun. The
water was lukewarm on a sunny day, and
they could wade about in it for hours with-
out feeling chilly. I ’ll tell you more about
the island as we are coming home. Here we
are at the Junction.”
After the ponies had been tethered in a
spot where the grass was long and green, the
chums walked down to the waterside.
Where the creek and river met, the sun was
shut out by a roof of boughs; the trees on
either bank had reached out towards each
other until the branches met and mingled.
The sky could be seen here and there, as if
pieces of blue cloth had been woven among
the green leaves. The waters of the creek
flowed swiftly round a curve, to join the
river, and a whirlpool was formed. Dead
leaves and sticks were tossed about here, like
boats on a stormy sea; and, under the banks,
the ferns and water plants swayed to and
fro.
A short distance up the creek, where the
water was quieter, a log bridge could be
seen. Jim led the way there, and the
ramblers crossed to the southern bank. They
found themselves among clumps of sword-
grass, growing in a hollow. There were


some small bushes also, covered with white
flowers—asters, Margaret called them.
“Shouldn’t wonder if we found a nest of
the white-eared honey-eater here,” said
Dick. “Do you hear them calling? Listen!”
The ramblers stood for a minute, with ears
alert. “Cherry bob, cherry bob!” Sharp
and clear the notes came from amid the
sword-grass, and Dick and Jim ran
forward. A moment later, the ramblers
saw the singer, a small bird, whose head was
dark-grey, with a pure white ear patch on
each side. The general colour of the body
was olive-yellow. The honey-eater was
Robin Redbreast.


quickly followed by its mate, and the boys,
who had noticed the bush from which the
pair came, had little trouble in finding the
nest. It was cup-shaped and deep, being
made of strips of bark and dry grass. The
lining was of softer material. Jim thought,
as there were no eggs, that the nest was not
quite finished; and Dick thought so too.
The girls, however, wished to peep into the
birdland cradle, which was placed only a few
feet above the ground, and bravely scram-
bled through the sword-grass to the bush
which held it.
Dick, who knew the notes of the bush birds
even better than Jim, said that he was sure
that a pair of yellow-eared honey-eaters had
a nest somewhere along the creek.
“It is not much good,” he explained, “to
go out looking for nests, unless you know
something about the ways of the birds, and
can tell the different notes when you hear
them. You must watch the birds, too.
I heard the yellow-eared honey-eaters as we
crossed the bridge; a queer whistling note
they make. Let us go and look in that
hazel. I say that the nest is in one of the
branches hanging over the creek.”
Back they went to the shaky old bridge,
and the boys began the search.
“Here it is,” Jim cried out, a few minutes
later. “A beauty, like a little casket, all
covered with yellow moss. There are
two eggs, pinky-brown, with reddish spots,”


The nest was fastened to some fine twigs
near the end of one of the overhanging
branches of a hazel-tree. Dick and Jim
could just see the eggs by climbing halfway
out on the bough. But it was not safe for
the girls to do this, so that they had to be
content with what Jim had told them.
It was rather a disappointment, but one
cannot see everything; and, soon, the girl
ramblers forgot the honey-eaters’ nest in the
delight of gathering wild flowers. It was
a little surprise which Dick had planned.
He led the to a sunny slope about half
a mile from the creek, where there was a
garden of orchids and other flowers. Most
of the blossoms were small, it is true, but
they were of many quaint shapes, and some
were brightly coloured. Between them,
Jean and Margaret gathered over thirty
different kinds in half an hour. Dick was
not a master among the flowers, although
he could give the bush names for a good
number of those which the girls picked.
Margaret knew them all. There were hosts
of spider orchids, with green and crimson
flowers, and sweet-scented yellow bee or-
chids. It was late in the season for the
greenhoods, yet a few were found in a moist
spot. The Japanese pansy also was there,
and the wild violet, with its pale, lilac-tinted
petals.


What interested the ramblers most in the
orchid flowers were the “tongues,” which,
in the spider kinds, were very pretty. Mar-
garet explained that the “tongue” is called
the labellum, and that insects visiting the
flowers alight on it.
In some of the greenhoods, the “tongue”
acts as if set on springs. When a bee or other
small insect comes to rest upon it, it flies
upward. In fact, every orchid is a tiny
machine, made in a wonderful manner.
“In one of the nature-study lessons at
school,” said Dick, “we were told how in-
sects visit the orchid flowers. They are
Nature’s little servants, and, but for their
visits, the flowers would not be able to pro-
duce seeds. It’s hard to explain, but I ex-
pect Margaret will be able to show you some
pictures in her botany book, which will make
it easier to understand.”
Leaving the pleasant hillside, the ramblers
followed the track back to the place where
the ponies were quietly cropping grass. The
shadows were beginning to grow long, and
Dick declared that “it was time to be off.”
So they rode home briskly, as merry as when
they set out for the Junction, while the sun
was still high in the sky.


Chapter VIII.—A Bush Fire.
Dick stayed at Warramulga for tea. He
did not mind having to ride home in
darkness, for he knew every foot of the
way. His pony was a clever beast, which
needed little guiding along roads and tracks
that it had passed over many times. Dick
was fond of “Come,” and often said that
he was the best pony in Australia. Jim, of
course, would not agree that Dick was right.
“Why,” he boasted to Dick, as they sat,
after tea, in the cosy room where he and
Margaret learned their lessons, and read
story books, “why, ‘Starlight’ once carried
me forty miles, when mother was ill, and
the doctor was in Monambar. Yes, and we
came home in the dark. I couldn’t see a
foot in front of ‘Starlight’s’ nose half the
way. ‘Corrie’ is a fine little fellow, Dick,
but he is not quite as good as my ‘Star-
light.’ ”
Dick only laughed, but it was easy to see
that he still believed his pony to be the best
in the land.
W 7 hen, at last, the time came for Dick to
leave, the cousins walked to the gate with
him, and, as he trotted away down the road,
they cried good-bye so heartily that an old
grey possum, that had just come out of his
nest in the hollow spout of a gum-tree,
scuttled back again in a great fright.


A day or two after Dick’s visit, the cousins
themselves had to part. The party from
Corinda Yale had already stayed longer
than Mr. Douglas had intended, and he
found that he must hasten back to his own
home. Once again, Fred was waiting at the
door with the buggy and horses. Jean and
Margaret kissed each other twenty times;
and Jim gave Robbie’s hand a final squeeze.
“All aboard,” cried Fred, cracking his
whip. The little passengers climbed into
the buggy, where their father was already
seated. A minute later, the wheels were
spinning round. At breakfast that morn-
ing, Jean and Robbie, after they had
thanked their uncle and cousins for the
happy days at the homestead, made them all
promise to come and spend a long holiday,
next year, at their father’s house in the city.
“We are going to leave Corinda Yale
when the winter is over,” said Jean; “and
father is going to take us to Black Rock for
a week or two; you will come, too. Won’t it
be fun to play on the beach and paddle in
the sea?”
Margaret’s eyes shone with pleasure at
the thought of being by the wide, blue sea;
and Jim at once made up his mind that he
would go out fishing in a boat, climb the
cliffs, and do a dozen other delightful things.
So it was arranged that, in September, all
being well, their father should bring Jim
and Margaret to Melbourne with Mrs.
Douglas.


The journey to Corinda Yale was not ex-
citing, although a fox ran across the track
near the creek, where the nest of the coach-
whip birds was found, and startled the
horses.
Fred had not a good word to say for foxes.
“They’re a pest,” he remarked; “I do wish
that no one had ever brought them to Aus-
tralia. Talk about rabbits! Why, the
foxes are becoming worse, and you can’t eat
them, as you can bunny. They kill the
lambs, and take young birds from the nests,
besides making raids on the fowl-runs. My
brother lost some of his best laying hens
last spring. An old fox came, nearly every
night, and ran off with one of the silly
birds.”
“But,” said Jean, “they are pretty
animals. The foxes, I mean. I’ve read that,
in England, the farmers are not allowed
to shoot them, because ladies and gentlemen,
with dogs, chase them over the fields.”
“Poor kind of sport,” Fred grumbled. “I
don’t love the fox, but I can’t see any fun
or fairness in setting thirty or forty dogs
after one small beast.”
As they drew near to Corinda Yale, the
children began to think that the horses were
travelling slowly, although, really, they were
trotting along briskly enough. It seemed,
to the young folk, a long, long time since they
set out on the great adventure. It would
be good to be with mother again, at Honey-
suckle Cottage.


the afternoon by a horseman, who had been
out among the ranges to a distant township.
When the rider drew rein before the store,
in front of which stood a number of men, his
face was flushed; foam showed at his horse’s
mouth, and the poor animal’s sides heaved.
“ You ’ll have to turn out quick and lively,
boys,” said the newcomer, “a fire is raging
on Eastern Hill, and down the gully. It’s
burning in the dry timber. We must get
to work, or it will be racing down here before
dark.”
Within five minutes, every person in
Corinda Yale knew of the danger. Empty
sacks were collected; and some young men
with axes went down to the coolest spots by
the creek to cut green branches. Then the
fire-fighters hurried away to meet the
flames. Mr. Douglas was one of the workers.
It was a hard fight, but the men won
and saved the village. After sunset, Joan
and Robbie walked with their mother to the
top of the road to see the glow of the great
fire against the sky. The air was thick with
smoke, and the wind carried ashes from the
fire right into the village. The watch-
ers heard a noise, now and again, like
the report of a big gun booming over
the sea. These sounds were made by falling
trees which the flames had burned through.
When Mr. Douglas returned, late at night,
to Honeysuckle Cottage, the children were
asleep, but, next morning, he told them how


the bush fire had been turned away from
the village.
“It was warm work,” he said, “and some
of the men have been badly scorched. Hun-
dreds of birds and other animals have
been burned to death. We saw wallabies
and foxes and a few kangaroos caught by
the flames. When the fire was going
through the gum-trees on Chinaman’s Flat,
parrots, cockatoos, and many other birds
rose into the air. The smoke seemed
to blind and daze them, for numbers flut-
tered down, and were shrivelled up at once,
like moths in the flame of a candle.”
“O, father, don’t tell us any more,” Jean
pleaded, with a little shiver. Her kind
heart sorrowed for the wild creatures that
had lost their lives in such a miserable way.
Robbie, also, was nearly in tears.
“I only wish that we could find out who
set the fire going,” continued Mr. Douglas.
“Some stupid or careless fellow dropped a
lighted match, I suppose, or left his camp
fire burning. No good bushman takes risks
when the grass is dry. A spark from the
engine of a train sometimes does the mis-
chief; but this fire started on Eastern Hill,
which is miles from the railway line. Dave
Harrison, who gave the alarm, says that he
is sure that a swagman, whom he met near
Tarradool, must have caused the outbreak.
Still, we don’t know.”
After dinner, Mr. Douglas drove the
ramblers out to the foot of Eastern Hill.


Many of the old gum-trees were still
burning, and the ground was black with
smoking ashes.
Some of the gum-trees had been killed
by the fire; only the hollow trunks remained,
like skeletons. Many others, however, had
escaped with a scorching; and Mr. Douglas
said that, in the spring, tender shoots would
appear around the trunks, although the
trees would never again have wide spread-
ing branches, covered with green leaves.
On the way home, as the buggy was cross-
ing an open place, Jean’s sharp eyes noticed
a small, grey object, huddled under a
clump of bracken. She saw it move, and,
like a true bush rambler, at once wished to
jump down and find out what animal it could
be.
“I believe it’s a young wallaby, Jean,”
said Mr. Douglas. “The poor little thing
has been scared nearly to death by the fire,
or else it is hurt.”
Jean walked, like a scout on the trail, until
she was within a yard of the bracken. Then
she darted forward, and, throwing down her
big, soft hat, captured the hiding creature.
It tried to get away; but Jean kept a tight
hold, and carried her captive to the buggy.
A fold of the hat was lifted, and, at once, the
head of a wallaby appeared.
Jean and Robbie were delighted, and
begged that they might take the little animal


home and make a pet of it. Their father
was willing.
“I don’t think he is much hurt,” re-
marked Mr. Douglas. “It is a case of
fright, and he will soon get over that. Let
me have a look at you, old fellow. Yes, you
are all right.”
“What is it called, father?” asked Jean.
“A pademelon,” her father replied.
“Fred says that there are plenty of them
in the scrub, and don’t you remember that
we saw one in the out-paddock at Warra-
mulga?”
As soon as they reached home, the chil-
dren set to work to prepare a cage for the
pademelon. An old packing-case was soon
fitted up, and the wallaby was placed in it
on a bed of soft grass. It would not touch
food, but drank a saucer of milk, and then
crouched up in a corner of the box. So it
was left in peace until the morning.
The little wallaby became as lively as a
cricket within a few days; and, when the
Douglas family left Corinda Vale, “Paddy,”
as Jean had named him, went with the party
to Melbourne. What happened to him there
you shall hear later.


Chapter IX. —Billy Rowton.
Christmas Day at Honeysuckle Cottage
was very different from other Christmas
Days which Jean and Robbie remembered.
Xo aunts, uncles, or cousins came to share
dinner with them, and, in the evening, there
was no merry gathering of girls and boys.
But the ramblers had been allowed to invite
some of the little country children to a picnic
in the afternoon; and you may be sure that
they all came. The party drove out to the
picnic grounds in charge of Mr. Douglas.
The spot chosen was a pleasant glade near
the creek, not more than three miles from
the village. There was no green grass on
which to spread the newspaper table-
cloths for afternoon tea, because the
sun had burned fiercely for w T eeks past.
Since the big fire on Eastern Hill, sev-
eral smaller ones had swept away patches
of scrub. On this December day, the
weather was warm, but the picnickers had
some jolly games at baseball, rounders, fol-
low-my-leader, and “tiggy touchwood.”
Billy Rowton was one of the boys at the
picnic; indeed, one could not say that any
outing of the kind at Corinda Yale was a
success without Billy. He always knew
what to do next. Billy was fifteen years old,
and had left school twelve months be-
fore, to help in his father’s orchard. He
could work all right, but was never so happy


as when rambling through the bush, or
fishing in the creek. His face was tanned;
he was stronger than any other boy of his
age in the village. At school, he used to
take the part of smaller lads when any of
the big boys began to bully them.
You will think that I am telling you a
great deal about Billy Rowton, and forget-
ting the picnic. But Billy was the chief
actor in an adventure on this day, and, if he
had not been one of the picnic guests, Robbie
Douglas might not have been alive now.
This was how it happened. Robbie, with
four of the younger boys, went down to the
creek to fish. One of Robbie’s Christmas
gifts was a fishing-rod, and he was eager
to make use of it. A driver was sent
with the boys to see that they did not
get into mischief. For a while, he kept
watchful eyes upon them, as he lay in the
shade of a gum-tree, smoking an old clay
pipe. The sun was warm, and the gentle
murmur of the creek soothed the driver, and,
presently, he closed his eyes and fell asleep.
Robbie and his chums had found a green
knoll, from which they cast their baited
hooks into the water. They were as jolly as
sand-boys, not knowing that the spot was
dangerous. Suddenly, Robbie felt a tug at
the end of his line.
“I’ve got a bite,” cried the young fisher-
man. Next minute, he called out in alarm,
as the bank crumbled away beneath his feet.
He slid down, clutching wildly at a clump of


ferns to save himself. The ferns were
not strong enough to bear his weight, and
he dropped into the swiftly flowing water.
The frightened boys on the bank called
loudly for help, and the driver awoke with
a start. He rushed down, and saw Robbie
struggling in the stream. As the man was
unable to swim, there seemed to be no hope
now for the drowning boy.
Help came just in time. Billy Rowton,
who had been looking for the nest of a pair
of bell birds in a hazel thicket, a short dis-
tance away, heard the cries of Robbie’s com-
panions, and came running swiftly to the
rescue. Kicking oft his rubber shoes, he
dived into the water. He rose within a few
feet of Robbie, and in a moment caught him
under the arms.
“Don’t cling to me, Robbie,” he cried out.
“Just lie still.”
Poor Robbie was so frightened that he
gave Billy a great deal of trouble. Twice
their heads were below water, and it was
only Billy’s strength which saved them from
death. Billy Rowton would never have
left Robbie to drown alone. He was
one of those boys who, like the great British
Admiral, Lord Nelson, do not know what
fear is. He closed his mouth tightly, and
struggled towards the bank with Robbie,
until they were near enough for the driver
to lean over and help them out,


The boys crowded round the two dripping
lads. Robbie was scarcely able to move,
so they laid him on the grass. Billy, tired
though he was, hurried oft to bring
help. Robbie was carried to the glade in
the arms of his father. After his wet clothes
were removed, he was wrapped in a
buggy rug and placed near a fire. His face
was pale, but the colour soon began to creep
into his cheeks. The accident rather spoiled
the picnic, although Mr. Douglas would not
hear of the guests going home so early in
the afternoon. He drove Robbie back to
the village in one of the buggies. Billy was
asked to come, too, but he did not care to
miss an*y of the fun.
“Your clothes are sopping wet, Billy,”
said Mr. Douglas, who had nearly crushed
one of the little hero’s hands, when thanking
him for saving Robbie.
“Oh, that doesn’t matter,” was Billy’s re-
ply. “I’m used to it. Anyway, I can dry
my things at the fire, and this rug isn’t too
bad. It makes me look like an Indian brave
in his wigwam. ’ ’
Jean wished to go with her father and
Robbie, but she knew that it was right for
her to stay behind with the guests. So she
tried to be cheerful. The hampers were
unpacked. The pies and cakes and jellies
were set out on the old newspapers spread
on the ground. You may be sure that Billy’s
tin plate was not allowed to go empty.


Billy did not know that he was a hero; but,
when he won the sack race and carried off
the prize for the longest standing jump, he
was pleased enough. Mr. Douglas, who had
returned in the buggy, gave the prizes to the
winners. He made a little speech when
Billy’s turn came, and called for cheers. A
great shout arose, and the hero was given
three times three. Then Jean went up to
Billy, and pinned a red flower to his cap.
Next day, Billy called at Honeysuckle
Cottage to inquire whether Robbie was all
right. Mrs. Douglas made him come in and
sit at Robbie’s bedside. He was rather shy
at first, but, in a few minutes, the two boys
were talking at a great rate. Robbie was
soon well again. He was not allowed to leave
his bed for a week; Billy came every
day to see him, and Jean read “The Swiss
Family Robinson” right through, aloud, so
that he did not have such a bad time.
One morning, about a month after the pic-
nic, Mr. Douglas looked up from a letter
which he had been reading at the breakfast
table.
“Here’s some news,” he said. “My old
friend, Harry Morton, whom I have not seen
or heard of since we were at college together
in Edinburgh, writes from Welshpool, ask-
ing me to come and stay with him. I won-
der how he knew where to find me?”
“You know, father,” Mrs. Douglas re-
plied, “when our bairn was saved from
drowning, your name appeared in the


papers. I suppose Harry read the report.
Will you go?”
“Well, it is rather a long journey, but we
might shut up the cottage for a month. What
do you say, bairns, to a holiday by the sea f ’ ’
Jean and Robbie were eager for fresh ad-
ventures, and both said that they would
“love to go.” So it was fixed that the
family should return to Melbourne, and,
after a week at the old home, travel to the
little fishing village on Corner Inlet ; all but
Mrs. Douglas, wdio wished to pay a visit to
her sister at Kew.
“Paddy,” the wallaby, was given into the
care of Billy Rowton, and one of the men
agreed to look after the cottage.
When they reached Melbourne, Jean and
Robbie were almost frightened at the noise
and bustle in the streets. It seemed years,
instead of months, since they had seen a
tram-car. The week at their city house
passed quickly; then came a mojning
when they once more found themselves
seated in the carriage of a train, which was
carrying them to South Gippsland.
At Welshpool, a quiet little village, Mr.
Douglas’s old friend had a small, but com-
fortable, home, where the visitors received a
hearty welcome. Mr. Morton’s wife was
dead, but he had a grown-up daughter and
a son, Alwyn, who was much older than Rob-
bie. The young folk soon became friends,


and Alwyn acted as leader in many trips.
Sometimes he took the visitors out in
a sailing boat. They were sick at first, but,
in time, became used to the motion of the
boat, and enjoyed the little journeys on the
sea. One afternoon, as the three chums
lay on the sand, watching the gulls and the
terns flying above the waves, Alwyn spoke
of some beautiful islands in Bass Strait.
“I have heard the fishermen talk about
them, ’ ’ Alwyn said, 4 4 and some of our boats
sail over to the Kent Group. There are
three small islands, and, on one of them, is a
lighthouse. Wouldn’t it be great if we could
see them for ourselves?”
It was such a daring idea that the others
did not reply at once.
44 1 don’t think that father would let us,”
Jean said at last; 44 it would be simply lovely,
though.”
4 4 You leave it to me, ’ ’ Alwyn returned. 44 1
know that father would like to go. We
could easily hire a boat and a man to take us
across.”
At dinner that evening, Alwyn asked the
great question. His father smiled, and
looked at Mr. Douglas.
44 The islands are worth a visit,” he said,
4 4 and, if we make the trip on a calm day, I
think it would be pleasant enough.”
There was a long talk about it, of course,
but, in the end, Alwyn won the day.


Chapter X.— Voyage of the Sea
Swallow.
Mr. Morton wrote to a fisherman friend,
at San Remo, who owned a fine boat fitted
with an oil engine, asking him whether he
would take a small party for a cruise among
the western islands of Bass Strait. A few
days later came a reply from Old Mac, who
said that he would like to see some of the
islands again, and would be round at Welsh-
pool with the Sea Swallow, as his boat was
named, at the beginning of the following
week. It was Wednesday, so that the
chums had five whole days to wait before
setting out on the voyage. It seemed a very
long time; but Alwyn did his best to amuse
the ramblers. If it had not been for the
desire that they had to set sail for the
mysterious islands, the days would have
gone by quickly enough.
On Monday, as soon as breakfast was over,
everybody at the house became busy. Even
Robbie and Jean helped to pile the luggage
on the veranda, ready for the trap which
was to run it down to the tram line. Before
9 o’clock, the party was aboard the Sea Swal-
low, and Old Mac and his mate were busy
with the sails. The wind was light, the sea
calm, and the sky could not show a cloud.
It was just the day to begin a voyage.
“It looks as if we are going to have a
smooth passage, Mac,” remarked Mr. Mor-


ton, as the mainsail began to flap against
the mast. “You won’t have to take in a reef
for a while.”
Mac, whose face was brown and wrinkled,
stroked his grey beard with one hand, and
looked first at the sea and then at the sky.
“Well, maybe,” he replied. “But you
never know what will spring up. Storms
come sudden-like in the Straits, and you’ve
got to keep an eye lifting. Now, then, Jim,
put the jib on her.”
Jim, the mate, soon had the jib hoisted.
The passengers ducked their heads as the
great boom of the mainsail swung across the
boat; and the Sea Swallow glided away from
the jetty. The voyage to the isles had begun.
Until they were out of Port Albert, the
motion of the boat was pleasant. Jean
and Robbie leaned over the side, to watch
the flakes of foam go by; or gazed at the
white-winged gulls that followed astern.
Alwyn, who was used to boating, stood
bravely in the bows, holding on by one hand
to a wire stay. Once or twice, when the
Sea Swallow “put her nose into it,”
to use Jim’s expression, the spray came
dashing over the side, and Alwyn received a
ducking. But he only laughed. It was
great fun, and he felt like a real seaman.
As the land faded astern, the Sea Swal-
low ran into a brisk sea breeze that filled
the sails. She leaned over until the water
was gurgling within a foot of the boat’s
edge.


'
Hf: ww .. -#* ***
' *** '■;].*■% ■■-■:*:*L '"At.
*ifc j 4 --vlv \ » PHmP
Freshwater Crayfish.
“Better take a reef in the mains ’1,” said
Mac, whose big brown hand held the tiller.
Jim, with the help of Mr. Morton, car-
ried out the order. Once more, the boom
swung out over the sea, and the Sea Swal-
low darted forward as if it were alive. Jean
and Robbie were rather frightened when the
boat leaned over. They stayed close to
their father. You see, they had never before
been far from the land in a sailing boat.
The waves, which were so near, seemed like
green mountains which would topple down
all over them. The Sea Swallow rode
over the seas like a gull. Sometimes she
met a wave broadside on, then the spray


came in showers. Alwyn always laughed at
it.
An albatross was seen as the boat passed
near the Hogan Islands. The great bird
soared high overhead, without a movement
of its wings. Then a flock of mutton birds
was passed, and some gannets were seen div-
ing for fish. After dinner, Old Mac decided
to take in sail, and start the oil engine. Un-
der her new power, the Sea Swallow trav-
elled faster than ever.
“She’s doing about 10 knots,” said Mac.
“I guess we’ll make Murray Pass before
dark. Once we ’re inside it ’ll be like a mill
pond.”
The old fisherman explained that the Kent
Group was composed of four islands, called
Deal, Dover, Erith, and North East. Deal
Island was by far the largest, and on it was
a lighthouse. Murray Pass was the entrance
to the quiet harbour.
The sun was just dipping into the water,
far away in the west, when the Sea Swallow
entered the pass. “Clug, dug, dug ” went
the engine. The boat seemed to skim over
the smooth water, until she was within fifty
yards of the jetty. Then the engine was
stopped, and the Sea Swallow glided past the
piles to the landing stage.
The lightkeeper and some of his children
were waiting to greet the newcomers. Deal
Island is not often visited by people from the
mainland. The lightkeepers and their


families are always pleased to see fresh
faces.
Old Mac unpacked the tents, which were
pitched in a sheltered spot for his passen-
gers. He and Jim slept aboard the Sea
Swallow, which had a snug little cabin. You
may think that the young folk did not sleep
soundly in the strange wild place; but they
were tired out. The 'sun was high before
they awoke. Robbie called to Jean to come
and see the ‘ 1 railway line up the cliff. ’ ’
“That is the haulage line,” said Jim, who
was busy carrying some packages from the
jetty to the tents. “The supplies for the
lightkeepers are landed here. They are hauled
up on the trolly to the top of the cliff. An old
horse up there walks round a kind of big
barrel, which winds the truck up by a rope.”
“What fun!” cried Jean. “I wonder if
they’ll let us have a ride?”
Robbie and Alwyn, also, were eager to
travel up the cliffs on the trolly. Before
long, the wish was satisfied. The island folk
are as kind as can be. I believe even the
old whim horse was glad enough to pull up
such a load of jolly youngsters to see him.
Later, a visit was made to the lighthouse-
keeper’s quarters. Here Jean had a great
surprise; she found a wonderful little gar-
den, enclosed by a fence of brushwood. It
was all aglow with flowers —larkspurs,
geraniums, sweet peas, and a dozen other
kinds. This garden, Jean was told, had been
made by a little girl who lived on the island


at one time. Jean was so happy in the gar-
den that she stayed there, while Alwyn and
Robbie were roaming about near the cliffs,
searching for birds’ nests among the
bushes.
In the afternoon, the visitors walked to the
lighthouse. It was built on the top of a
high cliff. They were allowed to climb the
winding stairway, and stand on the railed-in
ledge. Far below, the sea dashed against the
rocks. It made Jean giddy when she looked
over the rail. Robbie said that he could
feel the “big tower” shaking in the wind.
Alwyn, who had been in a lighthouse before,
was not the least bit afraid. The keeper told
them that the light was very powerful. It
could be seen by ships sailing many
miles away in the Tasman Sea, and those
outward bound from Melbourne. The ram-
blers learned, too, that numbers of sea birds
were killed by dashing against the windows
of the light.
At tea that night, Mac asked whether they
would like to see Cat Island.
“It’s rather a nut to get at, is Cat Island,”
the old fisherman remarked. “But the Sea
Swallow has been there before, and I know
all the reefs. What do you say, Mr. Morton?
It’s a great place for birds. Thousands of
them nesting last time I was there; but it is
a bit late now. ’ ’
The three chums were, of course, eager
to make the trip. Alwyn’s father thought


that, as the nesting season was over, it would
be better to leave the visit for another year.
“Well,” said Mac, “I’ll run you down to
Killiecrankie Bay, at Flinders Island. It is
much nearer. Like as not, you’ll see one of
those little grey wombats that Jim here is
always talking about.”
“That sounds better,” was Mr. Morton’s
reply. “ We’ll set out to-morrow r .”
As the weather was fine in the morning,
the Sea Swallow made a smart run to Killie-
crankie Bay. Once more, the tents were
pitched in a quiet nook ashore. There
were several huts at one end of the
Bay, the homes of fisher-folk, whose boats
were anchored off the beach. Next day, after
breakfast, the party started to walk along
the beach to the other end of the Bay, where
the bold peak of Mount Killiecrankie
showed like a dark shadow against the sky.
“It looks a stiff climb,” was Alwyn’s
reply, when Jim asked him whether he
would come to the top of Killiecrankie.
“But I am with you,” he added. So he and
the mate began to break a path through the
dense scrub on the lower slopes. The
others made themselves comfortable in a
shady spot below. Presently, Alwyn was
heard crashing through the bushes again.
“I say,” he called out, as he drew near:
“it isn’t so bad. I think Robbie could get
nearly to the top.”
Robbie begged to be allowed to go. After
some hesitation, his father said “yes.”


“But, mind you be very careful; and
don’t go too high,” Mr. Douglas added.
“Oh, I’ll look after him,” shouted Alwyn,
as he reached his hand down to give Robbie
a lift over a big stone. ‘ ‘ Come on, old chap;
Jim is just up there, where the tree is grow-
ing out of the rock.”
The climb was fairly easy for a while.
The two boys soon reached the spot where
the mate was waiting for them. Then all
three started to scramble higher.
“My word, I don’t like the look of that
place,” said Jim, as they came out on to a
rocky platform.
There seemed to be no way of getting
round the face of the cliff, save by a nar-
row ledge fringed with bushes. If one
slipped from the ledge, it meant a fall of
twenty feet on to granite rocks. Jim, who
was sure-footed as a mountain wallaby,
walked along the ledge a little way, clinging
to the bushes which grew on the cliff. When
he returned, he said that the ledge was not
safe for the boys; they must find some
other way to the top of the mountain. How,
Alwyn was not a boy to be turned back by
peril. He would have walked on to the ledge
at once, if only he and Jim had been there.
It was the thought of Robbie that stopped
him.
“Yes,” he said at last. “I think we had
best give it up, Jim.”


Robbie was only nine, but he made up his
mind that he would face the danger, rather
than return to tell Jean and his father that
they had not climbed the mount.
Jim and Alwyn would not hear of it, at
first, when Robbie said that he would follow
them along the ledge. He pleaded so hard,
however, that thev gave way.
Jim went first, then Robbie, and Alwyn
last. It made the boys rather dizzy when
they looked down, but they went on step by
step, keeping close to the face of the cliff, and
grasping every bush in reach above them.
They were nearly in safety, when Alwyn
gave a sharp cry; Robbie and Jim, turn-
ing quickly, saw him slide over the edge of
the rock.
“Stand still, Robbie,” cried the mate, as
he brushed past the white-faced boy.
“I’m holding on to a bush,” came Alwyn’s
voice from below. “It won’t keep me up
long.”
Jim, lying flat, looked carefully over the
ledge. He saw Alwyn hanging by the hands
from a thick bush.
“Easy all,” cried the mate. “I can
reach you, lad. Dig your toes into the rock.
Keep cool!”
Then Jim reached down until his right
hand was about one of Alwyn’s wrists. The
boy, thus helped, got his feet against the face
of the rock. Jim hauled with all the


strength of his arm. A minute later
Alwyn was on the ledge beside him, panting
for breath. His arms were aching with the
strain which had been upon them as he hung
in mid air.
“Close shave,” said the mate. “How did
you manage to get hold of the bush?”
Alwyn, as soon as he could speak, ex-
plained that, when he felt his feet slipping,
he threw himself towards the cliff face, and
clutched at the rock as he went over. His
feet crashed into the bush, breaking the fall,
and he was able to get a good hold of one
of the stout branches.
They were all glad, you may be sure, when
safe on the slope at the end of the ledge.
After all, they did not get to the top of the
mount, for the sky began to cloud over, and
mists were gathering in the hills. Jim
found another way for the descent, so that
they had not to pass along the dangerous
ledge again.
The three climbers were greeted with
cheers by the party below, when they came
into sight.
Robbie told the story of the accident, and
Alwyn’s father declared that he would not
let his boy go on any more harum-scarum
adventures for a while. On their way back
to camp, the ramblers had the good fortune
to find a wombat burrow on the edge of the
scrub. The wombat, however, must have


been asleep, or else away in the bush, for not
a glimpse of it was seen.
The party remained at Killiecrankie Bay
for several days. The young folk had fine
times, rambling in the scrub, fishing, and
hunting for wombats.
“It’s been just like the ‘Swiss Family
Robinson, ’ ” Jean said on the morning of de-
parture, as the Sea Swallow’s sails were be-
ing hoisted. “I’ll never forget Killie-
crankie; will you, Robbie?” Robbie, think-
ing of the adventure on the mountain, re-
plied that he, too, would always remember.
After a short stay at Deal Island, the Sea
Swallow brought them safely to Welshpool,
and the ramblers found that their holiday by
the sea was nearly over. At the end of the
week, it was time to return to Melbourne,
where Mrs. Douglas was already waiting for
her husband and bairns.


Chapter XI. — The Boy Scouts.
“Hullo! glad to see you again. Paddy
is as fat as a porker. ’ ’ That was Billy Row-
ton’s welcome to the ramblers, when they
jumped out of the railway carriage at
Corinda Yale. Fred was in the station
yard, with the buggy and horses.
Billy drove to Honeysuckle Cottage with
the family, and the three chums talked, as
Fred remarked, at the rate of twenty to the
dozen. Jean and Robbie had great adven-
tures to tell Billy; the village boy also
had news. You know already what hap-
pened to the ramblers while they were away
from their country home. Billy Rowton
listened to their story with interest. He had
never seen the sea.
For some weeks after their return, the
ramblers lived quietly at home. Lessons
kept the children busy; and, besides, the
autumn was approaching. There were no
nests to be found now, and the season of wild
flowers was over. Jean and Robbie were
happy enough; for, although they got into
what their father called mischief now and
again, they liked to learn. On Saturdays,
Billy Rowton, or one of their other village
friends, came to spend the day. One after-
noon, Billy came swinging down the road,
whistling gaily, as usual. ‘ ‘ Hulloa! Rob, ”he
called out, seeing his chum at the cottage


gate. “I’ve something to tell you. Jack
Alwork and I are starting a Boy Scout
Patrol; will you join?”
Bobbie was charmed with the idea; but be
suddenly remembered that, before the end of
the year, be would no longer be living at
Corinda Yale. He told this to Billy.
“That’s all right,” was the reply. “Be-
long to us while you are here. I tell you, we
are going to be a crack Patrol. When the
Chief Scout comes out to Victoria again,
we’ll show him some busbcraft, I promise
you.”
Billy was always in a burry when be bad
anything new in band. Before a week bad
gone by, be bad enrolled eleven boys, be-
sides Bobbie, in the Wallaby Patrol. Billy,
of course, was the leader, although, having
left school to work with bis father, be bad
not so much spare time as bis Scouts.
Most of the other lads were what the
leader called “good fellows.” There was
one, however, whom Bobbie disliked, a boy
named Arthur Prinkle. He was two years
older than Bobbie. Prinkle was afraid of
Billy Bowton, but, on the quiet, be tried to
bully some of the younger Scouts. Once
Bobbie saw him kick a kitten, which bad
strayed out of a cottage garden into the
roadway. Bobbie called him a cruel brute;
and Prinkle cuffed him on the ear. Bobbie
was hurt, but be was not a telltale, so be
just dropped the kitten over the fence into


the garden. Then he walked away, saying
to himself, “Next time I see yon hurt an
animal, Prinks, I’ll go for you.”
This happened a few weeks after the
Wallaby Patrol was formed. 1 should
have told you, before, how the Scouts fitted
up an old hut as a drill-room, built a trek
cart, and began to work for badges. Jean
felt, at first, rather in the cold, because she
could not join the Patrol. There were no
more games with the boys on Saturdays.
Robbie offered to give up scouting, but his
sister would not let him do this. Still, she
felt lonely on parade days. When Mrs.
Douglas suggested that Cousin Margaret be
invited to come and stay at the Cottage un-
til September, when they were to return to
Melbourne, the little girl was very glad in-
deed. Margaret came, and there were no
more lonely afternoons for Jean.
It was about two months after this, I
think, when Robbie again had trouble with
Prinkle. The Patrol was returning from a
tramp to Eastern Hill. Robbie was watch-
ing a wood-swallow, which sat on a bough
near the track. Prinkle threw a stone at
the bird, which fluttered to the ground dead.
Burning with rage, Robbie rushed forward
and hit the stone-thrower on the arm with
his fist. The two boys at once began to pound
away at each other. Robbie was not a match
for the big village lad, and had not Billy
Rowton appeared on the scene he must have
been badly bruised.


Ril STti&S® WjSF -' i ~^~T mm ■ "T“ \ m|N|
flg '■ -^^|lr^li. :i, ' ff !l 1MB
- ,« -- • ,■ ’■**'
V* jn y«r -' *■' I \j& ijf^ir 1 j if *it*m
«M8Bppjw&^^S
The Patrol Leader, pulling the angry
Scouts apart, asked what all! the fuss
was about. Prinkle looked sullen, and said
nothing; while Robbie, who was still angry,
pointed to the dead wood-swallow. Billy
guessed what had happened.
“You’d better get out, Prinkle,” he said,
“or there’ll be more trouble for you.”
Prinkle went.
Robbie thought that Prinkle would try to
get even with him. The next time they met, he
was on the lookout for a blow. To his
surprise, however, Prinkle came up and
held out his hand.
“Walden Hut" and the Birdman.


“Sorry I was a beast,” he said. “I was in
the wrong, bnt Billy Rowton says I can stay
in the Patrol.”
Robbie was glad to be friends. That
was the end of the quarrel between two
Scouts of the Wallaby Patrol. Prinkle was
not such a bad fellow, after all. Under Billy
Rowton’s rule, he became a first-class Scout,
and won all kinds of badges.
The Wallaby Patrol made steady progress
during the winter months. The Leader pro-
mised a camp-out in the spring; but Robbie
was afraid that he would be unable to take
part. The family was to leave Honeysuckle
Cottage in September.
One evening, about the middle of August,
Billy Rowton called to see Mr. Douglas.
At the end of their long talk, Billy was
smiling.
“It’s all right,” he said, going into Rob-
bie’s room. “We’ve fixed things up. I’ll
hold the camp early in September. Mr.
Douglas will stay here till the twentieth, so
that you can join us.”
“Hurrah!” cried Robbie, nearly jumping
out of bed. “But”—and his smile went —
‘ ‘ what about Jean ? ’ ’
“She’ll be all right,” replied Billy.
“She and Margaret are to stay at my
uncle’s farmhouse, which is only a mile
from the place where our camp is to be.
They will have a good time, never fear.”


Chapter Xll.— With the Birdman.
A week before the day on which the Wal-
laby Patrol was to go into camp, the leader
had a quiet talk with his special chums,
Robbie, Jack Alwork, “Bunty” Evans, and
Pat Connell. “Bunty” was a dark-faced,
active lad, Avho could never be still for long;
Pat was quiet and patient; Jack Alwork
was thoughtful.
“Now look here, you fellows,” said Billy
Rowton, as they lay in the shade of a light-
wood tree, kicking up the turf with their
toes, “look here, we’ve got to make this camp
a success. Next year, the Wallaby is
going to be the champion patrol of the
bush. Every one of us will have to wire
in at tracking, and first aid, and all that.”
“Right you are,” said “Bunty,” picking
up a clod of earth and tossing it into the
creek.
The other three Scouts also agreed with
their leader.
“I tell you what,” Pat drawled out; “let
us make a trail for the Walden Hut down
along the creek, below the old bridge. You
remember it, Billy. Old Jim Mackie lived
there years ago. Some fellows from Mel-
bourne came along and bought it, and started
to hunt for birds’ nests and all that sort of
thing.”
“That’s just the thing,” cried Billy.
“Now I think of it, Dad told me, a few
weeks back, that one of the nature men had


returned to the hut, and was living there
alone. Walden Hut is on our programme.”
After a long talk about other plans for
the camp, the council broke up.
Robbie and Jean had become used to bush
travels, but they were always ready to set
out on a fresh journey. As the days slipped
by, the ramblers became so busy and ex-
cited that their mother said, laughing, that
she would be glad when they said good-bye.
Jean left with Margaret for the farm-
house the day before the Scouts went into
camp, so that the girls missed the brave
sight which the Wallaby Patrol made as it
marched down the village street with Billy
Rowton in the lead. The villagers cheered
when the trek cart, piled with baggage,
appeared. It was a long way to the camp-
ing spot; the time was early spring, the
boys walked briskly through the morning
air. They halted for dinner, in a clearing
which last year’s fire had made. Then on
again, mile after mile, until the roof of the
farmhouse showed through the trees.
The Scouts soon had the tents off the trek
cart, and, before six o’clock, the camp looked
pretty comfortable. Billy Rowton shared a
tent with Robbie and “Bunty” Evans. After
tea, the campers found plenty to do, stowing
away packages and strewing bracken and
straw inside the tents. At nine o’clock, the
bugle sounded “Lights Out;” an hour later
all the Scouts, except Pat Connell, who
was on guard, were asleep.


The first day in camp is always taken up
by odd jobs, and the boys of the Wallaby
Patrol did not begin their real work and
play until the middle of the week. Their
leader was strict, his boys had to prac-
tise for proficiency badges, and every day
an hour or two was given to drill. On
the fifth night, when all the Scouts were
seated round the camp fire, Billy made a
speech which was greeted with hearty
cheers. He told his chums that, on the mor-
row, they were to set out for Walden Hut,
where the naturalist who had written a book
about the birds and beasts of the ranges
lived.
“Hope he doesn’t take us for a pack of
cannibals, then,” remarked “Bunty” Evans.
“If he does, Rob, my son, you’ll have to
play the part of Friday.”
Robbie threw a biscuit at his friend. “All
right, ‘Bunty,’ ” he replied, “then you’ll be
bowled over like a ninepin by Robinson, or
else he will tip you into the creek.”
“Attention, Scouts!” cried Billy, sternly.
“Ho larks till I’ve finished. Bugle call at
five o’clock sharp in the morning, and mind
that you tumble out, or I’ll be after you
with cold water. Breakfast at six, and, by
seven o’clock, we must be on the way to
Walden Hut.”
“Lights out” was sounded by the bugler
early that night. The stars looked down
on the white tents among the gum-trees,
while the possums played about on the


moonlit boughs. Billy Rowton came out of
his tent to glance at the sky for weather
signs. The beauty and silence of the night
were not new to him, but he stood there, bare-
headed, for many minutes, then called softly
to Robbie. The young Scout pulled back
the fold of the tent, and stepped out into the
moonlight. Just then, a boobook owl called,
away down the valley, “More pork, more
pork.” The answer came quickly from a
tree near the camp. A dingo on the hillside
howled mournfully. Then silence for
a while.
“I wish Jean were here,” Robbie whis-
pered ;‘ ‘ she likes the night and the stars. I
think it’s a bit creepy, though. Listen to the
old boobook.”
Billy laughed softly. He was a practical
boy, and I am afraid that the white wonder
of the moonlight and the glitter of the stars
were not so beautiful for him as they were
for Robbie.
“Anyhow,” he said at last, “it is getting
cold, you must turn in. Good-night, Rob.
I’ll give you a shake at five o’clock, if you
don’t hear the bugle.”
Robbie did hear the ringing notes at dawn,
and he was one of the first to appear. Some
of the other Scouts came out of their tents
yawning. Billy soon had them bustling
round. Breakfast over, and the camp tidied
up, the Patrol began the march to Walden
Hut. The day was fine, and the Scouts
hurried along with merry hearts. They


reached the Hut before nine o’clock. Smoke
was curling lazily from the chimney. At
the door of the little dwelling stood a young
man, who appeared to be watching the ac-
tions of a kookaburra perched on the dead
bough of a gum-tree growing in a corner of
the garden.
“Well, boys!” the naturalist called out.
“Are you going to hold up the hut? I didn’t
know there were any bushrangers in this
part of Australia.”
The young man’s voice was friendly.
Billy halted the Patrol at the slip panels,
vaulted over, and walked up the pathway to
the door of the Hut. He explained that he
and his chums were Scouts, and were camp-
ing down the creek, near the farmhouse.
“We have heard that you know all about
the birds,” he continued, “and thought that
you might not mind if we came along to see
you.”
“Glad you did,” replied the man of the
Hut. “But I expect that you can teach me
some points in bush lore. Bring your boys
inside to see some of my photographs.”
Billy blew his whistle, and the other mem-
bers of the Wallaby Patrol marched up to
Walden Hut. They were introduced to
the naturalist, who said that they could call
him the Birdman.
The Scouts spent a delightful hour look-
ing at the Birdman’s sun pictures of birds
and their nests and eggs. They saw snap-
shots of coachwhip birds, yellow robins, grey


thrushes, and dozens of other kinds, besides
photographs of lizards and snakes, ring-tail
possums, and other creatures of the bush.
Then the Birdman brought out his cameras
and field-glasses.
“I haven’t a gun,” he remarked, “be-
cause I never kill anything. The best sport
is in watching the birds and beasts at work
and play. You learn something about them
then, and I like to see the birds about my
garden. Swallows build under the bark
over the door every spring, and I generally
have a pair of silver eyes nesting in the ivy.
It’s early yet, but I can show you a few nests,
if you care to see them.”
The Scouts did care, and the Birdman led
the way to the creek. First, he entered a
clump of hazel, where the home of a pair
of scrub wrens was hidden. The nest was
placed near the ground among the twigs of
a fallen bough. It was an untidy-looking
bird home, made of strips of bark, bits of
moss and dead leaves. The Birdman said
that there were three fledglings inside.
Leaving the hazel thicket behind, the
party crossed the creek on a bridge of rough
logs, then they climbed half way to the top of
the hill slope. The guide called a halt beside
a circular patch'of ground which had been
cleared. The earth appeared to have been
raked over a few hours before, and there
were marks of some large bird upon it.
“My lyre-bird’s dancing mound,” said the
Birdman. “He comes here often, and dances


m. -: m ; t jjffifi Wf
“Did You Knock?” —Possum in Nest.
in a lively manner, spreading out his tail
as proudly as an old peacock. I’ve seen
him only a few times. And one has to be
careful to catch a glimpse of a dancing lyre-
bird. The least sound scares it, and it is off
like a shot into the scrub. But, come on
and I’ll show you the nest. The youngster
is pretty well grown now; I guess he will
be out in the world within a week or two.”
The nest of the lyre-birds was built about
five feet above the ground, among fern-trees


in the heart of a gully. It was large and
dome-shaped, being made of bark, roots,
leaves, and dead fern fronds, with a number
of rough sticks underneath and about the
top—a kind of thatch, cleverly woven. The
entrance, at the side, was big enough for one
to have dropped a football into the nest.
Robbie, who had never before seen such a
nest, went up, and put one of his hands
through the opening. His fingers touched
some fiutfy object, which moved; and, the
next instant, a shriek, like a blast from a
railway engine’s whistle, went echoing down
the gully. Robbie started back, his eyes
wide with surprise.
The Birdman and Robbie’s chums joined
in a hearty laugh. Most of them had heard
before the alarm notes of the baby lyre-bird.
Robbie did not care to place his hand into
the nest again, so the Birdman brought the
young lyre-bird out to be looked at. The
fledgling made a great fuss; its cries were
heard by the mother bird, which came
fluttering about the ferns. She alighted
once on one of the fronds, and balanced her-
self cleverly as it swayed up and down. A
ray of sunlight glanced on her long tail
feathers, making them shine like polished
copper. The Scouts wished to see the other
bird, but their luck was out, to use Billy’s
words. Although they did not see the male
lyre-bird, they heard its voice. From a clump
of “jungle,” about fifty yards up the creek,
came a jumble of notes, as if a score of birds


were gathered there, singing one after the
other. The boys heard the notes of the grey
shrike thrush, the yellow robin, pilot bird,
laughing-jackass, and many other well-
known birds. Then followed sounds like
those made by an axe cutting into wood, the
creaking of cart wheels, and other noises
which are often heard in the bush.
“Isn’t he a beauty?” said the Birdman.
‘ ‘ There is not a bush bird can come near the
old chap with the big tail for mimicking. I
know the lyre-bird that is ‘talking’ now. He
is a bit friendly with me, and sometimes
comes about the hut. I suppose he feels
shy to-day, when I have so many visi-
tors. You keep your eyes open when you
are in Deep Gully, the other side of the
farmhouse, for the chances are that you will
see a male bird. They are about as shy as
any of our birds, and I guess you won’t
catch one dancing on the mound.”
The hours passed quickly in the company
of the Birdman, who chatted freely with the
boys, and told them many queer things about
the bush folk. When he asked them to come
and have lunch with him at Walden Hut, the
Scouts voted him to be “a brick.” They
were pretty hungry after the march and
the long ramble, and the Birdman’s cup-
board was not nearly so full after the meai
as it had been before. Robbie liked the
wild honey, although it had a flavour
of gum leaves, and it was much darker
than the golden fluid which he and Jean


used to spread over their buttered bread in
the nursery at “St. Leonards,” their city
home.
The Birdman smiled when Robbie told
him how much he liked the honey.
“There arc some good ‘bee’ trees about
on the hillsides,” he said; “I’ll show you
one this afternoon.”
When lunch was over, the party, led by the
Birdman, climbed one of the hill slopes to a
spot where the trees were wide apart. The
guide looked round for a minute, then walked
to a giant gum-tree, whose topmost boughs
seemed almost to touch the blue sky. About
fifty feet from the ground, there was a small
hole in the trunk of the ancient white-gum;
in and out of this, a stream of black dots
was flowing. A faint humming noise could
heard by the ramblers.
“There you are, lads,” said the Birdman,
“that is a ‘bee’ tree; I guess there is a
good store of honey inside the hollow. The
tree which my honey came from was cut
down a while ago by two woodcutters, who
were camped on the creek. I did not wish
them to use their axes, but they wanted the
honey, and —well, down the tree came.
Afterwards, I was very sorry that I had not
stopped them, for there was a family of fly-
ing ‘squirrels’ in the tree. When the trunk
came crashing to the ground, the branches
whipped about, and two of the ‘squirrels’
were killed. Poor little chaps! I saved the


young one, which was only frightened. After
a few weeks, I let it go.”
“Flying ‘squirrels,’ ” cried Robbie. “O,
I would like to see one!”
“Well,” replied the Birdman, “if you
like to stay with me to-night, you will see
plenty of them.”
Robbie asked Billy whether he could stay.
The Patrol Leader said, “All right.” He
arranged that he and the other Scouts
should come to the hut again in the morn-
ing.
The Patrol, leaving Robbie with the Bird-
man, began the march back to camp soon
afterwards.
The young rambler had a glorious time.
After tea, he and the Birdman went down
to the creek, and waited for darkness. On
the far side of the stream, opposite to the
spot where they were seated, stood a dead
gum-tree, with one long bough pointing up
the hill. When the moon rose, making the
fern fronds shine like silver, Robbie’s com-
panion whispered, “Keep still, and watch,”
Presently, a small creature was seen creep-
ing out along the dead branch of the old
gum, which was over sixty feet above the
ground. When it reached the end of its
lofty perch, the “squirrel” bunched up its t
body, and leaped far into the air. It spread
out its four limbs, and went floating swiftly
towards another tree, some distance away.
Just before it reached the tree, the little
animal seemed to rise, and it came to rest


on one of the boughs safely. A few minutes
later, another “squirrel” made the flight.
Robbie longed for Jean to be present to
see the wonderful sight. He would have re-
mained by the creek for hours, if the Bird-
man had not said that it was bedtime.
The Wallaby Scouts arrived early next
morning, and spent another delightful day
with the owner of Walden Hut. When they
thanked him for his kindness, as they were
leaving for camp, he told them that he had
enjoyed their company.
“Come along any time you like, boys,” he
added. “I shall always be glad to see you.
Good-bye, Robbie. I may be in town at
Christmas. I will drop in and see you.”
The remaining days in camp were full of
interest. Billy Rowton, being a good leader,
saw that his Scouts had a “jolly good
time. ” Margaret and Jean visited the camp
with Billy’s uncle several times; and, on
the last day but one, a picnic was held. The
Birdman received an invitation. He came,
bringing pots of honey and a basket of
apples. A camp-fire concert brought the
happy day to an end.
All the Scouts were sorry to break camp,
but Billy promised that another should be
held after Christmas. *


Chapter XIII. — City Rambles.
The last few days at Corinda Yale were
busy ones for the Douglas family. Robbie
and Jean had to visit all their friends in the
village to say good-bye, while their father
and mother had many things to set right.
Billy Rowton was a great help on the day
of departure. He carried boxes and pack-
ages to the trap, saw that Paddy, the wal-
laby, was safely fastened in the cage in
which he was to be carried to Melbourne, and
made himself useful in a dozen other ways.
“My word, Rob, old chum, I shall miss
you, ’’ he remarked. ‘ ‘But I’m coming to the
city for a week some time next year, and, if
I don’t bring you back here with me, I shall
never go fishing again.”
“You must stay with us when you do
come, Billy,” said Mrs. Douglas. “Then we
shall see about Robbie.”
Margaret had already returned to War-
ramulga, so that Jean had no girl chums to
bid her farewell at the station. Billy
and some of the other villagers gathered on
the platform; and, as the train began to
move, they began to cheer. Jean and Robbie
leaned out of the carriage windows, and
waved handkerchiefs until the train passed
round a curve and the friendly faces of the
bush folk could no longer be seen.
The ramblers sank back on the seats. They
felt rather sad at leaving, perhaps for years,
so many good friends, and the bush itself,


which had shown them so many wonderful
and beautiful things. A year ago, they had
come to Corinda Yale, wishing with all their
hearts that they were back in the city. Now
they were really returning to the place of
noisy streets, it was the bush which called
them back to its soft, green arms. Closing
their eyes, the ramblers saw the creek wind-
ing among the ferns and rushes, and heard
the music of rippling water. They saw, too,
sunlit glades and shady places, blue hills and
the open sky, with white clouds floating in it
like the sails of fairy ships. They were
going home to the city, which would seem
strange to them now that they were children
of the bush.
“But we shall go back again,” Jean said
suddenly, thinking aloud. “Some day, we
shall return to the dear old bush. It will be
our friend as before.” Whether Jean’s
words ever came true, you may some day
learn.
Now, I must tell you of the ramblers’
further adventures with their cousins from
Warramulga. You remember that Jim and
Margaret had promised to spend a holiday
in Melbourne. At the end of October, they
arrived at “St. Leonards,” with their
mother. Mr. Douglas had not been able to
come, owing to business which needed his at-
tention.
The boy and girl from the bush, although
they loved the country life, were glad to
visit the city.


Young Magpie-larks.
“I would not like to live in such a noisy
place as Melbourne,” Jim remarked one
morning, as the chums were walking down
Collins-street. “But, all the same, it’s fun
to see the trams and motor cars, and all the
people hurrying about.”
“Yes,” chimed in his sister, “and I like
the shops. Did you ever see so many pretty
things before, Jim I”
“Just like a girl,” Jim replied, laughing.
“I suppose you’ll buy enough ribbons and
laces to fill a dray.”
“Well, I just am going to get some things.
Boys don’t understand.” And Margaret
turned to Jean, and began talking of a
“lovely blue ribbon” that she had noticed in
one of the big stores.


I cannot tell you of all the places to which
Jean and Robbie took their country cousins.
They rather enjoyed acting as guides. They
knew as much about the city as Jim and
Margaret did of the bush and its wonders.
One whole day was spent at the Zoological
Gardens. Here many old bush friends were
seen —kangaroos, wallabies, possums, and
a host of others. Margaret had a ride
on the elephant, and even dared to offer it
some food. It must be admitted that she
shrank back a step as the great trunk came
waving towards her. Jim fell in love with
the polar bears and the red deer.
Molly, the orang-outang, the pet of the
Zoo, was in a good humour when the ram-
blers visited her cage. She stretched one
of her hairy hands out for a cabbage leaf
that the keeper offered. For payment, she
handed back the skin of a banana. After
that Molly shuffled round the cage, turned
over the loose straw, and performed
some acrobatic feats on the old tree-stump
in the centre. Then she became weary, and
prepared to rest. There were several sacks
lying on the floor of the cage. Molly folded
one, and smoothed it with her hands.
Then she doubled up another for a pillow,
lay down, and pulled a third bag over her
body. There she rested, with only the tip
of her nose showing, and took no further
notice of the faces outside the bars.
A day or two after the visit to the Zoo,
the four chums went to the Botanical Gar-


dens, where Jean and Robbie used to chase
butterflies across the lawns in the days be-
fore they became bush ramblers. From the
Temple of the Winds, the cousins looked
down on the Yarra River. Beyond was
the great city, with its spires and factory
chimneys, and maze of telegraph wires. The
trains were speeding to and fro; the tram
cars were crossing Prince’s Bridge. But up
there, above the dust and din, it was peaceful.
The city was like another world.
Next day, Mr. Douglas took the ramblers
down to Port Melbourne, for both Jim and
Margaret wished to see the shipping. A
mail steamer was berthed at the railway
pier, and the young folk went on board. It
was like a romance to the bush children, the
sea and the ships, and the dark-faced sailor
men who hailed from foreign lands. Jim’s
eyes sparkled with pleasure all the time.
Perhaps he made up his mind to become a
sailor.
Two weeks passed away. Jim and Mar-
garet had seen the “sights of Melbourne;”
and, as their holiday was half over; Mr.
Douglas decided that it was time to make the
promised visit to Black Rock. He had rented
a small cottage close to the beach. They
all arrived there one morning, after a ride
from Sandringham in the horse tram.
“Maralena” was the name of the snug
little house in the tea-tree. The ramblers
fell in love with it at sight. I think that
you would have done the same. There were


not many rooms, but the cottage, with its
cool veranda and sloping roof, was hidden
amid the tea-tree. From the nearest road,
only the tops of the chimneys could be seen.
Delightful little paths wound through the
scrub to the Beach-road; and then one had
only to walk a few paces before the sea came
into view. The ramblers, of course, spent
most of the sunny hours on the beach,
although the paths through the tea-tree also
gave them pleasure. - j j - ~
Honeysuckle Grove, with its glorious old
banksia-trees and green dells, was a favour-
ite haunt of the two girls. Jim and Robbie
liked best to be at Quiet Corner, where they
could watch the fishermen hauling their
nets. Sometimes they had the joy of help-
ing to pull on the long lines. Their hearts
would beat more quickly as the circle of
bobbing corks became smaller and smaller,
until the fishes within began to leap wildly
above the sea, flashing like bars of silver in
the sunlight. The nets were generally hauled
ashore at early morning; and, unless the
boys were astir about sunrise, they could not
always be sure of “seeing the fun,” as Jim
put it.
Mr. Douglas one day hired a boat, and took
Jim and Robbie out to fish for flathead.
Robbie hardly knew how to cast a line in the
sea; and Jim, as you know, had only fished
in creeks and rivers. The two chums,
after losing the bait on their hooks a few
dozen times, became more skilful. The boat


was allowed to drift, while the lines trailed
astern, with the sinkers tapping on the
sandy floor of the sea. Before noon, the fish
baskets were nearly full.
“It is time we rowed in for dinner,” said
Mr. Douglas, beginning to haul up his line.
“Just a minute, please,” pleaded Jim. “I
had a lovely bite just now.”
So the “Rickety Anne” was allowed to
glide softly along, while Jim bent eagerly
over his line. Suddenly, the twine was torn
from his fingers, and the “slack” coiled on
the seat beside him went hissing over the
side. Jim made a wild grab at the line. He
caught it, but the cord cut his fingers.
“My word,” he cried, “I’ve got a big one
this time. Give me a hand, Rob; I can’t
pull him up.”
Rob grasped the line, and the two boys
pulled with all their strength. For a while,
it seemed as if the fish would win the tug-
of-war, Then the line began to come in-
board, inch by inch, until, bending over the
boatside, the anglers saw the body of a big
fish writhing in the clear water a few feet
below the surface.
“Why, it’s a shark,” said Mr. Douglas.
“I wonder the hook didn’t break.”
After a sharp tussle, the shark was hauled
into the boat. It began to lash fiercely
with its tail, and its cruel-looking jaws
opened and shut in an alarming manner.
Mr. Douglas hit the struggling fish on the


head with a piece of iron; and, after a few
more flaps of the tail, it lay still. It was
about five feet in length.
Well pleased with the morning’s fishing,
the crew of the “Rickety Anne” prepared
to make the laud. Jean and Margaret were
waiting for the boat at Quiet Corner.
“What luck?” was Jean’s greeting, as the
prow of the “Rickety Anne” ran upon the
sand.
“A shark,” answered Robbie, proudly,
trying to lift the big fish from the bottom
of the boat. “Isn’t he an ugly brute? Look
at the green, snaky eyes. Ugh! I wouldn’t
like to meet one of his sort when in swim-
ming. ’ ’
“You ought to see a real big one,” re-
marked a fisherman, who had come over
from his own boat to see the shark. ‘ ‘ When
we’re fishing for schnapper on the reefs, the
brutes often bite the fish in half before we
can get them into the boat. Some are 14 feet
or 15 feet long, and could snap your leg off
ns easy as winking.”
The boys, however, were proud of their
capture. Jim cut one of the fins from the
shark’s body to keep as a trophy.
In the afternoon, the four chums ran down
to Quiet Corner again. As the tide was out,
they were able to paddle over to the little
island, and peer into the rock pools.
“Let us pretend we are shipwrecked,”
said Margaret, “and that we have to live on


this coral island till a ship comes along to
rescue us.”
The islet is only a big rock, with a few
clumps of tussocky grass growing upon the
highest part; but the ramblers, besides hav-
ing a fine game, found plenty of queer things
in the pools. Jim and Robbie fished oft the
outer edge of the rocks, while the girls
gathered shellfish. Then a fire was lit in a
sheltered hollow; and the castaways, who
had taken good care to bring a basket packed
with cakes, sandwiches, and apples, sat
round it, and enjoyed themselves. You
would never have guessed from their merry
faces that they were shipwrecked folk.
Jim suddenly remembered the coral gar-
den which he had read of in a story of
adventures in the South Seas.
“I do not think this is a coral island,” he
said; ‘‘but let us see what we can find in
the pools.”
As I have already told you, they found
all kinds of strange things. Crabs scut-
tled about everywhere; shrimps, whose
bodies were the colour of barley sugar,
darted across the pools; tiny fishes, with
round goggle eyes and wavy fins, were seen
now and again; sea anemones, yellow and
red and green, like flowers in a cottage
garden, clung to the face of the rock.
“Well,” Margaret remarked, “if the
coral gardens are prettier than these little
pools they must be lovely. Look, Jean
quick I There’s a shell going for a walk.” ’


Jean looked, and saw a periwinkle crawl-
ing over the sand at the bottom of the pool,
slowly as a snail moves along a stone wall.
The boys were busy turning over some of
the loose, Hat stones, beneath which there
were hosts of tiny creatures. Big crabs,
little crabs, and middle-sized crabs were
found under nearly every stone.
Jean wondered where all the sea creatures
came from. On this tiny island, there
seemed to be millions. Each one was liv-
ing its life in its own way, hunting or
being hunted until death. The crabs w T ere
proved to be cannibals, for the girls saw a
dead one in a pool being eaten by about
twenty others, who were very much alive.
In one of the larger pools, a jelly fish had
become imprisoned; and it, too, was attacked
by the fierce, hungry crabs. They gathered
round the helpless creature, and tore pieces
from it with their nippers.
In the quiet water between the island and
the beach, a flock of silver gulls squabbled
over the body of a small shark, which had
been cast out of a fishing boat. One bird
would fly down, tear off a piece of flesh, and
fly off to eat it in peace. The poor bird woyld
be chased by three or four of its companions,
and forced to drop the morsel. Then the
robbers would dive down in a bunch, eager
to catch the food.
“They are a greedy lot,” said Jim. “All
they seem to live for is to eat.”


“That appears to be the business of all
the sea animals,” remarked Margaret.
“Look at these crabs. All the shellfish and
sea anemones seem to be on the lookout for
food. Anyhow, it’s fun to watch them. I had
almost forgotten that we were wrecked on a
lonely island. lam hungry. Isn’t it time
we saw the smoke of a steamer or a sail in
the bay?”
Margaret, you see, was fond of reading
Jim’s books; she knew just how ship-
wrecked folk should be rescued from an
island.
The ramblers really did see the smoke of
a steamer, drifting like a long, dark cloud
across the sky, far away in the direction of
Port Phillip Heads. The mail-boat, how-
ever, did not alter her course when Jim made
a smoke signal by throwing a cup of water
on the fire. So the youngsters slung boots
and stockings over their shoulders, and
waded to the beach. They gave three cheers
for Black Rock Island before entering the
scrub in search of shelter.
“Why, my lads,” cried Jim, “here’s a
path. There must be natives about. We’ll
follow the track, and see where it leads.”
The path led to “Maralena,” and a table
set for tea. As Jim finished his third scone,
he whispered to Robbie that, when one could
be home in time for tea, it was great fun
being shipwrecked on an island.


Chapter XIV. —By the Sea.
When the weather is fine, a holiday at the
seaside appears to slip away too quickly.
It is only when the rain pelts the tea-tree
that the days seem long. The ramblers were
fortunate. Day after day, while they were
at Black Rock, the sun shone from a clear
sky. They could not have enough of the
beach and the keen sea air. The holiday
added to their stores of health. The morn-
ing plunge in the sea was the joy of Jim’s
heart; and Robbie made good progress with
his swimming lessons. As he said, on the
last morning, while he and Jim trotted
briskly along the beach before dressing, next
time he fell into a creek he would be able to
save himself.
I need not tell you that they were all sorry
to leave the cottage in the tea-tree. Black
Rock would always have pleasant memories
for the ramblers.
After the return to “St. Leonards,” the
cousins were content to lead a quiet life for
a while. Jim and Margaret had not yet seen
all the sights of the city; and there werg
many pretty places near home which it was
decided they ought to visit. The great public
buildings, the Parliament Houses, Post
Office, Town Hall, and the Public Library,
so well known to Jean and Robbie, won the
surprise of the bush ramblers.


Jim could scarcely be brought away from
the Museum, with its thousands of birds,
and the wonderful cases containing groups
of native animals. The bush boy delighted
in the collections, but he was not altogether
pleased with the way in which some of the
animals were mounted.
“Tell you what, Rob,” he said to his
boon companion, “they ought to set them all
up like the lyre-birds and the swans. Those
cases are just right. All the same, give me
the birds in the bush. One live animal is
worth a hundred stuffed ones. How would
you like to see ‘Paddy’ stuck in one of the
cases, as stiff as a poker?”
Robbie laughed at the very idea. He told
Jim that the Museum was a good place for
those who could not live in the bush and
see the birds and other creatures alive.
“That’s so,” replied the bush boy. “And
then there are all the animals from countries
which I, for one, am never likely to see out-
side a Museum or the Zoo.”
When the ramblers reached home that
afternoon, there was another surprise await-
ing them.
“You young folk have been running wild,
more or less, for the past year,” Mr. Douglas
said, as they sat at the dinner table. “But,
you know, life is not made up of holiday
rambles; and Robbie is now well again. But
I am going to finish off your rambles with a
trip to South Australia. I wrote to War-
ramulga, asking whether Jim and Margaret


could come; and a reply came to-day that
they might. Hands up, those who will go.”
In a twinkling eight hands rose in the air,
and, had it not been meal time, I feel sure
that Mr. Douglas would have found himself
encircled by the happy youngsters.
None of the ramblers had ever been to any
of the other States, so you can imagine how
excited they were at the thought of the great
journey.
“It will be like going to a foreign country,
almost,” said Jim, as the cousins sat
talking in the play-room. 1 ‘ How many miles
is it to Adelaide, Jean?”
“O, hundreds!” replied Jean. “I know
that the train leaves Melbourne about half-
past four in the afternoon, and doesn’t reach
Adelaide until after ten o’clock next morn-
ing. Father was born there, you know, or
near Adelaide, at least, at a place called
Gawler.”
There is always a bustle on the Spencer-
street platform just before the express
train for Adelaide steams out. Jean and
Robbie were used to the scene; but, to their
cousins from the bush, it was strange.
“Is everybody going to Adelaide?” asked
Margaret, as she stood guard, with Jeah,
over a pile of luggage. “Where are the
boys, Jeannie? Isn’t it a crush?”
The boys had wandered down to see the
luggage vans. The porters and guards were
bundling in trunks and boxes and bundles.


The men were as busy as a colony of ants
whose nest has been strewn with bread-
crumbs.
Hurry-scurry went the people up and
down the long platform; and the carriages
began to fill rapidly as the time of departure
drew near. Mr. Douglas gathered his flock
together, and the party boarded the train.
Then the bell rang; a moment later the train
moved off. The ramblers had a carriage
to themselves; Mr. Douglas comfortably
settled himself in a corner seat to read his
newspaper. The cousins roamed along the
corridor, or looked out of the windows.
When night came, they coiled up on the
carriage seats and tried to sleep. The girls
dozed off, and, presently, Robbie joined them
in dreamland. Jim, however, found that he
could not sleep. So he softly opened the
carriage door, and stood looking through a
window at the moonlit landscape. Houses
and trees and telegraph posts flashed by in
an endless procession. When the train
stopped at a station, there was a stir among
the passengers. Some stepped out on to the
platform and stamped their feet; while
others stood sleepily in the corridor. At last,
Jim himself became drowsy, and returned
to the compartment. When he awoke, the
sun was rising over the Ninety Mile Desert.
Jim looked round the carriage, and found
that the others were beginning to stir.
Robbie opened his eyes, and sat up with a


start. He had been dreaming of his adven-
tures with Jim on Mount Killiecrankie.
The train reached Murray Bridge before
seven o’clock, and the ramblers had Murray
cod for breakfast. They were interested in a
steamer that was moored near the bridge;
Jim said that it would be grand to go for
a trip down the big river on board of her.
But the warning bell rang, the guard cried
“Seats, please!” and, soon, the cousins for-
got all about the steamer. The scenery in
Mount Lofty ranges delighted the young
passengers, although they had seen so many
beautiful places in their bush rambles.
The train entered a long tunnel, right
through the centre of a hill. When it came
out into the light again, puffing like a giant
after a race, the city of Adelaide could be
seen, spread out on a great plain. At the
Adelaide Station, the bustling scene of
Spencer-street was repeated. At length,
the passengers drifted away with their
friends, in tram-cars, taxi-cabs and wag-
gonettes. Mr. Douglas took the ramblers
to a boarding house on North Terrace. They
were to remain in the city for a day or two,
before going to the hills. ,
Next morning, the party roamed through
the city, and, after dinner, they visited the
Botanic Gardens and Torrens Lake. The
lake is small, but beautiful; and it is the
haunt of hundreds of black swans, water
hens, and other birds. The swans were so


tame that, when Jean scattered a hand-
ful of bread-crumbs on the water, the
birds came gliding up close to the bank.
The little water hens w r ere bold enough in
their actions, but they were careful not to
come too near. A lady, who was standing
beside the ramblers, told them that the
swans were the pride of the people of
Adelaide, and anyone who attempted to hurt
them would be severely punished.
“But,” she added, “I do not think that
anybody would harm one of the swans; we
all love to see them on our Lake.”
The day before the party was to leave for
Mount Lofty, Mr. Douglas was busy with
some business in the city; but he allowed
the young folk to go by electric tram to Hen-
ley Beach. Jim was in charge of the party.
“What lovely gardens they have in Ade-
laide!” Jean remarked. “Every house has
one, and all are so nicely kept. ’ ’
As the tram neared the Reedbeds, a pas-
senger, who had become friendly with the
ramblers, told them that, on one of the
estates in the district, a few years ago, the
skeleton of a big blackfellow had been dug
out of the sand.
“The blacks used to roam all about here
in the old days,” he went on, “and I
daresay there are plenty of bones and
skulls rotting under the soil. You won’t see
any live natives, now, though, unless you go


to one of the Mission stations. I’ve seen
some on the Coorong Lake. They were
camping in queer old whurlies, made of
sacks and canvas, stretched over wooden
frames. If } r ou are fond of birds, you should
visit the Coorong. There are islands in the
lake where the pelicans nest.”
The ramblers had a tine time on the
beach; and were tired when they arrived
back in the city. Jim had been thinking
over the remarks of their friend on the tram-
car. He wondered whether he would ever
see the Coorong, with its native whurlies,
and the islands on which pelicans built their
nests. Mr. Douglas heard the children
talking about the big lake, and he asked the
boys whether they would like to visit it.
“But what about Mount Lofty, father?”
said Jean. “There won’t be time for us to
go there and to the Coorong.”
“No,” replied her father; “and, if I take
the boys to the lake, it means a longer
holiday than I promised. You girls cannot
go. But I’ll send you to an old lady, who
keeps a boarding-house in the hills. I know
that she will look after you. I used to stay
with her in years gone by.”
Jean and Margaret had fallen in love
with the hills when the train was passing
through them on the journey from Mel-
bourne. They longed to obtain a closer view
of the wonderful terraced gardens near the
Mount Lofty Station, one of the prettiest


outdoor pictures in all Australia. The boys
were just as eager to see the islands of the
Coorong, and the pelicans. Mr. Douglas
was amused by the excitement which his
words caused. He promised that he would
take the girls to Mount Lofty in the morn-
ing ; and that, on the following day, he
and the boys would set out for the Coorong.
Jean and Margaret found Mrs. Foster, the
owner of “Hill View,” a kindly lady. The
house was built on the slope of a hill; it was
surrounded by a fine old garden; and some
of the loveliest spots in the ranges were
within walking distance. The boys, who
had come to get a sight of the hills, were half
inclined to stay.
“Good-bye; mind you have a good time,
and don’t tumble off the hill tops,” was
Jim’s farewell.
“Never fear,” replied his sister, with a
laugh. “We shall have more adventures
than you and Robbie. ’ ’


Chapter XV. — Pelican Island.
The journey to the Coorong was not made
in a day. Although Mr. Douglas and the
boys left Adelaide in the Milang train early
in the morning, the sun was low in the sky
when they arrived at the township on Lake
Alexandrina. Xext day, they boarded a
fussy, little steamboat, which lay beside the
jetty, and began the voyage across the lake.
The steamer made a call at Xarrung, where
some natives from the mission station were
lounging about the jetty. Bales and boxes
were put ashore. Then the boat passed
through the Narrows to Lake Albert, and
headed for Meningie. Thousands of ducks
were resting on the water; and, as the
steamer drew near the reed-fringed shore at
one spot, three long-legged birds, larger than
omus, trotted away from the lake side.
Jim and Robbie, who were on the upper
deck, nearly fell overboard in their eagerness
to see the strange birds, which, the captain
tnld them, were ostriches.
“There are plenty of them on the station,' 7
said one of the passengers. “When I was
over there, not long ago, one of the stockmen
showed me a nest, a clearing in the long
grass. There were about twenty eggs lying
in the sand. They were nearly twice
the size of emu’s eggs, and of a creamy
yellow colour.’ 7


/jl i
ni v v JHH^iff^ >
.v 1 V 4f *»•
B|f y4 w f jyj^WpWi
ftfBrwik'* \ -3*. yK%Vfc -
gb
A Pet Possum.
It was dark when the steamer reached
Meningie, which the travellers found to be
an even smaller place than Milang. Mr.
Douglas hired a trap, and engaged a driver
for the trip to the Coorong, which is really
an arm of the sea, some eighty miles in
length. An early start was made in the
morning. It was pleasant driving through
the Mallee scrub, and there was no lack of
interesting objects by the way. Two sun-
downers were seen at one spot, resting be-
side a fire; and, further on, an old black-


fellow, seated in a queer-looking cart, was
met. At noon, a halt was made for dinner.
The horses were unharnessed ; and Jack, the
driver, soon had a fire blazing beneath a she
oak tree. Grilled chops and billy tea did
not go begging. The ramblers were hungry
after the drive through the crisp air. The
road now followed the course of the lake;
and, at some places, Jim could have tossed a
stone into the still water. Near McGrath’s
Flat, on an open, grassy space, a native
whurlie was seen. A small rowing boat was
drawn up on the lake-shore, a few yards
below the whurlie; and there were other
signs that the queer dwelling was not
deserted. But, when Jim and Robbie
coo-eed, there was no reply.
“Not at home,” said the driver. “I expect
Sam has gone into the township.”
“We’ll call as we are coming back,” said
Mr. Douglas.
At sunset, the lake became lovelier than
ever; the water seemed to be of several
colours —purple, green, and dark blue.
Slowly the light faded, until the lake looked
dark and dreary, while the wind blew cold
from its surface. Far in the distance, at
the foot of a headland, a tiny light like a
star shone through the gloom. It came from
the window of a boundary-rider’s home, at
Woods Wells.
“We’d best camp at the Wells, I think,”
remarked Jack, the driver. “The road is
pretty bad in some parts.”


Mr. Douglas agreed, and, when they
reached the headland, the tent was pitched
in a sheltered spot. The boys, after tea,
rolled themselves snugly in their blankets
and tried to sleep; but, for long, the barking
of the foxes kept them awake. Then it began
to rain; the big drops beat a tattoo on the
canvas. Jim counted sheep leaping over a
shadow; and Robbie said seven times seven.
Whether these devices sent them to sleep or
not, I don’t know; but, before the camp fire
died, they were in dreamland.
Jim was awakened by the sun beating
upon his face, for the flap of the tent had
been opened by the driver after the rain
stopped. He shook Robbie by the shoulder;
and the two stepped out into the morning
air. Jack already had the billy slung over a
fire of driftwood, and was busy putting sau-
sages into the frying-pan. Mr. Douglas had
gone to the boundary-rider’s hut to see
whether a boat could be hired to take the
party to the islands. He returned in a few
minutes, and said that a fisherman living
near Salt Creek, four miles away, owned a
boat, which he might be willing to lend.
“Look here,” said Jack, “I’ll borrow a
saddle from the hut and ride up to the creek.
If the fisherman is at home, I’ll get him to
row down and pick you up at the Point.”
After breakfast, Jack rode off, and the
others walked to the Point, which ran far out
into the lake. Almost opposite lay one of the
islands. It was guarded by an army of


pelicans. Some of the birds were resting
ashore, while others swam slowly up and
down from one end to the other, with their
big bills pointing downwards. The white
plumage of the pelicans gleamed in the sun-
light.
“They are a funny lot,” Jim remarked.
“It looks as if they have nests on that island,
by the way they hang round it.”
It was rather slow, waiting for the
boat. Jim feared that it would never come,
and that, after all, they would not be able to
land on the isle of the pelicans. They had
been on the Point for nearly two hours, when
Robbie, who had climbed to the top of a sand
hummock, called out, “Here she comes.”
Jim raised a cheer, and raced up to join
Robbie on the sand-hill. There was the boat,
sure enough. The oars flashed in the sun;
and it was clear that the boatman was
travelling with all speed. The boys hurried
down to the landing place, and the boat had
scarcely touched the shore before they were
seated in her.
The distance to the little island was not
great; but the boat was old and leaky. Jim
had to keep baling with a battered tin
dipper, or the passengers would have been
sitting with their feet awash. However,
Pelican Island was reached in safety. The
birds had not stayed to dispute the landing
of the ramblers. As the boat drew near, the
whole flock rose, with a swishing of wings,


and flew towards another island, about a
mile below the Point.
Jim was the first to leap ashore, but
Robbie was only half a minute behind him.
Mr. Douglas and the boatman drew the bows
of the craft up on to the rugged shore, and
fastened the painter to a rock.
The boatman had told them that it was
too late in the season to find either eggs or
fledglings in the pelican rookery. Mr.
Douglas had learned, too, from a resident of
Meningie, that thousands of the old birds
had been killed by persons who wished to
gain the bounty money given for pelican
heads. The horrible butchery had not been
carried out that year; but the birds which
escaped were now shy. The head-hunters
killed nearly five thousand pelicans, it was
said, and only a few hundreds remained.
The ramblers had not been on Pelican
Island five minutes before they found a heap
of dead birds, bundles of blood-stained
feathers and bones. But not a head was to
be seen; all had been taken away by the
bird-killers. All over the island, there were
nests. Some contained broken egg-shells.
Here and there lay an egg, with a jagged
hole in the shell.
The boatman explained that the crows
were fond of pelican eggs, and, when they
could get at one, pecked a hole in the shell
and ate the contents.
The boys wandered all round the island,
searching every nook and corner. They


found some fine feathers, shed from the
pelicans’ wings, and made a bundle of them
to take back for Jean and Margaret.
“I wish we could have seen the young
pelicans in the nests,” Jim said, as he and
Robbie walked towards the boat. “ Better
luck next time. Although, I don’t suppose
we are likely to come here again. ’ ’
The voyage to the Point was rather
exciting. While the party was on Pelican
Island, the wind had risen, and it was
blowing strongly before the boat had made
half the distance to the shore. The water
had been still, but now angry little waves
came darting at the boat. Soon the waves
became higher; and, once or twice, the boat
Was in danger of capsizing. Jim baled away
as hard as he could; but the water kept
rising inch by inch in the boat. The boatman
tugged at the oars; all the time, wind
and waves fought against him. It looked
as if they would be carried far beyond the
Point, where Jack, the driver, stood, waiting
anxiously for their return. By good fortune,
however, there came a lull in the wind. The
boatmen rowed fiercely, and, bit by bit,
edged the little craft towards the landing-
place, which was reached at last.
“I didn’t think it could be rough on the
Coorong,” remarked Jim, as he stood
wringing the water out of his coat.
“Can’t it, just!” said the driver. “Why,
I’ve seen it so rough on the old lake that I


wouldn’t have gone out in a steamer. We
have had some wrecks here, too.”
It was a long and rough drive, but Menin-
gie was reached without any accidents that
night. Two days later, the ramblers were
back in Adelaide. Jcan and Margaret were
waiting on the platform to welcome the
wanderers.
“Well, how about adventures?” Jim
asked, as soon as the greetings were over.
“I don’t fancy you can beat ours. What
say you, Robbie?”
Robbie began to tell about the visit to
Pelican Island, and the storm on the lake.
The girls, when they had heard about the
adventures on the Coorong, owned that their
days among the hills had not been quite so
exciting.
“Still,” said Margaret, “we had a fine
holiday. We drove to the top of Mount
Lofty, and had a picnic there. The view
from the summit is simply glorious. And
there is a great stone monument there,
erected in memory of Captain Flinders, the
old-time explorer, who saw Mount Lofty
•from his ship at sea.”
“Yes,” Jean chimed in, “and the drives
among the hills were lovely. We went down
to the National Park, at Belair. O, and we
saw those beautiful gardens near the railway
station. And Margaret found a parrot’s
nest; and I ”
“Whoa!” cried Jim; “you’d better write
a story-book about your adventures. But I


am glad you enjoyed yourselves. Mount
Lofty must be a pleasant place.”
Jean did not write a book; but I have tried
to do it for her. She said that it would be
best to tell of all the rambles made by Robbie
and herself, with Jim and Margaret and
others, from the time they left Melbourne
for Corinda Vale until they returned from
Adelaide. And, now that the story has been
written, it is time to say good-bye to the
Bush Ramblers. Soon after the party
arrived in Melbourne, Jim and Margaret
had to leave for their bush home. They
were sorry to go, because they knew that it
would be a long, long time before their
cousins could come to the bushland again.
“ She ’ll be oft in a minute, Robbie, old
chap. I must jump in,” and Jim made a
dash for the door of the corridor carriage.
Margaret was leaning out of a window,
clinging to one of Jean’s hands; and,
moment later, Jim was beside her. “Gor
bye,” the two cried, as the train began V..
move, “Good-bye.” >. tr
“Good-bye” was echoed from the pL
form, “Good-bye.” r
That night, Jean sat at the window of L
room, and looked up at the stars.
“They are shining over the bushland
also,” she thought, “and the moon is above
the trees on Eastern Hill.”
The End.
Printed by T. Shaw Fitchett, Melbourne.


4 M (\
KJIJBKJJS SXSS.V^S5X5 , 5
W* VWfcV.
B8^&SBn88
felCp^lS^k*.
W&WWW


- O o ■ :
:
~ ; i , ... ’ . :• - "A-M : m
>* i; * *** jfc **&*'Sh -’$3*
' S-? -;f I : :^ r %; ;i *.
'v ,/*- ' X . A *’&:%. • ■ •':*■ :;-'”‘<V- * ,.4.V6j£*v., /* *■; :crH;y*,: ’ ■■ $
■■ \ ■■■’ ■“ J * > . '■•.*' ‘ - • '* /" ■ „7 i ■',•-• v v,, . s. . '•
./' '■-% . • 3jv?| ■• ■•>•'• V5*', -it *i\ '*$'£■■- '.? :• * i/‘V < •, ' ’ .• fii
>*•!, J
: f, :'•. v,. H dyAy t ■ .*;•, .-: §&
;■ f
V c*<% ... ;* &\; • * ■ ? -,l
■ Wy. -
••V** '• K, % '*■£'&<?■ -<fW « *»Y»* t i »<“V ■ i: , \ ■ li
■ :i i m’A^
• Tyf; ftfejL §£•■' > *** v*& ' > , ’h g
/ *V: v 5 v ’■••■. '.- v - *\i ••'■■ k i '
I
{
I
/. ■•;•' ):;'■[ ' k&rWZ*H s :< --. 'J;
Pf ‘


■




((;;'umi rM jSj


