

THE SELECTED DESIGN
THE NATIONAL
WAR MEMORIAL
for SOUTH AUSTRALIA
BROCHURE COMPILED BY WOODS,
BAGOT, JORY & LAYBOURNE-SMITH,
ARCHITECTS, ADELAIDE


The National war Memorial
for South Australia
This ‘Brochure was compiled by
Woods, Bagot, Jory & Laybourne-Smith
. , cAdelaide .


The Obverse
A Perspective View




NATIONAL WAR MEMORIAL
FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA
cArchi teds’ ‘Description accompanying the Design
“They died that we might live.
Hail and farewell!
All honour give
To those who, nobly striving,
Nobly fell—that we might live.”
HE design comprises two very distinct aspects, completely
Hp|l||9 separated by a screen of rugged granite, which has been
BjgjggH adopted as a monumental background and contrast to
scu ip tu re. The two aspects resemble the obverse and the
The obverse and reverse, to retain the simile, have been developed so
as to represent two dramatic sculptural scenes, the before and the after,
the active and the passive, the prologue and the epilogue of war.
THE OBVERSE.
Facing busy thoroughfares, and serving as a daily incentive to the multi-
tudes that pass by, is a sculptural group raised above the obstruction of
traffic.
It represents the prologue —the offering of spirit, mind, and body by the
Youth of South Australia in the great crisis of their generation; the active
step, the initial renunciation of self made by every man and woman who
enlisted or w T ho devoted energies and brains to the country’s cause.
The Group, symbolical of the youth of the community, is represented
as catching the first glimpse of the Vision which appears above the Altar of
the Shrine of Sacrifice. Each member of the group —the student, the
farmer, and the girl—affected by the impulse, instinctively drops the
emblems of craft, and turns to the Vision as it becomes clearer. The vision
that they see, the heart’s prompting which they will obey, is represented
here in marble as a great winged spirit of duty.
The Spirit bears in outstretched hands the Sword, as a Cross, the symbol
at once of battle and of sacrifice, preferred thus to all who seek it.
The youthful figures express action, but there must also be a simple
yearning to be girded wfith the sword as the sign of the moral support of an
Ineffable Power —a power above all strife, yet deeply concerned in its issue.
The figures are not garbed as soldiers, because they are not yet soldiers.


They are unarmed, as quite unprepared for war. The moment represented
is the first inspiration by the Spirit of Duty to uphold the sanctity of
violated right, the safety and the honour of native land.
The ruggedness and the scale of the architectural masses are designed to
give solemnity to the scene and simple contrast of line and texture to the
modelling of the sculpture.
The occasion is not one for conventional ornament, nor one for the
repetition of historic style —“Brother-heart to the mountain from which it
was rent,” it must be, to act as counterpart to the emotions portrayed.
THE REVERSE.
Screened from the bustle of traffic, and framed in its setting of ever-
greens, this group represents the passive, the aftermath of war the
EPILOGUE.
The helpless form of stricken youth portrays the tragedy of war, the
consummation of sacrifice.
The winged Spirit which carries it symbolizes the crowning attributes of
womanhood, her tender maternal compassion, her sacrifice of son and
lover, her patient work of succour, her power of resistance under strain.
It is the voice of Womanhood who utters the stirring lines of John
Oxenham:
“They died that we might live.
Hail and farewell!
All honour give
To those who, nobly striving,
Nobly fell—that we might live.”
Live, that is, not in the mere sense of escaping death, but to live to strive
for the same ideal of duty, of public service, and to live to remember.
To remember, is the last, the lingering note of the picture, and to
remember in this case is to grieve proudly. It is womanhood, whose
memories are longest, profoundest, tenderest.
In harmony with the sad retrospect of the theme is the Fountain, the
fountain of compassion, fed from the mouth of a bronze lion, crowned
with the Imperial Crown as the symbol of the British Commonwealth of
Nations. The murmur and the movement of water, which should be
ceaseless, typify a constant flow of memories.
It may be asked, Where is the idea of victory in this imagery?
It is maintained in reply that the victory to be commemorated is not
material, but a spiritual one.
The Arch of Triumph which was built in honour of a Caesar, a
Napoleon, no longer expresses the feelings of modern democracy after an
international struggle.


Expla natory Elevation and Setions




Victory in the Great War meant the repulse of the aggressor, the
crippling of his power to threaten the world’s peace.
That was only attainable by victory over self —Individual and collective
—which the people of South Australia, in concert with their kindred and
their allies, strove for and won in lesser or greater degree, up to that of the
supreme sacrifice of those who laid down their lives.
It is the collective personal sacrifice of victory over self which is expressed
in the sculpture of the two scenes. The renunciation of all that made life
sweet, of life itself, by the men who enlisted, toiled, fought, and died; by
the women who waited, worked, succoured, and suffered.
The solemn words of Saint Paul rise to the mind, “ Then shall be brought
to fass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed uf in Victory. O
Death , where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory
THE INNER SHRINE.
Two small vestibules are provided in the pylons, giving access to the
Inner Shrine, or record room.
The Record Room is suitably paved with marble tiles and lined with a
plain dado of marble. It would afford space for a parchment folio of
names, or, if desired, its walls could be lined with commemorative bronzes.
Lighting and means of ventilation are indicated on the sectional drawings.
THE CENOTAPH.
Within the Inner Shrine may be placed a single slab of marble, inscribed
“Miliii ignoto” (To the Unknown Soldier), thus marking a grave which
may be made a reality or simple serve as a Cenotaph.
GARLAND AND BANNER FASTENINGS.
On the lower surfaces of the Altar Platform decorative bronze rings
would be fixed as a permanent means of attaching garlands, and on each
Pylon a pair of grouped sockets, also in bronze, for seating the poles of
banners.
INSCRIPTION.
A suggestive dedication is shown, inscribed in six-inch letters, on the face
of the Altar Platform:
To Perpetuate the Courage, Loyalty,
and Sacrifice of those who served in
the Great War, 1914-1918.
Panels on either side are prepared to receive the names of the principal
Fields of Operation and most renowned Engagements.
Each panel would be enriched with a bronze laurel wreath and garlands.


On one face is suggested:
Egypt, Gallipoli, Palestine.
On the other:
France (list of engagements to follow).
The inscription on the reverse has already been referred to. It reads:
“All honour give
To THOSE who, nobly striving,
Nobly fell —that we might live.”
THE SITE.
Area. The area occupied by the proposed memorial takes the form of an
ellipse, with major and minor axes of sixtv and fiftv-onc feet respectively.
Together with the elliptical sweeps leading to gates to Government House
Grounds, the space required is within the specified limit shown in the
adopted site.
The suggested new driveways leading to the gates form an island site
for the memorial, allowing the public clear view and close inspection from
all points without penetrating into the Domain. The garden drives have
been modified in sweep to meet the new position for gates.
The additional open space, together with the extension of roadways at
this point, offers a large area for public gatherings of a ceremonial character.
In selecting a diagonal axis for the memorial the following considerations
were studied: Buildings and monuments suffer materially from monotonous
lighting when facing due south, and a distinct gain is obtained by rotating
the axis to north-w T est. The axis so placed is approximately that of the
Women’s Memorial Cross of Sacrifice and St. Peter’s Cathedral, and in a
view from an elevated position the War Memorial would form a proper
terminal to the long vista. The Site Plan, drawn to a scale of sixteen feet
to an inch, clearly emphasizes both points.
Gates and Railings. It is proposed to reproduce the western gate piers
and hang gates where shown, to build angle piers to junction with the
existing walls, and to enclose the grounds along the elliptical lines with
very simple but suitably massive railings, either of wrought iron or cast to
match the gates.
Th is work is deemed to be part of the preparation and lay-out of grounds
excluded under Clause 22 (c) of the conditions.
City Corporation Control. Modifications in the present outlines and
boundaries under the control of the Corporation are suggested. The pro-
posed widening of North Terrace has been assumed in the selection of
the site.
Whether this eventuates or not does not materially signify for the
purposes of the design, which could be adapted equally well to present
conditions.


The Reverse
luarter-inch Scadle Detail




MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION.
Grey granite is the material proposed for the platform and superstructure
generally.
The panels forming the sculptural screen within the arch and the
fountain rim and steps would be in white marble.
These two materials may be seen together in Parliament House, toning
together very softly.
Pink granite would not so harmonize.
Granite. Harcourt granite is the best available grey granite for texture
and cost of working, and, unless the Government would open the West
Island Quarry for this purpose, is recommended for use.
The finish would not need to be very finely axed —the surfaces are so
large, and in many cases so far removed from the eye, that single axing
would give texture and strength of appearance without want of finish. The
oval platform and steps would be single axed; the Altar and its steps patent
axed; the Pylons and Arch margin-drafted in single axing, with quarry
faces pitched off at joints.
Gun-metal cramps and dowels would be used where' necessary, and the
granite backed up in brickwork in cement.
Marble. The choice of marble is controlled by the matter of sculpture.
The lesser commercial grades of Carrara, known in the trade as “Sicilian,”
have all the desired qualities of tone and texture.
It is part of the scheme of sculpture that the winged figures should be
built in blocks of bonded masonry, making part of the structure.
The fountain rim and steps might be executed in South Australian white
marble.
Foundation. The foundation would consist of a raft of reinforced
concrete, with suitably designed piers and bearers under the principal loads.
Its extent must remain somewhat conjectural at present, but it would
need to be massive.
THE SCULPTURE.
A sculptor resident in Australia, with a distinguished record and local
experience, expressed the following opinion:
“There are no difficulties with regard to the sculpture suggested in your
scheme which cannot be overcome if a sufficient amount of money is avail-
able and if a reasonable amount of latitude is allowed to a competent
sculptor. Granted this, I would lend my support to the scheme.”
Enclosed in the identification envelope is a copy of the sculptor’s
estimate, viz., a definite offer to execute the sculpture at £7,000 approxi-
mately. He states in writing elsewhere, “Not less than £6,500 and not
more than £7,500.”


Since obtaining the estimate the figures have been elaborated somewhat,
and the competitor has increased the sum to be allocated to the purpose to
£8,500.
One of the leading Adelaide contractors for marble and granite masonry
has furnished to the competitor a confidential tender to execute the work,
as shown on drawings, for the sum of £1 5,300.
The total, £23,800, leaves a balance of £1,200 for sundry items, as in
the following statement:
THE ESTIMATE.
Sculptor’s estimate for modelling and carving two Winged
Figures in Marble, modelling and casting Bronze Group,
modelling and casting Bronze Lion’s Mask £8,500
Contractor’s tender for executing the work according to the
drawings, allowing the sum of £l,OOO for reinforced con-
crete foundations . . 15,300
Modelling, casting, and fixing Bronze Enrichments, two
Wreaths, four Banner Brackets, ten Garland Rings, water
supply to Fountain from five-inch main, electric light to
Interior, Marble and Mosaic Lining to Record Room, con-
tingencies (freight, fluctuations, inscriptions, etc.) 1,200
£25,000


plant to One-eight Scale




The Award
Press Announcement, January 17, 1927.
On Saturday the assessor in connection with the competitive designs for
a National War Memorial out of 18 designs selected that entered bv
M essrs. Woods, Bagot, Jory and Laybourne-Smith as the best.
On Saturday morning the Attorney-General (Hon. W. J. Denny) stated
that the Commonwealth Government Architect (Air. J. S. Murdoch) dur-
ing the past five days had been examining, at the Invitation of the Govern-
ment, the designs for the National War Memorial to be erected at the
corner of North Terrace and Klntore Avenue. The conditions relating to
the admission of designs limited the competition to South Australian
architects and stated, “The National War Memorial to be erected by the
State Government representing the community generally is to be for the
purpose of perpetuating and commemorating the victory of the Great War,
1914-1918, the supreme and personal sacrifice of those who participated
in that war, and the national effort involved in such activities.” It had
been a reproach to South Australia that, although nine years had elapsed
since the armistice, the City of Adelaide was without a memorial to its
soldiers, and, although it was originally intended to adopt a very much
more elaborate memorial, the Government decided to limit the total expen-
diture to £25,000, and to utilize the site above referred to.
In announcing the selection of the successful competitors —Messrs.
Woods, Bagot, Jory and Laybourne-Smith—Mr. Murdoch stated that In
his opinion the scheme would be the best, though not the most expensive,
in the Commonwealth, and that on the occasion of his visits to Adelaide
he would never be tired of looking at the monument which he thought
would be a great work of art. The work is to be supervised by South
Australians, and the whole of the material emplovcd will be Australian.
The Government, the Attorney-General said, not only congratulated
the successful firm of architects, but desired to convey its special thanks to
Mr. Murdoch for his splendid and disinterested services, and to the
Commonw 7 calth Government for having permitted him to spend so much
valuable time in the work of adjudication. When the thanks of the
Government were conveyed to Mr. Murdoch he replied, “No trouble is
too much to assist in the work of selecting a memorial to those who made
the great sacrifice.”


The Report
To the Under Secretary,
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Adelaide.
1. Eighteen designs have been received in the competition, which in all
particulars appears to have been conducted with due observance of the
regulating conditions issued by the Honourable the Minister of Repatria-
tion.
2. The competition being limited to South Australia, response to it
has not been so general as might have been expected in a competition
of such magnitude had it been open to a wider field.
3. Notwithstanding this limitation it is gratifying to find that the
competition has produced some work of a quality which probably would
not have been exceeded had the competition been more open; some of the
designs possess great merit, and the manner of their presentation is as
good as any in the experience of the Assessor.
4. The problem of the competition suggests that it was one primarily
for the sculptor to engage upon rather than the architect. It called for
only limited interior accommodation to be provided for relics, and that
the design of the memorial should perpetually express and commemorate
the personal and the national effect of participation by South Australia in
the War.
5. Without recourse to the art of the sculptor, as distinct from mere
carving incidental to architecture, it does not seem that even most perfect
architecture, as such, would perpetually express to the people those im-
pressions which the Promotors aim at. This suggests that in proportion to
the extent of employing the sculptor would lie the success of the memorial
in attaining the ambitions of the Promotors.
6. Among the authors of quite a number of scholarly architectural de-
signs, rich in memorial character, only one competitor has fully seized
upon the unusual opportunity afforded by the conditions to bring the
sculptor to his aid.
7. This exception is the author of Design No. 18. He depends almost
entirely upon the sculptor to tell the story of the memorial, employing in


his design no more architecture than that required to successfully frame
and set his sculptural subjects, and to provide accommodation to the extent
asked for by the conditions.
8. It is felt that no competitor will dispute the clever artistry in Design
No. 18, which blends sculpture, allegorical and realistic, with architecture
in a manner certain to produce and maintain popular reverence and interest
in the memorial should it be erected to this design.
9. The lay out of the memorial on the site is excellently conceived.
Plenty of space is left for assemblages of people around the memorial.
There would be a minimum of interference with the grounds of Govern-
ment House, and caretaking would be negligible.
10. The Assessor therefore recommends the Minister to adopt Design
No. 18, and considers that the memorial could be executed for a sum
approximating that available for its construction. Although realizing that
the success or otherwise of the work will depend upon the quality of its
sculpture, he believes that there is talent now in Australia which can he
depended on to produce this on a high plane of excellence, and that still
further talent of the quality needed will be available in Australia shortly.
11. The quality of work in Design No. 18 indicates that its author
might be safely employed to undertake practical execution of the memorial,
and that it is unlikely that the Assessor will be called upon as provided in
Clause 19 of the Conditions, to suggest collaboration between him and
any other competitor. Should necessity for this arise, however, it is sug-
gested that as the author of Design No. 6 is obviously an accomplished and
experienced architect, collaboration with him would probably meet the
position.
12. The Assessor desires to thank you for the facilities which you so
kindly afforded him in the execution of his duties.
J. S. MURDOCH,
Assessor.
15th January, 1927


Conditions under which the Competition
was conducted
The National War Memorial to he erected by the State
Government, representing the community generally, is to be
for the purpose of perpetually commemorating the Victory
achieved in the Great War, 1914-1918, the Supreme and
personal sacrifice of those 'who participated in that War,
and the National effort involved in such activities.
1. The Members of the Ministry of the Government for South Aus-
tralia, hereinafter termed the Promoters, invite designs for a Memorial tp
be erected on the site shown on the plan issued herewith.
2. The competition is open to all persons in the State of South Aus-
tralia who, in the opinion of the Promoters, are British subjects, and the
decision of the Promoters on this point shall be final.
3. The site to be devoted to the purposes of the Memorial shall comprise
one half acre on the south-east corner of Government House grounds,
facing North Terrace.
4. Competitors may send in more than one design if so desired, but all
designs must be kept entirely separate, and packed and dispatched separately.
5. The character of the design, and the treatment of the surroundings,
are left entirely open to competitors, but for the guidance of competitors
it is suggested that the Memorial take the form of a Shrine of Memory, and
provision made therein for the housing of records.
6. No design shall bear any motto or distinguishing mark, but all designs
shall be numbered by the Promoters in order of receipt. Each design shall
be accompanied by a sealed envelope containing the name or names of the
author. A competitor must be prepared to satisfy the Promoters that he is
the bona fide author. (The term “competitor” covers a single individual
or a combination of individuals associated for that purpose.)
7. Those eligible to compete will be supplied with a copy of the con-
ditions and plan showing site.
8. Any design will be excluded from the competition —
(a) If sent in after Thursday, December the 16th, 1926 (accidents
in transit excepted).
(b) If any of the conditions or instructions other than those of a
suggestive character are violated.
(c) If a competitor shall disclose his identity or attempt to influence
the decision.
9. The design placed first in order of merit shall become the property
of the Promoters. The other designs not becoming their property will be
returned on application within six weeks of the publication of the award.


The Inner Shrine




10. The Promoters will insure each design received for the sum of one
hundred pounds. Should any competitor consider this an insufficient
amount, such competitor may himself insure his design for any further
sum he considers necessary.
11. The assessor to be Mr. J. S. Murdoch, F.R.1.8.A., Commonwealth
Government Architect, in concurrence with the members of the Ministry
of the Government of South Australia.
12. The assessor will act in the following capacity, viz.:—
(a) To answer inquiries raised by competitors and lodged in
writing with the Under Secretary on or before the 15 th
October, 1926.
(Z<) To examine all designs submitted, and exclude all which do
not materially conform to the conditions of the competition.
( c ) To report on the designs in writing to the Promoters, who shall
announce the award in accordance therewith, which shall be
binding upon the Promoters and competitors.
13. No assessor engaged upon the competition shall compete or assist
a competitor, or act as architect, or joint architect, for the proposed work.
14. The Promoters shall be at liberty to exhibit all or any of the designs
submitted in the competition during a period of one month from the date
of the publication of the award.
15. Each competitor must, in addition to furnishing a detailed estimate
of the work as a whole, furnish a separate and detailed estimate of all
purely sculptural work comprising statuary, bas-relief, and other sculptural
decorative portions! of the work, and may, if he so desires, submit as part
of his proposal, a definite offer from a sculptor of approved standing to
carry out for the amount of such separate estimate, the whole of such
sculptural work erected complete in position.
16. The successful competitor shall, subject to clause 19, be employed
by the Promoters to carry out the works.
17. The successful competitor shall be paid for his services as architect
in accordance with the authorized scale of fees for the time being in force
of the Federal Council of the Australian Institute of Architects, both as
to the percentages to be charged and as to the services to be rendered.
18. Each of the five competitors, authors of the designs with the numbers
mentioned by the assessors of the last competition when the drawings were
destroyed by fire, as being the best five designs submitted, shall receive the
sum of seventy-five pounds each, upon submitting a design in this competi-
tion. The names of these competitors will be announced and the amounts
awarded, on the publication of the results of this competition.
In the event of one of these five competitors being the successful com-
petitor of this competition, the seventy-five pounds received by him would
form part payment of the fees mentioned in clause 17.
19. Should the competitor whose design is placed first be considered not
sufficiently experienced, in the opinion of the assessor, he shall, at the
assessor’s request, agree to be associated with one of the other competitors
who, on account of his experience, is considered capable of carrying out
the work, such other competitor to be nominated by the assessor, the com-
mission to be shared between the two in such proportion as shall be decided
by the Promoters.


20. In the event of the Promoters deciding not to proceed with the
work for a period of twelve months after the publication of the final
award, the successful competitor shall be entitled to receive a payment of
six hundred and twenty-five pounds (£625), such payment to be taken
and accepted in full satisfaction of the remuneration set forth in paragraph
17, save that, if at a later date the work shall be proceeded with in accord-
ance with the same design, and without further public competition, the
said payment of six hundred and twenty-five pounds shall be regarded as
having been made and accepted in part payment of such remuneration as
set forth.
21. The cost of the Memorial is not to exceed the sum of £25,000,
excluding architect’s commission. No margin over this amount will be
allowed. The competitors must show how the estimate of cost has been
arrived at, and if the estimate is, in the opinion of the assessor, misleading,
the design will be disqualified.
22. The drawings shall be as follows: —
(a) Geometrical drawings of structures to scale, Including
plans, elevations, and sections, to adequately explain the
design, and one sheet of scale details and enrichment.
( b ) Perspective or bird’s eye view optional with the competitor.
(c) Block plan of Memorial site, showing lay-out of surrounding
ground.
The cost of lay-out of grounds shall not be included in the
amount stipulated for the Memorial, but the lay-out may be
suggested by the competitor as a part of his scheme.
23. The drawings are to be finished on paper and executed in monotone
or pencil, shading optional, but not coloured. They are to be mounted
on stretchers with plain margins.
24. Each design is to be accompanied by a typewritten description of the
whole scheme, and the various materials to be employed.
25. In all questions of dispute respecting this competition, arising
thereout, or relating to the interpretation of the foregoing conditions, the
decision of the Promoters shall be final and conclusive.
26. Designs to be delivered to the Under Secretary, Chief Secretary’s
Office, Adelaide, not later than 5 o’clock, December 16th, 1926.
W. J. DENNY,
Minister of Repatriation.




The Hassell Tress
cAdelaide
