

NEW CONSTITUTION
V ICTORIA.
THOMAS HOWARD FELLOWS, ESQ.;
BARRISTER -AT -LA W.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY T. DANIEL,
1853.
76 and 78, York Street.




INTRODUCTION.
//335-Sy>9S
This commentary on the proposed New Constitution of Victoria,
has been published at Melbourne, by Mr. Thomas Howard
Fellows, and it has been deemed desirable by the advocates of
conservative principles to republish this pamphlet in Sydney.
The learned author has committed his brochure to the patronage
of the Mayor of Melbourne ; and has explained his reason for
doing so in the following words :
“ Assailed by the worst species of despotism—the tyranny of
“ self-sufficient press—you stood forth as the champion of liberty.
“ By coming forward as a candidate at the election, you enabled
“ your constituents to assert their independence, and to declare
“ their unalterable determination not to be dictated to by anony-
“ mous scribes. To you, their Chief Magistrate and Represen-
“ tative, the citizens of Melbourne now point as the individual
“ who, in spite of abusive epithots and libellous insinuations,
“ enabled them to escape from the thraldom with which they were
“ threatened. To you, therefore, though a perfect stranger, I
“ beg to inscribe these pages, in acknowledgement of the services
“ which you have performed for the people, by resisting the en-
“ croachments of their greatest foe.”
To these remarks of the able author,'the Sydney Editor of this
work, will add some observations by Mr. Roebuck in reference to the
fallacy pervading at the time when the Reform Bill was under the
consideration of Parliament, and which at this later day seems to
perplex the colonists of Australasia, namely, the imperious power
of a patented Upper Chamber.
The learned gentleman writes thus :
“ Who determines all the important acts of the King ? Is it
“ the King, or the House of Commons ? By whom is Lord
“ Melbourne made Minister ? Is it by the King, or the House
“of Commons ? It is notorious that his moat gracious Majesty


“ cordially detests the present Ministers; but he cannot get rid
of them, simply because the House of Commons determines that
‘he shall have no one else. In a desire for independence, the
“ King lately chose Sir R, Peel. What was the result ? The
“ Commons very coolly told his Majesty that Sir Robert did not suit
“ them, and Sir Robert consequently retired. So it is with all
“ the ac ts of the crown. The Ministry, while in office, determine
“ everything, and they are chosen by the Commons. Now, the
“ change I propose takes away power from the constitutional
“ advisers of the crown, and makes the word of law perform the
“ duty required,”
The fear professed to be entertained by a party here in respect
to a Nominee Chamber monopolizing that power which the people
place in the hands of their representatives is absurd, and to those
who entertain that fear the following pages are earnestly
recommended.


THE
NEW CONSTITUTION.
The important question which the Legislative Conncil in the
next session will be called upon to decide seems to be entitled
to more consideration than the public has yet thought proper
to bestow upon it. But as a proper and satisfactory conclusion
can not be attained without a full and fair discussion of the
object, the Author proposes, in these pages, to offer a few sug-
gestions for its attainment.
It may seem rather presumptious in an obscure individual, who
has not been three months in the colony, to •‘rush into print ” so
soon, and on such a subject, but a feeling of attachment to his
adopted country has induced him to attempt, by fair and legiti-
mate means, to impress upon his fellow colonists that the new
form of Goverment must he built upon the Imperial basis of Queen,
Lords, and Commons.
There is in every country a class of persons who are pleased to
designate themselves “ The People,” and to deny that appellation
to all who do not adopt their own peculiar views. For that class
these pages are not intended. They are for thinking men ; not
for rash and speculative innovators, who, having no opinions of
their own, would, in compliance with the unmeaning howl of a
besotted populace, or the frantic yellings of a degraded press,
make a sacrifice of all that is good or worth preserving. The
mob orator of public meetings, like the drum in a regimental
band, though very empty, maaes a very great noise. Instead of
argument, he uses abuse ; and Instead of appeals to the judgment
and understanding of his audience, he appeals to their worst pas-
sions ; and when every thing that can prevent their forming a
correct opinion has been insidiously laid before them, they are
made, like puppets, to pass resolutions condemnatory of every
body and every thing. We are then told that “public opinion”


is very strong on such and such matters, and that a “ demonstra-
tion ” has taken place in favor of them : the fact being that the
“ public ” do not care a rush about the thing in which they are
reported to have taken so much interest; while the “ demonstra-
tion ” was nothing but a hole-and-corner meeting, of some half a
dozen mal-contents. The people of this colony are not yet com-
pletely “ press-ridden,” and if they got under that yoke it would
be of very little use to tals about a New Constitution. The
“ fourth estate ” is the despot whom the other three have too
much reason to dread.
How the several forms of goverment now existing in the wolrd
first began it is not my intention to inquire. It is enough for us
to know that their is and must be in all of them a supreme, irrisls-
tible, and absolute power in which the rights of sovereignty reside;
and this power is placed in those hands in which (according to the
opinion of the founders of it) the qualities for government are the
most likely to be found. This is the point which has now to be
decided by ourselves ; and we must decide it calmly and dispass-
ionately.
The early writers on politics speak only of three forms of govern-
ment: monarchly, aristocracy, and democracy. Every other species
of government, they say, is either a corruption of, or reducible to,
these three. Cicero has told us, “ esse optime constitutum rempublicam
quce ex tribus generibus illis regali, optima, et populari sit modice
confusa and when we consider the advantages and disadvantages
of each of those three forms by Itself, and see in what manner the
evils of one may be checked by the virtues of the others, it must
be admitted that a union of them all is most beneficial; and
though Tacitus has treated this notion of a mixed government,
formed out of them all, and partaking of the advantages of each,
as a visionary whim, and has declared “ delecta ex his et constitute
reipublicee forma laudari facilius quam evenire, vel, si evenit, hand
diuturna esse possit”’ the British Constitution is an example by
which that author is confuted.
A monarchy is, without doubt, the most powerful of any; for
by the entire conjunction of the legislative and executive powers
all the sinews of government are knit together and united in the
hand of the prince ; but there is imminent danger of his employ-
ing that strength to oppressive purposes. He might enact
tyrannical laws and execute them in a tyrannical manner, since he


is possessed, as dispenser of justice, with all the power which he
as a legislator thinks proper to give himself. In aristocracies?
composed or intended to be composed of the most experienced
citizens, there is more judgment and discretion than in other forms
of government; but there is at the same time less honesty of
purpose than in a republic, and less strength than in a monarchy.
The Spartan aristocracies—a military cable of Dorian nobles—
haye been compared, by no mean authority, to “an army of
occupation in a conquered country.” Democracies, though they
generally mean to do what is right and just, and abound in
patriotism, want that solidity which is so necessary for proper
legislation; and are too apt to pass laws measured by the rule of
their own passions. What shall we say, for instance, to that law
of the Twelve Tables, by which insolvent debtors could be given
up to their creditors to be bound in fetters, and treated almost
worse than slaves. The fact is, that each form is bad by itself.
Absolute monarchy is a scheme for making one man worse than
the rest, and then obliging the whole nation to follow his example.
Aristocracy is calculated to make a multitude the serfs of an
oligarchy ; and democracy has a tendency to subvert the existing
state of things by crude and ill-considered legislation. In short,
wherever the monarch, the aristocracy, or the multitude, is allowed to
have too much power civil liberty is incomplete.
Under these circumstances can we do better than “transport”
from the United Kingdom to this colony so much of the constitu_
tion of the mother country as is capable of adaptation to our wants ?
Can we do better than adopt a plan which has stood the test of
ages ; which is capable of being, as it often has been, moulded
from time to time so as to meet an altered state of things; which
after being (in the reign of Charles) superseded, was again
adopted, as being more beneficial than its substitute; and which,
amidst the crash of empires and the ruin of nations, has, by God’s
blessing, not only remained unshaken, but, like the sun on its first
emerging from behind a cloud, shone with greater brilliancy than
before? The three branches of the legislature form what is
called the balance of the constitution ; and they may be compared
to what in mechanics is called a combination of forces ; for the
combined impressions received from the three powers decide the
direction of the whole. This form of government is so admi-
rable a compound that nothing can endanger it, but destroying


the equilibrium of power between one branch of the legislature
and the rest; and this is the form which, with a few alterations,
ought to be conferred upon this colony. What those alterations
are we will now proceed to consider.
The Sovereign not being personally übiquitous must of course
be represented by a Deputy, to be chosen by herself without any
sort of dictation by the other branches of the legislature ; and he
will of course be liable at any time to be recalled. He must,
however, be fully invested with all the rights of sovereignty ; he
must be the fountain of justice; the source of all honors; the
dispenser of all patronage. He must have the right of granting
absolute or conditional pardons, and the power of assenting to or
dissenting from any act of the Legislature without any communi-
cation with the Home Government. We want a decision on the
spot, and must not be called upon to wait till half the. globe has
been twice traversed. He must in fact be entrusted during the
Sovereign’s pleasure with absolute dominion, so that he may exer-
cise it in this colony, in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty,
as fully and effectually as the Queen herself could do were she
personally present in this place. We must not be subject to the
caprice of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the
Colonies : we must not have a quasi Poyning’s law introduced into
the colony. But we must be as distinct and Independent as, in
theory, Ireland was before her union with Great Britain, and be
connected with the mother country by the golden link of the
Imperial Crown.
The Upper House is the rock on which W'e are most likely
to split. The Peerage, of which it is intended, and as far as
possible ought, to be a copy, serves two great purposes in the con-
stitution. First, it is a great and splendid reward for national
services whether by sea, land, in the king’s council chamber, or
on the bench of justice : it places a stamp upon eminent merit,
and constitutes the posterity of the person ennobled a perpetual
image of his achievements and their recompense ; and secondly ?
which is the purpose for which it is chiefly wanted in this
colony, it collectively forms an assembly for weighing with greater
caution and deliberation the resolutions of the House of Commons.
If the more popular assembly is sometimes led away, as it is natu-
ral it should be, by sudden impressions or temporary clamour, this
hereditary senate may interpose its grave and thoughtful opinions


to suspend the effect of an intemperate vote, as it has done within
the last ten years. The occasion on which it did this was a bill
being sent to it from the other House for the abolition of trial
by Jury for certain offences committed in Middlesex, when Loid
Brougham observing that the reason given by Government for
the measure, viz ; that offenders were imprisoned so long before
their trial, was applicable, if at all, to every county except that to
which it was proposed to be applied. It did not apply to Middlesex,
as the Criminal Court sits there every month or six weeks, but in
other counties only twice in the year. r lhls bill had passed the
Commons, and had there been no House of Lords the first on-
slaught would have been successfully made on our first and best
of birthrights. The obvious disadvantage of this branch is that
talent is not hereditary, or, as was well said by Lord Halifax ‘ xSo
man chooses a coachman because his father was a coachman
before him.” In practice however it has worked well in the
United Kingdom and in every integral part of it while each had
its separate Parliament, but it does not follow that it would do so
in this colony. At all events it would not do at present, because
there are but few if any men among us who have that commanding
position, and that wealth that would enable them to bestow an
Independence on their eldest sons—without which the machine
could never be kepi in order. Hereditary legislators we ‘ cannot
look to have, but in their stead” persons nominated for life. If
nominated for a shorter period they would be too subservient to
the Crown ; and would be tempted to vote with the Government
from a fear of offending their patron, wdio, if they acted inde-
pendently, might decline to renew their appointment, dhey must
form a barrier between the jjCrown and the People, to withstand
the encroachments of both, and this they cannot do if an inde-
pendent vote were to subject them to the risk of losing their seats.
In the hill for conferring a constitution for New Zealand the
number of the Upper House was limited to ten, but in the Act
there is no limit; the House of Commons thinking that the
Crown should not be thus controlled. An attempt to limit the
number of English Peers was made in the reign of Queen Anne,
but the bill was lost in the Commons. The object of the measure
was to restrain the prerogative from gaining the .ascendant in the
House of Peers, by pouring in an unlimited number of new lords,
and the rejection of these two measures by the Commons may be


mentioned as instances in which they have beneficially checked
the intended legislation of the other branch. The number should
here be unlimited; and it should not be a condition of their
nomination that they should first have been returned to the Lower
House. Such a condition would exclude many from the Council
who are in every way fitted to be there. The Judges, for ex-
ample, could never be members, for care must be taken to provide
that they shall not be eligible to sit in the Lower House. In the
United Kingdom no judge, except one, can sit in the House of
Commons ; and he only by an oversight. The Master of the Rolls
is at present a member ; and he probably is so because when the
act for excluding the Admiralty Judge passed, Lord Langdale was
Master of the Rolls ; so that that office did not suggest itself to
the framers of the bill, though that of Admiralty Judge did, as
tho holder of the latter was at that time in the House of Com-
mons, while that of the former was in te House of Lords. There
is no objection to placing a Judge in the Upper House, provided
he does not hold his office at the pleasure of the Crown, and a
“ law-lord” has often been of the greatest service in that assembly.
It would moreover unnecessarily fetter the Crown thus to restrict
it in its nomination ; it is a libel on the colonists to say that none
are fit for the Upper House who cannot obtain a popular election,
and it would moreover do away with one of the main objects of
that body, and destroy its character of a deliberative assembly, to
insist that all its members shall possess the democratic element.
Are there not, too, many merchants and squatters, and naval and
military officers, from which a very reputable Upper House could
be formed, who from many circumstances would never take the
trouble to go to the expense of an election ? All these would be
lost by such a condition being imposed, and the colonists would
have to lament that their ancestors voluntarily submitted themselves
to such a yoke.
The Lower House will not cause so much difficulty; the
qualification of the members and their constituents is a matter
that must be settled by our own Legislature, when it is estab-
lished. It will not require any mention in the Act of Parliament
conferring the Constitution. One thing, however, must be pro-
vided for ; and that is, that Members of the Upper House shall
not be entitled to vote in the election of representatives. The
at object to be attained is, that the representative body should


be tbe image o£ the represented : not that it should represent
property only, or multitude only, or farmers, or merchants,
or manufacturers only; not that it should govern with the
pride of an insulted aristocracy, or he carried to and fro by
the breath of transient popularity; hut that it should unite
somewhat of all these things, and blend these various colours
into an agreeable picture. The Lower House should be an
assembly united with the people by the closest sympathies.
Not that it should be ever following the uppermost passion ol
the people ; but its decisions should be such as either to satisfy
people at the moment, or capable of satisfying them upon plain
reasons, when the facts and arguments are laid before them.
If the decisions of the representative body are not fit to do this,
not only are they a bad Lower House, but thej would form a
bad senate, or a bad executive council. All parts of the coun-
try, and all classes of people, ought to have a share in the elec-
tions. If this is not the case, the excluded class will become of
no importance in the eyes of the rest; its favour will nevei be
courted in the country, or its interests well attended to in the
legislature. Every system of uniform suffrage, except universal,
contains this dark blot; and universal suffrage, in pretending
to avoid it, gives the whole power to the highest and lowest
to money and to multitude—and thus virtually disfranchises
the middle class, the most disinterested, the most independent,
and the most unprejudiced of all. It is not, however, necessaiy,
that every member of every class should have a vote. A baker
at Geelong, who gives his vote perhaps once in five years, at an
election for the borough, has but little, if any, advantage over
another baker at the same place, who has no vote at all; and
even if he had, the interest of the state is the chief thing to be
consulted; and that is as well served by the suffrage of some of
each class, as by that of all of each class. Enlightened men of
every class should also be capable of being elected. The squat-
ter of ancient lineage, and the wealthy meachant of yesterday,
ought most undoubtedly to be capable of admission, as well as
those who are distinguished by their learning or their talents.
If talent is excluded from the assembly, it either makes its
possessor hostile to your institutions, or else a demagogue by
profession ; things both of them very pernicious and very dan-
gerous to the state. Various means have at times been sug-


gested, to admit persons of this class who are excluded by their
want of means ; but the nearest approach to it is the possession
of the elective franchise by m embers of the English and Irish
Universities, regardless of all property qualification. Whether
any system can be adopted here, which will admit the “ aris-
tocracy of talent,” is a question which may hereafter be well
worthy of discussion, but at present it is unnecessary to enter
into it.
Assuming, then, the New Constitution will take the shape
that has been suggested, the made of working it must next
occupy our attention, though it is perhaps more properly a
matter for future consideration. In the first place, in order to
secure the impartial administration of justice, the judges must
cease to hold office during the pleasure of the Crown, and must
be made removable only on the petition of both houses of the
Council. Such is the case at home, and such must be the case
here. Before it was so in England, we had a Jeffreys and a
Scroggs, and too many other trucklers to Court influence ; but
since it has been so, we have had a long series of most impartial
judges. In the next place the government officers or “ ministry”
must be removable, as at home. Mock philosophers, effeminate
men and sentimental women, may sigh over political divisions
and’contested elections; but he must be made of very queer
materials who can sit in Parliament for seven whole years with
some hundreds of his fellow-subjects, amidst the storm of such
tempestuous passions, in the sharp conflict of so many wits and
tempers, in the agitation of such mighty questions, in the dis-
cussion of such vast and ponderous Interests, without seeing
any one sort of men whose character, conduct, or disposition,
would lead him to associate himsflf with them, to aid and be
aided in any one system of public utility. Men, it is true,
thinking freely, will in many instances think differently. But
still as most measures depend on some leading general principles
of government, a man must be peculiarly unfortunate if he cannot
find persons with Avhom he agrees at least nine times in
ten ; and such being the case they will form “ a party -
a body of men united, under some chosen leader, for pro-
moting by their joint endeavours, the national interest upon
some particular principle on which they are agreed. It is not
necessary to treat of the Whig and Tory factions ; it is enoug i


for the present purpose to assert, that there are almost always
two sides to a question, so that If the Government Officers
happen to espouse that side which the majority of the Lower
House disapprove and defeat, and a hill is required to be drawn
in order to carry the will of the majority into effect, it is not
very probable that a Minister of the Crown would under such
circumstances bestow that care and attention upon the draft of
the wished-for bill, which would be bestowed upon it by a per-
son who approved of its principle. The details, too, would be
badly worked out by a person who opposed the measure. This
can only be avoided by making certain Officers of State and the
Attorney and Solicitor General, with another officer, to be pre-
sently noticed, liable to removal, as are the Ministers of the
Crown in the United Kingdom. To the first-named officers a
pension should be given on their retirement, but not more than
one such pension should be payable at the same time. Without
a pension no one in this Colony would give up his time or
attention to the duties of an office, held on so precarious a
tenure as the popular will, and no reasonable man would wish
him to do so; and without the tenure being precarious, the
government could not be harmoniously conducted. There should
also be in the Upper House a Minister of the Crown, correspond-
ing with the Speaker of the Lords, subject to dismissal, and
entitled also to a pension. The officer just named should be a
kind of “ Keeper of the Great Seal.” In the United Kingdom
the principal officers of state have retiring pensions, and it is
too much to expect any man to devote the best part of his life to
politics, and to the service of his country, without any remuneration.
Every servant is entitled to his wages, and although those of the
Government are always worse paid than any others, they are
clearly entitled to something. The Speaker of the Upper House
should be one of the “ Executive Council.” It may be said that
this would be giving way too much to lawyers ; but as the making
and administering law is the very thing we have to consider, it
seems rather absurd to say that it can be done without lawyers.
Moreover, we must not forget that Bracton, who was a judge in
the reign of Henry HI., and much more Foi'tescue, who was
Chief-Justice in that of Henry VI., are among the earliest authori-
ties in favour of the liberties of the country. In the beginning of
the contests with the Stuarts, the names of Coke and Selden


appear with auspicious lustre on the side of freedom. In the
second contests with the Stuarts, among a host of lawyers, with
Serjeant Maynard at their head, appears the wise and venerated
Somers, from whom we may pass to Lord Covvper, who, though a
Whig Chancellor, opposed the bill of pains and penalties against
Bishop Atterbury, as an unnecessary violation of justice. Nor
must we omit to mention Lord Camden, who by his able
judgments on the question of general warrants and on libel, saved
the country from the slavish doctrines with which it was once
threatened to be inundated; and Lord Erskine, an invincible
orator, and an undaunted patriot, who, with the tongue of Cicero
and the soul of Hampden, ever defended the liberties of his
country, but more particularly the Libkuty op tub Pjliess— a
liberty which the people of England, not in the heat of revolution,
but in calm and sober seriousness, without clamour and without
fear, wisely determined to maintain. The liberty of the press is
the liberty of every person in the land ; we must tender it as dearly
as we can, and we cannot do so more effectually than by discoun-
tenancing the person who abuses it by writing what is calumnious
or seditious. Some countries have assumed as a principle, that
as general freedom of discussion must produce much calumny
on private persons, much seditious writing against authority, and
much matter offensive to morality and religion, it is prudent
for the state, and humane to the writers, to place the press under
the guardianship of censors appointed by the government. By
this method, it is asserted, all fair and temperate discussion may
be allowed ; libels are stifled in the egg, before they have hatched
mischief, and public justice is spared the necessity of inflicting
severe punishment. But in fact there is no method of restraining
the abuse of the press before publication which does not also
control its use, and the practice of licensing, which was adopted
in the reign of Charles 1., and also by Cromwell was accordingly
discarded in 1G94, when the license act of James 11. expired..
One of the unhappy results of this is, that “ liberty” not unfre-
quently assumes the form of “ license,” and in this colony very
often ; so that those members of the Legislative Council who
dare to give an honest vote will, if that vote does not coincide
with the views of the press, be told that they have sold their
constituents, and been guilty of political treason. Scurrility,
however, cannot deter an honest man, but it must be treated with


the most sovereign contempt. If it be in anywise noticed, the
object of it will have been attained ; but if it be passed over in
contemptuous silence, its publication and disappearance will be
almost contemporaneous, and like “an unsubstantial pageant
faded,” it will “ leave not a rack behind.”
The country which a nation inhabits, whether that nation has
emigrated in a body, or that the different families of which it
•consists were previously scattered over the country, and there
uniting formed themselves into a political society—that country,
says Vattel, is the settlement of the nation, and it has a peculiar
and exclusive right to it. The learned author of the Law of
Nations then proceeds to explain that their right comprehends,
first, the DOMAIN by virtue of which the nation alone may use
this country for the supply of its necessities, may dispose of it as
it thinks proper, and derive from it every advantage it is capable
of yielding: and, secondly, the EMPIRE, or the right of
sovereign command, by which the nation ulrects and regulates at
its pleasure every thing that passes in the country. The same
writer then declares, that when a nation takes possession of a
country to which no prior owner can lay claim, it is considered as
asqulring the empire or sovereignty of it, at the same time with
the domain. For since the nation is free and independent, it can
have no intention, in settling in a country, to leave to others the
right of command, or any of those rights that constitute
sovereignty. The whole space over which a nation extends its
government becomes the seat of its jurisdiction, and is called its
territory.
Such is the substance of VatteVs remarks ; and if the universal
reception of them by all civilised nations were not sufficient
proof of their accuracy, the circumstances of the Australian
Colonies prove to demonstration the truth of every one of them.
The empire over this land was exercised by the nation before
legislative powers were granted to New South Wales \ and the
domain was disposed of as the nation thought proper. By con-
ferring a constitution the nation can not so much be said to part
with its sovereignty as to erect imperium in imperio, though the
latter is not exactly the case. In making choice, therefore, of
our form of government —a choice by the way which, as appears
from what has just been cited, we have no legal claim or right to
have we must not forget that we owe a debt of thanks to the


nation for allowing- us to exercise so gre'.t and valuable a privi-
lege ; and we must meet the Home Government not in a spirit of
intolerance and Insubordination, nor in the cringing attitude of
serfdom, but in a straightforward and independent manner, and
with a fixed determination to listen to and be guided by reason,
in spite of the virulence and rancour of an ill-conducted
press.
In considering the details of the measure, we must have
regard to the present position of this Colony. When a con-
stitution was given to New Zealand in 1852, provision was
made for the establishment of several minor or local legis-
latures in different parts of the islands. Much difference of
opinion w-as manifested in the House of Commons on the pro-
priety of that course, but on its being urged that the Chief
Legislative Council of the Islands could abolish them at any
time, the bill was suffered to proceed. Now as Melbourne is
already incorporated, and as the petty councils in New Zealand,
and their enactments, would much correspond with the Cor-
poration of the City of Melbourne and its Bye-Laws, it will
avoid much inconvenience if no such provision is contained in
our Act of Parliament. A great variety of laws, differing in
different parts of the country, have been formed in the mother
country, to be attended with many practical evils, and a slight
attempt has lately been made to assimilate them, so far as regards
making and regulating railways, forming public companies, and
other matters of continual occurrence. A new government should
avoid what has already been found bad in the Home Constitution,
and it would then have the power to erect corporations from time
to time, by Act of Council, as may be deemed proper and ex-
pedient. The great feature in the scheme is the “ double cham-
ber.” Of the advantage of two houses there cannot be much
doubt. History teaches us that it has been so considered at home
for very many centuries; for though in Scotland the Lords and
Commons sat together in one house, down to the time at which
that kingdom ceased to have a separate legislature, in England
they ceased to sit together about the time of the battle of Ever-
sham, and have ever since had a separate existence. Experience,
no doubt, taught our ancestors, and their posterity cannot but
admit, that it would be better to divide the grand council of the
realm into two different parts—to distinguish the senators Irom


the representatives, as was done in North America—rather than
allow, them to sit together. The consequence has been that the
proper duties of each house have been well defined, and limits
set down which neither can transgress. Money bills must ori-
ginate with the Commons, and the Lords must either adopt or
reject the whole, for the Commons will not suffer them to be
altered. The purse-strings can here also be in the hands of the
representative body, and indeed they can in every way copy the
Legislature of the Mother Country, except where a better can be
substituted, which in many instances could doubtless be the case.
“ The blessings of the constitution under which we live” is not
then, after all, an unmeaning phrase. They are acknowledged
by foreigners, and by the greater portion of the peojde of this
colony. The true coin of our freedom may be clipped and worn,
but it is still better than any paper security that can be offered to
us. We speak, we write, we think, without any fear of a Bastile
or an Inquisition. We wear liberty about us still ; and the dregs
of the spirit of old times, even with decayed institutions, are of
sounder and better flavour than a new kind of constitution, how-
ever admirable, which would require new maxims of conduct, and
new feelings of right and justice. Some defects, which time has
introduced, may furnish designing men with a pretext for in-
flaming the minds of the many, only to mislead them from their
true interest; but a temperate and judicious correction of these
abuses,and not a destruction of the system, is all that any reasonable
man can require.
It remains then for the People of Victoria, to consider whether
they will adopt the species of government which the accumulative
wisdom and experience of centuries has handed down to us at
home, or whether they w'ould be led, like slaves, by a dogmatic
and irresponsible press, to adopt some new fangled scheme, on the
specious representation of a soi-disant sophist, that it is a far more
liberal institution. In forming their opinion, once for all, they
must lay aside their prejudices, and discarding the ephemeral pro-
ductions of the bigot who revels in abuse for lack of argument,
must study the history of their own native land, and compare it
with those of other kingdoms and nations; but, as the mother of
Sir William Jones said to her illustrious son, they must “ read,
not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted,
but to weigh and consiler,” and they will then perceive that in


p ite of faults, the existence of which cannot be denied, there are
no countries that can boast of move, and few of so much, liberty
as the people of Great Britain and Ireland. Many countries,
indeed, have no idea of the freedom which we enjoy, and are at a
loss to undertand how liberty and order can co-cxist. Every one
of us, who have always seen the two combined, can afford to look
at the bright side of the Constitution, and exclaim in the words
of Horace
“ Non ego panels
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit
Ant liumana parum cavit natura.”
Printed by T. Daniel, opposite the Wesleyan Chapel, York-street.




