

I^os
The Life and Works of
Australia's Greatest Artist
W M
SHhHIII|| HHHb =
|| ||p • Irt-IS&M
= lfevsS:V£ '^issk’M.
Richard John Randall
And other Essays on Art
BY
Henry A. Tardent
Author of “The Life and Poetry of George Essex Evans,” “ Reflections on an
Australian Literature,” a propos of J. H. Nicholson’s " Haleck and
Almoni,” “ Influence of Poetry on Modern Life,” “Art and its Value as
a National Asset,” “ Functions of the State in Relation to its Commercial
Life,” “Arbitration v. War for the Settlement of International Disputes,”
“The Teaching of Agriculture in the Public Schools of Australasia,” “The
Future Development of Western Queensland,” “ Science as Applied to
Agriculture,” etc.
Anthony James Gumming, Government Printer, Brisbane




Richard John Randall


1
t
JU
g|
5~
J
E
*1 _
__J
-1 a :> .. ' ' ■MjTf?
1
hi
J*
-I
is
smw^sssks
. jt-ffl
■, r ||S&. 1 1'
J '
L—
mm
€
r Tp 1 „
mm®***
www»*a#«
r-B
1 MMEMManwet '^'’
A
AAA fs vs l
| |H| H VV“',';V'
, ; Jk Jfc : ** jp* i**** ™ II
i
H
|| ||
1
i
rj
W il-lf *i^|r
tkttm
tlzii- J I -MiA
«w
i|KP
'-7----
1
"
—— * — «—
’ '■':••■ h *
i£93
~-w, *.,adM» - J
1 =
The
Randall
Art Gallery—
City Hall Buildings,
South Brisbane.


The Life and Works
Richard J ohn Randall
(Australia’s Greatest Artist)
And other Essays on Art
Henry A. Tardent
Brisbane
By Authority : Anthony James Gumming, Government Printer




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Preface
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall
Addendum
Opening of the Randall Art Gallery
Art and its Value as a National Asset
A Plea for Nationalising Literature and Art
In Memoriam




PREFACE.
"J"HE following essay on the “ Life and Works of Aus-
tralia’s Greatest Artist ” was first read at the Wynnum
Literary and Debating Society, and later before a largely
attended meeting of members of the East Moreton Branch
of the Queensland Teachers’ Union and their friends.
The unanimous endorsement by those highly intellectual
bodies of men and women of the views expressed by the
writer have induced him to give his consent to its publica-
tion in pamphlet form in response to a spontaneous ofifer
by the Minister for Public Instruction of Queensland —tbe
Hon. Herbert L. Hardacre, to whom he expresses his
heartfelt thanks. He is equally grateful to all those who
have in any way assisted in bringing out a booklet which
aims at being worthy of the great artist, whilst being at the
same time a fine sample of the progress made in Australia
in the art of printing.
“ Ormonts,” Wynnum, Queensland,
January, 1916.


R. J. Randall.
“ A loss to Queensland, to Australia, and, aye, to the world was the
early death of the artist.” —Sir Wm. MacGregor (late Governor of
Queensland) at the opening of the Randall Art Gallery, Tuesday, 7th
July, 1914.
Photo, of Life-sized Bust Modelled by Chas. Lowther, Brisbane.


Life and Works of
RICHARD JOHN RANT)ALL
Australia’s Qrealest Artist
This is the hidden secret of the strife —
To find your life and live it—This is life!
—George Essex Evans.
IN his rather remarkable book “ Among Other Races, the
Australian traveller and materialistic philosopher, Aaron
Hoskin, makes the strange assertion that the desire to accu-
mulate wealth is the great incentive which has brought man
from savagedom into civilisation, or, to use his own words,
that “ the love of wealth is the creative principle of
civilisation.”
While admitting that such may be the case as far as
coarse and vulgar natures are concerned, the fact still
remains that all which is best, purest, and noblest in man-
kind has been inspired by higher motives than the love of
wealth.”
If we still remember Croesus, it is not so much on
account of his fabulous wealth as for the timely advice
which he once received from a penniless but wise
philosopher.
If we admire Grecian civilisation, it is not on account
of the wealth accumulated by the “ Knights of Hellenic
Mercantilism,” but because of its Homer and Herodotus,
Aristotle and Euclid, Phydias and Appelles, Socrates and
Plato, and other immortal writers, philosophers, architects,
sculptors, and painters, most of whom lived and died in
great poverty —objects of both pity and contempt to those
who live only for the “ love of wealth.”


And the same applies to all civilisations. Raphael and
Michel-Angelo, Shakespeare and Milton, Goethe and
Schiller, Beethoven and Mozart, Rousseau and Victor Hugo,
Tolstoi and Ibsen, will be revered by mankind in centuries
to come, when the Rockefellers, the Goulds, the Morgans,
and other “ lovers of wealth ” will be either forgotten alto-
gether, or, if remembered at all, it will be only as fit and
proper companions for the biblical prototype of the material-
ists of all ages and countries —the demented, grass-browsing
Nebuchadnezzar!
To see the “ love of wealth ” principle in all the horrors
of its natural consequences, w r e have only to look over the
looted cities of unfortunate Belgium, and at the ruined fields
of North-eastern France, of martyred Serbia and devastated
Poland.
But, as a contrast, Arnold Winkelried giving his life to
ensure the independence of his beloved Switzerland, the
three hundred Spartans dying to obey the law of their
country, and, nearer to us, the thousands of young Aus-
tralian heroes, the millions of our gallant fellow-Britishers
and Allies, cheerfully facing death in the Dardanelles, on
the battlefields of Europe, on the waters of the deep, and
in the heights of the air, in defence of the “ Love of
Freedom,” of the “ Love of Justice,” and other higher ideals
of mankind, are examples of men inspired by anything;
but the “ Love of Wealth."
It stands to reason that in all new countries, such as is,
for instance, our sunny Australia, materialistic pursuits and
preoccupations must, of necessity, take precedence—at least
for a time. Such countries have to be discovered, explored,
conquered, cleared, and made to produce the commodities
needed for the satisfaction of material wants.
Were we, however, to remain for ever in a primitive
stage of civilisation, our nation could be wiped off the
2
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


surface of the earth without leaving in the Temple of Fame
any more traces than did the hordes of an Attila or a
Tamerlane.
Fortunately, there is no fear whatever that such will
ever be the case, for there is always a fair proportion of
idealists to be found in our community. And these idealists
know that our material wealth—valuable as it is—is not
an end in itself, but the mere pedestal over which it is our
task and duty to erect the proud and glorious statue of a
civilisation which shall be the embodiment of the highest
ideals of our nation and our race!
Although noble workers in the higher realms of
idealism are not yet as numerous as it is desirable that they
should be, it is nevertheless cheering to think that, young
as she is as a nation, Australia can already point with
legitimate pride to innumerable men and women who will
leave their footprints on the sands of time, as they have
made a lasting mark in music, in literature, sculpture, and
painting.
And whoever will take the trouble to investigate the
matter will agree with me that a foremost place among
those pioneers of our national ideals belongs to the Queens-
land Artist, Richard John Randall, whose premature death,
in his prime and at the zenith of his talent, was an
irreparable loss to Australian Art and to the Australian
Nation at large.
Although his life was singularly free from adventures
and dramatic episodes, it presents such a unity and consist-
ency of purpose, such a determination to fulfil its mission
in spite of drawbacks and difficulties, that it is well worth
recording, were it only as an incentive and a guide to others
inclined to “go and do likewise.” He was born in Stanley
street, South Brisbane, on the sth of February, 1869. From
early youth, he showed an irresistible taste for drawing and
painting. His father, Mr. George Randall, who had spent
3
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


R. J. Randall at the Herkomee School.


several years in Great Britain, as emigration lectnrei foi the
Queensland Government, found on his return to Australia
that his son “ Dick ” had made very remarkable progress
indeed under the able tuition of Mr. J. Clarke, then teacher
of drawing at the Brisbane Technical College.
Returning to Great Britain again, he decided to take
his son, with a view of allowing him to pursue there his
artistic studies. He wisely allowed him to choose whichever
master he might wish to have. After a careful inspection
of the various London studios, and a short course of study
under Calderon, the young Queenslander, then about 23
years of age, decided to enter the famous Bushey Art School
of Professor Sir Hubert von Herkomer.
He soon became a favourite pupil of that world-
renowned artist and master, under whom he studied for
about four years. Then singling the young Queenslander
out of a large number of pupils, Professor von Herkomer
granted him a substantial scholarship to retain him longer
in his studio. The pupil’s efforts and achievements
thoroughly justified the master’s solicitude and sacrifices on
his behalf. He was an industrious and indefatigable worker,
taking as much delight in painting as others do in their
favourite pleasures or pastimes.
The leading artists and art critics of the metropolis of
the world expressed themselves in most eulogistic terms
about both his talent and his work. His pictures were
admitted to the annual exhibitions of the Royal Academy,
where they had invariably the much-coveted honour of
being hung “on the line.” By this time the young Aus-
tralian artist had gathered sufficient faith in himself and
in his powers to launch out in the world for himself, and
to fly with his own wings. • His father, who shared both
his faith and his confidence, provided for him a suitable
studio in the West End of London.
It was there that young Randall painted among others
5
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


Mr. George Randall.
The Father of the Artist. Painted in London, 1897, and
now in the Randall Art Gallery, South Brisbane.


the portraits of many of the Empire builders connected with
Australian life, such as Field-Marshal Sir Henry Wylie
Norman, Sir James Garrick, Sir Arthur Hodgson, Th.
Archer, C.M.G., then Agent-General for the Colony, Sir P.
N. Russell, and others. Had he chosen to do so, he could
have excelled as a portrait painter. But he felt such an
irresistible attraction towards God’s “ Belle Nature” that he
devoted most of his time and talent to the painting of land
and sea scapes. Strange to say, that so rich and fertile
talent, and so highly-endowed a nature, knew comparatively
little of the theory of art, the history of art, and the methods
of foreign art schools in general. He knew only from
hearsay about the art of Greece, Italy, Spain, and other
countries. All he had seen of the great art galleries of the
world was the rich and varied collections of the Louvre
visited during a brief sojourn in Paris. Like most intuitive
artists, he was not a keen art critic, nor was he greatly
enraptured with the works of other artists. He was thor-
oughly at home and perfectly happy only when brought
face to face with Nature, which he reflected in his pure and
candid soul with the fidelity of a Venetian mirror, and
reproduced on the canvas with the fervour and enthusiasm
of an ardent lover. He felt an affinity and attraction for the
peaceful and poetic landscapes of rural England, visiting-
in turn Hampshire, Sussex, Hertfordshire, and the fen
country of Lincolnshire, &c. He thus accumulated a unique
collection of water colours and oil paintings of English
rural life and scenery.
Although moving in the congenial society of artists
and art critics, who, one and all, had a very high opinion
indeed of both his talent and his productions, the young
Australian artist felt at times a kind of nostalgia—an
intense longing for the land of his birth.
When sitting in his studio in London, during some of
its cheerless, foggy winter days, which hang like a shroud
7
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


■•x.
1
"
""
*■
HlMk
f-
■
■
.
- -_3
*
as
" 8 ***Wh^,
-*
a*
f jj
W»i |
1: ™5|i
ft i
rj
IQ, , '
,.f ’’ -ffe i
%
igs
— 1
«aaaaa
aas
-1
%
-.. ■ < if
>
'1—..
Sjj.;
i ■ ii
f
I
||PP^
7 i
/
—
r
*»
1
**
jP. Pj
1
t*.-
1
1
4 I
7
Mi
*** **
■^L
iw. w 4
J
ff
f
1
M
i 'I
—•*_ . i .
' " " i?^S, ,||| I
1
|
i'-
ll
1
s.
1
1
|
H
' j, %
>
i
J
' / 1
m*"*
' “ ~ ■— — i»
m
"ta
s
ggj
I
| J
r"
■^8”
f
s' V
•
I
PP*
Br
., i
2
Mr
*
i
■:.vp
1
1
¥
i
l
I
RHE
1
B
f “"I 1
1
V
■f
;
i
;
1
1
ISE
IJI 1
1
v
1
j. , *
} j
■B
w X
1
fo
|
ri
J
|
1
L I 1 ■ ‘
1
***"**
*,~-rsr?
8
I
1
I
m
r
rl[
w |
L
*
■
/
■
■
Wm
r
f
j
A
b
.::
t
i
b 1
8
1
>*4,
i
—
Jr
" riiiiiiii-—
r
—
Bi
I!
1
%
*▼ ■
«
m
5
; V* ¥ -|rf
—
fc$
I i
Jr
W
m
1
,1
r/
iatii
>
M
*1
Hi
r
•
....
_zl
\ -
*?
PHMjBhn lx,
MMI
3 %fet
r 1
*
MV»
US
4 '
i
«t.^
1
§
a
\ *M
j||
m
n
r
Ms
f
|
rr^jj
*
—-
fc.?. :;.-. -
saf
El
■
*
* mm
J
|l
■HZ
f |
•*' Jf t*
m # k '
!•-
"a
m
lili
-t».
Hii
P
M
m
m
i
%
—
If
||mu -
Sr
NTERIOR
View
OF THE
Artist
’s Studio
at Time
of His
Death, Cordelia Street, South Brisbane.


over the big city and weigh on man like a huge leaden
extinguisher, he had visions of the sun-kissed scenery of
his beloved native Queensland, seeing in his mind’s eye—
An amphitheatre of purple hills
And emerald slopes, where nestling villas gleam,
Flooded with golden light that crowns and fills
Height, vale, and stream!
There must be, he thought, in that mysterious, unex-
plored, sunny land, hidden founts of poetry and art, awaiting
only the magic wand of the artist to well up with the force
and abundance of an artesian spring. Why should he not
be that magician; why should he not devote his talent and
energy to help in creating an original school of Australian
art which might some day equal the great schools of those
older countries that have already won a niche of honour
in the Temple of Fame and Immortality? Greatly
encouraged and materially assisted by his father, who shared
both those views and those lofty ambitions, the young-
Randall broke away from very dear associations and pro-
mising prospects, and sailed for Queensland, where he
arrived in 1899.
But, alas! how different was the reality from the golden
dreams of the enthusiastic artist and patriot. From the
very start, he was confronted with too many of those men
for whom “ the love of wealth ” is the only incentive to
activity and exertion, and who have been so aptly described
by Essex Evans as —
Men with a front of brass,
Men with the soul of a mouse;
Men with the mark of the beast scored as deep on their
brows unclean,
As erst the brows that quail ’neath the scourge of the
Nazarene!
What a rush might have been anticipated for that
collection of the beautiful water colour and oil paintings of


io The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.
the picturesque scenery of the dear old land from which we
come. His paintings were duly exhibited and advertised for
sale. The Press was eulogistic, a few connoisseurs hailed the
young artist as a master of his art, but . . . not a single
canvas was sold. Ah! if young Randall, instead of being
merely an inspired artist, had been a successful pugilist, and
as such had given an exhibition of his skill, how different
would have been the results. How he would have been
acclaimed as a national hero, the hope and pride of Aus-
tralia. What crowds he would have attracted, and how our
moneyed aristocracy, and thoughtless young fellow-colonists,
crazy over stadium exhibitions, would have, literally, rolled
up” and yelled themselves hoarse in praise of his exploits!
But there was yet hope in another direction. Had not the
community, as a whole, made provisions for the promotion
and encouragement of art? Had we not here a Queensland
National Art Gallery, maintained at the expense of the Con-
solidated Revenue of the State? A national artist, who had
already won his spurs, and made his mark in the great art
centres of the world, could not fad to find heie both
encouragement and support. It certainly should have been
so, but it wasn’t! Those official institutions fall not seldom
into the hands, or at least under the influence, of nonentities,
without either heart, brain, or talent, who reach such posi-
tions like creepers, by clubbing together and joining hands
to elbow out any man endowed with originality, talent, and
genius. Thus it was that our Queensland National Art
Gallery, which has repeatedly paid sterling money for paint-
ings, some of which can be hung there for no other purpose
but to cover a hole or hide a defect in the wall, did not possess
a single painting from the brush of the greatest and most
fecund artist whom Australia has ever produced —of the
most faithful interpreter of the beauties of the Australian
Bush—the young native-born Queenslander, Richard John
Randall.


It is facts like these which rightly aroused the ire of
our Queensland poet when he said —
And you thank the good Lord God in your pews, on your
bended knees—
That you live in a cultured age—and do cultured things—
like these.
The young artist received better treatment as soon
as he got out of the little local cliques and coteries. He
exhibited with conspicuous success at the annual festivals
of the famous Austral Association for the promotion of
music, art, literature, and science, and also at several Sydney
exhibitions, where he sold many paintings, including one
secured by the Government of New South Wales for the
National Art Gallery of Sydney.
Although, of course, somewhat disappointed at the
treatment he was receiving at the hands of his native
State, the young Queensland artist did not in the least
allow this to discourage him, and took things quite philo-
sophically. He was an indefatigable worker, possessed
of the optimism and cheerfulness characteristic of all
great workers, especially of workers in the higher realms
of art and speculative thought. His father had provided
for him and fitted up a thoroughly up-to-date studio
in Cordelia street, South Brisbane. Here, the artist not
only continued to produce with a kind of feverish activity,
as if he were foreseeing that his life would be cut short,
but he also opened classes in drawing and painting. He was
an ideal teacher, being possessed of a buoyant enthusiasm
which he had the gift of imparting to others. In this he
was generously painstaking to a fault. When thus engaged
in teaching by both precepts and example, he would
forget all the disappointments and injustices with which
the path of the artist is often strewn. But nowhere did
he feel more happy and contented than when out in the
bush or at the seaside, either by himself or in the congenial
11
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.




company of fellow-painters and pupils. Nature was to him
like an open book, teeming with beauty whichever way one
cares to look. While his companions would roam about
in search of suitable sites for a painting, he would sit
down anywhere and set at once to work. By the time the
roamers would come back, not infrequently disappointed
and discouraged, “ Dick ” Randall had already brushed in
half a dozen beautiful sketches, the motives for which he
had found on the spot by simply turning round and round
on his painter’s tabouret.
Thus it was that, without troubling himself much about
“ a market,” he went on producing most beautiful works of
art with the abundance and spontaneity of an orange tree
sending forth in all seasons and simultaneously both the
green leaves of hope and the buds, flowers, and fruits of
realisation.
The ways of Providence are truly inscrutable. While
thousands of young wasters, who are a burden both
to themselves and to others, are allowed to live and even to
prosper, grim death marked as one of its victims that
exceptionally talented young man, the joy, the pride, and the
hope of his family and of every one who had ever come in
contact with his sunny and sympathetic nature. A mys-
terious disease, which baffled the science of the most skilful
medical practitioners, was slowly undermining his robust
constitution. The young artist breathed his last at his
parents’ residence at Birkdale, near Brisbane, on the 15th
October, 1906, cut off in the prime of his life, and at the
zenith of his talent, at the age of 37 years 8 months and
10 days. His earthly remains were interred in the Cleve-
land Cemetery, and rest peacefully in the midst of the
verdant Australian bush scenery which he had loved so well.
Short, indeed, was the earthly pilgrimage of Richard
John Randall; but what a splendid use he did make of
it! Besides the numerous pupils and followers whom


he inspired with his genius and example, he left a singu-
larly rich collection of magnificent works of art in the
shape of water colours, oil paintings, black and white,
pencils, charcoal, pastels, &c. For some considerable time
the bereaved parents could not make up their mind to dis-
perse that unique collection of their beloved son’s produc-
tions, nor to break up the interior associations of the studio
in Cordelia street, where fresh from the scene of their
execution they had been hung or stored away.
It was then that the idea gradually dawned upon the
disconsolate father that the best way to honour the memory
of a great writer or of a great artist is not to weep at his
grave over a cold marble monument, but to take up the
task he had undertaken, and to continue it in the direction
which he intended it to go, or in the words of a great poet—
Build him no mockery of stone,
Nor shame him with your idle praise
He liveth in his work alone,
Through all our days.
So his father decided to make of the life-work of his
son one of the corner-stones of Australian art, a kind of
finger-post for young Australian artists who cannot fail to
follow in his footsteps, and move forward along the tracks
that one had blazed towards the high summits of national
art. After some negotiations, it was agreed that, practically,
the whole of the young artist’s works should be handed in
perpetuity to his native city on condition that the collection
should never be dispersed, but should remain together and
be accessible to students of art and to the public under the
name of “ The R. J. Randall Art Gallery and School of
Painting." There were various other interesting conditions
attached to the donation, one being that the South Brisbane
City Council should provide suitable housing accommodation
for the collection; another that the Randall Art Gallery
should be opened free to the public at least one day a week.
14
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


so that the poorest in the community should not be denied
the pure and ennobling enjoyments of art and direct com-
munion with the soul of a great artist.
Without being perfect, the housing provided by the
South Brisbane Council for the Randall Art Gallery is a
fairly suitable one for the purpose. The gallery is situated
on the first floor of the South Brisbane Public Library in
Stanley street, and within a stone’s throw of the Town
Hall. The gallery proper occupies a large room 70 ft. by
33 ft., and an annexe some 40 ft. by 20 ft. The gallery,
which is fairly well lighted from windows in two of the
lateral walls, receives in addition a nicely attenuated and
well-distributed light from convenient skylights. The main
gallery is divided into three bays or courts 18 ft. by 20 ft.,
while a panel or screen, running along the centre of the
annexe, more than doubles the hanging-wall space.
We cannot sufficiently praise the taste and forethought
displayed by Mr. Randall, senr., in hanging the pictures of
his son. The arrangement is both educational and pleasing.
The paintings are so grouped that, while forming a har-
monious ensemble, each court, panel, or wall is devoted to
a special aspect of the talent or activity of the artist. One
can thus follow and embrace, so to say, at a glance both his
methods of working and the ascending course of his talent
in the mastery of his art.
An intelligently compiled and well-illustrated catalogue
gives not only the number and name of every picture, but
also, in reference to many of them, appropriate explanations
and poetical quotations. Although this gallery contains over
600 original paintings executed by the young Australian
artist, it does not by any means represent all that he has
produced. Many other paintings are in the possession of
other public galleries, of private individuals, and of the
family of the artist. Among others, Mr. George Randall
is still in possession of a unique collection of sketches and


No. 370. —Oil Painting: “At the Cottage Door.”
“ And. wondering man could want a larger pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.’’
“ The swallow oft beneath my thatch
Shall twitter from her clay-built nest;
Oft shall the pilgrim lift the latch.
And share my meal, a welcome guest.”


paintings in oils made mostly direct from the nude in von
Herkomer's studio, many bearing, written on them, the
personal comments of the great master. If suitable
accommodation can be found, either by the South Brisbane
Council or other public educational body, Mr. Randall is
prepared to have the entire collection mounted and framed,
so that these invaluable aids to art culture by students
can be displayed for their especial use and benefit. One
cannot help being deeply moved at the touching piety
with which that disconsolate, loving father is cherishing
and honouring the memory of the son who has preceded
him to the grave. Nothing seems to have been forgotten.
No one will pass without a sentiment of respect and deep
regret the glass case in which are on view varied memorials
of the deceased artist, such as his palettes, brushes, maul
sticks, sketch books, &c., also specimens of his work in wood
carving, repousse work, and modelling. There is also there
a mandoline, and many other interesting relics, typical of
the life and pre-occupations of the artist.
When remembering that the productive period of the
artist was encompassed within the short span of from
fourteen to fifteen years, one cannot help being amazed at
the sum of talent and conscientious work represented by the
600 odd paintings forming the Randall Art Gallery, All
are interesting, either from the view point of the subject
treated or of the manner in which it has been treated.
Those paintings are not the mere mechanical reproduc-
tion of Nature. One feels in them a soul. They have the
power to set you thinking. That intuitive artist was a
creator, endowed with the supreme power of giving and
imparting life to any subject he cared to attempt. Many
of his paintings rank very high indeed as the accomplished
productions of a matured talent, of an artist in the full
possession of the mastery of his art. R. J. Randall was
well inspired in choosing the great von Herkomer as a
guide and master. While improving the technique of


No. 341. —0il Painting : “On the River Test, Hampshire/
“ Where fragrant herbage in the lush dewy grass abounds.”
“With banks a-wash the gurgling stream flows on.”


his pupil and initiating him into what the F rench call
“ les secrets du metier,’' he respected his undoubted origin-
ality and strong individuality. Randall was imbued with
the Ruskinesque gift of finding poetry and art in the
humblest callings as well as in the most ordinary objects and
sights. It is evident that painting was the favourite mode
of expression of his soul, and was as natural to him as is
singing to the nightingale. Above all, he is himself. Fie
belongs to no school and recognises no coterie. If anything,
one notices in his paintings a total absence of “ le leche ”
of the classics, and a slight tendency towards impressionism,
though without any of the exaggerations and “ parti pris ”
of the impressionist school. Fie was a daring colourist, and
used a bold, energetic stroke.
In presenting that unique collection of paintings to the
native city of the young artist, Mr. George Randall —who is
by no means a wealthy man —has made a princely gift to
his adopted country of Australia. Brisbane and Australia
at large can only feel proud and honoured in the possession
of an art gallery which has no counterpart in any other
city in the Commonwealth.
The inauguration of the Randall Art Gallery, which
was opened on 6th July, 1914, by Sir William MacGregor,
came as a revelation to the public, and marks a red-letter
day in the history of Australian art. Those of us who
hail from the old country find the dear land of their birth
poetised and idealised in the delightful water and oil paint-
ings, inspired by the rural districts of the English counties.
As to the natives of Australia, they cannot help feeling both
happy and proud of the fact that a young country as is
ours could produce such a great and accomplished artist as
was R. J. Randall. They will take an intense delight in the
masterpieces inspired by the familiar sunlit scenery from
the Blackall Range, Maroochy, Caloundra, Southport, Tweed
Heads, and the more immediate picturesque surroundings
of Brisbane.
19
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


But, perhaps, above all other works in that rich
and varied gallery, the visitors will, I believe, place the
portrait of the artist’s father. It impresses you at once.
The very pronounced and typical features of the face
emerge from a dark background as if illuminated by
an intense and radiating moral inner-light. It is the nearest
approach to a Rembrandt that we have ever seen in any of
the numerous art galleries visited in the course of extensive
travels, and many competent art critics have been similarly
impressed. One feels that there was perfect communion
between the artist and his subject, that the artist put all
his soul into that work in the justified hope of making of
it the masterpiece of his life.
It is men of the stamp of the Randalls who tower
in the serene regions of idealism far above the miasmatic
swamp in which move the men for whom “ the love of
wealth is the creative principle of civilisation.” With our
great national poet, George Essex Evans, one may truly say
of them—
The lust of wealth, the pride of place,
Were not a light to guide thy feet,
But larger hopes and wider space
For hearts to beat!
O, brother, dead! Thus, one by one,
Our broken swords remain to tell
The light is o’er, the work is done.
Sleep ! “It is well.”
■“ Ormonts,” Wynnum, near Brisbane,
Queensland, July, 1915.


ADDENDUM
spontaneous expression of approval by a great many
cultured minds of the stand taken by the writer might.
perhaps, justify him in ignoring altogether certain
criticism which seems rightly ashamed of coming out
into the limelight of publicity. Such critics do not allege
any reasons for their opinions. They are simply refractory
to enthusiasm and prejudiced against the natives of this
fair land of Australia. Like the Pharisees of old, they hold
the opinion that nothing good can come out of Nazareth.
Exception has here and there been taken to my claiming
for our Queensland-born artist the proud distinction of being
“ Australia’s greatest painter.”
Why should I be blamed for thus giving expression to
a sincere conviction? Should it even happen that I am
wrong in my judgment, its public enunciation would still
be useful by compelling those who differ from it to investi-
gate and bring forward the merits of other Australian artists
who may have also claims to pre-eminence. Australian art
and Australia as a whole can only benefit from such friendly
polemics.
I am quite prepared to admit that R. J. Randall may not
have said the last word in Australian Art, and this could
hardly be expected in a country where Art is yet so young
and receives on the whole such poor encouragement. This is
probably the reason why so many of our talented
Australian artists betake themselves to other countries,
devoting their abilities to painting the land and sea scapes
of Great Britain or the Continent, instead of their own
country.
Whilst excelling equally with them as a portrait painter
and a painter of the scenery of rural England, to R. J.


Randall belongs the merit of having devoted the best of his
life and talent to his native land; of having opened new
avenues to Art by adding to it, as says a distinguished critic,
a new chapter in the book of Art, called “ The Australian
Bush.” He is here absolutely unrivalled so far. His
matchless delineations of our poetic Bush—his subtle inter-
pretation of skies rivalling those of Greece and Italy—his
masterly rendering of mighty distances, cloud shapes,
diaphanous sunshine over land and sea scapes—must bring
the conviction that Randall has not only achieved the fore-
most place, but will continue to rank for all time among
Australia's greatest and most gifted painters.
While recognising that some Australian artists might
have surpassed him in certain special points, I know of
none who has combined in himself to the same extent the
very varied attainments which go to make a complete artist—
such as inspiration, assiduity to and for work, sure-
ness and firmness of drawing, marvellous gift of vision and
expression, singular intuition of the gamut and harmony
of colours, and, above all, that supreme attribute of genius:
fecundity.
To make perfectly sure of not committing an error of
judgment in my appreciations of both the character and the
talent of the late artist, I have consulted all available sources
of information; and I have invariably found that all those
who had come in contact with the artist, or had had oppor-
tunity of comparing his paintings with those of the great
masters of other countries, came to the conclusion that they
had met in him a man of delightful personality and of
undoubted talent.
Writing from Wellington, New Zealand, under date of
24th October, 1914, the Rev. John H. White says:—
Dear Dick Randall won my admiration by his frank and trans-
parent character quite equally with his artistic ability. His was a
rarely fine personality, frank, friendly, kindly, sympathetic, and
therein came the choice sensibility that enabled him to understand
22
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


and represent the atmosphere of landscape and the personality of
character; and his work was consequently suffused with the width,
charm, and benignity of Nature, whether in individual or land, sky,
or sea scape.
Such a scholarly, widely-read, and much-travelled
gentleman as the late Governor of Queensland, Sir William
MacGregor, said that “ what he admired most about Ran-
dall’s pictures was their grace and naturalness in depicting
the rural home life and scenery of both England and
Australia. I love the country,” he added, “as Nature has
made it, and I simply revel in the cottage homes of England
and the bush scenes of Australia as painted by Randall."
A Queenslander well qualified to judge, but who desires
to remain anonymous, thus describes a visit to the National
Art Gallery of Sydney :• —“ The gallery is a credit to the
State of New South Wales, as it contains a splendid collec-
tion.” After briefly describing it, he adds —
But I can see nothing here to excel Dick Randall’s water colours,
which can more than hold their own with the Australian section.
That special gift of Randall to understand the Aus-
tralian Bush and to translate it into the realms of Art has
been noticed by all the students of his talents and works.
An anonymous but well-informed critic wrote about
it as follows in one of Queensland’s weeklies: —
Randall was essentially an interpreter of the Australian Bush,
the country he patriotically came back to live in, though a promising
future awaited him abroad. You can feel —as you look back at the
gum trees and purply distances, winding streams (hyacinth-laden
or clearly pellucid), grazing cattle, foregrounds of green fern on
golden bracken, blossoming orchards, country roads, or gaps in
the hillside —that the man enjoyed painting the Bush and understood
every mood of our fair landscape.
About the same aspect of Randall’s talent, the Rev.
Douglas Price, M.A., expresses himself thus in a leading
Brisbane daily:—
There I saw in that Randall Art Gallery what made me feel
that to Queensland has come the honour of producing the first
23
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.


painter with the genius to make us understand and realise the glory
of this Southern Continent. To R. J. Randall must belong the
honour of opening a new chapter in the book of Art and that
chapter is called The Australian Bush.” Never were gum trees-
and wattle blossom painted so wonderfully and the peculiar effects
of local scenery so happily caught. No one who has ever seen these
pictures would again speak disparagingly of the Bush. Exhibited
in England, they would remove a hundred false impressions, and
dissipate at once and for ever that all too prevalent impression that
Australia is a country of eternal sameness. Exhibited in Australia,
they teach those of us who know the Bush familiarly to see much
that we had never seen before, and to realise for the first time the
marvellous diversity as well as the surpassing beauty of the scenery
of our own country No one, I believe, has ever so success-
fully unveiled the beauty that lies at our own doors, or caught up
with wizard’s brush so much of the poetry and spirit of the
Australian bush.
In an illustrated article on “ Art in Queensland,” the
Sydney Mail, of 31st December, 1913, observes that the 600
odd works from the brush of the young artist form a very
considerable addition to our claim to consideration in the
artistic sense:—
Without doubt (he continues) Dick Randall had much influence
for good on -our younger workers in Art, and it may be safely
said that he stands unrivalled in his treatment of Australian
atmosphere. He caught the golden green in the grass, the bright
lights and dark shadows, the clouds of purple mist on distant hills.
and, above all, the atmosphere. ... It is safe to say that in years
to come his name will be considered to be effectively and honourably
perpetuated.
Another writer adds :
His life is a wonderful record of one whose influence on the
beauty of the world and whose addition to its loveliness is just
beginning to be realised in its full importance—its generations—
yet unborn—see, watch, admire, learn to imitate, and try to emulate
the work of the gifted Painter-Poet, his spirit will indeed animate
them, and, perhaps, some of his skill, his diligence, his power, may
guide their efforts. It can but inspire them; for to what do we owe
the most noble achievements of mankind, but to the makers, to the
inspired ones, who themselves knowing not of their own glory
reflect so much upon lesser mortals that the latter are perforce
impelled to “go and do likewise!”


These quotations, which all bear out the stand taken by
the writer, could be multiplied at great length, both from
the Press and letters of competent Art critics. But we must
limit ourselves. It is, however, worth remarking that Ram
dall’s genius, which seems to appeal equally to the simple-
minded and to professional art judges, has also frequently
received generous recognition at the hands of other fellow
artists.
Amongst these, Mr. Fred. Marriott, A.R.C.A., Art
Master, University of London, a frequent exhibitor at the
Royal Academy and Paris Salons—a keen Art critic, with
intimate knowledge of all the various schools of painting in
Great Britain —when visiting Brisbane was invited to inspect
the work at Randall’s studio. After seeing the first half
dozen paintings he unhesitatingly exclaimed:—
This is the work of an artist. I can pay the painter no higher
compliment!
And, again, Mrs. Rowan, the unrivalled painter of
Australian wild flowers and foliage, a past master in the
manipulation of water colours, an artist to her fingers’ tips,
who had the advantage of having seen every art gallery in
Europe—on visiting the Randall Studio, and later the gallery,
reiterated again and again that what she saw was “ the work
of an absolute genius.”
25
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall.




OPENING OF THE RANDALL ART
GALLERY
(Compiled from various Press Reports)
HE Randall Art Gallery was opened on the 7th of Jnly,
1 9 1 4, by the Governor of Queensland, Sir William
MacGregor, in the presence of a large and distinguished
gathering, comprising representatives of the Government
•and of the civic authorities of both North and South
Brisbane.
In taking the chair, Alderman J. Allen, Mayor of the
Gity of South Brisbane, said that the gathering was unique
in the history of South Brisbane, because Elis Excellency
was about to dedicate to the public of Queensland a collec-
tion of pictures which were the work of an artist who was
born in South Brisbane, and were the gift of that artist’s
father. (Applause.) He explained the history of the gift,
and remarked that one of the most touching features of the
whole transaction had been the sincere love of Mr. George
Randall towards his son. Mr. Randall had not only given
the pictures to the public, but he had undertaken consider-
able expense in preparing them for exhibition.
Hrs Excellency the Governor, in dedicating the gallery,
sard that he remembered that some two or three years ago
he went to look at the late artist’s pictures, and he then
■expressed the hope that some day they would form a col-
lection dedicated to the public of the State. It, therefore,
gave him particular pleasure to be present. Like the Mayor,
he also had been impressed with the touching love, devotion,
■and admiration of the father towards the son. (Applause.)
He always had found that the people of Queensland were
by nature very affectionate. And then there was the splendid
patriotism .of both father and son, which had found


i 1
|
■Hi
... >
-
■ ■
m
M “s
*
m*
: r.
>asa^—,
tags
*
II
§*A
t*
1
-
1
k 1
a
PH
5
"i
M
I
4
m 1(*J|
sin
; if
1 pi
1)0
1 i%
\i
p» «
Kfi
1
ImI
i r > f .
H
; || ILJ
’""i |
SsFLt jV
-*■* IfS
1
?. II
H Mr
f
. 11
|ng|
Urn
■
gv--
AstoS'v ... ■ S
■ |
;■
- cJ IH
m
ii '
1 w
•
■■ Iftlli
rflBH
■ ii
■H|!
4
\ 1
II
||?| ‘lip
B ]
lli
\ \
(jliBKWI
“T
p
9
n
i -n
P— f r
if
1
II
, 9 !
m
1
**" Hi-
ii
--r I
>11*.*
1* II
. Ilk
I
IIP -
31
i? /. .
' ■ p■*
1
i . g .'j i
: 1.
* } -.
...
I
■cf !■
I
1
1
1
p \,
_ i .
iifiM
I
\ : :
1
* ■ | .
l i.
{
I
- -
C ”
1
1
P":. li^r
I
%
■:. <:
m*
1 il 1
,;i
1 |
> . „>
SB
vi
1 *
|p p
|
° *•
:• v
S.^f
I
aL.
•. • j >;
“IB ■
r
Wmmmrnm
■
I
frt / l
V 1
1 ;
' ' './ ■
* ■' •
Q
*
1
1
;
: •<
SSI
"SIS
I
ml Jf
. X x 1
;./■:* 'v:
I
11
i
a^.
e m
*
X
N
ii
SSaJ’l
// 'hf
HHK
|
1 M
, .r —
The Randall Art Gallery—
-Interior View
of part of Annex,
City Hall Buildings, South Brisbane.


-encouragement from the South Brisbane Council. He
eongratulated that body upon their action, and hoped that
they might be imitated by other public bodies. In a country
like Queensland, with such an extraordinary amount of
resources to develop, the people were so interested in the
material part of their lives that they had very little time to
give to art. The same applied to Canada. It was not
because there was not sufficient talent, but few people had
time to devote to art, and only those who were driven by
innate instinct and love of Art —as the late Mr. Randall
was—were likely to take it up. Did not that make the
gallery which they were dedicating even more valuable and
important to the people of South Brisbane and the State?
It was rather a peculiar thing that there was no creature
other than man who seemed to have taken to the delineation
of things that they saw or that occurred to their imagina-
tion. The late Mr. Randall had the powers of observation
that were indispensable in the artist who was going to be
true to Nature. They could see in the gallery that the
departed artist had an excellent eye for colour, and they
also could obtain a suggestion of his perseverance and
industry. “ A loss to Queensland, to Australia, and, aye, to
the world was the early death of the artist ,” said Sir William.
He added that the late Mr. Randall had left his mark deeply
impressed, and there was no doubt that future generations
would be influenced by his work. His Excellency praised
certain features of Mr. Randall's works, emphasising the
exceeding beauty of the colouring of the landscapes, and the
artist’s extraordinary versatility. In conclusion, he con-
gratulated the city upon coming into possession of such a
collection, and expressed his confidence that that magnificent
example of patriotism would be followed. In his opinion,
young men and women endowed with ordinary reason and
average intellectual capacity could not fully enjoy their lives
unless they devoted a portion of their time to works of Art.
(Applause.) If they looked at it from that point of view it
29
Opening of the Randall Art Gallery.


would help them to attach still greater value to, and have
still higher appreciation of, the two Randalls and the work
of the son. (Loud applause.)
Mr. C. M. Jenkinson, Mayor of the City of Brisbane,
in responding on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. G. Randall, senior,
said that the late artist was a friend of his, and it was
through the instrumentality of his father that he had first
been induced to come to Queensland. While they were there
rejoicing in the works of a talented young Queensland
native, the parents were at home lamenting still the death
of their talented son. The late artist had proved himself a
most worthy pupil of Sir H. von Herkomer, and his work
showed how well the training received had been imbibed.
The work accomplished by him would live for ever, and the
Government of the country had certainly been lax in its duty
in not fittingly recognising the undoubted genius of one
whom they were all proud to claim as a native-born Queens-
lander. It had been said that Australian flowers had no
perfume, its birds no song, and its bush no beauty; but those
who viewed the pictures of their own artist would be well
established in the belief that those assertions had no founda-
tions whatever, and that Australia was, after all, in every
sense of the word, God’s own country. He would at the
earliest opportunity convey to Mr. and Mrs. Randall the
hearty appreciation of their gift to the citizens of Queens-
land.
Mr. W. H. Barnes, State Treasurer of Queensland,
having added his testimony of admiration of the splendid
gift, and stated that he had taken to heart the words of the
Mayor, the proceedings closed with a vote of thanks to the
Governor, moved by the Mayor of South Brisbane, and
seconded by Alderman Burke.
The gallery was then declared formally opened by the
Governor, and all those present availed themselves of the
occasion to view the splendid collection of pictures.
30
Opening of the Randall Art Gallery.


ART AND ITS VALUE AS A NATIONAL
ASSET
(Essay Written for the Ballarat 1910 Festival of the National
Eisteddfod of Australasia)
A RT . is the term used to designate the work of man as
distinct from the direct productions of Nature. When
human activities have for their object utilities, the satisfac-
tion of some material want, they are known as Mechanical
or Industrial Arts; whilst the words Fine Arts or simply
Art apply to those branches of Art which do not minister
to necessities or conveniences, but to the love of the
Beautiful inherent in the heart of man.
Although Art is, to a certain extent, an imitation of
Nature, it also implies creation. If the materials for a
work of Art are supplied by Nature, their combination and
the form Divine given them express ideals and aspirations
which are in themselves true creations, bearing the stamp
of the artist in such a manner that his productions can
easily be recognised among those of all other artists.
Fine Arts comprise Music, Painting, Architecture,
Sculpture, Poetry, Eloquence, and their subdivisions; also
to a certain extent —Rhythmic Gymnastics and Dancing.
Art, being the highest manifestation of the creative
power of man, is the criterion by which we judge of the
civilisation and development of both individuals and nations.
The strongest man may be intellectually and morally a
brute, whilst the creative artist soars in the loftiest altitudes
of human achievements.
In a like manner the place of a nation in the Pantheon
of History is not determined by its material wealth and
power, nor by the extent of its territorial conquests, but by
its attainments in the higher realms of Literature, Science,
and Art.


No. 297. —Oil Painting : “ The Shepherd ” ; A Bush Idyll.
“ Par off in thought he’s wandering,
Through the years of long ago;
And who shall say what faces
He sees in the fire’s bright glow?
Who knows what memories, happy
Or sad, throng through his breast,
As he watches the billy boiling,
And takes his evening rest?


Huge as were the empires of an Attila or a Tamerlane,
they left no “ footprints on the sands of time”; while, on
the other hand, tiny geographical specks, like Ancient
Palestine, Egypt, Greece, the mediaeval Italian Republics,
shine as beacon lights, and tower over humanity among the
highest summits of Art.
In spite of those undeniable lessons from the past of
mankind, few men realise yet that all that will be left, some
day, of our boasted modern civilisation will be a few literary
and artistic monuments, the authors of which may be, like
Homer or our own Milton, almost unnoticed by their
generation, if not persecuted and starved to death.
For it must always be remembered that, if Art embodies
the highest ideals of a race, it receives the form Divine
from some privileged mortals, who combine a profound
knowledge of Nature with a keen perception, an extreme
.sensitiveness and a creative mind, which distinguish them
from the average man. Their feet may touch the earth, but
their forehead, which bears the stamp of genius, towers
among the stars of idealism. Those great artists not seldom
feel as if they were stranded in the world, strangers among
other men with whom they frequently come into violent
antagonism.
For true artists are creators, who often establish new
laws, even if, for so doing, they have to violate the laws
which had, up to then, ruled their art.
The ideal world which they see in their mind’s eye,
and which they endeavour to realise in their creations, is
constantly shocked by the contact with trivial reality. Their
mission is to lift up humanity to something nobler and better.
They thus become the types and ideals of a whole race
which moulds itself over them as corals mould themselves
over the beings which give them both substance and shape.
Art, being the pinnacle of the intellectual attainments
33
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


No. 328. — Oil Painting : “ Sunday Morning in the Bush.”
“ Where the undethron’d Forest’s Royal Tent
Broods with its hush o’er half a continent.’
“ What man with men would push and altercate,
Piecing out crooked means for crooked ends,
When he may have the skies and woods for friends,
Snatch back the rudder of his undismantled fate.
And in himself be ruler. Church, and State?”


of man, must be, of necessity, the most valuable asset of a
nation. All the national activities—all the mechanical arts,
from agriculture and mining to the manufacture of primary
products—should, therefore, strive to produce conditions-
favourahle to the birth and development of Fine Arts and
their cultivation and enjoyment by the greatest possible
number of individuals. For too long the enjoyment of Fine
Arts has been considered as the exclusive preserve of the
privileged few, while the great mass of the toilers are either
totally or partially denied it.
Fortunately, there is ample evidence of a rapidly
approaching —and welcome —change in that regrettable state
of affairs. The spread of comfort and education among
all classes renders them capable of enjoying Art in all its-
shapes and forms.
These new conditions open up endless possibilities
before Art, for, if Art deteriorates and degenerates when
simply aiming at amusing the idle rich, it acquires a new
life and vigour when striving to express the sentiments and
ideals of a whole nation and of mankind at large.
Those facts strike forcibly the observant traveller wha
has visited other civilised countries, and thus had oppor-
tunities for investigating and comparing the various
manifestations of Art.
Take, for instance, the Dramatic Art, which expresses
human sentiments by means of spoken words and acted
gestures. It is undoubtedly on the downgrade on the stages
of big cities, where it appeals more to the lower instincts of
the idlers than to the noble aspirations of the people.
As a rejoicing contrast there are noticeable in many
countries manifestations of an incipient popular Art of the
highest order of merit, as it aims at uplifting mankind by
appealing to all that is best and noblest in human nature.
This is especially the case in the spectacular displays of
35
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


No. 248. — Oil Painting, A Bush Homestead : “ The Pioneers.”
“ Making the wilderness kind and hospitable.”
“ How the waste places of the earth are filled.”
“They take their share of danger and a double share of toil.’
“ The multiplication of mankind has no limit but the world itself. The Pioneer
is the agent of Providence in carrying out its greatest work.”


the pageants of Great Britain and Holland, in the sublime
religious representations of Oberammergau, as well as in
the “ Festspiele” in which the Swiss dramatise the most
memorable events of their heroic history. But the most
perfect perhaps of those manifestations of modern popular
Art is the “ Fete des Vignerons,” held periodically at Vevey,
on the Lake of Geneva. In that fete local peasants and
tradesmen poetise their daily avocations in scenes of unsur-
passed beauty and grandeur.
People flock in thousands from all parts of the world to
see that Fete des Vignerons, in which the poetic creations of
Greek mythology harmoniously blend with the every-day life
and occupations of a modern rural democracy.
There is Pales, the goddess of spring and flowers; there
is Ceres, goddess of the golden harvest; there is Pomona,
goddess of Autumn and its fruits; there is also Bacchus,
who presides at all the works of the vinegrower. Each of
these mythological deities is carried on emblematical and
artistically decorated chariots, and is followed by suitably
dressed young people of both sexes, representing in songs
and dances the occupations peculiar to the season or to the
trades over which the deity is supposed to preside.
The varied episodes of that unique fete, in which all the
Arts combine to form a harmonious ensemble, develop in
the open air on the spacious “ Place du Marche,” in the
centre of a vast amphitheatre of hills and mountains,
reflecting their silhouettes in the azure waters of a most
beautiful lake. The fete culminates in the massing of all the
performers —several thousands in number —to act and sing
sublime chants in praise of the arts of peace and of the
dear native land: “ Heureux enfants d’une heureuse Patrie!”
But why thus dwell at length on those manifestations
of popular Art in other countries ? Simply because they are
not only rejoicing symptoms of a rejuvenation and renova-
37
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


266. — Oil Painting: “A Settler's .Home.” (On the Maroochy River, Queensland.)
“ Give us a million prosperous settlers, rooted to the soil of their 160-acre
Freeholds —men with hearts and homes to fight for —and you secure a bulwark
against any daring aggressor . . . .”
“ View them here, at home, where all their worth and pride is placed,
Where the hospitable fire burns clear, and where the lowliest farm house is graced
With manly hearts ; in piety sincere ;
In friendship loyal and true, in danger brave ;
Beloved in life and sainted in the grave.”


tion of Art in general, but are also finger-posts, as it were,
pointing out to us the lines along which our own Australian
Art should grow and develop.
Australia, one of the last born among the great coming
nations of the world, has before her an almost unlimited
scope in Art development. Our beautiful skies, which rival
those of Greece, Italy, and other favourite abodes of the
Muses; our sunny and invigorating climate; the magnificence
of our Nature, the range of which extends from the snowy
landscapes of Mount Kosciusko to the tropical luxuriance
of our Northern provinces; the marvels of our original
Fauna and Flora; the majesty of the seas bathing our shores;
the grace and charm of the Australian women; the athletic
forms and sturdiness of the men; the very picturesqueness of
our rural and some of our urban callings—everything is
here an incentive to Art, an inexhaustible source of artistic
inspiration, and points to Australia becoming in the near
future the cradle of an original Art of unsurpassed beauty
and perfection.
In spite of the many drawbacks yet besetting the path
of Australian Art—such, for instance, as the relative scarcity
-of art galleries and artistic environments —there are already
both evidences and instances of talent lying dormant in our
people and awaiting only the touch of the magic wand of
opportunity to pour forth with the suddenness and
abundance of a freshly tapped artesian spring.
In fact, Australia is already giving proofs of artistic
fecundity. Like the philosopher of old, who demonstrated
by walking the existence of movement, she is making good
her claim to Art by lending the world such singers and
musicians as Melba, Amy Castles, Eugenie Boland, Elsie
Hall, and scores of others, who have conquered foremost
places among the great musical artists of modern times.
Is Art not evident in a literature which, though born of
yesterday, already prides itself in the names of Marcus
39
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


Clarke, J. H. Nicholson, Gordon, Victor Daley, Kendall,
Brunton Stephens, Lawson, Patterson, and many other poets
and prose writers, whose works bear testimony to the heights
which can be occasionally attained by both Australian
thought and Australian expression.
Many of the public and private buildings designed by
our Australian architects compare not unfavourably with
those found in the capital cities of much older countries-
while such painters and sculptors as G. W. Lambert, A.
Stritten, A. H. Fulwood, the late R. J. Randall, Bertram
McKennal, the young Harold Parker, and many others have
boldly unfurled before the world the flag of Australian Art
and have forced their way into such sacred precincts of Art
as the Royal Academy of London and the annual “
of Paris.
If time and space would permit, the same could be
said of other forms of Art, all of which have in our midst
their little nuclei of ardent devotees and talented exponents.
Since we have in Australia the natural conditions and
the latent talent, it now devolves upon the nation as a whole
to do her share in the development of National Art.
That she intends doing so and is capable of the effort
demanded of her in that direction, we have proofs in the
very fair Art Galleries already established in all our capital
cities and in some of our more important provincial cities,
such, for instance, as Ballarat, where artistic preoccupations
are perhaps more prevalent than in any other Australian city.
But nowhere is the capacity of the Australian nation for
Art and Art enjoyment more conspicuous than in the
establishment of the South Street Society of Ballarat, the
Austral Association of Toowoomba, and the numerous
Eisteddfod Societies spread over the length and breadth of
our vast continent.
Their commencements were modest: “ Omnia origo
pudenda est.”
40
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


Some twenty years ago the few members of a South
Street Debating Society of the fair City of Ballarat decided
to hold singing and elocutionary competitions on the lines of
the ancient Welsh Eisteddfodan.
Six or seven years ago a few enthusiastic gentlemen—
quorum pars parva fui —rallying round one of Australia’s
greatest national poets, the late George Essex Evans,
founded in Sunny Queensland the Austral Association of
Toowoomba for the promotion of Music, Art, Literature,
and Science.
In spite of the croaking of the pessimists who are to
be found in all communities—in spite of their wailings about
young Australians being incapable of and unwilling to take
an interest in anything outside physical sports and material
pursuits—the success of both societies has been simply
phenomenal, and has branded the pessimists as calumniators
of an extremely well-gifted race.
Both societies had to erect huge colosseums, capable of
accommodating from 5,000 to 10,000 spectators, whom we
can see every year held spellbound by and keenly appreciative
of the classical masterpieces of Handel, Mozart, Beethoven,
and other master minds of the musical Art. Both societies;
spend annually thousands of pounds in the encouragement
of almost all forms of Art, but principally music. Their
annual Festivals last for weeks, and are attended by
thousands of performers and tens of thousands of spectators.
Large mixed choirs travel long distances—some over 3,00 a
miles by land and sea —to take part in the competitions, the
victors being received on their return to their native State
with as much enthusiasm as were, in ancient Greece, the
triumphant winners of the Olympic games.
No expenses are spared to secure the best procurable and
most impartial adjudicators, some being even imported from
as far as Great Britain, entailing a journey of over 30,000
miles to perform a work of only a few weeks’ duration.
41
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


Who could help feeling proud of such colossal efforts
made on behalf of Art by such small fractions of a com-
paratively small and scattered community as is ours?
But, creditable as are those achievements, which easily
eclipse those of much older and bigger nations, they are
only beginnings —the forerunners of much greater things to
follow.
Great as is the usefulness of the Ballarat, Toowoomba,
and other kindred societies as promoters of Art and
educators of our artistic taste, it is yet in its infancy.
We are within measurable distance of the time when
they will embrace in the programmes of their annual festivals
competitions in all branches of Art, including painting,
sculpture, plans of architectural edifices, &c. They will have
competitions in horticulture and other applied arts which—
as our great Ruskin has clearly demonstrated —contribute so
much to both the refinement of manners and the enjoyment
of life.
They will go further. Following in the footsteps of
the Swiss “ Fete des Vignerons,” they will show us, some
day, wending their way through the beautiful parks and tree-
shaded streets of our sunny cities, processions of young
Australians, representing in their dresses, songs, and dances,
as well as in their banners and other emblems, the so original
and picturesque occupations of our stockmen, miners,
farmers, sailors, and the thousand trades exercised by the
artisans of our cities. Our national poets shall supply the
verses, and our composers the music for the songs. Our
painters shall design the costumes and the emblematic
chariots; while to the masters of the choregraphical art shall
be allotted the task of composing the ballets which shall
42
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


be both the embodiment and manifestation of the sublime
poetry hidden in the humblest occupations of man. 1
But our Art shall not be limited by national boundaries;
it shall embrace the whole of mankind, and be as wide as
the wide world itself.
Being the last to appear on the stage of history, we are
the legitimate heirs of all the civilisations which preceded us,
and we have thus the invaluable privilege of being able to
■enrich our national Art by drawing at will from the
mythologies of the past as well as from the inexhaustible
fields of history.
If we want our people to become a truly artistic nation,
those artistic displays of our annual festivals should not be
limited to the exclusive and ephemerous enjoyment of the
privileged few who can attend them personally.
Artistic publications at popular prices should reproduce
the verses of the poets, the music of the composers, the
pictures and statues of the painters and sculptors, the
picturesque grouping of the performers; thus arousing in all
a taste for Art, and —who knows —may be kindling the fire
of genius in some latent talent which would otherwise remain
ignored, and consequently wasted in some remote corner of
■our vast continent.
These are by no means the only avenues open before
Australian Art.
Among others we may mention the fact that the recent
I The late George Essex Evans, who was passionately fond of
farming, has shown the example by writing the Dairyman’s Song,
in that truly Virgilian idyll—
“ When the cows are calling
In the morning,'
which only requires to be set to music by a composer, equally
penetrated with the charms of our rural life, to become popular
throughout the farming districts of Australia.
43
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


No. 127.—Water Colour Painting: “The Australian Bush.”
“ Welcome, the unhampered freedom of the Bush.”
“ The great masterful Australian Bush, beloved theatre of manhood’s
pioneering victories.”
“ The infinite glories of Australia’s World-unique Bush.”


union of our different States and territories into a powerful
Commonwealth, embracing a whole continent and its
adjacent islands, has not only increased one hundredfold our
material strength; it has also broadened our minds and
modes of thinking, and given us all the advantages of a
complete national life.
One of the first duties devolving upon our National
Government and Parliament is the creation of a Federal
Capital City which shall be not only an everlasting monument
and emblem of our national unity and aspirations, but also
the embodiment of all that is best in architecture, painting,
statuary, and other decorative Arts.
The drawing of the plans and the laying out of that
model city —the creation of its parks, avenues, and streets —
the designing and erecting of its public and private buildings
—the decorating of same with statues, frescoes, and paint-
ings—open endless possibilities before Australian Art and
Australian artists.
And when our whole atmosphere shall be saturated, so
to say, with Art —when Australians shall breathe in Art,
from their cradle to their grave —for our very cemeteries
shall bear testimony to the artistic taste of our people —then
no one will ever think of asking what is the value of Art
as a national asset. It will be as patent as is the existence of
the very sun which gives life, warmth, and light to the rest
of the universe.
A community permeated with Art, as we have tried to
briefly outline within the small compass of the allotted
number of words, would not only occupy a place of honour
among the nations of the world, it would also be the most
perfect, the most moral, and the happiest; for, as Plato
would say, “ To possess perfect beauty—which is both the
aim and raison d'etre of Art—is to possess perfect
happiness, which is the complete harmony of the human
being with the laws of both God and Nature.
Wynnum, xAuigust, 1910.
45
Art and its Value as a National Asset.


A PLEA FOR NATIONALISING
LITERATURE AND ART
O one can read without a thrill of pride and enthusiasm
about the heroism displayed by our brave Australian?
warriors at the Dardanelles and on other battlefields of that
gigantic struggle both on land and sea.
There is something inspiriting—truly epic, in fact—in
the idea of those young fearless scions of a great race, sailing
forth in thousands from the far-away Antipodes, furbishing
for a time their weapons in the shade of the forty-century old
Pyramids, then dashing boldly forward to deal deathblows
to the three greatest reactionary institutions known to history
as represented by the three empires of the Turco-Teutonic
alliance. What a subjct to inspire the genius of a Homer or
a Torquato Tasso!
True, our brave lads are paying a very dear price
indeed for their hard-fought and hard-disputed victories.
But the generous blood, so profusely and cheerfully shed io
the defence of freedom and justice, is not lost. It is just such
deeds of heroism and self-sacrifice which are the very
foundations of all great nations. Those intrepid Australian
heroes and martyrs are simply laying on those distant battle-
fields the very corner-stones of a great uprising nation.
Their spirit and deeds will ever live in the minds and hearts
of all the following generations. But it will be so only on one
condition. All that sublime heroism will be wasted, spent in
vain, unless simultaneously with heroes we produce also
great Orators, great Historians, great Poets, and great
Artists, capable of immortalising that heroism by embodying
it in imperishable literary and artistic monuments.


It rests with us here to do that part of the national task.
Whoever has observed the young Australians must come to
the conclusion that they are an admirably gifted race. To
the solidity and thoroughness of the robust stock from which
they spring, they add a new element of brightness and
intuition due, no doubt, to the vivifying and quickening
influence of our sunny skies. They are incontestably
destined to develop into the most artistic branch of the great
Anglo-Celtic Races.
There can be no doubt that an abundant crop of genius
lies latent in our people, like the thousands of undiscovered
and undeveloped gold mines which are yet dormant in our
soil. Genius is there, not only undiscovered, but, like the
chrysalis in its cocoon, unconscious of its own existence and
of the bright future awaiting it.
Shall we leave it in that state ? Shall we trust to mere
chance for its discovery, hatching, development, and
fruition? Shall we continue the mistakes of past ages and
restrict the enjoyment of Music, Art, and Literature to only
the men of wealth and leisure who can afford to pay for it ?
Shall we go on deserving the castigations of the Poet when
he said —
You have judged by the rich man’s rule!
You have treated your thinkers as dust!
You have honoured the braggart and fool!
Whilst Genius has starved on a crust!
—George Essex Evans.
Perish the thought that we should be satisfied with such
a state of affairs!
In our enlightened age, and in our progressive Demo-
cracy, all the nation-builders, all the toilers with both brain
and brawn, are entitled not only to a fair material living
but also to all the more refined enjoyments of Music, Art,
Literature, and Science. And this can be done only by the
47
A Pica for Nationalising Literature and Art.


No. 153.— Water Colour Painting : “ Nature's Mirror."
“Where the glorious sunset breaks.”
“ The clouds float motionless like isles of snow
Set in the sapphire of the summer sky ;
The river, like a ribbon, far below
Winds rippling by.”


State undertaking to discover, educate, and reward genius
and talent, with the object of putting their works within
the reach of the multitude.
It has to come. The most casual observer of the signs
of the times cannot fail to notice that we are within measure-
able distance of the time when the community will pay—
out of the Consolidated Revenue of the State —the honoraria
of a Melba or of a Paderewski, so that their elevating and
ennobling talent may be enjoyed by the whole people and not,
as at present, by only a privileged few.
In a like manner, the paintings and sculptures of our
great artists will no longer be a prey to the vanity of a few
wealthy idlers. They will be collected and displayed in
huge National Art Galleries for the edification and enjoy-
ment of the whole nation.
The State will go further. It will popularise their works
by issuing and distributing in all the schools of the land
artistic reproductions of those masterpieces.
The same will also be done for our National Poets and
Historians, whose works shall be published and distributed
to the remotest corners of our vast Island Continent.
The cost of such national undertakings would be a
trivial one compared with the incalculable influence for good
which would be exercised by the works of our great national
writers and artists.
If this were done, it is certain that the contact and inter-
course with those great minds and noble hearts would not
only raise the mental and moral level of the nation, but also
here and there awaken latent genius, like the contact of the
flint extracts the spark of fire lying dormant in the steel.
And that would happen in the most unexpected places. Who
knows but some of the great geniuses of the future may be
at present learning their letters on the forms of some obscure
49
A Plea for Nationalising Literature and Art.


country school, or walking barefooted in a bush bark hut, or
quietly resting under the canvas tent of some out-of-the-way
miner's camp.
Do not tell me that my scheme for promoting the
production and utilisation of genius and talent is only the
unrealisable dream of a dreamer! It is, on the contrary,
well within the range of possibility and even early prob-
ability. Since Kings and other Potentates have their Poets
Laureate, their Court Singers and Artists, why could not
our modern self-governing democracies have also their
National Poets, Singers, and Artists? I am, of course,
aware that such a desirable millennium in the development
of mankind cannot come, so to say, in a lump; it will come
like the rest of human progress —by gradual evolution. And
as a step towards that desirable end I beg leave to offer
two suggestions: —
One concerns literature. Now that we need to arouse
Australian patriotism up to the pitch of the sacrifice to it of
the very lives of our citizens, I would suggest that the
State and the Federal Governments of Australia combine
together to publish a national edition of the selected poems
of the Great Poet and ardent Patriot the late George Essex
Evans, and have them distributed not only in all the schools
of the Commonwealth but also to all our brave lads at the
front.
I have good reason to believe that the consent for the
compilation and issue of such a national edition would be
generously granted by both the publishers of his works and
by the noble lady who cheered his life and is now, while
mourning her and the nation’s irreparable loss, piously
honouring and cultivating the memory of the great departed
Poet.
My second suggestion is about Art. All those who
attended my recent lecture on the life and works of the late
50
A Plea for Nationalising Literature and Art.


Richard John Randall, including several State Ministers,
Members, and ex-Members of Parliament, unanimously
agreed that the community had not properly rewarded that
great Artist nor made the best use of the wonderful
collection of paintings which he has left.
It has been suggested that the State should in a measure-
repair that injustice by buying a couple of his canvases for
our embryonic National Art Gallery. On second thoughts,,
such a scheme seems quite inadequate. It could not give a
true idea of the versatility and truly astounding fecundity
of the Artist's genius. It would be like putting in a museum,
a piece of granite as a sample of the grandeur and majesty
of the Mont Blanc. We must try to find something better.
As is well known, Mr. George Randall has presented
that unique collection of his son’s paintings to the City of
South Brisbane, which has provided for its temporary accom-
modation in the South Brisbane Technical College. This is
right enough as far as it goes; but all will agree that the
space allotted is far too small to allow of the securing of a
proper perspective so as to show the paintings to best,
advantage. All will also agree that the present location of
the gallery is a good deal out of the way of both City
residents and visitors from the country. Now, my sug-
gestion is this:—l understand that one of the clauses of
the donation stipulates that, when the State shall erect a
National Art Gallery, the Randall Gallery may be trans-
ferred there. This being so, why not take advantage of the
splendid opportunity now being offered by the erection in
George street of the huge State Savings Bank Building and
so construct its top story, as regards side and sky lights, that
it could be used for the permanent housing of both the
National Art Gallery and the Randall Art Gallery? The
accommodation of so many artistic treasures in such a
centrally situated site would soon form a rallying centre for
artistic talent, and promote the very desirable establishment
of a National School of Fine Arts.
51
A Plea for Nationalising Literature and Art.


The advantages of such a scheme are so obvious in every
respect that I confidently recommend it to the favourable
consideration of those who are now in the position to
realise it. Dixi!
P.S. —Since these lines were written I have heard of a
still better project contemplated by the Department of Public
Instruction. It consists in devoting to Art the late Govern-
ment House, now occupied by the Queensland University.
Situated in the picturesque surroundings of our Botanic
Gardens, gracefully encircled by our poetic river, it would
form an ideal site for the Art Centre of the State.
H. A. T.
The Artist’s Palette, as Found in his Studio after his Death.
52
A Plea for Nationalising Literature and Art.


En fKemoriam.
<#««* nears Ijabc floton, get on Ins stubio boor
Still man toe trace the letters of Ins name;
glnb, entering, finb so much therein tire same
3 s Ije Ijab left it, to come back no more.
Sn-bair toitlj faltering steps | treab the floor,
bis lobeb toorh on ebern Ijanb,
depicting beauties of our Austral laub
|in skies, anb seas, anb brush uutbougbt before!
lore, rough toitlj colours, palette lies anb bruslj;
©n easel the unfinisljeb sketch is seen:
3-las • to feel bis Ijanb no more can touch
(fbese; or tbc ibln banging manbolinc!
garb gcatlj anb desolation, fobn bibs’t enter Ijere?
BTo bligljt high hopes inspireb, anb take a life so bear!
fi.
©ctober, 1910.
Water-colour Study, Unfinished—The Artist’s Last.
A. J. Gumming, Govt. Printer, Brisbane,




The_^>
ife and Works of
Richard J. Randall
. . Australia’s . .
Greatest Artist
On Sale at the Leading Booksellers & Newsagents.
Also at the Author’s
Henry A. Tardent,
“ Ormonts ” - - Wynnum,
Near Brisbane. Queensland.
Price, One Shilling
By buying a dozen copies, or more, the Trade and
School Teachers will be allowed a liberal discount.


CITY OF SOUTH BRISBANE.
The Randall Art
THIS Gallery contains over 600 Works in
Oils, Water Colours, Pastels, Black
and White, &c., and'is now open to the
public FREE, on
MONDAYS,
WEDNESDAYS, and
FRIDAYS,
from 10 a m. to 4 p.m., and on SUNDAYS
from 2 to 5 p.m.
NOTE.
Interstate and other visitors to the
Metropolis, as also State and other
School Teachers with parties of their
scholars, may obtain permission to view
the Gallery on other days than the
above by communicating with the Mayor
or Town Clerk, Town Hall, South
Brisbane.


ambleton
(Of London),
picture jf miner,
Hfcount Cutter, anb Cilber,
Kent’s Buildings,
Adelaide Street, BRISBANE
Stocks all kinds of Artists’ Materials,
Oil and Water Colours, Canvas,
Easels, Etc
A. L. HAMBLETON had sole charge
of the Mounting and Framing of the 600
Works now forming the Randall Art Gallery.


While held for Minors or persons not ] 4J% on first £6,000 and
entitled to immediate payment -> 4J% on the excess.
While held at Call .. .. ..3%.
State Public Curator’s Office
Transact ALL TRUSTEE BUSINESS
with Economy and Promptitude. Reduction in Legal and other expenses.
MONEYS IN THE COMMON FUND CAPITAL AND INTEREST
GUARANTEED BY STATE.
Interest payable to Estates on Moneys in this Fund —
THE PUBLIC CURATOR can be appointed—
EXECUTOR and TRUSTEE, alone or with any other person, of the Will
of any person in Queensland or elsewhere ; TRUSTEE in place of persons
wishing to be relieved of their Trusteeship; TRUSTEE of Settlements,
Money, or other Trusts; ATTORNEY OR AGENT; To INVESTIGATE and
AUDIT Private Trust Estates; MANAGER OR RECEIVER, GUARDIAN
NEXT FRIEND, ETC.
ADVANCES MADE TO ESTATES UNDER ADMINISTRATION.
Liability of Public Curator State Guaranteed.
LOANS MAY BE OBTAINED.
No Procuration Fee or Commission charged. Liberal Terms of Repayment.
The PUBLIC CURATOR has ample funds for immediate investment on
first mortgage of freehold securities in Queensland, or any other securities
authorised by the Trustees and Executors Acts, 1897-1915, at lowest current
rates of interest. Office Charges are fixed on the lowest possible scale.
HAVE YOU MADE YOUR WILL ?
NO CHARGE FOR PREPARING WILLS or obtaining Probate or
Administration, or for passing stamp or succession accounts, or for advising
on the numberless legal and other questions continually arising in the
course of administration.
be obtained at The Public Curator’s Office,
THE TREASURY BUILDINGS,
George Street, Brisbane (next Government Savings Bank);
also at Townsville and Rockhampton,
and at every Petty Sessions Office throughout the State.


Queensland Government Savings Bank.
Head Offices :
Treasury Buildings, Brisbane,
with Ledger Branches at Principal
Centres and 483 Branch Offices
and Agencies throughout the State.
Total on Deposit at 30th June, 1913, £10,663,855, of which
£7,596,151 have been invested in Queensland Government
Securities, and the Balance £3,067,704 is available to meet
Depositors’ current requirements.
All Deposits are secured on the Consolidated Revenue of Queensland
MINIMUM AMOUNT OF DEPOSIT. 1 /-.
NO CHARGE IS MADE FOR KEEPING ACCOUNTS
INTEREST at 3| per cent, per
annum is allowed on monthly
balances of SI and upwards to
S5OO. Interest on Deposits is not
subject to Income Tax, and every
facility is given for withdrawals
within the State, and for Interstate,
New Zealand, and International
Transfers.
SAVINGS BANK Funds made available by the purchase
of Government Securities are wholly expended in and for the
benefit of this State, and are used for Railway Construction,
for purchase of Estates for Closer Settlement, for Loans to
Settlers by the Agricultural Bank, and to aid in the Erection of
Homes under the Workers’ Dwellings Act.
THIS BANK HAS NO AGENCIES AT POST OFFICES.
EDWARD G. THEODORE, Treasurer.
The Treasury, Brisbane.


Queensland
Agricultural College
The agriculture Diploma Course.
1. The Agricultural Diploma Course of three
years is a carefully adjusted combination of
theoretical training and field practice, and includes —
General Agriculture, Breeding, Rearing, Feeding,
and Management of all classes of Live
Stock; Management of Sheep and Woolclassing;
Veterinary Science and Practice; Dairying and
Farm Engineering. Students also obtain practical
instruction in Saddlery, Blacksmithing, and
Carpentering.
The Dairy Diploma Course.
2. The Dairy Diploma Course, of two years, is
specially designed to enable students to qualify
for Dairy Factory Management. Students can
gain Milk and Cream Testing Certificate and
Engine Driver’s Certificate.
Short Courses.
3. There are Short Courses for those who do
not intend to take the Diploma Course, of from
six to twelve months, in the Dairy, Piggery, and
Poultry Sections.
Fees.
Twenty-seven pounds per annum, paid half-
yearly in advance, and one pound per annum each
for medical attendance, the sports fund, and for
guarantee, etc.
The age for admission is sixteen years or over.
The next year starts on 10th January, 1917.
Full particulars and conditions on application to
the Principal of the College and the Under
Secretary for Agriculture and Stock, Brisbane.
CUTHBERT POTTS, 8.A.,
Principal.


QUEENSLAND
. RAILWAYS .
□ □
QUEENSLAND.
The “Queen” State of the Commonwealth.
The Ideal Spot for Tourists and Settlers.
Delightful Climate. Invigorating Atmosphere.
—— ___________ (V 0 ...... i -
KT 0 State in the Commonwealth possesses the same
1 variety and resources, either for the Tourist
X or Agriculturist. The Farming and Grazing
Lands of the Darling Downs in the South west,
the Picturesque Scrub Country of the North Coast, and
Magnificent Scenery of the Cairns Districts, are among
its Many attractions.
SPLENDID RAILWAY FACILITIES.
Tourists’ Tickets—
Tourists' Tickets (first class), available for one calendar
month, will be Issued on application at the Railway Book-
ing Office. Queen Street, Brisbane ; Station-master’s
Office, Wallan-garra (for Southern and Central Divisions);
General Traffic Manager’s Office, Rockhampton (for
Central Division only); and General Traffic Manager’s
Office, Townsville (for Northern Division only), available
as under, viz. :
Between all stations In the Southern Division, f
which includes all railways as far North s-
as Gladstone 9 0 0
Between all stations In the Southern and Central
Divisions, which Includes all railways In
the Southern Division, and as far as
Longreach and branches .. .. 12 0 0
Between all stations In the Central Division,
which Includes ail railways West and
South of Rockhampton as far as Gladstone 7 0 0
Between all stations In the Northern Division,
which Includes all railways North of
Rockhampton 7 0 0
Illustrated Descriptive Booklets will be forwarded to
any address on application to Railway Inquiry Office,
Queen Street, Brisbane.
By Order of the Commissioner for Railways.
(Signed) ARTHUR J. CROWTHER,
Secretary.










