

i
--
THE LATE
fillimu Ijrfro
«>
NOTICES OF THE PRESS.
R. KYFPIN THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET.
1878.


JBI3E®.
THOMAS.—On the 4th July, 1878, at his
residence, Glenelg, William Kyffin Thomas,
aged 56 years.


THE LATE WILLIAM KYFEIN THOMAS.
[From the Sovth Australian Register.']
Less than eighteen months ago it was
our painful duty to record the death of
Mr. E. W. Andrews; only a few
weeks have passed since Mr. John
Howard Clark passed ever to the great
majority ; and now we announce, with
the deepest regret, the decease of Mr.
William Kyffin Thomas, who with them
carried on business for years under the
name of Andrews, Thomas, and
Clark. Mr. Thomas was the second
son of the late Mr. Robert Thomas,
one of the original proprietors of
the Register. He was born at Fleet-
street, in London, on November 4, 1821,
and was at the time of his death
consequently in his fifty - seventh
year. The family were of Welsh
extraction, having come from the
neighbourhood of Llanymynach in Mont-
gomeryshire, in North Wales. Mr.
Thomas was educated at a grammar
school in Rickmansworth, a small town
in Hertfordshire, one of the prettiest and
most thoroughly English of the various
counties of England, and the scenery of
which has been rendered classic ground by
the quaint and beautiful descriptions given
in the “ Essays of Elia.” The story of Mr.
Thomas’s life is so closely interwoven
with the history of the Register that it is
impossible to narrate the one without
speaking of the other, and the few parti-
culars of the career of this journal which
we shall give will not be out of place in
connection with the sad event which we
have now to record. The first number of
the Register, or, as it was then called, The
South Australian Gazette and Colonial
Register, was published in London on
June 18, 1836, prior to the departure of
the first Governor and the first batch of
emigrants for the new settlement
of South Australia. The proprietors
were then Mr. George Stevenson, who
was at that time Private Secretary to
Governor Hindmarsh, and Mr. Robert
Thomas. The latter gentleman sailed
from England in the Africaine with his
wife and four other members of his family,
of whom the late Mr. W. K. Thomas was
one, and bringing with him also the types,
presses, and materials for continuing the
publication of the infant paper in the
colony. The Africaine arrived in Novem-
ber, 1836, and the deceased gentleman
first set foot on Australian territory
at Kangaroo Island on the 4th of
that month—his fifteenth birthday. Four
days afterwards the Africaine anchored in
Holdfast Bay. It will be remembered
that Governor Hindmarsh arrived in
South Australia in the following month by
H. M. S. Buffalo, and Mr. W. K. Thomas
was one of the now fast decreasing band
of old colonists who were present at the
proclamation of the colony on December
28, 1836,
In order to qualify himself for takingpart
in newspaper work the late Mr. Thomas,
then between fourteen and fifteen years of
age, spent a short time in the printing
office of Leighton & Murphy, John-
son’s Court, Fleet-street, London, one
of the partners of which firm has
since been in the employ of the Register
proprietors. The second number of
the paper, and the first published
in the colony, wus issued on June 3,
1837, the official announcements of the
Government being given under the head
of “ The South Australian Gazette,” the
leading articles and news being published
in “The Colonial Register” portion of
the journal. As may be supposed, this
number was brought out under many
difficulties, and owing to the impossibility
of procuring hands the first few issues
were printed at irregular intervals.
These difficulties culminated in the follow-
ing November, when the only remaining
compositor left, leaving the management
of the mechanical department entirely in
the hands of Mr. Thomas, then a youth
of sixteen, who had assisted in setting up
the first number printed in the colony,
and upon whom a larger share of respon-
sibility now devolved. It is not necessary
to detail all the varying fortunes of the
Register up to the present time. It will
be sufficient to say that Mr. Thomas was
identified with it from its commencement
to the day of his death with the exception


of several months when he was away management. His name is well known in
at the Victorian diggings in 1852,
and of a longer interval about
ten years before that date, when he for a
time engaged in agricultural pursuits.
The Register first came out as a
daily paper in January, 1850, and
on May 24, 1853, the whole property,
including of course the Observer, was
purchased by seven gentlemen, of whom
the late Mr. Thomas was one. Since
then he has never ceased to hold
a proprietary interest in the papers.
From the very early days of the enter-
prise, with the brief exceptions already
mentioned, the printing departments have
been under Mr. Thomas’s control. Every
piece of machinery in the office, from the
primitive Stanhope press brought out
from England and conveyed with much
toil over the sandhills skirting Holdfast
Bay, to the Hoe machine now in use, was
put up under his direct and active super-
intendence. The Stanhope press is still
in this office and is capable of doing good
work, though for newspaper purposes it
has of course long been superseded by
improved machinery.
It has seldom fallen to the lot of any
one to be identified for so long a period
with a particular journalistic undertaking,
and to watch its growth from small begin-
nings until it has attained a position such
as the Register may now be fairly said to
occupy. In everything connected with
the working of the paper Mr. Thomas
naturally took a deep and untiring
concern, and until the last two or
three years, when failing health compelled
him to relax many of his former active
efforts, his attention to the details of his
department was unremitting. In public
politics Mr. Thomas never took a very
prominent part, though he was a keen
observer of passing events, and felt a deep
interest in the growth and development of
his adopted country. He was a Justice
of the Peace, was elected Coun-
cillor for Grey Ward in 1863, and in
the following year unsuccessfully con-
tested the Mayoralty of Adelaide with
Mr. Townsend, who gained the election
by 101 votes. Like many other patriotic
citizens, Mr. Thomas joined in the Volun-
teer movement about nineteen years
ago, and was a Lieutenant in the Ist
Adelaide Rifles. Of various religious and
philanthropic movements he was a
generous supporter, and so far as his
time allowed he took a direct part in their
connection with the Aborigines Mission,
the Bushmen’s Club, Union College, and
a number of other organizations of a
similar character. He was one of the
founders and one of the first members of
the Flinders-street Baptist Church, and
for many years filled the office of Secre-
tary to the Church with a courtesy and
diligence which won for him the
esteem of his fellow-members. About
three years ago, when the state
ot his health first began to be pre-
carious, he took up his residence at
Glenelg in the hope of deriving benefit
from the change, and there he has con-
tinued to reside ever since. During the
winters of 1877 and of the present year he
has been subject to attacks of bron-
chitis, and of late it had become
apparent that the action of the heart was
seriously enfeebled. Two or three weeks
ago the symptoms became more alarming,
and it was evident that his days were
numbered. He gradually grew weaker,
and on the afternoon of July 4 he peace-
fully passed away —so peacefully indeed
that those who were watching by him were
unable to fix the exact moment of his
death.
Mr. Thomas was a man of strong
religious convictions and was a conscien-
tious supporter of the denomination to
which he belonged ; out while thus firm in
his beliefs there was not the smallest
vestige of bigotry or sectarianism in
his nature. Though he never courted
publicity he was probably better known
to a jarge circle than many whose names
are more constantly before the public.
The announcement of his death will
awaken a feeling of sadness and
regret on the part of numbers
who have been privileged to share
his friendship and to participate in
the free and unrestrained intercourse
which in his own home he was
ever ready to hold with congenial
minds. Those who were not thus
brought into the inner circle of his
acquaintances could not be expected to
do justice to his ability and sterling
qualities. Though he left England in
early life ; though in the infancy of the
colony the opportunities for self-improve-
ment were few ; though his career has been
a busy one, the cares of a large business
and a large family engrossing his atten-
tion ; yet he was a diligent reader and an
intelligent student, especially of the more


abstruse phases of religious thought. It service was conducted by the Eev. S. Mead,
was in the home circle that he was the pastor of the Flinders-street
seen to the best advantage, and there
his geniality, his kindness of heart, his
unaffected simplicity, and the genuine-
ness and attractiveness of his character
came into full play. A man of blameless
life, a firm and loyal friend, a ready
helper of misfortune and distress, diligent
and conscientious in the various duties of
life, a faithful husband, an affectionate
father, and the idol of his household, the
memory of Mr. Thomas will long be
cherished. His brother, Mr. It. G.
Thomas, and two sisters survive, and are
in the colony, and he leaves besides a
widow and nine children—three sons and
six daughters—and twenty grandchildren.
His eldest daughter died rather more
than three months ago, and two other
children died in infancy. His eldest son
has been for some time a member of the
Register proprietary. Of the 546 persons
who represented the total population
when Governor Hindmarsh’s proclama-
tion gave a distinct national life to South
Australia only a few remain. Among
those who have shared the fortunes
of the colony from the first, who
have borne the burden and heat
of the day, who have striven manfully and
diligently for the good of their adopted
country, and who since first landing have
spent their days within its borders, the
name of William Kyffin Thomas de-
servedly occupies a foremost place. It is
to such as he that we are largely indebted
not only for the material prosperity we
now enjoy, but also for the healthy tone
which pervades our social and political
life.
The Funbkal.
The remains of the late Mr. William Kyffin
Thomas were interred in the West-terrace
Cemetery on the afternoon of Saturday, July 6,
in the presence of a large number of persons
who had known and esteemed the deceased
during his lifetime. During the day the flags
at Clenelg and at a large number of places of
business in the city were flying half-mast high,
and other tokens of respect to the memory of
the deceased were shown at the time of the
burial. The carriages following the hearse were
met on the Bay-road by about thirty other
vehicles containing the employes in the various
departments of the Register, Observer, and
Journal, and most of the gentlemen whose names
are given below. Among the carriages which we
noticed were those of His Excellency the Acting-
Governor, Chief Justice Way, Mrs. B. W.
Andrews, and Dr. Campbell. On arrival at the
Cemetery gates a large number of persons on
foot joined the procession. At the grave the
Baptist Church, of which Mr. Thomas was one
of the promoters, and the Eev. C. Manthorpe,
the Congregational minister at Glenelg. Mr.
Manthorpe read the usual form of burial service,
and then
The Eev. S. Mead delivered a brief address.
He said—“ The graveside is no place for the
eulogy of the dead. They need no commenda-
tion, no eulogiums from us. Those who, justified
by the faith that lays hold of Jesus Christ, pass
up at once into the presence of the Eternal
Father, hear from His lips the ‘ Well done,
good and faithful servant,’ and are satisfied
with the Divine commendation. That expres-
sion of worth more than ten thousand
plaudits from mortal and sinful men. I have
not a moment’s doubt but that the honour of
hearing God’s approving ‘Well done, good and
faithful servant,’ has been already in heaven
bestowed on our friend—and to many of us our
dear friend—William Kjffin Thomas. It is
nevertheless befitting, I think, that on this
occasion some words should be spoken in re-
ference to the life and death of him who, as
one of our earliest colonists, has filled no mean
place in the history of this South Australian
community. He was not indeed a fluent
speaker ; nor was he, I believe, much given to
the writing of original matter for the Press.
There can be no doubt, however, that his good
judgment and high moral convictions have
done much towards developing and fostering a
healthy national life in this province. It is to
such men as William Kyffin Thomas that, under
God, the later generation of colonists are indebted
for much of that sound integrity in business life
existing among us, and which we hope may
continue to characterize our commercial life
still more and more. We mourn to-day the loss
of one who for himself held firmly to the
principle of highest probity and did his best to
encourage it in others. We want such men
multiplied among us who will scorn every form
and phase of meanness. We want this, not
simplyamidall those daily movementsandopera-
tions which are covered by the terms labour
and business, but it is of the highest con-
sequence that throughout the whole range
of our social life a strong and victorious
regard to all that is true and pure and righteous
and Jgood should animate every one of us as it
did our departed friend. Whilst the life of
Mr. W. K. Thomas has been marked by diligent
labour, perseverance, enterprise, high purpose,
probity, and moral integrity, this was not the
whole. He was not ashamed either to serve or
confess his allegiance to God in Christ. He
made no secret of his faith in the personal
Eedeemer. Nor was he at all reluctant to avow
that through the divine mercy he owed the com-
mencement of his life of faith in the Son of
God to the ministrations of the late Eev.
Thomas Binney on the occasion of his visit to
this colony some twenty years ago. It was
then that he became a Christian, became a new
man in Christ Jesus. Since then he has striven
to live out a Christian life. How far he did so
those about him in business and those who
saw him in private life can best judge. He


himself was far from imagining that his I various departments of the above-mentioned
Christian life at all came near to his own idea 1 journals present, including Messrs. P.
of what that life might be. Yet his daily and
unwavering faith in Christ was a perpetual joy to
him. He did rejoice in God his Saviour, and that
daily for these eighteen years past. Nor did he
begrudge service in the cause of his Saviour.
As illustrations of this, I may say that, except
when disease necessitated, he was never absent
from the house of God at the appointed hours
of worship. For the sixteen years that I have
been associated with him in Church fellow-
ship I do not remember a single instance
in which he allowed the claims of business to
prevent his attendance at the weekly prayer
meeting. He had also generous conceptions of
what he owed to God in regard to his steward-
ship of money. It was a pleasure to him to
give, and he gave freely. We have said he is
dead. Rather he is living in the fulness of the
powers of his life.
“ Let us believe it is not death to die,
To leave this weary road,
And ’midst the brotherhood on high
To be at home with God.
“ It is not death to liing
Aside this sinful dust,
And rise on strong exulting wing
To live among the just.”
For some time past our brother has been encom-
passed with physical disabilities. These have
now ceased, and he has passed up into that
world where to live is living bliss. Death with
him has been swallowed up in victory. It is
but a short number of months ago since three
prominent men of business and of social position
who were at the head of a large business esta-
blishment were wont to meet daily in their
offices in Grenfell-street to deliberate about the
affairs of our colonial life. Only one of these
three had exceeded the age of 60, and one had
not reached 50. The age of the third you may
read on this coffin. When we have lowered this
coffin to its resting-place the mortal remains of
these three men will be lying in this cemetery.
This fact should speak its significant lesson to
every living man here. The interpretation of
the Divine voice which thus speaks to usat this
grave is clearly this—Be thou also ready.”
After the address an appropriate prayer was
offered by the Rev. 0. Manthorpe, and the body
was lowered into the grave. The coffin bore the
incription—“ William Kyffin Thomas, died 4th
July, 1878, aged 56 years,” and over it was the
brief text, “ God is love.”
In the mourning carriages were the following
relatives and immediate friends of the deceased
gentleman:—Messrs. R. K. Thomas, A. K.
Thomas, and E. K. Thomas (sons), Mrs. G. N.
Birks, Miss Thomas, Miss F. B. Thomas, Miss
A. I. Thomas (daughters), Mr. R. G. Thomas
(brother), Messrs. G. N. Birks, 0. Birks, W.
Neill (sons-in-law), C. Day, J, H. Finlayson
(partners of the deceased), J. M. Day, G. Wilson,
E. Good, W. H. Hillier, G. F. Birks, R. G. S.
Thomas, S. J. Skipper, 0. Skipper, R. P.
Robinson, Y. Mantegani, and the Hon, J. Fisher,
M.L.C.
There were about 80 members of the
Saunders, W. Holden, T. W. Harris, W.
T. Bednall, D. M. Magill, C. Proud, J.
0. F. Johnson, P. Benjamin, H. Oonigrave, J.
H. Crawford, A. H. Davis. 0. J. Stevens, R. W.
S ; evens, and F. Bathurst, members of the
literary staff; Messrs. H. Hele, J. F. Hillier, J.
W. Reed, L. A. Bristow, Oliphant, Brailey, H.
Oharlick, A. H. Scarfe, R. J. Rigaud.and W. O.
Whitridge, commercial department; Messrs. G.
Wilson, G. L. Cooper, J. Ferguson, S. Whit-
more, Thos. Murphy, T. B. Murphy, W. C.
Calder, J. Nancarrow, and C. H. Franklin,
and many others of the printing depart-
ments ; Mr. T. King, M.P., proprietor
of the Advertiser, and the following gen-
tlemen connected with that journal;— Messrs.
F. Burden, J. P. Stow, J.P.,T. G. Ponton, F.Z.S.,
J. L. Bony thou, J. Opey, J. F. Roberts, T. Wright,
A. B. Oockburn, W. H. Jeffery, and P. Sansom.
Amongst those present at the grave were the
Hon. Sir Henry Ayers, M.L.0., Sir John
Morphett, Messrs. R. C. Andrews, J. B. Austin,
0. I). Aston, J. Allen, Dr. Bailey, Messrs!
J. C. Bray, M.P., W. O. Buik, J.P., A.
Bounin, W. R. Birks, O. J. Barry, F.
W. Bullock, T. H. Bowen, H. Bowen, W. H.
Burrell, J. Boundy, John Brown, A. G. Burt,
Rev. F. W. Cox, Rev. L. G. Carter, Messrs.
Sidney Clark, M. S. Clark, Frank Clark, F. I.
Caterer, W. 0. Cox, J.P., W. T. Cooper’, 0. N.
Gollison, A. O. Chambers, G. H. Oaraeeg, Jas.
Gumming, J. F. Oonigrave, T. S. Carey (Methodist
Journal), G. W. Cotton, A. Dowie, J. M. Dowie,
M. C. Davies, T. Duffield, W. Bggers, G. Aimer,o.
Everett, Rev. W. R, Fletcher, Messrs. G. S. Fowler,
M. W. Finlayson, R. K. Finlayson, Eb.
Finlayson, L. L. Furner, M.P., W. W. Forwood,
J. Fitzpatrick, H. Giles, R. George, A. Gore, E. B.
W. Glandfield, Joshua Gurr, Rev. J. Henderson,
Messrs. S. Higgs, J.P., W. Hitchcox, G. F.
Hussey, H. Hussey, R. Hay, Councillor Hagedorn,
N. Hailes, W. A. Hughes, J. H. Horweod. J.
Kelly, J. Kirkpatrick, Rev. J. Lyall, Rev. H. J.
Lambert, Rev. M. Lloyd, Rev. T. S. Lloyd,
Messrs. W. M. Letchford, J.P., E. 0. Longson,
Rev. FI. Morgan, Messrs. D. W. Melvin,
D. Melville, Hiram Mildred, J.P., Alex.
Murray, A. Molineux, B. Mellor, T. Magarey,
J.P., R. O. Mitton, D. Miller, Martin,
D. C. F. Moodie {Portonian), J. Neill, J. L
Parsons, M.P., Rev. G. Prince, Messrs. C. Potter
J. Kemp Penney,Rev. Richardson Reid, Mr. T.
Rhodes, Hon. W. Sandover, M.L.0., Dr. Sea-
brook, Messrs. E. T, Smith, M.P., C. Smedley,
J.P., Jas. Scott, J.P., J. S. Scott, W. Sanders,
G. Sauerbier, A. E. Sawtell, G. Shaw, J. Stacy,
G. W. Smith, Capt. Underwood, Rev. J. 0.
Woods, 8.A., Messrs. C. A. Wilson, J.P., 0.
Wylde, R. H. Wigg, A. Warner, G. Watson,
and J. L. Young. We also noticed present the
whole of the gentlemen who had been associated
with Mr Thomas in the diaconate of the
Flinders-street Baptist Church—namely, Messrs.
J. Smith, J. Darling, M.P., J. Ferguson, S.
Summers, T. Good, J. Whiting, J. Ellis, P.
Atkin, and 0. Rogers. The Yery Rev. Dean
Russell, Dr. Campbell, Dr. Ferguson, Mr. E. W.
Hitchin (Auditor-General), Mr. D. W. Duffield,


Mr. N.J. Hone, Mr. R. Jagoe, Mr. F. B. Andrews, for betting—and gambling of all sorts
Mr. L. E. Harcus, Mr. B. Davies, Mr. J. was always and everywhere demora-
Elliott, and Mr. J. D. Stone sent apologies
for their unavoidable absence.
The Funeral Sermon.
A sermon having special reference to the life
and death of the late Mr. Wm, Kyffin Thomas
was on Sunday morning, July 14, preached by
the Rev. S. Mead, M.A., LL.B , at the Flinders-
street Baptist Church, of which the deceased
gentleman was one of tne founders and most
active members. There was a very large con-
gregation. The hymns sung and the selections
from the Scriptures read were appropriate to
the occasion. Mr. Mead founded his discourse
on the last clause of the 18th verse of the 26th
chapter of Acts—“ And inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in me.”
He said that by reason of the special services
performed by the late Mr. Thomas he felt it
right to devote that morning’s discourse
entirely to the setting forth of the truth
illustrated by his life— that a living
faith in Christ sanctified and made
holy. He did not like to speak of
their departed friend as “ the late Mr.
Thomas,” because he had not ceased to be—he
had passed into another part of his Heavenly
Father’s great empire, and had began to under-
stand more fully what a rich and wonderful
thing life was. It was a blessed fact that that
faith never deserted him for a moment, and
that when dying he acted and spoke as one who
was but going on a long journey, and had
entered into a contract which he knew would
never be broken. The varied services he rendered
were the outcome and fruitage of his faith.
Christian service was to him not something
extra and abnormal. It came within the scope
and was embraced in the law of his faith. He
rendered that service first in the home, which
was to him the most sacred place on earth. He
was ever anxious for and earnest in seeking to
promote the spiritual as well as material welfare
and happiness of his children—the former in its
true place as of paramount importance. His
life as a business man demonstrated the com-
patibility of a deep religious life with good
business habits. His faith in Christ was not
a thing for Sundays only. Though all his
decisions were perhaps not free from error he
ever strove to do the right in the many and
complicated questions which came up before
him as one of the men charged with
the responsibility of the conduct of a
leading newspaper. The Press exerted a
powerful influence for good or ill in this
colony, as indeed in all English-speaking
communities. Secular newspapers, perhaps un-
avoidably, were the purveyors of ill as well as
good. It were easy, for example, to so report
the proceedings of our Police Courts that lovers
of sensuality would gloat over the records as the
vulture gloated over the carrion. It were easy
so to report the plays acted on the stage that
the newspaper should become the most powerful
abettor of the theatre. In England there were
papers devoted to horseracing. His (the
preacher’s) judgment was that horseracing as
now carried on was but another name
lizing. Newspapers which pandered to these
tastes incurred grave obligations. So as to
scandal. It would not be difficult to make a
newspaper |the medium for diffusing abroad
coarse and ruinous scandals. Again, as the
newspaper took up a position neutral towards
Christ’s Gospel and His Church, or antagonistic
or approbative, it greatly retarded or helped
forward the cause of truth. Of all the men
occupying important public positions he knew
of none who so deeply needed to be swayed by
the divine and solid principles of a living and
strong faith in the Son of God as those who
wrote for and those who governed our news-
paper Press. No sensible man could legitimately
question but that it was a positive public
advantage that Mr. Thomas in his influence on
the newspaper with which he was identified
was so earnest and so real a Christian.
A remarkable attestation of this was the fact
that all our newspapers had so favourably
spoken of the departed one, and that even the
comic journals, which dealt mainly with the
faults of men, had in this instance written
with evidently sincere respect and appreciation
of him. It often happened that intimate con-
nection with the secular Press caused the
Christian sympathies of men and their faith
in God to suffer thereby. But it was
not so with Mr. Thomas. Those who knew
him best knew not only that he had been
an influence for good in the Press, but also that
he had not in any way been spiritually injured
by his association with it. This should be an
incentive to men to seek to influence the
newspaper Press for good—to gain the Press
for God, for Christ, for truth, for righteous-
ness, purity, and whatsoever was of good
report and not to allow it to be
mainly devoted to the interests of mammon.
Referring to the connection of Mr. Thomas with
Church matters, the preacher mentioned that
Mr. Thomas originally joined the Congregational
Church in Freeman-street, with which he was
in fellowship for two or three years. On August
5, 1861, the Flinders-street Baptist Church was
formed ot 26 members, Mr. Thomas being one
who took a very active part in its establishment
and in all its future work and in the welcome
then given to himself as its first pastor. Of
those 26 original members only seven now
remained, Mr. Thomas was chosen one of the
first four Deacons, and also Secretary, and he
held these offices to his death, though during
the last year the duties of the latter position
were performed by another. From July, 1865, he
was Superintendent of the Sunday-schoel for eight
years, having previously been a teacher therein.
Though a firm and conscientious Baptist, he was
a Christian first, and he fraternized according
to his opportunity with all true-hearted fol-
lowers of the Siviour, having been on the
Committees of various philanthropic and
religious societies—discharging useful duties
and never regarding office as a sinecure or
seeking to carry out his own views against the
wishes of the majority. The 17 years’ friend-
ship between himself and Mr. Thomas had been
deep and true-hearted. Perhaps but for his


generous and enthusiastic sympathy his (Mr, In December, 1863, he was elected City
Mead’s) connection with that Church would Councillor for Grey Ward, and having
have terminated ten or a dozen years ago. j• + i t n ArriAr „4.; n °
Though Mr. Thomas was no lomrer here, he was ? ervea in that capacity in the Corporation
Though Mr. Thomas was no longer here, he was
still among loved ones—no less than about
sixty former members of that Church whose
names he had enrolled on its books having gone
to the brighter home before him.
[From the South Australian Advertiser. ]
It is with sincere regret that we record
the death of Mr. William Kyffin Thomas,
senior proprietor of the Register. The
deceased gentleman -was one of our earliest
colonists, and a pioneer of journalism in
this colony. With a view to engaging in
newspaper work in the settlement of
South Australia, then about to be formed,
Mr. Thomas, at that time a boy, spent
six months in a printing-office in the old
country. His father, Mr. Robert Thomas,
well remembered by old colonists, was
connected with the Register from its
establishment in 1836 in London,
till some years afterwards he discon-
tinued his interest in it in this colony.
In November, 1836, the subject of this
notice, with his father and family,
arrived in Holdfast Bay by the Africaine,
a vessel which brought a number of the
early settlers, including the commander,
Captain Duff, the late Dr. Everard, Mr.
John Brown, and others. Mr. Thomas
was present at the proclamation of the
colony by Captain Hindmarsh, under the
oldgumtree, at the Bay, and has never
been away from Australia since then,
his travels not having extended beyond the
neighbouring colonies. He assisted with
his own hands to get up in July, 1837, the
first copy of the Register published in the
province, and has ever since maintained
his connection with that newspaper, except
for an interval of some months in 1852, when
he was at the Victorian diggings. From
an early period in the history of the
Register until the time of his death the
printing department was under his control,
and every piece of machinery has been put
up under his superintendence. In 1853 he
became one of the proprietors—seven in
number—who bought the Register and
Observer from the executors of the late
Mr. John Stephens, for some years the
fearless and able editor of those journals.
Of those seven proprietors some died and
others sold their interest, till Mr. Thomas
was the last, and now the property is in
entirely different hands. Mr. Thomas was
not a very active public man, his business
engagements absorbing most of his time.
for twelve months, he became a candidate
for the Mayoralty, but was defeated by
Mr. William Townsend by a majority of
101 votes. For many years he was on the
Commission of the Peace. The career of
the deceased colonist has been an honour-
able and deservedly successful one, and
he had secured the esteem not merely of a
numerous circle of friends, but of his
fellow-citizens generally, who knew him
as a man of sterling integrity and kindly
disposition and manner.
[From the Adelaide Correspondent of the
Melbourne Argusi]
The shadow of death has been resting
on the Register newspaper establishment
during the past 18 months. Within that
period the three members of the old firm
of Andrews, Thomas, & Clark have
passed away into the silent land of the
dead. Mr. Andrews died in March, 1877 ;
Mr. Clark died in May, 1878; and now
Mr. William Kyffin Thomas has died.
His death took place yesterday, after a
short illness, from disease of the heart,
followed by dropsy. With the demise of
Mr. Thomas the past and the present in
the history of newspapers in the colony
have been snapped asunder. He arrived
here in the year 1836, then a lad of 15,
and he assisted in setting up the type for
the first newspaper ever published in
South Australia, his father being one of
the proprietoi’s of that paper. From that
time to the moment of his decease—
with a trifling interval—he has been asso-
ciated with the Pi’ess of the Province, the
only journals with which he has been iden-
tified being the daily Register, the weekly
Observer, and the Evening Journal. His
special forte was mechanics, and the
superior way in which the mechanical
departments of the three papers just
referred to is managed is mainly due to
his skill and knowledge. He was a good
citizen, but he was not ambitious to lead
a public life. He was a Justice of the
Peace, and in 1863 he was elected a
member of the City Council. In 1864 he
allowed himself to be nominated for the
Mayoralty. Mr. Wm. Townsend, the
present Chairman of Committees in the
House of Assembly, opposed him, and the
contest was one of the keenest ever known
in Adelaide. The latter was, however, suc-
cessful, securing the coveted position by


100 votes. From that time to the day of was anticipated. The end came therefore
his death Mr. Thomas studiously avoided
seeking any public positions. He was for
years a deacon of the Baptist Church
under the pastoral care of the Rev. S.
Mead, M.A., and was connected with
many of the philanthropic institutions of
the city, such as Union College, the Bush-
men’s Club, and the Aborigines’ Friends’
Association. He was widely respected
for his upright Christian character and
his kindly benevolent disposition. About
a year ago he began the erection of a
handsome residence at Glenelg, his notion
being to have in the later and more
leisurely days of his life a house large
enough, as he had a heart warm enough,
to entertain not merely relatives, but his
still more extensive circle of friends.
He was very hospitable, and had
he lived it was his intention to have had a
sort of open house every Saturday. This
pleasant fancy, however, he has been
unable to carry out. He has been barely
two months in possesion of his new home,
and during the whole of that time he has
been an invalid. With his death the old
firm that for so many years held possession
of the leading newspapers of the colony
has become extinct, the extraordinary
feature about it being the quickness with
which that extinction has come about.
Mr. Thomas was not an old man, being
only 56, and he was well enough to attend
Mr. Clark’s funeral six weeks ago. He
has left an affectionate widow and a large
and united family of sons and daughters,
who, though well provided for, feel their
bereavement most keenly.
[From the Methodist Journal .]
Eighteen months ago the Register pro-
prietary lost one of its senior members, in
the decease of Mr. E. W. Andrews; it is but
a few weeks since a second, Mr. John
Howard Clark, was removed ; and on
Thursday, July 4, the last surviving
member of the old firm, Mr. Wil-
liam Kyffin Thomas, passed from earth
away. So singular, so serious, and so
complete a change as this implies, in a great
establishment having an almost national
character, may well excite surprise
and sympathy in all directions. A grave
and great responsibility is thus thrown
upon younger men to fill worthily the
places of these departed veterans. Mr.
Thomas had been in failing health for
some months ; but it was not until a few
days before his death that a fatal issue
with something of sudddenness ; yet was
the “ house in order,” and peacefully as a
child the sufferer “fell on sleep.” Mr.
Thomas was one of our oldest colonists,
and had gone through a varied and trying
experience during the development of the
early fortunes of South Australia. He was
associated with the Register Office from
his youth up ; and in that position, as
well as in domestic and social life, die set
an example of persevering industry, in-
tegrity, liberality, faithfulness, and affec-
tion, which won for him the enviable
fame he so long and deservedly enjoyed.
More than this, the deceased gentleman
was “a good soldier of Jesus Christ,” and
“ witnessed a good confession” before the
world. He openly avowed[his service of
the Master, without parading his religion,
and he ever exceeded and adorned his
profession of it by his practice. To his
influence, always on the side of morality,
is largely due the healthy tone of our lead-
ing newspaper ; and similarly he contri-
buted in no small measure to the esta-
blishmennt of the generally respectable
character of the community at large, which
is one of the distinguishing and gratifying
features of South Australian society. We
can indeed ill spare such a man from
amongst us ; and the world is the poorer
since he died. To the bereaved family,
from amongst whom his genial presence
will most of all be missed, we offer our
most sincere condolence, and in so doing
feel assured we are joined by our readers
in all parts of the colony. At the funeral,
on Saturday, the Rev. C. Manthorpe con-
ducted the service with tender impres-
siveness ; the Rev. S. Mead read an
appropriately eulogistic sketch of the life
and character of the deceased ; and crowdt
of sorrowing friends regretfully cast a lass
look into the grave of one who had
established his claim to universal esteem.
[By R. T, in the Methodist Journal .]
Among the hundreds who in the raw
atmosphere of last Saturday week crowded
round the grave of the late Mr. W. K.
Thomas were to be found representatives
of every class of our community. There
was something fitting that one who had
nobly borne so large a share of the pioneer
work of our country should virtually have
received so public a funeral, and whose
loss should have created such widespread
regret. If the reason why this is so be
sought, it certainly will not be found in


the fact that Mr. Thomas was a public man
in the ordinary acceptance of the term. On
the contrary, he seemed intuitively to
shrink from any public duty, but
just that amount which would qualify
him for the title of a “good citizen.”
And yet in the death of W. K. Thomas
South Australia has lost one of her
noblest sons. Per courtesy of the
Methodist Journal, the writer, as one
who has in no small measure been the
recipient of kindly words and healthy
stimulus from out of the fulness of the
great heart that has gone, would desire
very gratefully to record his tribute to the
worth of the late Mr. Thomas. Hot that
this is needed, for as Mr. Mead so well
put it in is address at the grave, “ the
Divine ‘ well done’ is worth more than
ten thousand plaudits from mortal and
sinful men.” Though this is true, a debt
of obligation which South Australia is
under to one who has so manfully and so
successfully endeavoured to maintain the
purity of the Press through all its in-
cipient stages right up to its present state
is one that cannot be too highly estimated.
This will be acknowledged freely, when it
is considered how important an engine,
either for good or evil, our daily Press
can prove itself. It is to be sincerely
hoped that the cause of morality and the
best interests of the people will not suffer
from the removal of one who faithfully
served his day and generation.
[From the Australian Star .]
Mr. Thomas was always amiable and
courteous, and a clever man of business.
Those who had the pleasure of his acquain-
tance spoke of him in affectionate terms ;
in fact, one could not help liking him.
[From the Portonian. ]
In the short space of eighteen months
three times has Death’s dark angel
swooped, and three times has he carried
off one of our esteemed old colonists and
public men, and three times have we had
reverently to doff our cap and bells in the
august presence of death. I allude to the
public bereavement in the loss of the three
late proprietors of the Register paper—
Messrs. Andrews, Clark, and Thomas.
They were, as aforesaid, the proprietors
of the Register paper, established by
the father of the last gentleman
who fell, and a paper deservedly
much valued for its public utility,
fairness, and general soundness of view.
Altogether the Elishas of the Register may
decidedly be proud of the departed
Elijahs ; for verily they were respectively
the idols of their family circles, the
honoured of society, and the highly
appreciated and the deeply lamented of
the public in general, to whose wants they
so long administered as tried, faithful, and
beloved servants. To turn the back upon
the mournful past and look upon the
active present—for such is life—
“ Let the dead past bury their dead;
Act, act in the living present!
Heart within and God o’erhead.”
In Memoeiam.
[From the Orabthorn Club Papers.]
The last now of the three familiar faces
Has faded from amongst us here for ever;
And younger men must fill the vacant places
Of those who’ve finished with life’s fitful
fever.
Ah ! little thought we such forebodings
scorning—
When first by death the triple bond was
broken;
How soon o’er the remaining two left mourning,
The sweet, sad, solemn Service would be
spoken.
The world rolls on, its speed knows no abating,
The mighty engine ceases not its throbbing ;
And busy life still finds its day’s work waiting,
Though Death its wisest and its best b«
robbing.
This stirring age gives mortals little leisure,
We scarce can snatch a moment brief for
sorrow ;
But memories dear we of our dead may treasure,
And from their lives some lesson strive to
borrow.
And surely his short life made up of action,
For us who mourn was full of good example,
A man the subject of no foe’s detraction.
Of all oar pioneers a worthy sample.
Oh! sturdy band of founders, yearly thinning,
Say who amongst you ’neath yon gumtree
standing,
That marked the infant colony’s beginning,
Dreamt days like these would follow on your
landing ?
Not he methinks as on the creek’s green
border,
From sun and rain by canvas tent protected,
He hastily arranged his types in order,
And roughly there his printing press erected.
And as his modest sheet he slowly printed,
O’er new soil thus the Press’s flag unfurling;
Naught surely to him of a future hinted,
With vast machines, and swift wheels wildly
whirling.


A grand and noble work that morn he started,
And watched its progress slow through all its
stages,
And with it linked the name of him departed,
Shall aye be handed down to future ages.
[From the Lantern.']
Gone are the trio—joining those, too soon,
Who with him shared the struggle of the past;
Their labours ended, he—in manhood’s noon
Of days—rests with them in the grave at last.
All praise be his that through a long career
No blemish stained his name; and it shall
live
While worth commands respect; while conscience
clear
An honoured ending to a life can give.
[By S. J. Skipper in the Observer
Miscellany.]
Another of our Pioneers
Who forced the forests back.
And planted by their enterprise
Fair cities in their track,
Whose hero hearts each peril met
That stood athwart the goal.
Has gone to add one other name
To that great muster-roll
Of men whose deeds have been to us
Examples fair and true,
Of what a manly mind may plan
And gallant spirit do.
’Tis thinning fast as years sweep on,
That small but mighty band
Of grey-haired hardy pioneers,
The Fathers of our Land.
Like Caesar’s Legions, where they trod
They won the virgin shore,
Though not the Eagle, but the Dove,
Those hardy heroes bore.
And he the loving father, friend,
Who helped their cause to serve
So nobly through so many years,
Has joined God’s great reserve.
His heart, the mainspring of a hand
That wrought at kindly deeds,
Was ever opened at the call
To help another’s needs.
No stately monument be his,
Cut by a mortal hand,
For living works behind he leaves
That must enduring stand.
No marble tombstone’s sculptured face
Need blazon forth his praise
Of kindly acts, unselfish thoughts ;
His friends a tablet raise.
Carved deeply in their saddened hearts
In lines Time cannot sear
Are records of his useful life,
His honoured, pure career.
Spencer J. Skipper.
Adelaide, July 6,1878,
[From the Adelaide Correspondent of the
Australasian Typographical Journal.]
An obituary notice in a late number of
your journal recorded the death of Mr.
J. H. Clark, and now it is my painful d aty
to announce the decease of Mr. W. K.
Thomas, As the latter gentleman occu-
pied the position of manager of the
Register, he was brought more into contact
with the employes than his copartners,
and the generous and gentlemanly manner
in which he treated those under him will
long be remembered by them- Mr.
Thomas came to South Australia in 1836
with his father, the late Mr. Robert
Thomas, who arrived with a plant for the
printing of the Register and two composi-
tors before the declaration of the colony
as a British dependency. In consequence
of one of the compositors having been lost
in the bush on Kangaroo Island imme-
diately on landing, and the other not
turning out so well as anticipated, the
brunt of the work fell on the deceased
gentleman —who was then only a lad of 15,
with a few months’ experience acquired in
a London office prior to embarkation—
and some of the earlier numbers of
the Register were almost entirely the work
of his own hands.
[From the Kapunda Herald.]
Mr. Thomas was a gentleman of themos
kindly and genial disposition, and though
he did not take the same prominent part
in public matters as his late partners in
the firm, he was always ready to assist in
every good movement, and was much
beloved by all who came into contact with
him, more especially by the employes in
the mechanical department of the office,
that branch having for many years been
under his direct personal supervision. He
was a thoroughly good man, one who in
his lifetime ranked high in the estimation
of those who knew him best, and whose
memory will be kindly cherished alike by
those who like himself were the earlier
settlers in the colony and those whose
arrival is of a more recent date.
[From the City Correspondent of the Kapunda
Herald.]
I have just returned from the funeral
of Mr, W. Kyffin Thomas, which was
very numerously attended, as befitted the
obsequies of one of our oldest colonists
and a man so generally respected as he
was. Amongst those present was one of his
fellow-passengers by the ship Africaine
in 1836, Mr. John Brown, some twelve
years Mr. Thomas’s senior, a slight and
feeble old gentleman ; also Mr. Nathaniel
Hailes, another very old colonist, Sir John
Morphett, and several hundreds of others.


SR 4-5S
Mr. Thomas was an amiable kind-hearted
man, esteemed by all who had the
pleasure of his acquaintance. He deserves
honour from all journalists, as he was one
of the oldest members of the Press in the
colony, and assisted in setting up the first
newspaper—the Register —printed in the
colony, in July, 1837. His connection
with the colonial Press was almost un-
interrupted for 41 years.
[From the Northern Argus.]
Death’s shafts fly quickly and often
strangely, making fell havoc at the times
in families and other relationships. The
senior proprietors of the Register have
one after another with startling rapidity
been cut down by the unseen messenger.
Mr. W. K. Thomas, one of the early
colonists, and who has been connected
with the Register from its commencement,
died at his residence on Thursday last.
Three of the proprietors have been thus
called away within eighteen months. Mr.
Thomas lived a consistent life, and was
not only esteemed by the Church with
which he was connected, but his Christian
worth was recognised wherever he was
known.
[From the Areas Express.]
The late Mr. W. K. Thomas was one of
the fast-decreasing band of early colonists
who witnessed the proclamation of the
colony on December 28, 1836. He was
then 15 years of age. His father had
come bringing the material for the con-
tinuation of the South Australian Gazette
and Rt gister, the first number of which
had already been issued in London. Mr.
W. K. Thomas’s connection with the
paper was uninterrupted to his death. He
never took an active part in public affairs,
save holding a seat in the Adelaide Muni-
cipality. He was one of the promoters of
the Flinders-street Baptist Church, and
was always a zealous and respected
member of that body, though no bigot.
[From the Jamesteivn Review.']
Most of our readers will know before
this reaches them that the above well-
known and widely respected gentleman
has gone to join the great majority. By
his loss another of the existing links
between the South Australia of to-day
and the struggling colony of 20 years ago
is broken. It will be well for those who
follow after if they in their day and gene-
ration do as much for the general good as
was unostentatiously accomplished by the
father of the South Australian Press.
[From the Southern Argus.]
To Mr. Thomas, in the exercise of his
untiring and skilful mechanical tact, we
believe the Register owes as much of its
prosperity as to those other members who
supplied the literary necessities. He was
a genius in mechanics ; as an employer, a
just man; as a friend, husband, and
father, devoted; as a Christian, warm
and consistent; as a man altogether, he
was exemplary; and we may search far and
wide before such another embodiment of
good qualities in the one being may be
found combined.
NATIONAL library of AUSTRALIA
