

The
Humour
Christ
232.9
MOR
D.N.M.




The Humour of Christ


TO MY MOTHER
On her 85th ‘Birthday
With sweet recollections of her
cheerfulness and hope


“ Be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world ”
D. N. MORI SON


CONTENTS
1. Foreword.
2. Definitions.
3. More Definitions.
4. Sarcasm.
5. Christ’s Addresses.
6. A Human Story.
7. The Halo Round the Penny.
8. The Half Shekel.
9. The Picture Gallery.
10. Addenda.


FOREWORD
The character and the personality of the
man Christ Jesus has been the theme of many
writers. One aspect of Christ’s personality
has too long been overlooked.
It is true that many men have drawn
attention to what was recognised as perhaps
an occasional flash of humour, but no adequate
treatment of this attribute so necessary to the
personality of an all-round man, a man’s man,
a man among men, appears to have been forth-
coming. The purpose of this pamphlet is to
encourage a deeper study of the sublime life
and character of Christ. Our knowledge of
Christ is derived from the Scripture record.
The Bible has been designated by Professor
R. G. Moulton as the worst printed book in
the world. The monotony of the setting of


the lines and type of the ordinary editions may
account for this. No book of poetry or
drama is so set up. Consequently, the book
may not be attractive to many, who thereby
do not become conversant with its treasures.
It is less than 200 years ago since Bishop
Lowth uncovered the principles of its unique
poetry, an elementary knowledge of which
opens up a source of intense pleasure to the
Bible student. Ruskin has drawn attention to
the lack of truth in many representations of
Scripture scenes and character by old-world
master painters. The pictorial presentation
of the features of Christ do not satisfy us;
some quality is missing. The world still
waits for a perfect and satisfying presentation
in art and literature of the personality of the
divine Son of Man.
D. N. MORISON.
Newcastle, N.S.W.
Australia.
November, 1931.


The Humour of Christ
DEFINITIONS OF HUMOUR
At the first blush it may appear almost
irreverent to think, let alone speak, of the
“humour of Christ,” but “second thoughts” an
old adage runs, “are best”; and certainly the
later thoughts are best, as they suggest to us
that Christ without a sense of humour would
not have been a perfect man, or that ideal man
we all more or less apprehend Him to be.
Before entering further upon the study of
this absorbing theme, it will be advisable to
follow the good old maxim of paying due
atttention to definitions. What is to be
understood by the word “humour”?
Webster defines humour as “that quality
of the imagination which gives to ideas an
incongruous or fantastic turn and tends to
excite laughter or mirth by ludicrous images
or representations.”


A study of the sayings of Jesus reveals
abundantly this quality of mind in our
Saviour.
We should not confound wit with humour
or think they are synonymous. Both wit and
humour imply a perception of the incon-
gruous, the absurd, the ridiculous; but there
are wide differences between the two.
You are apt to feel uncomfortable in the
company of a mere wit, fearing that at any
moment you may become the butt or target
of his keen and unkind witticism, but in the
company of a man of true and kindly humour
you feel happy and inspired.
The differences or distinctions observed
between wit and humour by eminent men of
letters would not be out of place here.
“Humour is consistent with pathos while' 7
“wit is not.”
“Men of humour are always, in some de-”
“gree, men of genius, wits are rarely so.”
—(Coleridge)
“Humour is wit and love.”
—(Thackeray)
In his work, “The Poets of America,” Mr.
Stedman writes: “The Command of humour”


“has distinguished men whose genius was
“both high and broad. If inessential to
“exalted poetical work, its absence is hurtful”
“to the critical or polemic essay.”
These quotations provoke the question,
“Was Christ a genius?” J. S. Mill in ‘ Three
Essays on Religion,” discusses the sayings and
the character of Christ in the following words:
“But who among His disciples, or among
“the proselytes was capable of inventing the
“sayings ascribed to Jesus, or of imagining”
“the life and character revealed in the Gos-”
“pels? Certainly not the fishermen of Galilee”
“. . . still less the early Christian writers . .
“But about the life and sayings of Jesus there”
“is a stamp of personal originality combined”
“with profundity of insight which . . . must”
“place the Prophet of Nazareth, even in the”
“estimation of those who have no belief in”
“His inspiration, in the very front rank of the”
“men of sublime genius of whom our species”
“can boast. When this pre-eminent genius”
“is combined with the qualities of probably”
“the greatest moral reformer and martyr to


“that mission who ever existed on earth,”
“religion cannot be said to have made a bad”
“choice in pitching upon this man as the ideal”
“representative and guide of humanity, nor,”
“even now, would it be easy, even for an”
“unbeliever, to find a better translation of the”
“rule of virtue from the abstract into the”
“concrete, than to endeavour so to live that”
“Christ would approve our life.”
A more recent writer, H. G. Wells, was
eulogised by “The American Magazine” for
the boldness of his conception in compiling a
history of the world, and of the still greater
achievement of carrying it through in the
short space of time that he took to complete
it.
As a tribute to his position in the field of
literature and history, Wells was asked by
the editor of that magazine to name the six
greatest figures in history. He selected:—
Christ, Buddha, Asoka, Aristotle, Roger
Bacon and Lincoln.
He was then asked—“ Which is the great-”
est of all? Which one in character and”


“influence has left the most permanent”
“impression on the world?”
His reply was: “You probably expect me”
“to answer Jesus of Nazareth.” There can”
“be no other answer. He is easily the domi-”
“nant figure in history. I am speaking of”
“Him as a man. We do not know as much”
“about Him as we would like to know. The”
“Gospels give us a picture of a very definite”
“personality, they carry a conviction of"
“reality. Historians must set forth evidence”
“without any theological bias whatever; they"
“cannot portray the progress of humanity”
“honestly without giving a foremost place to”
“a penniless teacher of Nazareth.”
“The old Roman historians ignored Jesus”
“entirely, ignored the growth and spread of”
“His teaching; regarding it as something”
“apart from life, something, as it were, that”
“happened on Sundays. More than 1900”
“years later a historian who does not even”
“call himself a Christian finds the picture”
“centering irresistibly around the life and”
“character of this simple, lovable man.”


"The place is his by virtue of the doctrine”
"he taught —the universal loving Fatherhood”
‘‘of God and the coming of the Kingdom of”
"Heaven. One of the most revolutionary”
"doctrines that has ever stirred and changed”
"human thought. The world began to be”
"different from the day it was preached.”
"The historian’s test is not —‘What did”
"He accumulate for Himself? What did He”
"build up to tumble down at His death?’ —but”
"this: Did He start men thinking along lines”
"with a vigor and vitality that persisted after”
"Him?”
We can gather, then, from the judgment of
essayists and critics like Coleridge and Stead-
man, that humour is a distinguishing charac-
teristic or a necssary accompaniment of
genius; also that in the estimation of students
of history and economists like H. G. Wells and
J. S. Mill, that Christ is to be selected first,
and placed "in the very front rank of the men


of sublime genius of whom our species can
boast.” Christ, then, would surely exhibit
this quality of humour so essential to his
character and teaching. We can theretore
logically expect to find ample evidence of uue
humour in the records of his life and work,
however clouded those records may be in the
mists of doubt, criticism, age, and imperfect
presentation.


II. MORE DEFINITIONS
Perhaps one of the finest definitions of
humour in the English language is that of
Carlyle:
“Humour is properly the exponent of low”
“things; that which first renders them”
“poetical to the mind. The essence of humour”
“is sensibility, warm, tender fellow-feeling”
“with all forms of existence. True humour”
“springs not more from the head than from”
“the heart; it is not contempt, its essence is”
“love; it issues not in laughter, but in smiles,”
“which lie far deeper. It is a sort of inverse”
“sublimity, exalting as it were into our affec-”
“tions what is below us, while sublimity”
“draws draws down into our affections what”
“is above us.”
The above quotation could well bear
repetition.
The probability of Christ having a true
and complete sense of humour, or possessing
that “quality of the imagination” defined by


Webster, is involved in the perfection of His
manhood or, our conception of His character.
The sense of humour was equally necessary
to His life and work as was the faculty of
reason, of comparison, perception of colour,
time or tune, or the admiration of the sublime
and beautiful.
How often is it urged against a man as a
defect in his mental development, or a blemish
in his character, that “he is lacking in a sense
of humour.” No one ever suggests that the
sense of humour in man ever was a a sin. It
was none-the-less pure and holy in Christ.
Christ should not, and could not, be charged
with a “lack of the sense of humour.”
This desirable quality of the imagination
being admitted as probable or necessary in
the character of Christ, the seeker after our
Saviour’s humour will not search long without
meeting his reward.
Christ, above all men, was “the exponent
of low things.” He has made the lowliest, the
commonplace things of life truly poetical to
our minds, and has sanctified the commonest
task of man.


“He trod the gloomy paths of life,
And made them radiant with light.”
His gospel was the gospel of the common-
place: everything that He touched was subli-
mated; every place He trod upon has been
made truly poetical to our minds; every
parable He enunciated was a story from com-
mon life with its counterpart in heaven. Every
great spiritual truth was impressed upon the
heart and mind by the media of common
things, and every beautiful lesson was taught
by means of some humdrum experience of
every-day life, which ever afterwards is lit
with a ray of glory.
The essence of Christ’s humour was His
deep sensibility, His warm, tender fellow-
feeling, which He exhibited to all men; His
unerring and abiding love.
Christ was not an ascetic. He “feasted
with publicans and sinners.”
Christ was not a dyspeptic. We do not read
of Him being irritable and difficult of approach
or exhibting symptoms of indigestion.


Neither was He a professor—Dry-as-dust.
Multitudes flocked to hear Him, “The com-
mon people heard Him gladly” (Mark 12.37).
The officers of the Sanhedrin were sent to
arrest Jesus, but returned without Him.
When questioned, “Why have ye not brought
Him?” these officers, whose duty it was to
obey, to do, and die if need be, not to mur-
mur or question, had only one answer, one
reason for their dereliction of duty—“ Never
man spake like this man” (John 7, 48)”.
Christ moved among men and knew
their hopes and their fears and entered fully
into all human experiences, and was in true
and generous sympathy with all mankind.
Examples of Christ’s humour are to be found
in His addresses to the simple fisher-folk and
peasant population of the Holy Land.


III. SARCASM
There is an old epigram, a piece of minis-
terial advice to preachers: “Spoil no man’s
person, but spare no man’s sin.’’ Christ never
spoiled any man’s person, but He never spared
anyone’s sins. The inconsistency of the
Scribes and Pharisees called forth His search-
ing sarcasm, as found in Matt. XXlll:
“Ye blind guides, which strain out a gnat and
swallow a camel,” in verse 24 (revised ver-
sion) is a smnmation of His condemnation of
their hypocrisy. These blind teachers and
leaders could not, or would not, see their
inconsistency when they condemned a man
as guilty who swore by the lesser gold of the
temple or the gift on the altar, while they
pronounced that man innocent who swore by
the greater temple or altar which sanctified
the gold and the gift.
It is immaterial whether Christ was making
use of a current proverb or launching a new
one upon the world. If the former, He ful-
filled His mission as a true humourist in using


a commonplace and giving it added strength
and currency.
One of America’s great preachers, Dr. De
Witt Talmage, with a vocabulary at his com-
mand that one might well envy, commented
on this 24th verse somewhat in this style:
“The gnat referred to here is the wiggler, the”
“first form of life of the gnat or mosquito, as”
“it is familiar to us in our tanks and pools.”
“This prince of inconsistencies perceives this”
“wiggler in a glass of water he is about to”
“drink. He scorns to drink it till he has”
“procured a delicate piece of silk and strains”
“out the gnat. He then drinks the water in”
“placidity. But going out into the street one”
“day, he spies a camel, a ship of the desert.”
“The gastronomer has no compunctions of”
“conscience. He suffers from no indigestion.”
“He places his lower jaw under the camel’s”
“forefoot; his upper jaw over the hump on”
“the dromedary’s back; gives one swallow,”
“and the dromedary disappears for ever. He”
“strained out a gnat. He swallowed a camel.”
The moral of the foregoing, of course,
being applied by the Reverend Doctor in such


modern instances as that of a man who would
look upon it as a criminal act and scorn to put
his hand into another man’s pocket to take out
a penny, and yet who would see no wrong in
floating a bogus company to relieve his neigh-
bours of a few thousand pounds or dollars.
Another instance of similar sarcasm is
recorded in the incident of the hypocrite offer-
ing to take a mote or speck out of his neigh-
bour’s eye while he has, metaphorically, a log
or beam in his own eye.


CHRIST’S ADDRESSES
A great portion of the Christ’s addresses,
particularly as recorded in the earlier chapters
of St. Matthew, are polemical or of a contro-
versial or disputational character.
He was combating the inconsistencies and
the incongruities of the leading teachers and
exponents of religion of that day. His
addresses corruscate with gems of Hebrew
poetry, parallelism, synthesis and authitesis,
climax and anticlimax.
Steadman’s criticism of American poets
was that the absence of humour was hurtfui
to the critical or polemic essay.
There is no absence of humour in these
addresses. In the before-mentioned chapters
and in their companion gospels are suggestions
of the absurd and the ludicrous, lighting up
the disputations, in verses which are pearls of
parallelism and loving humour.


Of many such examples, take the following:
“Beware of false phophets
which outwardly are clothed as sheep
but inwardly are ravening wolves.
“By their fruits ye shall know them
Do men gather
i grapes of thorns
or figs of thistles.
Even so
A good tree bringeth forth good fruit.
A corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.
A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit
Is hewn down
and cast into the fire.
Wherefore
By their fruits ye shall know them.”
—(Matt. VII, 15)
In reading the reported or reputed sayings
of Christ, we may look at them as being either


the mere gist or substance of his addresses,
or the verbal, though abbreviated, reports of
those addresses.
Isaac Pitman did not live in that day.
John tells us (John 20, 30) : “Many other signs
truly did Jesus in the presence of His dis-
ciples, which are not written in this book.”
We can safely also infer that there were
many other things He said which are not
recorded.
Look at it as we may, there is solid ground
for the conviction that His addresses were
illuminated with suggestive actions to suit the
word; facial expressions and attitudes which,
even to-day, cannot be reported in cold print
by modern reporters of modern orators.
One of the earliest touches of Christ’s
humour is to be recorded in Matt. 4 . 19,
where He called to the simple fishermen,
“Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of
men.”
“Fishers of men”! They surely smiled at
the suggestion. It was a strange vocation to
them. But they felt the pathos, the romance


in the invitation, it touched their hearts and
they left all and followed Him.
Two accounts are given of Christ asking
the question, “Is the lamp brought to be put
under bushel or under the bed?” And while
He looked round for an answer, there could
be heard a slight gurgling, and the faint smile
would appear as these simple peasant folk
quickly recognised the absurdity of the sug-
gestion. Then came home the lesson about
hiding one’s own light.
In this modern century much time and
expense has been spent in research work, to
arrive at the best elevation and position of our
electric lamps for lighting streets and public
buildings, and the lesser lights of homes,
billiard tables, and tennis courts. There can
be no doubt that the ancient dwellers in Pales-
tine had found out experimentally the best
place for lamp or the domestic candle in their
mansions, or humble abodes. Christ’s appeal
to their knowledge and experience would
therefore reach a fitting climax, as while they
were smiling at the absurdity of putting the
light under the bushel or under the bed, He


challenged them to “Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your Father, which is in
heaven.”
Again, an Eastern wizard or necromancer
may have been practicing his art nearby, with
grave and thoughtful face, low mutterings,
and magic passes, when Jesus propounded the
question, “Which of you by taking thought
can add one cubit to his stature?” As in
Christ’s time, in any audience to-day can be
found some who would earnestly wish they
were taller, and others who would prefer to be
shorter, if only they could make the change.
No amount of exercise of muscle, no pass of
magic wand, no amount of worrying or wish-
ing had ever accomplished the change.
Centuries later we join in the smile at
Christ’s question, “Which of you by taking
thought can add one cubit (fifteen inches) to
his stature?” The opportunity being given for
the sweet and gentle rebuke against anxiety
and worry in the reminder of the Father’s
provision for the sparrows and the lilies of


the field. “How much more will He clothe
you, O ye of little faith?”
There were fathers in his audience who
came to Him pleading that He would do some-
thing for. their sons—heal them of their sick-
ness, of their deformities; or that He would
restore them to their right minds. Fathers
whose hearts yearned over their boys; fathers
who would walk any distance, undertake any
task, that their sons might be healed. They
felt the pangs of being unable to do all they
would have liked to do for their sons. The
tears would swim into their eyes as Christ
asked the question, “Which man is there
among you if his son ask for bread, would give
him a stone? Or if he asked for a fish, would
give him a scorpion?” These fathers would be
conscious of the impossibility of such a thing;
and the smiles, shining through their tears,
would merge into a laugh as their hearts
recognised the absurdity of the question.


When the depths of their parental love,
with all its human limitations, had been
fathomed, Christ launched them out upon the
fathomless ocean of God’s love for them. “If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask Him (Matt. 7 :11).”


A HUMAN STORY
An intensely human story is told in Luke,
7th chapter, and Matt. 11.
John the Baptist had been cast into prison,
and either to allay his own probable doubts,
or those more real ones of his disciples, he
sent two of his disciples to ask Christ a plain,
straightforward question, “Art thou He that
should come, or look we for another?” True
to his method of teaching, Christ did not
immediately or definitely answer that ques-
tion. He evidently arranged for them to stay
awhile; for we read —“in that same hour He
cured many of their infirmities, and plagues
and evil spirits, and on many that were blind
he bestowed sight.” Then it was that Jesus
turned to John’s disciples and said, “Go your
way and tell John what things ye have seen
and heard, how the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the
dead are raised, the poor have good tidings
preached to them, and blessed is he who shall
not be offended in me.”


The disciples of John returned to give an
answer from their own convictions, through
what they had seen.
What we have felt and seen
With confidence we tell,
And publish to the sons of men
The signs infallible.
(C. Wesley)
While these men were disappearing over
the hill or round the corner, Christ turned to
the people and began to talk to them about
John the Baptist.
How human ! How often do we do the
same thing to-day? A few men meet on the
street and converse for a while; one departs,
the remaining members of the party begin to
talk of the departing acquaintance or discuss
the house or establishment he represents.
Christ talked to the multitudes of the
leader of the departing disciples. Notice how
Christ led his hearers out to express their
convictions about John the Baptist with an
exhibition of humour adopted by many a suc-
cessful teacher to-day.


Thinking of John, speaking of John, whom
everyone knew had dwelt in the wilderness,
Christ asked the multitude the question,
“What went ye out into the wilderness to
see?”
There was apparently no answer, so Christ
Himself suggests an absurd answer: “A reed
shaken with the wind?”
They instantly recognised the absurdity of
(some of His hearers), no doubt, travelling up
and down that precipitous, barren, uninviting,
robber-infested road from Jerusalem to
Jericho and further on to the wilderness, only
to see “a reed shaken with the wind.” Absurd!
Ha!
But Christ is still waiting for their answer.
Again He asks, “What went ye out into the
wilderness to see?” Still no answer.
Christ now suggests an answer even more
ridiculous than the first: “A man clothed in
fine raiment?” As we picture in our mind the
coarseness of John’s dress, his leathern girdle
and coat of camel hair so familiar to all the
people; that Robinson Crusoe outfit; that wild


man-of-the-wood attire, we have no doubt his
audience laughed outright; while Christ adds:
“Behold, they that wear soft raiment are in
King’s palaces.”
The contrast between the coarsely-clad,
active prophet of the wilderness, living on
coarse food, ever proclaiming his message of
repentance, and the idle, gorgeously-appar-
elled, softly-attired, delicately-fed dwellers of
the palace, was indeed ludicrous. Still, Christ
has not even yet received an answer to His
question.
For the third time He asked, “What went
ye out to see?”
It seems so lifelike that someone in the
crowd at last is encouraged by Christ’s humour
to answer, perhaps faintly, “A prophet”; and
Christ, with His hand to His ear as if to hear
more distinctly, invites the answer again by
repeating it, “A prophet”?—(did you say?).
Being assured, no doubt, that was the answer,
He proceeds: “Yea, I say unto you, and more


than a prophet. This is He of whom it is
written, “Behold I send my messenger before
thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee. For I say unto you, that of all men born
of women there is none greater than John the
Baptist; but he that is least in the Kingdom
of God is greater than he.”
It is not to be wondered at that the multi-
tude and the publicans who were baptised by
John were carried away in enthusiasm at the
testimony of Christ concerning John and
glorified God.


THE HALO ROUND THE PENNY
Thackeray definies humour as ‘wit and love’
and has given us a delightful account of the
“Humourists of the Eighteenth Century.” In
all the characters referred to, there is some-
thing lacking, some grave imperfection a
lack of balance of the wit with love. A great
amount of the humour there reviewed is of
the purely local and of passing interest, and
does not appeal to men and women of later
periods. The humour of Christ appeals to all
races and for all time.
Christ never aspired to be a common or a
popular wit. His mission was incomparably
nobler.
But the readiness and aptness of his retort
and repartee have commanded the wonder and


admiration of centuries. Again and again his
detractors planned, schemed, conferred and
racked their brains to fix upon what they con-
sidered the most perplexing or subtle question
for Him to answer, or the greatest dilemma
upon which they hoped to impale Him. They
came out in the strength of numbers, and fell
back dumbfounded at His answers.
Once, perhaps more than once, while He
was teaching in the temple, the chief priests
and elders heckled Him with the quetions:
“By what authority doest Thou these
things?”
and
“Who gave Thee this authority?”
Christ replied:
“I will also ask you one question, which,
if you tell me, I likewise will tell you
by what authority I do these things—
The baptism of John, whence was it?
From heaven, or from men?”


His interrogators held a conference among
themselves. Some said, “If we say from
heaven, He will say unto us: “Why then did
ye not believe him?”
Some others said, “But if we shall say ‘Of
men,’ we fear the multitude, for all hold John
as a prophet.”
They found themselves in a dilemma. It
was moved, seconded, and carried unani-
mously that their answer be, “We cannot tell.”
He said unto them: “Neither tell I you by
what authority I do these things.”
The discussion did not end here. Christ
followed up their discomfiture with two par-
ables —The first one of the two sons called to
work in their father’s vineyard. One said he
would go, and went not; the other said he
would not go, but afterwards repented and
went.


The second parable was of the husband-
man who let out his vineyard on shares, and
whose messengers and son were so badly
treated.
The elders readily pronounced judgment
upon the men in the parables, and felt keenly
their own conviction of ingratitude.
They come again, bringing a woman caught
in an act of sin, to have the sentence of ston-
ing passed upon her. He passed the expected
sentence, but in these unexpected words: ‘‘Let
him that is without sin cast the first stone.”
When the accusers had all quietly disappeared
—self-convicted —He discharged the sinner in
sympathetic words that echo through the
corridors of time, impelling obedience to-day:
“Go and sin no more.”
He is challenged by a lawyer to state
which is the greatest of all the commandments.
In a manner reminiscent of Socrates, Christ


leads the lawyer on to answer his own ques-
tion, and contrary to the lawyer’s wildest
speculation. Thus the world became enriched
with the story of “The Good Samaritan.”
Again the leaders come with a question,
anticipating His answer would alienate from
Him all the goodwill, admiration and attach-
ment of the common people. The question
concerned the repugnant national submission
to foreign domination, and was framed in the
words: “Ought we to pay tribute to Caesar
or net?” Christ immediately held out his
hand asking to be shown a penny—one of the
smallest coins then current. After scanning
it, He held it up for all to see, and asks,
“Whose image and superscription is this?”
Quickly the answer comes back—Caesar’s ! !
Handing back the coin, Christ adds:
“Render therefore unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar’s, and unto God the
things that are God’s.”


Silence reigns after his quiet but astound-
ing answer.
Centuries later we pay our daily tribute,
tolls, rates and taxes in coins of the same
designation.
A penny for our paper. Two for a stamp.
Three for our tram fare. Four for our rates.
Five for our train trip. Six for our tax—
and so on.
Every ring and jingle of the penny pro-
claiming daily the same material and spiritual
duties of discharging our debts:
“Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar’s, and unto God the things that
are God’s.”
Thus has Christ shed a spiritual light
around the common duties of life and around
many common things and their offices, in-
cluding the humble penny—


THE HALO ROUND THE PENNY
Listen ! every nation,
As the pennies fall;
Hear the proclamation
Sounded by them all.
Watch ! (be their description
Or their value small),
See the superscription
Haloed ’round them all:
“Render unto Caesar
Things that Caesar’s are”;
“Render to Jehovah
All your heart’s desire.”
Still another question is put to Christ, but
his answer silenced them effectively, for after
that “no man durst ask Him any more
questions.”


The poet Burns gives us a wonderful
example of the ideal of humour described or
defined by Carlyle, in that poem, “To A
Mouse,” judged by critics as “exquisite,” and
about which Chambers relates this story:
While Burns was ploughing in the field
one morning, the plough disturbed the domi-
cile of a little field mouse. John Blane, who
was assisting Burns, ran after the mouse to
kill it, but Burns checked him, asking what
ill the poor mouse had done to him. After
this the poet became very thoughtful and con-
templative. Both men retired to rest at night;
sometime late Burns woke Blane and read the
poem, which had been composed in the mean-
time, and asked what he thought of the mouse
now.


The apostrophe begins:
“Wee sleekit, cowrin’, tim’rous beastie,”
expressive of the poet’s touching sympathy
with the weaker creature.
In the oft-quoted lines of the later verse:
“The best-laid schemes o’ mice and men
Gang aft a-gley,”
there is the recognition of common experi-
ences. After reading this poem we are con-
scious of a more tender feeling of sympathy
towards these small but annoying creatures.
Dickens has endeared to us a great many
characters, both young and old. They are
not the great domineering grandees, con-
querors and emperors of ancient or modern
history, but the humble ones of the every-day
life of our great cities.
Dickens is truly an exponent of low things
of lowly characters. He has rendered humble


men and women, boys and girls, truly poetical
to our minds. He has awakened within us a
warm, tender fellow-feeling with characters
we otherwise would have passed unnoticed;
he has elevated into our affections men of
humble callings in life.
Christ, in a far grander and nobler way,
has illustrated the love of God for the human
race; the nearness of the Kingdom of heaven,
by means of humble wayfaring people, and
the commonplace experiences and problems of
human life.
No one who is familiar with the gospels of
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John can ever see
a sower going forth to sow, a shepherd seek-
ing for a stray sheep, a woman seeking for
a lost silver coin, a tailor patching up an
old garment, and many other common inci-
dents of life, without recognising the poetical
aspect of these incidents; and no one can see


them without calling to mind the wonderful
lessons Christ taught concerning our higher
and heavenly relationships and duties and our
citizenship in the kingdom of heaven.
These commonplace experiences are but
stepping-stones to greater heights. They are
the vehicles by which Christ lifts the finite
human mind to the sublimer atmosphere
where we feel and breathe the illimitable,
boundless love of God for all mankind.
How the good housewife, or the tailor,
would smile at the idea of “patching up an old
garment with a new piece of cloth”; how the
man of the house would appreciate the ridicule
in the suggestion of “putting new wine into
old, cracked skins”; or the gardener, the sim-
plicity of anyone looking for “grapes on
thorn, or figs on thistles”; the wedding guests
at the idea of the best-man “mourning at the
wedding.”


Christ’s audiences would instantly recog-
nise such incongruities as the servant imagin-
ing himself superior to his lord, or the scholar
more learned than his master; or the blind
man essaying to show another the way round.


THE HALF SHEKEL
There is a delightful touch of kindly
humour in the story of Peter and the tribute
money in Matt. 17:25. The Hebrews acknow-
ledged Jehovah alone as their soverign. Jose-
phus, the Jewish historian, describes their
form of government as a Theocracy. Every
Israelite was expected to make an annual pay-
ment of half a shekel to the upkeep of the
temple of their God. This was instituted in
the time of Moses
As Christ and His disciples entered Caper-
naum on one occasion, the übiquitous tax
collector, or some officer appointed to collect
this levy, asked Simon Peter, “Does not your
master pay the half shekel?”


It has been suggested that the enemies of
Christ were eagerely waiting to make a charge
against Him of evading the payment (which
every Jew held to be his sacred duty) for the
upkeep of the temple of their King.
Be that as it may, immediately Simon heard
the question, we can imagine the quick, impul-
sive answer, “Yes,” as if he added “of course
He pays, why ask such a question?” Let us
read between the lines of this brief narrative
in Matthew.
The disciples soon after were about to
enter a house when Christ detained Peter,
perhaps with a gentle tap on the shoulder,
and engaged Peter in this unrecorded con-
versation :
“Peter, I saw you talking to the tax col-
lector. What did he want?”


“Why, he asked me ‘didn’t you pay the half
shekel?’ and I told him ‘Yes, certainly you
pay’.”
Here with a smile Christ put the recorded
question to Peter of “What thinkest thou,
Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth
take custom or tribute? From their sons or
from strangers?” Peter answered correctly,
“from strangers.” With a smile Christ replied,
“Therefore the sons are free.”
Here we can picture the cloud and then
the look of illumination that seemed to spread
over Peter’s face, as he recognised, in spite of
what he said previously, that there was no
occasion for his Master, the Son of the King
of Kings, to pay any tribute at all.
How beautifully Christ delivers Peter from
his dilemma by telling him, “Notwithstanding,
lest we cause them to stumble, go thou to the
sea and cast a hook and take up the fish that


first cometh up, and when thou hast opened
his mouth thou shalt find a (whole) shekel.
Take that and give unto them for me and
thee.”
What a marvellous teacher, what a match-
less leader, what wonderful tact, what tender
consideration for a disciple in a difficulty !
Well might we stand alongside of J. S. Mill,
and exclaim, “Who among His disciples or
among His apostles was capable of inventing
the sayings ascribed to Jesus?”


THE PICTURE GALLERY
What a wonderful picture gallery passes
before our view in the lesson or address of our
Saviour. Here we see drama, comedy, hum-
our, pathos, love and tragedy. Here, a king
calculating his risks and prospects of success
in a threatened war, and finding a way out.
There, an architect and contractor estimating
the cost of a building. Teacher and scholar,
father and son, landlord and tenant, debtor
and creditor, master and servant, bride and
bridegroom, mourners and bereaved ones,
physician and patient, curable and incurable,
deaf and dumb, halt and blind, the quick and
the dead, lawyers and lawmakers, judge and
the judged, bond and free, the innocent and
guilty, just and unjust; the merchant, the
trader, banker, miner, prospector, shepherd,


farmer, potentate, traveller, sower, reaper,
fishermen, carpenters, taxpayer and tax-gath-
erer, orchardist, gardener;
“Tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor,
Rich man, poor man, beggar man, thief”—
they are all included in the limitless range of
Christ’s wonderful message to mankind.
These are a few of the many instances of
Christ’s humour found scattered throughout
His life and teaching. His addresses and His
parables teem with gospel of the common-
place, and the principle of inverse sublimity.
Such work-a-day experiences and charac-
ters as a sower who went forth to sow; a man
who had two sons, one of whom was a prodi-
gal; a man who hired out his vineyard; a
farmer whose enemy sowed tares in his field;
a potentate who went into a far country to
receive a kingdom; a woman who lost a silver
coin; a shepherd who lost a sheep; the father
concerned about the health of his son, the


children playing in the market place; ’the
debtor pressed for payment; the appealing
widow, succeeding through her importunity;
and many others in lowly life are made truly
poetical to one’s mind because they are shown
to be parallel to, and exponents of, the rela-
tionship between God and the human family.
These stories will ever remain poetical to our
minds, and the very proverbs of our own lives.
Judged by the best standard definitions of
humour—the greatest exponent of low things;
the man with the largest heart, the greatest
sensibility, the keenest insight, the tenderest
pathos and the purest love —in short, the
grandest and noblest humourist of all times—
is our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.


ADDENDA
HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS AND
COMMONPLACE THINGS
REFERRED TO BY CHRIST
Kings, queens, governors, lords, rulers,
prophets, priests, elders, scribes, teachers, dis-
ciples, wise men, fools, Pharisee, Sadducee,
centurion, soldier, master, servant, steward,
husbandman, sower, reaper, labourer, stranger,
Gentile.
Banker, merchant, trader, buyer, seller,
money-changer, (prospector*), fisherman, car-
penter, builder, publican, physician, shepherd,
rich, poor, beggar, thief, profit, loss, exchange.
Debtor, creditor, judge, officer, lawyer, wit-
ness, tormentor, prison.
(Note * —The man who found treasure hid 1 in a field
and sold ail he had to buy that Held).


Mite, farthing, penny, coin, pounds, shekel,
talent, treasure, pearl, gold, silver, brass, purse.
Father, mother, son, daughter, sister, bro-
ther, babes, mother-in-law, daughter-in-law,
husband, wife, neighbours, friends, enemies,
adversary, bride, bridegroom, guests, widow,
mourners, musicians, music, dancing, pipers.
Just, unjust, righteous, good, sinner, prodi-
gal, winebibber, harlot, glutton, devils, angels.
Whole, sick, maimed, halt, blind, deaf,
dumb, palsied, diseased, leper, cleansed, healed,
strong, weak, meek, lowly, peacemaker, merci-
ful, hungry, thirsty, pure, persecuted.
Vineyard, winepress, field, plough, yoke,
barn, harvest, seed, grain, root, blade, ear, full
corn, wheat, tares, grass, lilies, flower, fruit,
grapes, thorns, figs, thistles, root, hedge, palm
mint, anise, cummin, mustard, tree, herbs,
branches, vine.


Sky, cloud, shore, beach, land, sea, waves,
shower, heat, wind, tempest, net, boat, hook,
rock, sand, mountain, plain, wilderness, des-
ert, market-place, street, house-top, chamber,
wayside.
Law, jot, tittle, oath, reward, love, hate,
joy, sadness, sorrow, tribulation, persecution.
Hair, head, eye, tooth, cheek, ear, hand
foot, right-hand, left-hand.
Colt, foal, ass, lambs, sheep, swine, horse,
dog, oxen, camel, fowls, hen, chicken, bird,
sparrow, dove, fish, whale, serpent, viper, scor-
pion, wolves, foxes, moth.
House, wall, door, keys, bed, couch, table,
cup, platter, dish, baskets, candle, candlestick,
light, oil, lamp, measure, victual, food, salt.


bread, crumbs, loaves, water, drink, leaven,
meat, fish, fast, wine, mote, beam, furnace, fire,
swept, garnished.
Purse, wallet, coat, cloak, shoes, raiment,
clothing, garment, staff, scrip.
COPYRIGHT:
Registered under the Copyright Act, 1912,
of the Commonwealth of Australia.


DAVIES & CANNINGTON LTD,
NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
1931




The
Humour
Christ
D.N.M.


CONTENTS
1. Foreword.
2. Definitions.
3. More Definitions.
4. Sarcasm.
5. Christ’s Addresses.
6. A Human Story.
7. The Halo Round the Penny.
8. The Half Shekel.
9. The Picture Gallery.
10. Addenda.
BY D. N. MORISON
DAVIES & CANNINGTON LTD., PRINTERS, NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.


NOW READY FOR DISTRIBUTION
Size, Bvo. Crown; 56 p.p. and 4 p.p. Cover.
RETAIL PRICE, in paper covers
„ „ „ Linen „
Postage on single copies, extra 2d.
Freight on parcels extra.
1/'
1/6
A BOOKLET FOR CHRISTMAS OR ANY
OTHER SEASON
ORDER FROM TOUR BOOKSELLER NOW!
ORDER FORM
To
Please forward to my address as under, per
copies of “The Humour of Christ
cm ] binding -
Signature
Address
Hand this Order to your local Bookseller or communicate
direct to P.O. Box 463 E, Newcastle, giving name of your
bookseller.




