

t A f.
y 0
e II
5 !
y I
THE PRESENT CONDITION j
n
i 5
M
AND ' |
FUTURE
PROSPECTS OF AUSTRALIA.
U
i
1 1
i :
5
i
i
1 A
l|
i I
SPEECH
i
ii
DELIVERED BY
1
|
)
Him it it
I <SW cf «[
il
'ipHI |iiirl)C5. ii.Oi.0h
r
0
ii
| : PREMIER AND COLONIAL SECRETARY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ii
5
I
I ALBTJBY
0/1 21st SEPTEMBER, 1880.
f ii
■ a
GEORGE ROBERTSON jjj
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE j |
j L MDCCCLXXX A |
• W 3& |
• A: • 4<= c=>« c=r>» <K=^cr, - :y< ♦<=c=*c= -—,■ • •




THE PRESENT CONDITION
FUTURE PROSPECTS OF AUSTRALIA
A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
ijw Ifrtiica
PREMIER AND COLONIAL SECRETARY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
_A.T albtjey
On 21st SEPTEMBER, 1880
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXX


The Hon. Sir Henry Parkes left Melbourne by special train at five
o’clock on Tuesday morning, 21st September, and arrived atWodonga about
eleven. He was met at the station by Mr. George Day, M.L.A. for the
Hume, Mr. L. Solomon, and Mr, T. Affleck, and, in company with those
gentlemen, he came on to Albury, a distance of about three miles, in a
four-horse drag. He partook of luncheon at the Globe Hotel, and after-
wards visited the show of the Albury and Border Pastoral and
Agricultural Association, which he formally opened. During the course
of the afternoon the Premier was taken to see most of the places of
interest in and around the town, and he visited several of the more
influential residents.
In the evening, a banquet to Sir Henry Parkes was given at the
Globe Hotel, at which nearly a hundred gentlemen were present. The
spacious verandah of the hotel was converted into a banqueting hall for
the occasion, and, being nicely fitted up and gaily decorated, it served
the purpose admirably. The dinner was provided by host Aeschimann
in a style that would have done no discredit to the metropolis. The
Mayor of Albury (Mr. W, N. M. Edmondson) occupied the chair, with
the guest of the evening on his right hand, and Mr. G. Day, M.L.A.,
on his left. The vice-chair was taken by Mr. „James Hayes; and among
the gentlemen present were Captain Brownrigg, P.M.; Mr. Sub-Inspector
Medley, Mr. P. H. Yeo, Mr. W. J. Lyne, several of the aldermen of
the town, and most of the principal residents of the locality. After the
usual loyal toasts,
The Chairman proposed the health of the Premier, Sir Henry Parkes.
The toast was received with much enthusiasm, when Sir Henry, who on
rising to speak was greeted with continued cheering, delivered a speech,
which is taken from the special report by the Sydney Morning Herald.
Afterwards “The Parliament of Hew South Wales” was proposed by
Mr. W. J. Lyne, and responded to by Mr. George Day. The remaining
toasts were :—“ The Pastoral, Agricultural, and Commercial Interests
of the District,” proposed by Sir Henry Parkes, and replied to by
Mr. Douglas, Mr. James Day, and Mr. Downie ; “ The Mayor and
Aldermen of the Borough Council of Albury,” proposed by Mr. G. Day,
and responded to by the Mayor and Alderman Gulson.
The proceedings terminated about 1 o’clock.


SPEECH AT ALBERT.
Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen, — This is not the first time—it is not the
second time—that I have received the hospitality of you, the people of
Albury. It is now, I think, some sixteen years since I first visited
your district. On account of your position in the country, I have
never visited your district except on occasions when I have been going
to the sister colony, and I remember that on the first occasion my
journey from Sydney to Melbourne occupied twenty-five days. I
admit that I loitered on the way, that to some extent I zigzagged, in
order to make myself acquainted with the country. But, still, it is a
fact that from the time I left Sydney until I arrived in Melbourne
twenty-five days were consumed. Last week I performed that journey
in twenty hours. (Cheers.) Something must have made progress
within those fourteen years. I recollect I left the railway in 1866 at
Mittagong, many miles on the other side of Goulburn. How our
Southern railway is near 400 miles in length, and in a month’s time
it will be close at your doors. (Cheers.) I remember well that on that
first visit I was received with very great hospitality ; half the town
came out some ten miles to meet me. And on the following day they
made me taste samples of all the wine produced by every vineyard in
the district. (Laughter.) They have spared me that pleasure on this
occasion. (Laughter.) I was here some six years ago, and I received
the same favourable treatment then; and on this occasion it would
appear that you are in no way cooled in your good feeling towards the
Government of this colony. (Cheers.) v
As you are aware, I have just returned from the capital of Victoria,
and I have pleasure in stating here to-night, on the very confines of our
own country, that I never visit the sister colony without being deeply
impressed by its great resources —(cheers) —by the splendid energy of the


population, and the vast achievements which they display on all hands in
building up a nation. (Cheers.) I have a greater pleasure in the expres-
sion of my admiration of the manner in which our neighbours do a great
many things, because I cannot—and I fear I shall never be able to—tie
myself to their policy. (Cheers.) I admit thoroughly that there is
ample scope for differences of opinion; I admit thoroughly that great
progress has been made in the sister colony—progress so great, indeed,
that in many respects it fills me with amazement every time I visit
Victoria. But, irrespective of that, I greatly regret that the way has not
been more smooth for united action and a general common co-operation
between these colonies. (Cheers.) That, however, must be left to time,
and to those inscrutable agencies which in time set all things right. But
it is my intention to-night to say something which shall appertain entirely
to our own colony, because I feel a special interest in speaking to you,
the inhabitants of this border town—this federal city, I believe you call
•£, (applause) —lying so remotely from the metropolis. I think I shall
be able to show you, if you will permit me, that we have nothing to fear
in the race of emulation in this new part of the world; that we shall be
able to hold our own against any of the other colonies. (Cheers.) No
doubt, we have in the one broad fact that our territory contains 310,000
square miles of land, as against the 88,000 square miles of Victoria, an
assurance of future prosperity, because an area of country so vast as
that must contain such varieties of soil, such varieties of climate, that
we may hope in the course of time to produce nearly everything that
is wanted for the use of man. (Hear, hear.) And that is fast coming
about.
I was greatly struck the other day, in going through the Melbourne
Exhibition, which I think will be a very fine Exhibition, superior in
many respects to the Sydney Exhibition—l was amazingly struck with
one fact in connection with the court representing New South Wales.
In as far as I could see, New South Wales will more extensively
represent the natural sources of wealth than any other Australian colony.
(Cheers.) We shall have there coal, shale, fine samples of the oil
manufactured from shale; we shall have iron, copper, tin, gold ; and
there is a perfect little pyramid representing the bulk of the silver we
have raised from the soil of New South Wales. We shall have a
splendid display of other minerals, those most wanted in the manufac-
tures of the civilized world. We shall have a fine collection of timbers,


of leather (both in its raw state and manufactured), corn, wine, wool,
preserved meats, and nearly all the commodities required for human
consumption. We may not be so rich in protected manufactures as
others, but I venture to predict that in the Exhibition we shall more
generally represent the great sources of national wealth than any other
of the Australian colonies. (Cheers.) If we do that, it will be holding
our own j and, with every desire to do justice to every other colony, no
one can complain of us in doing the very best we can for ourselves.
(Cheers.) I have obtained, since I arrived in Albury, some returns
showing the present position of the colony. Do not be alarmed; I am
not going to read all the papers in my hand—(laughter) but just to
illustrate how this colony stands at the present moment. You are
all aware that at the beginning of this year there was a great falling
off in our revenue. In the months of January and February
the decline in the revenue of New South AYales was almost
alarming. I am, however, happy to state to you that during the
last 3| months —June, July, August, and up to the 16th of this
month—our revenue had so mounted up by the natural operations
of trade, that we were about £320,000 in excess of the corres-
ponding months of last year. (Cheers.) This, of course, has to bear
a great reduction by the heavy falling off in the revenue at the
beginning of the year. But still, it had not only sustained itself, but
showed a credit balance of nearly £70,000. (Cheers.) So that, not-
withstanding the falling-off at the beginning of the year, you will see
that we have recouped ourselves, and show a very handsome excess
over the revenue of 1879. There can be only one meaning of that
fact, and that is, that it represents the general prosperity of this colony.
(Applause.) There can be no clearer, surer, more satisfactory index
to prosperity than the ordinary operation of the laws under which the
revenues of the country are raised. (Hear, hear.) Even our Customs
revenue, which represents the commodities which go into consumption,
for this period of 3| months, shows an increase of £40,000. I say that
must satisfy both friend and opponent, even the most adverse critic,
that the condition of New South Wales is, upon the whole, sound, and
that our prosperity is steadily going on. (Cheers.)
I received also, this morning, the following statement of how we stand
generally; and, if you will bear with me for a few minutes, I will let
you know what that state is : —Our estimated population, at the end of


last year, was 734,280. The estimated population of Victoria, at the
same date, was 899,300. Our revenue for last year was £4,475,000.
The revenue of Victoria, with its larger population, was £4,621,000,
showing only an excess over us of £146,000, notwithstanding her much
larger population. With regard to the taxation of this colony, I will
not detain you by going into particulars; but I would like to show you
how we stand in relation to our sister colonies in this matter of public
burden. The taxation of New South Wales amounts to £1 15s. Bd.
per head of the whole population. The taxation of Victoria amounts
to £1 19s. sd. per head of the whole population; of South Australia,
to £2 Is. 3d.; of Queensland, to £2 18s, lid.; of Tasmania, to
£2 2s. 6d.; of Western Australia, to £3 Is. 7d.; and that of New
Zealand to no less than £3 4s. 4d. per head, showing that, while the
people of New Zealand, who are the most heavily taxed people in this
part of the world—and, I believe, the heaviest-taxed people in the
wide world—while they are taxed to the extent of £3 4s. 4d. per
head, we in New South Wales are taxed only to the extent of
£1 15s. Bd., and are the lightest taxed of all the Australian colonies.
(Cheers.) Coming to our public debt—and here, again, I will not weary
you with particulars, but just give you the burden upon the
population per head—our debt amounts to the sum of £2O 6s. lOd. for
every soul in the community; that of Victoria is £22 ss. lOd. per
head; of South Australia, £25 9s. 6d.; the public debt of Queensland
amounts to £46 16s. per head; that of Tasmania is £ls 7s. Bd.; of
Western Australia, £l2 11s. lOd.; and in New Zealand the public
debt amounts to—how much do you think for every man, woman, and
child in the country? To no less than £sl 13s. 3d. per head. (Sen-
sation.) In other words, the total amount of the public debt of New
South Wales is £14,937,400; the debt of New Zealand is £23,958,300.
Now, I will detain you a few moments showing what we have done
so far as we have borrowed money on public account. We have
constructed in New South Wales—my figures relate to the end of last
year we have constructed 736 miles of railway. Victoria had
constructed 1,125 miles. But we had in course of construction, and
which will be completed in a very short time, 280 miles, while Victoria
had in course of construction only 74 miles. (Cheers.) Many of you
will know that, in the work of railway construction, New South Wales
has had to contend with difficulties which to many persons, a few years


ago, would have appeared insurmountable. In taking our Western
railway into the fine districts around Bathurst, Orange, and Wellington,
we had to ascend a mountain range of a most formidable character. I
am quite certain that if a thousand men had been placed in the Lithgow
Valley twenty years ago, not one man in that thousand would have
dreamed that a railway could have been carried over- such a place.
Thus, thert, we have had to carry our railways from the seaboard
over the most stupendous mountain ranges, before we could get into the
good land. We had to conquer natural impediments so formidable that
it is utterly impossible to travel in that direction without feeling
surprised that a few hundred thousand people could have faced a work
of such a gigantic character. But we have done that, and we are now
fast approaching this town of Albury with the Southern line, which will
be one of the longest railways in all Australia. (Cheers.) W"ell, at the
end of last year we had 7,517 miles of electric telegraphs, while Victoria
had 3,055 miles. This, of course, arises from the smallness and the
compactness of the territory of Victoria as compared with ours. We
had in the course of construction 498 miles, while Victoria had in
course of construction only 28 miles. But there are some remarkable
facts which these statistics bring out, as illustrative of the very opposite
policies pursued in the two colonies. Of course, in what I say lam not
combating any other man’s opinion—l am simply stating the broad facts,
and we do know that just over the border the policy is to protect native
industry j and we do know that up to this point the policy on this side
of the border has been to create no impediment to the exercise of
industry. (Applause.)
Well, I find that the imports of New South Wales last year
amounted to £14,198,800. The imports of Victoria amounted to
£15,035,500, or about £836,700 more than those of New South Wales.
The imports of New South Wales per head of the population amounted
to £l9 7s. Bd.; those of Victoria to £l6 18s. 5d.; but we have this
very remarkable fact, that the exports of New South Wales, which is
considered in the mother country as a free-trade colony, were actually
in excess of those of Victoria. (Cheers.) The exports of New South
Wales amounted to £13,860,800, while the exports of Victoria
amounted to only £12,454,100. (Cheers.) Now, as our population is
about 175,000 smaller than that of Victoria, you will see that our
exports must have been relatively much greater in excess of those of


Victoria. (Cheers.) If we really send out more wealth to exchange
for the commodities of other countries than Victoria, we certainly must
have done much better with our free-trade policy than Victoria has
done with her protectionist policy. (Applause.) Because, after all, it
seems to me that civilization itself would be deprived of half its value,
half its triumphs, if it did not enable everybody to expend his money
in that way which is most convenient to him —to buy the article he
most wants, where he can buy it best, and not to be compelled to buy
it when it is not the thing he wants, or where he cannot buy it in
the best way. This is a clear result of civilization. As we send
out more wealth to exchange for the wealth of other parts of the world
than Victoria does, we must have managed our affairs in a more
satisfactory and enlightened way. (Cheers.)
How, as regards the trade, as represented by our exports and imports,
the two colonies stand thus :—The amount of the united trade in Hew
South Wales was £27,285,700; the united trade of Victoria was
£27,489,700. In other words, the united trade, as represented by our
imports and exports, in Hew South Wales amounted to £3B 4s. 3d. per
head of the population ; while the same trade, represented in the same
way, only amounted to £3O 18s. 9d. per -head of the population of
Victoria. (Hear, hear.) It does seem to me that this fact ought to
have a particular weight upon all of us, and set people thinking, even
in the sister colony, as to whether they are really travelling in the right
path. (Applause.) It is somewhat consoling to us to find that by these
latest statistics we still stand at the head in the live stock of Australia.
Hew South Wales had 363,000 horses ; Victoria had 216,700 ; Queens-
land, 163,000; Hew South Wales had 2,914,200 head of horned
cattle; Victoria had 1,129,300 ; and Queensland had 2,800,600. And
then, again, Hew South Wales had 29,143,400 sheep, while Victoria
had only 8,651,700, and Queensland had 6,065,000 ; the old colony
stands at the head of that still, and she is likely to continue to do so.
(Hear, hear.)
How, I shall only be a minute or two more. The total revenue of
this colony, up to the 16th of this month, was £3,146,506 ; the total
revenue for last year, up to the corresponding date, amounted to
£3,088,905, showing, as I before said, an increase, notwithstanding the
great decline at the beginning of the year, of £57,600. How, if this
rate of revenue goes on to the end of the year, as we have every reason


to suppose it will, and in all probability it will greatly increase, the
revenue will show at least an excess over the Treasurer’s estimate of
some £85,000 sterling, which must be consolatory, as it to some extent
diminishes the chances of fresh taxation. (Cheers.) You have all heard
of the surplus that has been in the hands of the Government of this
colony for some years past, and some of you have heard that it has
dwindled down to comparatively nothing. lam happy to tell you that
when the loans account has paid back some £400,000, we shall still have
a surplus of more than a million and a half sterling, which money it is
intended to expend in carrying out great public works which have had
the sanction of Parliament. But still we have to our credit a surplus
of £1,700,000. And now just one word about an item in the Govern-
ment accounts which I think has attracted some attention in the
district of the Hume —I mean that of the unpaid balances of the free
selectors. (Hear, hear.) lam not going to express an opinion about
this, and I do not think you will find me disclosing any State secrets of
any kind ; but it may be well to know what these balances are : it may
be well to know how far they are an element in the revenues of the
country, because the public revenues of the country simply mean the
public improvements of the country. You cannot carry out anything—
you cannot construct a bridge, or extend a mile of railway, or build a
new court-house, without money. And the revenues of the country
properly expended mean what is a benefit to every man in the country
—the continuous improvement of the interior of the country.
(Hear, hear.)
Well, I find that the balances on conditional purchases, which is
under the law as solid an asset of the Government as any other asset it
holds—these balances amount to nine millions sterling. When these
balances matured (that was when the period in the case of each selection
had expired) the interest would amount to no smaller sum than £450,000
per annum, and during the present year the interest on these balances
was over £200,000. How, then, if this £200,000 had been given up,
there must have been imposed in some form or other £200,000 of new
taxation. (Hear, hear.) If the interest secured by law in the future
is given up upon the nine millions due to the State, the £450,000 per
annum, it means that every little freehold in the land must have a land-
tax put upon it, or some other tax still more objectionable. (Hear,
hear.) I only state these facts to let you know how the account stands.


The money must be had; and if not in this way, it must be imposed in
some other way.
I will now say a few words about this district, as part of the colony;
and about the future of our common country and its relations to the
other countries. You are approaching a general election. I have
nothing to say to you as constituting one body of electors, as I should
have nothing to say to any body of electors in particular as to how
they should discharge their duties. But I desire to say one thing. As
intelligent men, looking at this vast country—a territory consisting of
310,000 square miles—at the complex and conflicting structure of society
that is growing up, and bearing in mind that the member elected for some
locality must exercise his voice and vote for all localities in the country ;
you will, I am sure, elect representatives who will be fitted to deal with
all those conflicting interests. (Cheers.) It will be a mistake for any
district anywhere to elect a member simply upon some cry, or for one
question, because in performing his duties he must deal with all the
interests of the country. Look at the general fitness of the man ) think
that you are electing men to deal with your liberties and your lives—
because the Parliament can actually deal with your personal interests,
your property, and your lives. All I say, th® ll * is—look to the general
interests of the country, so that the Parliament may be enabled to
regard the country as one and undivided in all interests. (Hear, hear.)
The next ten years will disclose to the world an advance of human
progress in Australia which has never been witnessed before in the
same time. We who have lived during the last twenty years know
what vast changes have taken place. I remember the time—for I was
among the very few who advocated a railway to Albury twenty years
ago—l remember when the people laughed at the idea of it being accom-
plished in our lifetime. But we see it done ; and, vast as have been
the changes during the last ten years, they give but a faint indication
of the advance that will be made during the next ten years. The
census will take place next year ; and I venture to say it will show in
Australia an aggregate population of near three millions, made of the
material that has shown itself capable of anything under the sun in
achievement, in works of defence, and in the work of self-government.
And looking at the eventfulness of the next decade, I think we may all
well bear in mind how imperative it is that we should elect this next
Parliament of the very best material that we can find in society. As


to the people of Albury, X am not here to flatter, and there is no
occasion to flatter, hut you certainly occupy a position full of interest.
You are on the highway between the two great cities of this continent ;
you occupy the gateway, as it were, between the two capitals.
In a short time the railway will connect these two cities, and this
will be the first time in the southern hemisphere that a railway will be
seen in operation under its natural conditions, with a great feeder at
each end \ and I predict that the accumulated traffic will greatly
transcend the warmest anticipations. More than this, when once the
railway from Sydney to Melbourne joins, and thus the two colonies
interlock their arms across the Murray, that will break down all
restrictive laws and policies, and more will be done to make the colonies
one than all the schemes of all the politicians under the sun. (Cheers.)
Depend upon it, that when this volume of national intercourse is kept
open, whatever men may do, the force of events will make Yictoria
and New South W:ales cordially unite with one another, and among
the marvels of the next ten years will be seen the joining of hands of
these two colonies. (Cheers.) For myself, as a member of this
community, I have no leaning of which I am conscious in treating the
consideration of Australian questions on an Australian basis. I would
never allow, as far as I could command myself, any attachment to New
South Wales to interfere with the fairest consideration of any great
question affecting Australia as a whole, and, therefore, if I am
permitted to exercise any influence, I shall try to exercise it in a spirit
of the truest patriotism. (Hear, hear.) But still, professing this
broad view in the consideration of all Australian questions, I am bound
to confess that if I see another colony seeking to take advantage of
our own, I shall resent it, and stand by my own land. (Cheers.) lam
willing to give up much where others are willing to give up much; I
am willing to sacrifice much to bring about united action between these
great countries. But it behoves me, as it behoves you, to guard the
privileges and rights of New South Wales, and see that no attempt is
made in any way to impair them or treat them with indignity.
(Cheers).
I trust, however, that a better time is coming upon Australia—that
we shall emerge from our sectional course of action, and occupy a much
broader platform, and that many questions—such as that of our defences,
the question of immigration, the question to a great extent of our inter-


national improvements —may be treated as affecting the whole of the
Australias; and I shall feel most happy if I can in any way be an
instrument in bringing that result about, always reserving to myself the
right to fight against any attempt to take advantage of our own country.
(Cheers.) You have been pleased to drink my health, as a member of
the Government, with much cordiality. I am sure I can say of my absent
colleagues that we are very sensible of your kindness, and I am sure I
can say that the first object we have in view is to do the best we pos-
sibly can for the whole colony of Yew South Wales. (Applause.) We
thoroughly believe in its great resources, in the soundness of its popula-
tion, and in the grandeur of its destiny ; and, having this strong belief,
it would be strange if we were to fail in our exertions to impress it upon
the history of the country. (Cheers.) We shall do all we possibly can
to advance the country, to bring out its latent resources, and to give it,
if possible, the first place in the Australian group, but never by taking
any undue advantage of our neighbours, or envying the superiority
which they may possess; but in a spirit, I trust, too thoroughly Aus-
tralian to admit of any sectional jealousies. In this mind I trust we
shall do all we can for the country which we have been permitted to
endeavour to govern. I thank you most heartily for the manner in
which you have been pleased to drink my health. (Continued cheering.)


1508
02236819


PRINTED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
AT THE
Melbourne International Exhibition, 1830,
BY THE
jVEW SOUTH W/HtES CGWIIjSJSIOJMEI^S.
