

PoJlfrvfitvCAl f
THE APPROACHING
AUSTRALASIAN CENTENARY. WcTTH pPrnS
3K
v4iV HISTORICAL RETROSPECT OF EVENTS
NOT TO BE FORGOTTEN.
B. A. HEY WOOD, M.A,
THIN. COLL., CAMBRIDGE,
Author of “ A Vacation Tour at the Antipodes,” etc.
LONDON:
ELLIOT STOCK, 02, PATERNOSTER ROW, EC.
1885.
Price One Shilling.


Recently published, by the same Author.
MEMOIR OF CAPT. P. W. STEPHENS, R.N.
Small Bvo. with Portrait, 8 illustrations, and 2 maps, price 6s.
J. NISBET & CO., 21, BERNERS STREET, W.
“The subject of this memoir was a ‘worthy’indeed. Mr. Heywood has ful-
filled his task admirably.”— Spectator.
“Open the book where one may, some passage of bright, manly, affectionate
enterprise is sure to catch the eye. The volume is printed in delightfully clear
type, and has illustrations and good maps.”— Churchman.
“The adventures of Captain Stephens in striving to put down the slave trade
will arouse the enthusiasm of the reader.”— Eccles. Gazette.
“ This is the history of ‘ a man ’ both as to his inner and outer life. A fine
spirit breathes through the book, and we congratulate Mr. Heywood upon having
done his work so well.”— Sword and TrovjeX.
“An excellent and well-written memoir of more than ordinary merit.”—
Brighton Examiner.
“ The reader will find it difficult to withstand the simple pathos and manliness
of the closing scene. The book will doubtless be appreciated by a large circle of
readers.”— Bookseller.
“A very interesting record of Christian life. The accounts of his travels and
adventures will be read with enjoyment by old and young.”— Christian.
“ His adventures are of thrilling interest.”— Church Intelligencer.
“ A very interesting and edifying book. Mr. Heywood has produced a book in
which there is not a dry page.” —Church Missionary Intelligencer.
“Much of the information given has never, we believe, been published in this
country.”— Leamington Courier.
“The story of his life will throughout sustain the attention of the reader. As
a gift-book or for school prizes, it will be found most excellent.”— Leicester
Advertiser.
“ We very cordially recommend this volume.”— Liverpool Mercury.
“ There is a good account of the Oroya Railway over the Andes, one of the most
remarkable feats of engineering in the world. "—Morning Post.
“ The book deserves to have a place beside the lives of Captain Hedloy Vicars
and other Christian heroes in the army and navy.”— North British Mail.
“ This memoir may safely be said to possess general interest. All sorts of ad-
ventures and hairbreadth escapes are recorded. ” — Northern Whig.
“Cannot fail to interest.”— Perthshire Advertiser.
“Full of interest from beginning to end.”— S. Amer. Miss. Magazine.
“ Captain Stephens set a noble, thoughunobtrusive example, and proved that it is
possible to combine the excellent naval officer with the good man, and the record
of a good man’s life cannot but be beneficial to the world.”— United Service Gazette.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Note.— To Clergymen and Ministers wishing to have copies for School
prizes, the Author will be happy to supply grants at half a crown a copy
(carriage not included), when not less than a dozen copies are taken.
Letters to he addressed to the Author, care of Messrs. J. Nisbet & Co.,
21, Berners Street, W.


THE APPROACHING
AUSTRALASIAN CENTENARY.
“ V\J ELL, it is many a fine fellow besides you who was sent
VV that way,” remarked the driver of a Dublin car, in the
year 1848, to his passenger, Mr. Therry, an Australian Judge,
who was chatting about his recent return from Botany Bay,
after an absence of twenty years. During the drive the Judge
had occasion to remonstrate with the man for reckless driving,
whereupon the latter burst out with—“ Ah, hould your tongue,
man i why, you ought to be as bould as a bulldog, coming from
Botany Bay.” Some twenty years later, Miss Jane Whately,
in the memoir of her father, the late Archbishop of Dublin,
when referring to the state of Alban Hah, Oxford, before he
was its principal, gave a point to her remarks by stating that
it was “ a kind of ‘ Botany Bay ’to the University—a place
where students were sent who were considered too idle and
dissipated to be received elsewhere.” “ Botany Bay,” indeed,
was a proverbial expression. Happily, however, for the present
generation, “ Botany Bay,” with its sad associations of convict
hardship and brutality, is a tale of the past, and the Australian
world now ranks as the most highly favoured of the British
dependencies.
At first thought we might be inclined to regard the early
history of the Australasian Colonies as having no particular
interest for us at the present time; and this seems to have been
the opinion of our leading educationists, for the late Professor
Green, in his “ Short History of the English People,” a volume
of 800 pages, referred to the Australasian world merely as a
place where English “settlers were to wrest New Zealand from
the Maori, and to sow on the shores of Australia the seeds of
great nations.” But this is a grand mistake, for we cannot
fully sympathize with or understand the present status of the
colonies, unless we can enter somewhat into their experiences
of the past. We propose, therefore, to give a brief survey of the
origin and early history and trials of the great Austral Empire,
ever bearing in mind the hand of God in its growth.
Early in the sixteenth century Portuguese ships navigated the


Southern Seas, and possibly they may have discovered Austra-
lia ; but in 1601 the Spaniards, and a few years later the Dutch,
certainly did visit the northern and western and southern
portions of that vast island from Carpentaria in the north to
that great bight in the south, of which part is even now called
Nuyts’Archipelago, after the Dutch navigator, Peter de Nuyts.
Early in the year 1642, a few months before the day when
Charles I. raised his royal standard in opposition to the
Parliamentarians, Tasman, a Dutch navigator, discovered (as
he imagined) the southernmost part of Australia, and called
it Van Diemen’s Land, 1 in honour of the Dutch Governor-
General of Batavia. Subsequently he discovered New Zealand,
where some of his men were murdered by the aborigines an
event which impressed him with the ferocity of the latter.
Tasman made a careful chart of his discoveries, and in the
year 1744 it was published by Harris in his work on “ Voyages.”
In a remarkable note by Harris, inserted in the centre of the
chart, attention was drawn to the position of the great Terra
Australis as compared with that of other gold-yielding
countries, and the author added; “This continent enjoys the
benefit of the same position, and, therefore, whoever perfectly
discovers and settles it will become infallibly possessed of terri-
tories as rich, as fruitful, and as capable of improvement as any
that have been hitherto found out either in the East Indies or the
West.” More than a century elapsed before these anticipations
were realized, as it was not till the year 1851 that gold in
Australia was discovered; and we have no reason to suppose
that Edward Hammond Hargreaves, the discoverer, had ever
seen or heard of Harris’s note.
As a nation we were very slow to engage in Southern Ocean
voyages; but in 1768 Captain Cook (who a Yorkshire
peasant by birth) was despatched on an expedition to observe
the transit of Venus, and to make explorations in the South
Seas, Accompanied by two distinguished naturalists, Mr.
(afterwards Sir) Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander, he set
out well equipped and full of hope as to the results of
the expedition. Early in the year 1770 he discovered the
south-easterly extremity of Terra Australis , or Hollandia
Nova, as it was called in Tasman’s chart, and this he named
Cape Howe, in honour of Lord Howe. Steering northwards,
ho explored the coast, giving names to_ bays and headlands,
and keeping a carefully written diary of his discoveries. Early in
May he entered a bay, which, in consequence of the rich vegeta-
tion in the neighbourhood, he named Botany Bay. On 6th May
1 This designation, so long associated with convictism, has been dis-
carded for “ Tasmania,” in memory of the discoverer.


he left Botany Bay for the north. “We steered (he wrote)
N.N.E., and at noon our latitude by observation was 33° 50' S.
At this time we were between two and three miles distant from
the land, and abreast of a bay or harbour in which there
appeared to be good anchorage, and which I called Port Jack-
son. This harbour lies three leagues to the northward of
Botany Bay.” The wonderful capabilities and beauty of Port
Jackson could not be realized, of course, by any passing its
entrance in this manner.
It must be interesting for those who delight in tracing God’s
hand in history to notice how opportune for the interests of our
country were the explorations by Cook, for the Declaration of
Independence by our North American Colonies in 1776 deprived
us suddenly of our only outlet for convicted criminals, and,
as the sequel shows, our statesmen in their perplexity were led
to conceive the bold idea of substituting Australia for America.
At first, the scheme had been to form a convict settlement
on the shores of Western Africa; and a Parliamentary Com-
mittee, after taking the evidence of several persons acquainted
with the coast, reported in its favour; but thoughtful per-
sons, like Burke, dreaded the idea of consigning the convicts
to one of the most unhealthy climates in the world, and
through their opposition the scheme was abandoned.
Sir Joseph Banks strongly urged the formation of a settle-
ment at Botany Bay, in New South Wales ; but it was opposed
with great vigour by the Gentleman’s Magazine, the great
organ of literature and science in those days. Referring to
the proposal of Sir Joseph Banks, which it was believed the
Government were ready to adopt, the editor wrote: “If this
report is true, the expense will be equal to that of an expedi-
tion to the South Sea against an enemy; and if it is to be
continued with every freight of felons, it will annihilate the
surplus that is intended for augmenting the payment of the
National Debt. It is certainly a most extravagant scheme,
and will probably be reconsidered.” The strength of the
opposition may be measured by the pertinacity with which it
was renewed, even so late as the year 1803, when the penal
settlement had actually been in existence sixteen years. At
that date a writer in the newly formed Edinburgh Review
wrote as follows; “It may be a curious consideration to
reflect what we are to do with this colony when it comes to
years of discretion. Are we to spend another hundred millions
of money in discovering its strength, and to humble ourselves
again before a fresh set of Washingtons and Franklins ? The
moment after we have suffered such serious mischiefs from the
escape of the old tiger, we are breeding up a young cub whom
we cannot render less ferocious or more secure.”


All opposition, however, was useless; and in the year 1784
the colony of New South Wales was formed, and the Crown
was empowered by Parliament to constitute a competent Court
of Criminal Judicature in the new settlement. In December,
1786 the requisite Orders in Council were made by the King;
and in May, 1787, 1 Captain Philip, R.N, sailed as Governor ot
the intended settlement, with a frigate, an armed tender, six
transports containing 548 male and 230 female convicts, and
three storeships with provisions for two years. <
After touching at the Canaries and Rio Janeiro, and also at
the Cape of Good Hope, which then belonged to the Dutch,
the expedition reached Botany Bay in the month ot January,
1788 • but they did not disembark, as the bay was exposed to
tempestuous seas from the eastward. Captain Philip lost no
time in exploring Port Jackson, which Cook _ had only seen
from a distance, and he was delighted to find it a magnificent
harbour. Selecting one of its coves, in which was an ample
supply of fresh water, he called it Sydney Cove, in honour ot
Lord Sydney; and there, on the 26th day of February, 1788,
he planted the first British colony in Australasia.* His entire
live stock consisted of six head of horned cattle and seven
horses.
For many years, the anniversary of the discovery of Sydney
Cove was observed in Sydney as a general festival; and in
1845 the Sydney Herald wrote of the event as follows:
As we look upon the noble ships riding in our harbour, and the
steamers, yachts, wherries, and boats innumerable gliding to. and fro
amid the -joyous excitements of the regatta, let us picture the three
humble boats which this day fifty-seven years ago were slowly creeping
up the unknown waters of Port Jackson in quest of a sure resting-place
for our first predecessors. As we cast our eye over the elegant buildings
which now skirt our shores on either side, and oyer the crowds of well-
dressed men, women, and children who are keeping holiday on this our
national festival, let us think of the dense woods which then frowned on
Governor Philip, of the profound silence that reigned around him, of
the awful sense of solitude with which he and his little band must have
been impressed, and of the exultation they would have felt if they could
have foreseen that within so brief a term the wilderness they were ap-
proaching would have become “replenished” with a teeming population,
and have been “ subdued” to the beauty and affluence of civilized life.
Captain Philip commenced his rule of the new settlement
by a stirring address, in which he set before his men the vast
importance of the work in which they were engaged, and
1 In August, 1787, Captain Bligh left England in the Bounty on his
disastrous expedition to the South Seas. He had been the companion of
Captain Cook in one of his voyages, and was subsequently Governor of
New South Wales.
2 Australasia is a term including Australia, Tasmania, and JNew
Zealand.


referring to the American Declaration of Independence, he said :
“ Britain, resigning the North American continent to the do-
minion of her full-grown offspring, magnanimously seeks in
other parts of the earth a region where she may lay the found-
ation of another empire which will one day rival in strength,
but we hope not in disobedience, that which she has so recently
lost.” ,
In a wild and uncultivated country whose capabilities had
never been tested, surrounded with aborigines who might resent
any attempt to appropriate and break up the soil, and with only
the convict castaways of our land as the nucleus of that future
empire which he hoped he was founding, Captain Philip had
indeed a position to occupy which must have severely tested
his judgment and skill, as well as his courage and energy.
Even after the lapse of twenty-four years, Sir S.Romilly stated
in the House of Commons that the founding of this settle-
ment “was an experiment more unpromising and bolder
than any ever tried in any former age, or by any other
nation ; for it was an attempt to found a colony which was to
consist'altogether of thieves and convicts —of the very refuse
of society, and of men and women having no motive for wish-
ing success to it. Convicts transplanted to North America
found themselves, immediately on their arrival, in a society
where habits of industry and regularity prevailed ; but in the
infancy of the colony of New South Wales guilt and vice were
the characteristics of the whole nation. It was in fact to be a
people of thieves and outlaws, under the control of their mili-
tary guards.”
This “ experiment,” as Sir S. Romilly called the Austral
Settlement, must have failed, had not God in His good provi-
dence stirred up Mr. Wm. Wilberforce and his Evangelical
friends to supply the one thing needful for its success, which
our Church and country had so carelessly overlooked. We
refer to the need for spiritual instruction, of which the expe-
dition, though otherwise so well equipped, was, as originally
planned, entirely destitute. Wilberforce used his influence
with Mr. Pitt, and a chaplaincy for New South Wales was
founded, with a salary of £lBO per annum. The Rev. R. John-
son was appointed to this important post, and he went forth
cheered with the prayers and sympathy of such men as
Mr. Thornton, and the Rev. 11. Venn, and John Newton.
Mr Venn, in a letter to his daughter, Miss J. C. Venn, dated
Oct. 28, 1786, 1 after stating that on the Sunday previous
i The biographers of the late William Wilberforce have not under-
stood the history of this chaplaincy, for they have confused its institu-
tion with the formation of the second and auxiliary chaplaincy which
was afterwards filled by the Rev. S. Marsden. The reader of the “ Life


Mr. Johnson had been introduced by Mr. Thornton to two
hundred and fifty of his future congregation aboard the hulk
at Woolwich, and after referring to the origin of the chap-
laincy, wrote as follows :
I trust he will prove a blessing to these lost creatures. Those that
stole will there steal no more ; for having no receivers of stolen goods,
no alehouses, etc., they will be under no temptation to steal. With what
pleasure may we consider this plan of peopling that far-distant region,
and other opening connections with the heathen, as a foundation for the
Gospel of our God and Saviour to be preached unto them: when “a
vast multitude whom no man can number” shall “call upon His
Name when “ the wilderness shall become a fruitful field,” and all the
savageness of the heathen shall be put off, and all the graces of the
Spirit shall be put on. . . To be the means of sending the Gospel to the
other side of the globe—what a favour ! Mr. Thornton says the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury and Sir Charles Middleton seem much to approve
the sending of Mr, Johnson.
The Kev. John Newton had known Mr. Johnson for several
years, and wrote the following lines on the occasion of his
appointment to the chaplaincy :
The Lord, Who sends thee hence, will be thine aid ;
In vain at thee the lion, Danger, roars ;
His arm and love shall keep thee undismayed
On tempest-tossed seas and savage shores.
Go, bear the Saviour’s name to lands unknown,
Tell to the southern world His wondrous grace ;
An energy divine thy words shall own,
And draw their untaught hearts to seek His face.
Many in quest of gold or empty fame
Would compass earth or venture near the poles ;
But how much nobler thy reward and aim—
To spread His praise, and win immortal souls !
At the present day, when steamers reach Australia in six
weeks, we find it difficult to realize the position of the infant
colony in the far-distant unknown world, which it took them
eight months to reach. Ere long starvation, amongst other
perils, threatened their very existence; and death by famine
was on one occasion only dispelled by the timely return of one
of Captain Philip’s ships from Batavia, with an ample supply
of provisions. As soon as possible, Captain Philip planted a
small offshoot colony at Norfolk Island, which lies one thou-
sand miles to the north-east of Port Jackson, in the hope
of Wilberforce ” would imagine that Mr. Johnson was not appointed till
1790, after the post had been offered to the Rev. S. Crowther, who was
shipwrecked on his way out, and returning home, resigned the post.
There is some difficulty in making this event take its proper place, but
in all probability Marsden took Crowther’s post as second chaplain. ’ Mr.
Johnson is called in the Gentleman’s Magazine of January, 1787, “chap-
lain to the intended new settlement,” and as such his marriage on Dec 4
1786, is referred to. ‘ ’


that by reason of its fertility it might prove a granary for
Sydney in times of dearth, and might also be used as a recep-
tacle for the more hardened convicts whom he wished to keep
separate from the rest. Subsequently his explorations in the
districts of Broken Bay, and of the river Hawkesbury which
flowed into it, opened up a rich fertile country from which m
course of time supplies of grain were obtained.
In the third year of the colony’s existence, Captain Philip
commenced a plan of emancipating the better disposed of
the convicts who seemed to him to be desirous, of leading a
life of honesty and industry, and he granted two acres of
land and a house to each emancipist, with the conditional
promise of a further grant, as an encouragement to persevere
in raising themselves to the level of respectability and inde-
pendence.
In 1794 the Rev. Samuel Marsden reached the colony, as
second chaplain. He was appointed in January, 1793, whilst
still an undergraduate at Cambridge; and as the fleet was
to sail in the summer, his ordination had to be arranged without
delay, and it was followed by his marriage.
Marsden maybe truly called one of the Fathers of Australia,
and we shall endeavour to notice presently some of the more
important points in which his influence helped to build up
that distant colonial world. The son of a Yorkshire farmer
in a small way, he was educated in a village school, and after-
wards in the Free Grammar School of Hull, from which he
was removed to a place of business at Horsforth, near Leeds.
Anxious to become a minister of the Gospel of Christ, was
sent to St. John’s College, Cambridge, by the Elland Society,
to study with the view of becoming a clergyman. Through
the influence of Mr. Wilberforce, who was guided by the Rev.
Joseph Milner, head-master of the Grammar School at Hull,
he was chosen to fill the chaplaincy to which we have referred.
As a link with the past, we may mention that Marsden’s Bible
passed into the possession of Dr. Broughton, first Bishop of
Australia, who gave it to the late Bishop Selwyn, and by the
latter it was presented, in 1869, to Marsden’s grandson, the
Right Rev. S. E. Marsden, on his consecration as Bishop of
Bathurst in New South Wales.
At the close of a rule of five years Captain Philip returned
to England, and for a period of three years the colony was
administered by a deputy-governor. In 1795 Captain John
Hunter arrived as governor. About the same time the Cape
of Good Hope became a British possession, and our naval and
military commanders there sent to Governor Hunter an official
notification of the fact, with an expression of their earnest
desire to offer every assistance in their power to this young and
struggling colony.


Free settlers soon began to arrive in New South Wales, and
explorations were made in various quarters. Through the
energy of Mr. Bass and Lieut. Flinders the important discovery
was made that Van Diemen’s Land (now Tasmania) was an
island. Subsequently, Flinders 1 explored and surveyed a con-
siderable portion of the southern part of Australia which lies
to the west of Victoria, and he also visited the great bay called
Port Philip, part of which was subsequently named Hobson’s
Bay, on whose shores are the port and suburbs of Melbourne.
In 1800, Governor Hunter was succeeded by Captain King,
who had been commandant of Norfolk Island under Captain
Philip. 2 At this time the entire lands granted to settlers,
whether emancipist or free, amounted to 47,678 acres, and in
1801 the colonial population numbered 5,547 on the mainland
and 961 in Norfolk Island.
The unfortunate Captain Bligh, of the Bounty, succeeded
Governor King in 1806, and his rule of Australia was as dis-
astrous as his command of th q Bounty; for in 1808 the military
and civilians combined and effected a revolution, in which he
was placed under arrest, and the government exercised by the
commander of the forces.
In those days a British Government did not allow its em-
barrassments at home to impede the development of imperial
interests at a distance; and notwithstanding that our country
was at this time politically isolated on the Continent of Europe,
the Australian crisis was promptly dealt with, and Lachlan
Macquarie, a man of extraordinary vigour—though somewhat
arbitrary in the exercise of his power—was sent out as Gover-
nor of New South Wales. He reinstated Bligh for twenty-
four hours, and then himself resumed his post as Governor,
and with much energy applied himself to the reorganization of
the various departments of the public service, and to establish-
ing rules and regulations for the better observance of order
and decency.
In the time of Governor Hunter a rule had been made
under which every civil and military officer could claim a
grant from the Government of one hundred acres of un-
1 In Flinders’s later explorations Mr. (afterwards Sir John) Franklin
took part as a midshipman.
2 In 1803 a settlement of ten male and six female convicts, with a
sufficient guard, was planted in Yan Diemen’s Land, near the site of the
present city of Hobart Town ; and soon afterwards their numbers were
increased by a fresh consignment of convicts from England. The latter
had been sent out to Port Philip to make a settlement there, but through
lack of water they were unable to remain, and were transferred to Van
Diemen’s Land. It has always been a subject of congratulation in the
Port Philip district—now better known as Victoria—that this first and
only attempt to form there a convict settlement signally failed.


cleared land, and also an assignment of thirteen convicts as
servants to bring the land into order. Governor King added
a further rule, under which the employer of convict labour
was bound by a deed of covenant to clothe and maintain his
assigned servants for twelve months according to the same
rate of allowance as that allowed to convicts in the employ of
the Government; and the hours of labour were limited to six
on Saturdays and ten on other week-days, whilst Sunday was
a day of rest. Oftentimes the convict was able to perform his
allotted task so quickly as to have extra time for himself; and
if he could not turn this to profit by extra work, for which his
master paid him, he necessarily had plenty of idle time for
mischief This was felt to be a great evil; and the attempts
to correct the convicts by corporal punishment, which was too
often very arbitrarily and even cruelly exercised, were by no
means generally successful.
During Macquarie’s time, the best mechanics, or those who
were supposed to possess qualifications especially useful to
Government, were taken direct from the convict vessels on
their arrival, and sent to the Government-gangs, whilst (as
the Edinburgh Review pithily wrote) “ the poets, attorneys,
and politicians were put up to auction.” The settlers naturally
complained bitterly that they could not get any efficient work-
men to execute their designs, whilst the Governor himself was
being transformed into a useless and expensive builder.
Any of the convicts who were thus favoured by the Govern-
ment, and had money, found opportunities of ingratiating
themselves with the overseers and clerks of the different
offices, and, in consideration of a regular weekly payment of
ten shillings each, they were allowed to be at large at Sydney
and elsewhere. Any convict who had the advantage of this
indulgence, and conducted himself so as to avoid the censure
of the police, had a good opportunity of maintaining himself
with comfort; but the system was most prejudicial to the real
welfare of the colony, and was also most unfair to the less
favoured convicts. By degrees the management of the con-
victs passed chiefly into the hands of men of their own class.
The chief-superintendent was an emancipated convict, having
under him 142 remunerated overseers, of whom only 42 were
free settlers.
Mr. Bigge, who was sent out from England by the Govern-
ment to inquire into colonial matters, and whose reports were
published in 1822-23, remarked that the superintendents of
the higher class were too much occupied by interests of their
own to attend to the labour of those under them; and those
of an inferior class possessed neither sufficient courage nor
integrity to compel the convicts to work, nor sufficient skill


to direct them. When, in addition to this, we take into account
the almost complete freedom which the female convicts had
to give way to unbridled vice, we can well imagine how, even
under the rule of such an energetic man as Macquarie, the
colony must have been in a state of fearful degradation. In
1822 the number of emancipists was 4,376, of whom only 369
bore a good character. Still they were the wealthiest class
in the community. One emancipist owned 19,000 acres;
another 2,620 acres. In 1820 the emancipists had 92,618
acres, 40,643 head of horned cattle, and 221,079 sheep. They
were also the chief traders. One of them gained his wealth as
follows. Arriving in the colony as a young and active man,
he was employed in the penal gang of stone-masons, and then
set up a small retail shop, in which he continued till the
expiration of his term of service. He then repaired to Sydney,
where he extended his business, and by marriage increased his
capital. For many years he kept a public-house and retail
shop, which was the resort of many of the smaller settlers,
whom he led into habits of intoxication, and induced to sign
documents which placed their property under his control.
By these means and by an active use of the commoner arts of
overreaching ignorant and worthless persons, he accumulated
considerable wealth.
Some of the educated convicts opened schools and became
private tutors; and Mr. Bigge mentions the case of one who,
in his capacity as writing-master, used to instruct the son of a
free settler in the art of skilfully copying the signatures of
persons then living.
Alongside, however, of all this vice and degradation progress
was being made in material prosperity, though far too slowly
in the paths of respectability.
Even before the close of last century, the young colony had
begun to create an export trade in cloth manufactured from
the wool of colonial sheep, and which, together with linen
made in the colony and some excellent iron ore, were for-
warded to the mother country.
We have already referred to the "rant of land which each
civil and military officer was entitled to receive, and in many
cases this must have been very beneficial to the colony. The
Kev. S. Marsden, with the natural shrewdness of the York-
shireman, soon turned his one hundred acres to good account,
and, largely increasing his estate by purchase, he made a model
farm, which drew from M. Perron, a French explorer in 1802,
the following remarks:—“ No longer than eight years ago the
whole of this spot was covered with immense and useless
forests; what pains, what exertions must have been employed!
These roads, these pastures, these fields, these harvests, these


orchards, these flocks, the work merely of eight years.” M.
Perron also referred to Marsden as a man “ who generously
interfered in behalf of the poorer settlers in their distresses,
established schools for their children, and often relieved their
necessities ; whilst to the unhappy convicts whom the Justice
of their offended country had banished from their native soil,
he administered alternately exhortation and comfort.” 1
One of the greatest impediments to colonial progress in the
paths of purity was the rule that, with the exception of the
Governor and chaplain, no military officer should be allowed
to have his wife with him. This, and other circumstances
which tended to impede Christian progress, induced Mr.
Marsden to return to England in 1807, and on starting he
received a gratifying memorial from three hundred and two of
the principal inhabitants, expressing their thanks to him for his
exemplary conduct in the many important offices held by him,
and for all the benefits he had even then conferred on the
colony. He took with him some wool from his own farm,
and had it manufactured at Leeds into a material equal, if not
superior, to the manufactures of Saxony or France, and he
frequently expressed his firm conviction that Australia would
become the great wool-producing emporium for English trade.
He had frequent interviews with members of the English
Government, and endeavoured to impress upon them the
importance of reform in the treatment of the convicts,
Marsden had observed that by far the greater number of
reformed criminals consisted of those who had been either
married before they were transported, and whose wives had
obtained help to get out to the colony, or of thosp who had
married in the colony; and he endeavoured to induce the
Government to allow convicts’ wives (who chose to do so)
to accompany their husbands, even at the public expense.
This was refused, but the wives of officers and soldiers were
permitted to accompany their husbands, and not less than
three hundred forthwith went out with a single regiment.
Noticing that oftentimes convicts, through ignorance of
profitable kinds of skilled labour, were either unemployed or
were occupied in work which was extremely irksome to them-
selves and of no advantage to the colony, he urged the Home
Government to appoint practical mechanics and general manu-
1 Marsden’s experience, too, was useful in showing that convicts were
reclaimable and might be treated with confidence, for at a later date he
could write thus : “ The greater part of my property is in the charge of
common felons, more than a hundred miles from my house, in the woods ;
and much of it I have never seen. I can truly say I feel no more concern
about ray sheep and cattle than if they were under my own eye, I have
never once visited the place where many of them are, having no time
to do so.”


facturers as instructors for them; but his scheme met with no
official sympathy, until by dint of perseverance and by setting
clearly before the Secretary of State the fact that remuner-
ative work would materially lessen the expense of the convict
establishment, and so benefit the home country, he succeeded
in obtaining a formal consent to its adoption.
p On receiving this consent Marsden forthwith hastened, at
his own cost, into Warwickshire and Yorkshire, sought out four
artisans and manufacturers, and sent them off without delay
to the colony. With the same energy he urged the Home
Government to institute a female penitentiary, as there were
1,400 women in the colony, and of these more than 1,000 were
unmarried, nearly all convicts, and many of them living in a
state of great moral degradation. The Secretary of State
promised his aid, but several years passed before the Governor
of the Colony would give his consent to such an institution
being formed.
At the present day we can scarcely imagine what New South
Wales was at that time, and even so late as the year 1822 it
was designated “ the fifth or pickpocket quarter of the' globe
but this did not adequately express its degraded condition. In
1818, when Marsden replied to a memorial of sympathy from the
colonel and officers of the 46th Foot, on the successful result
to an action which he was compelled to bring against the
Government Gazette, for a libel written by the Governor’s
Secretary, he was constrained to write as follows :
When you first arrived in New South Wales every barrier against
licentiousness 1 was broken down, every fence swept away. There were
a few, and but a few, who resolved to stand their ground, and preserve
that line of conduct which the wisest and best men consider essential as
marking the distinction between the good and the evil. . . Had you not
arrived in New South Wales and acted the honourable part you did, the
few who were marked for future conquest would not have been able to
have stood out longer, but must have either yielded to superior force or
have withdrawn from the colony. You just arrived in time to turn the
wavering balance, and to inspire the desponding with hope.
1 In 1805 Wilberforce wrote : “ I have been of late making strong
representations to Lord Castlereagh on the dreadful state of morals in
New South Wales. I have been assured on good authority that of near
2,000 children now in the colony, there are not 100 who receive any
education at all.” In 1809 Wilberforce wrote: “ Mr. Marsden’s coming over
to this country was so opportune, and the services he has been able to
render while here are such, that I cannot consider him any otherwise
than as a special instrument of Providence, sent over on a particular
errand, just when he could do most good here, and be delivered from
most evil in New South Wales. I hope we shall get the moral state of
the colony greatly reformed. Alas !in how many instances does our
national conduct in foreign countries call aloud for the vengeance of
heaven ! I hope I have been able to prevent some shocking violations of
our national religion in one of our distant settlements, some short time
ago.”


How one wishes that every regiment could emblazon on its
ensign the glorious record that, like the 46th Foob it had pro-
moted the cause of morality and piety in the district in which
lt Having succeeded in inducing the Government to allow
three more chaplains and three schoolmasters to go to the
colony, Marsden at once set to work to find men like Venn
and Milner, who, being renewed m the spirit of their minds,
were desirous to devote themselves to the spread of the Gospel
of the Saviour. He went from parish to P , s ® ek ,
them, and after a long search he selected, as well fitted for two
of the chaplaincies, the Rev. R. Cartwright and the Rev. Mr.
Cowper, who, with their families, returned to the colony wit
him Mr. Cowper afterwards became Archdeacon of Sydney,
and one of his sons became Prime Minister, whilst another was
Dean of Sydney, under the late Bishop Barker.
New South Wales was at this time in the Hiocese of India,
but until it was nearly fifty years old it remained without the
personal supervision of any Bishop. 1 „
Marsden was near his end before Australia had a Bishop
its own. The first Bishop (styled the Bishop of Australia) was
Dr. Broughton, who had previously been Archdeacon of Sydney.
At the present time there are eighteen Australasian bishoprics
and the Nonconformists are organized as m England. Une ot
the first acts of Dr. Barry, the present Bishop of Sydney has
been to invite the Nonconformists to join with Episcopalians
in united opposition to infidelity. Of the good work done in
Svdney by the late Bishop Barker and in Melbourne by
Bishop Perry, or of the labours of Bishop Reunion in
Adelaide, Bishop Thornton in Ballarat, and other pious and
devoted Bishops, it does not fall within the scope of this
paper to make more than a passing mention. #
During Marsden’s visit to England he was much in the com-
pany of the managers of the Church Missionary Society, which
1 In the “ Memoirs” of the late Dr. Daniel Wilson, Bishop of Calcutta
we find a letter from him, in September, 1832, to the Archdeacon of
Sydney, who was evidently perplexed with reference to the admission o
the unconfirmed to the Lord’s Table. The Bishop wrote : The per-
mission for the young to approach the Lord’s Table when desirous of
confirmation is allowed by the rubric. The> exammation of them
privately, and the decision upon their qualifications all fall p
office and duty of a presbyter. Of course you do not read the Confirma-
tion Service, nor proceed to imposition of hands, nor pronounce that
Apostolical benediction which has ever been accounted (with ordination,
iurisdiction, correction of doctrine, and discipline and superintendence ,
the peculiar spiritual province vested in the office termed E P IS( Nj? ’
Any solemnity which can be given to your examination and admissio
to the Holy Communion, short of these would of course be most
desirable, at your distance from your diocesan.”


had then been established only about seven years, and he con-
sidered very fully with them the subject of Missions to New
Zealand. Little did any of them then perceive how the door
for such mission work was to be opened; but, in God’s good
providence, there was on board the convict ship in which
Marsden returned to New South Wales in 1809, a dark-skinned
sailor whose distressing cough and weak state of health at-
tracted his attention, and who appeared to be a New Zealand
chieftain named Ruatara, working his way back (as he hoped)
to his native land. In 1805 he had been induced to become a
sailor in a British whaling vessel which had touched at the
place where he resided. And passing from one vessel to
another, he had experienced such foul play and perfidiousness,
as well as personal ill-treatment, that he was almost reduced
to a dying state when Marsden became acquainted with him.
On this convict ship, however, Ruatara received great kindness,
and, having recovered his health, he formed a deep friendship
lor Marsden, and subsequently assisted the early mission work
in New Zealand.
On Marsden return to New South Wales his attention was
so much occupied in colonial matters that he was obliged to
defer, for a time, the missionary enterprise; but as soon as the
opportunity afforded he purchased the Active, a brig of 100
tons burden, and in this he prepared to start for New Zealand
with two laymen, Messrs. Hall and King, who, however, were
obliged to sail by themselves, as Governor Macquarie forbade
his leaving the colony.
These first heralds of the Gospel to New Zealand sailed for
the Bay of Islands, and, through the influence of Ruatara,
were received with kindness. In 1814 they returned to Sydney
in the Active, with Ruatara and six other chiefs, who were
most kindly received by Marsden. In the same year—a year
famous amongst us for the triumphant entry of the Peninsula
hero and his forces into Paris—Marsden himself sailed to
New Zealand, accompanied by Messrs. Kendall, Hall, and King
with their wives and children, and eight Maoris, 1 and some
mechanics. The mission work now began in earnest, and was
carried on amidst much peril and many difficulties. Marsden
made in all seven voyages to New Zealand, and his last was in
the year 1837, when he was able to write to the Church
Missionary Society an account which glows with pious exulta-
tion, describing the success which God had granted to the
work of the missionaries. The want of unity, however, amongst
the native tribes and the disgraceful 2 conduct of the English
1 Maoris are the New Zealand aborigines.
2 The late Professor Darwin visited the north of New Zealand in 1835
and referred in glowing terms (in his “ Naturalist’s Voyage round the


and European traders and settlers much troubled him, and he
longed for the country to come under the strong hand ot
British rule ; but he was not permitted to see the fulfilment of
his desires on this point. He died in 1838, and it was not till
the Ist of May, 1810, that the Queen’s sovereignty—the result
in the North Island of a treaty obtained with the Maoris
through the influence of the missionaries—was proclaimed,
and New Zealand became a British dependency.
One of Marsden’s missionary fellow-workers, the Rev, Mr.
Williams (who went to New Zealand in 1825, and after-
wards became Bishop of Waiapu) wrote thus, in 1867, of the
state of Christianity amongst the Maoris : “ Great numbers
have fallen away; but it is a cheering fact that there are
twelve native clergymen, supported by- the contributions of
their flocks, amounting to upwards of £3,000, who are labour-
ing with diligence and zeal to lead their countrymen in the
right path. The present period is the sifting-time of the
Church, a sifting which will be for its benefit.” 1
From the “Church Missionary Report for 1883-84,” we
gather that, at the present time, the native Christians belong-
ing to the Church of England are 31,865, and that the native
clergymen are 27 in number. The total native population is
about 45,000. When Marsden was in England, he wrote from
Cambridge to a friend, in 1809, respecting what he called his
mission to this country: “ The object of my mission has been
answered far beyond my expectations. I believe that God has
gracious designs towards New South Wales, and that His
Gospel will take root there, and spread amongst the heathen
nations to the glory of His grace.”
Governor Macquarie, after consulting Marsden with refer-
ence to the Australian aborigines, formed a farm and a kind
of reformatory school at Paramatta (which was fifteen miles
from Sydney), for the purpose of civilizing and Christianizing
them. The attempt, however, failed, partly because the civi-
lized mode of life was so unnatural to the free-roving savage,
but more especially because Christianizing was made only
subsidiary to the civilizing process. The Governor having
conceived a violent prejudice to Marsden, gave him no share
in the management of this institution, and several years elapsed
before the latter took an active part in its affairs.
World,” pp. 417-430) to the signs of civilization about the Mission Station
at Waimate, Bay of Islands, as well as to the energy and cordiality of
the missionaries themselves. He did not think that the Maoris com-
pared favourably with the natives of Tahiti, and he added : “ The greater
part of the English are the very refuse of society. I look back to one
bright spot, and that is Waimate, with its Christian inhabitants.”
1 “ Christianity among the New Zealanders,” p. 377.


The state of the aborigines as years went on became more
and more a matter of deep anxiety to Christian men. Attempts
to Christianize them were made by the Society for the Propa-
gation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, aided by the Colonial
Government, by the Wesleyan and Church Missionary Societies,
and by the London Missionary Society, but without success ;
and yet in Tasmania, in 1880, some 800 aborigines, of the same
type as the Australians, and the remnant of a body which
numbered 1,600 in 1808, were placed by the Government in
Flinders Island, which is two hundred miles in circumference,
under the care of a kind protector, Mr. Robinson, and he has
earnestly denied that they were incapable of gratitude, cour-
tesy, or kindness, or were not alive to the simple truths of
Christianity, At the religious services “ their conduct ” (he
said) “ would be a pattern to many congregations of civilized
Europeans. In sacred melody they displayed great proficiency.
They learned to write, and answered well questions in Scrip-
ture history, doctrine, and duty, as well as in arithmetic and
useful information. The females showed much aptitude in
sewing, etc.; in fact, both sexes gave ample proofs of some
degree of mental application and physical industry.’*
The whole, however, of this little band have melted away,
and not one of the aborigines of Tasmania now exists. We
might fill pages with tales of the atrocities perpetrated by
ill-disposed colonists on the aborigines of Australia and
Tasmania, which were quite sufficient to make the latter look
upon Christianity as only a designation for more subtle and
successful modes of retaliation than the savage black man of
the woods possessed; but we must not forget that the Home
Government frequently urged on the colonial authorities the
necessity for upholding the just and humane treatment of the
aborigines, and that, in the fourth year of the present reign,
when the Colonial Council passed an Act to check such atro-
cities, the Governor of New South Wales issued a proclama-
tion, stating plainly that the aborigines were subjects of the
Queen, and had an equal right with the people of European
origin to the protection and assistance of the law of England.
We turn to a brighter page. When the news of the victory
at Waterloo reached the colony, the settlers exerted themselves
to send home a subscription to the fund for the relief of the
widows and orphans of those who had fallen in the battle. 1
Young Australia soon began to compete for English prizes ;
and early in the reign of George IY., William Charles VVent-
1 The like practical sympathy of the colonists ■with the old country
has been frequently shown even to the most recent times. More than
one-tenth of the Crimean Patriotic Fund was contributed in Australia.


worth, an Australian born, was second amongst twenty-five
competitors, at the University of Cambridge, for the Chancel-
lor’s Medal for the best English Poem on a stated subject.
Mr. Praed gained the first place.
In 1822 Sir Thomas Brisbane became Governor of New
South Wales, and under him the colonies gained the privilege
of a free press and trial by jury; explorations were pushed
forward, and reached even to Moreton Bay, which lay 450
miles north of Sydney, and gave the name to a large district
now forming part of the great colony of Queensland.
Science received a great impetus under Sir T. Brisbane, for
at his own expense he founded an observatory at Paramatta,
with skilled assistants to help him in his observations, and
he published a catalogue of 7,385 stars.
Year by year, fresh settlements were formed ; and in 182G
one was formed at King George’s Sound, at the south-west of
Australia, to prevent an anticipated attempt on the part of
the French to found a colony there. In the early part of the
present reign, a fresh impetus was given to immigration ; but
the discovery of gold in 1851 attracted vast numbers of
settlers from all parts of the world, and proved to be a
great incentive to the opening up of previously unexplored
districts. Cities and towns sprang into existence with
marvellous rapidity, and with increased population there
came the extension of political privileges, so that in a very
few years to the greater part of Australia free parliamentary
and legislative powers were fully conceded.
When the centenary anniversary of the Colonial Settlement
is celebrated in 1888, the progress of the colonies in material
prosperity, unless adversity intervenes, will be the theme of
much exultation; and no doubt attention will especially be
drawn to the rapidity with which the colony of New South
Wales has contributed a force of 800 men to form part of
the British army now in Egypt and to the vast loans which
the Colonial Governments have been able to raise in England,
and which amount in the aggregate to nearly £100,000,000.
These loans are not the same burden to the colonies
as the National Debt is to us at home, for they have
been expended on remunerative public works, and in the
case of New South Wales the interest of its loans is
nearly defrayed out of the profits from its public works.
Looking at the map of Australasia, which is generally on a
scale far smaller than that of the British Isles, we almost
fail to grasp the vastness of its area, which is equal to that of
Germany, Austria, Italy, and European Russia, and Turkey
combined; but if we bear in mind that the smallest colony
(Tasmania) is of the area of Ireland, whilst New Zealand is


as large as the British Isles, and New South Wales, even in
its present reduced condition, is more than three times the
size of New Zealand, we may form some idea of the extent of
the great Southern Dependency, and realize the responsible
trust which God has committed to the British nation.
The rapidity, however, of its growth, and the special draw-
backs of its early degraded condition, have been serious
obstacles to its religious and moral progress; and we must
draw attention to this, as there is no doubt a special risk in its
being in some degree lost sight of amidst the glare of the
material and financial prosperity to which we have already
referred. In 1817 an auxiliary of the British and Foreign
Bible Society was formed in New South Wales, and in seven
years its remittances to London amounted to £1,400. We
turn to the Society’s Report of 1884, and we find that the
entire Australasian contributions (exclusive of moneys from
sale of Scriptures) amounted to only £3,749 Is. 2d., of which
the Sydney Committee contributed £1,200 ; whilst against the
name “ Melbourne ” is a sad blank under the heading “ free
contributions.” We turn to the Church Missionary Society
Report for last year, and the only entry of contributions from
Australia is the sum of £213 17s. Bd., raised in New South
Wales. Cannot the Australasian Churches rise to the dignity
of being Missionary Churches ? / We would fain hope that
they lack only the opportunity and not the will, for when the
late Bishop Patteson visited the Dioceses of Adelaide, Mel-
bourne, Sydney, and Brisbane in 1864, he received encourage-
ment such as he had never anticipated, and he thanked God
for the opportunities afforded to him “in the crowded
meetings to tell people face to face their duties, and to
stand up as an apologist of the despised Australian black,
and the Chinese gold-digger, and the Melanesian islander.”
We hope that confederation, which many of the colonists are
earnestly desiring as a means of mutual support in matters
political, may set an example to the Churches for more united
action in matters spiritual, and that New South Wales, be-
coming more and more interpenetrated by a true missionary
spirit, may stir up the other colonies to help in the realiza-
tion of those hopes which Henry Venn expressed in 1786,
and to which we have already referred, that the Australian
Settlement midbt prove to be the means of “ opening con-
nexions with the heathen, as a foundation for the gospel of
our God and Saviour to be preached unto them.”
The above is reprinted from the “ Churchman,” a monthly magazine, published by
Elliot Stock, Paternoster liow, London.
