

Beautful Views and description of TENNYSON
ON THE PARRAMATTA RIVER
Facing the Champion Course.




THE
PARRAMATTA RIVER
A SKETCH OF ITS
Attractions, Historic Associations, &c,
AND A GLIMPSE AT THE
TENNYSON ESTATE
WITH ITS FUTURE.
BY "LINNAEUS.”




INTRODUCTION
SmSt WILL obviously he unnecessary in giving a notice
S|S of the Parramatta Biver and its environs to dwell
S§ii at any length on the familiar objects intervening
between the King Street Perry Wharf and the
* general entrance to the river.
It will suffice" to say that, as Darling Harbour is
steamed down, on the right are the various ferry stations
and the wharves of the chief intercolonial shipping lines,
at which are usually moored some of the finest steamers
and sailing ships afloat. Prominent among these may he
mentioned the palatial structures of the Grafton Wharf,
the Union Company of New Zealand, Howard Smith &
Sons, Huddart, Parker, & Co., and many other coasting
and trading company’s liners.
On the opposite shore are Pyrmont and Balmain, the
old A. S. N. Co.’s shipbuilding yards, the ferry stations ;
and, further on, Waterview Bay (with Mort’s Dock in the
distance), Snail’s Bay, Longnose Point, Long Coye, and
the islands of Biloela (Cockatoo), Schnapper (Spectacle) ;
and moored, just out of the fair-way opposite Cockatoo,
are the “ Wolverene ” and the “ Vernon ” training ships.


Darling Harbour cleared, the Goat Island powder
magazine is close by on the right, and directly in front loom
out the stern bluffs of Ball’s Head, with the rugged coast
line extending around to Greenwich, at which the Lane
Cove steamers usually stop, hut which is missed by the
Parramatta boats. It was in the stone quarry at the base
of these cliffs that Edward Trickett worked with his father
for many years, and there laid the foundation of that mus-
cular power and endurance which has made his name
famous as the once “ champion of the world.”
Biloela passed on the left, and the entrance to the
Lane Cove Itiver on the right, the Parramatta proper is
entered. Within a few minutes’ steaming Pern Bay and
Hunter’s Hill are passed, and in rapid succession the ferry
stations of Drummoyne, Pive Hock, Gladesville, and
Chiswick; the river from this assumes the character of
the famed Hawkeshury and Broadwater systems.


View from the Estate, looking towards Five Dock:.


PARRAMATTA RIVER
JT is a notable circumstance that nearly all cities of the
Old World are approached from the sea by a river,
or have been built upon the banks of some important
stream. Thus, London on the Thames, Paris on the
Seine, Plorence on the Arno, Lome on the Tiber, Cairo on
the Nile, &c., &c. Perhaps it is in accordance with the
proverbial nature of matters Antipodean that we reverse
the order of things here, and have built our city on the
shores of our inland sea, and so have preserved the Parra-
matta and Lane Cove Livers unpolluted by dense settle-
ment on their banks, and have left them available for
suburban retreats free from the insanitary surroundings of
the city. In any case, it has been a fortunate matter that we
have been able to cast to the ocean what must have proved
an intolerable burden to the rivers which still happily
retain their pristine purity and freedom from contamina-
tion.
A philosopher has left his opinion on record that no
country can be happier than that which has no history ;
but sages may differ even on this point. Perhaps a com-
promise may be struck by concluding that a country is
none the worse for having a short history, and if so, we
may certainly claim this condition for New South Wales.


View of th.e Estate on a Race Day.


Yet though this history dates back a century, intimately
associated with it, and woven in the web and woof of the
narrative of its early struggles and privations, its later
triumphs and successes, is the Parramatta Biver. In the
early days it was the chief highway then known to the
source of a reliable permanent water supply, for the bush
track from Sydney to Rosehill at the head of the tidal river
was a boggy, rugged and dangerous journey, and rarely
attempted for many years until a passable road was con-
structed.
It was at Bosehill—as Parramatta was first called—
that Governor Phillip, attracted by the suitability of the
soil and the pure supply of fresh water for cultural pur-
poses, first fixed upon the site for a farm and garden. It
was here the first orchard was planted, and the first grain
sown. Here also the first sheep were depastured and here
the first cattle grazed, though the value of our indigenous
grasses was but faintly guessed at. Little was it dreamed
then that within the space of a lifetime the export
of wool would exceed in annual value thirty million
pounds sterling; that we should he sending to England
vast consignments of fresh and preserved meats to
cheapen food to the poverty-stricken of the mother
country; or that wine and fruit would in the future
form important features in our exports. By a happy
chance the dried pips of an orange which had been
brought from Madeira and one of the Islands of the
Azores by a servant of Capt. Phillip, were sown at Hose-
hill, and thus was made known the exceptional suitability
of the district for the growth of this fruit, which has since


"View from th.e Estate, looking down th.e River
Showing the Ivleroantile Club Boat-house.


rendered the place famed the world over. Indeed perhaps
many of the largest trees of the orange in the world are
growing here, being oyer fifty years old, yet in the most
robust health. Some idea may be formed of their phe-
nomenal productiveness when it is mentioned that there
are several trees in the neighbourhood from which more
than four hundred dozens of marketable fruit have been
gathered in a single season. Not only is the district famed
for its oranges, but nearly every fruit of temperate zones
may be grown to advantage throughout the region inter-
sected by the Parramatta and Lane Cove Livers —Lyde,
Gladesville, the Pennant Hills, Gordon, and other settle-
ments. The apple, pear, plum, peach, nectarine, almond,
apricot, loquat, granadilla, with almost every fruit-yielding
shrub, grow in the wildest luxuriance, and during the
season these products form the chief trade of the river
and suburban railways to the Sydney market and for
export. Profitable as this trade has been in the past, it
promises to be a very pronounced success in the future,
as the recent efforts to export fresh fruit to Europe, and
the attention which has been directed to the preserving,
drying, and canning of fruits and vegetables must give a
great impetus and a new direction to the industry of fruit
growing.
It may further be mentioned as adding interest to
the Parramatta, that its banks, as also those of the Lane
Cove Liver, are peculiarly rich in indigenous vegetation,
and it was from these districts that our early botanists en-


View of the Estate from Putney, showing the Champion Course.


riched the gardens, greenhouses, and conservatories of
England with the treasures which for years have been the
glory of home cultivators, and the chief features of every
Horticultural Exhibition throughout Europe.
This brief notice of the town, which is given as lend-
ing interest to the district and its historic river, must be
closed by the remark that Parramatta is, altogether, a
pleasantly situated place —has all the advantages of
modern progressive towns —gas and water supply, a school
of arts and library, schools, churches, a theatre, town hall,
and extensive railway station, with speedy communication
by rail and river.


View from ttie Estate, looking up tine River.


TENNYSON.
Haying thus briefly sketched the early history of the
Parramatta and the general character of its chief town
and surroundings, a few words may be devoted to the
Tennyson Estate, which is the prime motif in directing
attention to the river.
Undoubtedly one of the most strikingly picturesque
features of the Parramatta River is that bold tongue of
land on the right, situate less than a mile from Gladesville
Bridge, forming the promontory running out to the river
between Glades’ Bay on the right and Morison s Bay on
the left, its wharf and landing place being midway between
Gladesville and the picturesque Putney Point. The Bays
named are large sheets of water which form the boundaries
of the property on either side. Tennyson—originally
Raven’s Point —has lor many years been an attractive
retreat for pleasure and picnic parties, and indeed has been
almost the only portion of the “ forest primeval ” remain-
ing uncleared and unbuilt upon by private residences yet
admitting of pleasant rambles and pastimes for young and
old. The wharf is reached in half an hour from King
Street, and ferry boats ply regularly and frequently from
and to the city.


Ascending from the wharf the visitor in a few seconds
reaches a well-elevated plateau of level land, extending
hack as far as the eye can reach to the boundary formed
hy the uncleared land, with scarcely any of its surface
broken hy irregularities, hut gently sloping to the river
and hays on either side. As relating to the sanitary
features of the estate may he noted the total absence of
mud-flats or low-lying coast land, which so frequently mar
the beauty and attractions of river-side resorts. Tennyson
is hounded all round with clear deep water, which washes
to the base of its rocky outline.
SOIL AND VEGETATION.
Although the water frontages and contour line pre-
sent a bold rocky face, the crown of the peninsula is a
level table-land of sound sandy loam, resting in parts on a
clayey subsoil, but mainly overlapping the sandstone rock.
This soil is exceedingly productive and well adapted for gar-
dening. In the process of clearing for layingdown the survey
lines, some of the indigenous flora and vegetation for which
the place was famed, has of course been destroyed, but
sufficient remains to attest the fertility of the soil and its
special suitability for flowering plants. As examples of
this note may he made of a few of these gems, several of
which, as before observed, have for years past formed con-
spicuous features in the greenhouses and conservatories of
England and the European continent. Generally speaking
the character of the soil resembles that of the Lane Cove
and Hyde districts, and the same classes of plants prevail.
A great many forms of epacris, lysinema, eriostemon,


sprengelias, boronias (of which the native rose is one), and
other dwarf heath-like plants, with lobelias, campanulas,
flannel-flower (actinotus), prevail. The pretty “curl curl”
grassy rush, the fern-leaved Lomatia, and many varieties
of ferns —maidenhairs, davallias, pteris, aspleniums, are
characteristic of shaded glens and rocky nooks; while
plants of shrubby growth embrace the persoonias (Gee-
bungs), Bossioes, Acacias, Isopogons, Banksias, native pear
(Zylomela), &c. The prevailing timber of the district is
the weeping eucalyptus (E. lachryma), the honeysuckle
(Banksia littoralis), the she oak (Casuarina), the native
cherry (Exocarpus), and a few others.
DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
It is difficult to conceive any piece of land enjoying
better natural conditions for drainage. It is well elevated,
has a gentle inclination to Glades’ Bay on the one hand
and to Morison’s Bay on the other. In addition to this,
the soil is a sandy loam resting on a sub-stratum of sand-
stone rock —the very essentials insisted on by scientific
men for securing sanitary conditions to a residence.
WATER SUPPLY.
The numerous wells on the estate attest the fact of ex-
cellent water being obtainable by even shallow sinking, the
porous sandstone rock acting as a natural filter to the
supply. But as it is proposed to supply the North Shore
with water from the Lane Cove district, when that project
is carried out, the whole district of Ryde, Gladesville, &c.,
will be embraced by the scheme.


GAS SUPPLY.
Within a very short time of the sale of the first portion
of the land, an arrangement has been made for the supply
of gas from the Mortlake works.
BUILDING STONE, &c.
Pine freestone may be quarried on and adjacent to
the estate; while the facility afforded by water carriage
brings the produce of the North Shore brick yards well
within reach for building purposes. Several fine pic-
turesque residences, built of the stone of the locality, mav
be seen as they are passed on the way to Tennyson.
SEA BATHING.
The water of the Parramatta, and the extensive bays
on either side of the Tennyson peninsula is of the purest,
and the coast line presents excellent opportunities for the
construction of private bathing houses with but very little
cost. Indeed, the advantages of sea bathing may here
be enjoyed to the full, the water being perfectly limpid
and clear, and untainted by sewage and other abomina-
tions which pollute the harbor and waters adjacent to the
shores in the vicinity of large centres of population with
defective drainage. Tennyson has a total frontage of
6,500 feet, with no reservation, to the deep, clear water.
BOATING AND YACHTING.
With ready access to the water from every allotment,
und the privilege of constructing boat-houses and laying
down moorings for yachts and larger craft, Tennyson
presents exceptional advantages. Every allotment not
having an absolute frontage to the water will have a right


of access by well formed roads, and be just as free to the
use of the river as those holding frontages. With this in
view the roads have been projected by the surveyor to
meet the special need of the allotments in this direction.
At the present moment, as is well known, it is almost
impossible to purchase frontages to the harbor, every
available nook and front having long been occupied. The
same remark applies to nearly all the desirable points on
the Parramatta and Lane Cove Rivers, those fortunate
persons who have erected their dwellings knowing too
well the value of such frontages to readily part with them.
And as every year means of communication are extended
and will be facilitated with settlement, so every year
gives an increased value to such positions.
FACILITIES OF APPROACH.
Tennyson has always had a good wharf, but a new’
permanent structure, of a most substantial character,
has recently been erected exactly midway between
Gladesville and Putney Point, to which the Parra-
matta boats regularly ply, from 6.30 a.m. till 11.15
p.m., at intervals of an hour or less, there and back.
As the estate is settled it will abut on the old
Hyde and Gladesville Hoad, and, as this favorite
district progresses, every year will witness fresh facilities
for communication, just as it has been realised with the
Lane Cove River and the North and South Shore lands of
the harbour. It may also be observed that the Ryde
railway station is but a pleasant stroll of fifteen minutes
from the estate, and that public schools and churches are
within easy distance. It may he added that the tracings


of the new Tramway, proposed by the Government, bring
that means of communication right through the estate; and
it is expected, before the time fixed for the sale, bona jides
of this proposal will be obtained.
FISHING.
The two bays before alluded to are favorite feeding
and breeding grounds for the black bream, red bream, black
fish, flathead, and other fishes common to the harbor,
and good hauls of these are regularly taken by those who
delight in the pleasures of the Waltonian art. Many
families in the neighbourhood of the Lane Cove and
Parramatta Livers, by the simple contrivance of a fish
trap, manage to furnish their breakfast tables every morn-
with fish taken fresh from the water.
THE CHAMPION COURSE.
To the numerous attractions offered by Tennyson as a
place of residence, not the least is the perfect view obtain-
able therefrom of the last two miles and finish of the boat
races, for which the Parramatta is world-famed, and
destined to maintain this prestige as the premier course in
the world. In the very near future the ’vantage points
for viewing these great athletic trials of strength and
endurance will he pleasantly dotted with villas and more
pretentious marine residences, just as the unpicturesque
Thames is fringed with palatial structures on either side
of the Oxford and Cambridge course, from start to finish.
The advantage to the resident of Tennyson will be in the
fact that he may lounge at his ease on his own verandah


or balcony and witness every phase of the race, while on
the Thames the observer can merely catch a glimpse of
the contestants as they pass the spot on which he is
located. The frontages to the Thames have, ages ago,
passed into the possession of the titled aristocracy, and at
the present moment it would take a princely fortune to
purchase any spot commanding a fair view of the river.
In offering a vague guess at the future of this district, it
is only necessary to look back a period of only five or
ten years, and note the vast progress of the suburbs of
Sydney. If so much has been done in that short past,
what may be expected in the immediate future, accelerated
as matters must be by the march of science and invention,
so characteristic of modern times ?
VIEWS PROM THE ESTATE.
Our artist has selected a few of tlie many delightful
river peeps which may be had from every portion of the
estate, but a visit to the spot is necessary to realise the
widely varying beauties of the views of the river and the
distant landscape. In addition to the bays named, which
adjoin the property, the historic Hen and Chickens Bay,
Five Dock Bay, Concord, the Mortlake Gasworks, and the
prominent structures, churches, &c., of the distant Sydney
suburbs may be taken in by the eye from the Tennyson
plateau: and the rapidly passing river steamers and sail-
ing boats give incident, life, and perennial interest to the
scene.
The general survey and laying-out of the estate has
been entrusted to Mr. J. J. Robertson, who has ably
carried out the instructions of the Company to so subdivide


the land, to provide drains and roads with a view to
convenience, so that the best sanitary opportunities
may be taken advantage of, and further to secure each
allotment from in any way marring the view or the out-
look from a neighbouring one. The configuration of the
land has rendered this arrangement quite easy, and enabled
such steps to be taken as will secure for the site a total
immunity from the blunders and inconveniences attending
the taking-up, in the early times, of river and harbour
frontages, This has been obtained with hut slight depar-
ture from the modern rectilinear plan.
CLIMATIC CONDITIONS—GENERAL
HEALTHINESS OF THE DISTRICT, &c.
It was owing to the salubrity of the climate of Parra-
matta and district that Governor Phillip built the first
Government House there, and the various Governors down
to the time of Sir Charles Fitz-Roy, held their court there.
It was at the entrance to the Park that Lady Mary Fitz-
Roy was killed by a carriage accident. This lady had
endeared herself to all classes of the people, poor and rich,
and her death was in many ways deplorable. She may
truly be said to have exhibited in her person all the best
characteristics of an English gentlewoman. A good story
is still told of her by the old identities of the district as to
her domestic qualities. A Sydney tradesman called at
Government House early one morning for orders, and
seeing a neatly-dressed, rosy-cheeked body hustling about
at such an early hour, concerning herself with the
domestic arrangements of the household, he fancied she
must be the housekeeper, and thinking to secure the lion’s


share of Government House business, he slipped into her
hand a five pound note, evidently in that spirit of gratitude
for the part which Dr. Johnson was apt to define as “a
lively hope of favours to come.” It is said that Lady
Mary accepted the gift with a quiet smile, but presented it
to a charitable institution.
In the foregoing an attempt has been made to present
to the public a few of the characteristics of the Tennyson
Estate, chiefly with the view to induce intending pur-
chasers to pay the place a visit, for only on a personal
acquaintance can the attractions and advantages of the site
for residences be adequately appreciated.
It is scarcely necessary to add that the
TITLE IS TORRENS’,
and purchasers can get their deeds at any moment.
r l he allotments are of good villa size, varying from 66
to 100 feet frontage, by depths ranging up to 320 feet.
TERMS.
Only £5 per cent, deposit; balance by instalments to
suit purchasers. Buyers desirous of paying cash will
receive a discount of two-ctfid-ct-half per cent, if paid
within one month ; and those wishing to receive the
convenience of deferred payments, may obtain this for a
period extending over ten years. Interest calculated on
unpaid balances at half-yearly rests, at the rate of six
per cent only.
Note. —As this Estate embraces a large area of land,
and as it is probable that for some time to come the
remaining unsold portions will be available for sale, it is
suggested that this pamphlet be retained for future
reference.


PECIAL INDUCEMENT
To bipose desirous of BUILDING- upop
THIS ESTATE,
Jo blpG BuLjGt? Wlpo erecbs a |dousG, bo blpG tfalue
of £BOO and upWards, Wi blpip EWC YEARS
fporp DSY af PURCHASE, ib Ipas beep
decided bo pipesenb A FREE STEAMER
TICKET for HIMSELFj WIFE apd
FAMILY) fop a period exbepdipg otfetpTHREE
YEARS j apd blpG Gorppapa Will liberal
bo Build


FARNGLL & ROBERTSON,
J\anb ? Mining cinb (Jeneruf JJsfttfc jfgenfs ?
TATTERSALL’S CHAMBERS,
HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
Mr. FARN ELL will undertake any business connected
with the Lands and other Departments.
Mr. ROBERTSON will undertake the Survey and Sub-
division of Estates, &e.
J. J. ROBERTSON,
Licensed and JA ining 3 uf \ yeyor :
Specially Jjicensed under the Jleal property Act,
X.ATJS GOVERNMENT MINING BVSTXTOB,
2 & 3 TATTERSALL’S CHAMBERS,
HUNTER ST., SYDNEY.


SCOULLER AND ROBERTSON,
Mercantile, Estate, Finance & General Agents & Brokers,
WYNYARD CHAMBERS,
Corner of Wynyard and York Streets,
s-yiDicsriEiY".
SEEDS & PLANTS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Flower Yases, Japanese Flower pots, Garden Tools, &c., &c.
P. L. C. SHEPHERD AND SON,
leeimea Plaa® Merchants,
29 ROYAL ARCADE, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
LAND FOR SALE.
nww USKRAL TERMS.
£1 Deposit, Balance extending over 10 years.
Splendid Building Sites in the following Estates :
mwm EWELEIGEi ROCKDALE, WEST KOGARAH,
CARL TOM,
Also, COTTAGES and VILLAS at Rockdale, "West
Kogarah, and Carlton.
£5 Deposit, Balance as Rent, from 10s. to 11s. 6d. per week.
Mr. H. Cambridge, our agent, will meet intending purchasers at Rockdale Station
by 10.38 a.m. train from Sydney, or Carlton Station by 3.5 p.m. train from Sydney, on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, when every information can be obtained.
The Mercantile Building, Land, & Investment Co., Limited,
CASTX*3K3R3£I J &.a3BE & STS.
EDWIN J. C, BRYANT, Manager.


MERCANTILE MUTUAL CHAMBERS.
Mercantile Mutual Insurance Co., Ltd
FIRE
INSURANCE.
FIRE
INSURANCE
Mead Qfidces s ig@ WITT iflllt,
Piro Insurance at Liowost Rates.
A Cash Bonus to Poliey-holders every year. 20 per cent, on Premiums paid last year. £3,885 divided.
KELSO KING, Secretary.
THE MERCANTILE
Building, Land, & Investment Co,, Ltd.,
s^'viiiisra-s
Head Office: PARK & CASTLEREA6H STS., SYDNEY.
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO. RESERVE FUND, £22,000.
HIGHEST RATES OF INTEREST FOR DEPOSITS.-Twelve Months, 7 per cent., Six Months,
6 per cent., at Call, withdrawable at any time, 5 per cent.
On 30th June, 1886, the deposits amounted to £47,930 6s. 6d.; and on SOth June, 1887, to
£94,984 6s. sd. No better evidence can be given to prove the confidence of the public in this
Company.
NEW ISSUE OF
OLJ A DpO A limited number of Investing Shares or
onnrvi-.Ui Coupons are still available. Up to the present
time the Coupons taken up have advanced to £10,120, showing that this class of investment,
INCURRING NO LIABILITY, at the same time returning such a satisfactory rate of INTEREST
—lO PER CENT.—is becoming appreciated by investors.
ASSETS of the COMPANY at 30th June, 1887, £285,119 3s. Bd. ] RESERVE FUND, £22,000.
APPLICATIONS FOR NEW SHARES RECEIVED DAILY.
EDWIN J. C. BRYANT, General Manager.


ESTABLISHED 1554
Venetian,
Gauze Wire,
Spring Roller,
AND
Conservatory
BUND MANUFACTURERS.
BRASS CORNICES & CORNICE POLES.
PIOTURB RODS.
MOSQUITO &, FLY WIRE DOOR SCREENS
A great boon during Summer Months.
OLD BLINDS PAINTED & REPAIRED.
315 PITT STREET, SYDNEY
(Near Temperance Hall).
BEST WORKMANSHIP AND LOWEST CHARGES


BAIT, RODD, ft PORVES,
Jo]
aitti
LMIMum
m
VALUATORS, FINANCIAL & ESTATE AGENTS,
CLEMENT’S CHAMBERS,
88 PITT STREET, SYDNEY
AUCTION SALES conducted at THE ROOMS on
TUESDAYS, at 11.30 a.m., and OUTDOORS on Saturday
Afternoons, or at such other times as may be arranged.
THE ENTIRE MANAGEMENT OE ESTATES
A SPECIALITY.
Agents for the Estates of
The late Hon. JOHN BLAXLAND, Ryde.
DANIEL COOPER, Esq., Point Piper,
Waverley.
WILLIAM COOPER, Esq., Randwick,
Botany.
Rose Bay, Woollahra,
Waterloo, Alexandria,
The late Rev. W. PURVES, City, Suburban, Country.
Trustees Mrs. METCALFE, City, Suburban, Country.
H. E. LORD, Esq., City, Botany.
And many others, too numerous to particularise in the
limited space here available.


Ctir SltatraW IniJiu'n firms.
jIHE Proprietors of THE ILLUSTRATED SYDNEY NEWS, in view of the uniform
as excellence of this Journal during its twenty-five years of existence, deem it only necessary
to assure the readers that they are determined to make THE ILLUSTRATED SYDNEY NEWS
the leading Australian Pictorial Periodical of the day, to which end neither expense nor labour
will be spared.
The Literary contributions are from the pens of Popular Authors, and consist of Editorials,
Short Leaders, and Serial Tales, and in connection with the Illustrations form a complete resume
of Australian progress in the Social, Scientific, Religious, and Literary World.
Published —OECES 81W»X#XXf® PJiM CQPlsr*
Jwelve Shillings per annum, in advance.
Clip Jliisfraliati Journal
■HE Best and Cheapest Family Magazine published in Australia, is issued on the first of each
month, and contains Serial Novels by writers of the first European, Colonial, and American
Reputation, Sensational Tales, Scientific Notes and Comments, Essays, Sketches, &c., the whole
constituting 58 pages of the most interesting and instructive reading matter published.
guhlmhed ManiMy* PRICE BIMPEMGM PMM MWMMEM «
Jerms, in advance, Six Shillings per annum.
Australian (Opinion.
NEW WEEKLY JOURNAL, in which the best opinions of the day on all topics of
interest are presented in a concise form.
Though essentially Australian in purpose, it includes all matters of special interest, whether
published in Australian, English, or Foreign Journals.
Price 3d, per copy ; 3s. per Quarter; or 12s. per annum.
PUBLISHERS AND PROPRIETORS—
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO.,
HOSKING PLACE, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.






THE HERCAHTILE
Building, Land, & Investment G. 0., Limited,
And SAVINGS BANK.
RESERVE FTTNID £22000.
CAPITAL:
£lOO,OOO 0:0
SUBSCRIBED CAPITAL
£50,000 : 0 : 0.
PAID-UP CAPITAL;
£31,143 0 0.
RESERVED LIABILITY
OF SHAREHOLDERS;
£18,857 0 0.
Hon. Sir ROBT. WISDOM, K.C.M.G., M.L.C.
F. J. GIBBES, Esq.. M.L.A.
JMartagtvtft gKrecior for gtortljevn gJt&trtcia:
E. HERBERT BECKE, Esq., J.R
• *5 emit er e-:
THE NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA. |
EXTRACTS FROM REPORTS.
PROFITS have been made during the past year AMOUNTING
£19,830 12s. 9d-, which is appropriated as follows:
To Dividend, equal to 25 per cent. .£7,780 11
~ Profit allotted to Coupon Holders, 21 per cent-,
making 10 per cent, per annum •• 101 8
~ Bonus to Depositors over six months, H per cent. I ggg g
„ Bonus to Depositors under six months, 1 per cent- *
Reserve Fund 10,500 0
Carrying forward to next half-year • • •• 809 3
£619,830 12
2
0
10
9
6
5
TO
11
; 2
i 10
I 0
_lO
! 9
\m
j.-.
••.-'l''-
mm
OFFICES
WEW
rj?:
SptVCCtOX'S :
GEO. MARSHALL, Esq,, M.D.
JAS. H. SAUNDERS. Esq.
Permanent Head Offices:
Corner
Park and Gastlereagh
Streets, Sydney.
Branch Offices (late Com-
mercial Bank Premises):
Smith Street, Kempsey.
GEO* E. THOMPSON,
Agent.
1
©encvcil Jttananev:
EDWIN J. G. BRYANT , Esq.
gtolieticr* :
F. VILLENEUVE-SMITH, Esq
Important Notice to Investors and Depositors.
SHARES.—A limited number of INVESTING SHARES (or
Coupons). INCURRING NO LIABILITY are available, upon
which INTEREST at the rate of 7 y 2 Per Cent, is Guaranteed,
together with PARTICIPATION IN PROFITS such as the
Directors may from time to time determine.
BONUSES OF PER CENT, nave been allottedto Coupon
Holders, making TEN PER CENT. PER ANNUM. The
Coupons taken up have advanced to £10,120, showing that this
class of investment, incurring no liability, at the same time return- ’
ing such a satisfactory RATE OF INTEREST—TEN PER
CENT., is becoming appreciated by investors.
The SAVINGS BANK in connection with this 'Company
pays the HIGHEST RATE OF INTEREST upon deposits.
Money Received upon Deposit, and Interest allowed as
follows :
Deposit for 12 months .. .. 7 per cent, With such Bonus
~ 6 ~ .. 6 ~ - as may
~ withdrawable at call ..5 ~ ) be declared.
Special arrangements for large sums.
Applications for NEW SHARES receiver} Daily, Balance Sheets anti all particulars forwarded immediately on application,
EDWIN J, 0. BRYANT, General'Manager
