

F.f*l 3
-form.';
COKSECEATIUG
CHURCHES
Burial (grounlrs,








P) SiSS/P %a.ii
S-S-77
PEEPABATIO ICsTS
IN ORDER TO THE
af a dfhurrh
The Church is to he furnished with Seats, a Font,
and a Communion Table, with linen and vessels for
the same; also with a Great Bible and Book of Com-
mon Prayer, a Beading Desk, a Pulpit and cushion, and
one or more surplices.
The Endowment, Deed of Conveyance, or the evi-
dences thereof, are to be laid before the Bishop or his
Chancellor, some time before the day appointed, in order
to the preparing of the Act or sentence of Consecration
against that day.
An intimation of the Bishop's intention to Consecrate
the Church, with the day and hour appointed, is to be
fixed on the Church door, at least three days before.
A chair is to be placed for the Bishop, on the north
side of the Communion table, and one on the south side,
for the Bishop's Chaplain : also another for the Chan-
cellor, or Actuary, without the rails, on the north
side.
All things are to be prepared for a Communion.


A FORM
CONSECRATING CHURCHES, &c.
The Bishop having proceeded to the front of the
Communion Table , the Petition for Consecration from
the Minister and Parishioners is presented to him,
and read by his direction: after which the sentence of
Consecration is read i/n like manner.
Then the Bishop, with the Clergy walks down
the principal Aisle of the Church and' back again—
the Bishop beginning the 2 Ath Psalm, and the
Clergy, repeating the alternate verses.
r l'HE Earth is the Lord’s, and all that therein is :
■- the compass of the world, and they that dwell
therein.
2. For He hath founded it upon the Seas: and
prepared it upon the Floods.
3. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord P
or who shall rise up in His Holy Place ?
4. Even he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart:
and that hath not lift up his mind unto vanity, nor
sworn to deceive his neighbour.
5. He shall receive the Blessing from the Lord,
and Bighteousness from the Hod of his Salvation.
6. This is the generation of them that seek Him:
even of them that seek thy face, O Jacob.
7. Lift up your heads, 0 ye Gates, and be ye lift
up, ye everlasting Doors : and the King of Glory shall
come in.
8. Who is the King of Glory ? It is the Lord,
strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle.


9. Lift up your Heads, 0 ye Gates, and be ye lift
up, ye everlasting Doors: and the -King of Glory
shall come in.
10. Who is the King of Gloty ? Even the Lord of
Hosts, He is the King of Glory.
Glory be to the Eather, and to the Sou, and to the
Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall
be: world without end. Amen.
*|[ When they return to the Lord's Table , the Bishop,
standing on the North Side t shall turn to the
Congregation and say :
DEARLY beloved in the Lord, forasmuch as devout
and holy men as well under the Law as under
the Gospel, moved either by the secret Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, or by the express command of God,
or by their own Reason and Sense of Order and
Decency, have erected houses for the public Worship
of God, and separated them from all profane and
common Uses ; which godly practice hath a manifest
tendency to fill Men’s minds with a becoming Reve-
rence to the Divine Majesty, and to affect their hearts
with Devotion and Humility in the service of God :
Let us humbly hope, that our Heavenly Eather will
favourably approve our present purpose, of setting
apart this place in solemn manner for the performance
of the several Offices of religious Worship : and let
us faithfully and devoutly beg His blessing on this
our undertaking.
Let us pray.
OUR EATHER, which art in Heaven, hallowed
be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will
be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this


day our daily bread. And forgive us our Trespasses,
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation: but deliver us from Evil:
for Thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.
ETERNAL GrOD, mighty in power, of Majesty
incomprehensible, whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain, much less the Walls of Temples made
with hands; who yet has been graciously pleased to
promise thine especial Presence in whatever place
even two or three of Thy faithful Servants shall
assemble in Thy name, to offer up their Supplications
and their Praises to Thee: vouchsafe, 0 Lord, to be
now present with us, who are here gathered together
to consecrate this place, with all Humility and Readi-
ness of Heart, to the Honour of Thy great Name,
separating it henceforth from all unhallowed, ordinary,
and common Uses, and dedicating it entirely to Thy
Service, for reading therein Thy most Holy Word, for
celebrating Thy Holy Sacraments, for offering to Thy
glorious Majesty the Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanks-
giving, for blessing Thy People in Thy Name, and for
performing all other Holy Ordinances. Accept, O
Lord, this Service at our Hands, and bless it with
such Success as may promote Thy glory and the Sal-
vation of thy People, through Jesus Christ our
Lore and Saviour. Amen.
•[[ Then the Bishop, standing up , and turning towards
the Congregation, shall say:
lAEGARD, 0 Lord, the Supplications of Thy ser-
vants, and grant, that whosoever shall be dedi-
cated to Thee in this House by Baptism, may be


sanctified by the Holy G-host, delivered from Thy
Wrath, and Eternal Death, and being made a living
Member of Christ’s Church, may ever remain in the
number of Thy faithful and elect Children. Amen.
RANT, 0 Lord, that they, who in this Place
shall in their own Persons renew the Promises
and Vows made for them by their Sureties at their
Baptism, and thereupon shall be confirmed by the
Bishop, may continue Thine for ever; and being pre-
served in the Unity of Thy Church, may daily increase
in Thy Holy Spirit more and more, until they come to
Thine everlasting Kingdom. Amen.
RANT, O Lord, that whosoever shall receive in
this Place, the blessed Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ, may come to that Holy Ordi-
nance with a true, penitent Heart, lively Faith, and
perfect Charity ; and being filled with Thy Grace and
Heavenly Benediction, may, to their great and endless
Comfort, obtain Remission of their Sins, and all other
Benefits of His Passion. Amen.
RANT, 0 Lord, that by Thy Holy Word, which
shall be read and preached in this Place, and by
Thy Holy Spirit grafting it inwardly in the Heart, the
Hearers thereof may both perceive and know what
Things they ought to do, and also may have Grace
and Power faithfully to fulfil the same. Amen.
O Lord, that whosoever shall be joined
together in this Place, in the Holy Estate of
Matrimony, may faithfully perform and keep the Vow
and Covenant betwixt them made, and remain in per-
fect Love together unto their Lives’ end. Amen.


GEANT, O Lord, that whosoever shall confess
their Sins, and offer up their Prayers and
Praises unto Thy Divine Majesty in this Place may
draw near unto Thee with, such Stedfastness ot
Paith, and with such Seriousness, Sincerity, arid
devout Affection of Mind, that they may be gra-
ciously accepted in Thy Sight. Lord, pardon their
Sins, compassionate their Infirmities, sanctify them
by Thy Holy Spirit, and conduct them in the paths
of Eighteousness to life everlasting. Amen.
NOW unto the King Eternal, Immortal and
Invisible, the only Wise God, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, be Honour and Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.
Then the Service of the day shall he read hy the
Minister.
t PEOPEE PSALMS, 84, 122, 132
f PEOPEE LESSONS.
The First —2 Chronicles VI., to verse 31; or V 11.;
or XXXI., verse 2to verse 10; or Fzra III.; or
Haggai I.
The Second —Lulce IV., verse 14 to verse 21 inclu-
sive ; XVIII., verse 18 to verse 30.
% After the Collect for the day, the Minister stops ,
till the Bishop has said the folio icing grayer :
OLOED GOD who dwellest not in temples made
with hands (as saith the prophet) yet hast
ever vouchsafed to accept the devout endeavours
of Thy servants, allotting special places for Thy
divine worship, promising, even there, to hear and
grant their requests: We humbly beseech Thee to
accept of this day’s duty and service of dedicating
this Church to Thy great and glorious Name;
fulfil, O Lord, we pray Thee, Thy gracious pro-


mises, that whatsoever prayer in this sacred place
shall be made according to Thy will, may he ac-
cepted by Thy gracious favour, and returned with
the desired success, to Thy glory and our comfort,
for the sake of Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
COMMUNION SERVICE.
The Bishop standing on the north side of the Com-
munion Table, as before, reads the Communion Service.
*f[ After the Collect for the Queen, he sags the
following prager
/ \ MOST glorious Lord Oon, we acknowledge
that we are not worthy to offer unto Thee any-
thing belonging to us; yet we beseech Thee, in
Thy great goodness, graciously to accept the dedi-
cation of this place to Thy service, and to prosper
this our undertaking: receive the prayers and
intercessions of us, and all others Thy servants who
either now or hereafter entering into this house
shall call upon Thee; and give both them and us
grace to prepare our hearts to serve Thee with
reverence and godly fear; affect us with an awful
apprehension of Thy Divine Majesty, and a deep
sense of our own unworthiness; that so, approach-
ing Thy sanctuary with lowliness and devotion,
and coming before Thee with clean thoughts and
pure hearts, with bodies undefiled, and minds sanc-
tified, we may always perform a service acceptable to
Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Epistle, 2 Corinthians VI. 14, to VII. 1.
13 E ye not unequally yoked together with unbe-
lievers; for what fellowship hath righteous-
ness with unrighteousness: and what communion
hath light with darkness ? and what concord hath
Christ with Delia 1 ? or what part hath he that be-
lieveth with an infidel ? and what agreement hath


the Temple of God with idols ? For ye are the
Temple of the Living God; as God hath said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will
he their God, and they shall be My people. Where-
fore come out from among them, and be ye sepa-
rate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing ; and I will receive you and will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be My sons and daughters
saith the Lord Almighty. Having, therefore, these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.
Gospel, Matthew XIII., verse 17 to verse 23 inclusive.
’VTERILY I say unto you that many prophets
* and righteous men have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and
to hear those things Avhich ye hear, and have not
heard them. Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower. When any one heareth the Word of the
Kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh
the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in his heart. This is he which received the seed
by the wayside. But he that received the seed
into stony places, the same is he that heareth the
Word, and anon with joy receiveth it; yet hath
he not root in himself, but dureth for a while; for
when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of
the Word, by and by he is offended. He also
that received seed among the thorns is he that
heareth the Word, and the care of this world and
the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Word, and
he becometh unfruitful. But he that received seed
into the good ground, is he that heareth the Word,
and understandeth it; which also heareth fruit, and
bringeth forth, some an hundred fold, some sixty,
some thirty. '


Then follows the Nicene Creed. —After which
Psalm is sung : then follows the Sermon.
After the Sermon , the following Prayer :
BLESSED be Thy Name O Lord God, for that
it pleaseth Thee to have Thy habitation among
the sons of men upon the earth, and to dwell in the
midst of the assembly of the saints upon earth.
Bless, we beseech Thee, the religious service of
this day, and grant that in this place, now set apart
to Thy glory, Thy Holy Name may be worshipped
in truth and purity to all generations, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
r PHE Peace of God which passeth all under-
*- standing, keep your hearts and minds, in the
knowledge and love of God, and of His Son Jesus
Christ our Lord ; and the blessing of God Almighty,
the Eather, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.
When a Purial Ground is also to he consecrated ,
the following is the Prayer.
/ \ GOD, who has taught us in Thy Holy Word
that there is a difference between the Spirit
of a Beast, that goeth downward to the Earth, and
the Spirit of a Man, which ascendeth up to God
who gave it; and likewise hast instructed us by
the example of Thy devout Servants, to set apart
peculiar Places, wherein the bodies of the faithful
may be committed to the Ground, in sure and
certain hope of the Resurrection to Eternal Life:
accept, we beseech Thee, this pious and charitable
Work of ours, in separating and consecrating this
portion of Ground, where they may rest in Peace,
and be preserved from all indignities. And give
us all Grace, that by the frequent instances of
Mortality which we behold, we may learn and


seriously consider how frail and uncertain our con-
dition here on Earth is, and may so number our
days, as to apply our hearts unto wisdom; that in
the midst of Life, thinking upon Death, and daily
preparing ourselves for the Judgment, that is to
follow, we may pass through the Grave to a joyful
Resurrection, for His Merits who died, and was
buried, and rose again for us, Thy Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
-*■ Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, be with us all, evermore. Amen.
|P saints iuu\ Junius,
SUITABLE TO THE OCCASION.
I. I. M.
1 O may the great Jehovah deign,
Here to abide no transient guest!
Here may the world’s Redeemer reign,
And here the Holy Spirit rest!
2 That glory never hence depart!
Yet choose not, Lord, this house alone ;
Thy kingdom come to every heart,
In ev’ry bosom fix Thy Throne.
3 Here, when Thy people seek Thy face,
And dying sinners pray to live,
Hear Thou, in Heaven, Thy dwelling-place,
And when Thou hearest, oh! forgive.
4 Here, when Thy messengers proclaim,
The blessed Gospel of Thy Son,
Still by the power of His great name,
Be mighty'deeds of mercy done.


GREAT Shepherd of Thy people, hero
Thy presence now display;
As Thou hast giv’n a place for prayer,
So give us hearts to pray.
Show us some token of Thy love,
Our feeble hope to raise ;
And pour Thy blessing from above,
That we may render praise.
The hearing ear, the watchful eye,
The contrite heart bestow ;
And shine upon us from on high,
To make our virtues grow.
May wo in faith receive Thy Word,
In faith address our prayers :
And in the presence of the Lord
Unbosom all our cares.
And may Thy Gospel’s joyful sound,
Enforced by grace divine,
Awaken many sinners round,
And bend their wills to Thine.
111. 6—B.
O King of Glory! come,
And with Thy favour crown
This temple as Thy dome,
This people as Thine own.
Beneath this roof vouchsafe to show
How God can dwell with man below.
Now let Thine ear attend
Our supplicating cries;
Now let our praise ascend
Accepted to the skies.
Now let Thy Gospel’s joyful sound
Spread its celestial influence round.
Here may the list’ning throng
Imbibe thy truth and love;
Here Christians join the song
Of seraphim above,
Till all who humbly seek Thy face,
Rejoice in Thy unbounded grace.


LORD, when we bend before Thy throne,
And our confessions pour, ■
Teach us to feel the sins we own,
And hate what we deplore.
Our broken spirits pitying see;
True penitence impart;
Then, let a kindling ray from Thee,
Beam hope upon the heart.
When our responsive tongues essay
Their grateful hymns to raise,
Grant that our souls may join the lay,
And rise to Thee in praise.
When we disclose our wants in prayer,
May we our wills resign ;
And not a thought our bosom share,
That is not wholly Thine.
May faith each weak petition fill,
And waft it to the skies ;
And teach our hearts ’tis goodness still
That grants it or denies.
Y. i. m.
BEFORE Jehovah’s awful throne,
Ye nations bow with sacred joy ;
Know that the Lord is God alone :
He can create, and He destroy.
His sovereign power, without our aid,
Made us of clay, arid form’d us men ;
And when like wand’ring sheep we stray’d
He brought us to His fold again.
We’ll crowd Thy gates with thankful songs,
High as the heavens our voices raise ;
And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
Shall fill Thy courts with sounding praise.
Wide as the world is Thy command,
Yast as Eternity Thy love ;
Firm as a rock Thy truth will stand,
When rolling years shall cease to move.


of a burial (Ground J&njgln.
The Endowment, Deed of conveyance, or the
evidences thereof, are to he laid before the Bishop or his
Chancellor, some time before the day appointed, in
order to the preparing of the Act or sentence of
Consecration against that day.
Note. —The ground must be securely enclosed with
a pailing or other sufficient fence, and gates, to prevent
the intrusion of animals: and otherwise be put into
decent order prior to the Consecration.
The ordinary service for the day is to be read at
the Church, except where it is otherwise ordered.
Psalms, 39. 90.
First lesson, Gren. xxiii.
Second lesson, John v. verse 21 to v. 29 inclusive,
or 1 Thess. iv. verse 13 to the end.
When the service at the Church is finished the
Bishop, Clergy, and Farishioners, proceed to the ground
which is to be consecrated : and the usual petition having
been read, the Bishop says :
The glorious majesty of the Lord our Giod he
upon us ; prosper Thou the work of our hands
upon us, O prosper Thou our handiwork.
•[ Then the Act or Sentence of Consecration is read
by the Chancellor or Actuary, and signed by the Bishop,
and ordered to be registered.
This done, the Bishop reads the prayer that is
before directed to be used in a Burial Ground ivhich is
consecrated, together with the Church.


Then are sung two staves of the 39 th Psalm, viz.
v. 5,6, 12, 18.
5. 0 Lord my heart and will incline
To bear in mind always,
How frail it is—this flesh of mine,
And I how few of days.
6. My term of years has been by Thee
Contracted to a span;
Yea, and how high so e’r he be,
How vain a thing is man!
12. Disdain not then, the flowing tear,
But hear my mournful cry;
My fathers were but strangers here,
And as they were, am I.
13. O spare me that brief space, which may
My wasted strength restore,
Ere from the world I pass away,
And thence be seen no more.
After which the Bishop pronounces the blessing:
fpHE peace of Goi) which passeth all under-
standing, keep your, hearts and minds in the
knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus
Christ, our Lord : and the blessing of God Almighty,
the Lather, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.
FINIS.
NOTE. —It is requested that this book may be returned to
the Church.
Joseph Cook and Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.
16




