

The
Dunrich
School
of
Dressmaking
1 DEAN PLACE, SYDNEY


FOREWORD
“Because You Love Nice Frocks.”
INTRODUCING simplicity of dressmaking by the
“Dunrich” Foundation Pattern, it is
to give complete details that will equip any novice
with the foundation for the expert handling of our
patterns and all materials, and instruct her in that
knowledge essential to become the accomplished
dressmaker.
When compiling this Course, special attention has
been given to the many patterns which it embraces,
it being our objective to make sewing and dress-
making easy and an accomplished home fact for
country and town folk alike.
The book contains many helpful suggestions and
practical hints for the cutting, sewing, fitting, and
assembling of the many types of garments covered
by the Course. The simplicity of our method makes
the work interesting, the detail thorough, enabling
you, by the use of our foundation patterns, to become
an accomplished dressmaker, and further, we he-
lieve, for the first time obviating the need to>
continually purchase new patterns.
We claim that our System is so simple that the girl
or woman who aspires to be well dressed, with all
the creative expression, will attain a more profes-
sional approach in the making of her garments.
The many diagrams presented with the System arc
worked out with SEAM ALLOWANCES, and once
the groundwork is laid it is but a short step to the
creation of really “chic” clothes.
The simplicity of dressmaking makes life happier,
because it creates for you a new, striking personality
vivid, gay, stately, sombre whichever you may
wish interpreted in your appearance. And thus the
demands for modernism are fulfilled.
In compiling this System every endeavour has been
made not to overlook trifles, as trifles make perfec-
tion but perfection is no trifle.
CONTENTS
Page
Equipment 1
Printed Patterns 2
How to Take Measurements 3
Altering the Pattern 4
Cutting and Sewing Hints 5
Diagram for Layout of Costume Coat 6
Hints for Pressing 7
Seam Finishings 8
Binding—Diagonal or Crossway 9
Finishing Side Openings 10
Skirt Openings with Underlap and Belting II
Setting Sleeve into Armhole, Finishing Sleeve Openings 12
Buttons —Press Studs—Hooks and Eyes 13
Corded Loops for Buttons 14
Ve-ioua Ornamental Loops for Buttons 15
Inserted Pockets with Bound Openings 16
inserting Welled Pockets 17
Smocking 18-19
Decorative Stitches 20
Pleats 21
Collars for Frocks „ 22
Page
Making Up and Attaching Collars 23
Tailored Garments with Notched Collars 21
Darts and Tucks 25
Sleeves 26-27
Linings 23
Skirts 29
Cutting a Skirt on the Bias or Cross 30
Flared or Gored Skirts 31
Blouses, Jackets, etc 32-33
Chic Day Frock 31
Sports Frock 35
Afternoon Frock 35
Housefrock and Housecoat 37
Wedding Gown 3g
Evening Frock 39
Fitted Coat 40
Loose Casnal Coats 41
Kiddies’ Nighties and Helpful Hints 42
Men’s Pyjamas 43
Worked Buttonholes 44
Boys’ Suspender Suit 45


EQUIPMENT
It is always advisable when cutting material to use scissors medium
weight, about Sin. long.
When it is possible, use steel pins, as they do not mark the cloth.
TAPE MEASURE.
Should be 60in. long, and of good quality.
Use yard stick for marking long straight lines and for measuring an even
hem line.
Tracing wheel may be used for marking lines through patterned or plain
materials. Always be careful not to use tracing wheel on good table.
The tailor’s chalk may be used for marking.
ADDITIONAL EQUIPMENT.
Cutting Table, large and straight.
A Full Length Mirror.
Tracing Wheel.
Ironing Board.
Sleeve Board.
Pressing Iron.
Pressing Cloths.
Dress Stand.
Stiletto for making Eyelets.
Tailor’s Cushion.
Press Cloth.
THE SEWING MACHINE.
It is essential that your machine should be in perfect running order.
When the machine is not in use, see that it is well oiled, but before using
again, stitch a piece of material backward and forward to dispose of
surplus oil.
Wipe around needle base, and always have a sharp point on your needle.


PRINTED PATTERNS
The “Dunrich” Pattern has many important features.
You will observe that on the printed patterns there arc lines represent-
ing the different sizes (from the 34-inch bust to the 44-inch). In
emphasising this important feature, the risk of making mistakes in cut-
ting out the pattern should be negligible—in fact, they should not occur.
We have endeavoured, as far as possible, to minimise the number of
pieces of pattern, but these patterns have many creative, distinctive
features for both girls and women.
It will be noticed that provision is made for the making of various types
of garments, such as the tailored type of costume, jumper suits, cardigans,
day and evening frocks, blouses, various types of skirts cut on the
straight or bias, kiddies’ nights, men’s pyjamas, boys’ suspender suits,
etc.
Thus, by application of the “Dunrich” Foundation Pattern submitted
and dealt with in this Course, we bring within the scope of each , and
every girl or woman the opportunity of becoming the accomplished
dressmaker, and the creator of that distinctive dressing so desired in a
simple, but yet most effective, manner.
POINTS TO REMEMBER.
For cutting smaller sizes, cut the smallest size 34in. from your founda-
tion pattern, decrease it to the same extent as you would increase to the
36in., and so on for still smaller sizes.
When cutting velvet it is necessary to have the pile running all the one
way —for street wear the pile should run up, which shows dark or dull,
i.e., when looking down. Just the reverse applies for evening wear,
which shows the bright light effect.
For practice, it is a good plan to make a few miniature frocks, coats,
blouses, etc., in paper. First of all you cut the plain foundation pattern
and then mark it out to the design you require, either by adding to or
cutting through the pattern, etc. Then re-cut the final pattern. It is
really-a simple method for designing and cutting of models, and is
specially recommended to make you efficient in designing and cutting
patterns.
Seams are allowed on foundation patterns supplied, but ALWAYS allow
for seams when altering the patterns, and all seams should be pressed
after sowing.


HOW TO TAKE MEASUREMENTS
1. BUST. Pass the tape round
fullest part of bust, about lin.
below armhole and a little higher
at back.
WAIST.—Draw the tape snugly
around natural Waist-line.
HIP. —Take hip measurements
about lOin. below waist-line—not
too tightly.
3. ARM.—Measure around fullest part of
arm, about lin. below armhole.
OVERARM LENGTH. —Measure from
where sleeve joins to armhole down to
elbow, to wrist.
4. ELBOW. —Place the tape around
elbow, with arm bent.
WRIST. Measure around wrist
—not too tightly.
2. ACROSS BACK.—Measure across
back between armholes, 4in.‘ be-
low neck.
CENTRE - BACK LENGTH.
Take measurements from base of
neck to desired length.
SKIRT LENGTH. —Take mea-
surements at side from waist to
required length.
SUMMARY.
f
The garment when finished should be about Sin. bigger in bust for comfort; hips, 2in. bigger, and if a
tight sleeve is required, about bigger. No alteration in waist or wrist measurement.


ALTERING THE PATTERN
As some figures vary, it is necessary for some slight alteration to the pattern. To ensure absolute correct
fitting, after taking your measurements, as directed on Page 5, it would be advisable to get ordinary paper
and place the pattern on the paper, and cut to the size required.
FOR SQUARE SHOULDERS.
After pinning pattern together at UNDERARM AND
SHOULDER SEAM, try it on to see if any alteration
is necessary.
If shoulder slope of pattern is higher at the neck, make
a dart across front and back, from nothing at armhole
to needed amount at neck edge.
FOR PROMINENT BUST.
3. First try on pattern to ascertain if it needs alteration.
If pattern is too shprt in front, cut across front of bust
line and spread amount needed.
Pin thin paper to hold spread in position.
Make a side dart above spread as shown by dotted line.
FOR SLOPED SHOULDERS.
Fin pattern together at underarm and shoulder seams,
and try it on to see if alteration is needed.
If shoulder slope of pattern is tight at neck, cut across
front and back to armhole at shoulder.
Be sure to begin the cutting as near to the neck as
possible, then spread needed amount.
When spreading pattern, pin over thin paper to hold
spread in position.


GUTTING AND SEWING HINTS
CUTTING HINTS.
When making the first garment, choose a simple style
and material that is easy to cut and sew.
Allow wider seams for material that frays easily.
After garment is cut, remove pattern pieces, but before
removing garment put a tacking thread along centre
front and centre back. This will be a good guide when
fitting garment.
First straighten end of material by tearing across, as
per diagram below. But if it does not tear well, draw
a thread and cut on the line.
SEWING HINTS.
Tack garment together and try on before stitching the
seams.
When joining underarm seams work from the armhole
downwards.
Join shoulder seams, working from the neck outward—
tp armhole. .
Do not leave all the pressing till the garment is com-
plete. Press each seam after it has been stitched.
After curved seams are joined, clip the seam allowance
to prevent the material from drawing.
To prevent edges from stretching, such as neck lines,
armholes, etc., make fine running stitches, or machine
stitch close to edge, as seen on above diagram.
CUTTING THE GARMENT
LAYING OUT THE MATERIAL.
The grain of the material refers to lengthwise and
crosswise threads.
Lengthwise threads are parallel to the selvedge. Cross-
wise threads run from selvedge to selvedge.
The diagrams shown are to make lengthwise and cross-
wise folds.
When making lengthwise fold, be sure that the crossing
threads run perfectly straight from selvedge to selvedge.
PINNING PATTERN TO MATERIAL.
First lay the material on a flat surface (if possible, a
large, straight table). Pin pattern to material. Trace
through line to size required.
It is advisable to always use sharp scissors in cutting,
thus preventing jagging and moving the edges.
NOTE.—If the front or back is cut on the fold of
material, mark centres with basting thread before re-
moving patten^
Remove patterns carefully.
If a dart or tuck is needed in shoulder, lay pattern
temporarily on material for guidance to shoulder seam,
then pin dart or tuck as required. Now lay pattern on,
trace, and cut.


DIAGRAM FOR LAYOUT OF COSTUME
COAT
Don't fold your patterns when not in use. Roll them —thus ensuring
lasting wear.
TAILORED 3 BUTTON
COAT
JIGGER BUTTON
COAT
CARDIGAN
COAT


HINTS FOR PRESSING
PRESSING SEAMS.
Press seams and parts of garments on wrong side of
material.
Silk, art. silk, and cottons, use a warm iron—not hot.
After joining a seam, press open before joining to
another part of the garment.
NOTE. —When it is necessary to press on the right side
of material (as for a patch pocket, or various band
trimmings, etc.), place a heavy, dry press cloth over
material.
Never press garments on the right side without a pro-
tecting cloth.
SLEEVES.
The use of a sleeve board is a great convenience when
pressing sleeve seams or other parts of garments that
are difficult to press on ironing hoard o~ table. It is
necessary for the sleeve hoard to be well padded.
TAILOR’S PAD.
Tailor’s pad can be made with oval shape pieces of
material, stuffed with wadding or cuttings of material.
It is used for pressing curved seams or shaped under-
arm seams and tops of sleeves when joined to arm-
holes, etc.


SEAM "FINISHINGS
OVERSTITCH SEAM EDGES.
Overstitch edges which are likely to fray.
When seams are not pressed open, such as armholes,
overstitch both edges together, or a machine stitch or
may be used.
TURNED IN SEAM EDGES.
Press seam open, then turn under edges about 5 inch
and machine stitch close to turned edge, or a hand
running stitch may be used.
FLATFELL SEAM.
Used where a flat finish is desired, as in blouses, shirts,
pyjamas and shorts, etc.-, etc.
Join seam, right sides together, turn one edge close to
stitching. Turn in other edge about £ inch, and stitch
close to edge.
CLIP SEAMS.
Suitable 'for woollens, heavy silks, and velvets. After
clipping seams, press open.
FRENCH SEAM.
This is an in-and-out seam, suitable for blouses, or
dresses of silk, georgette, and other thin materials, also
lingerie silks.
EASING IN FULLNESS.
Used at the top of a sleeve, in the back shoulder edges
of a garment, etc. With a larger edge of seam towards
you, pin at close intervals, spreading the fullness evenly,
tack with small stitches along seam allowance, removing
pin as you go along.


BINDING - DIAGONAL OR CROSSWAY
For a true crossway, fold material so that the crossway
threads meet the lengthway thread selvedge.
A yard stitch can be used.for marking the necessary
width.
A true bias runs diagonally across the material. (
TO JOIN DIAGONAL SEAMS.
Lay the two diagonal ends together and stitch in a
seam. When the seam is opened, the grain of both
pieces is to run in the same direction.
SINGLE DIAGONAL BINDING.
Used to trim and finish a raw edge. '
The diagonal strips must be cut twice the width of the
finished binding, plus seam allowances on each edge.
Sew edge of binding to edge of garment, right sides
together, then roll binding to inside, turn in seam
allowance, and hem to position.
For making a belt, allow 5 inches bigger than your waist measurement so as to
allow one inch for sewing on buckle. The remaining 4 inches to be passed
through the buckle to effect a finish.
DOUBLE BINDING.
Double binding is used for thinner materials, and should
be cut 4 times the width of the finished binding. Press the
strips through centre fold, sew the raw edges to edge of
garment, right sjdes together, then roll binding to inside
and hem folded edge in position.


FINISHING SIDE OPENINGS
1. Cut upper and lower part of seam allowances at open-
ing, then sew a hook at centre of opening.
2. Slipstitch an underfacing about i inch wide, finished
to front of opening covering sewn-on part of hook.
3. For underlap cut a piece of fabric about 2i inches
wide, then sew one edge to back edge of opening, right
sides together.
Fold through centre, turn to inside, and hem free edge
in position. Stitch upper and lower edges of under-
facings and overlap together.
4. Sew an eye to underlap, then fasten remainder of
opening with press studs.
The above are suitable for the heavier fabrics.
“OPENING WITH ONE-PIECE LAP.”
1. Cut seam allowance at upper and lower part of
opening.
2. Cut a strip about 2 inches wide and twice the length
of opening. Sew one edge of lap to edges of open-
ing, right sid a « together.
3. Turn lap to inside, then fold through centre and
hem in position other edge.
4. Oversew upper edges of lap together. Fasten with
hook and eye and clips.
The above are suitable for cotton and sheer fabrics.


SKIRT OPENING WITH UNDERLAP AND
BELTING
1. Sew an underfacing one inch wide, finished to front edge of
opening.
For underlap, cut a piece 2 inches wide, plus seam allow-
ances on each side.
Sew one edge to back edge of opening, right sides together.
Fold strip through centre, and hem free edge to position.
Overstitch lower edges of underfacing and underlap to-
gether.
2. Place belting on wrong side of skirt about inch from
upper edge, then tape on right side of skirt, joining in
belting and covering raw edge.
/
r ■— ~— * 1
Don’t fold your patterns when not in use. Roll them—
thus ensuring lasting wear.
—. . : vi
3. Turn belting to wrong side of skirt so that the binding will
not show on right side, then hem ends of belting to position.
i —: ~~ ]
A belt at back pulls the waist line in snugly. (
i
i
4. Sew hooks and eyes to top of skirt, as shown on Diagram 4,
- Fasten remainder of opening with clips.
To prevent the opening from tearing, reinforce with a tack
on right side of material.


SETTING SLEEVE INTO ARMHOLE
1. Place sleeve into armhole with nicks matching, hold-
ing sleeve towards you so that it will not be difficult
• to ease in fullness at top.
First pin at nicks, then at shoulder and underarm
seams.
Ease in fullness at top of sleeve.
For a sleeve that has a great amount of ease at top
(as in suit or coat), run a gathering thread along
seam allowances between nicks.
2. Stitch sleeve into armhole with running stitches,
removing pins as you stitch, then stitch and oversew
edges. Press seam edges to one side over a tailor’s
cushion.
/
For woollen material, the ease of top of sleeve can
be shrunk by using a damp cloth while pressing.
FINISHING SLEEVE OPENINGS
WITH LOOPS & BUTTONS.
1. Make corded loops and apply
to sleeve openings according to
directions on Page 17. For
details refer to 1 and 4 under
heading, “Corded Loops for
Buttons.”
Turn up sleeve allowance at
lower edge of sleeve and cover
raw edges with crossway under-
facings or seam bindings,
mitreing corners as shown.
WITH “CONTINUOUS
LAP.”
2, Suitable for lightweight mater-
ials. Finish lower edge of
sleeve with narrow hem, and
cut seam allowance at upper
part of opening. Cut a strip of
self m3terial inch wide
and twice the length of sleeve
opening, plus seam allowance
on each side.
Sew continuous lap to openings
according to instructions given
on Page 12, Diagrams 1 to 3,
then turn in seam allowances
at ends of continuous lap and
overstitch edges together.
Fasten opening with clips.
WITH CROSSWAY
UNDERFACING.
3. Turn in seam allowances of
sleeve openings and lower edge.
Then cover raw edges with
crossway underfacing, mitreing
at corners as sho^vn.
Fasten with clips, sewing fast-
eners as close to edge of open-
ing as possible.


BUTTONS, CLIPS, HOOKS AND EYES
1. When sewing buttons,
use a heavy thread or
twist. Make the knot
at the end of a double
thread, and be careful
to allow room for but-
tonhole by placing a
pin over the centre of
the button.
Sew back and forth
across pin.
The pin keeps the
thread loose enough to
form a stem.
CLIP FASTENERS.
Sew clip fasteners to opposite positions, make over-
stitches several times in each hole. If the material is
thin, a piece of self material may be used on wrong
side, as illustrated above.
LINK OR JIGGER BUTTONS.
SEWING ON BUTTONS.
2. Remove pin and twist
thread firmly around
stem, then draw needle
to wrong side and
fasten with several
stitches. !
2. Use a double thread,
and sew hack and forth
through both buttons
and across pin, as illus-
trated.
The use of the small
button or the self piece
of material on the
wrong side prevents
strain or tearing away
of larger button.
“HOOK AND EYE OR BAR.”
When sewing on hooks and eyes, extend the eye beyond
the edge of opening.
When sewing on hook and bar, extend the hook a little
beyond the opening.
Make over and over stitches.
Buttonhole stitches may be used for finer finish.
The link or jigger button is used
for loosely holding garments to-
gether.
Stitch through buttons two or
three times, then join shank or
stem by making blanket stitches.
1. When sewing buttons
on thin or unlined gar-
ments, it is advisable to
use a small button or
piece of self material
on wrong side, with a
larger button on right
side.


CORDED LOOPS FOR BUTTONS
1. Cut a crossway strip about 1
inch wide, and join seam edges.
To turn right side out, thread
a needle or bodkin to one end
and draw through cording.
2. Illustrating the cording after
being right side out.
3. The edges of the loops are
sewn to the opening on the
wrong side of material. Cut a
crossway piece for binding
about J inch wide and twice
the length of opening, then
sew to edges of opening, right
sides of material together.
4. The binding to be turned to
wrong side and hemmed to
position.
5. Finished opening shown on the
right side.
FOR FACED OPENINGS.
1. Loops for cording to be made as illustrated
above, Diagrams 1 and 2.
Loop section to be sewn to edge of opening"
on right side of material.
2. Material to be turned under, leaving loops
extended.
3. Slipstitch seam bindings or a strip of cross-
way underfacing to position, so that raw
edges are covered.
4. Illustration shows right side of material with
loops and buttons,
FOR BOUND OPENINGS.


ORNAMENTAL LOOPS FOR BUTTONS
FANCY LOOPS FOR BUTTONS.
1. When the edges of opening are completed, form a
loop with several threads, using twist or thick
thread, finish with close buttonhole stitch.
2. The buttons to be sewn on opposite edge of open-
ing in position to correspond.
BRAIDED LOOPS FOR BUTTONS.
1. Loops made of braid for buttons—the braid to be
cut the length required and form loops. The ends
,to be sewn in position on one side of opening. To
cover raw edges, sew buttons over ends of loops.
2. The button to be sewn on opposite edge of open-
ing in position to correspond.
CORDED FROG.
1. A crossway strip to be cut the required width and
length. Then sew the end of a cable cord and the
end of a thin cord to one end of crossway strip on
right side.
2. Fold strip through centre and join seam edges to
fit cord.
3. After joining the entire' seam,. pull the thin cord
through from the inside, work the material slowly
over the cable cord. It is essential that the seam
does not twist.
4. Shape frog and tack to wrapping paper, with seams
• of cording towards you. Securely fasten cordings
together at all crossings. Remove the paper and
sew frog to position on garment.


HOW TO INSERT POCKETS WITH
BOUND OPENINGS
1. Cut a piece of same material
twice the length of the pocket,
and about 1 inch wider than
pocket opening.
Stitch pocket pieces to garment
along slash line, right side of
material together, then stitch
£ inch each side of stitching
and across each end.
An afternoon frock is
very becoming with
lace yoke and sleeves,
as lace next to the
/ face is very flattering.
Stitched or welted
pockets make an ex-
cellent finish for a
plain frock.
3. Pocket opening shown on
right side.
2. Cut through centre to £ inch
from ends and diagonally to
corners. Draw pocket pieces
to wrong side, forming an even
binding on the right side, as
shown on Diagram 3, and in-
verted pleats on the wrong
side, as shown on Diagram 4.
The width of your
machine foot is a
good guide for welt-
ing, and helps you to
keep it straight.
4. Firmly sew binding along seam on right side of
pocket opening, then turn garment to wrong side
and turn up pocket piece to form pocket.
5. Stitch around outer edge of pocket, trim and over-
sew edges.


HOW TO INSERT TAILORED ROCKETS
WITH BOUND OPENINGS
1. Cut garment as indicated on line for pocket open-
ing and diagonally at corners.
2. For binding, cut 2 strips about lj inch wide and
inch longer than pocket opening.
Strips to be folded through centre, right side out,
and stitch to each side of pocket opening.
3. With the same material as garment, face upper edge
of one pocket piece, making the strip 2 inches wide.
4. Pocket pieces to be placed to each side of pocket
opening and stitch joining in binding.
7. Pocket pieces to be joined together and overstitch
edges.
8. The opening of the bound pocket shown on right
side.
5. Draw pocket pieces to wrong side, turning binding
to position on right side, stitch at sides of binding
close to folded edge—see Diagram 8.
6. Shown wrong side of garment before pocket pieces
are joined together. ,


SMOCKING
<SJPECIAL transfers are available for
smocking. Another method is to
mark out the material in dots, as illus-
trated A. These dots can be Jin. apart,
or closer if desired.
RACKING threads are then run along on
each line of dots, illustrated B, fastening
each thread securely at the end of each line
of dots, illustrated C, when the material has
been gathered to the desired fullness. It is
important to have an individual thread for
each line of dots. The foundations illustrated
A, B, C, must be perfect before attempting to
smock.
All work must he commenced from left hand
side and worked towards the right. Fasten
every thread securely at the end of each row.
On completion of the smocking the tacking
threads can be taken out.
'J'HE Outline Stitch, il-
lustrated D, is com-
menced in the second
pleat at the' gathering
thread on the wrong side
of the material. Put the
needle through the first
pleat on the right side of
the material, taking the
stitch from left to right on
top of the pleat. Remem-
ber to keep the thread
below the needle.


'J’HE Wave Stitch, illustrated
E, comprises four stitches
worked up and four stitches
worked down. Commence
with the thread on the second
pleat (right side of material
facing you), and work to the
line above, using one, two and
three stitches, one in each
pleat, with the thread below
the needle going up. With the
thread above the needle, take
one stitch on the line next to
the third stitch up, and with
thread above the needle, and
work to the line below, using
the three stitches gradually.
With the thread below the
needle, take one stitch next to
the last stitch on the line and
work again to the line above,
using the three stitches, and
repeat.
JJONEYCOMBING illus-
trated F: This is the
simplest form of smocking—
it is specially recommended
for children’s wear, etc. If
desired, there is no necessity
to gather the material as illus-
trated in B and C. You can
work straight from the dots.
Either method is equally as
satisfactory. Commence on
the second row of dots and
upper right hand side (this is
the only stitch which is com-
menced on the right hand
side), bring the needle up
through the second dot and
take first and second dots
together, then over once again
to the first dot; pass needle up
the back of the material to the
first row, and take the second
and third dots together in the
same way. Then to the second
row and take the third and
fourth dots together, then to
the first row and take the
fourth and fifth dots.
Important. —The number of
dots on the material to be
smocked must be divisible by
two or four, and end with two
dots.


FANCY EMBROIDERY STITCHES
1. Mark position for tack,
then insert needle and
thread through lower
left-hand corner with
, knot on the wrong
side; then pass needle
through upper point
from right to left..
2. Pass needle from upper
point to lower right
point for the second
stitch; continue to pass
needle through the
. lower left point for the
third stitch.
CROW’S FOOT TACKS.
4. Shows the completed
tack.
Your initials brightly worked in silk , ivool,
or beads makes a nice trimming.
FAGGOTING.
Draw parallel lines on a strip of paper when marking out the desired
width of faggoting. Cut ribbon, braid, or bands of double material with
finished edges to position on paper, and begin faggoting stitch, working
from top to bottom.
Make slanting stitches from one side to the other, passing needle under the
preceding stitch, as illustration.
FRENCH KNOTS.
1. First draw needle through to right side, then wind thread
around needle two or three .times.
2. Holding thread firmly around needle, insert through mater-
ial as close as possible to the place where it first came up.
When last knot is completed, fasten on wrong side with
several hack stitches.
3. Continue the process,
making stitches close
together, and being
careful to follow the
outline of the crow’s
foot.
EYELETS.
Outline eyelet with small running stitches, then punch centre with a stiletto.
Make padding stitches, then finish edge with close over-and-ovcr stitch.
Buttonhole stitches may also be used.
If the stiletto is inserted after every three or four stitches it will help to keep the edge rolled as ye-ti stitch,


PLEATS
SIDE PLEATS.
Pleat lines may be marked with tailor’s tacks, tailor’s
chalk, or tracing wheel.
Side pleats run in one direction. Form pleats by
bringing corresponding lines together, then tack to hold
in position, and press.
BOX PLEATS.
After pleat lines are marked, form box pleats and tack
to hold in position, then press. A box pleat forms an
inverted pleat on the wrong side.
INVERTED PLEATS.
The inverted pleat is made by bringing two folded
edges together which form a box pleat on the wrong
side.
MAKING HEM AT LOWER PLEATED EDGE.
Before pressing pleats, make hem at lower edge, then
press pleats.
When seam is joined under a pleat, clip seam edges at
top of hem, then press open below clipped edges and
make hem;
STITCHED PLEATS. ~
j
Form pleats and stitch close to folded edges, tie loose
ends nt threads together on wrong side of material.


COLLARS FOR FROCKS
for various sizes of necks: Cut
from the foundation pattern the size
of neck required. This may be obtained
by pinning the shoulder seams together
and placing it on paper. If the collar re-
quired is to have no opening at the hack,
place hack of the pattern to fold of paper,
trace or chalk the style of collar you require
(illustrated A) and cut. For a stand-up
collar (as illustrated Bl) the neck line of
the collar is cut straight, the peaks to
measure, say. Sin. or 6in., or length re-
quired; the points extended and tapering
narrower at the centre back (illustrated
B 2).
jpOR collars that are required not so high
at the back, the neckline of the collar
should he slightly curved (as illustrated in
C 2 and D 2). For collars such as Peter
Pan (illustrated Dl) that are flat, these
must be cut the same as the foundation
pattern after being pinned together at the
shoulder seams (as illustrated A).
To finish the outer edge of a collar, lace
can he used most effectively, or material
cut on the bias also produces a nice finish.
A charming little Peter Pan collar is the
right treatment for office, spectacular, sport
or afternoon wear.
Tailored collar, illustrated FI and F 2, is
cut on the fold of the material, using the
foundation suit collar, and is stitched as
illustrated and instructed on page No. 24.


COLLARS
TAILORED COLLAR.
The tailored foliar must have an interlining of canvas.
Cut the canvas | of an inch smaller than the pattern
at all edges.
Shrink the canvas before cutting.
The “stand” of the collar is the part next to the neck
that stands up when the coat is worn.
It is a crescent shape section marked by parallel rows
of stitching about £ of an inch apart.
SEWING COLLAR TO NECK EDGE WITH DIAGONAL BINDING
1. Stitch collar to neck edge on right side of garment,
cut a diagonal strip about inch wide for binding,
stitch collar and edge of strip to neck edge.
DETACHABLE COLLAR.
1. For easy laundering, a collar can be made detach-
able. The collar can be faced or lined before sew-
ing binding to neck edge of collar.
Use a crossway strip about inch wide, then fold
through centre, turn under raw edges, and sew to
collar.
2. First finish neck edge of garment, then tack collar
to inside of neck edge.
2. Turn down other edge of strip to jover raw edges of
seam. Then turn back raw edge of binding, and
hem. 1
SEWING STRAIGHT COLLAR TO NECK
EDGE.
1. Join front edges of collar right sides together,
2. Sew one edge of collar to neck edge and other edge
to facing, right sides together.
Turn collar and facings right side out,' then tack
seam allowances of collar at back neck edge and
hem in position.


TAILORED GARMENTS WITH COLLAR
1. Cut interlining for under collars of soft canvas, then
join centre seams, and stitch wrong sides together.
Make parallel rows of stitching £ inch apart from
rolling line to neck edge.
Use the front facing patterns as a guide for cutting
canvas interlinings for the front, but make inter-
linings a little wider than facings.
Stitch to front, wrong sides together.
Sew under part of collar to neck edge of garment
(right sides together), stretching back neck edge of
collar about £ inch.
Clip curved neck edge of garment, and press seams
open.
2. The facings to be sewn to upper collar, right sides
together.
Clip curved neck edges of facing, and press seams
open,
3. Sew facings and upper collar to garment (right sides
together), the outer edges to be trimmed close to
stitching. Facing and collar then to he turned right
side,
4. Stitch outer edge with diagonal running stitch. Tack
neck seams of facings to neck edge of garment on
wrong side.
Catch-stitch inside edges of facings to interlinings
only. Tack free edge of upper collar to back neck
edge.


DARTS AND TUCKS
Introducing Darts and Tucks for top part of garment, it is advisable to take your, measurement as shown on Page 3.
Cut a pattern in paper two si?es bigger than your measurement.
Then lay the pattern oir material, cut front, then put darts or tucks (whichever you prefer) then put a traced pattern of
your actual size on the piece that is tucked, then cut.
1. Shows tailor’s tacks
for shoulder darts.
1. Shows sewing lines
marked with tailor’s
tacks.
1. Shows tailor’s tacks for
pleated tucks.
2. Make dart by bringing
the two lines together,
usually with the fold
towards the wrong side.
TUCKS.
2. Tucks formed by bring-
ing corresponding lines
together and sewing
with a fine running
stitch.
2. Pin in position by
bringing lines together.
4. When putting dart in
heavy material after
the seam is formed, cut
the dart, press open,
and over-sew edges.
4. Shows the tucks on
the reverse 'side of
material.
PLEATED TUCKS.
4. Stitch close to folded
edges.
3. When you machine-
stitch a dart, tie loose
ends of thread at bot-
tom into a knot on
wrong side of material.
3. All tucks should be
pressed to one side.
3. Shows tucks pinned in
position.


SLEEVES; SHORT, LONG AND THREE-QUARTER
POPULAR SLEEVE.—From the
foundation pattern, enlarge the
top of the sleeve by cutting down
the centre of pattern, and spread
the top of the sleeve about 3|in.,
leaving the wrist the same size.
From the top allow lin. to
at centre, graduating at the top
as required (illustration Al).
Illustrations A 2 and A 3 show the
popular sleeve with pleated or
gathered top.
Full Long Sleeve. —For the Full
Long Sleeve , use the popular
sleeve pattern, adding width re-
quired at the Wrist —about Sin.
each side —as illustrated 81.
Also allow 2in. longer than the
foundation sleeve. Gather into
required size, and stitch into
band the wrist measurement re-
quired, as illustrated 82. For
the Loose Sleeve, illustrated 83,
. it is not necessary to add the two
extra inches.


"pVANCY Gathered • Sleeve,
illustrated Cl. By using
the foundation sleeve and
making the underarm length
6in. (i.e., for short sleeves),
then cut Sin. out of centre
of sleeve, illustrated C 2.
Replace with a piece 6in.
wide and 6in. longer than
the piece already taken out,
illustrated C 3, to allow for
the gathering and your turn-
ings.
With regard to short or J length
sleeves, same method applies,
cutting the sleeve the required
length from underarm.
TAILORED SLEEVE
(illustrated Dl)
Use the two-piece foundation
pattern sleeve, and cut as illus-
trated D 2. The top sleeve is
sewn to the underarm sleeve,
carefully matching the hitches.
Full instructions for setting in
sleeves are shown on page 12.
For the Bell Sleeve shown in il-
lustration E 2, width is reduced at
the wrist, so use the foundation
pattern and add Sin. more, as
illustration El shows. This, like
the Full Sleeve, can he cut 2in.
longer and fitted into hand at
wrist, and makes a very attractive
easy sleeve (E 3).


LININGS
1. The underarm seams of lining
to be then joined together,
then stitch front to position at
shoulder and armhole.
4. Join seam of sleeve linings and
arrange over sleeve wrong
sides together.
Cut lining for front, bacK, also
sleeves about | inch shorter
than coat pattern. Allow 1
inch for pleat at top of centre
back for ease.
3. Tack under-arm seams of lin-
ing and garment together on
wrong side. To make hem in
lining turn up lower edge to-
gether. Slip-stitch front edge
of lining over facing.
2. Put pleat at top of centre back ,
. and catch-stitch to hold in posi-
tion. Tack back to position at
armhole, then slip-stitch to
shoulder and back neck edge.
5. Slip-stitch the lower edge of
lining over hem of sleeve.
Sew sleeve into armhole ac-
cording to directions given on
Page 15, leaving linings free;
slip-stitch sleeve linings over
lining of garment.


SKIRTS
Skirts that are pleated for full-
ness are ideal for walking or golf.
Plain flared skirts, topped with
jaunty colourful jacket or jumper,
are right for sports and afternoon
wear. A very pleasing finish to a
skirt is a pocket, which is very
effective.
Whatever your hip measurement
is, the front portion of your skirt
should measure Sin. bigger than
the back.' For example, should
your hips be 38in., the front of
the skirt should measure
and the hack 19|in., which al-
lows lin. seams each side. Then
when joined together the mea-
surement is 3 Sin.
For bigger hips, to be enlarged
accordingly; smaller hips to be
reduced likewise.
Plackets are usually made on the
left side of skirt, and are made
as illustrated on page 12. The
method of making the frock skirt
differs only at the waist; it re-
quires no petersham, as the skirt
of the frock is usually 2in. big-
ger, and the openings at the side
are shown on diagrams on page
11.
PLEATED SKIRTS
First straighten end of material
as shown on diagram, page No. 5,
then cut or tear two widths Sin.
longer than your skirt length re-
quired. This will then allow a
2in. hem when complete, the
other inch being used half an
inch for sewing on a petersham
at waist, and the other half-inch
to neaten the bottom before
bringing hem up.
i
Various types of pleating are
shown on page 21, from which
you can take your choice. First
take hip measurement lOiu.
from the waist line.
After deciding on the type of
pleating, pleat to your required
measurements, then fold down
the centre, place the pattern on
material, chalk through the per-
forated line to size required.
Remove pattern and then cut.
The back portion of skirt has
two darts. First measure 3in.
from centre hack. Put a dart
each side. Commence half an
inch on fold at top, taping to
nothing Sin. down.
Illustration A shows skirt with
three box pleats.
illustration B shows skirt with
inverted front pleat.


CUTTING A SKIRT ON THE BIAS OR CROSS
For cutting a skirt on the bias or cross, first take the measurements of
your waist and hips.
Place tracing paper on your foundation pattern, then trace to the size
required 9 to 10 inches down from the waist-line, which is your hip
measurement. Flare out from this point to the length and width of the
skirt required.
Remove the foundation pattern, then place your traced pattern (“the
part marked centre front”) on the bias fold of material, then cut.
When using a material 36 inches wide or less, you will always find it
necessary to join a piece on one side of the skirt, as cutting on the bias
leaves one corner short.
If you require a skirt coming to a point on the centre front of bodice,
chalk about 4 inches up from the centre of the natural waist line of
skirt to nothing at sides, and then cut.
This skirt gives the slim, chic appearance which is much admired on
the evening and dinner gowns, and it is amazing how simple they are
to make.
A tucked shirt front
blouse with small
collar and bow is
ideal for a tailored
suit.
Don’t fold your pat-
terns when not in
use. Roll them—thus
ensuring lasting wear.


FLARED AND GORED SKIRTS
As a guide for a flared skirt,
illustrated Cl: Use the foun-
dation skirt pattern, place
same to the fold of another
piece of paper, and then cut
out; then cut up three times
from the bottom, almost to the
top, as illustrated C 2. Spread
out these cuts until you obtain
the required width at the bot-
tom, illustrated C 3. You will
notice the top has become
curved. Pin this new pattern
to another piece of paper,
spread out, then cut around
the outside lines. Be sure that
you have the skirt pattern the
same length at the sides as at
the centre of the skirt; the top
and the bottom then will he
curved. Cut out in material
and stitch the bodice exactly as
though the skirt were straight
along the top. This lifting of
the curve' to the straight edge
makes the flare.
Gored Skirt (illustrated Dl) ;
For a four-piece gored skirt,
flare out from just below the
hips to about 4in. to hem, as
illustrated D 2. In a three
gored skirt, the back would be
placed on the fold and cut
straight.


BLOUSES, JACKETS, ETC.
Just try your hand at making one of these, and
see how fascinated you will become —-after a
while you will be creating many styles of your
own ideas. A snappy little jacket or blouse
can he successfully worn with pleated, gored
or flared skirts. Make your jackets and
blouses in gay new checks, stripes, plain or
floral materials.
Remember that all blouses must be cut to
allow for extra length for keeping down under
the skirt hand —4in. or more if required.
(If cutting blouse to attach to skirt to make a
frock, allow lin. longer at waistline for sew-
ing bodice on to the skirt.)
For jackets, etc., fitting over skirts, remember
to allow lin. for turning up at hem.
For jackets and blouses with buttoned fronts,
fold revere part of pattern back to the straight
line of buttoned coat, which is about 1 Jin.
beyond jumper line on fold. Place pattern
on selvedge, trace through line and cut high
or low neck, \vhichever is required, button to
begin from the neckline down. A strip of
material 2Jin. wide vwill be required for
facings of “buttoned” jackets and blouses.
If you require pleats or tucks down the front
or back, first of all take your measurements
from shoulder to waist; cut or tear two widths
IJin. longer than the length required. Tack
set of tucks or pleats either down the centre of
material or, if you prefer, lin. or so each side
of centre. Then cut blouse bodice according
to instructions. If you prefer, shirring may
be used in place of pleats or tucks.
A. —Using foundation bodice pattern with
the high neckline, cut side seams straight
from armhole instead of shaped (this allows
for fullness at waistline). Use popular sleeve
pattern, as illustrated on page 26. Tuck the
bodice as required, or as illustrated, remem-
bering to allow a Sin. or 4in. opening at front.
The hack of the bodice will be placed on the
fold of material. The tie is cut on the bias,
approximately 36in. in length and Sin. wide.
Lace makes a lovely soft finish to this blouse.


B. —Cut the same as illustrated Blouse A. Place
centre fronts to selvedge, allowing |in. for join-
ing facings. Cut strip 2in. wide on straight of
material, length of front opening, and face as
illustrated. Collar of same is on page 22, illus-
tration Dl. Sleeves on page 26. Finish with
buttons and pocket, also frilling if desired.
Cl. —Cut original bodice foundation pattern
with the high neckline. The collar is cut
double on straight oif material, about 2|in.
wide. Measure length required around neck
edge, and taper out l|in. as illustrated C 2. Face
fronts with 3|in. facings, and then attach collar.
D. —Use bodice pattern with high neckline, and
cut the required length; dart waist back and
front for snug fitting at waistline. Face both
fronts. Use the sleeve illustrated on page 26,
83. Two or three pockets on jacket make a
smart finish.


Al. —This chic day frock is cut from the
original bodice foundation pattern, using
the V neckline open out, as illustrated A 2.
This allows for gathering into the yoke.
Cut centre waistband from foundation pat-
tern —take waistline as centre and allow
2in. above and below. This makes 4in.
waistband. Remember to allow this 2in.
off bodice and skirt when cutting same, but
allow extra |in. on everything for seams.
The back will be cut similar. Cut the skirt,
allowing 3in. at the fold for gathering at
centre front skirt. Use V neckline collar
from foundation pattern and sleeve illus-
trated 82, page 26.


ALWAYS ALLOW FOR SEAMS ON ANY ALTERATIONS OF
FOUNDATION PATTERNS
FOR THE SPORTS GIRL THIS
FROCK ALLOWS PLENTY OF
MOVEMENT, AND IS EASY
TO MAKE.
Bl. —Use the ordinary foundation
bodice pattern with high neckline, and
cut as illustrated B 2 and 83. Use
sleeve A 2, and cut the skirt with box
pleats as instructed on page 29. Collar
illustrated blouse G 2, page 33. A
straight strip is all that is required for
the belt.


Charming is the Word For This
Afternoon Frock
Cl. —rAlter foundation pattern as illus-
trated C 2 and C 3, opening out l|in., as
shown C 3, to allow for gathering into the
yoke and cut. Use the sleeve Con page 26,
and skirt C on page 31, taking off 2in. at
the side seams and sloping Sin. centre front
to match the bodice. When cutting the
back of the frock, remember to extend the
bodice 2in. below waist, and allow this 2in.
off skirt when cutting same in the same
manner as you lowered the front waist.


D and E—The house frock and
house coat are cut from the bodice
and skirt foundation pattern. The
house coat is cut with the high neck-
line, and the house frock is cut with
a square neckline. This is a simple
style, and most attractive and com-
fortable for house wear. The skirt
can either be cut from the bias or
flared skirt instructions as desired,
and', of course, will be cut longer for
the house coat. The popular sleeve
Simplicity is the keynote to these garments. Their
greatest advantage is their convenience.
is recommended for both these gar-
ments. A high stand-up collar is
most suitable for the house coat and
pockets. The house frock looks at-
tractive if finished with frills, and a
pocket is always very handy.


For this individual expertly
designed Wedding Gown.
FI. —Cut the bodice as illustrated
F 2 from the foundation bodice
pattern, and spread out as F 3 to
allow for fullness under the bust.
The skirt is cut from the founda-
tion pattern in the same manner as
the evening dress, not forgetting to
allow for the princess line above
the waist when cutting. Use the
popular sleeve pattern, tapering to
fit the wrist. The back is cut
straight from the back bodice, and
the hack skirt will be cut with full-
ness as in the front skirt. Finish
with buttons and loops at the back
to waist. The front will look
enchanting if finished with beading
or embroidery at waist.


An up-to-the-minute , young-looking
Dinner or Evening Gown.
Gl.—Use the bodice foundation pattern
with the high neckline. Chalk out bodice
as shown in illustration G 2 on a separate
sheet of paper. Then cut the bodice, and
open out to allow for fullness, as illustrated
G 3. I'he lace yoke is cut as in dotted outline
of diagram G 2. Remember to allow for all
seams on these alterations. The sleeves are
cut from the popular sleeve pattern, and,
of course, will be cut in lace. The skirt is
cut as illustrated G 4, remembering to add
the princess line to the skirt top to fit in
under the bodice. The back is cut in a
similar way and finished with buttons and"
loops on lace yoke.


Quite a fashion feature this becoming
Tailored Coat.
HI. —It is cut from the bodice foundation
pattern, using the coat line, allowing extra
length for skirt, as illustrated H 2. Use the
popular sleeve and tailored coat collar,
which have already been previously ex-
plained. Remember to cut facing for front
of coat. Pockets are becoming on a coat of
this style, with a long tie-over belt.


These Casual Coats provide a pleasant and be
coming change. They can be worn during the
moaning, afternoon and evening.
J 3. The back of the coat is cut
in a similar manner. Remember
the hack and centre front of coat
are cut on the straight of the
material. Use the full sleeve
foundation pattern. This is a
very smart style for heavy winter
or light weight autumn coats, and
looks distinctive if finished with
front facings and pockets.
Kl.—This hip length style coat,
which is very popular, is cut in
the same way as the coat illus-
Jl. Use the foundation
pattern for tailored coat,
curving the neckline as illus-
trated, and shaping out from
the underarm to length re-
quired over hips, illustrated
J 2. The bottom is then cut
up and opened out to allow
for fullness, as illustrated
trated Jl. Cut the foundation
pattern the required length, and
then open out at the bottom in
the same manner to allow width
at the bottom." Of course, there
will be no necessity to open out
the bottom unless you desire this
coat to have extra fullness around
the hips. A smart finish to this
particular coat is patch pockets
and rows of stitching around
neck and down fronts. Use
sleeve A 2 on page 26.


KIDDIES’ NIGHTS
TO CUT.
1. Length of garment should be measured at back from centre of shoulder to hem.
2. Before cutting material compare measurements with pattern, lengthen or shorten
accordingly.
3. Straighten material by tearing across one end or by drawing a thread (as illus-
trated on Page 5. Lay material smoothly on a flat surface.
4. Then trace from foundation required size, place on material and cnt.
HELPFUL HINTS.
Take measurements and read the cutting instructions carefully before laying on
material.
Materials should be laid smoothly on cutting table if dress is cut on fold, pin sel-
vedge edges ■ together. Cut through the traced line, and avoid jagged edges.
Tack garment together, try on, make any necessary alterations before stitching.
A row of machine stitching at the neck line and armholes, and on bias edges, will
keep them from stretching. Shoulder seam should be stitched from the neckline
outwards, under arm seams, from top downwards.
Seams of collars, cuffs, helts, and bands should be trimmed close to stitching before
turning. Bias pieces should be seamed on the length or crossgrain of the material.
Checks and stripes should match as nearly as possible at the seams.
Pattern for kiddies’ nighties can be used as a foundation for kiddies’ frocks if
cut to the required length.


MEN’S PYJAMAS
FOR MAKING JACKET.
»
Before cutting, take your measurement. Trace required size, place on material,
and cut.
1. Sew facings to edges of j front, right sides of materials together.
Turn facing right side out and stitch inner edge to position.
2. Join shoulder seams, making a flatfell seam as shown on Diagram 5, Page 8.
3. Sew sleeve to armhole edge, making a flatfell seam.
4. Join underarm and sleeve seams, making a flatfell serin. Make hem at lower
edge of jacket. Sew pocket to position on left front
—— —■—■— —~~—~~~
Don't fold your patterns when not in use. Roll them—thus
ensuring lasting wear. [
I— • . —~— ——— —-i
COLLAR.
1. Sew one edge of collar to neck 'edge, then stitch other side of
collar to position.
2. Make plain huttonhole in left front. (See how to make button-
hole, as on Page 44, Diagrams 1,2, 3,4.)
TROUSERS.
1. Join leg and centre seams, making flatfell seam.
2. For fly: Turn back inch, and stitch to wrong side.
3. Turn back 1| inch at top as shown on pattern for pyjama cord.
Make hem at bottom of leg of trousers.
4. Before cutting, take all measurements, lengthening pattern as
length required. In order to convert men’s trousers to boys’
sizes, undo all seams and lay boy’s pattern on material, and cut.


WORKED BUTTONHOLES
1. Cut two strips half an
inch wide and £ inch
longer than finished
buttonhole.
Fold through centre
and stitch close to raw
edges. Place raw edges
on line of buttonhole
on right side of mater-
ial, then stitch 5 inch
from raw edges to 4
inch from ends.
1. Form buttonholes,
mark position, and re-
inforce with several
rows of machine stitch-
ing before cutting.
WELT BUTTON-HOLES.
PLAIN BUTTON- HOLES.
2. On wrong side cut
through centre to
inch from ends and
diagonally to corners.
Draw strips to wrong
side.
2. Beginning at inner
edge, work buttonhole
stitch down one side,
continue around outer
end and along the
other side.
3. Sew triangular piece at
each end firmly to
strips.
3. At the inner edge make
several stitches across
cut, forming a bar-tack.
Make blanket stitches
over bar - tack and
through the material.
4. Shows right side of fin-
ished buttonhole.
4. Showing the finished
buttonhole.


BOY’S SUSPENDER SUIT
Before cutting, take your measurements, trace required
size, place on material, then cut.
FOR SHIRT.
1. Make hem at front by turning under where illus-
trated on pattern. For the right front of jacket,
turn hem to wrong side and stitch,
2. For left front, turn hem to right side of material
and stitch; also stitch on outer edge.
3. Join shoulder with flatfell seam (for flatfell seam
see Page 8, Diagram 5).
4. Sew sleeve to armhole edges, making a flatfell seam.
Join underarm and sleeve seams,
5. To finish opening of sleeve with continuous lap.
Sec Diagrams on Page 13, Diagram 2.
Make cuff, then sew one edge to gathered edge of
sleeve, slipstitching other edge of cuff to position.
ATTACHING COLLAR.
FOR COLLAR.
1. Make collar, leaving notches
open,
2. Sew neckband and facing to
collar, right •idea of mater-
ial together.
3. Sew one edge of neckband
to garment, slipstitching
other edge of neckband
position.
4. Finish lower edge of shirt
with narrow hem.
5. For shorter length sleeve,
hem lower edge.
FOR SHORTS.
1. Join side and leg seams, face lap, and
sew to right front between dots.
2. Join centre seam.
3. Make hems at lower edge.
4 . Make plain buttonholes in upper edges.
For making plain buttonholes, see
Page 20, Diagrams 1,2, 3, 4.


How to Choose
your Materials
ortunilY 10 makC 11 X \
«prs VOU the opportunity lion to 1
»THIS course oli« J j >vitb carefu Winter I
Sa»SSsBS»*H
, „l,en selecting material L ml „er wear, are
Remember , { or Winter or .inning, etc.
weight bibr.es ' for gathering « maleria l, as
always the best 1 gather a hen > best
Never attempt to « P er ma ,er.als are 1
it does not i„ plainer styles,
pleated, etc., nnalitv and always
Study your ami ( „t
choose those <<>'» " “, slud , of
*****
h- thmhrighter -!»» darU _ p astel shades
can be worn by anyone.
Fabrics should J>® elasl i c ily, etc.,
qualities » f en<l mine d in daylight-
and carefully e ea«er to p ur "
Be reluctant y a *« r make quite
chase “bargain J« ; Always study
they suit your pe ion te a,ures.
suitability as well as
★ * '
1 DEAN PLACE, SYDNEY
•J - o A


THE DUNRICH SCHOOL OF DRESS DESIGNING
DRESS CUTTING DRESSMAKING
PRINCIPAL: MADAME VERLE DUNRICH
1 DEAN PLAGE, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Please Address ail Communications to Box No. 3573 G.P.0., Sydney
Phone: BW 797}
CIRCULAR.
My Dear friend.
First of all let me thank you for sending for my
Course, which goes to show your good taste.
One like yourself who appreciates the better
things will have excellent judgment in materials from which
you will wish to cut your frocks, but suggestions are
offered on the back cover of the book of instructions.
When you start the Course remember not to
attempt anything too complicated at first. Commence with
something simple - e.g,, a plain skirt or blouse - then with
practice you will find that you will become more proficient,
and then it will be quite a simple matter for you to cut,
fit and finish any garment you desire.
If you study the book of instructions carefully
and follow my advice for using the foundation patterns for
cutting, you will prove how really simple it is to alter the
patterns and cut your garment to any size you require.
So now you can begin and if there is any way I
can help you further, please let me know.
Yours very truly.
[?]
