



THE WRECK OF THE LONDON.
fit Ucrannt of
G. V. BROOKE.
Sadness surrounds thy name on hist’ry’s page ;
Cast by the Mighty Manager of this world’s stage,
l J oor Brooke!—thou’st play’d thy last of parts.
Thy praise how great,—’twas that of bursting hearts.
Amid the raging elemental strife,
With honour didst thou qilit the Scenes oflife :
Though clasp’d were trembling hands, and Mercy was the scream,—
Through gushing tears (to thee,) sweet Gratitude did beam
For thy great perseverance.
How solemn are the words
That note tby last appearance.
Ah! sad the truth to tell,
’Twas in the “Tempest,” on the “London Boards,”
Thou bad’st thy “ Last Farewell.”
Oh, frightful thought to all, and thee,
When Hope was gone,
To be within that dismal grave as it did yawn;
To feel no finite power could save;
To know, in gloomy majesty,
Jhat grisly Death was riding high
Upon the crested wave;
To feel life's blood with horror chill,
So soon to freeze, the pulse to still,
Beneath his icy grasp;
To see, as ’twere, spread out, his awful pall,
And veil each ghastly face,
As billows rose in mountains dark, stupendous,
And clos’d above with grimmest frown,
Then roll’d with heavy thunders down,
Anon aloft to foam and fall,
And dash with roar tremendous ;
While itoarsclyhdvvl’ng rush’d the ruthless blast.
Terrific-thought, to feel each moment was the last,
.. And then—that moment’s agony —oh God! to die,
t Ami pass mat u.uUfiii™vC of doubt, —Eternity.
mi""*' r 1 • r
Thus blooming rosy Life,
Sank to its last long dreamless sleep,
And Terror’s King in silence rode
Triumphant o’er the deep.
-Yet He who wills the sparrow’s fall,
Was in that fierce storm kind, e’en then;
His messenger* was there. ’Twas that good man,
That spiritual Samaritan,
Who comfort spake to all;
That one,
Who pray’d, and caus’d to pray,
E’en taught the little child to say,
Gp. Great God, “THY WILL BE DONE.”
, __ ; EDWIN TOMLIN,
" * Rev. Daniel D.rapcr.


of the “ London.V
(BY ONE OF THE SURVIVORS.)
' vn"
On Saturday morning, 30th December, 1865, I left Fenchurch Street
Station for Tilbury, to join as passenger the screw steamship London , to
sail that day for Melbourne. She was built and despatched by the
Messrs. Wigram, of Blackwall—a firm of high standing, of long experience
in the Australian trade, and whose name was a sufficient guarantee that
the equipment and management would be good. She was compara-
tively a new ship, this being her third voyage. Built of iron, 1428 tons
register, and 267 feet long, auxiliary screw of 200 horse-power, very
loftily sparred, and ship-rigged, clipper or modern build, long, low, and
narrow, which said she was built for speed—the very thing that induced
me, and no doubt others, to choose this ship. I had come home from
Australia a few months previous, and had selected this London to return,
saying, “ I can spend a month longer time at home, and still be at
Melbourne as soon by her as though I started a month earlier by a sailing
vessel.” She was commanded by Captain Martin, a navigator of great
experience, a skilful sailor in every sense of the word, and a gentleman,
I should say, as far as I had an opportunity of judging. So, naturally
enough, we entertained high hopes of a speedy and safe voyage.
I had always a great dislike, or rather dread, in commencing this
voyage during the winter season, on account of the dangers of the English
Channel, and getting off clear of the coast. This was also one of my
reasons for choosing this ship: she having steam-power, the danger I
considered was very much lessened, as well as a saving of time, and I felt
in undertaking this voyage, at this inclement season of the year, perfect
security, and no such thought as fear entered my mind, wholly reliant on
the reputation of the ship, captain, and owners.
Everybody who has been to sea a little have their own ideas as to the
character and seaworthiness of a ship, and of course I have mine ; but in
the case of the London, would not exercise my judgment ; would have
considered it presumption, and quite ridiculous for me to be biassed by my
humble opinion of one of the first ships of London, owned by one of the
first firms, and commanded by an experienced captain. No ; I would take
all for granted, or else what good is there in a reputation or name ?
On board the ship, lying in the river off Gravesend, were the usual
scenes of confusion, preparation, affectionate and trying partings of friends,
generally attending at departure for these long voyages. About two o’clock
in the day we left Gravesend, and proceeded down the Thames on our
long voyage to Australia, or rather Plymouth ; for on a voyage we always


look forward to the next port that we expect to call at, though it should
not be the port of destination. The day was fine as we steamed down the
river; the passengers congregated on deck to view the country, which was
already green, and also to take observations, as the saying is at sea, to
examine the “ship, and criticize her rig and general appearance ; also
to notice each other and make acquaintances. I was surprised to find
so many Australians on board : fully three out of four had been out there
and were returning again, many saying it was for the last time ; that they
had got tired of England, and particularly London, where the sun had not
been seen for a month ; longed for the beautiful Australian climate, with its
clear atmosphere, blue sky, and bright sunshine, for ten months out of
twelve. That evening about sunset we anchored at the Nore. Though the
evening was fine the barometer denoted unsettled weather, which we had
the next day (Sunday), and owing to its severity w r e remained at anchor
till Monday morning, the Ist January, when the weather had become fine.
Between eight and nine in the morning we were again under weigh,
steaming down Channel. The wind was ahead; the day pleasant. We
had a fine view of the coast —-Margate, Ramsgate, North and South Fore-
land, and Dover, which we passed about 4 p.m. That night the wind
increased. The next morning it was dull, heavy, unsettled weather; pretty
strong wind dead ahead, with a nasty short Channel sea on ; a great
number of passengers sick ; and, as usual, many regretting having
come, and would certainly leave the ship at Plymouth, and forfeit their
passage-money. But how suddenly we change our minds under different
circumstances.
About ten in the morning we were in sight of the Isle of Wight: the
weather still boisterous, the indications of the barometer threatening.
Captain Martin and pilot decided on taking shelter at Spithead, which we
did, and anchored about 4 p.m., opposite to Eyde; and thankful we were,
for it blew fearfully that night. The next morning was fine. We were
under weigh again about 9 a.m., steaming out of the St. Helen’s Roads ;
passed out through the Needles at noon ; once again in the Channel ; day
fine, wind ahead, heavy swell. Next morning, Thursday, 4th, the weather
was very boisterous, the heaviest we had experienced as yet. By this time
we had an opportunity of judging of the sea-going qualities of the London ,
and I must say I was very much disappointed in her. I could see she
■was a ship of great length for breadth, heavily sparred, very low in the
water, not at all lively or buoyant; and when contemplating the thoughts
of her in a gale, I actually entertained fears for her. Opinions were
expressed freely, as always are on beard of passenger-ships, such as, —
“ Boys, we have got a wet, uncomfortajfe old tub this time, and if I could
afford it, wmuld leave her at Another would say, “ Oh,
nonsense ; she will be all right after a, few days, as she will lighten by
consumption of coal and stores, and we wtll soon be in fine weather. In a
week or two we will be to Madeira : all plain sailing then to the Cape,
and if we meet any rough weather there, why she will be in proper trim,”


Between eight and nine in the morning of this Thursday the 4th, we
were off Plymouth waiting for a pilot. Soon a fishing-smack with three
men and two boys in her ran up near us, and launched a little boat from
their deck, intending to board us, to pilot our ship into harbour. Two
men got into her—a heavy sea running at the time. In a few minutes
after casting off, I saw that the little boat did not rise on the wave :
presently I saw the heads of the two men rise up on a wave, and could
see that their boat was swamped. At that moment I heard Mr. Harris, the
chief mate of our ship, give orders to man a lifeboat. Soon the men
were in it ready for lowering, but there was a great delay in consequence
of the lowering gear not being in proper order. The detention was truly
painful. Occasionally the two heads would appear, then down again,
expecting every time to be the last. Presently our boat got up to where
they were. We could see them pick up one man, then row about looking
for the other ; but the poor fellow had sunk only two or three minutes
before they got to the spot. The affair cast quite a gloom over the ship.
Many said it was a bad omen for us ; and what made the accident appear
worse and more to be regretted, was that it might have been prevented
had the lowering apparatus been in proper order, or Clifford’s patent.
In a short time a pilot-boat was seen bearing down to us. At about
ten o’clock the pilot was on board, and we running into the Sound, and at
noon were anchored inside of the breakwater. The afternoon was wet
and cold, consequently very little was done towards preparing for sea.
The next morning, Friday, sth January, was beautiful, clear and still, much
like a November morning : all was bustle and life on board now, as it was
reported we should sail that day. Barges came alongside with coal, and
fifty tons were added to our stock and piled on deck in sacks ; boats with
stock, meat, vegetables, &c. Many passengers joined us here : I observed
our passengers were of a superior class. In the afternoon my attention was
called to a gentleman and lady walking on the poop : they were Mr. and
Mrs. Gr. Y. Brooke. Fortunately the lady did not accompany her Imsband
on this voyage ; she was to have joined him out there in a year.
Almost every class of society was represented on board our ship—•
clergyman, actor, magistrate, lawyer, banker, merchant, tradesman,
labourer—of all ages; mothers with their children and nurses; beautiful
and accomplished young ladies; newly-married couples; young men in the
prime of manhood ; wealthy families returning after a visit to their native
country; also many going out for the first time to seek their fortune,
full of hope.
Two of our passengers left the ship at Plymouth—a fortunate thing
for them. One was a gentleman, whose acquaintance I had made during
the trip from Gravesend. He expressed a great dislike to the sea and the.
long voyage before us, this being his first voyage; also the horror of being
compelled to live in one of those small cell-like state-rooms for two months
or more. When .he left the ship he did not tell us of his intention of
not returning; perhaps he thought we would consider him a coward.


The other was a young man who had, from some family quarrel, taken
passage in the London , unknown to them. He at as entreated to return by
an advertisement in The Times , to which he paid no attention. The last
day his whereabouts was ascertained ; a brother came on board, and by
urgent entreaty he was induced to quit the vessel. I know of three who
would have willingly left the ship at Plymouth, but were ashamed. A
young man, one of my state-room companions, about twenty years of age,
and who was married only the day before his departure—but fortunately
had left his wife behind—was thinking very seriously of leaving the ship,
was quite undecided all day. All he wanted was a little encouragement
to have done so. But many are deterred at a time like this from follow-
ing their desires out of fear of the opinions of others. I now can call to
mind many remarks of passengers’ forebodings of the evil to come; of
course I naturally remember them in a case of this kind.
At dark all was ready for sea : Captain Martin gave orders for all to be
on board, as we would sail that evening; but the more knowing ones gave
it as their opinion that Captain Martin would not sail until after twelve
o’clock, to avoid commencing the voyage on a Friday. There is a super-
stitious belief amongst sailors, and in fact amongst many who are not, that
Friday is an unlucky day to sail. A young girl said to me, “ I hope we
shall not sail to-night.”—“ Why ?”—“ Because Friday sail always fail.” I
asked her if she was influenced by such foolish nonsense as that ? For my
part, I said, I was willing we should sail at once. The public, through
the newspapers, have censured Captain Martin very much for putting
to sea when he did, and disregarding the threatening indications of the
barometer. In justice to him, I will state that at no time after leaving
Plymouth did I. hear one word of censure by anybody on board. The
night of Friday that we sailed was fine, Saturday was fine; true, Sunday
and Monday were rough, but nothing to create fear for a well-found and
first-class ship. I am sure, had Captain Martin not sailed, say until
Sunday, he would have been censured by the passengers for remaining so
long. In judging Captain Martin, we must go back to that time. He
would argue, “ I know what the London is, I have confidence in her ; I
have made two voyages to Melbourne with her ; as a matter of course
she would experience some heavy weather during these trips, and if I
wait for fine weather to cross the Bay of Biscay, I may be here all
winter. It’s midwinter now, we must expect five days stormy out of
the seven. I have a fine night to start with; true, the barometer is
falling, but the storm foretold may bring a favourable wind; if it should
not, the London will weather it; and more than that, I can afford to use
plenty of coal at the commencement of the voyage.”
As the evening wore on, the passengers were nearly all on board.
We found that a larger number had joined us there than we expected
to see; so we made a pretty large party, 252, including captain, crew,
and all connected with the ship, divided as follows ;59 first-class
passengers, 52 second-class, 52 third-class, 89 belonging to the ship, and,


I have no doubt, a few stowaways ; I was told of some, and I knew of three
on board whose names were not on the published list ; say, there were six,
making a total of 258. The number of passengers were 163, not many
for so large a ship as the London , but 160 too many, as the end proved.
In the course of the evening the usual questions were asked, as it
generally is at the beginning of a voyage —What is to be the length of
time for the passage ? and usually bets are made. One would give her
sixty days; or would bet a dinner that we would be able to take one
at the “Albion,” in Bourke Street, by 10th of March. Others would
give her sixty-five to seventy days. One man said, “ I’ll take odds she
never gets to Melbourne. Do you remember what I told you at Graves-
end, that she looked like a coffin ? ” Not a very comforting observation,
but I remember it distinctly.
The next morning we were out of sight of land; we had left in the
night. I asked one who was up at the time of starting, helping to heave
the anchor, what was the time then; he said twelve, or a little before.
This our first day (Saturday) was pleasant—light head wind, ship rolling
considerably. The coals piled on deck, in sacks, rolled down, and came
very nigh killing a little boy. A good number of passengers on deck
—making acquaintance. But this day gave us the last opportunity of
seeing much of each other. The weather the next day became severe —it
was too unpleasant to be on deck, and a great number were sea-sick and
kept to their rooms. I do not think I saw a lady on deck at any time
after, excepting on the last day. So Saturday passed over, and Sunday
came in, and with it rain, and rather heavy wind, but a little more
favourable, and we had now a few sails set. At noon, being on deck, I
noticed that the ship’s position was posted up, which I now forget;
but I distinctly remember that our distance then from Plymouth w r as
170 miles. Understand what I mean by the position of the ship : on
board passenger-vessels, the latitude, longitude, and distance run for the
last day, ending at noon, or since last reckoning, is posted up by one of
the officers in a conspicuous part of the ship, for the satisfaction of the
passengers, who generally keep logs, and can see their position every
day on a map or chart. In the afternoon, a clergyman from the after,
or chief saloon—the Rev. Mr. Kerr I think was his name—came to
our cabin, in second class, and read prayers and gave a short sermon
or exhortation, but under difficulties, as he said he was suffering from
sea-sickness : also the water occasionally would come down on his bare
head, through the small skylights in the deck-house. Divine service
was held in the chief saloon in the morning, I think by Eev. Dr. Wolly. I
suppose very few thought of that being their last Sabbath,
Monday, the Bth, came in a little more pleasantly ; that is, through
the day the sun was to be seen at times, but the wind was still strong
and ahead, and the ship under steam, and being low in the water, she
made pretty heavy weather of it. The ship’s position this day, as far
as I can remember, was latitude 46° 40' N., longitude 7° 7W. The


distance I can remember more distinctly was 102 miles, we being now
272 miles from Plymouth, and entered on to the Bay of Biscay —that bay
of terrible repute, for why I did not fully understand, but do now.
There are unpleasant days at sea, and this was one of them : no
comfort below, nor pleasure on deck. lam now speaking of the second-
class accommodation on board an Australian passenger steamship of
London, not Liverpool. The cabin is between decks, entered by the
main hatchway of the ship, nearly midships and just forward of the main-
mast. As far as regards the motion of the ship, this is the best part
to be in. There were fifty-two passengers and only two stewards, not a
sufficient number to do the work. The consequence was, the work was
always ahead ; everything rough and dirty, everybody complaining.
I felt rather disappointed myself with the arrangements of the ship.
Coming down Channel, I saw much to complain of, but said nothing ;
would make every allowance at the commencement of a voyage, knowing
well what those long voyages are, and trusting that all would be right,
once we left Plymouth and at sea. But instead of matters improving,
they grew worse. Of course, you must make some allowances for the
severe weather; and, to make matters worse, there was the steam-winch,
that the work of the ship was done by, Avith its everlasting din and rattle.
It was placed on the main deck, close to our hatcluvay ; and while it was
Avorking—Avhich Avas more than half the time—Ave could not hear each
other converse in our cabin ; and as for reading—the only solace at sea
• —why, you Avould just as much think of taking a book on a cold
showery day in winter, and sit on London Bridge to read, as there.
On deck it was worse still; for this London Avas a very Avet ship, much
more so than any I had ever seen. Her decks Avere continually covered
Avith water, more or less SAvashing from one side to the other ; and she
had such a Avholesale Avay of taking it in. She Avould roll Avell over on her
side (and she Avas a devil for rolling !), and scoop in the green seas, and
then it Avould take ten or fifteen minutes before it Avould run off. The
scuppers appeared to me to be very small, and not at all suitable for the
purpose. I can very Avell remember being on deck that afternoon,
standing with a feAV others near the cuddy. You will please understand
that the cuddy or chief saloon Avas on the main-deck, and extended to,
say, a third of the length of the ship. The deck over it is the poop, and
Avhere none but first-class passengers are permitted. From the cuddy
forward to the forecastle is the large, clear main-deck, or Avaist, pro-
tected by bulwarks and a rail on top, in all together over six feet high—a
good shelter from the Avind and sea. We had not been there long before
over came a sea, Avetting us effectually, and taking us up to about the
knees. Presently Ave noticed that the Avater Avas not running off. “ Oh,
I see. Who Avill Avade to the side, and take aAvay that door-mat and
rubbish from over the scupper ? ” It Avas done, but still no difference.
“ Get a stick and run it doAvn, perhaps that will clear it. Oh, I see hoav
Avhat is the trouble, the scupper is filled Avith coal.” And so they Avere


most of the time after. They came from the sacks of coal piled on deck.
There were also large lumps that had not been put in sacks, which would
roll about the decks, to the great danger of men’s legs. For two nights
after I could hear these lumps of coal rolling about above my head. So
at any time after I did not go on deck oftener than was required, for
fear of getting hurt; as there were always so many things knocking about
the decks, such as lumps of coal, buckets, empty casks, &c., and sometimes
we would see a bag of coal moving about with the water. So after
remaining on deck until we got nicely drenched, we went to our happy
home below, to hear dishes rattling, children crying, women grumbling,
and that everlasting steam-winch.
"While we were at tea this evening (Monday, the Bth) the ship com-
menced to roll (it is often remarked at sea that a ship generally com-
mences to roll and pitch at meal times), and shipped a great deal of
water, which soon found its way down through the skylight on to cur
heads. Soon after we shipped another heavy sea—or rather dipped it in
out of the Bay of Biscay; and it came rushing down our hatchway in a
body, causing quite a scene of consternation among the ladies, many
screaming at once, “Oh, we are sinking!” others crying, “Shut down
the lids of the hatch I ” One man who had come home in her from Mel-
bourne said, “ Oh, you must not mind this, it is an old trick of the
Lo7idoris; and more than that, if the lids of the hatch are shut down, it
will not prevent the water coming down—they are not made properly :
the sides of the covering of the hatch don’t fit close to the combings, and
also the water floats up the lid, and comes down nearly the same as
though there were none I ” all of which proved true. After a time the
water on deck subsided. Then the men had to fall to and carry up the
water in buckets out of their state-rooms, to save their clothes from
being spoilt. This continued nearly all night; for by the time the rooms
were free, down would come another supply. All the women, excepting a
few, remained up all night: not that there was any danger—or rather I
did not consider there was. About twelve o’clock I went to bed, as our
side of the ship was dry, we being then on the windward side. At four
in the morning (of Tuesday, the 9th), I found that the ship was then on
the other tack, that we had the leeward side, consequently the water;
and I heard a lady in next state-room asking some others, her com-
panions who had remained up all night, to come and assist her in keeping
the state-room dry, saying they could pray and work too, as she did ; I at
once got up and assisted her.
When daylight came in, we learned that the wind was still ahead,
the weather heavy, the ship under steam, and making very little progress.
About ten o’clock I went on deck, and found that the jibboom was
carried away, and the fore-royal-mast broken in two and hanging down :
soon after the foretopgallant-mast broke off, then the foretop-mast, and
all hanging down a wreck. That day, some time after, the main-royal-
mast was carried away. The first part of the day rather pleasant : I


remember the sun was shining when I went on deck to see the wreck of
the foretop-mast. But towards the latter part of the day the wind in-
creased—the ship labouring very much, and a prospect of a wild night.
Many now began to express fears, and question the propriety of the captain
still forcing the ship in the face of a head-sea. We had several passengers
on board who had been sailors. One, I remember, John Hickman, from
Ballarat, had his wife and four children on board. He told me he had
been brought up to the sea, and was, if I remember right, fourteen years
at it. In the afternoon of this day, I saw Hickman come down from the
deck. u Well, Hickman,” said I, “ how do matters look on deck?” He
said in reply —“ I have been a good deal at sea ; I have been in a good
many vessels, and I know something about them, but I never yet saw one
behave as this. She frightens me—l don’t know what to make of her.”
The same opinions were expressed by others. The women all this time
were in a constant state of fear ; but their fears were no proof of danger.
By seven or eight o’clock matters grew worse, the gale increasing. One
of the lifeboats was carried away —lifted out of the davits by the sea.
Shipping a deal of water, our hatches had to be closed; but, as I have
said before, this did not prevent the water coming in, and by nine o’clock
in the evening all was confusion and terror in our second-class cabin :
ladies clinging to you, and beseeching you to stay beside them; some in
their rooms reading and praying, but the majority out in the open cabin.
Fear at this time was not confined entirely to the females. Most of the
men had fear on their faces. I myself began to feel very uneasy, for I
heard expressions of doubt and fear from many who understood nautical
matters. Mr. Munroe, one of the surviving passengers, and who had
formerly been at sea, came down about twelve o’clock. I asked him how
things looked on deck. He said, <£ I have been on the poop all the night,
and the sight up there is really terrible—seas mounting right over her.”
“Do you think there is any danger? ” I asked. “ Yes ; not so much from
the violence of the gale, as the behaviour of the ship.” He added that
Captain Martin had been on deck all the time, and it was plain to be seen
that he was not at rest in his mind as to the fate of his ship. He
(Munroe) said, “ I dread to be down here, but I am nearly perished by
being on deck so long.” And no wonder he dreaded being below. Apart
from the horror of being in the company of nearly frantic girls and women,
who thought that every roll would be the last, and not quite clear on that
point yourself, there was the discomfort that at every roll of the ship the
water would shoot down the hatchway, first one side, then the other —then
wash to and fro the same as on the upper deck. Then worse than all was
the steam, produced by water that went down the engine-hatch on to the hot
machinery : this steam came forward and lodged in our cabin, which was
very suffocating. During any lull of the sea we lifted the lid to get some
fresh air, but most of the time we could not see each other five feet apart.
Most of the passengers were sitting on the tables. That night was really
terrible, but the next was worse. The ship at this time was hove-to, and


oh! how she would roll! It was no gentle, undulating motion ; she
would roll on her side until you were in doubts of her ever coming
up again. Then up she would come with a jerk ; and when she did
rise there was a general displacement of boxes, trunks, chairs, buckets,
and other moveable articles, placed on board in confusion at Gravesend
and Plymouth. How the passengers fared in the other parts of the ship,
or what their fears were, I can’t say. Those in the after-part, I think,
would not see the same danger as Ave; at any rate they would not be
so inconvenienced as we were. We could now see that we had more
than the dangers of a gale to contend with. It was quite evident our
ship was deeply, if not over laden. She was a ship built for speed, of
great length for her breadth —belonging to a class of ships that cannot
be loaded Avith safety in proportion to her tonnage, like those of the old
style. She Avas, perhaps, safe enough when properly loaded, with less
top-hamper, not so heavily sparred, and properly equipped. And
besides, it Avas the prevailing opinion on board that she Avas not prepared
for a gale. It appeared as if she had been forced to sea in a hurry,
and there Avas confusion above deck as Avell as below. Work Avas
always ahead. The sailors Avere continually at work, and yet the ship
was never “ snugged,” as the saying is at sea. The creAV had not got
used to the ship ; and, another difficulty, many Avere foreigners, and
did not understand English. Once I suav Mr. Angel, one of the officers,
directing a man to do something : the poor felloAV Avas anxious to do it
right, but every attempt Avas Avrong ; at last I discovered that he did
not understand a Avord that Avas said to him. I also noticed a Avant of
regularity and discipline in the ship. I make this observation with no
desire to throAv discredit on any one, or insinuate that the loss of the
ship Avas in any Avay attributable to this ; but I think it will all tend to
show that there was not that sufficient preparation, or that proper regard
to life, at the outset, and in the despatching of the ship, that there ought
to have been; yet I feel fully convinced as I noAV write this, that had the
same gale overtaken us two months after, on the last Aveek of our voyage,
the London would not have succumbed to it as she did. I believe she
Avas a good, strong, Avell-built ship ; but that is not where the fault rests;
it’s in the cramming her so full of goods that even the space allotted to
the passengers Avas encroached on. This interfered with the Avorking of
the ship when trouble overtook us.
As I said before, fear Avas not confined to the females ; Ave all expe-
rienced it more or less. Of course Ave men endeavoured to disguise our
real feelings from them—going from one room to the other cheering them
up as best Ave could. This state of things continued all night. About
tAvo in the morning (Wednesday) I went to my room, and had a short
sleep, the last I had in the London. When I aAvoke I then found a slight
improvement in the cabin—not so much Avater coming doAvn, and the
ship rolling less : she had been put round an hour before to return to
Plymouth, and Avas running close-hauled.


When daylight came in, the wind had somewhat abated, but the sea
was very heavy. We then had to go to work, and carry up water out of
our rooms. I went on deck at nine in the morning, and looked over the
side just abaft the main rigging, and saw the two pieces of broken booms
that had been carried away the previous day, still towing by the iron
rigging and thumping against the ship’s sides. I was told by one of the
firemen that night that there were one or two forward dead-lights knocked
in by these booms. The most of this day, say up to three o’clock, the
crew were engaged in getting in-board the wreck of the boom, for what
purpose I never understood, nor do I know now, unless it was fear of it
coming in contact with the screw. Even so I think that in towing it to
the stern, and then letting it go adrift, there would have been no danger.
As it was, it proved a cause of trouble to us : it was lashed that afternoon
just alongside of the engine-room skylight, and at night, when the gale
increased, it got loose from its lashings and was knocking about, there
always being a deal of water on the deck ; and by the action of it and
the sea the skylight over the engine-room was carried away, which was
the immediate cause of the ship’s loss.
When it was known in the morning that we were returning to
England, everybody appeared much pleased. Then commenced new
speculations, many saying they would not return in this ship, they didn’t
like her, some would go by another vessel, some would give up going to
Australia altogether. Several asked me what I intended doing. I said,
“If the ship goes I go. lam not afraid of the London ” (although I was
the previous night,) “if she is properly managed. When she gets repaired
and put in proper sea-trim, she will go all right. She was started this time
before she was ready. I think the owners and captain will have learned a
severe lesson not to attempt the like again.”
We had a scrambling dinner that day, which was the last meal we had
together. It was very good, under the circumstances, —thanks to a good
steward.
A small vessel passed near us. I did not see her, not happening to
be on deck at the time, but I heard many speaking of having seen her.
People have since asked why Captain Martin did not request this vessel
to remain near us. That is a question no one can answer. He may
have said, “ I have perfect confidence in my own ship,” and I know the
feeling in our cabin was perfect reliance on his judgment. The whole
day (Wednesday) was dull and gloomy; heavy cross seas, ship labouring,
no comfort anywhere. Darkness came on early, the wind increased, the
sky looked wild, everything bespoke a terrible night: and the anxious
countenances of all seemed to have forebodings of danger. I dreaded the
thoughts of another such night as last. I thought of the hatchway, and
said to Munroe, “ Here is night coming on, and a prospect of a severe one,
and yet nothing has been done to prevent the water coming down.” He
said, “ I know it. I have told Mr. Harris (the first officer) about it,
and all the satisfaction I got was, ‘ Let it go down.’ If they Avould only


let me have canvas and pump-tacks, I would do it myself. I will try
again.” After a while I heard some one hammering overhead. When
he returned, I said, “ Well, you have succeeded at last.” He said, “No,
only partially. I got enough canvas, but could get only half enough pump-
tacks. Everything is alike on board, everything in confusion, nothing can
be got that is required.”
At length night set in : hatches were closed doAvn and fastened on
the inside, to prevent the water from floating them up ; but still the
water came in—first one side, then the other—with every roll. By seven
or eight o’clock we were in as great a state of terror as on the previous
night, and with more cause, for the gale was more violent. The steam
was so troublesome that Ave could not open the lids for a moment .to let in
air. The sensation in the cabin then Avas really aAvful. I never shall be
able to convey an idea of it. Imagine what your feelings Avould be,
waiting and expecting every moment to meet death. Add to that the
dismal sound of Avater rushing in. You could not see it through the
cloud of steam and dim lights, and Avere not sure whether the ship was
filling dr not; in fact, a foot of water washing to and fro, carrying with
it every movable article, strengthened your fears that she Avas. Then
at every heavy roll a woman shrieked. There Avas one young girl nearly
frantic. By nine o’clock Ave wei’e in worse state than ever; Avhen the
ship rolled there would be nearly tAvo feet of Avater in the cabin. It Avould
come in Avith a rush, then back again to the other side, carrying Avith it
anything that Avas not lashed. The boards of the loAver berths Avere
Avashed out, and the bedding Avould drop down, and then, by the roll of
the ship, was carried out into the cabin, and there floated about. There
was a lady in next state-room —about the only one Avho remained in her
berth—and Avhom I was assisting to prevent her trunks being broken ;
both of us up to OAir knees in water, in Avhich various articles, such as
buckets, pieces of boxes, clothing of every description, apples, books and
papers Avere swimming. A few of the Avomen Avere quite collected—talk-
ing as calmly as on land. One in particular I remember, Mrs. M , who
had come home in this ship on her last voyage from Melbourne; she said to
me, “ I feel as if I never should see land again. lam loth to give up life,
but it is not so much on my OAvn account as for those I leave behind.
I Avas married only two months before leaving Melbourne. I knoAV my
husband Avill mourn my death very much. I came home to settle some pro-
perty. And another thing I regret very much is, that I have brought this
little niece of mine with me” (a nice girl of about tAvelve or thirteen years).
“I induced her father and mother to let her come with me.” “Never
mind,” says the little niece, “ I am happy, aunt, and Ave Avill die together.”
And I think they did. They Avere the last Avhom I spoke to in the cuddy,
just before leaving the ship. They Avere then close together, sitting at
one of the tables, and the water nearly up to the seat, and not far from the
Rev. Mr. Draper.
I often stood that night watching the port-hole in the state-room—


■when the ship would take those awful larches. I would see the water
dark and still against the glass of the port ; it -would remain so for half a
minute or more. I would say to myself, “Is she sinking now, and twenty
feet under water, or is she at her old tricks ? ” Presently I would see
the water in a foam against the glass, and then I would say, “ She is all
right yet.”
So the evening wore on —all of us more or less frightened; with the
females, some reading and praying, some their husbands comforting. In
one cabin where there were several congregated, one woman had five
children: two of the smaller ones were playing about in the bed as happy
as could be : some one remarked that their innocence and happiness were
to be envied. The children at no time showed much fear—even those of
eight or ten years of age did not seem to realize their danger. Several
females, still seated on the tables, had never been in bed since Sunday
night; their clothes wet, their eyes red from the hot steam. Occasionally
a man would come in from the deck, and his report would be anything
but consoling. Our means of getting on deck now was through to the
after-part, and up through the cuddy.
About ten o’clock, the purser of the ship came into our cabin. I
spoke to him about the water being there. “ Oh, you have nothing to
complain of,” he said, “we are just as bad aft : we have been carrying
it out of the state-rooms all the evening.” I said it was very wrong
that it should be there when it could have been so easily prevented by
securing the hatches —not on account of the danger, but for the comfort
of the passengers : they had plenty of warning—last night was nearly
as bad. He said, “ There is no danger of it; it runs aft to the engine-
pumps, and is pumped up.” But what was the consequence? its weight
all told with a heavily-laden ship; it all tended to bring her deeper
in the water. In a few minutes after, the fires were out—the engine
stopped: what use were their pumps then, and wdiere was the water ?
Still there.
While the purser and I were talking, there came some sailors, and
rushed past us going to the room where the sails were kept. I heard one
say to another, “ Let us make haste with a sail, or she will sink.” At
that moment I heard an order from one of the sailors that all men were
wanted on the poop. I knew this applied to the passengers, and felt
there must be something very serious now. Immediately we left to go
aft, leaving the women alone : only a few men having children remained
behind, their wives begging of them not to go. In getting there we
had to grope our way through a long dark passage, say sixty or eighty
feet in length, and over the top of stores, luggage, &c., that were piled
in some places within two feet of the deck. Once through, and in passing
the engine-room, we could see there was water rushing down. A short
time before, the skylight over the engine-room hatch had been washed
off, and this was the cause of the consternation. At this time I was not
aware of it, but hurried by to get up on the poop, the place we were


ordered to. There a dismal sight presented itself, and one I shall never
forget. The gale was at its height. The night was very dark ; but from
lights held at the cuddy windows to give light on the deck in front, and
which reflected up the mainmast, could be seen the half of the maim
topsail still standing, and the other half blown away, the shreds blown
straight out at right angles with the yard by the force of the wind. The
winds whistling through the wire rigging produced a dreadful sound.
Waves lashed the sides of the ship—now and then one breaking over her,
she laying over very much. There was a boiling foam level with the
railings, and a little farther off could be seen seas ten or fifteen feet
above us, with a phosphorescent crest showing through the dark. While
standing there, viewing this scene of wild fury, and supporting myself by
the companion-way, others were coming up the steps ; so I let go my
hold, and reached across to catch hold of a railing round the screw-shaft
or opening, where it was drawn up out of water when disconnected, but
I found nothing to hold on by but a smooth wall. All at once I found
myself sliding down to leeward, and nothing to prevent me going over the
low iron railing into the boiling foam below, when suddenly I caught hold
of something in the dark that brought me up. No one but myself knew
what a narrow escape I had—even to the present day it sends a thrill
through me when I think of it.
Soon after getting on the poop I saw there was nothing to be done
there, and with the others went down again. I then went into the cuddy,
which was well lit up; it was full of people. There was a clergyman
praying at the time, very fervently, and all joined in Avith deep and
earnest Amens. It was a solemn and trying moment : I remained there
about five minutes until prayers were ended, when all arose and with one
consent showed a willingness to assist in any way for our safety ; even
some of the ladies were very energetic—assisting the best they could, and
encouraging others. Of course there were some quite prostrated with
fear. Very much has been said upon the remarkable coolness and resig-
nation evinced by all, which certainly was the case during the last twelve
or fourteen hours : but when our helpless position was first apparent to
every one, then fear and excitement showed itself more or less in every
face ; but there was no raving, no running to and fro but in the way of
assisting. Several were advising what the captain should do, I heard
one gentleman, a first-class passenger, crying out, “ Tell the captain to
shut the watertight compartments and run to land.” I said to myself,
“ That request is useless now, as the ship is filling through the openings in
the deck ; if it were a hole knocked through her bottom, these compart-
ments might be of some use. As for running to land, ’tis too late ; we
have to go wherever the wind takes us.” As soon as prayers were over,
I heard one of the officers order more lights to be held to the windows
to enable the men to see how to secure the engine-room hatch. I got
two swing-lights from the after-part of the cuddy, and took them to the
windows. There were several holding lights at the time ; a lady came to
VOL. xiv.— no. 79. o.


us—she was rather tall and exceedingly handsome—and proposed that
the ladies should hold the lights if we could assist in anything else. Sails
were being got up at the time from the second cabin, I went below
’tween decks to assist with the sails. As I passed along by the engine-
room, Mr, Greenhill, the chief engineer, sung out to the firemen below to
come up. Soon I saw three men come, who said, u It’s useless to try any
longer; the fires are out and the Avater up to our middle.” All this
took place in a short time —say about ten minutes from the time I went
on to the poop, then to the cuddy, and then to the engine-room, ’tween
decks. Water Ayas coming doAvn at the time, but the mass of it Avas
stopped by sails, &c. placed over the opening. While I stood by the
engine-room holding a light for the men aa t lio were seeking sails, I had an
opportunity of learning our actual condition from the captain, officers,
doctor, and engineer, Avho frequently met there. They had little hope,
though they endeavoured to disguise the actual danger. The engineer,
Mr. Greenhill, took a light from me to go doAvn into the engine to have
a look. It seemed to me a A r ery dangerous undertaking, as there Avas
Avater still going doAvn, and I could hear it washing about beloAV. He
Avas a A r ery acti\'e and able young man. I did not see him return, and
felt very uneasy about him—some time after I Avas relieved to see him,
he had come up Avithout me noticing him. At this time, almost all the
passengers Avere assisting ; among them Avas G. Y. Brooke, Avithout coat
or hat, Avorking with a will. I then helped Avith a sail which they Avere
getting through to take up on deck; Avhen it Avas up, I heard an order
to bring mattresses, beds, &c., to put in this opening over the engine-
room, to prevent it going doAvn in a body; then afterAvards to be covered
over with sails. The ladies immediately Avent into their rooms and turned
up their beds to get at the mattress. The conduct of some of the ladies
Avas certainly heroic in aiding, directing, and encouraging. After the
mattresses Avere passed out on deck, I Avent beloAV again. It Avas then
proposed that the passengers should get buckets and pass up water from
between decks, as every little Avould lighten, though tAvo were coming in
for one taken out. Buckets Avere accordingly produced, and fifty or
eighty men were soon employed in passing along buckets of water.
Some time after, say half-past one o’clock (Thursday morning, the 11th),
as Ave Avere arranged along ’tAveen decks, the captain came to us and
said, “ Men, put doAvn those buckets, and come and try to secure the
engine-room hatch, for that is the only chance to save the ship.” It has
been thought that there must have been some other leak than the engine-
room hatch, —the captain’s Avords do not favour the supposition. Imme-
diately some one sung out, “ More sails Avanted.” A very large one Avas
brought, the last one of the lot (as I was told). It Avas very heavy, and
they had great difficulty in getting it along.
The sails Avere kept in a store or state-room, on the starboard side
abaft the mainmast; they could not be taken aft by the passage- Avay
on that side of the ship, as it Avas blocked up Avith freight or luggage ;


* consequently they had to be taken forward around the mainmast and down
the passage-way on the port side, where there was just room enough left
to crawl over ; and here is where the detention was, a truly painful one
at that time. As the sail was thus delayed, some came down to see what
was the cause ; first the captain, asking, “ What is detaining you ? hurry
it along ! ” then Mr. Tycehurst, the second officer, singing out, “Hurry
up that sail! ” then some one else, “ For God’s sake bring along that sail, or
the ship will sink ! ” I mention this to show how evexy space was choked
up that should have been clear, and also to show the unprepared state of
the ship for an emergency. At length the sail was got over (I think the
passage-way had to be cleared first), and through on to the deck. There
we could best understand our hopeless condition. There was much water
in deck, perhaps never less than two feet on the lee side; though she was
not taking much over on the weather side, she would roll over and take it
over the lee rail ; then when she rolled to windward, up would come a
tide two to three feet deep, carrying everything before it. It is no wonder
then the skylight was carried away, particularly when there was a piece of
a spar striking against it.
About fifty men were on deck assisting to put the sail where it was
required, and where there were already a pile of them about three feet
high. The great difficulty appeared to be in preventing the water from
Heating up the whole pile of sails and getting down. The one we had
just brought up was spread over all the others, and nailed to the deck on
the lee side with great difficulty. I saw Mr. Harris and the carpenter-
driving nails in a foot of water. We were about half-an-hour at this job,
and oh, how it did blow, and how cold was the water, and what a medley
of dismal noises there was—men hallooing, the sea roaring, and the rigging
whistling ! At this time I heard the captain give orders that the pumps
should be kept going. When the sail was placed over, I went into the
cuddy, and passed on down below to assist in carrying up water—fully
convinced that the ship must sink. I did not expect her to keep afloat till
daylight, and am astonished to this day that she floated as long as she did.
I remember saying twice that night to a young man, “ This ship will sink
before morning, and there will not be one left to tell the tale.” My
prophecy did not prove true. It was an error in judgment, a thing which
few like to own to, but I am happy to do so in this instance.
Again below, I joined in the ranks of those passing buckets of water.
Presently Mr. Grant, one of the junior officers, came round raising
volunteers for the pumps. At this time there was a great difficulty in
getting men to go to the pumps ; not but what they were willing to work,
but they dreaded going on to the deck—the night dark and cold—and a
danger of being washed out to sea. I consented to go, though I dreaded
it as much as the others; moreover, I felt very weak and fatigued, having
eaten little that day. On my way up, I noticed that the stern ports on the
starboard side were knocked in, and the water coming in; later in the
morning those on the port side were also stove in. On my way out,


through the cuddy, I noticed that almost everybody had become very
quiet. Ladies were sitting together talking, some reading. Those from
the second cabin were there also, as well as the children. Men had become
much more calm than they were three or four hours previous ; there was
very little conversation ; every one seemed wrapped in his own thoughts.
I got to the cuddy door to go out, watching an opportunity when the
ship was over to leeward to open the door, so that the water should not
rush in. Once on deck, what a sensation it was ! Water whirling round
you up to the knees—wind piercing cold—night intensely dark. I felt
my way along in the darkness, again steadying myself by the ropes, &c.
on the weather bulwarks, to about midships, to where the pumps were.
I found about a dozen men there. I could barely distinguish figures in
the dark, though I recognized a few voices. It required six to turn the
wheels that worked the pumps, three at each handle. All were passengers
there at the time, excepting two of the officers, Mr. Angel and Mr. Grant.
Mr. Angel was placed to see the pumps were kept going—and nobly he
did his duty. I saw him there after we had left the ship, still at his
post, encouraging and assisting. There were no sailors at the pumps at
any time after I went out. Ido not think worse of them for this. They
had had a hard week of it—most all the time at work-all the time
Avet; poorly fed for the last day or tAVO. Some were disabled by so much
lumber on deck; I saAV several Avho had bad wounds. Mr. Munroe Avent
to the forecastle once to get men for the pumps, and twenty pleaded illness.
The Avork at the pumps was very laborious. We had to take brief spells,
being short-handed ; occasionally Ave Avould have a fresh hand, Avhom
Mr. Grant had persuaded to come, Avhile others left off, quite done up ; and
indeed it Avas a trying place. The seas broke over us so roughly, that
sometimes I felt the Avater up round my neck. At those moments the
pumps would have to stop ; but as soon as the tide had receded, then
Avould be heard Mr. Angel’s voice, “ Round Avith the pumps, keep them
going.” There Avas a good deal of talking and encouraging to keep
up pluck and make the Avork go lighter. I felt much happier here,
aAvay from the women, for seeing so many frightened made me feel Averse,
and Avhen inside you did not knoAV how matters stood, whether she Avas
sinking or not ; and I had a great horror of being shut up inside when
she did go. After being about an hour there Ave were getting fatigued—
Avanted a stimulant —and Avishing Ave could get something to drink. One
said, “ I will try and get some.” lie went to the cuddy and returned
Avith a bottle of Avhiskey, Avhich Avas fully appreciated. It gave us ucav
life. Some time after, Mr. Main, a passenger, and I were sent to the cuddy
to raise volunteers, as Ave Avere getting Avorn out. When Ave got in I shav
a good many men sitting there, and asked every one; some Avent out,
some Avere not Avell, some sitting beside their Avives and children. The
mother Avould say, “ Oh, do not take him from me ! ” Most of the passengers
Avere still beloAv, carrying up Avater.
Daylight at length came in, and then Ave could see Avhat a helpless log


our ship was. She was then pretty low at the stern, and when she rolled
seemed going right under. The sensation to any one on deck was truly
awful. None seemed to blame Captain Martin, and at no time did 1 hear
anybody reproaching him. But the expressions towards the owners were
quite different ; they were anything but blessings.
The weather in the morning was very dull and unsettled. The wind
was not so furious as in the night, but the sea still heavy. A few now
talked about the boats, though none entertained much hopes of them, —of
those remaining—for the lifeboats were both gone. The last one had
been washed away the evening previous, and one of the cutters was stove,
and hanging down at the side of the ship by the stern-fall from the davit.
The mate to it on the opposite side was still good, also two iron pinnaces,
capable of carrying say thirty each, and a small wooden boat forward near
the forecastle. The two iron boats were swung on davits on board.
About nine o’clock in the morning, and while I was still at the pumps,
I saw them making ready the starboard iron boat. The captain had given
orders to get the boats ready. I did not leave the pumps to seek a chance
in the boat, although there was one whom I knew who was helping in
preparing her for sea. I had previously made up my mind to stop by the
ship till the last, in case any vessel should come to our rescue, although
we had no distress signals up ; for why, I cannot say. lam puzzled to
this day why Captain Martin did not have up signals, as a vessel, if she
did happen to sight us, and we not her, of course would take no notice
and pass on. Another reason why I was so indifferent about the boats
was this : I thought that where a large ship could not live, a small
boat could not. I saw the boat lowered, and several jump over the side
to get in her. Soon I saw them climbing in again. The boat had been
swamped in lowering her, and she sank. I think, but am not sure, that
one or two were drowned at that time.
Steam had now been got up in the donkey-engine, which was a house
on deck forward, and shortly it was connected with the pumps, and we
were relieved. I then climbed up on the poop, where everything presented
a gloomy appearance : the boat sinking had destroyed all hope. We had
still three boats, but they were on the weather side ; the ship would have
to be brought round before they could be lowered- There was no effort
made at that time to get them out. People were walking about, very quiet
and very anxious. I saw the captain then, also Mr. Tycehurst ; several
ladies walking about bare-headed, their hair dying about with the wind,
but calm and resigned, and very little being said. They were walking
about just as you see people at a railway station when they are waiting
for a train. I saw and spoke to the young girl who was so frantic at first:
now she was as reasonable and calm as anybody. I then thought, as a
good many thought, that we were not long for this world ; death was
staring us in the face. I felt loth to give up life ; I enjoy life. There
was also the uppermost thought of all, the uncertain hereafter. I said to
myself, “Well, I suppose I am as prepared now as I should be twenty


years to come.” I regretted most for those I was leaving behind, and whom
I had come on a visit half round the world to see; and now to be drowned
in returning, and that in such a stupid, unsatisfactory way! There
appeared to be no excuse for it whatever. True, we had a severe gale, but
I fancied I had seen as heavy a one before. It appeared to me that a new,
strong, well-built ship had been thrown away. Had our ship been driven
on to a rock, or had taken fire, or met with some unavoidable accident, I
should not have felt so bad. I always dread to think, or to get talking on
this part of it; for my feelings of sorrow become mixed with feelings of
regret and reproach against some one for so cruel a sacrifice.
Whilst on the deck at this time I saw tire sailors going about throwing
overboard any articles they could—hencoops, useless gear, &c. I then
looked about to see what prospect there was of saving myself. Hope
had not altogether deserted me. I looked out on to the sea, and asked
myself the question, What boat could live there but a lifeboat ? There
was no vessel in sight. I then turned my eyes to the deck. I saw a
piece of a board or side of a hencoop, and said to myself, “ I shall keep
near that when she sinks.” It appears now a ridiculous idea to expect
that to save me, then 190 miles from land ! I remained on deck about half
an hour, and then went below to the cuddy, to see how fared my lady
acquaintances, it then being about ten o’clock. Just as I was turning to
go down, I noticed the sailors were beginning to get the port-cutter ready,
and I heard one say, “ This boat is for the captain and ladies ; ” so any
hopes I had from this boat were destroyed then; for I would not try to get
in it, and destroy the chance of any of the ladies. So took no notice of if,
and passed on below, intending to keep a pretty sharp look-out when she
was going to sink, to rush on deck to where my board was.
When I got to the cuddy the usual question was put by the women,
as it was to any one coming in from the deck, “ What hopes now ? ” I
said, “We are afloat still; and while we are afloat we are alive, is all
I can say.” At this time I thought it wrong to disguise our actual con-
dition; in fact, the captain did not. He had been in the cuddy some
time previous, and told all to “ prepare for the worst, nothing but a
miracle would save us now ! ” which dreadful assertion was received with
no fresh outburst of terror. All the women from the second cabin were
sitting by themselves. Those from the steerage part of the ship were in the
cuddy also. No distinction now. There were fathers and mothers, with their
families of three, four, and five, grouped around them—the children very
quiet. They did not seem to understand why their fathers and mothers
were crying so; and, poor little things, many were standing up to their
knees in water. The Rev. Mr, Draper was sitting about the middle of the
cuddy, at one of the tables, with many round him, reading and praying
unceasingly. Now and then would be heard a voice, saying, “ Oh, Mr.
Drape.r, pray with me.” There were also to be seen men by themselves,
reading the Bible. I remember seeing a newly-married couple sitting by
themselves, weeping bitterly. He had lately returned from Australia, had


got married, and had induced many of his relations to return with him.
They were on board—in all nine, I have since heard. He appeared to be
reproaching himself for having taken her away from her home. She was
consoling and comforting him as best she could, saying she was happy,
and they would die together. One poor young girl was writing a message
on an envelope. I little thought I might have been the bearer of it. She
probably intended, putting it in a cask or keg that was being got ready by
a friend of hers, as I learned afterwards. A young man whom I know
was instrumental in starting it; his name was Row, of New Zealand,
This keg has not yet turned up.
I conversed with many I knew ; every one seemed fully to understand
that there was no chance of being saved. A few clung to the hope that a
vessel would yet come. Some of the sailors circulated a report that a
vessel was in sight, to quiet them. I remained there until say twelve
o’clock. Matters getting worse and worse, I could not remain below, but
went up on deck again, bidding some whom I knew good-by. As
I went to the door to go up the steps I found a number of people
standing on the ladder-way, apparently bewildered. I turned round
and took the last look I ever had of the cuddy; the sight is indelibly
stamped on my memory. I found some difficulty in pushing my way
through the crowd to gain the deck. The day had brightened up a little,
the sun would occasionally show out. The wind and sea were still heavy,
but I think had abated since morning. I noticed the sailors were still
about the same boat, intending soon to lower it; but as I had previously
heard this was for the ladies and captain, of course I never looked to it
with any hope for my safety. I glanced at the state of the ship, won-
dering at the length of time she kept together—which raised false hopes
with many, not that she would ever get to land, but that she might live
long enough for a vessel to come to take ns off. For my part I thought she
might keep afloat four or five hours yet (at this time I would not ask any-
body’s opinion for fear of being misled), and concluded I would go down
to my state-room to put on a dry coat. I thought I might as well live
comfortably for a few hours, if I had to die then. Before going, I satisfied
myself she would not sink while I was below, as I had a long distance to
go, and had a particular horror of being closed in. I went down the
companion-way to the cuddy-deck, then around and down to between
decks. At this time the passengers had ceased with the buckets, thinking
their labour useless. There was no one there at the time but the captain.
He had been having a look at the engine-room. I spoke to him, and asked
him if he thought it any use to still continue carrying up water; if so, I
would go and try and get them together again. He did not care about
answering me, and walked back again to the engine-room, and I with him.
We looked down, and a frightful place it was : the water coloured black
with the coal, and washing about and breaking up the iron floorings or
platforms, and producing an unearthly noise. And a great pool of water
it appeared to be. We stood looking for a minute or two. When he


turned to go aft, I said, u Well, captain, what do you say?” He replied,
“You may, but I think it’s no use.” We then went up the steps on to
the cuddy-deck. There was a division between the after state-rooms and
the cuddy. In passing these rooms we saw some sailors and firemen in
there opening cases of liquor, and some with bottles of brandy in their
hands: there were several drunk at this time. The captain said to
them, calling some by name, “ Don’t do that, boys ! don’t die cowards ! ”
I saw a sailor down on his knees, feeling about in a foot of water for
a sovereign he had dropped out of his mouth : he was as cool and eager
looking for it as a street Arab would be for a sixpence he had seen fall.
I saw standing at the cuddy-door a first-clrtss passenger with a life-pre-
server strapped round him. I then turned and went down again to go to
my room, opened one of my trunks, took out a coat, saw my watch and
purse; thought to myself, well, I may as well take them ; laid them out,
shut the trunk, was particular in locking it (such is the force of habit):
then put my watch in my pocket. At that moment the ship gave a roll,
the water covering the port, which darkened the room, and in picking up
my coat, my purse fell into the water. There was about a foot and a half
there at the time. I put my arm down, and felt for half a minute, like the
sailor for the sovereign, but could not find it: then walked out into the
cabin; there were about half-a-dozen there at the time. I saw a Mr.
Lemmon, of Melbourne ; I spoke to a Mr. Harding,-—he shook his head
as much as to say he did not wish to be interrupted then; some sitting
with their heads resting on the table—almost all preparing for death, and
patiently waiting. I saw an elderly person strapping up a railway-rug
into a bundle; shortly after he was seen on deck with it, when the captain,
with a faint smile, asked him if he intended taking it with him. I have
since been told by friends of this gentleman that he had a thousand
sovereigns with him; and probably these were in the rug. On my way
back to the engine-room, I was alarmed at seeing that a serious change
had taken place—a deal more water was rushing down. From what I
saw, I thought the pile of sails over the opening above had floated up, the
water pouring in underneath. I looked over into the engine-room below,
and noticed that the water had increased considerably since the captain and
I were there : it was now within two or three feet of the deck on which I
was standing. I got on the poop as soon as I could, knowing now that
the end was near. I had some difficulty in getting up the staircase
between the cuddy and the poop, as it was crowded with people, who
were all mute. It was then about one o’clock or half-past one in the
day, Thursday, 11th January. Just as I got on to the poop I saw an
elderly couple, man and wife, with three children, two little girls about
eight to ten years of age, and an infant. I am not sure, but I think
they were the same who were wrecked a short time previously in the
Dunbar , and this was the second, if not the third, attempt they had made
to get to Australia. The mother and the two girls were sitting on the
lee-side, close to the mizen rigging, and the father alongside of them,


holding an infant in his arms, and shielding it from the spray that was
blowing clean over from windward. I took the mother and two girls up,
and set them midships in the lee of the after companion-way. In about
half-an-hour after, and just before we left the ship, I saw the mother and
two girls washing about on deck, drowned. When I got on deck this
last time, I found the ship being put round to bring the boats on the lee
side, so that they could be lowered. The sun would show out occasionally
—very heavy and troubled sea yet —people still walking about, calmly
watching the scene. The captain was walking up and down the poop with
a long mackintosh coat on, and a cap of same material tied close down
under his chin. Poor man ! I pitied him. It was a trying moment to
each of us, but how much more must it be to a captain at a time like
that, when every one looks up to him as their head; when ladies come
up to him and ask if there is any hope, and he has to say No; when one
or more asks him if he would advise them to go in the boat, he has to tell
them, u I think there is no hope for you,” which amounts to saying, “No,
you had better remain here, and be drowned at once.” I felt very much
for him situated at that moment; I felt at peace with every one, even
the owners. The ship at this time was nearly on a level keel, and very
low at the stern, and rolling much like a log—not those sudden tosses and
jerks. There was no one at the helm, it (the wheel) was lashed with a
rope. I looked around to see what prospect there was of being saved, and
saw that the small wooden boat near the forecastle had been got out to
the ship’s side to be lowered, the bows were just over the railing. At this
time, nor at any time after did I see any men near it for the purpose of
launching it. The port iron pinnace was still hanging in its place ; no
order was given that I heard, nor any preparation made for lowering it.
I saw a young man in it trying to do something, but he knew nothing
of a boat. There was only one boat being got ready —the same one I
have mentioned before—that for the captain and ladies, —the port cutter,
a fine wooden boat, and still hanging in the davits, with several men in
it. I stood by for a time watching the proceedings, when it gradually
dawned on my mind that the sailors had this boat in their own possession,
entirely under their own control. I never saw any of the officers giving
any orders or directions ; and as for the ladies, I saw no preparation
towards getting any on board. The facts of the case were, as I afterwards
learned —that after the first boat swamping in the morning, there seemed
not much chance of any getting lowered and cleared from the ship with
safety; which would account for the captain’s not having his first order
in the morning carried out, —of getting the boats ready; for if he saw
reason to get the boats ready then, surely he must have seen more now r .
But a few of the sailors were evidently men -who knew what could be
done with a boat at sea, and agreed among themselves to fit out this boat,
and have a trial for their lives. They got her ready with oars, com-
passes, bucket, bailer, life-buoys, biscuits, &c. The captain may have
directed, but I never understood so ; and, for the half-hour or more that


I was on deck at the last, I did not see him interfere, and I was near
the boat all the time. So when I saw how matters stood with regard
to this boat, I then and there determined to got in her if possible. Once
that boat is in the water (thought I), I will jump in, and I don’t think they
will put me out. Presently I saw a sailor step over, and get in the stern
of the boat, which was still hanging in the davits; he was one of those who
had helped prepare her, and one I knew by sight—the only one on board.
Our acquaintance Avas very slight, and made by chance. When on my
Avay from Fenchurch Street to Tilbury, he got in at Stepney, and sat on the
same seat with me, and from that circumstance Ave spoke once or tAvice on
board. I then Avent up to the side of the ship, and spoke to him in a
free sailor-like Avay. Though not a seafaring man myself, I had been
throAvn during my life very much amongst sailors, and fancied I understood
them pretty well, and knew their dislike to ceremony or to a line of
distinction being draAvn betAveen them and the rest of society; so I asked
him in an off-handed manner, Avishing to establish a felloAV feeling. It
had the desired effect. He said, “Yes, but take your chance Avhen she is
in the Avater,” Avhich Avas all I Avanted ; for if I had been allowed to have
got in before, I think I Avould not, as I Avas afraid she might upset in the
lowering, as the first did. I scon found that my plan for gaining a favour
at that time AA r as decidedly the best, as I heard men beseeching of them
to let them go, also offering large amounts of money ; the ans Aver Avas,
“We don’t Avant your money.” When my friend the sailor gave me
permission to go, I thought of the ladies ; and asked myself the question,
“ Am I robbing them of any chance they might haAm ? ” and said to my
friend in the boat, “ Well, I do not like going and leaving those behind,”
pointing to some that Avere standing near the mizen-mast. Not that I
thought many could be saA r ed ; but should like to have a feAV in the
boat, in case avc Avere saved, to slioav Ave Avere not selfish. He said, “I
am as sorry as you, but it can’t be helped ; try and save yourself:” AA'hich
nerved me, and also shoAved to me the impossibility of saving any, unless
they jumped after the boatAvas lowered. Anybody Avould say, “ Why not
lower them in the boat? ” but that Avas Avhere the danger Avas, in case she
upset, as a great many expected she Avould. If this sailor had said to me,
“ Yes, get one or two, and put them in the boat,” I would not have done it ;
for I could not have advised females to go Avhere I Avals afraid to go
myself. Many at this time Avere standing near ; some passengers and
some of tire foreign sailors Avere trying to get into the boat, but were
prevented by one of the sailors AAdiose duty it Avas to see she Avas not
overloaded, for if so they could not loAA'er her Avith any safety. The
assistant-surgeon Avas pleading very hard for himself and a young lady,
and I heard one say to him, “ Keep your money, and as for a doctor avc
don’t Avant one.” By the remark I judged he had been offering money,
and I heard him say, “ You must take me, you will Avant a doctor.” This
same young lady I saAV soon after talking AA'ith one of the sailors; I heard
after that she offered him 500/. if he Avould save her. Ido not knoAV her


name. She was about middle height, and I think fair complexion and very
pretty. He was anxious to save her, but I suppose he thought as others
that it would not be advisable for her then to get in the boat. There was
another young lady, also very pretty. She came to the side, and said to
this sailor-friend of mine—“ Young man, will you save me?” He said,
“ Yes, you jump as soon as you see the boat in the water all right and
when the boat was in the water he held up his arms (she was then holding
on by the mizen-rigging), and told her to jump, but she would not.
Often during the night after I heard him regretting that she did not jump.
In the troubled state of the sea at that time, it was a very dangerous
jump ; if you fell into the water, then good-by ; no one would pull you
in. I foresaw this difficulty, and provided against any such contingency,
by asking my friend in court if he would pull me in in case I should fall
into the water, which he promised to do; luckily I did not have occasion
to test his honest intentions, which I never for a moment doubted.
By this time, say five or ten minutes before the boat was lowered, and
about half-past one or nearly two o’clock of Thursday, the 11th, the ship
was settling gradually by the stern. Any one who was keeping a sharp
look-out could not but help seeing there was a great change within a
quarter of an hour. People were still walking about—the number on deck
increasing. I saw the captain amongst them, apparently giving no direc-
tions; now and then a lady would speak to him. A good many were stand-
ing in a group near the companion-way, scarcely a word being said. I saw
some of those I knew, but did not even exchange a word with any one,
excepting Munroe, when once he came near me. I said to him, “ I intend
to have a trial for this boat,” not with the purpose of wishing to influence
him, as I could not advise anybody at that time, but I wished to get his
opinion as to the probability of a boat living in such a sea. All he said,
“ Are you ? ” and walked away. I began to fear that the ship would go
from under us before the boat was lowered, so said to my acquaintance in
the boat, “ Unless you lower soon, you will be too late.” He said, “ We can’t
lower till King comes.” He was one of their party, who had gone below
to see if any Avater could be got to take Avith them ; presently he came up,
and they told him to come in, and they would loAver. He then Avalked
a short distance to Avhere Captain Martin was, to ask him if he Avould go
Avith them. He declined, saying (Avhich I did not hear, being too far
aAvay), “ God speed you safe to land.” Then King asked him for the
course and distance to land ; he said, “ E.N.E., ninety miles to Brest.”
King must have misunderstood him, as we Avere then fully 190 miles off.
King returned and jumped into the boat, and immediately they lowered,
being about a dozen in her. I got on to the rail, holding on to the mizen-
rigging ; as soon as I suav that she Avas safe in the Avater, I stepped doAvn
on to the mizen-chains, then Avatched my opportunity Avhen the boat rose
on the sea, and made a cautious leap right into her stern, I did not have
far to jump, about four or five feet, by Availing until a sea lifted the boat.
Immediately that I was in, I suav the boat was draAving under the channels


of the ship, and was in imminent peril, lat once got out an oar, as did
two others, and we pressed the boat off. When the sailors saw that the
boat was safe, and there was a chance of getting away, then they were
anxious to have a few women. Mr. Munroe was at the side intending to
leap, when they sung out to bring a lady ; he turned round and run his
eyes around the few to find, naturally enough, one he knew ; not seeing
one, he made a few steps to the middle of the deck and asked the nearest,
a young girl of sixteen or eighteen, if she would go. She said, “ Yes.”
They went to the side to jump; but when she saw the fearful sight below,
the little boat being tossed about, and a prospect of being smashed at
every heave of the sea against the iron wall of the ship, she said, “ I
can’t do that.” There was no time for delay or consideration; as she
would not leap, Munroe, seeing the boat shoving off, leaped in him-
self. All this took place in about a minute or two —that is, the lowering
and getting away. After the boat was shoved off the first time, she drew in
again. There appeared to be a suction at the stern, and I saw when she
drew in this time that she was drawing right under the stern —which
would have been sudden death to us. The oars were again brought to
bear against the side of the ship; we were then, I think, more in dread
of being lost by getting under the ship’s side than in fear of too many
jumping. At that time there was no attempt made by any to prevent any
one from getting in—all on board could have jumped. There was only
one man prevented getting in, and that was one of the foreign sailors :
he came down by the falls from the davits, and some one pressed them
on one side so that if he dropped he would go into the water. The
boat was apparently crowded full, and I heard one remark (which was
very true), “Why don’t they go and get out the other boats? why all
look to this one, as if there was no other on board ? ” It still is an
unaccountable thing to me why Captain Martin did not see and have
those boats got ready, properly manned and officered, and then tell some
of the ladies, “ There is your only chance ; accept it, if you choose.”
The second time the boat was shoved off her bows were got round, and
soon we were pulling away on the port side, and running before the wind.
Just then a heavy sea was seen to break over the ship’s stern, and w r ash
the people about the deck; but just before we saw a good many, both
men and women, standing on the lee-side of the forward part of the poop,
waving handkerchiefs and cheering. The sun had just shone out at that
time, which made the scene appear worse to me. I thought dark and
gloom more suitable for such a sad moment, and more in keeping with
the feelings of those on board. Not that I rejoiced over my position, or
considered myself much better off, for we did not know the moment we
would be swallowed up.
I saw distinctly Mr. Angel still by the pumps ; many -with their eyes
turned towards us. The foresail still standing, also the half of the
maintopsail. The mizen yards were swinging about, not braced; the
wreck of the foretopmast still hanging, and swinging to and fro ; the gang-


ways knocked out, the bulwarks all standing as good as when she left the
docks. The stern very low in the water, the bows pretty well out of
it, so that we could see the red painted bottom, or coloured iron by
rust ; the jibboom gone. Soon we ran down in the trough of a large sea,
and were hid from sight of her. When we came up we could see she had
changed her position very much ; Ave could not see the after-part of the
vessel —whether under Avater or hid by a sea, I cannot tell; her bows
were high up out of Avater, and by the pitch or rake of the mast avc
could see that she Avas sitting at an angle of about 45 degrees. Soon
another Avave came, and we ran doAvn in the trough of another sea :
when avc came up, there was nothing to be seen of the London.
Thus ended this fine ship and all in her. When avc Avere lifted on the
Avave this second time, and found that the ship Avas no more to be seen,
it cast a gloom over our little party, though pretty Avell prepared to expect
it. We still continued looking in the direction Avhere avc last saAV the
ship, to see if anybody Avould be seen clinging to a spar, boat, or any-
thing; but nothing Avhatever Avas to be seen. Although there might have
been one or more there, and Ave not able to see, even so they could not
have survived long, from the spray that Avas flying.
One of the sailors (King)—then I did not know the name of any —
noAV sang out, “ Boys, the London is gone, and there is no help for
those gone with her, so let her drop for the present. If avc don’t mind
Avhat avc are about, Ave’ll soon be with them. Say nothing more about her,
but attend to the boat ” —Avhich Avas certainly a Avise proposition, as our
boat Avas in a similar condition to our ship at starting—too heavily laden.
>She was a fine, light, square-sterned boat, about twenty-five feet in
length, six in breadth in the Avidest part; her right complement I was told
Avas tAvelve, and there were now nineteen in her. Our party consisted
of three engineers, one fireman, one young midshipman, one carpenter,
eight seamen, one steward, one boy, and three passengers. We had been
thrown together mostly by chance, and were almost all unknown to each
other, but all bound together by the same tie ; for if one sunk all must
sink too. We Avere entirely on our oavu resources, with no one to look
up to, no captain to depend upon, and no officers to navigate to land.
But avc had what Avas far better, and the only thing to save us at that
time :we had cool, skilful, and excellent boatmen ; and, had Ave not,
we Avould not have lived half-an-hour. I never had much experience
in boats, and had no idea of what they could go through. No one could
ever have made me believe that a boat could have Avithstood Avhat ours
did. I think some of our men must have been born and reared in a
boat. Smith, a seaman, Avas the first who took the helm, and Ave all
agreed to obey him, as there were noAV a good many giving orders.
There Avere also other arrangements made: those who understood rowing
were to work by spells, those Avho did not were to bale. I was one of
the latter; tAvo or three Avere to be on the look-out for vessels, one to be
constantly watching behind to see when a wave was coming that had a


crest on it, and tell the helmsman. Those were the waves we dreaded.
And here was where the skill and judgment was displayed. One time we
would have to back water so as to let the large sea break just in front of
us. At other times the order would be pull quick, to get out of its way
until its force would be spent ; when along it would come and raise us
up on the top, and as it would pass by would invariably give us a dash;
then we had to bale out quickly. Three oars were out for the first few hours
—as much to assist in steering as pulling. We were running before the
wind, arid the chief study was to let the seas meet us square on to the stern,
for if the boat was allowed to broach to, or meet the seas on the side,
she would fill or upset at once. As one sea would pass, then another
would be seen coming from another direction, perhaps on our quarter.
These were the cross seas, and the ones most likely to catch us;
immediately the boat would have to be brought round to meet it. As
the rudder could not bring her round in time, or it might be up out of
water at that moment, then would be heard the man at the helm singing
out, “ Pull on the starboard, and back on the port —quick, quick.” The
next moment it would be, “ Pull on the port, and back on the starboard,”
as a cross sea would be seen making for us. Then the next cry would
be, “ Pull, pull, all,” that was to get out of the way of a sea that was
going to break. After it had passed, then it would be, “ Back, back, all.”
Sometimes all four orders would be given within the minute.
We also made arrangements as to the provisions, which consisted of
about fifty pounds of biscuit; when anybody took a piece, all were to
have alike. Soon we discovered that our little supply of water was
mixed with salt. The cask was therefore thrown overboard to make
more room, for we were very much crowded. After that the allowance
of biscuit was restricted—they being so dry increased our thirst. Not
long after getting away I learned that they had some brandy on board,
which I thought was a fortunate provision, as the weather was dreadfully
cold, with water splashing over us every little while. On second thought
I feared it might prove to our disadvantage, in case they should take too
much at once, but my fears were soon set to rights when I found that all
we had was three bottles. One was got out and despatched, but it was
only a mouthful to each. The second bottle was drank in the evening.
The next morning when we most wanted the other, it could not be found.
There was also one bottle of champagne, which was the amount of drink-
ables on board. About two or three hours after being at sea, our helms-
man had to resign his post, as one of his hands was sore, or frost-bitten as
he thought. Steering was most trying work for the hands, there being
no tiller to the rudder—he had to work the rudder by his hand, con-
sequently one hand was almost all the time in water. King, another
seaman, then took his place, which he kept until about three o’clock next
morning. Just before dark, we sighted a vessel. We at first thought to
run for her, but soon we found it impossible; she was out of our track,
and we had to keep fair before the wind. Our chief study was to keep


afloat, no matter where we went to. We had two of the ship’s compasses
on board, but they proved of very little use to us. I heard King say in
the night that he could not steer at all by them, even though the sea
would permit us. They had been adjusted for an iron vessel, which may
have been the cause of their not working properly now.
Night was now coming on ; I dreaded to look forward to it. Asked
myself the question, how are we to see those curling seas that we so much
fear? The sky looked wild; the wind still strong and very cold—the
seas still very heavy. It was what you might call a troubled sea. All of
us wet, cold, and hungry, and nearly worn out by the constant exertion,
anxiety, and fatigue of the two previous days, I considered it about
one chance in a hundred that ever we saw the morning. True, I was
beginning to have more faith in our little boat and the good skill of our
crew, but those high-crested waves in the dark rather shook my hopes. I
could not see any possible Avay of escaping them, and I was rather puzzled
to see that the sailors did not entertain any more fear of them in the night
than day—-that is, they did not speak of this great difficulty that troubled
me. Presently the night closed in, and the mystery was solved by the
phosphorescent tops of the waves, which, shining through the dark, showed
pretty well their position, and the way they Avere coming. The first of
the evening Avas rather clear; the stars shone out occasionally; by them
Ave could guess pretty nearly the direction Ave Avere steering. Up to about
nine, Ave thought Ave Avere going south. I said to King, “At this course
avc Avill not fetch the Spanish coast, much less the French coast —Ave shall
go Avide of Cape Finisterre.” He said, “ I can’t help it, we must go where
Ave are compelled to—the Avind may change soon.” And so it did. I had
certain stars as guides, and by them I could see that Ave Avere coming round
gradually, and by about midnight Avere going pretty nearly east. We
kneAv that any course that had east in it Avould bring us to land, Avhich
at this time Ave thought Avas only ninety miles distant. But our chief
hope Avas in falling in Avith a vessel. As the evening wore on, I found that
Ave got on pretty nearly as Avell as before dark, but great Avatchfulness was
required; and King, Avho Avas then steering, Avas continually singing out
to pull first one Avay, then immediately the other Avay, or back water.
Then the next order Avould be, “ Bale her out, keep her dry. Who is
baling hoav ?’’ So in that Avay he was constantly talking and encouraging
us, Avhich Avas needed, for, cold as the night Avas, and drenched as Ave
were, Ave Avere drowsy ; in fact, Ave Avere quite done up Avith fatigue.
I myself had had but three or four hours’ sleep since Sunday night,
and no doubt there were others Avho had no more. At times, while
baling, I Avould be half asleep, but still dipping out the Avater. When in
that state I could always see a vessel before me Avith her stern under
water —her boAvs Avell up—her jibboom and foretopmast gone, and her
foresail shaking in the Avind : it was the London as she last appeared to
me. At any time during the night if I Avere to close my eyes, if only for
a minute, the ship Avas always before me in this form.


A few hours after dark, King asked, “ Who had the time ? ” I had.
I had set my watch going at four o’clock. I pulled it out to look, but
could not distinguish the hands in the darkness. By-and-by, I was
asked about the time again ; we thought it must be getting on towards
daylight. I opened my watch, felt the hands, and found it was only
eleven o’clock. And so the long dreary night wore slowly on. We
thought daylight would never come.
About midnight the weather became more squally. Heavy black
clouds came down upon us, and sometimes we were running, as it seemed,
right into a black wall. It was difficrdt even to discern the figure of a
man sitting alongside. It was a night remembered in London for a heavy
fall of snow, —the heaviest of the season, when the telegraph wires were
broken down in many parts of England, and vessels were being wrecked
by scores in Torbay. About this time, and a time that will never be
forgotten by any in the boat, we experienced the most narrow escape of
any during the whole of our disaster. A large sea was seen close behind
us, and on the point of breaking, and it was impossible to get out of the
way in time. There it was, eight or ten feet higher than our stern, and
the next moment we should be all engulphed. Some quietly remarked, —
“ It’s all over with us now.” I myself thought the end had come at last.
Over came the wave, burying the after-part of the boat completely. She
trembled, and up she came ; the sea had passed on and left us in all but
a sinking state. The water in the boat -was about a foot and a half deep;
a bucket would dip in it. Immediately King sung out, “ Don’t move—
bale out quick —we are safe yet! ” At once the bucket rvas going, and
in a few minutes she was lightened, and on we went again. It was
some time before we fully recovered from that shock. It was a providen-
tial thing that we had no more in our boat at this time, for I think the
■weight of one man more would have taken us down.
After many weary hours of anxious looking we at last saw the sky in
the east lighten up a little. We at first thought it to be daylight break-
ing, but it proved to be the moon rising. It was then about four o’clock.
Daniels was now steering ; he relieved King for about three hours, when
of a sudden the lights of a distant ship were seen. We watched her intently
for a short time,' and discovered she was nearing us. Presently she was
abreast of us, and only a short distance off. We dare not row towards
her, the sea would not permit that. The order was then given for all
to sing out at once, and lustily we obeyed ; it must have sounded
terrible to those on board of the vessel—our voices above the roar of the
sea and wind. We soon had the gratification of knowing they had heard
us, and were putting the vessel about to run for us. We could now see
her—a small vessel of two masts. She ran across our bow, a short
distance ahead of us. • We could see her, but they could not see us.
They were evidently looking for us, and we bellowed as loud as we
could. We also tried to light matches, but they had got wet. We could
see the ship run first to one side, then across to the other. Then a squall


would come, and she would be hid from view ; when it passed we would
see her again, perhaps in another direction; on which there Avas another
cheer and another cry. Presently avc could see they had lost the run of
us; and how tantalizing that Avas when avo Avere within three minutes’
roAv of her, and dare not deviate from our course. Noav Ave could only see
her occasionally through the gloom when avc rose to the top of a Avave.
At last she Avas out of sight; all hopes of safety from her Avere now gone.
It affected the spirits of all. We Avere beginning to suffer from cold,
exposure, and thirst. The latter I felt the most ; when baling, could
scarcely resist the temptation of putting the dipper to my mouth. When
we could see the vessel no more, Ave decided upon not going any faster
than avc could help, hoping to see her Avhen daylight came in : Avhich did
happen at last—in hail and rain. Then the sun shone out for a feAv
minutes ; we scanned the horizon, but could see nothing. By the sun Ave
judged Ave were making the course that Captain Martin had given us,
and had a strong idea that Ave Avere within forty miles of the French coast.
It was just as well Ave did not know our actual position. When picked
tip, an hour or two after, Ave Avere then 140 miles from land.
Again the cry A\ r as raised, “ Ship in sight! ” We could just see her
off on the port-quarter, apparently making towards us. Presently avc
sighted another, more in our track, on the starboard boAV, but at a great
distance. We could only see the tops of the masts, like three fingers
above the Avater. Hope revived again ; Ave were in the track of vessels,
and rejoiced to find there Avere some still floating.
On Ave Avent for half-an-hour, Avith occasional sunshine, then a shoAver
and squall, the sea still rough, the same constant attention required always.
Those on the look-out reported that the vessel Avas not getting any nearer
to us. Some proposed to King, Avho Avas now steering, to put about to
run for her. He strongly objected : saying the boat Avould surely sAvamp
in going round ; and then Ave had a good distance to roAv, nearly to Avind-
ward, before reaching the vessel. The men by this time Avere getting
impatient, and Avilling to risk a good deal to bring this boating trip to a
termination. My only fear was that they Avould end it too abruptly in
trying to reach a vessel. They Avere also getting irritable ; there Avas
not that friendly feeling as existed at first—Avould ans Aver each other
sharply. Of course this was oAving to exposure and want: all Avere com-
plaining of thirst. There Avere a feAv raAv vegetables that by chance had
been left in the boat; Ave noAV got eating them, and found them a great
relief. By this time, say 9 a.m. (Friday, 12th), a dispute arose, and Avords
were running pretty high as to the advisability of putting round to run
for this vessel on the port-quarter. One Avho Avas holding the signal of
distress (a shirt on an oar), said to King, at the rudder, “If you don't
put her about, I will put this oar through the bottom.” I Avas beginning
to feel frightened. Of course every alloAvance must be made for a man
under these trying circumstances. I myself do not entertain any ill-
feeling towards him whatever for his threat. Immediately somebody


proposed that we should run for the vessel on our starboard bow, not so
much with the hopes of reaching her, as to prevent the boat being put
round. I seconded the proposition by saying that it was certainly the
best plan ; that if we should miss her, we would still be making our
course good to land ; that it was not more than forty miles off, and by
keeping on we would sight it before night ; that it was early in the day,
and most likely we should see other vessels; that we were in the track of
them, we having seen four already was proof. The proposition was then
put and carried in parliamentary style, though some of the language used
might not be considered parliamentary. The oars were doubly manned,
the course of the boat slightly altered. Soon everything was going
pleasantly, and all seemed well satisfied with the new arrangement : all
they wanted was to be going towards some vessel. The sun at that time
was shining, and our little craft sped along bravely. She quite astonished
the most sanguine,—everybody expressing great affection for her. The
man on the look-out, the only one allowed to stand up, and who was also
supporting the oar with the signal of distress, reported that we were
nearing the ship. Still great caution was required to manage the boat.
The vessel not being directly in our track, we of course had to make good
a few points to the wind; and this is where the difficulty was. Whenever
an opportunity offered, we would steer to windward of the vessel,
knowing we could make leeway at any time. Whenever a crested wave
was seen coming, then Avould be heard, “Look out, King, here is one;”
when round would come the boat. We would turn tail and run with
it until it had passed, Avhen up she would come again to windward of
the vessel. In the course of half-an-hour we were getting pretty near her.
Soon we could see her hull, and when within half-a-mile of her, we were
rejoiced to find that they had got sight of us, by their taking in some
sails, and bearing aw r ay to run for us. We then intended to run up to
windward, and come round under her lee. Just at that moment there
was seen a terrific squall, with its high wall of white foam coming down
fast upon us, as if to totally annihilate us just at the moment that succour
was at hand. In a few' minutes we wmuld be up abreast of the vessel.
But on came the gale. Of course we had to turn and run with it. By
the next two or three minutes we found ourselves right down to leeward,
and being carried fast away from the ship. Our great fear now was that
we ‘would be shut out from sight of each other. Many then sung out to
King to put about, and some not to. He said, “ She will certainly fill, if
I do; and I will not; and don’t you see them running for us.” And so
they were, and hallooing, and directing Avith their hands in the wildest
state of excitement, which very much bothered us, and tended to increase
our embarrassment. I suppose they Avere trying to make us understand
to run on Avith the Avind, and they Avould folloAv. After the first shock of
the gale had passed, the boat Avas brought partly round, but in doing so
avc had a narroAV escape from being SAvamped, as she shipped a heavy sea.
In a few minutes ye Avere running up to the stern of the vessel (a barque


of about 400 tons), •when a Hue was thrown to us with remarkable accu-
racy. It was caught; soon a rope followed ; and we were at last by the
side of the barque. She had come round to the wind, was rolling very
much, and we were thumping against her side by the main chains. All
order now was broken through—each one grasping hold of anything he
could lay hands on, and scrambling up, some assisted by those in the
vessel. I saw directly before me two iron bolts by which the main
rigging was secured; they looked very tempting; I sprang and caught
hold of them; at that moment the boat was taken from under me by the
roll of the vessel, and I was left hanging by my hands. I could see others
on each side of me ; in a moment, up rose the sea and boat again lifting
us up, when I caught another hold, and was soon on to the rail.- All
were out of the boat but one, —he had hurt himself the day before, and
was not able to get up; a rope was got over, and he was drawn up. How
thankful I felt to be once more in safety, and with a prospect of having
plenty to eat and drink ! The ship was Italian. We were kindly welcomed
by the captain, Avho was serving out geneva when I got aft. He was a
fine jolly and burly old fellow, with a most benevolent countenance, and
with his crew were doing their best to assist for our comfort; only we
could not understand each other. It was now about 10 a.m., and we had
been about twenty hours in the boat. In a short space of time we w r ere
all arrayed in w r arm dry clothing, and in possession of the captain’s cabin ;
they soon got us warm tea and biscuit, and we saw preparations for
something more substantial; some fowls were killed, which were served
up in the evening in the shape of a stew. After the first meal was over,
we then began to move about—to learn something of our preservers, and
whereabouts we were. She was an Italian barque and crew of Genoa,
bound from the Mediterranean laden with wheat, to call at Cork for
orders; her name was Marianopolis, Captain Gion Batta Cavassa. Her
position this day at noon, N. hit. 45° 54', W. long. 7° 13', Greenwich
meridian. She had experienced pretty heavy weather, and had been
obliged some time previous to throw overboard some of her cargo, but
at this time was safe, dry, and snug. We now felt very comfortable, and
quite at home. We could talk freely, and began to realize more fully the
dreadful catastrophe we had witnessed. It appeared more terrible to us
now than at the time, or during the night, as our own safety then was very
doubtful. In the afternoon I laid down and had a sleep, and a troubled
sleep it Was. I passed through all the horrors of another shipwreck. And
for many nights after, and I may say many weeks after, I had to go through
the same ordeal. At night, I can’t say we went to bed ; most of us lay
down on the wheat, which was loose in bulk, and covered ourselves with
sails, and felt very comfortable : such a happy change from last night.
The next morning we found ourselves all very sore, particularly our
hands. Having sat so long in one position, our knees and legs got stiff,
and some could barely manage to crawl about. The weather was still
boisterous. About noon we had quite an alarm. The rudder-head was


carried away, and of course the vessel became unmanageable; the seas
thumping against her sides most unmercifully. We had a carpenter in
our party ; and he and some of the others rendered the Italians great
assistance. In the course of half-an-hour all was secure again. The
day passed, and another night came. Next morning (Sunday) we found the
weather still unpleasant—wind unfavourable —with no prospect ot getting to
land that day. Wc were now getting uneasy, longing to see land again. The
captain gave us to understand that he could not land us at Brest; but would
go on to Falmouth, which was just as agreeable to us as the former place.
So another, the third, night came, and we really hoped that we
would get on to land to-morrow. When it came, which was now Monday,
it was fine, with a fair wind. We were now in the English Channel.
About 10 A.M., sighted land—the Scillys or Land’s End. ' How rejoiced
avc were once more to behold it ! We Avere now all alive and happy Avith
the thoughts of being on shore at night. During the afternoon were
anxiously looking out in hopes a pilot Avould be got to take us in. Even-
ing came and none Avas to be seen. The wind increased, and Ave Avere
in doubt if Ave Avould get in before night after all. The tA\ T o Lizard
lights bore nearly ahead of us, and Ave running toAvards land. About
10 p.m., the vessel A\ r as put about to stand off for the night, and by twelve
o’clock the Avind had increased to nearly a gale, bloAving dead on shore.
The captain Avith his creAV on deck all the time, apparently very anxious ;
Ave could not communicate our fears, or learn anything of our state.
They Avere continually singing out and directing; and Ave not under-
standing them, rather tended to increase our fears.
But our little barque held her own. BctAveen three and four in the morn-
ing, she Avas put about to run sloAvly to land. The day broke Avith a fog ;
soon it rose, and then Avas to be seen the land close by, and we running
along, with Falmouth harbour fair before us. Three cheers for our captain !
We ran in and dropped anchor. Shortly after, an agent or interpreter came
on board. Our history Avas made known to him. When he returned to
shore he took three of us with him, including the chief engineer, Avho then
made his report, and the neAvs Avas soon telegraphed to London. I could
scarcely believe my good fortune Avhen looking back to five or six days ago ;
then it appeared too much to expect—and hoav that I Avas commencing a new
existence. On "Wednesday night, on board the there seemed to be
so little possibility of any ever being saved, much less me; and Iso fully
expected to meet .death.
We had to remain on board a few hours until noon, Avhen a steam-tug
came alongside. The captain took us on shore, Ave said good-by to our
Italian preservers, and with many cheers from them Ave parted. I need not
carry the history of the adventure any further; but am pleased to add
that, Avhen the facts Avere made knoAvn to the Board of Trade of London,
a gold chronometer, with a suitable inscription, Avas awarded to Captain
Cavassa for his noble and humane conduct towards us.




