

The Rebell ion on Ponape


THE REBELLION ON PONAPE AND ITS SUPPRESSION
BY HMS "EMDEN", "NURNBERG", "CORMORAN", AND "PLANET"
Compiled According to Official Reports
by Kapitanleutnant Gartzke
Translated by
Ivan Tilgenkamp
1970
Published in
"Marine Rundschau"
Berlin, Germany
June 1911


The shocking news of the death of Bezirksamtmann Boeder, two German
administrative officers, and five natives who were assassinated by
people from Sokehs Island hit Berlin on December 26, 1910. Due to
the bad communication conditions in the South Seas, Germany was
deprived of the news for nearly fen weeks and only after seven weeks
could the first support be shipped to the oppressed colony of Ponape
from neighboring New Guinea. Up to that time, the colony sustained
in anxiety, relying but on the loyalty of local tribes.
It was-up to the landing force of HMS "Emden", "Nurnberg", "Cormoran"
and "Planet" concentrated in Ponape to suppress the rebellion
in a six-week operation and, thus, to restore governmental authority
in the island.


I
INTRODUCTION
Historical Remarks About Ponape
The natives on Ponape, being dividea into the tribes of Sokehs, Net,
U, Kiti, and Metalanim, were headed until recently by chiefs who
practiced a complicated feudalism of which the hardships were the
reason for perpetual agitations and fights and a profound political
division among the tribes. It is probably that the latest efforts of
the German government to change the ancient conditions which were
opposed to the cultural development of the country and to restrict the
pretentious aspirations for power of particular chiefs are connected
with the motives of the latest rebellion. Yet, by far more decisive
was the influence of the morbid Spanish rule, the mistakes and sins
of which the German colonial government had to experience from the
very start of the seizure of power. It is probably only with this last
forced intervention that they will be rectified forever.
Politically, the Spanish never were really master of the island. The
hoisting of the German flag in the year 1885 on the island of Yap,
considered as unclaimed, revived Spain's claims of the Caroline Islands
which originated in former voyages of discovery. Even demonstrations
against Germany took place in Madrid. Yet, Prince Bismarck consented


to an.arbitration by which the Pope granted the Spanish ownership of
the islands, but granting the Germans freedom of trade. It was only
then that the Spanish remembered their possession. The moving in
of Spanish troops on Ponape was the start for unfortunate times of
endless warfare.
Very reluctantly, the tribes submitted to a colonialization which was
too fast and, in the choice of its means, hardly very wise. With the
start of confessional schism, open rebellion was no longer to be
stopped. %
The Spanish Capucins looked for quick missionary success in this
country which lead to Protestantism by the Boston mission as early
as 1820.
The Spanish, even with an occupancy force of 800 soldiers, did not
succeed in gaining a firm footing on the island. The garrison was
forced to stay in forts; assassinations in front of the bastions were
quite common. Soon bitter warfare started against the misunderstood
colonists. This situation ended only after the Spanish left the island
forever.
At the time when the Caroline Islands were bought by Germany after
the unfortunate war between Spain and the United States of America,


the suppressed deplorable people were ruined. Hypocrisy, slyness,
and ardent hate against colonists became part of the Ponapean
characteristics. However, the German government soon succeeded
in establishing a period of calm and peace.
The first Bezlrksamtmann, Dr. Hohl, occupied the island with only
a few soldiers. He cleared a way through the bastion, thus making
the colony accessible to the natives which was an unprecedented
situation. During eleven years of government, not only was peace
maintained, but also very beautiful results of colonization were
registered. But it was just the people of Sokehs, the most audacious
and warlike tribe, that occasionally remembered the old Spanish times.
Near the end of the year 1908, HMS "Jaguar" had to show up in Ponape
to demonstrate governmental power. During its stay, the crew cleared
a way through the jungle from the colony to Kiti on the south coast
and, thus, established for the government a connection from one side
of the island to the other. The demonstration of HMS "Jaguar" which
also included some military exercises seemed to be sufficient. In
July, 1910, the east Asiatic cruiser squadron noticed no threat of
peace in Ponape.


The Outbreak of the Rebellion of October 18, 1910
Bezirksamtmann Boeder's plan to open up the island of Ponape by roads
included the establishing of a 5-meter wide road on the shoreline of
Sokehs Island; a northern island which is separated from Ponape only
by a narrow inlet. This work was insofar considered very important by
Boeder as it would finally open up the so far uneasily accessible island
and grounds of the restless Jokoj tribe, as well as the retreat area of
discontented elements, to the influence of the government. The task
had first been willingly advanced by the people of Sokehs who were
drafted for compulsory work.
It seemed as if this region had been finally made approachable to the
aspirations of the district government. Particularly, the measure to
hire the influential but uncomfortable second chief Jomatau en Sokehs
as a paid supervisor seemed to be successful since the work progressed
very well.
On October 17, 1910, differences occurring between Supervisor Hollborn
and working natives lead to the disciplinary punishment of a guilty
person. Without any doubt, this was the sparkle to induce the highly
susceptible Jokoj people to open rebellion. Anyhow, these most warlike
and proudest people of Ponape only watched the newest developments
reluctantly. With the establishment of this road, they saw their proud


independence go forever. The compulsory work made them feel a tough
yoke, unknown hitherto. The never before humiliated pride of these
Children of nature raised the memory of the old days of freedom and
ease, of the military glory and success against the Spanish government,
and the flame of revolt against the new master started to flare up
luminously.
Two natives in the road construction engaged officials Hollbron and
Hefner who had to escape to the Catholic mission where, together with
Father Gebhard, they were besieged. The news reached the colony
seat of district government offices only in the afternoon. All warnings
failed to prevent Boeder from leaving the colony without extended military
cover. Escorted only by his secretary, Brauckmann, two native servants,
and a crew of five, Boeder left in a boat. He hardly reached Janepei,
an open place on Sokehs Island, when he collapsed after being hit by
two shots in the abdomen and then receiving the fatal shot in his head
from Jomatau. The rebels then mutilated Boeder's corpse by stabs; it
was found later on by coincidence floating in the lagoon together with
the corpses of the other victims of the massacre.
Secretary Brauckmann was hit three times during his flight to the boat
and killed in the water with machetes. Father Superior, who also rushed
to Sokehs Island, was saved only by the failure of the gun of a native


who took aim at him. Some loyal women threw themselves between
him and the natives, thus enabling him and Father Gebhard to escape
unharmed to the church. Enraged, the rebels now precipitated themselves
on Hollborn and Hefner who, by defending themselves with guns, tried
to force a way to the boats. But there they were also killed by lead
and machetes; even the loyally awaiting crew, with one exception,
was killed.
In the colony, when the terrible news was carried back by women, it
was barely given credence.
The government physician, Dr. Girschner, to whom governmental power
now passed over, intended to leave for Sokehs Island instantly, having
confidence in his knowledge of the island. All warnings, including
those of his wife, could not prevent him from doing so. Together with
her, he approached Breeder's drifting government boat already out a
few hundred meters when the two Fathers, escaping in a canoe, waved
at him and informed him that the rebellion could no longer be smothered.
Dr. Girschner returned to the colony as fast as he could to put it in
a state of defense. The 50 police-soldiers were, by far, not sufficient
to protect the 2-kilometer, long-shaped grounds. The wall of the old
Spanish bastion was partially dilapidated and, in any case, unable
to serve as protection against a planned attack of the rebels whose


force was estimated at 200 men. The colony's few whites could not have
saved the situation, not even by over-exerting guard duty. Thus,
Dr. Girschner decided upon the desperate step of calling upon the loyal
tribes of the island for protection of the colony. Only so well as expert
of the island and its inhabitants as he was could dare to make such a
step. On October 19, Girschner assembled 470 men from Metalanim,
U, Kiti, and from catholic Net and Auak to protect the colony. The
district government's carbines were distributed to groups and each
native j-eceived a machete. Old hostilities among the chiefs were
forgotten; even the closest ties of kinship were denied to prove loyalty
to the government by action. Due to the valuable influences of the
missionaries, even the barriers of religious oppositions fell and the
question of the rebellion never became mixed up in them.
Entrenchment, stone fortifications, and barbed wire, and the devoted
efforts of the Europeans in particular, prevented the rebels from attacking
the colony, although they looted Peipalap, the Bezirksamtmann's home
only ten minutes away from the colony, on October 19 while searching
for rifles.
Even if it was rather difficult to provide such a large number of people
with room and board in the colony, the despondency which reigned in
the beginning soon started to give way to greater confidence. To the


demand of the rebels to render all guns and ammunition, that nothing
would happen to the colony and its inhabitants, Dr. Girschner had already
on October 10 approved their request to relinquish all the guns, guilty
persons, and the corpses. When the invitation to all innocents, women,
and children to join the colony was answered, "We praise your goodness,
but are afraid of you since we fell deep in sin already!", all further
communications were discontinued.
The First Communication of the Colony
with the External World and the First Help
At the arrival of the scheduled ship "Germania" of the Jaluit Company
on Ponape, the colony was finally able to get in touch with the external
world on November 26. There was no complete confirmation later to
the rumor of a planned, but never tried, attack on the boat by the enemy.
After a stop of only two hours, "Germania" moved on for Rabaul to
inform the imperial government about the event and to go for help.
The acting governor of German New Guinea, Regierungsrat Osswald,
gathered the rest of the available colored police force of which the
largest part was sent on expeditions to different sections of the
protectorate. Together with 68 men, he boarded "Germania" after having
left requisitions on HMS "Cormoran", which was expected in Rabaul


on December 12, and on HMS "Planet", which was assumed to be along
the coast of Kalser-Wilhelms-land. He also left orders for the next
steamboat due for Sydney to give the imperial colonial office notification
about the rebellion.
On the morning of December 5, "Germania", with the first feeble help
of a colored police force, arrived at Ponape. It was followed on
December 13 by the Steamer "Siar" from Rabaul which carried an additional
7 0 colored soldiers. Here, with the arrival of the first echelon, all
but 150 of the Ponape people called up for the protection of the colony
were dismissed home. The police force, after the arrival of the second
echelon, assumed the protection completely by itself.
Finally, on December 19, HMS "Cormoran" was the first warship anchored
at Ponape. Regierungsrat Osswald, after intensive briefing with the
commander aboard the Steamer "Germania", was now able to leave for
Yap, the closest telegraphic station, from where on December 25 he asked
telegraphically the chief of the cruiser squadron, as well as the imperial
colonial office, for the dispatch of additional strong means of power.
On December 28, he received a wire telling him that HMS "Emden" and
'Nurnberg" left the same day for Ponape, and that "Nurnberg" was
supposed to arrive at Yap on January 4.


II
THE ACTION OF HMS "CORMORAN" AND "PLANET"
UNTIL THE ARRIVAL OF THE EAST ASIATIC CRUISERS
The Situation on Ponape
Upon its arrival at Ponape, HMS "Cormoran" found the situation as follows:
The rebels had installed themselves on Sokehs Island for a tenacious
defense. Their number was not yet determined, however, it was assumed
that more than 250 men had gathered around Jomatau, the very life and
%
soul of the rebellion. The real chief of the Jokoj Tribe, a weakling,
was apparently totally under the influence of Jomatau. It was certain
that the enemy had a considerable amount of weapons at his disposal,
estimated at about 90 rifles, among them Remington rifles, Winchester
guns, revolvers, and a number of bird guns. Furthermore, a thorough
distribution of machetes was expected. There was also some old cannons
in the hands of the rebels. More serious was their possession of a
box of dynamite taken from the road construction because some of the
rebels were familiar with handling dynamite.
It was only during the course of the operations that the original assumption
of the enemy having limited ammunition at his disposal was recognized
as being wrong. It was based on the rumor that rounds of ammunition
with cartridges made of banana leaves had been found.


The main obstacle for the aggressor represented, without any doubt,
the topography of Sokehs Island which was qualified for defense in an
extremely high degree. This is also one of the main reasons that confined
the enemy to his rocky refuge and prevented him from moving over to the
main island. A high mountain covers Sokehs Island like a wall from
north to south. The impassable, steep rocky walls raise to a height
of 300 meters and form an uninterrupted crest in the south; whereas,
in the north the brittle basalt rock forms a rugged ridge. A cone-shaped,
densely-wooded peak forms the highest part of the island which was
recognized from the beginning as a keypoint of the defensive position.
According to loyal natives, all accessible parts of the crest were equipped
with rocky parapets and entanglements. Only a few inaccessible ways,
about two or three, reach the plateau from the east and west sides of
the island. They are narrow and lead through heavy jungle, thus permitting
movement only in single file. From north to south the bare rock is
fringed with shell-proof caves. The leisure of the idle weeks was well
exploited by the enemy; all trails and accesses were made inaccessible
and bared with rocks. Defense systems had been installed by stages
from below, specifically on the north side, close to the mission station.
It was apparently here that landing and basin attack were expected
because, as it was seen later, even the watercourses at this spot had
been bared by rock dams.


The enemy did not forget the experiences from the Spanish times which
resulted in the belief of the impregnability of the plateau. Perhaps his
successes of war during that time made him think of being superior to
all whites. In any case, the Ponapean has to be characterized as war-
like, he does not lack courage. Although he misses the spirit of offensive
action, as later enterprises made evident, there was a stubborn resistence
to be expected in the fight for his defensive positions.
The conduct of the remaining Ponapean tribes until the arrival of the war
ships remained loyal. Their engagement in the defense of the colony
stood the test brilliantly. The official reports state it clearly "that
thereby the possibility of an expansion of the rebellion to the rest of
the island was far removed. The old-rooted oppositions between Sokehs
and most of the remaining states, specifically U and Metalanim, have
been deepened and intensified, insofar as where there were no oppositions
at all before they were created now. But by being assembled in the
colony the influential chiefs were deprived of the Jokojs' bad insinuations,
and by the participation of the Catholic regions the religious contrast
had also been eliminated."
However, considering the inconstancy of the Ponapean character, the
most possible precaution was to be exercised. The slightest failure
on our side would have weakened their attitude. To begin with, it was


presumed that the rebellion was restricted to the island of Sokehs which,
including Tomara, the focus of the rebellion, was considered as hostile.
In Palikir, which was obliged to support Sokehs in wartime, the situation
was uncertain.
The Tasks of the Ships
Until the Arrival of the Reinforcements
Korvettenkapitan Siemens, commander of HMS "Cormoran", recognized
from the beginning that under the existing circumstances the forces at
his disposal were not sufficient to achieve fast and final success.
The general situation, however, prohibited any mode of action not leading
to full success. The assault of the defensive position had to be prepared
by the most possible intensive bombardment which could be only successful
when executed simultaneously from two directions. For an assault,
the some 9 0-man strong landing corps was scarcely sufficient. The
efficiency of the 213-man strong colored unit in a war of aggression was
unknown. In general, the Melanesians are not considered to be a match
for the Ponapeans in battle. Therefore, until the arrival of the East
Asiatic cruisers, the commander of HMS "Cormoran" saw his task limited
to the following:
1. reconnaissance of the enemy positions, by force if necessary,
2. tempting the enemy to exhaust his ammunition and produce casualties


3. retaining the enemy on Sokehs Island, and
4. preparing for future operations by surveying the harbors and
entries around Sokehs Island.
These tasks were mastered to the fullest extent by HMS "Cormoran"
in cooperation with the surveying boat "Planet" which entered Langar
Harbor on January 3.
On December 23, second lieutenant Frhr. v. Spiegel von und zu Peckelshelm
of HMS "Cormoran" was given command over the colored police force,
directing its systematic training and use.
HMS Cormoran" frequently changed its anchorage to survey the eastern
and western waters of Sokehs Island. The sea maps indicated sufficient
depths only at Langar Harbor which was a distance of 5,000 meters from
Sokehs Island and thus undesirably far away. "Cormoran" detected
during the first days of January that the Sokehs passage and the Palikir
passage were passable for cruisers and that Sokehs Harbor had a sufficient
depth for several ships.
The boats extended their surveys to close proximity of the enemy positions
and were frequently alarmed by enemy shots. In this way the enemy
positions could be observed from all directions. Prominent points, as
Jomatau s home, or defense positions were occasionally taken under fire.


Along the shore, canoes and some buildings were destroyed.
Whereas the enemy was kept on the move by this action, he was even
more considerably pressed by the systematic reconnaissances of the .•
ianding corps, commanded by first officer Kapitanleutnant Weber who
always operated jointly with the colored force. What the enemy tried
to avoid on Sokehs Island happened on December 23 Tol en Tolonier
was occupied. The enemy positions were taken under fire by guns and
machine guns. On December 27 and 31, similar moves cleared the
island shoreline of the enemy by intensive fire which was reinforced
by ship and machine artillery. The enemy abandoned his lower positions
and retracted to the hills. By this opportunity, some black soldiers
were sent over to the island where they destroyed the shore positions
and burned a home despite heavy gunfire from the hills. The necessary
movement was executed with all due military precautions because attacks
were also expected from the rebellious regions on the main island.
Front, side, and beach coverages were mostly assigned to black
detachments. On December 29, the entire landing corps thrusted forward
to Nanpohnmwal and on to the Kiti ridge where, according to received
news, the enemy had ousted the people of Nanpohnmwal and installed
defense positions controlling the ridge. Executing an envelopment
through extremely difficult and swampy terrain, the bulk of the corps
moved in back of the enemy; whereas, the black back coverage commanded


by Polizeimeister Kemmerich attacked the front of the ridge where they
were very soon engaged In a fight which cost them one dead and one
wounded. After the loss of three dead, seven to ten according to other
information, the enemy took their dead and retreated to the jungle.
On January 6, HMS "Cormoran", anchored in the deepest part of Sokehs
Harbor, controlled the western part of the channel where the enemy,
until then, was still able to move to the main island as he pleased.
In the afternoon of January 7 , the Jaluit Company's schooner "Orion"
equipped with a 3.7-cm machine cannon, a machine gun, and a
corresponding military detachment, took over the blockade position
which was never abandoned from then on. The Jaluit Company had its
vessel most readily at disposal for the entire duration of the operations.


III
THE MAIN OPERATIONS
The Arrival of the East Asiatic Cruisers
'Emden" and "Nurnberg"
According to an order of His Majesty the Emperor, the commander of
the cruiser squadron detached the cruisers "Emden" and "Nurnberg"
to crush the rebellion. HMS "Nurnberg", which was in Hong Kong with
the flagship, left on December 28 for Yap to get in contact with the
acting governor, Reglerungsrat Osswald, and to board at the same time
Regierungsrat Dr. Kersting, the newly assigned Bezirksamtmann for
Ponape. HMS "Emden" was in Tsingtau preparing for the annual repair
and, with its coal bunkers partially emptied for conservation, was about
to enter the shipyard. This cruiser, too, left Tsingtau on December 28.
From the very beginning of their trips, the ships were in constant radio-
telegraphic connection.
"Nurnberg" informed the senior commander of HMS "Emden", Fregatten-
kapitan Vollerthun, about the situation on Ponape and transmitted the
new government representative's wish of meeting in Truk prior to calling
at Ponape, so that the situation could be evaluated as to the natives
who might be inclined to rebellion and all the measures to be taken
against Ponape could be discussed. The commander of HMS "Emden" agreed


Truk islands were calm. It was to assume that the above-mentioned
conditions on Ponape had not changed. Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun
realized in accordance with Dr. Kersting that, considering the historical
development of the colony and the newest experiences, it was important
to crash the rebellion thoroughly, to collect all weapons and ammunition,
and to catch or kill all the leaders of the rebellion and the murderers.
The natives had to be inspired with respect for the German power which
up to now they failed to believe. The size of the superior strength had
to extinguish every inclination to repeat such rebellion.
Since it was through fear that the enemy, by seeing the arriving
reinforcements, would break through to the main island, whereas its
confinement to Sokehs Island was still desirable, Fregattenkapitan
Vollerthun decided to approach Ponape at daybreak on January 10.
Thus, lacking a radio-telegraphic connection, he informed "Cormoran"
and "Planet" of the cruisers' arrival by reflectors and ordered them to
take all necessary means to shut off Sokehs Island successfully. Contact
was established at 0400 hours when the cruisers were still 30 nautical
miles away from Langar Harbor. At 0515 hours, the commander of HMS
"Cormoran" had already occupied Sokehs Channel with the black corps.
"Planet" and "Orion" guarded the western entry of the channel. At 0700
hours, "Emden" and "Nurnberg" entered Langar Harbor whereby Fregatten-
kapitan Vollerthun, as senior commander, assumed the supreme command


over the ships assembled at Ponape and the land forces to which the
black corps was attached.
The Plans to Crush the Rebellion
At the immediately appointed meeting aboard HMS "Emden", in which
Dr. Girschner also participated, the situation was generally characterized
as it was described at the arrival of HMS "Cormoran". It was to be
assumed that the defense positions on Sokehs Island had been enlarged
and completed further. Moreover, it was confirmed that lately several
chiefs and leaders had moved to the main island, among them Chief
Uajei en Jokoj and especially Chief Samuel who was charged with the
bloodbath of October 18 and who was assumed to be in Palikir. Jomatau,
the rebellion's soul, was still on Sokehs Island.
Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun, in consent with the representatives of the
government, established the following directions for the military and
political actions against the rebels:
1. conquest of Sokehs Island, identification of prisoners and the
dead, declaration of the island as exclusive government property;
2. encirclement of the Sokehs and Palikir regions on the main island,
surrender of the prisoners to the district government, and
declaration of these regions as government property;


3. surrender of all weapons and ammunition found on the dead to
the district government office;
4. if these directions did not lead to the surrender of the leaders,
murderers, and their weapons, an occupation of the main island
at different locations and alimentation of the troops by the natives
had to be considered in order to exert pressure; and
5 • as a further reprisal, confiscation of all the canoes to prevent
fishing.
The Operations Against Sokehs Island
The Isolation of the Island
Still during January 10, Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun had the barricading
black force, reinforced by the landing corps "Emden" and "Cormoran",
cut off the island, especially in the direction of Palikir region. Fregatten-
kapitan Karl Taegert, Captain of HMS "Numberg", was appointed commander
i
of all landing forces. The sealing off in the direction of the sea was
assumed by "Nurnberg", "Planet", and "Orion" which, assisted by armed
boats and searchlights, had to prevent any kind of maritime traffic.
In the night of January 10 to 11, the shorelines of the island and Takatik
Island were illuminated by searchlights and occasionally taken under
fire by 5-cm guns since there was information that an enemy canoe was
to cross over. The next two days were used for reconnaissance. A drive


around the island showed that a disembarkation would be most appropriate
at its west side. The hill to the west of the enemy's defense positions
was the best location to start the assault.
A hill behind the cut-off force, called "signalmountain", was envisioned
to be used as an observation post for the intended bombardment by the
ships. After being cleared of shrubbery, it proved to be an excellent
observation and signal post which was occupied day and night and
which maintained connection with the ships via the signal post installed
at the district office. Furthermore, the cut-off force, whose efficiency
was decisive during a successful bombardment and assault, was inspected
thoroughly and, at the same time, assigned to bombardment positions
to be occupied during the shelling of Sokehs Island by the ships.
The Bombardment
There was no thought of starving out the enemy since the island bore
a wealth of fruits of all kinds. To assure a strong moral impact, fast
decisions had to be realized. The enemy had to be thrown out of his
positions by assault. Since the assault, due to topographical difficulties;
expected great things from the white troops, it was necessary to plan
it with all the means at their disposal, one of which was a methodical
bombardment of the ridge with the defense positions.


The commander was right in attributing high moral value to a bombardment
of the ridge. The natives believed that their aerie was unattainable
by ship artillery because bombardments in Spanish times, in default of
efficient guns, never reached the ridge.
The extended positions of the enemy and the impossibility of any close
reconnaissance did not permit them to predict if there was also a
sufficient physical impact to be expected.
If the bombardment and the assault were to realize the expected success,
the enemy was expected to leave the island in hurried flight and try to
move over to the main island. The cut-off troops had to prevent this.
The landing corps "Nurnberg" , anchored closest to the intended landing
plance and reinforced by 100 black soldiers, was chosen for the assault.
The operation was commanded by Fregattenkapitan Karl Taegert, commander
of the landing forces. During his absence, Korvettenkapitan Siemens,
captain of HMS "Cormoran", commanded the cut-off forces. They were
supported by a 6-cm ship cannon and five machine guns. The signal
mountain was armed by a machine cannon and a machine gun.
In the early morning hours of January 13, steam vessels took the schooner
"Orion" to a safe anchorage in the north of Sokehs Island. At the same
time "Nurnberg", shifting its anchorage to the north, went into bombardment
position. Emden" and "Cormoran" took position in Langar Harbor, also


preparing for bombardment. At 0630 hours, "Nurnberg" signaled the
line of fire free. One hour later, the cut-off troops signaled to maintain
shell-proof positions.
The bombardment started at 0745 hours in clear, sunny weather. According
to observations from the signal mountain, the shells hit their target
right from the start. "Emden" and "Cormoran" spread over the whole
ridge; whereas "Nurnberg" , with regard to not endanger the signal mountain,
had to shell the west side and the lower parts of the island in order to
prevent the rebels from invading the west side from the ridge.
Landing and Assault on the Sokehs Plateau
The bombardment ended at 0900 hours. "Nurnberg" and "Orion" took
the blockade position again. The troops of the blocking zone went back
to their prescribed position. At 1000 hours Fregattenkapitan Taegert
had his landing corps of 100 black soldiers disembark. They were led
by their commander, Oberleutnant Freiherr von Spiegel, who was assisted
by police master Jahn, Leutnant von Prittwitz und Gaffron, and six
selected sailors.
The steppe mountain offered a good sight of the main ridge. After its
occupation, Fregattenkapitan Taegert wanted first to push the black
company forward to the ridge and then follow with the rest of the troops.


After a footpath was cut, the very steep mountain was occupied at 1140
hours. The black troops rested shprtly and then advanced through the
bush; at 1430 hours, they were 800 meters further into the mountains.
The bush was very thick and immense. The commander ordered his
reserve landing corps ashore to protect his troops, thereby increasing
the white troops to 180 soldiers.
Some chiefs who had enlisted volunteered to lead the troops to the trenches
of the plateau. There were three more hours left till sunset. The troops
were still separated by a 2-km wide heavy bush field from the main
ridge which was 150 meters high and could only be climbed up in single
file. The development of the attack on the trenches would be difficult.
Nevertheless, Fregattenkapitan Taegert could not be detained from
l
attacking immediately because the prompt capture of the ridge would
make a favorable impression.
He hastily advanced with the black company and the white back-up
troops and ordered Kapitanleutnant von Gilgenheimb to follow as soon
as possible with guns and machine guns.
The foot of the ridge was reached at 1545 hours. Only the most skilled
people could keep up with the marching pace, among them the commander
and his aide-de-camp, Oberleutnant Bahrfeldt, Oberleutnant Freiherr
von Spiegel, Leutnant v. Prittwitz und Gaffron, Regierungsrat Dr. Kersting,


who was always with the troops, police master Jahn, surveyor Bulk,
the selected marines of the "Nurnberg", and about 15 black people.
At 16 30 hours, fire was opened against the head of the group 10 meters
above a steep wall where people had to pull themselves up. The enemy's
opened fire was accompanied by a hail of heavy rocks. The enemy,
approximately 50 men, was hiding behind a stone rampart. Oberleutnant
von Spiegel made his head troops spread out and, after a while, his
men were returning the fire energetically. Von Spiegel was heading
the left wing and police master Jahn the right wing. Leutnant von Prittwitz
und Gaffron was seriously wounded in his arm. At that point, Oberleutnant
von Spiegel asked for a machine gun. Dr. Kersting, who had gained
good experiences from the African Bushwar and had given advice to the
commander until now, carried the request through the enemy's fire to
the commander. The head was informed that the machine gun would be
there in 20 minutes. It was processed with great effort. For a short
time the battle stopped. Meanwhile, paymaster Groth reinforced the
gun lines with more black people and police master Jahn pushed his
right wing forward at the same time so that it was almost flanking the
enemy's position. Now Oberleutnant von Spiegel thought he was strong
enough to start the assault. The enemy escaped from his very strong
position into the bush, leaving two dead men behind. According to
comments of prisoners, everybody who was able to run panicked and


and started to flee down the southern slope as soon as they heard the
troop's first hurrays.
At 1700 hours, the highest part of the Sokehs mountain was occupied
and soon after the ships could see the war banner blowing over the
northern slope of the ridge. They knew that the enemy's trench, which
had seemed to be impregnable, was now in our hands. The landing
corps of the "Nurnberg" occupied the summit. At its highest point an
outpost stayed, while the remaining men spent the night in the enemy's
huts 30 meters below. Since night was breaking in and the ground was
dangerous, the enemy could not be pursued. They had only lost five
men. The next day seven men and 14 women and children were taken
prisoners. Our losses were the following: one officer seriously wounded
one black soldier lightly wounded, and two black soldiers seriously
wounded. Among the prisoners was the Jokoj man who had cut off
Dr. Boeder's hand. Jomatau's brother was among the dead. Due to
the fact that the Jokojs had left their casualties behind, it was assumed
that they abandoned their trenches in a hurry. The other murderers and
leaders of the rebels, especially Jomatau, had escaped and spread over
the Island.
The landing corps of the "Nurnberg" spent the night under heavy protection
The baggage had to be left at the foot of the mountain, thus food and


mainly water were missing. .On the morning of January 14, the whole
ridge was stripped off and the above-mentioned prisoners were taken.
One hundred ready-made dynamite cartridges, but only a few guns,
were found in the huts. An inspection of the plateau showed that the
bombardment's effect was quite serious at certain places. Along the
1,000-meter tract were fallen trees and deep shot holes. On the ridge,
there were no shell-proof caves where the enemy could have hidden,
but a large number of caves were later found further down.
Although we did not take many prisoners during the Sokehs Island conquest
its success lies in the amazingly fast execution and the low losses we
suffered. The supposedly impregnable trench was in our hands. The
enemy disbanded in such a way that his resistance was broken. The
expected demoralizing effects of the bombardments were fulfilled, to
which alone the responding abandonment of the carefully prepared
defense trenches has to be attributed.
The guidance and behavior of the troops during this very well prepared
and executed operation showed a great deal of prudence, concern, and
devotion, and has strengthened confidence for further action. The black
troops interspersed with white soldiers were a very useful combat body
which did not fail under Oberleutnant von Spiegel's command.


The Search of Sokehs Island
On January 15 and 16, a systematic search of Sokehs Island took place
but there were no positive results. On the 15th, 39 men of whom 30
were fit to bear arms, 5 3 women, 31 children a total of 123 Ponape
people, and five Mortlock people surrendered and were taken to the
mission station where they were conducted as prisoners to the district
office.
That same day the caves at the southern ridge were searched where,
according to a woman, refugees were hiding. The caves were only
accessible with the help of a flag line. Since resistance was expected,
we had to be very careful. Caves with fresh blood traces, food leftovers
and other objects were found which signified the recent stay of refugees.
The search was carried out by two sections. The leader of the landing
troops asked for reinforcements on January 16 in order to search the
whole east side and the northern caves. Divisions of the landing corps
Emden" and "Cormoran" were put under his orders until the operations
on the island were completed.
The blocking zone was occupied by one-half of the landing corps of the
"Emden", the landing corps of the "Cormoran" and "Planet", as well as
by the rest of the black people. All the departments advanced toward
the enemy's main defense trench at the northern end of the island on


January 16. In those caves many traces of a resting place which had
just been abandoned were found. A few enemies were also seen, but
they took off so hurriedly that not even the most dexterous black man
could have followed them. These experiences show that it was possible
for the enemy to stay right next to the troops since the caves and the
bush were hiding him. During the morning, a rain cloudburst started
which partly interrupted the search. In the afternoon, the mission at
the northern end of the island was converted into a camp for the troops.
The inspection of the enemy's defense trenches in this part of the island
led to the above-mentioned presumption that the enemy had expected
a debarkation on the more accessible east shore. The accomplished
landing thus had avoided the enemy's strong trenches and hit the weakest
point. This partly explains the quick success of the attack.
As all the caves were searched in a short time without meeting any
resistance, the leader of the landing troops informed the command that
there were no more groups of armed men expected on the island. The
rest of the enemy most probably had gone back to the main island,
but there were some signs that a few rebels were still on the island.
Two sections of the "Nurnberg" remained on the island, one as a guard
on the ridge and the other stayed at the mission in order to undertake
more raids in the lowlands. Furthermore, they had orders to search
the island and look for more caves and to destroy all food.


Operation Against the Tomara - Palikir Regions
The command had to decide now to transfer the operations to the main
island in order to capture the rest of the rebels. The governor had
already started negotiations with the loyal chiefs to establish the general
directions which would help to produce the murderers and rebel leaders.
It appeared that the chiefs nowadays only had a very small influence
on their tribes. Although they were personally willing to help, they
refused to do so on behalf of their subjects.
More success was needed fast in order not to weaken the moral advantage
of what had already been gained. Since it was expected that the rebels
would retire first to Tomara, the headquarters of the Jokojs, an extensive
action was to be undertaken against that region before the whole island
was to be attacked.
The operation against Tomara - Palikir was planned for January 19.
On the 18th, Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun took the "Planet" on a
reconnaissance trip around the main island. Besides obtaining a general
view of the Tomara - Palikir regions and of Tauak Harbor, special
attention was given to the harbor entrances and the ground conditions
for the intended distribution of the landing troops. Tauak Harbor was
deep enough for a cruiser, which would fire against Tomara, thus forcing
the rebels to leave the beaches and to retire to the interior. They would


then be caught by the landing troops advancing in two sections on two
different routes which were expected to join at the same time at Tomara.
This operation was scheduled for the 19th, although the search of Sokehs
Island could not be completely finished by then and the troops were
already considerably worn out.
The plateau of Sokehs Island and the mission stayed under the control
of a small division of the "Nurnberg". The sentinels on the mountain,
on the blocking zone, and on the channel were removed. The local
colony was protected by 12 military policemen and a police master.
The troops were supposed to leave at dawn in two columns from the place
of assembly at the channel. Column I was under the command of
Fregattenkapitan Taegert and consisted of the landing corps of "Nurnberg'
"Cormoran" , and "Planet", and 60 soldiers. It would follow the coast-
line (24 kilometers) to Tomara which should be reached on the 20th.
Column II consisted of the landing corps of "Emden" and 100 soldiers
under the command of Kapitan-Leutnant Huth; they had orders to rush
along the Kiti path to be in Tomara on the evening of the 19th. This
distance was estimated to be 12 kilometers. Both columns would meet
near Tomara to avoid a withdrawal of the rebels to Kiti and the adjacent
regions. On the march back, a radical burning of all the farms was
planned.


The entrances to Tauak Harbor had been rapidly surrounded by Korvetten-
kapitan Habenicht of HMS "Planet”, Guided by her, "Cormoran" entered
the harbor at 1215 hours and at once started the bombardment of Tomara.
The purpose was to push the rebels north towards Column I before the
estimated arrival of Column 11.
All the shots were well placed. The rebels hoisted the white flag.
Had the two columns met as it had been planned, the intended plan would
have worked out. But it did not. Column I had to look for the way by
itself since the leaders failed completely. All the farms seemed to
have been abandoned hastily; some conoes with white flags were seen.
The path led through marshy mangrove bushes. The march was very
hard, especially for those carrying the machine guns. At 1700 hours,
high tide stopped the advance and camp was set up for the night on a
hill. On the morning of the 20th, the march through the mangrove marsh
continued. The men had to walk for hours through a completely soaked
region where the mud came up to their knees. Around noon, some wood-
cutters were heard. The soldiers picked up a woman who had cut her
hair as the rebels did. They also found the place where the canoes
had been seen the day before. These and two houses were burnt to
to ashes. In the houses, cartridges, dynamite fuses, and objects
coming from Sokehs Island were found. At 1500 hours, Column I met
the governor who was asking the rebels caught in between the two columns


to surrender. He asked Column I not to go any further in order to avoid
scaring the people. Then Column I camped one kilometer from the governor's
position on a site which was surrendered by approximately 5 0 prisoners.
Not any less painful was the approach of Column II which, after a 12-1/2-
hour march and having rested only a few times, reached the first farm
southeast of Tomara on the evening of January 19. On the last third of
the way, the soldiers had left all the baggage behind in order to reach
Tomara on time. The time calculated for Column ll's march had unfortunately
been too short, and it did not reach the water the same day. Thus the
rebels had easily escaped in the night of the 19th to the 20th to Kiti.
The lack of maps, which could not be matched by the presence of guides,
proved to have had a very painful impact. The next day Column I and
Column 11, split in two divisions, burned houses, canoes, and farms.
On the night of the 21st, the command was notified that 9 3 prisoners,
among them 20 men, had been captured. The next day a Jokoj man
was killed in the bush. Up to the 24th, the total prisoner count for
this operation was 110 rebels; among them were 30 to4o strong men who
had played a considerable part in the bloodbath of October 18.
Unfortunately, the captured arms were few but, according to the prisoners,
there still were 20 to 25 guns as well as 60 to 70 other firearms on
Sokehs Island.


After having met. Columns I and II went back to the colony through the
main villages and farms along the shoreline of the Palikir region. On
January 24 they embarked. The prisoners were put on boats and handed
over to the district office. Although the chief leader of the rebels had
not been caught during the operation against Tomara - Palikir, the operation
was quite a considerable step toward the final goal. Furthermore, it
made a moral impression on the population of the island.
The Operation Against the Nankiop Position
According to the observations made during the Tomara - Palikir raid,
it was assumed that the enemy had split into small groups and was no
longer able to keep up with its original tactics. Thus the command
prepared for a lasting guerilla war and decided to distribute small detachments
in the different regions. The pressure on the island's inhabitants was
to bring the rest of the rebels Into the hands of the troops. The ships
had already received their respective orders when on January 28, the
chief of Net brought news that Jomatau and his 100 men were on the
Nankiop mountain near Nanepil on the main island, hastily restoring
the fortifications remaining from the Spanish times.
It was clear that only a part of the rebels had been separated, most
probably the weaker part. The main body, still with Jomatau, decided
to continue.with the adopted tactics of fighting from trenches. In spite


of the conquest of the Sokehs trenches and in spite of the jealousies
which were to split the belief in final victory (as it was reported later
by prisoners), Jomatau's personal Influence was undeniably capable of
unifying his men again and again. He was an ingenious man who knew
where the best defense trenches were and he changed them into real'
fortifications in no time. He also solved the problems of providing food
and shelter without any difficulty in spite of being surrounded by the
enemy.
The enemy had only little time to get organized. Although the soldiers
were tired and weary and the "Nurnberg" had to be filled with coal from
the escort steamer "Titanla" which arrived on January 25 from Tsingtau,
the command decided to encircle and attack Jomatau in his trench at
Nankrop with separate detachments. According to the description of
reliable natives, the camp could be reached in a few hours by two ways.
The possibility of a success was too big and not to be aspired.
On the 26th at 0800 hours, the landing corps of the "Emden" with 60
black men and with Fregattenkapltan Taegert as leader would attack
the Nankiop position by following the ridge of the mountain. Meanwhile,
Korvettenkapltan Siemens would encircle the enemy at the foot of the
mountain with the landing corps of the "Nurnberg" and "Cormoran" .
The attack was scheduled for 1300 hours.


Siemens and his black soldiers saw the trench at 1000 hours. It was
situated at approximately three-quarters of the height of Nankiop mountain
and consisted of a building with a 200-meter long and 300-meter high wall
of basalt rocks pointing southwards. Behind the house was a very steep
rocky wall. The cleared-out terrain in front of the base was 100 meters
wide.
Korvettenkapitan Siemens had his black detachment reinforced by a
"Cormoran" section under command of Oberleutnant Jess. This officer
sent a sketch and first notification to the troops who arrived at 1145
hours. Men of the "Nurnberg" corps occupied three points from where
paths led to the enemy's position, thereby blocking these paths.
A patrol who was in communication with the advance group brought
Oberleutnant Jess's news that he was standing near the enemy and was
too weak to advance any further. They had first sighted the fortification
from the right side and was shot at when they approached it within 20
meters. The soldiers took cover but Leutnant Erhard and a black soldier
were killed. Korvettenkapitan Siemens advanced with his staff and the
"Cormoran" section to the aid of Oberleutnant Jess.
The reinforcement was sufficient. The gunfire and the falling stones of
the enemy were quite a danger and it would have been better to withdraw
a little, but by doing that would have left Erhard’s body unprotected.


Three sailors were creeping towards the body in order to keep an eye
on it. Oberleutnant Jess had stood near the enemy's trench under a
steady fire for four hours.
Division Taegert reached the trench at 1620 hours after long detours
because of mistakes made by the native guides. Instead of coming
directly toward the Nankiop position, they met division Siemens at
the mission. Taegert wanted to encircle the sides of the enemy with
his two wings and then attack.
The enemy was shooting steadily from his loopholes. They had approximately
30 guns and some men were stationed on the steep slope behind the house.
Fregattenkapitan Taegert made his men proceed left and right of the
clearing in extended lines and had placed the well covered machine gun
in between the two lines. Then he opened fire. His right wing was
coming from the right side towards the slope and the left wing was over-
topping the house when the enemy's fire discontinued. At 1705 hours
the trench was taken by storm. During this attack Obermatrose Kneidl
of Emden was fatally shot in the head. Three sailors were seriously
wounded and an officer and a man were superficially wounded. Three
black men were also seriously wounded. The retiring enemy who did not
resist any more was fleeing backwards and escaped over the steep peaks.


The clearing of the woods and the searching of the farms, which were a
main attraction for the rebels, were now done at a faster pace. On
February 8, all the loyal natives of the colony were sent to the island
to help harvest for a full week.
Further Operations on the Main Island
On February 27, the men killed on Nankiop and Obermatrose Guenther
were buried. Only small divisions accompanied their dead comrades
to the grave. The military operations were urgent and there was no time
for ceremonies now.
The distribution of the ships to the various ports and the disposition
of small detachments on the different points of the island as intended
before the assault of Nankiop, were to be executed now. Although this
might have drawn some natives towards the rebels, there was no other
possibility of contacting and capturing the enemy. On February 28,
the ships went to their positions. "Nurnberg" was sent to the port of
Ronkiti, Cormoran" to Metalanim, while "Emden" and "Planet" stayed
in the port of Ponape. "Planet" was kept back for a special mission.
The ships were supposed to send detachments from their positions.
Two "Emden" detachments (I and II) were to search the northern part
of the main island. Detachment I would camp at Tanak, detachment II
at Palikir - Tomara. "Nurnberg" was to send one detachment to the


north and one to the south of Kiti / while "Cormoran" was to secure
the region of Metalanim.
The ships had to communicate constantly with their detachments in
order to provide food and get information. The leaders and all the
officers were informed through written orders about the purpose of
the planned measures. It was important to determine the relations
between the garrison troops and the loyal natives. These had to be
induced through pressure to cooperate but the natives' attitude, by
no means, had to be changed. This task was not easy at all and
required tact, prudence, and determination from the officers. The
farms no longer had to deliver food for the troops and the harvest had
to be finished as soon as possible. The troops had orders to keep
absolute silence regarding the military actions. The enemy had to
be persued by small and daring expeditions without giving him time
to settle anywhere.
The Concentric March toward Impeip
As soon as the ships reached their positions, the reliable Chief Lap
en Net reported that the enemy had entrenched not very far from Nankiop
in a cave called Impeip.
None of the white people of the colony had ever visited this place
which had historical importance since the Spanish times. A casual


sketch was done according to indications of the natives. This sketch
approximately showed the approach routes of the different detachments
Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun had decided to guide the detachments in
concentric ways to encircle the enemy's trench and then to attack.
The divisions had to depart in the morning of January 30 in order to
reach on the following day definite places which would be only two
hours from the enemy's position. The Auak detachment had to take
position near Nanepil, the Metalanim detachment at Nankana, the
Kiti detachment I on the old Kiti way, the Kiti detachment II above
Nankap and Impeip, and the Palikir detachment at Nankiop. Taegert
who was with detachment I had to lead the operation after the reunion
of the detachments.
Since "Emden" was nearest to the concentration point of the columns,
she assumed the responsibility of providing food after the second
day. Kapitanleutnant Luehe was the leader of the food column which
also had to take care of information. They had orders to be at Nankiop
on January 31 with food provisions for two days.
The supplying of the troops started to become a problem. There were
almost no cattle, no vegetables and fruit on the island any longer,
and the expected provisions from Yap were limited.


The divisions advanced according to the fixed plan. The troops endured
great hardships. The routes led through regions that had no paths at all
that were very rocky. The weather which had been good until now
changed and became stormy. The ground became muddy and very slippery
Fregattenkapitan Taegert's report of this march gives a very good image
of the situation;
January 29. The people of Kiti placed at our disposal several
canoes as well as 35 carriers and guides and helped us
disembark. They all seemed willing to help.
The route of both detachments first led over Dschalapuk, the
last plantation. Soon after that the detachments divided.
I stayed with Kiti I which soon deviated into the old Kill way
right of the path dividing the forest. According to the natives,
this path would take us to Impeip in six hours; instead it
took us 16 hours. The latest typhoon of 1905 had thrown so
many trees across the way that it was not used any more by
the natives.
First we had to cross four very inaccessible riverbeds. It
was a constant balancing over uprooted trees which often
collapsed under the people. Left and right of the so-called
way was heavy bush.


Around 1600 hours'we found traces of natives who had picked
taro. The leaders Immediately recognized the traces as those
of Sokehs people since Kiti people never entered this terrible
region. Besides, the Sokehs people must be in a very bad
condition for they had picked poor roots.
Then we found a small hut where six to eight Sokehs people'
had rested. The hut and traces were approximately two days
old. At 1700 hours we had to camp for the night on a very
damp and steep mountain. It started to rain and it rained the
whole next day.
30: Departure at 0615 hours. The path first crossed
several riverbeds then followed the extremely steep 580-meter
high saddle. Everybody was completely soaked. The difficult
path was even worse because of the slipperiness of the ground.
Several men fell but none were seriously wounded.
The Kiti carriers who carried the machine gun and the ammunition
accomplished an extraordinary Job. At 1300 hours the ridge
was reached. It is only a bit lower than neighboring Tolokole
peak and it gave us a very good view over the island. In the
afternoon we marched through marshy ground until we reached
the altitude of 490 meters.


Again we had to choose damp, uneven ground for the night camp
because the descent was very steep and I wanted to take a look
at it first. During the night there were very thick fog and stormy
rains, but our men had already gained enough experience to make
even fires.
What worried me was that they had not taken with them any
clothes to change in order that they did not have too much to
carry. Their only cover was completely wet and did not give
any protection or warmth.
January 31: The leaders told us that there was a cave along
the way to the next valley we would cross. A patrol of black
people confirmed that. Here too there was a small fire place
for six or eight men, probably the same people as before.
It seems that they had taken this way after the battle at Nankiop.
Departure at 0930 hours. Rain. Very dangerous and steep
descent along the ridge; had to cross several waterfalls.
At 1345 hours reunion with the "Cormoran" detachment in
Nankana halfway up a steep mountain. Its commander, Kapitan-
leutnant Werber, informs that the enemy's trench is approximately
400 meters above. Apparently it can be seen from the place
where I have to take my detachment. There is no road leading


up to it. To climb the mountain we had to follow the edge of
a wild mountain river and cross it under a waterfall. Then we
had to break a way up a steep precipice. Since I expected
the enemy's trench to be very near, I followed immediately
the skilled black soldiers forming the head of the detachment.
Even they were slipping from time to time on the wet rocks and
fell several meters back.
Helping each other and using ropes, our column was advancing
slowly. Even the machine gun, carried by the Kiti men, came
with us.
At 1700 hours I realized that we would not reach the peak the
same day. We had to camp in hollows formed by the roots of
trees along the precipice. Officers and soldiers were completely
wet. It was still stormy and raining very hard. Because of the
proximity of the enemy we could not make a fire. The guards
were on such dangerous spots that one of them fell and broke
the protective flank of his gun. The naked black soldiers
who suffered extremely did not have to stand guard that night.
They were coughing very badly the whole night. We had no
more food.


It was still raining after a sleepless night for all of us. I had
a clearance cut out of the woods. We discovered Kiti detachment
II 400 meters below to the left of us. Now we had contacts to
the left and to the right with our people. I intended to send
all the detachments toward the enemy's position for further
reconnaissance when at 1130 hours a patrol of the "Emden"
notified us that the cave had been discovered, searched, and
found empty.
I went to see for myself and searched the place again. It was
a small cave under a rock, impossible to attack from above,
flanked on both sides by steep slopes, and protected in front
by strong entanglements. Above the entanglements, a few huts
for 40 or 50 people had been erected.
With .police master Jahn, the oldest black corporal, and a
reliable Kiti chief, I examined all the footprints leading from
the cave. They were all a few days old and were leading into
different directions. Since some of them were going up the
steep hill, I assumed that the cave must had been abandoned
suddenly. The Kiti chief was right in assuming that the women
and children had used this cave during the Nankiop battle,
which took place one kilometer away, and left it afterwards.


Bloody clothes were on the floor. Except for a shoe, we did not
find any other objects.
By finding the cave the purpose of the expedition was accomplished
and I ordered all the detachments to meet at the mission of
Nanepil and to move from there to Ponape.
/signed/ Taegert
This is the report of the commander. The other detachments had more
or less the same experience. Unfortunately the whole expedition had
been useless. Nevertheless, we recognized that the enemy began to
withdraw and change his tactics. In order to weary them out, the hunt
by the encircling detachments continued. The commander of the leading
troops noted very correctly the difference between the huts at the
locations; On Sokehs Island were real natives' houses fully
furnished; at Nankiop were good waterproof huts with sleeping mats
and some dishes; at Impeip were a few scanty huts; and the camps
along the way were more adequate for animals than for human beings.
The rebels, who are used to a certain comfort, could certainly not
stand the rough life in the inner part of the island much longer.
Undoubtedly, we now had to look for them in the plain where they
could find sufficient food and good houses. There they had to be
tired out until they would surrender voluntarily or fight the last battle.


The Impeip thrust had prepared our leaders and the troops for that difficult
operation. In spite of extraordinary topographic and climatic difficulties,
and after extended enveloping movements through tropical jungle,
contact between the different detachments was established. Due to
the lack of maps and guides, the ingenuity of the officers had increased.
The troops were trained for the bushwar and even they seemed to have
gotten used to the climate since nobody got sick after those tiring days.
The supply of provisions worked out perfectly so that on January 31
food was distributed. The signal and information corps maintained
contact with the command in Ponape throughout the whole operation.
On February 3, the troops were embarked again in order to get new
uniforms and arms. "Planet" took the "Nurnberg" and the "Cormoran"
detachments back to the ports of Ronkiti and Metalanim.
"Planet" Inspects Pakin Island
According to information, a few Jokoj people had fled to the island of
Pakin, 24 sea miles northwest of Ponape, with guns and objects belonging
to Regierungsrat Boeder. It was recommended to search for that group
of people and "Planet" was charged with this task. With Regierungsrat
Kersting and Captain Jeschke of the "Orion", three armed boats were
sent ashore; there was no resistance at all. During the search Boeder's
sword as well as a gun with ammunition were found. Five men, two


women, and two children were taken prisoners. The island itself was
declared property of the German government.
The Final Operations
The information coming in up to February 4 indicated that the enemy was
staying in the hills of Sokehs - Palikir. Kill people saw a group of men
north of Kiti who were shooting at them. The chief leader of Metalanim
assured that up to now no rebel had crossed his borderline. On February 5,
Poipoi people (Jokoj kin) had turned themselves in at Kiti. On the next
day four Joftoj people turned themselves in at Ponape. They had taken
part in all the battles and even in the massacre of October 18. After
Nanklop they deserted Jomatau. During extensive examinations, they
confessed that after the Sokehs attack Jomatau and Samuel quarreled
and that after Nankiop a strong war-weariness had occured. Jomatau
left it up to each one's opinion to leave or to stay with him. Those
four men had left. They said they had hidden their three guns and the
ammunition on Mant Island near Palikir; it was found to be true. The
cartridges were of a very poor quality, being powder and lead wrapped
In paper.
Therefore, the detachments were expected to be successful. The "Cormoran"
(Metalanim) detachment seemed useless and therefore "Cormoran" was
transferred on February 7 to Tauak from where her and "Planet's" landing
corps disembarked for Tomara.


From that day on the Sokehs - Palikir region was encircled. In the west
was the "Cormoran" detachment, north and east were occupied by the
two Emden divisions, and south Meilap and up-country were secured
by the "Nurnberg" detachments.
The divisions searched the regions to which they had been assigned.
Both Kiti detachments came in contact with the enemy on February 7,
8, and 9, but always failed to take prisoners since the enemy always
managed to escape into the bush. Jomatau himself was recognized
several times by black soldiers of the Ponape garrison. At certain
places the rebels guns, ammunition, and equipment were captured.
At the same time, the squads had to harvest those regions which were
especially fertile, taking the food away from the enemy and using it
for our own troops.
On February 6 and 7, 2 8 Jokojs turned themselves in to the jurisdiction
of the district. Among them were the chief leader, 13 women, and eight
children. Ten men had taken part in the events of October 18. All said
that they had come because they were desperate and hungry. On February 11,
eleven other men turned themselves in. The pressure of the detachments
was already being felt.
According to official lists, the group around Jomatau and Samuel consisted
of only 30 men who certainly were decided to lead a desperate fight for


their lives.
It was striking that all the men who had surrendered until now had come
without arms. They pretended that guns and ammunition were taken away
before they left their troops. During cross examinations, though, it
came out that often they had hidden their equipment somewhere. Nobody
wanted to be seen carrying arms because of a rumor that this was considered
to be a reason for the death penalty. Officials contradicted this rumor
because it was not true. Only the people responsible for the massacre
of October 18 would be put to death. This and the thorough search for
arms helped to increase the plunder considerably.
From the information obtained during the next few days, it was assumed
that there were three groups left which had to be looked for in the surroundings
of Nanepil - Kamar, at Tian, and in Kiti. It was clear that Jomatau and
Samuel had separated. Almost all the patrols of the detachments encountered
rebels. Never did the enemy fight back, but he always escaped success-
fully. The detachments had managed to get in touch with each other
Partly through patrols and partly with the help of signals. On February 11,
five of Jomatau's people who had been shot at and chased by the Kiti
detachment I two days ago surrendered. They were lost and tired and
predicted the surrender of more of Jomatau's people. In fact, on February 13
Jomatau himself and five companions surrendered to the chief of Net who


turned them over to the jurisdiction of the district government. These
people carried five excellent Remington and Winchester guns as well
as 230 cartridges with them.
The termination of the operations was now evident. Therefore, destroyer
escort "Titania", which had already received orders to get coal, food,
new uniforms, and shoewear at Tsingtau, was now detached to Yap for
coaling and delivering mail and telegrams. A very thorough raid by an
Emden detachment in the Tamatamansakir region showed that it was
free of enemies.
Only one group, probably headed by Samuel, was left in the region of
Kiti. On February 15, people of Nanepil were said to have seen Samuel
who declared that he would surrender the next day. And in fact, on
February 16 he showed up with six other men, five women, and one
child on board the "Nurnberg" from where he was taken to the colony.
This group also had six Winchester guns and many cartridges. By
February 19, the district government was in possession of a total of
21 Winchester guns all in excellent condition, 98 rifles, and 1,020
cartridges. The group of Jomatau and Samuel had 750 cartridges, so
the enemy did not surrender because of lack of ammunition.
The troops caught all the missing leaders and Jokojs up to February 22;
on February 23, the whole tribe was in our hands and thereby the


operation closed. Most of the rebels' guns were now in the hands of
the government, so the district government asked all the loyal tribes
to deliver their guns, too, in order to ensure a thorough control.
The troops pulled back, they had accomplished their task. On February 22
Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun declared the military operations closed.
Thus the black police troop went back under the command of the district
government.
It is psychologically very interesting to know why the rebels, who were
so much more skillful and familiar with the topography and who certainly
did not lack ammunition or equipment, surrendered so fact without fighting
back although they knew they would face the death penalty. Fregatten-
kapitan Vollerthun, the leader of the operation, answers it as follows:
From all I have seen and heard about these people, I would say two
points were responsible for their bahavior: lack of tenacity and a very
high contempt of death. From the moment they felt their fighting tactics
inferior to those of the white troops, their energy became paralyzed.
They saw a horrible end approaching and wanted it to come soon. They
did not fear death. This is the only reason for our mastering the situation
so fast.
"The impression this spectacle made on the loyal tribes of the island


is very deep and a long-lasting one. Only few believed in the possibility
of conquering the most martial, defiant, and never before defeated tribe
of the island. Nobody believed the white troops were capable of such
tenacity, energy, and total despite of bullets and walls."
Destiny of the Rebels of the Jokoj Tribe
Proceedings at Law, Execution, and Deportation of the Rebels
A regular court with representatives of the colony and the commander
of HMS Planet" afe representative of the commands of the concentrated
armed forces in Ponape sentenced to death the 15 people who were
responsible for the slaughter of October 18. Two other men already
shipped to Yap would be executed there. The leaders were sentenced
to deportation and forced labor. The rest of the rebels belonging to the
Jokoj tribe were deported.
On February 24, the sentences were published and the condemneds
notified of the verdict of execution by firing squad. In the afternoon
of the same day the black police troop carried out the execution,
surrounded by the extremely interested population. The white troops
were not present.
It must have been a moving picture to watch those 15 men walk calmly
towards death. Jomatau had asked permission to give a speech to the


natives. He was not allowed to do so. But Samuel, shortly before he
was shot, shouted.with bright eyes, "Take an example and live better
than we did ! "
The Ships Leave Ponape
.On February 26, HMS "Condor" coming from Australia entered the port
pf Ponape. She alone was to remain there since there was no more
trouble to be expected. The whole country was longing for peace and
order. On February 27, the landing corps of all the ships assembled
again for a military ceremony at the graves of the men who had died.
Military honors were given to them and Fregattenkapitan Vollerthun
recalled in a simple speech the imporatnce of the accomplished peace.
The effective ceremony which was also attended by the white people
of the colony and the natives constituted a solemn but striking conclusion
of the action on Ponape.
The same day "Cormoran" left the port and on the 2 Bth, "Nurnberg"
left for Truk. On March 1, HMS ships "Emden", "Planet", and "Titania"
with 172 prisoners aboard to be taken to Yap, left port.
The crews of the ships had tiresome but successful weeks behind them.
Leaders and troops had to carry out a new and difficult task. Their
actual battlefield, the sea, had to be traded for jungle and mountains,
the cannons to be exchanged for guns. In an unknown, almost impassable


country, a determined enemy, far superior in its familiarity with topography
endowed with all the instincts of nature-oriented man, had to be forced
out of its positions and pursued in tiring marches.
The command knew from the beginning how to surmount these obstacles
by using all the means it had at its disposition. In spite of the lack
of land maps and good guides, we encircled the enemy fast and soon.
And where the enemy was more ingenious and flexible, we soon knew
where the weak points were and hit them. The success fully confirms
the dispositions taken by the command.
But all this was made possible only by the complete devotion of all
participating officers and crews. The commanders frequently had to
face difficult decisions but the clearly recognized goal and the submission
of the individual to the overall task always increased their ability of
decision and helped to carry the heavy responsibility through. The white
troops corresponded entirely to the high pretensions of the battles.
Where experience lacked, courage soon bridged the gap. It has to be
admired how fast the troops adapted themselves to the terrain. If, in
the final analysis, the enemy was not beaten by feat of arms, the success
was achieved by the courage, endurance, tenacity, and complete devotion
of the troops. All the participants gave full evidence of being determined
to fulfill their duties to their emperor and Germany; among them were
some sealing it with their blood.


COMPOSITION OF THE SHIPS' LANDING CORPS
"Emden"
Leader: Captain Huth
Staff: 4 officers
Infantry: 2 officers
2 aspirant officers
75 men
Artillery: 1 officer
28 men
1 ship's cannon
1 machine gun
Pioneers: 1 engineer
I machinist
II men
Medical
Personnel: 1 doctor
10 enlisted men
"Nurnberq"
Leader: Captain Hentschel von Gilgenheimb
Staff: 3 m en
Infantry: 1 officer
1 aspirant officer
71 men
Artillery: 1 aspirant officer
22 men
1 ship's gun
1 machine gun


Pioneers: 1 machinist
15 men
Medical
Personnel: 1 doctor
9 men
"Cormoran"
Leader: Captain Werber
Staff: 4 men
Infantry: 2 officers
35 men
Artillery: 25 men
1 ship's cannon
2 machine guns
Pioneers: 5 men
Medical
Personnel: 1 doctor
5 men


HMA "Cormoran"


a detacne ment dur ing shooting practice in kolonia


ready for an operation


C aves on sokens island




the rebels' position on sokens ridge


the 15 people wh o were responsible for me slaughter of October 18.1910 shortl y before their execution
1) Somatau 2) Panapean husband of Mrs kubari


s ite of the execution


Ponapean allies of the Germans guarding the walls surrounding Kolonia during the early stages of
the Sokehs War


D ie Rolonne des Fregattentapitän Tägert.
The caution in German translates, "The Column of Frigate-Captain Tägert." German officers and
soldiers, Melanesian soldiers, and Ponapean guides in the persuit of Somatau on Nankiop.


The column returns from the bush: the three German officers in front are Lt. Erhard (killed during
the campaign, Freiherr von und zu Peckelsheim, and Captain-Lieutenant Werber on the right.


The group Chief Samuel captured and held prisoner on board the S.M.S. Cormoran in February
of 1911. Chief Samuel is seated on the right on the stairway.


(1) Lepereren and (2) Somatau shortly before their execution


The Rebellion on Ponape
mapof German operations january 1911


The Rebellion on Ponape
March toward Impei p cave


