

The Smith
Family
The Work and
Story
"T he Smith a mighty man is he,
With open heart and hand”
1932






Preface.
With their customary modesty, the Smith Family
did not write this little book themselves. They left
it to somebody outside the organization, who was
supplied with scrapbooks, annual reports, and docu-
ments for the purpose.
He has, of course, ended up as a Smith, and
writes this little preface only to regret that his
account has to be short and restricted. There are
a thousand small activities of the Smiths unchron-
icled, a thousand good yarns untold.
The only consolation about it all is that a good
story will always keep, and that as time goes on
there will be more and more Smiths to write about
and more and more of their good works to record.
The Smith Family.


CONTENTS:
THE BEGINNING Or IT.
(CHAPTER 1.)
ON THE ART OF SMITHING.
(CHAPTER 2.)
SHORT STORIES OF THE SMITHS.
(CHAPTER 3.)
ALL SORTS OF GOOD WORK.
(CHAPTER 4.)
WHAT REMAINS TO BE DONE—WORK FOR THE
MALNOURISHED CHILDREN.
(CHAPTER 5.)
The Smith Family.


Beginning of it.
5T began on the Parramatta Road ten years ago.
The afternoon was sultry ; the season was near
Christmas and the five business men in the motor
car were a little tired of their trip and looking
forward to getting home.
They had exhausted the usual topics of conversa*
tion. They had discussed last week’s cricket, and the
weather, and the iniquity of the Government, and the
badness of business, and there seemed to be very little
else left to say anything about, when the jovial fellow
in the corner remarked suddenly :
“My word, you should see the monkey I got for
my youngsters for Christmas. It’s a bonzer !”
Now, since everybody in the car was a respom
sible business man full of the seriousness of life, it
was quite natural that this auspicious opening of an
important subject should set every tongue going. It
seemed that everybody aboard had been investing or
planning to invest in the machinery of Christmas delight.
So the talk which had subsided flared up again.
The merits of stick'dimbing monkeys were can'
vasscd against the benefits of Meccano. The new tri'
cycle, which was to be sneaked into the house on padded
wheels during the later hours of Christmas Eve, com-
peted with the elephant who rolled his eyes. The
present merged itself into the past and brought up a
The Smith Family.


train of reminiscences about time’s changes and the
Christmas adventures of other days when everybody
present was a boy ; but the discussion being cut short
by arrival at the “Woolpack,” where it was proposed
that the company should modestly fortify themselves
to face the traffic on the road into the city and wash
away the dust of Baulkham Hills, the jovial man who
had started the conversation summed up :
“Ah, well !” said he, “it’s a great thing to be a
kid in these times. You may be hard up when you
grow infirm and creaky like us old crocks, but there
isn’t a kid who hasn’t got something to look forward to
at Christmas !”
“I wonder ?” said the driver solemnly.
“Wonder what ?” asked the jovial man.
“Whether every kid has a good time at Christ'
mas,” replied the driver.
“Don’t talk through your hat, man !” said the Jovial
One. “I’ll bet you there isn’t a youngster in the blessed
country who doesn’t get a Christmas'box and have a
little bit of plum pudding.”
“I doubt it,” retorted the driver—an argumentative
cuss like all his ilk.
“Oh, rats !” shouted his opponent. “I bet you
can’t find anybody in this country who isn’t looked
after, you old pessimist. What are you boys
having ?
“Well, what about trying ?” asked the Driver.
The Smith Family.


The upshot of it all was that the Jovial Man, within
two or three days, was feeling devoutly glad that he
had agreed to join a committee of investigation instead
of putting money on his opinion.
It was found, at once, that there was no difficulty
in discovering not only small boys and girls, but large
numbers of families to whom Christmas was only a
name. There were institutions full of orphans who had
never seen Santa Claus, for the simple reason that the
funds with which they were supplied did not run to such
luxuries. There was a place where the best the matron
could do for fifty or sixty mites was to marshal them
and lead in carol singing. There was another where the
softhearted staff simulated the bounty of St. Nicholas by
changing some of their own meagre shillings into pennies
and dropping them down the chimney to be scrambled
for by their charges.
“Something will have to be done about this!”
muttered the Jovial Man when he heard the facts. And
surely enough, something was done.
On Christmas Eve, 1922, half a dozen shamefaced
males might have been seen getting out of a motor car
at a Home for mentally deficient boys at Carlingford.
Behind was another motor car loaded down with parcels.
In front was the hall of the home in which, seated on
forms, were forty small boys. The Jovial Man was
present, quite unrecognisable as Santa Claus. The
remainder of the party were bunched together with the
look of people who were saying to themselves : “Now,
why did we let ourselves in for a thing like this ?”
The Smith Family.


Like most of those kindhearted people who do good
in this world, they were painfully shy and self-conscious,
and the spectacle of those forty small, stolid boys, washed
and brushed and sitting open-mouthed, with a cynical
look of unbelief on their faces, was not reassuring.
If there was some sign of animation among them
as Santa walked grandly up the aisle, none of the visitors
noticed it. What they saw before them most specifically
was the open space which they were to occupy. It was
even more exposed than the aisle, and all of them,
during their progress, were experiencing something of
the “gooseflesh sensation” that usually afflicts male-
factors on their way to the scaffold.
They reached their place of prominence and looked
down.
Santa Claus ranged himself with the matron, feeling
for the moment very foolish in his robes and quite con-
vinced that every small boy in that hall was suppressing
his giggles at so ridiculous a sight.
He looked round the hall at that sea of uncom-
promising faces, and suddenly he saw a very small and
very spindly youngster leave his seat in the back row.
Having a thorough knowledge of the psychology of
small boys, especially those who sit in back rows, he
was naturally convinced that this one boded no good
to him, and he felt himself breaking out into a cold
perspiration.
Here that young monster came, sneaking up the
aisle, his whole face speaking tension, his movements
wary. Every step which he took made our potential
Santa Claus more anxious. What was his little game ?
The Smith Family.


He crept closer and closer.
He reached the platform. He put out his hand.
He touched Santa Claus.
He let out a resounding whoop of glee which
was echoed through the hall. The youngsters rose as
one man and shrieked with delight. They stood up.
They jumped on the forms. They yelled, and they
yelled again, so that the visitors themselves felt inclined
to yell with them.
Then it all came out. The small, creeping boy,
a pathetic little figure whom experience had long since
made into a sceptic, had been bent merely on
ing whether Santa Claus was real and not a myth.
People who gave away something for nothing were com'
pletely outside his experience. But having once satis-
fied himself that he was actually face to face with the
old man of the reindeer sleigh, his joy knew no bounds.
He positively howled with delight, and, what with the
noise and the cheering, the visitors completely forgot
their self-consciousness and the party went with a swing.
When it was over, when the toys had been dis-
tributed into small hands that had never handled a tov
■%
before ; when the songs had been sung and when heaps
of small boys had climbed, shouting, over the enter-
tainers and were at last ripe for bed, the party of busi-
ness-men left—no longer shamefaced, but vowing that
they had had the time of their lives, and that they
w'ould come again next year.
The Smith Family.


“Who are you people, anyway ?” asked the gratified
matron, who was facing the Christmas for the first time
in her official experience with equanimity and satis-
faction.
“Us ?” said one of the now exuberant entertainers,
startled out of himself for a moment
“Well, who are we, you fellows ?” he asked, turn-
ing to the his friends. “What’s our name ?”
“Oh—er —Smith !” said another member.
“That’s right !” said the first, with a nervous
chuckle. “We’re the Smith Family—that’s who we
are !’’
They little knew, as they drove off into a night
quiet after the cheerful babble of the hall, how bright a
fire they had lighted that evening.
The Smith Family.


On the Art of Smithing.
Though the Smith Family grew rapidly and soon
became quite out of proportion to the number of truly
named Smiths in the world, its beginnings were not
altogether easy.
The original Santa Claus party, soon after their first
effort, started to visit hospitals and children’s homes, and
before very long a few of the friends to whom they
reported their adventures began to come along and help
them.
It was a principle with them from the first that
their good work should be conducted in a more or less
joyous atmosphere. Their outlook was : “We out'
selves are all very human. Some of us have been
unlucky in our time. Some of us, but for the better
opportunities and the circumstances of our youth, might
be in industrial or reformatory homes. Some of us, had
our luck been bad instead of good, might have had
tender constitutions or slightly light heads. Therefore,
we don’t feel that we can be superior—and we don’t
want to be, anyhow.
“We are just a party of the boys, so to speak, out
to give somebody less lucky than ourselves a good time.’’
Their greatest cares, then, were to remain anonym
mous, to avoid adopting a “benevolent society’’ attitude
or carrying out the ordinary functions of organized
charity. Their particular job was to bring pleasure into
The Smith Family.


the lives of people who ordinarily did not get much of
it, especially at those seasons which are usually associ'
ated with celebrations and a good time.
It became necessary, half'way through 1923, to form
an official organization.
On September 18, 1923, the Smith Family came into
formal existence with sixty members, and a sub'titk to
its name to explain itself :
“JOYSPREADERS UNLIMITED.”
Its objects were set out clearly :
“To maintain throughout the whole year the spirit
of true charity, letting not the right hand
know what the left hand doeth.
“To maintain a continuous campaign of good
cheer and goodwill, to brighten the lives of
the afflicted, distressed, sick and needy, and
to restore confidence in those whom mis'
fortune hath dealt with.
“To develop a centre of service so that the spirit
of the Family shall radiate throughout the
length and breadth of the country.
“To develop a definite interest in the other
fellow.”
q
They found plenty of scope for their objectives, and
plenty of helpers anxious to be Smiths. Before Christ'
mas, 1923, hundreds of young and old people—patients
in hospitals, inmates of homes for incurables, of sana'
The Smith Family.


toriums, industrial schools, and private dwellings into
which want and trouble had penetrated—had come to
honour the name of the Smiths. The deeds of the latter
were marked by a quiet unobtrusiveness which was new
to organised effort of the sort.
Half a dozen motor cars would drive up to the
door of some institution on a Saturday afternoon, or
in the middle of the week—
“We are the Smith Family. We’ve come to give
you a concert.”
Usually somebody more sophisticated in current
knowledge than the average waif or paimracked per'
manent patient could have recognised among the unob'
trusive Smiths an artist or two whom the whole town
was talking about and paying many good shillings to
hear; and it was always the endeavour of those early
Smiths, when they entertained, to see that their concert
was not merely a concert. The atmosphere was generally
genial and “hail'fellow'well'inet.”
And Christmas ! The preparations for the 1924
Christmas were as different from the first tentative
arrangements of 1922 as the Arabian Nights Entertain'
ments from a copy of Hansard in the middle of a par'
liamentary session.
There was giving on every side, and the giving
went a long way because there were virtually no organ'
ising expenses. Kindly'hearted people, who generally
looked upon any charitable activity with suspicion, gave
bravely to provide the mountain of Christmas hampers
The Smith Family.


which was made up. Self 'Styled selfish people—the kind
who are usually the most unselfish in the end—rushed
into the fun.
Wholesale'Grocery'Firm'Director Smiths vied with
each other in providing provender. Toymaker Smiths
put their heads together and made the Smith store'
houses look like the original cave of Saint Nicholas.
Shop-assistant Smiths, rubbing shoulders with their
employers, wrapped till their fingers ached. And for
weeks before the happy day, male Smiths and female
Smiths travelled the suburbs seeking out cases of trouble,
families in which illness or hardship had decreed a lean
or a sad Christmas.
Inquiring Smiths, with tact and guile, made a census
of every home and every institution which was to be
served.
Grocer and Baker Smiths around the suburbs whis'
pered secrets about people who could not buy bread.
Policemen and Doctors and Chemist Smiths and kindly
neighbours, matrons and nurses and wardsmen, combined
in guile to find just what was needed for each individual
case—for it was the policy of the Smiths to leave nothing
to chance if they could help it. There was nothing
standardised about their operations.
If they knew that Old Granny Jones at Lidcombe
longed for a mob'cap or a copy of “The Pilgrim’s Pro'
gress” to solace her last years, Granny got it if at all
possible, and got it direct from the donor’s hands so as
to give the transaction a touch of personal warmth.
If young Thomas Jones (all skin and bone and freckles,
and minus a father) was casting longing eyes on that
The Smith Family.


cricket-ball in the window of the corner shop, there was
an even chance that some snooping Smith would get to
hear about it and report it down in the cellar where
Santa Claus Smith and his wife were packing parcels in
a hurricane of brown paper and flying straw.
And when the Smith party blew in on the Widow
Robinson, they made certain not only that they had
sufficient gifts to go round John Willie and Thomas
James (twins), Isaiah, Millicent, Sadie, Annie, Sophia,
Philomena, Doreen, Hector, Benaiah, and Jehosaphat
Robinson, but that each member of the family had a
gift suitable to his or her age, and that each gift was
done up with mysterious wrappings, labelled with
the actual name of its new owner, and delivered in an
atmosphere of proper Yuletide hilarity.
Few who took part in the expedition of that mem-
orable first organized Christmas will forget it.
About 1,200 children received a visit from old Santa
Claus and his deputies. A thousand Christmas stockings,
loaded with individual gifts, went out, along with moun-
tains of balls, balloons, picture-books, hairy rabbits, dolls,
squeakers, and other Christmas-tide paraphenalia.
Whole grosses of ties, bottles of perfume, kerosene tins
full of sweets, hundreds of pounds of cakes found their
way into homes private and public. Concert parties
were everywhere, so far as resources allowed. And
when the cohorts re-assembled after it was all over,
everybody agreed that it had been a wonderful Christ-
mas Eve, replete with all kinds of adventure.
The Smith Family.


One delivery'car had encountered a poor woman
with three children who needed an alibi from the neigh'
hours before she would admit Santa Claus, because she
feared that he was only the baliff arriving again. An'
other had aroused the suspicion of the police by reason
of the opulence of its load. There was, all in all, material
for a dozen short stories in the tales that came home with
the workers, and it put heart into them for the New
Year work, which, alas ! was not accomplished without
difficulty and effort, in spite of the steady access of
workers to membership.
q
Every day there seemed to be some new need to be
met. The concert parties were kept going week in and
week out. Their programmes and itineraries were varied
and extensive. One day they might be singing among
the beds of incurables at Waterfall Sanatorium, or to
ecstatic children in some industrial school. The next day
they would be behind the bars of Parramatta Gaol.
And every time they or the other workers of the Family
went abr®ad, they heard of something more which
needed doing.
Here, in an old Ladies’ Home, was an inmate read'
ing aloud an out-of'date paper to twenty others gathered
round her.
Papers wanted !
Behold a procession of Smiths armed with every
degree and brand of paper from “Ginger Meggs" to the
“Sydney Morning Herald" !
The effort grows. Presently, apart from the annual
gift of enough printed news'sheets to cover Hyde Park
The Smith Family.


an inch deep, £IOO a year is spent in supplying popular
fiction to the old and sick. This work continues for a
long period until the more vital needs of the depression-
time replace it.
Some Smith passes through the grounds of an in-
stitution.
Half a dozen old fellows are sitting along the fence
with an air of dejection that needs explaining.
What’s this ? No funds to buy tobacco ?
Well, within a week or two the haze of tobacco
smoke over that suburb will half-blot out the sun, and
the next Smith that passes by will need a gas-helmet.
The Crippled Boys’ Home at Roylestone is a silent
place.
“This is unnatural. Don’t you little beggars like
music ?’’
“Too right, we do, mister; but there isn’t even a
Jew’s harp or a musical gum-leaf on the premises.’’
Hands go into Smith pockets. There will be no
complaint about the silence of Roylestone any more.
There is a large gramophone there now, equipped
with Harry Lauder and “Tipperary”—the first of a long
stream of fifty quietly donated talking machines.
The Old Men’s Home at Lidcombe, with its 1,500
inmates, has a new set of bowls for its brand-new
bowling green. It came from the Smiths.
Mrs. Jones, mother of the new twins in Blank
Street, Surry Hills (whose husband has a broken leg),
The Smith Family.


has received a sympathetic visit from Sydney’s largest
Family, who have presented her with a pink bed-jacket
and four bottles of tonic which the doctor says she
should have and which she undoubtedly cannot afford
to buy.
A certain old lady in the back-blocks of Woolloo-
mooloo has mysteriously acquired a pair of red slippers.
She has been longing for red slippers for a long
and of course it is very wasteful of sensible people to
give her slippers because she has not long to live, and
bread would be more to the point in any case.
Still, the Smith Family are not always sensible ;
primarily they are human. They have all the com'
monest foibles of mankind. They never forget that they
are “joysp readers,” and that their mission is not charity.
Their job is to give the other fellow some of
the fun of life. They don’t hand out a parcel of food
merely on the principle that so-and-so needs a square
feed, but with the idea in their heads : “My word, won t
this be a delightful surprise to the old fellow when he
gets it! Let’s give it to him and make a bright spot in
his year !”
Until you go about your work of giving in that
spirit you are not a true Smith.
The Smith Family.


Short Stocies of the Smiths.
There is a curious book in the office of the Smith
Family. It might be called the “Golden Book,” but it
isn’t. I believe the name on it is “Case Record."
But a short story writer would brand it with the
more romantic name. Charles Dickens and O. Henry
would have given anything to get hold of it. It would
have been worth a fortune to either of them in plots.
Kipling, even, with his cynical outlook, might have found
material in it. That wonderful story of “The Case of
Bedalia Herodsfoot” might have come out of it—though
in that case it would have had a very different ending.
All sorts of things happen to Smiths.
They encounter devoted women slaving to keep
their families together and out of the way of starva-
tion.
They have glimpses of the continual and pathetic
war with the bailiffs which goes on unnoticed by a
happier world.
They encounter people who have not seen the out'
side of a sickroom for months.
They find stories even in their own office. What
tales are in this morning’s mail, for instance.
Mr. Secretary Smith opens his letters at Christ'
mas'time.
Out of the first envelope falls a note which says :
“I have very little ready money, but grow vegetables,
also have some fowls, and at Christmas I am prepared
The Smith Family.


to supply vegetables, fowls and toys for a few poo*,
children.”
The next one has a postal note for five shillings in
it, and a letter : “Our little mite, from a man and a
woman nearly seventy who have to earn their own
living ; but there are some worse off than us.”
The Pensioner’s Party.
Lots of letters like this. Sometimes the story they
tell is not apparent on the surface.
There was one which came in last year, and which
asked simply whether the Smith Family could fina a
dozen children to attend a Christmas party. The chib
dren were found and sent to an address in a good
suburb. Afterwards, in accordance with custom, an
inquiry was made as to whether they had behaved
themselves, and how the affair had gone off. The Secre*
tary being told that it had gone with a swing and would
be repeated next year added some thanks.
“Oh, don’t thank me,” said the apparent hostess.
“I didn’t pay for it.”
Then came the story. There lived in an institu'
tion an old-age pensioner, a dear old lady, devoid of
relatives; and out of her pension she put aside every
week a small sum which accumulated until Christmas
time. With the funds thus gathered she gave a party
to as many children as could be managed. This was her
annual treat, and her only condition was that each party
should be photographed and that she should receive a
copy of the picture. Her portrait gallery was her special
pride.
The Smith Family.


The Last Present.
And the Smiths have stories of their own parties
no less poignant. Once, at Waterfall, they found when
they had handed round their presents that there was
one over.
“What’s this ?” asked the Chief of the Smiths.
People are usually on the spot bright and early when
presents are about.
“This,” it appeared, was young Bill, who was not
fit to be present. He was to have his present taken
to him by a nurse, as duly happened. Then it appeared
that Bill was made of sterner stuff. He was not having
any present from any nurse.
Santa Claus or nobody for Bill!
The nurse capitulated.
Santa, in all his finery, was taken behind a screen.
There was poor little Bill, unable to move, unable to
raise his hands. They gently gave him his present. He
was never to have another in this world, because he
barely lived through the night.
It was a very hushed lot of Smiths who drove back
to town that evening after their concert to the children.
q
Tommy Tuck well’s Monument.
And take the case of Tommy Tuckwell of the
Lazaret. Tommy is more worthy than a lot of public
benefactors to have his name engraved on a slab of
granite in fat gold letters, but it never will be ; the
records of the Smiths is all that will preserve his fame
outside the Lazaret.
The Smith Family.


In plain fact he was not a real Tuckwell. He was
a Javanese with one of those characteristic names like
Ventacachellum which people are inclined to laugh at,
but which very often cover personalities that we our-
selves would be more than proud to own.
Tommy changed it to Tuckwell in honour of one
of the oldest established families on the Hawkesbury,
for whom he had worked for many years and who had
been kind to him. This practice is another good old
Oriental custom.
One day there was tragedy. Tommy developed
leprosy. He spent many years in the Lazaret, where he
was noted as a gentle, welLmannered and considerate
patient, bearing his horrible affliction with fortitude.
In course of time he came to die.
Two or three years afterwards, members of the
Smith Family appeared at the Lazaret to instal wireless.
They did it thoroughly.
The equipment which they put in made a set
already there look rather like a toy.
“We’d better take that thing away,” said the
Smiths.
“Oh, no you don’t,” said the superintendent.
“That’s Tommy Tuckwell’s monument. We never in-
tend to part with that.”
And here was another story. It had been dis-
covered, when Tommy died, that he had left half of his
savings to buy the set to amuse his fellow-inmates in
the Lazaret.
Tommy, in a word, was a true Smith !
The Smith Family.


The Musical Roller.
Little stories crop up in the letters of thanks which
arrive after Christmas. Chuckle, for instance, as you
think of the picture conjured up by this extract from
a long epistle of gratitude written by a mother with a
large family :
“It’s a great pity you splendid people cannot
see the youngsters’ little faces on Christmas morn'
ing. My youngest boy, aged eighteen months, re'
ceived your lovely toy, the musical roller. He has
played it ever since and has taken it to bed.
It needs only a flash of intuition to realise the
difference which the musical roller made to the atmos'
phere of that home on Christmas Day. Many a omith,
since the beginning of time, has lived at Christmas'time
with a musical roller and will understand.
n
A Party with an Admiral.
The children and the people who are objects of
the Smith Family efforts will have a few reminiscences
themselves. What boy, for instance, will ever forger
the party arranged on H.M.A.S. “Canberra, when 500
kiddies were entertained by the captain, officers, and
crew, and shook hands with that doughty adventurer
and writer of adventurers’ books, Admiral E. R. G. R.
Evans, then in command of the Fleet ?
What girl who was there will ever forget that damp,
unpromising day when it seemed that the Harbour
Picnic could not go on, and the sad occasion was turned
The Smith Family.


to a glad one through the determination of the Girl
Smith organizers, who commandeered a whole cafe floor
of a big store and turned it into a most attractive picnic
ground replete with all the paraphenalia of childhood.
9
The Hardness of Life.
One might go on with stories endlessly, but one
more will have to suffice. Here it is, told in a letter
Dear Sir, —On Tuesday I received your ever-welcome letter.
I had hardly liked to write my troubles to you —the one and
only friend I have met in this very Christian-like world. After
your letter of inquiry as to my new home, I will try and let
you see a mother’s fight for existence.
On arrival here, my sons felled trees and cleared a place
to build on ; then, after one month’s hard work, succeeded in
building a log hut 32ft. by 20ft. We had to collect old iron
from tips near and far for the roof. They eventually had
sufficient old iron to roof the structure —we were at least
sheltered from the sun and wind. Then they cleared the re'
mainder of the two and a half acres—and mind, only with
hand-tools ; we were able to grow vegetables in plenty. Then
you enabled me to purchase the tank.
We were very happy. But last August the Inspector of the
Child Welfare came up and gave me one week to put on a
new roof, move elsewhere, or lose my two children. What
could I do, without a penny ? We found a little two-rooms
and kitchen for 7/- a week, which we took, and are still there.
The boys again started to build a four-roomed structure, each
room 12ft. by 12ft., and when finished will mean doors, win-
dows and roof—believing, hoping, praying to God in some way
to find work so as to buy iron for the roof ; but no work has
come—only two days at Christmas for relief.
Then a nearby farmer, having plenty of ground, offered
ray boys to go halves in all profits if they would work and
sow five acres with melons, tomatoes, corn, peas, beans and
The Smith Family.


pumpkins. They worked the ground for five months—one with
no boots ; everything was growing lovely, and we would have
had the first melons and peas and tomatoes in the market.
Then God saw fit to send the hail three weeks before the crop
was ready for market, and destroyed everything, leaving the
ground like a table. The hail here was three feet deep
On Saturday, 23rd January, I received a letter from Water-
fall telling me that my husband could not die until he saw his
children, and I buried my feelings and asked a neighbour to
loan me £3 to take all the little ones (except one who had no
boots) up to him, and I took them to their father on the 25th
January, and my husband passed away on Wednesday. 27th
January, at 5 a.m., and was buried on Thursday, 28th, at 1.30.
Oh I’m not complaining, but I must tell you the whole
truth, as I will never be able on earth to repay, even in a
small degree, the only true Christian it has been my fortune
to meet. ,
Hoping I am not boring you with all my troubles, and
wishing you and yours every success, I will close with every
good wish from,
E A THANKFUL MOTHER.
It is a whole condensed novel in itself, and serves
the combined purpose of bringing home to us how
much worse off some other people are than ourselves ;
how much the Smith Family, with all its brightness, is
needed ; and how much room there is for lots more
Smiths in the world.
The Smith Family -


All Sorts of Good Work.
Eight years after the first essay of the Family at
joyspreading, there was only one thing which had not
grown so very much. That was the cost of office organfi
zation.
It is true that a modestly'paid secretary and a couple
of typists were employed, and there was a small per'
manent office rented in the basement of a building in
Pitt Street. But administration expenses had not ex'
panded as they usually do in such societies, and this for
a very good reason.
It has been explained that the essence of the work
of the Smith Family is its personal touch. It not only
seeks to do good, but it seeks to do it in a specific way.
Its theory is that no mere machine can do the sort of
thing it wants to do.
Therefore it is an obligation of every Smith not
only to give, but to give personally.
Money, of course, can always be used for special
purposes. But contact is also necessary.
Therefore, when John Brown Smith walks into the
office and says : “Here is £5 for Christmas presents,” the
secretary does not sign a receipt and go out and buy
something with the money unless there is no other way
out of it.
His usual mode of procedure is that he opens the
side'door of his office and shouts at the two volunteer
The Smith Family.


cobblers who are mending boots which have been
brought in to be reconditioned for those who need
boots: “Hey, you fellows, stop hammering for a minute,
will you ?”
Then he turns to the would'be donor and says :
“Five pounds, eh ? As a Smith, you’d like to spend that
yourself, wouldn’t you ? Well, out in suclvand'such'a'
place there’s so'and'so with so many youngsters who
need such and such. What about hopping into the car
and going out to have a look—see for yourself ?
The result, generally, is that John Smith goes, is
conquered by the needs of the situation, comes back and
has another consultation with Secretary Smith, and
parts feeling that the case which has fallen in his way
has become his special care. He has the personal thrill
of giving and sees real results for his money.
That is the secret of Smith economy and of the
continuing nature of the Smith work. The original
workers scarcely know their casually named Family, so
much has it extended, so wide has its ambit become. Its
Christmas parties are the biggest known to the State.
Five or six thousand adults take part in them. Fifteen
hundred old men at Lidcombe are provided for;
some hundreds of old ladies at Newington. Apart from
gifts in kind, which are enormous, and gifts brought by
individual Smiths, and by the “Goodfellows of Sydney”
(who always make a Christmas appeal to deal with
Smith cases), it takes about £1,250 to cover the expen'
diture of the Smiths for Christmas Eve alone.
A thousand families get Christmas hampers ; and
when the Smith Family says hamper it means hamper—
not a pound or two of groceries done up in brown paper.
The Smith Family -


Meat. Milk.
Vegetables. Fruit.
6
lbs. sugar.
2 lbs. rice.
2
lbs. tapioca.
i lb. tea.
2 pkts flour.
1 lb. jam.
2 lbs. cake.
1 tin peaches.
2
tins condensed milk.
1 tin meat paste.
2
lbs. oats.
3 lbs. salt.
i
tin golden syrup.
2 lbs. dates.
1
lb. walnuts.
2 pkts. jellies.
1
bar soap.
1 lb. cocoa.
1 pkt. custard powder.
2 cakes bath-soap
1
lb. biscuits.
I pudding.
1
pkt. figs.
£ lb. sweets.
This is the kind of surprise package which arrives
at the doors of the destitute during Christmas week when
the Smiths are abroad :
With a Christmas box for every child.
A car drives up. Out comes a weighty package.
“Christmas box from the Smith Family, Mrs. Brown,
and something for the kids. Happy Christmas and
better luck next year !”
Furthermore, when a Smith says party he means
party, just as vigorously as he means hamper when he
says it.
The Smith Gatherings.
The whole life of a Smith is built on parties.
Every quarter the Family has a party to itself just to
talk things over, for instance. It is conducted on the
bring-your'own'drinks'and'sandwich principle—or at
least the money to buy them.
The Smith Family.


There are no bigger gatherings of men in Aus-
tralia than these, and none more democratic. It is a
pleasant sight to see about a quarter of an acre of Smiths
of every size, weight and measure enjoying their com'
munity singsong or listening to the distinguished Smith
who is always there to give a talk on some topic of
public interest.
Govemor'Generals, Governors, Railway Commis'
sioners, cobblers, politicians, journalists, musicians, broad'
casting announcers .... every walk of life has its
Smiths, and they all turn up to the quarterly parties
from time to time and rehearse unconsciously so that
when the Smiths give a party to their clients at Christ'
mas time the Smith spirit has been well established.
Their procedure is not just to nip out to an
institution and say : “Come along. Hurry up. We’re
going to give you a party ! Let’s get it over !”
That isn’t the Smith spirit at all. Smith Christmas
parties begin in the afternoon. A competent and versa-
tile gang of Smiths arrives and divides into two sections.
One concentrates on meeting the inmates, yarning, swop-
ping tobacco and the latest knitting stitch. The other
rolls up its sleeves and decorates the dining-hall.
Then dinner proceeds with Smiths as waiters.
Everybody has cake cut for them and sweets placed
on their plates, and everybody has a Christmas present
as he or she files into the room. The banter flows fast
and free, and after everybody is full to repletion, the
concert begins.
Of course, merely being a Smith soon makes friends
for one in no time, and many a Smith to-day has acquain-
The Smith Family.


tances who command his interest and help in all sorts
of places—interesting old men, needy women struggling
with three or four children, boys without parents, or
with parents who have not done justice to them,
crippled soldiers, lonely men, boys and girls who have
found their way into industrial homes.
Of late years these young people in particular have
had special attention, and a lot of them are looked up at
intervals by their Smith friends, and so long as they
remain inmates of a home they receive birthday presents
with a little note each year.
q
Wireless for the Sick.
Out of all this basic work, calling for the organiza-
tion of dozens of concert parties, hundreds of visits,
thousands of quietly written letters, the booking of hun-
dreds of motor cars at special times of the year, and
the building up of armies of voluntary helpers has grown
other undertakings. Each year the tasks grow bigger
and yet more intimate.
It was discovered three years ago that the big
Coast Hospital, with its many sections, its turnover of
10,000 patients a year, and its thousand beds, had a very
pressing need for radio entertainment.
For months afterwards it was impossible to turn to
the left or the right in those circles in which Smiths
move without falling over some member of the family
busily engaged in acquiring funds. The work was under-
taken in six sections, and eventually cost more than
£IJOO. It did not take the thousand Smiths who were
The Smith Family.


at work on the job very long to do it, though the instah
lation is the third largest of the kind in the world.
Radio balls, radio exhibitions, smoke concerts, news'
paper and radio appeals, and personal donations by
Smiths and people who were qualified to be Smiths,
enabled Sir Dudley de Chair to declare the last section
open on April 1, 1930, before he left for England.
The Lazaret, the Waterfall Sanatorium, the Girls'
Industrial Home at Parramatta, the Girls’ Home at Brush
Farm, the Lidcombe Hospital, the Old Men’s Home at
Parramatta, and the Boys’ Home at Carlingford, too,
have wireless—thanks to the Smiths—costing £6OO ; and
now the work is being extended to picture shows for
the sick and the bedridden, in addition to the regular
concerts. The Lazaret has its own cinematograph, so
have other institutions.
So thoroughly has the concert branch of the work
come to be done that a distinguished artist of the lighter
order of mirth rarely comes to Sydney without being
escorted to some institution and allowed the privilege of
giving a free entertainment. But for the time being he
becomes Smith, and nobody hears of the good deed.
f
For Hungry Girls.
Take another activity. Early in 1930 an obviously
tired and footsore girl came into the office and wearily
burst into tears.
She had no work, no money, no friends, nowhere
to go, since she had outstayed her welcome at various
hostels.
The Smith Family.


Some kindly Smith whom she had encountered had
suggested that she might find shelter for the week-end
through the Family. The Family, of course, had no
hostel, no funds for such cases, but its principle is never
to let the other fellow down if it can help it.
The incident brought home to them the fact that
there must be hundreds of girls in like positions to that
of their visitor, whose first consideration was to keep a
roof over their heads during the time of trouble, and to
secure meals while looking for work.
The job of providing these meals was tackled.
A number of first'cl ass restaurants in town were
approached and asked to provide a meal or two each
day for girls sent by the Family. Within four months
1,200 meals had been provided in this way, one restaur',
ant giving food to the value of between £2O and £3O.
The girls simply went and ordered their meals as if
they were ordinary customers. Nobody but the cashier
knew they were not paying guests. The restaurant re-
ceived no advertisement for the good work they were
doing.
It was done in the Smith spirit.
Some of the girls whose plight was desperate were
housed as well as partially fed at the Smith Family’s
expense, and some of them tO'day have been restored to
wage'earning life as the result of the efforts of the
Family.
The Smith Family.


Boots ! Boots ! Boots !
Then there is the matter of boots and clothing.
Somebody suggested this winter that while everybody
was ready to give warm clothing to the poor, nobody
thought about sound boots which are equally valuable,
especially to a man who is trudging the streets in search
of work. Sound boots add to a man’s appearance and
self-respect and conserve his strength. Dozens of people
now get boots through the Smith Family. They are
made up from other people’s cast-offs. These are sent
to the Smith Family office, and there two unemployed
cobblers give their time to the work of re-soling and
heeling them. Each pair of shoes cost the Family 2/-
on an average to put into order, but the 2/- is always
forthcoming.
The problem of clothing, too, has been re-tackled,
but in a thoroughly organized way.
The Ladies—Bless Them !
Finally, it is, perhaps, necessary to say something
about Mrs. Smith and Miss Smith. Do not imagine for
one moment that the male Smiths went down on their
knees and pleaded to these ladies to join them in their
work. Rather, it was their policy to keep what they
were doing to their self-conscious selves.
But—have you ever tried to keep a secret from
your Mrs. Smith ?
“James, where are you going to-night ? . . . “Dar-
ling, I am going to the Stadium.” . . . “James, you
The Smith Family.


know quite well that this is Thursday, and there is no
fight on Thursday . . . and last week you went to the
Capitol and came home with an enthusiastic description
of a picture called ‘She Loves Me Not, which was being
shown EXCLUSIVELY at the Prince Edward
Now, James, exactly—wh’re—ARE—you going ?
The real difference between bad and good hus-
bands is that no good husband ever risks having to face
a conversation like this, even in a worthy cause, so the
wise Smiths told their wives confidentially what they
were doing ; and most wives, being good-hearted, de-
cided to take a hand in the game.
You can bet it was not very long under those
circumstances before the Ladies’ Auxiliary and the
Younger Smith Set were in existence.
The first of these organisations meets twice every
week to pack parcels, sort gifts and do over presents
of material. One lady in a single year recently re-made
more than 600 garments for distribution. Five hundred
yards of flannel were cut up in one week and given
out to be made into garments.
Sometimes the Auxiliary is up to its waist in
brown paper ; sometimes it is snowed under with rem-
nants of tweed and flannel samples donated by city
houses, which it makes into rugs. The members take
part in the Christmas expeditions of the Family ; they
have a special and very personal interest in various
homes for unmarried mothers, whose only visitors they
are ; and they, too, have their monthly gatherings, for
their own enjoyment as do the larger (if not better)
SEX.
The Smith Family.


The Younger Set takes special care of the Christmas
cheer at various children’s homes, devotes itself to all
the services of the main body and the Ladies Auxih
iary, and generally serves a fruitful apprenticeship to
Smithdom, out of which they get a lot of fun, and in
the course of which they do as much good per head
as their elders.
. ,
One might go on for ever telling of these sectional
works .... the weekly expedition in which Diggers
from Randwick and Graythwaite Hospitals are taken to
the theatre ; the 274 families in dire distress who are
periodically fed by personal efforts; the special parties
which allow hundreds of children, who in the ordinary
way would never even see Sydney Harbour, or a first'
class picture-show, to be entertained occasionally at
festive seasons on battleships by real Admirals ; and at
resplendent city theatres; the drive which placed a
cinema in the Lazaret, and has so far provided 2,000,000
feet of film to feed it; the work to get the second cinema
into Gosford Boys’ Home ; Roylestone Crippled Chib
dren’s Home has a Smith Family Pianola. More than
fifty homes have Smith Family gramophones.
With all that has been done, not a single Smith has
advertised himself or herself or even felt self-righteous
because every Smith job has its own reward. No Smith
ever feels that the other fellow is under any obligation
to him for favours received. He soon learns that the
giver gets more out of life than the receiver.
It is great fun to be anonymous. The other day
the writer was discussing the Smith Family with the
manager of one of the greatest newspapers in Australia.
The Smith Family.


“Queer lot,” said the manager, who by reason of
his position knows more than most about human frailty.
“They do an immense amount of good apparently, but
I have never before heard of any organization which
did not publish the names of its committee. One of
them came in to see me officially the other day.”
“Who was it ?” asked the writer.
“He said his name was Smith !” replied the mam
ager.
The Smith Family.


What remains to be done —Work for
Malnourished Children.
“Well, here’s another problem,” said Mr. Secretary
Smith, raising his voice slightly to overcome the din of
his two cobblers next door —not to mention the explana'
tions of one of the Smiths’ many adopted nursing mothers
who was acquiring free tonic on the other side of the
open door, and the noise of the second typist packing
donated jam on the shelf.
“Good !” said the doctor who gives his every Friday
to the Smith Family service. “I suppose we’ve got to
turn to and find a way of paying income taxes for ruined
capitalists or something now.”
“Better job than that,” said the Secretary, and he
proceeded to outline the problem which had just fallen
on the Family out of the blue.
When the depression reached its height it suddenly
occurred to somebody in the Family that many a small
child in the industrial districts was probably losing its
whole future through present malnutrition.
First inquiries suggested that there was little or
nothing in it. But a deeper inquest showed a very urgent
need.
q
The Christmas calls of 1930 provided that qifite a
number of children were already handicapped both
The Smith Family.


through underfeeding and through infections prolonged
by malnutrition.
Probably it would not have deterred the Smiths
from getting to work on the problem had they known
what it would lead to. When they tackled it first it
seemed just one of those many transitory auxiliary jobs
which come to 81 Pitt Street—the Family home.
But in their carefree eagerness to take on any job
which needed doing, they did not realise that they were
embarking on a national work.
One look at their task showed them
that it was not merely a matter of providing food for
the hungry. Special cases of illness required special
nourishment. It was a task in which there could be no
thought of mere rule'of'thumb methods. Each child
needed skilled personal attention, so as a preliminary
each case is referred to a doctor who goes into its features
and prescribes. Sixty'eight honorary doctors are now at
work in the various suburbs, giving their time to the
cause freely and without any charge.
Each case is reviewed regularly by the Smith Med'
ical Board every few weeks.
Should progress not measure up to possibility the
Family sets out to discover the reason why, and no
stone is left unturned to give the child concerned a
maximum chance.
Soon it became apparent, through experience, that
one of the major reasons why patients did not mend,
even with liberal tonic doses and abundant milk and
nourishment, lay in bad teeth. With a glittering eye
The Smith Family.


Mr. Secretary Smith descended on a dentist to supple-
ment his honorary medical staff of 68 in the suburbs.
His glittering eye was not needed.
“Certainly we’ll help !” said the dentists, when they
heard the story. “Only too glad to help.”
Now every malnourished child who comes within
the ken of the Family undergoes dental inspection and,
if necessary, treatment at the hands of the Smith Family
dentist in his suburb. Here again the work is done
without charge. One Macquarie Street dentist gives an
hour every week to the Family, opening his room at
8 a.m. for the purpose.
The opticians have been “roped in,” and the won-
derful part of the organization is that not only work,
but material, is provided free by these professional men,
and they have had a good deal of providing to do.
The average age of the children which have been
treated under the scheme has been five and a half years ;
the average period for which each has been treated has
been eighty days —four days short of three months.
The approximate cost to date has been £2,500 ; and this
does not by any means represent the investment in the
work if one takes into account the immense value of
the professional working time which it has consumed.
The honorary physicians of the family have reported on
children 2,610 times. The Medical Board has made
2,445 case reviews, making a total of 5,055 consultations
which have been entirely free of fees, apart from those
given by dentists and oculists and material used.
Measured in terms of sectional effort, the results
The Smith Family.


have been as great comparatively to the influences be-
hind them, as to the whole. From one business house
alone the Family has received £450 for the work, from
another £l3O. Seven businesses and their employees
have contributed each between £25 and £4O, and four'
teen between £ls and £25.
Frequently the amounts themselves do not tell of
the full story of the enthusiasm and helpfulness behind
them. At the one end of the scale was a dance which
yielded £2O in the produce of eighteempenny tickets ; at
the other, Wednesday community concerts at the Savoy
Theatre, from which £4BO in reservation fees have been
received.
Acting on their normal principle, the Family has
sought to introduce the personal touch into the work,
and so far most of it has been financed by 75 office staffs
and individuals who have each undertaken the care of
one child or more. A specific child is allotted. The
office becomes its god'parent, so to speak, and has the
satisfaction of knowing that its subscriptions are doing
direct good.
One business house is looking after no less than 28
children, and around the operations of the branch a
normal Smith Family atmosphere has grown up. The
whole of one office staff visited its charge recently and
gave him a birthday party, much to his proud astonish'
ment, since it was the first birthday party he had ever
known in his nine thin years of life. Another office dis'
covered that the mother of their charges was in hospital,
and its staff took to visiting her regularly.
The Smith Family.


But with all that is being done, with all the gener*
osity of doctors, the selflessness of dentists and opticians,
and all the pouring out of the milk of human kindness
from financing offices and individuals, there is tenfold as
much still to be done, and on this work the Smith Family
is now concentrating.
It calls on all the Smiths of New South Wales to
rally round and help. It calls on everybody with healthy
children of their own, going to good schools and growing
up to the heritage of a sound, robust, Smith'like consti'
tution to remember the waifs who are losing their chance
in the world through illness and the lack of right food
and medical treatment.
The community at large will have to carry the re'
sponsibility of many of these children, in any case,
forever, if it does not take them in hand at once. Left
o their fate they are a human liability and a burden.
Properly treated and Smithified back to health, they
become selfireliant citizens and an asset to the country.
Good health is the greatest cure for all the evils of
the world. The best panacea for Bolshevism is content.
Most revolutions have been carried out by men who
have known starvation or illness in their youth. Most of
the murders, cruelties and crimes can be traced back to
childhood influences.
No happy man ever murders ; a murderer kills to
remove some unhappiness, to satisfy some craving.
Nobody steals who is content; thieving is the out'
let of an unsatisfied instinct.
The Smith Family.


Kindness is the mainspring of the world and the
Smith Family to-day calls for a few thousand more kind
people with pennies of sixpences or shillings in their
pockets to help those children who need those coins in
terms of milk and fruit and oranges.
It does not necessarily want that money to pass
through the Family’s hands. It wants you, quietly, to
form a group among the girls in the office or the boys at
the club, or among that regular poker-school which
plays its tram-tickets on its way home of an evening,
or among the fellows round the luncheon table.
Then let somebody come to the Smith Family office
and say ; “We will bring one youngster back to health
and find the six shillings a week to do it.”
It is not a very big job measured in personal effort ;
but if it were done generally, wherever it needs doing,
the national effect of it would be tremendous, the amount
of happiness it will make will be immeasurable.
There is no other work better worth doing, and
somehow the Smiths are going to see to it that they
fail nobody who is a child and in need of succour and
happiness.
They have taken on the job with confidence be-
cause years of Smithing has given them an immense faith
in the goodness of human nature.
It only remains for you good people of New South
Wales to join with them in their efforts. Health-
bringing is the best form of joyspreading you can do.
The Smith Family.


nofo —gour parti
So far, this story has been all words; the deeds on which
it is based have been done and the future lies before us.
The Smith Family never has appealed to the public for
members or for help, though kind people sometimes have made
an appeal for it when the needs of Christmas have proved
bigger than the Smiths’ hearts.
Now, however, they are up against a problem such as they
have never before been called on to face.
The problem of malnourished children seemed one of their
usual jobs when they first tackled it, but instead of them being
able to take a grip of it, it is beginning by its magnitude and
importance to take a grip of them.
BADLY NEEDED —more help to pull a thousand or so ailing
mites out of the mire of illness, and to turn them from a
liability into a real asset to the community.
Remember the old axiom: “He who gives quickly gives
twice.” Do it right away, and feel the repercussion in your
own happiness in having done so.
There is no limit to the amount of your investment in this
work—its dividends are paid in happy and healthy children.
Because we know that every real human good-fellow will
get as much fun out of pulling his weight as all the existing
Smiths do, we hope that next time an instalment of Smith
history is written, YOU—the reader—will be able to feel a
personal pride in the record as a Smith.
It is easy to be a Smith; easier to stay one when you
have joined.
THE SMITH FAMILY JOYSPREADERS UNLIMITED
81 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Box 328-F., G.P.O. ’Phone; B-3948
The Smith Family.


“Hey, Smithy !—I'm cured !”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia, by D. S. Ford,
44-50 Reservoir Street, Sydney.




