

PF
3,25. 2-1
/ 77
SAK
t^-RABY


- ■- ■
& ■ Mm
KhmW
LJ.
| ■. •’•"‘•rminuiwi': ■ ■ <ii— — afe&


CONTENTS
Introduction 2_
Section 1. History of Chinese Immigration into Sumatra . . 2
Early Settlements 2
Intermarriage with Native Women 2
Early Relationship with the Dutch 3
The Period of Great Immigration (1700 - 1930) 3
Tin Mining in Banka 4
Tin Mining in Billiton 3
Timber Enterprises. (Panglongs) 6
Tobacco Culture in Deli 7
The Fishing Industry at Bagan Si Api Api ... 8
Trade and Industry g
Section 11, The Chinese Population of Sumatra 10
Distribution . 2.Q
Chinese Races , 0. 10
Sex Ratio. H
Intermarriage with Native Women 11
Percentage of Immigrants among the Chinese , . 11
Living Conditions of Panglong Labourers ... 11
Living Conditions of Tin Miners 13
The Abolishment of the Penal Sanction System . 14
Living Conditions of Estate Labourers .... 14
Living Conditions of Chinese Business Men . . 15
Living Conditions of Chinese Born and Brought
Up in This Country ’. l£>
Chinese Education in Sumatra l£
Section 111 The Nature oi the Chinese in Sumatra 17
Aptitude for Business . 17




The Group-Spirit ..... 17
The Spirit of Co-operation with the Government 17
Mild Interest in International Affairs .... 18
Section IV. The Economic Position of the Chinese 19
Occupational Distribution 17
Economic Position and Competition 19
Influence on European Business ... 20
Influence on the Natives 20
Section V. Chinese Organization 21
Organization for Commerce 21
Financial Organization 21
Section VI. Chinese Policies . 22
Section VII. The Policy of the Dutch Government 23
General Attitude 23
Immigration Restriction 23
Supervision of Immigration 24
Legal Position 24
Prohibition of Political Activities 24
Conclusion 23




IUTt;OL U C T I 0 N
The aim of this "Study- ib to give a general view of the life
ana activities of the Chinese population in Sumatra. The writer
has therefore taken great care to give all the facts and partic
ul&rs that are essential to the making of a clear picture of
this important and useful portion of the Inhabitants of this
country.
It is a well-known fact that though numerically not very
great, the Chinese in Sumatra have helped considerably in the
development of this country and have exerted great influence
upon almost every sphere of industry, trade and commerce. The
results of their work and influence can be seen everywhere in
this country to-day; the writer* s wish is to point bhemaotLt'
show how these results have been a chleved. Thus will be seen
what this country owes to the Chinese portion of its population.
To-day, under the direction of our Government, this country
is about to carry out a programme of still greater improvement
and development. And it is quite certain that the Chinese will
play their part in this great undertaking. It is therefore im-
portant to have some knowledge of their past and.present con-
tributions, as this will help us to understand the part that
they will play in future in the further development of this
country.




HibiOr.Y Or CHINESE IjiiiialOßATlON INTO SUMTRi
Early Set 4 :! ijiants :
Chin-. .... iun Ou.aa.tra Organ centuries ago. It hau-
penea that Sumatra felt Chinese Influence even before Java/
which is not to be wondered at, situated as it is on the
thoroughfare from China to India, as early as the year A6O a.D
a Sumatran tribute-embassy was received in China; ard 1.,-
there was evidence of regular commercial traffic (gold. //-;_
cotton, camphor, rattan, kdpok, ivory, wood carvings, oerfume/
textile fabrics), while vapin'r? „ . c ,
/, various Chinese Settlements in this
country strongly expanded.
About UOO A.D. there was mention of important permanent
Chinese settlements at Sanbotsal or Kukang Ucw Paleabar- .p
South Sumatra) . The Chinese chief at Kukang, who was a r‘ot)h
f°us pirate irom Canton, had his own fleet of junks. In a
piratical attack upon the famous imperial envoy Cheng Ho, h~
was taken prisonner by the latter and was later on sentenced
to death in China (1407 a.D.)
His successor as chief of the Chinese at Kukang was appoint-
-7 from whom he received the title of Pacifi-
cator of Kukang.
0 the ISlano of Banka «ne the northern part of Sumatra,
-ere was indeed some mention of them in the annals, but no
close contact between these parts and China seemed to have
existed in those early days-
In consequence of the trade connections described above,
some Chinese trade centers existed towards the close of the
oth century in South Sumatra, those Chinese being natives of
tne Provinces of Fukien and Kwangtung (1„ south China).
Intermarriage with Native Worn >n ;
All sources of evidence point to the fact that for several
hundred years the Chinese immigra nt'- h ■« . ,
*-3r brought their
wives with them from China. For a long f m , r>-ir
1 a Chinese woman in
burndtra was looked upon as a curiosity.
lwioce b e,ndtion of Chinese and Native women slaves as we] 1 as
with free women had always taken place.
Without doubt, many of tho descendants resulting from sue-,
unions had been quite reabsorbed in the Native population. That
116 lneSe Bs ® raCe dld not Set completely lost in this racial
melting-not.




melting pot is go be ascribed go the continual immigration of
Chines 6o± pure blooc, ■;no in ixko ire a. sure to the tln
of the majority cx Chinese in special awelllng-cuar tor s where
it was easier to retain their national character than in +he
Inland villages- Wnereas in the interior the Chinese warn ab-
sorbed by the Native population, in the Chinese quarter., there
was more evidence of the absorption of Native women into -he
Chinese community
Early Relationship with the Dutch
filth the arrival of the Netherlands in the Indies in .1 c 96
A.D. began lor the Chinese a new period of progress and
prosperity, and consequently greater imraigm-icn. Duiin, -ho
two centuries of the existence of the United East India Com-
pany, the Chinese enjoyed many advantages from the Company's
policy ol well-nigh permanent friendliness towards them.
Governor-General J.P. Coen stated that according to his view
the Company must limit its trade to that of a "mighty whole-
sale dealer I ', that the hutch colonists should be active as
middlemen, whereas retail trade should be left to the Chinese.
This scheme for leaving retail trace to the Chinese succeeded
only too well, and has continued almost uninterruptedly up to
the present day.
Not only in the days ol the hast India Company, but also
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the arrival of
Europeans in Sumatra gave an impetus to Chinese trade, as their
appearance always betokened the establishment of centers of
government, enterprises, or factories, or the like, which
meant besides greater safe ty of person and security of
goods material progress and enlargement of the bulk of
trade.
The Period, of Great Immigration (1700 * 1910)
Fx’om the year 1700 onward, Chinese lHi_ 6i ation into Sumatra
was increasing considerably, due to the development of
-1-. oin-mlning in Banka fwbioh hpur-n -in ivoc'i
(which began in .1725)
• " '* Billiton ( n.- it tt ]B5 i)
3. timber enterprises on the Bintan,
Karimon , Lingga, Singkep and
Bengkalis islands (near Singapore)
( " " " 1850)
4-. tobacco culture in Deli h n ?? 186)^)




Year Males Females Total No. cf Chineses
1905 43,700
1920 48,397 19,001 67,398
1930 66,388 30,037 96,423
Race Born in Indies Born outside Indies Total
Hakkas 19,733 3,046 24,779
Kwong Bus 3,b34 8,761 14,413
Kuang Sis 3,010 8,736 11,746
Ko Chius 2,749 4,887 7,636
Others 24,738 12,306 37,264
Unclassified 583
33,904 39,936 96,423
3. fishing industry at Bagan Si Api Api (which began in l8?0)
6. trade and industry in the Chinese settlements and in the
towns.
It will be well to give a general description here of how
each of the above enterprises had influenced Chinese immigration
into this country_
Tin Mining in Banka: The first native exploitation of tin-de-
posits here began in or about the year 1710, and in 1725 mention
was made of the presence of Chinese, in addition to the Native
miners. As time went on, an increasing number of Chinese were
brought to the island as contract labourers for the mines, and
by 1840 the Chinese there were estimated to number 10,000 (of
whom 6,000 were miners) and all of these were directly or in-
directly connected with the tin-mining Industry,
In more recent years the numbers were as follows
Additional information regarding immigration into Banka as
well as regarding the origin of the Banka Chinese is provided
as follows by the 1930 census:
After 1930, however, due to the restriction in tin production
(one of the results of the world depression) the immigration of
Chinese into Banka practically ceased. No considerable demand
for Chinese labour at the tin-mines is to be expected in future,
and although prospects for agriculture are better, any large-
scale immigration is not likely to take place.
Tin




Tin Mining la Billiton. The exploration undertaken on thin
island in 1851 led to the oromotioi n the Billiton Oorroeny
(i860) which obtained all the min inf, concessions for the entire
island.
This concession-holding Company began to employ free Chinese
coolies in 1851, and during the further development of trm in-
dustry, Chinese have been practically the only workers employed.
Partly in consequence of the rivalry of the Banka tin-mines
serious difficulties were experienced in the initial years in
recruiting labourers, so that in 1853 it was decided to solve
the problem by sending European and Chinese recruiting-. nr 3
to China. In that year 253 men were forthcoming from Hongkong
and Whampoa.
When the rich tinfields at Manggar had been opened in lB6l ;
and it became known in the areas in China from which coouj.es
were generally recruited that the miners were sharing in the
plentiful yields, a spontaneous stream of immigrants began to
flow into Billiton, without any recruiting being required. They
came to the island in hundreds. For three-quarters of a century
(1855 - 1930) Billiton was one of the most attractive places
for the immigration of Chinese workmen. The 1930 figures were
as follows:
Males 22591 ,
Females 6023
Total 28614
But after 1930, caused by the restriction in tin-production,
the number was greatly reduced.
Total in 1930
29.000 (in round figures)
14.000
" " 1932
" " 1933
10,000
The departure of large numbers of miners from the island
led many traders to return to Singapore and China to©. This
alternative was not open to those born on phe island, of
course, who had their own home there.
Moreover, extensive use of labour in the mining, which
formerly gave employment to thousands of Chinese coolies,, has
been replaced definitely by modern mechanized methods, so that
even should there be a boom in the tin-producing Industry, the
same number of Chinese employed at one time could never hope
to find work again in the mines.
Timber




Timber Enterprises
LLMfl&lopffs).. Along the East Coast of Sumatr a c
Panglongs are the timber-exploitation concerns run by Chinese
(that is, the beam-cutting mills, sawmills, firewood mills, and
Charcoal-burning plants) along the east coast of Sumatra, on the
small islands lying oif the Sumatran east coast, and in the
Residency of Riouw and Dependencies.
Such pangxongs seemed to have existed as far back as the
middle ol -lie past century (1830) ; presumably they originated
on the islands of the Bintan group around Singapore, and on
Karimon, Later on panglongs arose on islands situated farther
from Singapore (Lingga, Singkep and Bengkalis), and as far back
as about lobO there were some hundreds of these concerns on
those islands.
Although at present there are also some panglongs on the
north coast of Atjeh and along the coast of Djambi, they center
around the division of Bengkalis and the Residency of Riouw.
To give some idea regarding the extent of this enterprise,
it may be stated that as early as 1898, there were 131 pang-
longs on the Island of Bengkalis alone. The number of workmen
engaged were as follows:
Year 1890 1893 1898 1930 1931 1932
Bengkalis 1370 1130 3400 1792 1316 1071
Riouw 1714 1663 1422
Total 3306 2981 2493
It will be noted that the number of workmen employed fell
from 3306 to 2493 in 1932. This was due to the closing down of
many panglongs in consequence of falling timber-prices.
As to the number of panglongs, the following figures are
available;-
Place Bengkalis Bengkalis and Riouw
Year 1896 1913 1923 1927 1930 1933 1934 1933
Panglongs $4 216 376 434 476 326 313 413
The recruiting of panglong labourers took place exclusively
in Singapore., where opium, trickery, and misrepresentation, as
in every Chinese port town, played a more important role than
more persuasion. The races most strongly represented on the
panglongs were the Kwong Bus, Hakkas and Hokkiens.
Tobacco




Tobacco Culture in L'eli:
k fourth factor that caused consider-
able Chinese immigration of labourers was the cultivation
tobacco in Deli. This culture was carried on mainly with
Chinese workmen recruited at Singapore, Penang or in China
The recruitment of Chinese labourers at Penang and Singaoor
dated from 1864-, ana took place through the intermediary of
Chinese brokers established at those places. This system, of
recruitment, coupled with the pioneer conditions then prevai-
ling at Deli, led to shocking abuses, man-stealing being of
frequent occurrence.
The following table shows the results .of the recruit:ng
before 1900:
Year Immigrants Total Immigrants
From From
Straits China.
1888 2820 1152 3972
1890 2462 6666 9128
1895 2142'. 8163 10305
1900 4 6922 6926
Below follow some figures regarding Chinese labourers
working on the East Coast of Sumatra in recent years:
Year
1930
1931 1932
1933
1934 1935
26819
m _ u
„ o ua.L
22314 18484
13823
12 802 12550
In order to give some idea of the origin of the immigrants
it may be stated that during the years 1912 - 1920
36 per cent were
j. 1 11 im n ,
A r - -
5 ?f ??
r ft*
4 ” »
Ik ■’ it
The results of the economic
-929 have manifested themselves
Tio Chus
Li okhongs and Haihongs
(both Tio Chu groups),
Hokkiens
other Chinese groups
depression t commenced afte
in no rncorLcin fashion on the
piantc.tione, and have led no a great decrease in the number of.
bouters employed (both Chinese and Natives), who hive c?
rope cna tea in thousands. The drawing up of Chinese
contracts, of which in 1930 and 19.31 the numbers registered
v(in 1950 and 194, respectively, came to a complete standstill
in iff 2
Hecrulumen




recruitment la China has likewise ceased, ana the Immigrants
bureau at nohgkong closed aovm at the era of 1933.
existence from 1888 to 1933 no fewer than 305.257 Chinese
cooiies emigrated from China to hell through its agency, where-
as 1*4,025 returned to China with the Bureau's help.
lndus try of Ba Surround pp
districts: ' 3 ‘
Speciai mention must also De made of Bagan Si A pi A pi (east
coast of Sumatra), the typically Chinese settlement founded bv
Chinese pirates in the middle »70*s, which has since become the
most important fishing-center of the entire archipelago. This
fact is borne out by the results of the census of 1930, whim
demonstrated that of the 9811 Chinese earning a living in the
fishing industry in the hast Indies > no fewer than 5368 lived
on the east coast of Cumatra (practically all of them at Bagan
L " 1 iipl lj 2s on Banka, and 1953 in the archipelago of
Biouw,
Of the Chinese population of more than 16,000 in this sub-
division, 12,000 live at the capital, Bagan bi Api api.
These Chinese are for the greater part riokkiens, many of the
remainder being Tio Chus.
The Post-1929 crisis would appear to have affected the popu-
lotion figure here too; an official report in 1933 stating' that
tome thousands of Chinese had quitted the country In consequen-
ce.
Iraae ana industry Chinese trade has been going on ever since
the early nays of Chinese immigration Into Sumatra. The earlier
traae v,as mainly the coastal traffic. But with the rapid econo-
mic development of Sumatra (under the influence of European
large-scale cultivation ana mining activities, as veil at the
Native cultivation of coconuts, coffee ana ruoaer) and tne ex-
cessively rapla Increase of tne Chinese pop,., lion of tne coun-
, a coirc.,conning grovth In traae ana industry also took
place.
Ooilfcr wra& -’ tne Chinese who are not in tobacco-planting,
tin-mining, fishing, ana the timber enterprises are chiefly
concerned with various kinds of retail trade ana small crafts.
■ Ult; traafc in one 01 tvvo Products has at all times been entirely




or almost entirely in the lianas of Chinese, fur example, the
benzoin traau of is pa ■ad , an... d^mur;uu tobacco trade, pepn
ana areca-nuts in l tje..., a,. \ hole?, ale trade in rice in ail
rice-impor is i'c' ,j_\ x 0.-i b • x‘ ux "Liit:- 1" x g ma/ b & bct-LO. that every
variety of traae ana commerce of niout, indragiri, Lower Lgambi
and the East Coast of Sumatra is almost exclusively in the hand
of the Chinese.
Industry under Cninese control extends, apart from arts ana
crafts, to a few soap factories, vegetable-oil factories, .a-men
aae ana mineral-water works, brick and .tile kilns, printing-
works', repair-workshops, rubber manufactories, the small esta-
blishments for the preparation of sago, and so on.
It is obvious that this rather extensive trade and industry
had attracted a considerable stream of immigration to Sumatra.
The post-1929 economic crisis, however, caused a contrary move-
ment; many traders could not carry on and v.ere forced to leave
the country, at that time commerce was carried on at a loss
everywhere, so that a veritable dislocation of Chinese business
life ensued, with catastrophic results for many. It was only in
the last five or six years that the situation improved a bit.
btill in recent years there has been no furtnor Intentional im-
migration of Chinese for commercial enterprises




_ rumaxeo 10L3 •
At J eh 14646 7149 21795
Dust Coast 134145 58677 192822
Tapanuli 3385 2319 5704
Vvest Coast 8664 6298 14962
28796 10288 39084
L j- mbi 5959 2884 8843
Palembang 16889 9187 26076
Lencoelen 3541 2175 *>716
Lampong List. 5660 3178 8838
Lanka 66215 29383 96098
Billiton 22591 6023 28614
i-ntirc Sumatra 448552
Chinese Races:
Lection li
Trill- Cal.li
Jl jF , b..i/iTRii,
Distribution:
The following taolo gives some idea the Chinese population
01 the various regions in 1930. In the years following 1930 a con
siaerable number of Chinese left Banka, Billiton, Palembang, Dyi
bi and Dell, but since more recent figures are not at present
available to the writer, he has decided to use the 1930 figure
which still give a fairly gooa view of the Cninese population
distribution in this country.
Province _Males Females Total
xhe following table (1930 figures) shows the various Chinese
races found in the different regions of Sumatra:
Melons Hokkiens Hakkas Kwbngfus Tio Chus Others
ixt.ieh
3706
8887
6045
35089
933
2174
hast Coast
66643 15099
36363
39628
Tapanuli
West Coast
ttiouw
14413
8067
1016
4060
100
897
394.3
16305
10669
Djambi
Benooelen
24801
8079
9432
3461
Palembang
Lampong
>1 U J
24824
' r\ z n a
1.4441
56833
Billiton
1786
1232
2230 2991
V.nole
Sumatra
119537
Ba2 2 0
n r ' z n n
(u; yy
59593
116767
Sex




Sex Ratio;
By the sex ratio is meant the number of Chinese females to
per 1000 males. It was rather unfavourable in Billiton (1000
males : 267 females), Riouw 1000 : 336), East Coast of Sumatra
(1000 ; 429), Banka (1000 ; 432), while it was most favourable
for the West Coast (100 : 713). For the whole of Sumatra the
ratio was 1000 ; 442.
Intelmarriage with Native Women:
Because of the comparatively small number of females among
the Chinese population of Sumatra, as seen from the sex ratio
of 1000 j 442, some Chinese immigrants have married native
women. However, this occurs only in such places as the estates,
mines, outlying districts and small towns. In the bigger towns
and cities the Chinese generally marry females of their own race.
Percentage of Immigrants among the Chinese:
The percentage of the Chinese population born outside the
iast Inuies (and who were thus immigrants) was 37 per cent for
the whole of Sumatra.
This percentage was 71 per cent, for Riouw, 69 per cent, for
Billiton, 64 per cent, for the East Coast of Sumatra, and 60 per
cent, for Atjeh.ln the remaining regions the percentage varied
roughly around the average for the entire island, with the ex-
ception of the /vest Coast, where the immigrants only accounted
ior 28 per cent of the Chinese population.
Mzing Conditions of Pqnelong Labourers:
Conditions of living were most difficult at first among the
Panglong labourers. These people lived on the outlying Islands
and coastal regions, which were far from towns and consequently
difficult to reach. Naturally they had very little of town in-
fluences or goods.
The difficulty in controlling the panglongs, owing to their
being situated at such a distance and the indifference of the
panglong-holders regarding the state of affairs of their pang-
longs, -gave rise to very bad conditions of labour that prevailed
for a long time. The worst abuses occured at the beam-cutting
mills, where very heavy work had to be done, especially in the
transport of the beams.
Owing to numerous complaints about ill-treatment, non-payment
of wages, enslavement, and even manslaughter, sharper control




mained permanently in aebt.
at that time the nominal wages (in btraits 4) were;
Overseers $ 25 to # 75 per month
Manaoers "15 " " 45 " n
Fellers " 12 " » 16 " »
Transport Coolies " 8 " " 12 " "
bawyers ana Cutters " 6 " " 9 " »
On most or the panglongs the majority of the coolies had
large debts > oeing compelled to make purchases at the overseer's
shop.
In
by the Government was introduced. In 1903 a Government Medical
Oliicer was sent to trie puhglong area, where a hospital was
erected, while in 1907 the panglong-holders of niouw were placed
under the obligation of providing free medical aid to their work-
men, with whom they had made no contracts. Finally, in 1924, a
special staff for the inspection of the panglongs was introduced,
provided with efficient means of conveyance, while at the same
time evil laoour conditions were declared a sufficient reason
for closing down any panglong where such prevailed.
This coercive measure has hao a salutary effect, for the
panglong holders were brought to a sense of responsibility
wnich they haa hitherto not manifested. The result of this
strict Government Inspection is that labour conditions are
quite tolerable at present.
On scarcely any oi the panglongs are women to be found.
Opium addicts are numerous everywhere, statistics regarding
thiw< matter are dixficuit to ascertain, owing to the large
quantities oi opium tnat are certainly smuggled into the terri-
tory, o/er and aoove the quantities disposed of on the pang-
longs by the Government Opium Monopoly. Forty-five per cent of
the panglong coolies are known to be opium addicts.
The races most strongly represented on the panglongs are the
Kwong .pus, dakkas and dokkiens. At the beam-cutting mills the
number ol workmen per panglong is as a rule from 25 to 40, very
occasionally more than 60. At the firewood panglongs the aver-
age is 12, and at the charcoal-burning plants it is more often
tnan not from 3 to 5.
Prior to the year 1925 it was farcical to speak of wages;
for the overseer, who himself owned a shop and was a clandes-
tine distributor of opium, took good care that the coolies re-




In later years (until 1930) the Labour Inspection was able
to obtain increased wages for the coolies; since 1930, however,
wages have again fallen along with the general level of prices.
Formerly a working-day of 14 to 16 hours was the rule rather
than the exception. At present a maximum working period of 10
hours daily is the order of the day, while a half-holiday is
given every four days.
In addition to wages, all the coolies have free victuals.
On the whole, however, in spite of the difficulties so long
in the way of stringent measures by the authorities, consider-
able improvements in the lot of the panglong coolies may be
said to have been attained. The only thing that still leaves
much to be desired is the housing accommodation. (Like the
majority of labourers in this country, the panglong coolies
live in groups in sheds erected near their places of work).
Living Conditions of Tin Miners (Banka and Billiton
Unlike the case of the panglongs, the tin mines are either
Government enterprises (as, in Banka) or under strict Government
supervision. Hence conditions of living in them have always
been fairly good.
Miners’ dwelling-houses are built in Chinese style, and care
has always been taken to provide each kongsi (a dwelling-house
and the group of coolies in it) with the opportunity of having
its own kitchen-gardens and pig-styes.
There has been a constant endeavour to leave the miners in
their own, undisturbed surroundings. Internal disputes are left,
as far as at all practicable, to be settled by the kongsi-
boards.
at first there was a heavy death-rate among the miners,
mainly through beri-beri and dysentery; but improvement has
been brought about by the Company's policy of introducing bet-
ter sanitary conditions as well as taking preventive measures
against beri-beri (silver-skin rice is supplied) and malaria
(quinine is distributed). Between 1871 and 1933 the death-rate
sank regularly from 1.8 per cent to 0.32 per cent.
The miners are paid a fixed wage, graduated according to
length of service, the average wage being about 41 cents daily,
together with free food, lodgings and medical attendance. In
addition to this is the possibility of earning a premium should
a quantiptellaiit tea exceeded.
Evils




Evils which the Company has had to cope (and its efforts
have been mainly successful) have been the use of opium and
dice-playing among the miners.
The Abolishment of the Penal Sanction (Contract) System
Among Miners;
As a result of the Government’s endeavours to abolish the
penal sanction element from labour-contracts entirely, regulat-
ions have been included in the Coolie-Ordinance of 1932 where-
by employers are compelled gradually to decrease the ratio of
penal-sanction contract-coolies to free coolies; so in 1932,
1933 and 193& only 73 per cent,, 60 per cent., and 30 per cent.,
respectively, of the total number of coolies employed might be
such penal-sanction coolies.
This legal enactment applies with equal force to all Provin
ces in Sumatra, and therefore includes the Banka and Billiton
miners and the coolies of the Deli Tobacco Plantations.
Actually the abolishment of the penal-sanction system has
been rather rapid, so that the prevailing ratio between free
coolies and penal-sanction coolies is even more favourable
than the law proscribes. Nowadays all coolies employed are free
coolies.
Living Conditions of Estate Labourers:
The estates in oumatra are all within easy reach of the Govern
ment’s inspectors, so that living conditions in them have been
tolerable.
It is true that in former years there was frequent ill-
treotment of coolies, but this has been entirely stopped by the
Government. Penal Sanctions having been abolished on all tobac-
co plantations since the end of 1932, all coolies employed in
them now are free coolies. The working day is limited to a maxi-
mum of ten hours.
Excellent medical arrangements are provided for the labourers.
Numerous qualified medical practitioners and subordinate staff
are employed at more than 20 central hospitals, apart from in-
numerable first-aid dressing-stations; besides v/hich, there is a
large quarantine establishment and a pathological laboratory.'
hith regard to the system of Wyoming pursued, it may be said
that the Chinese coolies work under their own foremen (tandils
and head—tanc.ils) , but these are employed by the employers and
only supervise and control the v/ork.




_ u _
xhe housing accomodations for trie coolies are also fairly
good. They live in groups in large, sheds of wood or stone. On
the estates are snops -where they can purchase goods, while on
their free days (twice a month; they are able to visit the
towns.
Evils that nave to be combated, on the plantations are gamb-
ling aDQ tru. 0,. opium, which are a constant source of
trouble,
~itibg —SjbPLdih eQ- 1 1s of Cninese Business Men;
The typical Cninese business man of the town is the shoe-
keeper. Besides owing the shop, he usually manages it as well.
xrna for reasons of economy as well as to enable him to keep
constant watch over his shop, he and his family usually live in
it too. This is such a prevailing custom in this country that a
special type oi house -- the shop-house -- has been designed for
the use of these people. This shop-house is simply a two-storied
house, with the ground floor serving as the place for the shop
and the upper floor as the living quarters of the shopkeeper and
his family. Rows and rows of such shop-houses are to be found
in all the big and small towns in this country; indeed they form
the greater part ol the houses in the towns.
In connection with this matter of the living conditions of
the Chinese in the towns, it may be well to mention here that
the Government has done much to promote cleanliness and sanita-
tion among the people. If left to themselves, the people are not
likely to keep their living quarters as clean and sanitary as
they ought to be, for sometimes overcrowding takes place and
sometimes dirt and refuse are allowed to accumulate. Hence the
constant supervision and interference of the Municipal and
Government officials have been necessary and have improved the
situation greatly in recent years, another helpful factor is the
Government's policy of pulling down unsuitable houses and al-
lowing only suitable nouses to be erected in the towns and ci-
ties. Finally education and European influence have helped peop-
le to appreciate the importance of clean and sanitary living
conditions.
In recent years the custom among more and more wealthy Chine-
Se businesfc People, particularly those in the bigger towns and
cities, is to live in separate residences bungalows built and
furnished




furnished in the European style. Here entire families will live,
rather comfortably, a great many of these fine bungalows are to
be found in Medan (the capital of bumatra), which is the Chinese
center par excellence,
Living Conditions of Chinese Born and Brought Up in This Countr
There is still another group of Chinese people to be consider-
ed, namely those who were born and brought up in this country.
Their parents might be either immigrants from Malaya or China or
people born in this country too. Among this group of people the
desire to "make a fortune” and then return to China is good
financial circumstances is no longer the predominant thing in
their lives; they are quite satisfied to stay in this country.
Those of them who are educated in either Dutch or English have
been able to tind employment as clerks in the offices of Europ-
ean firms (or estates), Tnose educated in Chinese only either work
lor Chinese merchants or engage in some business.
Generally speaking, these group of people are neither very
wealthy nor very poor; they form a sort of middle class. Like
the majority of clerks anc. skilled workers, they occupy the usu-
al one-story dwelling-houses, of which rows are to be found in
Meaan and in some other towns as well.
onlnese Education in burnatra;
Of increasing importance to Chinese business people in the
towns and cities is the matter of educationmfor their children,
particularly since the formation of the Chinese Republic (1912
n.L,) This can be seen from the increasing number of Chinese
schools with a Chinese vernacular language and Chinese teachers
in all places where the Chinese settle in large numbers .
The main object of these schools continue to be directed to-
wards the deepening of Chinese national feeling, with educatiqn
for life in this country a s a secondary aim. It is clear that
this Implies a powerful stimulus towards the strengthening of
the bonds between the b umatran Chinese and the country of ori-
gin of their forefathers.
Rather large numbers of Chinese pupils are still sent to
bingapore and China to be educated.
Particularly noticeable is the fact that girls are also sent
to schools nowadays, thus proving that the former custom of edu-
cating boys only is a thing of the past,




Section 111,
lilt itailUßu Ox 1 THh Ik CUjAiiTfdi
To get a clear understanding or the nature of the Chinese in
this country, we must bear in mind the following fact:-
Chinese immigration is hardly ever aimed at establishing a fix.
lixea colonization in the new country of settlement. The origin-
al intention has always been to obtain as much direct economic
advantage as possible from a temporary abode in this country; the
profits from which s houlu enable the Chinese in question to
return to China, after a certain period, in better financial dr-
eams tances thah they were in when they left their own country.
Tnis has been the principle governing their activities and
ho,s consequently Drought out the following features in their
nature:-
AEtitu&e for...business: Wherever the Chinese have settled, they
are generally characterized oy activity, industry and business
acumen-- an inborn love of gain and Indefatigable energy. The ac-
tivity of the Hokkiens lie for the greater part In trade, that
of the Hakkas in agriculture ana mining, that of the Tio Chus in
the production of raw materials, ana that of the Kwong fus in
industry.
The Croup spirit: The existence of great numbers of commercial
kongsis, trade guilds, clan associations, burial funds, reading-
circles ana the like points unmistakably to the exls tence of
the group- spirit among the Chinese. "To associate and to feel
solidarity with the association, this is indeed the great feature
of the Chinese." They remain associated by reason of family coned**
sciousness ana commercial Interest.
Generally speaking, all these associations (guilds, corporat-
ions, unions of merchants, artisans, wage-earners, etc.) do not
move exclusively in the economic sphere, but denote a marked cor-
porative tendency in every department of lilt . What strikes one
mo~t in this respect is the great show of mutual and reciprocal
a ta,nce, and the intricate & ys tern of settling disputes by
arbitration.
—lh. bpirit —of— Co-operation with the Government: All along the
l. uniat ran Chinese have shown a fairly consistent spirit of co-
operation with txie Government, They appear to realize that get-
ting along smoothly with the Government is essential to realiz-
ing their main object, namely, the gaining of profits from




business enterprises. One proof of this it the willingness of
prominent Cninese business men to serve us civil officers for the
Government, namely, Lieutenants, Captains and Majors. If there
haa been any serious disturbance of the peace (as in Bagan bi
Apilapi in 1889), it was only in former years and was principal-
ly the work of the low class people; the higher class Chinese
ha ve a Iways been gratfefhilfor the Government's friendly atti-
tude towards them ana have shown this by their peaceful behaviour
anc co-operative spirit.
Mila Interest in International Affairs: The Chinese in Lumatra
have always been only mildly affected by international events,
even in these time of great and violent changes in Europe and
China. Consequently there have never been any demonstrations,
agitations, or violence by Chinese in this country against any
movements or changes in the outside world.
This attitude may be &ue to the remoteness of this country
and to the all-absorbing interest taken by the Chinese in their
business activities.




Occupations Regions Number of People (Estimated)
Intermediate and Towns and cities 146250
retail trade
Farming Around (in the 36250
vicinity) of
towns and cities
Tin-mining Banka, Billiton 10000
and Singkep
Fishing Bagan Si Apl Api,, 8500
Banka and Riouw
Tobacco culture Deli (East Coast) 8500
Timber enterprises Bengkalis, Riouw 1500
and Djambi
Bricklayers Farmers Shop-keepers
Butchers Goldsmiths Shop-assistants
Carpenters Hawkers Servants
Clerks House painters Teachers
Chemists & House & land Tin smiths
dispensers owners Tailors
Contractors Journalists Watch-repairers
00^s Labourers Workers in rattan (cane)
Economic Position and Competition:
Section IV
TIE ECONOMIC POSITION OF THE CHINESE IN SUMATRA
Occupational Distribution:
It has already been mentioned in earlier sections that the
main occupations of the Chinese in Sumatra are:-
The following list gives a closer view of the occupations of
the Chinese:-
Artists Dentists Laundrymen
Fishers Medical practitioners
Blacksmiths Factory employees Photographers
Bicycle repairers Food & Drink Repair workshop employees
Bakers sellers Shoe-makers
In this country, large-scale agriculture, major industries,
wholesale trade, large transport undertaking and banking, in
short, enterprises requiring large capitals, elaborate organi-
zation and technical knowledge, are generally in European hands.
The Chinese merchants handle only intermediate and retail
trade, which demands local acquaintance with the needs of the
Native population, close relationship with Native groups of pro-
ducers and consumers, soberness and patience, a low standard of
living, and the like. Thus the shop (toko) trade (sometimes dis-
tributing intermediate trade, sometimes retail trade) in Sumatra,
until




until recent years apart from nombay-shops and the one or two
European shop concerns, vnica are only founa in capital towns
was an almost uncun tes tes. Cninese monopoly»
There was a time wnun the Chinese has almost complete econo-
mic aomination of the Native population in the fields of trade,
agriculture and industry, But in recent years, Native competi-
tion with the Chinese dealers is becoming more severe, es-
pecially that of the Bataks, the Minangkabauers, the Vvest Coast
<*hd the Palembung natives. In ocher words, these Natives are
becoming more and more interested in economic development and
are beginning to make a stand against further Chinese penetrat-
ion .
Influence un European business:
The European merchant cannot hold his own against the Chinese
in intermediate and retail trade, ana since this Chinese inter-
mediate ana retail trace has long proved itself to bo a well-
functioning ana reliable apparatus, the European merchant has
long depended upon it. Thus the Chinese business men have be-
come an essential apparatus for European business in this country.
Influence on the Natives:
as long as the intermediate ana retail trade of the Natives
remained undeveloped or small, they were dependent on the
Cniness for the sale of their produce ana the purchase of their
supplies. But with their present economic awakening (among some
of the native peoples), they are gradually learning and taking
over this form of trade from the Chinese., Thus the Chinese,
quite unintentionally, nave been serving as business teachers
to the natives !




beetion V
Ohllloj:. IZiiTION
Organization for --m m *«et
Theoretically oi r i commerce in this country Is regulated
by the Chinese Chanb2- of Commerce which exists at Medan. But t
tne functions 01 this Cr. amber reach far beyona the realms of
comma Ice. is facj.ll tares tautuai aid, as.cists in the. settlement
ul deputes, repatriates poor Chinese to their native country,
collects funds for various purposes (schools, hospitals), ar-
ranges for che cui eorutaon oi Chinese national hoiiu tvs, helps
Chinese schools, ana undertakes further such offices. It has
probably met wish the least success in purely commercial matters
a &reat seal oi j.maUenoo Is also exercised by the Chinese
craft guiles or trade-unions (as the guild of Goldsmiths,
slaughterers, bootmakers, tobacco workers, costermongers, ana
su on). Membership of these guilds is open to employers as well
as employees, as these two groups are not considered to have
conflicting interests.
Financial Organi za t i on:
Chinese financial organization in this country is neither
elaborate nor extensive, Tney have (in Medan) two bunks, a
couple or insurance agents, ana the exchanges (institutions
vhiah undertake to remit money to people in China). Quite often
turns of money are sent, none to China via friends ana, acquaintan-
ces or are taken back tv the immigrants themselves.
Cv j.ng to the cisinclination of tne Chinese population to
invest money with the banks, it is dubious whether the Chinese
banes will ever be in a position to attract any considerable
amount of money (deposits or clearing-funds) from tne public,
v.itnout doubt their capital will always remain extremely limit-
ed .
Chinese banks have little immediate com with the im-
pecunious, credit seeking Chinese intermediate trade, because
the latter is entirely t inaneed by the import trade, which is
mainly in European hands.
Unuer the present structure of Chinese business life, the
future of the public Chinese banking institutions cannot be con-
sidered to be lavourable, either us regards the attraction of
capital as a trace medium, or as regards the possibility of
good investment of capital.




Lection VI.
ChlnoLF POLICIhb
Chinese policies in general may be summarized as follows:-
1. Ihe Chinese (even the greater part of those born in this
country) continue to regard themselves as aliens.
/t. Chinese immigration does not aim to establish a fixed coloni-
zation in the new country of settlement. The original in-
tention has always been to obtain as much direct economic
advantage as possible from a temporary abode in this country;
teethe profits from which should enable the Chinese in question
to return to China, after a certain period, in better finan-
cial circumstances than they were In when they left their o?m
country.
3. Chinese business men have always united, to a fairly great
extent, mainly for the purpose of controlling trade and com-
peting successfully with the Natives.
4« by a. sort ol common agreement among themselves, certain
races of Chinese iiave taken up certain occupations or cal-
lings. For instance, the Hakkas engage in the exploitation
of new lands both In mining and agriculture, while the Hok-
kiens engage in retail trade, and the Kwongfus in industry.
5. xhe Chinese wish, as xar as possible, to get along smoothly
with the Government.
b, j.n their transactions, Chinese business men seek and give
credit.




Section VII.
THE POLICY OP THE DUTCH GO ViiHNaliiNT WITH REGaRD TO THE CHINESE
General .attltuao;
In a general way, it may be saia that the Dutch Government
welcomes the presence of the Chinese in this country. Besides
being not in any way difficult to manage, nor possessing any-
thing more than commercial aims, the Chinese have been very
helpful in the development of this country and of Dutch commer-
cial enterprises. This is shown by the fact that they have
worked in the Dutch tin-mines and tobacco-plantations and have
assisted in extending Dutch trace over the whole country.
nil along trie Dutch have placed no serious obstacles on
their way. ns long as they can pay the immigration fee of
f. 150.-- and have good health ana good character, and no
dangerous political connections or intentions, they are per-
mitted to enter this country. That this is quite true, despite
the immigration restriction is shown by the next paragraph.
Immigration Restriction:
The necessity of immigration restriction was that too
large a number of immigrants would impede the increasingly
evident tendency of the Native population to obtain a place
outside agriculture, in trace and incustry; a tendency which
is of great importance to this country, now that the agricul-
tural possibilities only yield an existence which lies but
little above the minimum of subsistence.
Every year (since 1932) the maximum number of foreigners
to be admitted (for 1933, 1934 ana 1935, twelve thousand
persons a year) is fixec beforehand. This total is sub-divided
into 15 groups with a maximum of 800 per group (also for the
Chinese group), as long as the general maximum of 12,000 is
not reached, each group is allowed to surpass its group-maximum
by a number at most equal to the annual average number of im-
migrants (belonging to this group) over the past ten years.
In this way the restrictive element is fixed in the total
maximum of 12,000; and the equality principle for all national-
ities is embodied in the equal group-maximum of 800 for all
groups, while tne recognition of "vested rights" of certain
groups frounc expression in the factor of the averages over the
past




2 4 ~
past ten years.
Criteria of race, religion, or nationality ol the foreigners
have not been adopted in this immigration legislation.
In the meantime the consequences of the economic depression
proven so aire, that the total number of immigrants fell far
short of 12,000, while none of the larger groups reached the
average of the past 10 years, and none of the smaller groups
the group maximum of 800; so that the new immigration regulat
ions up to the present have not led to the restriction of any
group.
supervision of Immigration:
The now existing supervision is threefold..
Firstly, control on disembarkation, when undesiraoles may be
prevented from coming ashore;
Secondly, control of the issue of immigration permits, which
are refused to persons who are not likely to be able to support
themselves ana dependents, ana also to those who may become a
aanger to public security, or to public health or morals;
Thirdly, control of the granting of permits for permanent
residence, which is subject to the same requirements as stated
in the second cuse, while the conduct of the Immigrants since
their admission into the country is duly taken into considerat-
ion.
The immigration permit entitles the holder to a stay ol two
years (with the possibility of an extension to ten years); the
status of resident is generally only given after a stay in the
Netherlands Indies ox at least nine
*ny admitted person who endangers or is likely to endanger
the public peace ana good order, may be turned out of the countiy.
T.efeal Position:.
Regarding this matter, it is enough to say that almost the
whole boay of the Netherlands East Indies Civil Law is applicaole
to the Chinese, (as they do to the Europeans). In audition to
this, however, the Chinese are still permitted to maintain their
own customary law.
Prohibition of Political activities,:,
Tne Dutch Government has absolutely prohibited political gather-
ings or activities of any kina.ln this connection it must be
mentioned that paragraphs 158 and 159 of the Netherlands Indian
Penal Code prohibit the holding of or participation in the Nether-
lands Indies in elections for membership of foreign political
parties•




- 25 -
C 0 il C jj U b I 0 N
Having comp la tea tnis general survey of the Chinese popu-
lation of bumatra, the writer has drawn the following general
conclusions concerning them;-
1. The Chinese people have shown that conuitions of living in
this country (climate, food, etc.) suit them, and that they
can live and work well here.
2. Great numbers of Chinese have for decades found employment
or carried on trade in this country.
3. Chinese immigration has not been associated with any influx
oi capital, but was exclusively a flow of labourers from one
part ol the world to the other, these labourers being but
very seldom skilled or technically or educationally trained,
but belonging mainly to the class of unskilled and agricul-
tural labour. Tnis is in contrast with European immigration,
of whicn an essential characteristic is the import of capital
and the supply of highly specialised technical and intellec-
tual workers.
4. In recent ye;ars the number of wage-earning Chinese has fallen
consideradlj/ . Tnis falling-off may oe accounted for not'only
by reference to the depression that set in after 1929, but
also Dy increased mechanization and the substitution of Na-
tives for Chinese; so that even should the present economic
situation improve, there is but little reason for supposing
that the latter will ever recover their former predominant
position as wage-earners. Thus one of the most Important sti-
muli to immigration has lost a great deal of its force.
5- Notwithstanding tnis, and even notwithstanding the growing
economic consciousness oi some Native the economic
field still offers many good chances to the Chinese, who --
by reason of their dilllgence, business acumen and thrift -
Vy ill continue in the future to be a useful section of buma—
tran society.




i
01538043
1508


■
gsi • ' ■
H I
I
j HI
ggH ' ||||
H
