

AMATEUR 5ERIE5.
No. 8.
. ffhe . . .
★
Australian ,g_
<s fruit Harden^
P '
By J. S. HERON.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and London.


COMPY.,
It.), SYDNEY,
:OPLE for FARM, ORCHARD, VINEYARD and all other IMPLEMENTS
and MACHINES. Our Catalogues are FREE for the asking-.
D ° '' an,d °HAR ))G Ho'uNIf D . ™ ES JAMES MARTIN’S PLOWS
Single Plows • Lead them all. Hillside Plows .
Double Plows . Digging Plows.
Walkin' 6 Plows ' SubsoiflPlowT !
Hiding Plows Stump-Jump Plows
All our Plo>vs are built to do SATISFACTORY WORK, and THEY DO IT.
ADJUSTABLE LEVER HARROW
A splendid Tool
for the Orchard.
Covers 5 feet and
is easily worked
by one horse.
Price • £2 10s.
Farmers, Orchardists, Vineyardists, Corn, Tobacco and Sugar Growers I
nftlM’T RF with a mere livin s- Get the right
1/1/11 1 UL OatloriCU Implements and Machines if you are
Farming for PROFIT. You can’t afford to do without our Catalogues. They are FREE
for the asking. THEY WILL STIR YOU UP. Send for one To-day.
James MARTIN & Comfy.,
161 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.


Established 1881.
J. JVnbhIGAJN,
Late oT George Street Markets,
BUSINESS CARRIED ON AT——
6 ROYAL ARCADE,
★
S CODIN'IB
Seeds of the Best Quality always in Steely
All Seeds being offered are tested under our
Special Superintendence.
VEGETABLE & FLOWER SEEDS
OF ALL DESCRIPTIONS,
flade up in packets of 3d. and 6d. each.
POST FREE ON ALL ss. ORDERS.
Our Only Address— CFvarleS . Ciatlijl
J. MILLIGAN,
No 6 Jloyal Arcade, Sydney.
CASH ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.


“ fee hive J
DURHL
W. & 8. FAGAN y The Premier Citrus
Growers of Cumberland, have always on hand a
large assortment of clean, healthy, well-grown trees of all the
leading varieties of the Citrus family, worked on both oi ange
and lemon seedlings.
All Trees are grown in new soil
Our Assortment includes—
ORANGES. —St. Michael, Mediterranean Sweet, Joppa
Homasassa, Washington Navel, Common Navel,
Valencia Late, Blood Orange, Common Seville, Flat
Seville and Navel Seville.
MANDARINS. —Emperor, Thorney, Scarlet and Beauty of
Glen Retreat.
LEMONS. —Lisbon, Thornless Lisbon, Villa Franca, Sicilian
and Belior.
Bast India Limes, West India Limes.
Shaddocks, Citrons and Cumquots.
PERSIMMONS. —We have a grand collection of all the best
varieties.
All Orders for Trees receive our best attention.
ORCHARD PROPERTIES.
Those desirous of obtaining an Orchard Property in the finest
Citrus-growing district of Cumberland should communicate with
W. & S. FAGAN, who will furnish full particulars, or drive
intending purchasers to inspect. We frequently have splendid
orchard properties for sale, of large area, and in full bearing. We
also undertake the formation and planting of orchards, and the
supply of fruit trees of every variety.
W. & S. FAGAN,
fruitgrowers and J/urserymerj.
Address—DUßAL, N.S.W.


Adyertisembnt.
TESTIMOKTIA.LS
W. & S. FAGAN, “ Beehive Nursery,” Dural.
We have received extensive consignments of Orange and Lemon
trees from you every season for some years past and they have always
given us great satisfaction. They are splendidly packed and always
clean and thrifty. They are certainly the best Citrus stock we have
handled. WEST BEOS., Goulburn Valley Nurseries,
Mooroopna, Victoria.
The trees you supplied to me have given entire satisfaction. The
Washington Navels are very fine, the Mandarins have yielded wonder-
ful crops, and are all that can be desired both for flavour and size.
The Lemons are a splendid sample. A., TUENBULL, Emu Plains.
The eleven hundred trees I had from you two years ago have all
done splendidly. I can recommend your trees to anyone desiring good
Citrus fruit. OEOEOE POWEE, Seven Hills.
I thank you for the care and painstaking manner in which you both
laid out and planted my orchard at Arcadia. The trees are healthy,
clean and well rooted. Your work shows practical and scientific
knowledge of the highest order.
J. G. CLEGG, 67 King-st., Newtown, Sydney.
I have had trees from your Nursery several times, and they have
given me entire satisfaction. I recommend anyone planting to give
your trees a trial. W. BOWD, Caddai.
The fruit trees I have obtained from you have been of very good
quality, and have given the greatest satisfaction.
W. LUCAS, Emu Plains.
The two thousand five hundred Citrus trees you supplied for our
orchard are turning out excellently, with abundance of fruit of fine
quality. BEYAN BEOS., “ Crickhowel Orangery,” Galston.
The trees purchased from you have done very well, despite the fact
that they were planted at the beginning of a severe drought. Being
well rooted stock and free from disease, they made headway where
weaker trees died. H. LAND, Newtown.
We can bear testimony to the very excellent manner in which you
planted twenty acres of our orchard with your very fine Citrus fruit.
They have done remarkably well. CAEE BEOS., Galston.
The excellent selection of fruit trees which you have supplied for
me to friends at Gosford, Morpeth, and Liverpool Plains has given
entire satisfaction. I would recommend any person desiring a good
assortment of choice trees to leave the selection in your hands.
JOHN W. S. CAMPBELL, Public School. Galston.


FRUIT. FRUIT. FRUIT.
Established 1859.
JOHN POPE & CO.,
Wholesale jfruit flfcercbants,
IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS. PACKERS AND SHIPPERS,
129 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
VICTOR BRAND (Registered).
All Orders promptly and carefully executed. Communications solicited.
TELEPHONE 1885.
BOX, G.P.0.. 696.
CABLE : “POPE.”
ABC 4th Edition used.
Reliable Fruit Trees,
TRUE TO NAME.
Acclimatised Persimmons, Walnuts, Chestnuts
And English Forest Trees.
Shade and Shelter Trees, Hardy Evergreen and
Deciduous Flowering Shrubs, Climbers, Palms
and Nursery Stock of Every Description.
FRANCIS FERGUSON,
Nurseryman, Double Bay, Sydney.
CITY depot-
30 ELIZABETH ST. (near Hunter St.)
IS" No connection with any Firms trading under a similar name.


G. LICCIARDI,
Tpuitepcp I Coi^fcetionep
128 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
Branch Shop-BENT and PHILLIP STS-
Choicest Fruits and Confectionery only kept in stock.
FRUITS OF THE SEASON
AT LOWEST PRICES.
All Orders punctually attended to and delivered free
to any part of the City and Suburbs of Sydney.
Uu’'«U(' l 'W'WHu' n tu’
ALL KINDS OF SOMMER DRINKS IN STOCK.
Country Orders executed at Lowest Prices—payable in
advance.
Extreme Care is taken in Packing Fruit.
Wines, Tobacco &. Cigars kept in Stock.
Letters attended to with despatch
A TRIAL SOLICITED.


GEORGE ROBERTSON & GO.’S
USSFUL
a Australian Publications
The Dog in Australasia— By Walter Beilby, with 85 Full Page
and many minor Illustrations, Pedigrees, &c., Bvo., 21s.
Australian Sheep Husbandry— By Armstrong & Campbell,
Or. Bvo , 6s.
Malays, Game Fowls and Bantams in Australasia, Or. Bvo., 2s. 6d.
Australian Botany — By W. P. Guilfoyle, Cr. Bvo., 6s.
Australian Agriculture— By Angus Mackay, Cr. Bvo , 6s.
In the Press
The Australian Book of Poultry— By A. J. Compton. Profusely
Illustrated, 21s.
George Robertson & Co.’s Amateur Series
ONE SHILLING EACH.
1. Australian Grape Grower’s Guide — By A. J. Downey. 20
Illustrations.
2. The Amateur Fisherman’s Guide — By C. Thackeray, Secretary
to the Australian Fishermen’s Association. 88 Illustrations.
3. Australian Amateur Gardening —By James J. Mortlock, with
30 Illustrations.
4. The Australasian Poultry Guide — By James J. McCue. Illus-
trated by A. J. Compton.
5. Australasian Pigeon Guide — By Walter Fry. Illustrated by
A. J. Compton.
6. Australasian Canary Guide — By Walter Fry. Illustrated
by A. J. Compton.
7. Australian Kitchen Garden— By J. Finedon. Illustrated.
8. The Australian Fruit Garden— By J. S, Heron. Illustrated.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
MELBOURNE, 384-390 Little Collins St. SYDNEY, 361-363 George St.
ADELAIDE, Freeman St. BRISBANE, Elizabeth St.
And LONDON, 17 Warwick Square. Paternoster Row, E.C.




fc
Ed
>
b
co
w
B
iJ
<
*
a
EH
a
o
02
m
a
►j
S
o
03
<
K
o
03
o
0 W
■« g
S O
® o
§ P 3
1 S
M co
s; W
. H
£ 03
I Eh
a. C 5
" fc
s •<
.2 03
s. O
,s
-5
r3<
s


IJou Cannot Grow perfect F rilBf -
Unless you use the Spray Pump freely as a remedy against the
numerous insect and fungus pests that infest our orchards.
SPRAYING is of
njore importance
than Cultivation!
A fact now recognised by
all up-to-date Orchardists.
you are not using a
Good Pump you are
wasting time and
money.
OUR PUMPS
PERFECTION.
The BEAN and KNAPSACK PUMPS are the best of their class,
while the . . .
CLIMAX SPRAY PUMP
The Premier Pump of the World.
PRICES-
Bean Bucket Pump 21s.
Supreme” Knapsack Pumps 355,
Figaro” „ „ 425. 6d.
Climax Pumps £2 155., £3 10s., £4 10s., £5.
Write for our Spray Pump Catalogue, post free on application.
F. LASSETTER & CO., Ltd., Sydney and Brisbane.


JOHN C. COLE & SON,
jSurserjnncn,
Richmond Nurseries
URNLEY ST. & VICTORIA ST. E.
(AT BRIDGE),
RICHMOND, MELBOURNE.
AND AT . . .
GLEN HARROW,
FERN TREE GULLY, VICTORIA.
Certificated tinder Vegetation Diseases Act. 1896.
New Pears, New Apples, New Peaches, New Plums,
and many other varieties of Fruit.
AU Apples worked on Blight-proof Stocks, all Pears on Seedling Stocks.
We make a Specialty oi the Dwarfing System for Pears and
Apples, which we consider the best for private gardens.
ALL OUR STOCKS ARE WELL-GROWN AND HEALTHY.
Oranges and Lemons acclimatized ; also, New South Wales
and Japanese Persimmons, Rhubarb, Guava, Asparagus, Loquats,
and Japanese Plums.
CATALOGUES FREE BY POST ON APPLICATION.
INSPECTION OF NURSERIES INVITED.
Our Nurseries at Richmond are situated about 3 miles from the City.
The Victoria Street trams pass the gates. Fare Bd.


THE
Australian Fruit Garden
A PRACTICAL MANUAL
On the Formation and Planting of Orchards, and the
Management of the chief Fruit-yielding Plants
of Australia,
With Lists of Varieties and Chapters on the Treatment of
Fruit Pests and the Disposal of Fruit.
CFvarles E. (Ratliff
By J. S. HERON
Member of Council Fruit-Growers’ Association of New
South Wales.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and London.


MURRAY BROS.,
CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA.
The Cheapest House for all your Requirements.
IRONMONGERY. Including all Descriptions of Agricultural
Implements and Tools.
Cultivators, Ploughs, Forks, Hoes, Spades.
Everything Required by the Farmer, the Orchardist, or the Gardener.
Building Requisites. Crockery and Glassware.
Furniture. Pianos. Organs. Plumbing and Ironworking.
Direct Importations arriving each week.
1 1 s F .i.wnfli
WOOSTER’S MANURES
FRUIT GROWING WILL BE PROFITABLE.
No. 1. Bone Dust Manure.
No. 2. All Pure Bone Dust.
No. 3. Fertilizer.
SULP. POTASH AND AMMONIA, BLOOD AND NIPHO
MANURES, blended to your own formula.
Note Address
.A.. WOOSTER,
Manure Mills,
EAST CARLINGFORD, N.S.W.


PREFACE.
This little manual is intended chiefly for the use of those fruit-
growers whose orchards are limited in extent, and whose principal
occupation is other than the culture of fruit for profit. At the same
time, the author ventures to hope that the professional, as well as the
amateur fruit-grower, will find it of some use to him, as it contains
the result of a careful study of the best modern authorities on the
subject, as well as the fruits of several years’ practical experience on
an orchard in New South Wales.
The profit and loss side of the subject is, perhaps, brought into
greater prominence than is usual in hand-books of this class. The
reader, whose orchard is a “ hobby ” to be maintained regardless of
expense, will remember, when he comes across matter of this kind,
that the author is a professional— i.e., grows fruit solely with a view
to its sale, —and naturally regards outlay on an orchard as
capital sunk in a business, on which he expects to earn a profit.
If the reader desires to be bound by no pecuniary limits, and to
make his orchard ornamental rather than useful, a source of expense
rather than of profit, the ways of doing so are countless, and, provided
the rules of healthy tree life are observed, his own fancy is the best
guide.
Through the courtesy of the Department of Agriculture of New
South Wales, the great mass of valuable information contained in
the Agricultural Gazette of this Colony, and the Fanners' and
Fruitgrowers' Guide, has been placed at the author’s disposal in
the compiling of this work. For permission to reproduce illus-
trations, and for the loan of blocks, he is indebted to the same
generous source, and to Messrs. F. Lassetter & Co., the owners of
the blocks used in the production of the full page views of citrus
trees, which are here republished, both to add to the attractiveness of
the book and to give an idea of the habit of the trees. The owners
of many of the orchards have kindly consented to the republication
of the views, and Messrs. E. Bevan and J. Cocks have supplied
details in connection with them.
The author should also acknowledge the many hints and valuable
pieces of information which friends in the industry have from
time to time afforded him, and which they will doubtless be pleased
to find he has valued so highly that they are incorporated in this
volume.
Castle Hill, New South Wales,
March 14, 1898.


Manufacturers of SPRAY PUMPS
and the “FLORIST” Sprayer
WHICH IS THE BEST SYRINGE MADE
“ FLORIST
SPRAYER
will not
damage the
most delicate
of Plants or
Ferns,
Price— 7s.
each.
Price, 455. each.
►♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
MERRIMAN BROS. & GO.,
Engineers, Brassfounders and Pump Makers,
611 LITTLE LONSDALE STREET,
Telephone 1075.
(NEAR SPENCER STREET),
»—MELBOURNE.


CONTENTS.
Introductory Chapter—
Fruit-Growing in Australia
Citrus Fruit
Summer Fruit ...
Gluts ...
Profits in the Industry-
Advice to the Intending Planter
To the Reader ...
Chapter I.—
Selection of Site for an Orchard
The Quality of the Soil ...
Subsoil...
Aspect ...
Frosts ...
Shelter...
Evenness of Ground
Accessibility
Chapter ll.
The Preparation of the Ground —Clearing
Trenching
Trench-ploughing
Ploughing and Subsoiling
Roads ....
Fences ...
Surface Drains
Chapter lII.
What to Plant.—The Nursery
Stocks ...
Lemon versus Orange Stock
Budding
Tongue Grafting
Heading Young Trees
Chapter IY.—
Planting Fruit Trees.—Time to Plant
Staking Out
Quincunx Planting


Preparation of Holes
The Operation of Planting
Watering, Mulching, Tying, Trimming and Labelling
Subsoil Draining
Chapter V.—
Pruning
Heading Back Old Trees
Root Pruning
Chapter Vl.
Cultivation
Summer Cultivation
Winter Cultivation
The Growth of Crops in an Orchard
Chapter VII.—
Manures for Fruit Trees
Nitrogen
Phosphoric Acid...
Liebig’s Law of Minimum
Potash ...
Price and Value of Manures
Quantity to Apply
Chapter VIII.—
The Apple
The Pear
The Quince
The Loquat
The Peach
The Nectarine ..
The Apricot
The Plum
The Cherry
Citrus Fruits
The Vine
The Fig
The Passion Fruit
The Persimmon ..
Other Fruits Cultivated in Australia
The Growth of Bush Fruits in the Orchard


Chapter IX.—
The Picking and Marketing of Fruit
The Necessity for Canneries
Stone Fruits
Apples and Pears
Storing Pippin Fruits
Marketing Citrus Fruits ...
Storage of Citrus Fruit ...
The Export of Citrus Fruit
The Export of Summer Fruit
Picking Aprons and Shirts
Ladders
The Gin Case
Agents’ Charges...
Chapter X.—
Diseases of Fruit Trees
Bordeaux Mixture
Soft Soap and Sulphur
Spraying Apparatus
Chapter XL
Fruit Preserving
Jam Making
Canning
Drying and Evaporating
Prunes ...
Crystallized Fruit


C. A. NOBELIUS,
JYurseryman,
Qrower of
All Kinds of FRUIT TREES-
Strawberries, Gooseberries, Currants,
Raspberries, &c.
Also DECIDUOUS TREES—
Elms, Oaks, Palms, Poplars, &c.,
for Street and Avenue Planting.
My Nurseries are now over Sixty Acres in extent, and
contain upwards of HALF-A-MILLION of Trees in various
stages; by far the largest establishment cf the kind in the
Australian colonies. Being entirely under my own supervision,
customers can depend upon the trees supplied being well grown and
true to name.
Nursery Notes, in The Australasian , says : “The whole garden
is a model of order and cleanliness. A visit to the Gembrook
Nurseries, Emerald, will well repay anyone who can appreciate a
well-conducted nursery establishment.”
CATALOGUES issued on the First of March
each year-free by post, on application.
GEMBROOK NURSERIES,
EMERALD, VICTORIA.


INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.
FRUIT-GROWING IN AUSTRALIA.
The history of fruit-growing in Australia is a varied one, as
regards both the extent and profitableness of the occupation.
In the early days of settlement the limited amount of
fruit which was then cultivated brought very high prices ;
indeed, rumour fixes the price of the first oranges sold in
Sydney and Melbourne at an almost fabulous figure. Fruit-
growing, therefore, naturally became a popular occupation, and
orchards multiplied in the settled districts.
The facility with which the most delicate fruits could be
raised in this climate induced an over-expansion of the
industry. Settlers who had looked upon the apples, plums,
gooseberries, and other fruits of the wintry climate of the old
country (speaking as an Australian) as delicacies, could not
resist the fascination of embarking in the culture of such
chefs-d'oeuvre of nature’s bounty as the orange, peach,
apricot, and nectarine —fruits which, perhaps, they had de-
voured only with their eyes when displayed with all the pomp
due to their rarity and delicacy in the windows of “ West
End ” fruiterers. The inevitable result of over production—
unremunerative prices—followed this unjustified expansion ;
and fruit-farming suffered from a series of bad years, during
which, the finest peaches, pears, and apples were sent loose
or in baskets to market by the cart-load, and fruit was
commonly retailed out by the case, a “ gin ” case being
used as a measure, at prices so low that the wages of the
seller could barely be cleared. With the outbreak of the
gold mines, however, a new state of things was inaugurated.
Great numbers of settlers arrived who were, or speedily
became, consumers of large quantities of fruit, without com-
peting in its production ; in their train new industries and
commercial enterprises were started, the country was opened


up, and the demand for fruit and other farm produce rose
with a bound, soon outstripping the limited production, and
raising prices to such a height again that fruit-growing
became almost as lucrative as gold-mining itself. These were
the palmy days when a small basketful of fruit was commonly
sold for one pound sterling, and the grower looked with
disdain at a fruit tree which did not return him one or two
pounds per annum clear of expenses. As the demand for
labour on the gold-fields was gradually satisfied by the rush
of immigrants, and wages reached a normal level, the popula-
tion drifted into employments other than mining, which pro-
mised profitable returns. Again the glamour which
surrounds the raising of fruit on this continent asserted
itself, and hundreds of men rushed into the industry, not only
because of its remunerative nature, but because the merest
tyro in agriculture may, if he have a few pounds of capital,
or the energy to work, here hope to become possessed of acres
of fruit trees, which would return a fortune if their produce
could but be transported, like Aladdin’s palace, fresh to
London, Glasgow, or Dublin, and may revel in fruit which,
in cold and mist-veiled England (comparatively speaking, of
course) might “ grace the table of a duke.” To this cause,
more than any other, the almost reckless planting of orchards
is to be attributed. New-comers, especially, could not, and
cannot, grasp the fact that peaches, a ton of which in England
would be worth a king’s ransom, might possibly be sold in
Australia at such a price that it would pay better to feed
them to pigs. Again, therefore, the pendulum swung back,
so that twenty or thirty years ago, with the exception,
perhaps, of citrus fruit, fruit-growing had ceased to be
profitable, existing orchards were neglected or abandoned, and
planting ceased.
This time the recovery was slow but sure. Population
gradually rose year after year, until the consumption of fruit
balanced the production ; the low prices prevailing in one
market induced the exportation of fruit to other parts of the
continent ; and the industry was established on a firmer
basis, though the arrangements for the disposal of fruit, in
Sydney, at any rate, remain in the same crude state as
formerly. For the last four or five years we have seen signs
of returning depression, and prices have, in some instances,
during gluts, sunk very low—so low that the agent who


negotiated the sale, has often received more, in commission,
than the grower who produced the fruit. Another return of the
former hard times for fruit-growing is now much more to be
dreaded than ever before, owing to the large number of per-
sons engaged in the industry and the large amount of capital
involved.
It behoves all fruit-growers to very seriously consider
their position, and devise means for preventing these periodical
returns of depression which not only cause wide-spread
suffering and distress, but prevent the embarkation of capital
and the introduction of “ new blood ” into an industry which
should be one of the staples of Australia.
Citrus Fruit.
With regard to the raising of citrus fruit, and especially
oranges, the future is already bright. The recent successful
shipments to London have opened up a market—the best in
the world —which can comfortably dispose of all the oranges
grown here, and that are likely to be grown for some time,
provided only those of the best quality are shipped, and the
directions given by experienced packers carefully followed.
Many growers are complaining that the London market is
only open to a quality of fruit which always brings remuner-
ative prices in Australian markets, and want to know what is
to be done with the “ rubbish ” which is always unsaleable.
The answer to this complaint is : In the first place “ rubbish ”
should not be grown. If the trees are properly manured,
cultivated, pruned, and cleaned of diseases as far as possible,
they will probably produce good fruit. If they won’t produce
good fruit after trying this treatment, there is something
radically wrong with the trees or the ground, and success in
fruit-growing without suitable soil and position, and good
trees, is impossible.
Again, the sending away of our best fruit will ease the
market, and help to raise the price of much second-class,
though by no means worthless, fruit which is now seen to
disadvantage in comparison. If the grower netts six shillings
a bushel for fifty out of one hundred cases in London, and
two shillings a bushel for the rest in Sydney, Melbourne, or
Adelaide, he is better off than if he gets four shillings a bushel


for fifty, and one shilling a bushel for the rest, in colonial
markets, although the price of the cheapest fruit has only
risen one shilling per bushel.
Moreover, the incentive to get the higher price for
first-class fruit, and the knowledge that a market awaits all
the fruit of that quality that can be produced, at a settled
price, is a great inducement to exertion in looking after an
orchard.
The worthless fruit, in the way of small inferior oranges
and lemons, such as one sometimes sees carted loose, or in
bags, to market, by the load, should be converted into citric
acid. This would pay better than selling it for less than a
pound a ton to hawkers, as is done now, and would relieve
the market of fruit which is not fit to eat in many cases, being
either undeveloped and astringent, or over-ripe and on the
borders of decay.
The manufacture of candied peel could also dispose of a
good deal of citrus fruit.
The grower of citrus fruits may hopefully look forward to
a time when his best oranges and lemons will be shipped to
Europe, his “ seconds ” and a few of the best sold profitably
in the Australian markets (Federation, when it becomes an
established fact will, it is hoped, extend the intercolonial fruit
trade considerably), and his worst fruit turned into citric acid,
for which there is an immense demand, at rates which return
a small margin of profit to the grower of the fruit.
Summer Fruit.
Having spoken at length on the prospects of citrus fruit
growing, it will be only just to give summer fruit—so-called —
a separate paragraph. The acreage under deciduous fruit-trees,
in New South Wales and Victoria alone, is immense, and the
annual output is very great, and increasing.
Unlike Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania, New
South Wales has not yet attempted the export of apples to
London in any quantity. This, however, is probably due to
the fact that the cooler parts of that colony, which produce the
best apples, are some considerable distance from the port of
shipment.
No impartial observer, who carefully considers the present
position of affairs in the fruit growing industry, and especially


in summer fruit growing, can fail to be struck with the want
of method which characterizes the selection of varieties for
planting.
Growers appear to emulate each other in the number of
varieties which they grow. Among amateurs, selections are
now preferred to collections of fruits and flowers, .and yet to
the amateur the presence of a number of worthless sorts in his
plantation makes much less difference than to the professional
horticulturist, who is unable, in nine orchards out of ten, to
get a remunerative for a certain proportion of his output,
owing to the fact that the trees are of some inferior variety.
It may well be said that, as far as the best varieties of
trees to plant are concerned, fruit-growing here is still in the
experimental stage.
If six English or six Californian growers were asked
separately to name the best apple, pear, peach, plum, or
apricot to grow for market in a given locality in their respective
countries, their answers would show a certain amount of
similarity. The same answers to that question would
scarcely be given by six Australian growers, unless they were
neighbours, who knew exactly what was in each other’s
orchards, and how much each sort of fruit brought in the
market.
The reason for this is not far to seek. There is abso-
lutely no commercial union among the growers, no recognized
authority on fruit-growing, no means of getting accurate
information about the practical side of the business.
Nurserymen, too, are constantly introducing novelties in
fruit trees, which they advertise until the fruit is tested and
found wanting, when the advertisements cease, and another
novelty, or an old variety with a new name, is brought out,
and presented to the public as the best of its kind.
Many professional growers of long experience will not
embark in the cultivation of any variety of tree, on a large
scale, unless they know something about its fruiting qualities,
and suitability for their market, but plant every year one or
two trees of each novelty that comes out, “ so as to have the
wood.” The result is, that they have half an acre or so set aside
as an experimental patch, which costs as much to look after
as half an acre of bearing and profitable orchard, and brings
nothing in.


Another cause of the large number of worthless
varieties of fruit trees now cultivated is the difficulty of
disposing of large quantities of fruit at one time.
While growers depend so much on local markets for
fresh fruit, they will not plant the best varieties extensively,
for they say, with reason, that it is no good growing too much
of one sort, the market won’t take it. The remedy for this is
the establishment of canneries and drying establishments,
which must have the best fruit, and can consume large
quantities when the market price sinks below a certain level.
The time is not far distant, the writer hopes and believes,
when a grower for profit in Australia will be able to plant at
least ten or twenty acres of a single variety of peach,
apricot, plum, or pear, knowing that if the market price for
the fresh fruit shall be too low, he can readily dispose of his
whole crop to a local cannery at a profitable price.
When this can be done—and it is done in many parts of
America—growers will be able to confine their varieties to
ten or a dozen of the best—a system which will entail far less
labour than is the case with the present hodge-podge of
varieties, and will admit of the orchards being kept in much
better trim.
On a “ mixed ” orchard at the present time the labour of
marketing summer fruit is enormous. Varieties succeed each
other throughout the season, and the trees have to he gone
over every few days. If there is not enough fruit of any
variety—as is often the case—to be worth pulling, it is
wasted, or loads have to be “made up’’with fruit which is
not fit for market.
This is not always the fault of the grower ; it is the
result of a system which depends upon the market for fresh
fruit, and entails the growing of a number of varieties
sufficient to “ have something going every week.” When wet
weather comes, and weeds spring up, a large part of the
available labour is expended in picking fvuit, instead of
working the ground.
Orange growers, whose crop falls within a certain part of
the year, are well known to have a much better chance of
keeping their orchards clean than summer fruit growers, who
must attend to the marketing of fruit all through a long
season (when they have the number of varieties generally
cultivated in a summer fruit orchard).


Gluts.
Fruit-growing for profit in Australia, in addition to the
nncertainties of the climate, the possibility of trees proving of
inferior variety, and the ills that agriculture and horticulture
are everywhere heirs to, has to face the chance of a glut. In
other parts of the world there are gluts, of course ; but in
almost every progressive fruit-growing country some provision
is made for meeting them.
Jam factories we certainly have, but the consumption of
jam here has been met, and jam cannot be exported to
Europe. California, which sends thousands of pounds’ worth
of dried and canned fruit away, both to other parts of
America, and to Europe, has hardly any export of jam.
It would be a mistake not to mention the use of jam
factories in relieving gluts ; but, as small and inferior fruit is
good enough for jam, the manufacturers can only afford to
give the price of such fruit for what they require. In the
event of a glut in the market, they take fruit too good for
their purposes at a low price, which might pay the grower if
the fruit had been shipped direct to the factory, perhaps in
bags ; but is ruinous when he has to pay marketing
expenses and fees out of it.
What professional grower, who sends his fruit to market
to be sold, does not know the feeling of hopelessness, of being
checkmated, euchred, in “ that form of gambling known as
farming,” when he finds that his fruit, which last season,
perhaps, brought him in “ big money,” is going in this time
to be sacrificed in a glutted market ?
The fruit looks just the same, it may be better than last
year’s, but the delicacy of its bloom, its fragrance, and beauty
have vanished, for the grower. No longer packed carefully
into small boxes, papered, and daintily set off with green
leaves ; it is now dumped ignominiously into larger cases,
and shaken down, with no pretence of respect or care, the
only aim being to make up a good big load, and pack it off to
market in the shortest time.- Every penny in the expense of
handling it has become of account, and the question is,
whether it is worth sending in at all.
The grower has, in his mind’s eye, already struck its
name off his list of “ good sorts,” and will turn his attention
next planting time to something which comes in later or


earlier, however inferior in quality. It is the “ fortune of
war,” and it never strikes him that really good fruit would
never be sold cheap, no matter when it ripened, if any means
of disposing of it were available.
The question has been raised that Australian fruit will
not can and dry so well as the Californian ; and yet bottled
fruit from Australian orchards, as exhibited at our local
Shows, will compare favourably with canned or bottled fruit
from any part of the world.
The question of marketing expenses, and the cases now
in use, which, although not causing or resulting from gluts,
make their effect much more disastrous, are dealt with in
Chapter IX.
The use of the “ gin,” it should here be remarked, as it
necessitates the re-packing of fruit for export, is a serious
check to the easing of the market during a glut—much more
serious than many people might think, since the speculation of
exporting fruit fit to carry can only now be indulged in by the
packer who has the labour and means to re-pack in exp; rt
cases.
Profits in the Industry.
In spite of ail its drawbacks, which have been, and in
these pages will be, unhesitatingly insisted upon—not wKh a
view to discouraging enterprise in fruit-growing, but to
induce the fruit-growing reader to make an effort to grasp
the position and possibilities of his industry,—in spite of the
many risks and dangers attending the planting of fruit-trees,
there is undoubtedly a large profit to be made out of a good
orchard.
Instances of very remunerative returns from orchard
properties might be quoted without number. Proof that
money may be made out of fruit-growing is to be found in the
very large number of growers who obtain a living, and support
themselves and their families in comfort, off orchards the
reverse of flourishing. The visitor to the fruit districts of
New South Wales, for instance, may well ask himself “if it
is possible for a living to be made off five or six acres of
stunted, diseased, badly cultivated, inferior trees, what
might a hard-working man obtain from ten or fifteen acres of
trees, carefully selected, well cultivated, manured, and pruned,


ipiai
If-
' > 1
(Block kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassctter Sg Co.)
ORANGE TREE IN MR. CAY'S ORCHARD, GALSXON, NEW SOUTH WALES.
This tree is one of two which, in one season, together bore 40 bushels of
oranges.


healthy and vigorous, and planted in a picked position?” As
a matter of fact, even in the present bad times, it is no
uncommon thing for a grower to clear £3O or £4O per acre
off his orchard. The writer is acquainted with a man who
has supported himself and family in comfort for many years
on the produce of less than three-quarters of an acre of an
orchard of mixed fruits, his annual return being sometimes as
high as £BO for the fruit on the trees. One grower obtains
on an average £1 per annum from every one of his apricot
trees ; another has lemon trees averaging ten cases to the
tree every year, and returning not less than twice that amount
per annum. The writer, off his own orchard, which is by no
means the model he would wish it to be, has obtained the
following within the last four years : —From a single cherry
plum tree, twelve cases of plums in one year, bringing over
£3 clear ; from an orange tree, five cases of oranges, netting
over £1 ; from an apricot, four cases of early apricots,
netting £2 ; from a four-year-old lemon tree, thirteen
shillings’ worth of fruit ; from a single tree, fourteen cases of
pears, netting fifty shillings. Amongst his immediate
neighbours, within a mile’s radius, peach, plum, apple, loquat,
nectarine, and persimmon trees could be found, returning
year after year considerably over £1 worth of fruit each.
Is it too much to suppose that what one tree will do, an
orchard of a thousand trees might and would do if they
received similar attention, and were planted in equally
favourable positions ?
Advice to the Intending Planter
To those about to embark in the industry, the Author
offers the following advice, much of it the result of dearly
bought experience.
Before all things, devote great care to the selection of
your land. If you are not tied down to any particular
locality, time will be well spent in a tour through the fruit-
growing districts of the colony in which you intend to settle.
Put yourself into communication with the Department
of Agriculture of that Colony, which exists for the pur-
pose of assisting de facto, and in posse cultivators, and
will give you much disinterested and valuable advice;
at the same time remember that officialism is some-


times unpractical, and occasionally capricious. Buy all the
books on fruit-growing you can. There are very few
Australian ones of practical value. Crichton’s two volumes
are the best modern Australian work. Beyond Australian
ones you will find Wickson’s California Fruits the best.
Remember, however, that circumstances alter cases, and that
no books—not even this one —contain all the information you
will need. Lastly, don’t be afraid, if you are a newcomer to
the colonies (if a native I needn’t say this), to ask the
“ natives ” of whatever place you think of settling in for their
advice, which you will find them in almost all cases willing to
give.
Remember, in this connection, that a little practical
experience is sometimes worth a good deal of theory. “ A
scholar without diligence is a lover without money; a traveller
without knowledge is a bird without wings ; a theorist without
practice is a tree without fruit.”
Having chosen your land with a view to its adaptability
for fruit-growing, accessibility 7", and so on, you will embark
next in the operations of getting it ready for planting.
Whatever work you let on contract will require your
supervision if you expect it to be properly done ; no work is
so easily “scamped” as clearing, ploughing, etc. Remember
that a very honest man is sometimes tempted to leave a
troublesome root in the hole where a tree has been grubbed,
or weigh on the handles of his plough in rough ground. A
clearing contract is more effective than Diogenes’ lantern for
finding honest men, and the proper fulfilment of it is safe-
guarded by a little personal attention. I do not mean to
suggest that the class of men you have to deal with on a farm
in Australia is worse than the same class elsewhere, but there
are black sheep here as everywhere.
Advice as to the selection of trees, directions for planting
and looking after them, you will find ( as complete as space
permits, in this book.
How, as to the capital required. In the most thickly-
populated fruit-growing centres, land in its virgin forest state,
suitable for fruit-growing, can be bought (1898) at prices
varying from £lO to £3O per acre, according to position. The
cost of clearing ranges generally from £5 to £l2 per acre ; of
ploughing and subsoiling, fifty shillings per acre at present.
Fruit trees budded or grafted (one year old) from sixty shillings


to £5 per hundred, according to variety, delivered on the ground.
Manures vary in price ; good bonedust is worth from £3 10s.
to £4 10s. per ton in Sydney and Melbourne. An orchard in its
sixth year should clear worldng expenses, and before then a
considerable amount of fruit will have been produced. An acre
of orchard, when six years old, will have cost, approximately,
as follows :—Land, £ls ; clearing, £8 ; fencing and road-
making, £3 ; subsoiling and planting, £lO ; five years’
maintenance, £B4* ; total, £7O. This sum should provide
for “intense ” culture, but will not cover sub-drainage.
If the writer closed this Introductory Chapter without a
glowing eulogy on the possibilities of fruit-growing in Aus-
tralia, he would be committing, possibly, a grave breach of
etiquette, since it is the rule with most writers on fruit
culture to assure their readers, in their introductions, that
their particular corner of the world is a terrestrial Paradise
the Garden of Eden revived, and bound to whip the rest of
creation in raising fruit—if it does not do so already—as soon
as its natural advantages become sufficiently recognised.
English authors assure their readers that English apples
(when they are grown) are very superior to American ones.
Californians assure their readers that California leads the
world in prunes and raisins, in spite of the higher prices
given for the French and Spanish products. France assures
all whom it may concern that Australia can never, never hope
to compete with her own sunny land in the production of
wines in any way fit to drink, in spite of all the prize medals
which judges may award. And Australia—where does she
come in in this game of bluff ?
Perhaps it would be more pleasing to the average Aus-
tralian reader, whose modesty is proverbial, that no jubilant
panegyric should be indulged in. New South Wales is not
unknown to fame, however, as the producer of excellent oranges.
Victoria, Tasmania, and South Australia have established a
reputation in and beyond these lands (which, to his ever-
lasting loss, Csesar never knew), and we, the fruit-growers
of Australia, need have no hesitation in declaring to the
universe at large :
1. We are not ashamed of what we have done, in the
short time at our disposal, in the way of producing good
* This estimate, of course, refers to small and medium-sized orchards. Large
areas may be more economically worked.


fruit ; we believe that our best will compare favourably with
the best from any other country, grown under similar
conditions.
2. We hope before long to have the honour of meeting the
fruit-growers of other countries in the markets of the world,
and of trying a friendly fall with them to prove who can turn
out the best preserved product at the lowest price.
3. We also hope that our fresh fruit, which has been
welcomed in far-distant lands, both for its excellence and for
the auspicious time at which it makes its appearance, will
before long arrive at those hospitable shores in larger quan-
tities, and also make its entry into other places where, we
believe, an equally warm welcome awaits it. To those
m-hospitable shores where our fruit has been hitherto sub-
jected to strict examination, and even ill-usage, we turn with
“ a countenance more in sorrow than in anger,” and declare
that in those points—diseases and so forth—in which we are
said to have been to blame, we hope to amend, and, as to the
faults on the other side, we look forward to the removal or
abatement of the present troublesome restrictions in the first
place ; in the second, we take this hesitancy about the admit-
tance of our produce as a tribute to our strength.
4. We admit that our system of fruit-growing is not,
perhaps, as highly developed as it might be. What results
we have achieved are owing more, perhaps, to natural con-
ditions than to our skill. We acknowledge, with thanks,
receipt of much valuable information from across the Pacific,
as also from Europe, and trust that when that information
shall have been assimilated and adapted to our needs, and
when the results of our own best efforts shall be properly
understood and appreciated, we shall be in a position to reflect
back the light so opportunely and generously shown us, with
an added lustre.
To the Reader.
The Author will esteem it a favour if the reader will
forward him any well-attested information on fruit culture in
these colonies, or any cases in support of, or controverting,
opinions advanced in this book.


CHAPTER I,
Selection of Site for an Orchard.
Ik the selection of the site for an orchard, many points
have to be considered. To obtain land satisfying all possible
requirements is, of course, almost out of the question, but.
when the choice of several blocks of land is open to the
intending planter, every particular in their condition should be
well weighed and. considered before the final decision is made.
The principal factors in the success of the future orchard,
which may be reckoned up before the land is prepared for
planting, are :—lst, the quality of the top soil ; 2nd, the
condition of the subsoil ; 3rd, aspect ; 4th, the presence oi
sufficient shelter from prevailing winds ; sth, the evenness oi
the ground, on which depends the possibility of working the
land with horse labour, or the necessity for doing all work with
the hoe ; 6th, accessibility, i.e., the distance from market, and
the labour necessary to get the produce there.
Another consideration which the intending purchaser oi
land frequently puts first, but which is, in reality, by no means
the most important for the financial success of the future
orchard, is the price of the land. Many a plantation has been
made, of late years, on land wholly unsuited for the culture of
fruit, simply because it was for sale at a low price, and from a
wholly mistaken policy of economy.
Thirty pounds per acre is not always an excessive price
for really good fruit land. Five pounds per acre is dear for
unsuitable soil. Twenty-five pounds per . acre saved in the
cost of the land will not compensate the purchaser for sterile
soil, impervious subsoil, a wrong aspect; it will not balance the
cost of replacing necessary plant food in the soil, and pay for
the annual loss of time in hoe-working broken ground, or in
hauling the fruit many miles to the nearest railway station,
over miry roads.
“If you wish to make a success of your orchard, then, choose
a small acreage of good and suitable, rather than a large area
of unsuitable, land. Though apparently cheap at first, the
latter will, in ten years, cost you more than the dearer land to
maintain in fertility, and return you half the crops,” is good
advice to the planter of fruit trees for profit.


The Quality of the Soil.
Fruit trees may be profitably grown upon a very large
variety of soils. Even on a small area of land so many
variations may be found in the soil that it will be found better
to select trees to suit its varying conditions, than to find a soil
of exactly the right quality to suit a given variety of fruit
tree. The best soil for an orchard is sandy loam ; fruit trees
of every variety thrive better, and produce a better quality of
fruit in such a soil, than in any other.
The worst soils in which to plant fruit trees are barren,
hungry sand —some readers may remark “That goes without
saying,” but thousands of fruit trees have been planted in
ground which cannot be otherwise described —and stiff clay
ground, such as in California goes by the name of “ adobe.
The first may, indeed, be planted, but every substance
necessary to plant life must be introduced before trees can
thrive on it. Such treatment being given, fruit of very good
quality may be produced on almost pure sand. Many of the
finest mandarins which annually reach the Sydney and
Melbourne markets are grown on the poorest of sand by means
of heavy manuring, but nine-tenths of the orchards planted on
such inhospitable soil end in failure.
Stiff clay soils, on the other hand, should never be
planted with fruit trees while any other soil is available.
They are, as a rule, hard to work, being either in the condition
of puddle when damp, or baked to the consistency of bricks
when dry.
John Walker, the well-known English popular authority on
agricultural matters, says :—“ Of all hard problems the farmer
has to solve, none equals in magnitude the difficulty of making
a profit out of the poor -clayey soils. . . . Insurmount-
able, however, as the difficulties of working clay land may
appear, it is practicable to farm it to a small profit, in the
following manner :—Let the land be well drained, thoroughly
cleared, and richly manured,” and so on. The Australian
farmer will do better to let such land religiously alone, while
there is any other to be had. If he must plant an orchard on
clayey soil, however, let him confine his varieties to pears and
pl umg —on the plum stock —while at the same time taking
Mr. Walker’s advice re manure and drains.
E. J. Wickson says of the pear, in his work on


“ California fruits,” which every orchardist who can afford to
spend twenty-five shillings on it, should possess :—“ In laying
out fruit farms, which often include a variety of soils, even in
comparatively small areas, the pears and plums (if on the
right stock) should be set on the lower, moister, stiffer soil,
and other fruits on the lighter, warmer, and better drained
portions.”
Both pears and plums, however, will do better on a loose
soil than on clay. Citrus fruits will not stand a stiff soil
under any circumstances when budded or grafted, though
seedling orange trees may be seen to occasionally thrive on
very heavy soils.
Shale soils, which are very prevalent in some parts of
Central Cumberland, N’.S.W’., produce good fruit when properly
treated. There should be at least eight inches of workable
soil on the surface, and drains should be dug to allow the
subsoil water to flow away. In many cases parallel seams of
clay run through the shale, and the water is unable to escape
through them without subsoil drainage. Shaley soils, as a
rule, are poor, and need plentiful manuring. Drainage being
secured, and manure forthcoming, apricots, lemons, peaches,
nectarines, plums—on peach stock—loquats, oranges, may
be planted, in the order named. Apples and pears do not
thrive on light shale soils, though the trees will live and
bear fair crops of fruit.
Ironstone is not a good substance to have in soil where
fruit-growing is contemplated. Where it is present in any
quantity, fruit trees do not, as a rule, prosper, although a
small amount of iron is necessary for their growth.
H. J. Webb, on the chemical composition of soils, says :
“ Oxide of iron is found in all soils, especially clays. It acts
injuriously in the form of the lower pxides, which are found
in undrained clay soils. Iron is also found in the form of
ferric sulphide (iron pyrites) and ferrous sulphate (green
vitriol) These substances occurring in large quantities are
sometimes the cause of sterility of soil.” The same author
remarks of lime : “ It neutralizes organic acids and poisonous
salts of iron, copper, etc., thus sweetening the soil.” Lime
might, therefore, be advantageously applied to a soil con-
taining iron in excess.
Soil containing small stones of over an inch and a half
diameter is not attractive to the experienced farmer on that


account. The stones will be found to interfere with the
working of the ground, and rapidly wear out all tools used
amongst them.
Boulders and rock require no comment, A small
boulder is often as troublesome to dispose of as a large
forest tree.
At the same time a small stone quarry, consisting of a
few large boulders, perhaps, on the banks of a creek, is an
acquisition to a farm, for stone, besides being valuable for
mending roads with, can be utilized for paving a yard, pro-
tecting the outlet of a drain, and in many other ways.
To sum up : Sand and heavy clay soils should be re-
jected for orchard purposes. Stony and shaley soils are not
the best, but will produce good fruit with proper treatment.
Loamy soil's, alluvial soils, light clay soils, calcareous or lime
soils, and volcanic soils may be safely planted out, and may
be relied upon to grow and maintain good healthy fruit trees,
other circumstances being favourable.
Whatever the soil may be, however, certain substances
required for the nourishment of the trees must either be
present in its natural state, or must bo supplied in the form
of manure. These substances are dealt with in Chapter 7of
this book.
Subsoil.
By subsoil is meant the soil immediately beneath the
workable surface soil. Where the latter extends to the depth
of two or three feet throughout the whole of the area to be
placed under fruit trees, the quality of the subsoil may be
ignored.
In most parts of Australia —and, indeed, of the world—
this is not the case ; and as fruit trees send their roots into
the ground to a depth of two or three feet, the subsoil becomes
a matter of importance.
The subsoil, whatever its quality, should not be found at
less than a foot below the surface. Eight inches of top soil
may be called the minimum in which to plant fruit trees.
Subsoils vary as much as surface soils. The chief
requirement in a subsoil is, that it shall be sufficiently open
and porous to allow the water to drain away, but not porous
enough to allow fertilizing substances to escape through it.


A rocky subsoil is undesirable. In deep ploughing, or
subsoiling, the stone will be found constantly in the way of
the plough, while in sub-draining, when large stones are met
with, considerable extra labour is necessary to cut through
them. Small stones in the subsoil are no disadvantage.
A shale subsoil is found to suit fruit trees, but generally
requires drainage to enable them to attain a great age. When
shale occurs near the surface in an orchard, the trees will
often grow well for the first five or six years after planting,
extending their roots rapidly through the surface soil, just
above the shale. When the whole of the soil is thus occu-
pied, the tree ceases growing, being unable to find nourish-
ment in the impermeable subsoil, and has to be constantly
manured to keep it alive. In this condition very good fruit
will often be borne, apricots of especially good quality and
early maturity being produced on light warm soils with shale
subsoils, but the trees rarely reach their full size. The crop of
fruit is consequently light, and the owner must be constantly
prepared to see his trees die off, a long drought being especially
severe to them in such a position. Drainage has a very
marked effect on a shale subsoil, but is expensive, as the
trenches must be dug with pick and shovel, instead of the
usual implements.
White, sticky clay, such as is found beneath the surface
of a large part of the land now under fruit trees in Central
Cumberland, N.S.W., is a bad subsoil. It is not only im-
pervious to water, but often contains mineral matters absolutely
poisonous to the roots of plants.
Draining is imperatively necessary in this case, and the
application of lime is beneficial ; but it is better still not to
plant fruit trees over a “ white ” clay subsoil at all when it
rises to within three feet of the surface. Red friable clay is
also a common subsoil, and though often retentive —clays
vary much in consistency and quality —forms by no means a
bad subsoil for an orchard. Trees will thrive for many years
over such a subsoil without draining, though vastly benefited
by it.
Aspect.
A north-easterly aspect is considered the best for an
orchard. Other aspects do not, however, render land unsuit-
able for orchard purposes, provided sufficient shelter is found
on the sides from which high winds may be expected.


For some of the earlier varieties of stone fruits a westerly
aspect is preferred by a few growers, the afternoon sun being
supposed to hasten the maturity of the fruit.
Frosts.
When citrus fruit is intended to be grown, particular
care should be taken to choose a situation free from frost.
(While this consideration scarcely falls under the heading of
aspect, aspect will be found to exercise a good deal of influence
over frosts.) Low lying flats and hollows should be avoided.
Local experience will prove the best guide in this matter.
Shelter.
It is most important that an orchard should be sheltered
on all sides from which high winds can strike it, either by
bills, or belts of timber trees.
The latter can only be relied upon to form a durable
breakwind when there is no possible chance of the trees being
felled. This is the case when the owner of the orchard also
owns the belt of timber trees, and has his salvation in his own
hands. It is never wise to count on one’s neighbour for the pre-
servation of a sheltering patch of native timber trees.
Many orchardists grudge the ground necessary for the
support of such effectual shelter trees as the Finns Insignis—
by far the best tree to plant for this purpose ; but the straighter
growth of the fruit trees, their freedom from the breakage and
wrenches which follow a violent gust of wind through an
orchard, and the better quality of fruit, where limbs are not
scraped and blown about, will compensate for a narrow strip of
ground thrown out of the orchard and devoted to shelter trees.
Finns Insignis forms a most efficient wind-break when
planted in double rows, the trees overlapping each other,
eighteen feet apart. They should be worked once or twice a
year for the first three or four years, after which, in good
ground, they may be left to shift for themselves.
The ground in which pines are planted should not be
impoverished by the carting off of surface soil, and the trees
will grow faster, and stand wind better, if the ground is sub-
soiled before the pines are planted,


E. J. Wickson recommends the pepper tree (Schinus
Molle ) for providing a thick low growth. It is extensively
used in Mildura. In California the Australian blue gum is
largely planted for shelter, but requires a great deal of room,
and soon runs up into the air with no branches near the
ground, necessitating the planting of lower growing trees to
render the wind-break complete. When “ native ” trees are
planted for a wind-break they should stand about twelve feet
apart, and be cut back every other year—which means labour.
The famous orange groves of the Azores—the home of
the St. Michael orange —are laid out in orchards of 200
yards square, each square surrounded by a stone wall 9 to 18
feet in height, and a belt of acacia trees within the wall. In
France rows of Lombardy poplars are planted for this purpose ;
in Italy olives, pistachio nuts, and mulberries.
The loquat tree is commonly planted for sheltering pur-
poses, a row of seedling loquats being placed down each side
of the orchard, and where low shelter only is necessary it acts
satisfactorily. The fruit of the seedling loquat is, however,
inferior, and it is doubtful whether the grafted trees grow
sufficiently fast and tall to be used as shelter trees.
Land not naturally sheltered may be surrounded by
timber trees at the cost of a small space of ground. If the
land is almost level, seedling loquats will form an effective
break-wind ; if it slopes gradually to a windy quarter, higher
growing trees will be necessary ; if the slope is steep and
the land of large area, it is impossible to effectually shelter it
by a single belt of trees, however high they may grow.
Evenness of Ground,
Very flat ground doe 3 not allow the water to pass off,
without much trouble in draining, both surface and subsoil ;
hence, after rain, it is often impossible to work it for some
time.
Broken ground cannot be worked by horse implements,
and is, therefore, unsatisfactory.
A long stretch of sloping ground must be laid out with
very particular attention to surface drains along the slope,
and these must be both large and kept constantly clean, or a
thundershower may at any time sweep the surface soil dowq


the hill. Gently undulating land is the best for orchard
purposes ; it is easily drained and worked, and the trees get
the full benefit of those two great natural aids to horticulture—
sunshine and air.
Accessibility.
The great question of accessibility is too often neglected
by the purchaser of land for fruit-growing.
It must be remembered that the culture of several varieties
of fruit trees in one orchard entails the sending to market of
fruit sometimes every week in the year. The distance to be
travelled, therefore, makes a considerable item in the working
expenses when it has to be gone over so many times.
If a case be stated, the reader will grasp this fact more
clearly. Suppose the choice lies between two blocks of land, one
within a short distance of a market or railway station, the other
two hours’ journey further away, all other things being equal,
and the difference in price between the two blocks is £lOO ;
the nearer one to the station will prove the cheaper. Reckon-
ing the wages of a man with a cart and horse at seven shillings
and sixpence a day—a low estimate—and supposing that only
one hundred journeys to and from his destination are made in
the year, the annual balance in favour of the nearer block of
land will amount to £l5, Four hours spent in going and
returning, at ninepence per hour, equals three shillings,
multiplied by one hundred equals £l5. £lOO is well
invested in saving this annual drain. The various points
to be considered in choosing land for fruit-growing have
now been enumerated. Whilst, as before stated, perfection
is unattainable, in land as in other sublunary affairs, a
careful weighing of the conditions above laid down, and a
careful scrutiny of the land which is at the selection of the
intending planter, with these conditions in view, will result in
a much more satisfactory start being made than the hap-
hazard tour of a district, while the local estate agent pours
glowing accounts of the advantages and possibilities of the
properties he has for sale into the would-be settler’s ear—the
only “ inspection ” made very often.


CHAPTER TT.
The Preparation of the Ground-Clearing.
The first step in the transformation of “ bush ” ground into
an orchard is clearing. There are many ways of performing
this operation. The cheapest way to clear land, where time is
no object, is by ring-barking the trees ; but as time, in the
making of an orchard, generally is an object, this plan may be
passed by. The use of either one or two steam engines for
clearing is only economical when very large areas of ground
are to be cleared, and the timber is of certain descriptions ;
and as such undertakings are few, and are usually done by
contract, a description of the methods employed would be out
of place in this book. A “ forest devil,” or stump extractor,
will be found to pay for its cost where more than five acres
are to be cleared. These machines are now to be bought
very cheaply. A good stump extractor will pull down trees
as well as extract stamps ; several makes of these implements
are on the market, varying in price and value. Dynamite
cartridges and blasting powder are frequently used to split
large stumps, and answer the purpose admirably ; stumps,
both dry and green, may also be blown out of the ground.
The charge is placed immediately under the centre of the
stump to be operated upon, close to the tap root, but not
necessarily in the tap root.
A team of bullocks, when procurable, will clear land
rapidly and cheaply, pulling up the stumps and hauling down
standing timber. A steady horse used to the work is also a
great help, but the management of bullocks and horses in
clearing requires some experience.
Lastly, the primitive method of mattock, shovel, and
axe, with blocks and tackle, is responsible, probably, for the
clearing of more orchard land than all other methods put
together.
In whatever way the forest is cleared, the roots must be
run two inches deeper than the land is intended to be ploughed.
If the clearing is done by contract, the contractor is always
expected to “ follow the plough,” i.e., to find men to cut and
dig up all roots which the plough or subsoiler may strike,


It is often also stipulated in such contracts that no holes,
where trees or stumps have been removed, shall be filled
up until inspected by the proprietor, who can thus satisfy
himself that tap roots have been cut at the required depth.
All timber which can be split into posts and rails, or
slabs, or utilized in any way, such as for building trellises for
passion-fruit vines, and a sufficient quantity of the best burn-
ing timber—oak, ironbark, or grey-gum—should, in any case,
be reserved. Timber which can neither be used for these
purposes nor sold should be dragged or rolled together and
burnt, and the ashes spread over the ground.
Stone and rocks must be dug up, or blasted out, and
carted off the land. It is a good plan to heap the stone
together, if not immediately wanted for such purposes, in an
accessible place, whence it can be drawn for mending roads,
building a rough wall, or lining a well, &c.
Trenching.
Owing to its expense, this method of preparing land is
seldom employed for large areas of ground. Where the subsoil
is retentive and unkindly, it is also a mistake to bring it to
the surface. The process known as “ bastard trenching ”
consists simply of digging two spits deep with a breaking-up
hoe.
Trench-ploughing.
This is done by means of a trenching plough and a team
of bullocks, or four or six horses ; the furrows have to be made
of great width, so that they can be turned over, the land is
consequently left exceedingly rough, and, as in trenching,
the subsoil is brought to the surface.
Ploughing and Bubsoiling.
The plough and subsoil plough are the best implements
to use in the preparation of new ground. It is usual to
plough new ground once before the final cross-ploughing and
subsoiling. It will be found preferable to do the ploughing


and subsoiling first, while the ground is hard, as the required
depth can then be more easily reached, and, as before men-
tioned, the clearers have the opportunity of being present.
After ploughing and subsoiling, the ground should be left
rough to “sweeten’’ for two or three months —in fact, the
longer the better. It should then be well harrowed, the
same way as ploughed, rolled, and cross-ploughed, then
harrowed and rolled again. Open furrows should be left in
the ploughed ground at equal distances apart, and precautions
must be taken, by measuring, that a row of trees does not fall
in the line of the furrow. The final rolling enables the opera-
tion of staking out the places for the fruit trees to be most
conveniently performed.
Roads.
Before the fruit trees are planted all arrangements for
roads, sites for buildings, lines of fence, and breakwinds should
be made. The roads should be made along the lines where
the least fall can be obtained. The soil may be carted off the
roads and drawn on to parts of the ground where the existing
soil is shallow. The plough will have pointed out all such
places. Soil which is not utilized in this way may be drawn
to the highest part of the land and heaped up on the edge of
the worked ground; it will form a reserve to draw upon as the
soil finds its way—as it will do—down the hill.
Fences.
Fences should not be erected round newly cleared ground
till it has been ploughed ; they interfere with the turning of
the team, and necessitate headlands.
A strong substantial fence will be found the most eco-
nomical in the long run. Where there is danger of bush
fires a top rail and three or four wires form the best fence.
A two-rail fence is more substantial. When timber is
scarce, rails are often dispensed with, but a top rail should, if
possible, be used, as a post and wire fence is liable to be run
into by cattle. A barbed wire and post fence is a fearful
thing in bush land among stock unused to it, many valuable
horses and cattle being annually destroyed by such means.


The best fencing timber is split out of old trees; rails may-
be split out of lighter timber than posts, but should not be
“ half ” saplings if possible. Ironbark, grey gum, and black-
butt are the best timbers for fencing-posts, though the list of
what may be used is a long one, and opinions differ on this
subject in different localities.
Where hares and rabbits abound, the fence round the
orchard must be wire-netted outside, as these vermin are fond
of ringbarking young fruit trees, especially apples, and will
very thoroughly destroy a large plantation in a short time.
In places where flying-foxes are numerous, it has some-
times been found necessary to stretch wires across the tops of
fruit trees, fastening the ends of the wire to tall poles set in
the ground.
This unfortunate necessity, however, occurs in very few
districts. In such places, the best advice to give is ; do not
plant fruit trees unless you can get a phenomenal price for
the fruit.
The usual sizes for fencing timber are :—Posts, 7 feet
long, top measurement 6x4 inches (minimum) ; rails, 8
feet 6 inches long, measurement at smallest end 8 x 8
inches (minimum).
Posts are usually sunk 2 feet into the ground.
Gate posts and corner posts should be heavy and sound,
let into the ground at least 2 feet 6 inches ; 12 inches across
the top, if round (minimum) ; and of good lasting timber.
Gates are always preferable to slip-rails, and not much
more expensive, if the time gained every time the entrance is
passed is taken into consideration.
Galvanized wire, it should be noted, lasts three times as
long as plain wire, though seldom used on account of its
higher price.
Surface Drains.
Arrangements must be made for the get-away of surface
water. The number and size of the drains necessary will
depend upon the size and formation of the area to be drained.
The surface water should be led, in furrows and drains of
sufficient width and depth, with the gentlest fall possible, to
the lowest point of the ground.
Care must be taken that water coming from higher


ground than the area under cultivation does not flow over
it. During a heavy rain the greatest danger of soil being
washed away generally rises from the water breaking away
from a road, or from higher ground, and sweeping, in a
continuous stream, down the hill. The water which actually
falls on the worked ground can be disposed of by means of
open surface furrows at proper intervals between the rows of
trees, so arranged that no furrow has so steep a gradient as to
give the water force enough to deepen it into a creek.
Shallow holes at the outlets of the main open drains, or
in the bed of a creek, will intercept the soil carried down after
rain. Those should be made in places where a horse and dray
can be brought to cart the soil back when sufficient has
accumulated.-
The surface drains, creeks, furrows, and watertables,
should never be allowed to get choked with grass and weeds,
or filled up with soil. “ A stitch in time saves nine ”is never
truer than of the disposal of surface water on a farm. With
proper channels for its flow, and foresight in looking after
them, the farmer can listen to the rain pelting on his roof,
and know that it is bringing only “ blessings in its train,”
instead of carrying off the best part of his soil, and causing
damage that will take weeks to repair.


CHAPTER 111.
What to Plant. The Nursery.
Some decision as to the varieties of fruit trees to be grown
has probably been arrived at before the land was prepared in
any way, or even perhaps bought.
Many men who enter the fruit-growing business do so
with the express intention of embarking largely in the cultiva-
tion of some particular fruit, without the slightest reference
to the adaptability of their land to the growth of that variety.
“ I’m going to grow peaches,” says one. “ I know they
pay, especially the late sorts ; a friend of mine told me so.”
“You stick to citrus fruit,” says another. “I’ve planted
nothing else on my ground. Look at the price oranges bring
in Melbourne in February.” And they quote various facts in
support of their opinions, but forget to consult the great
authority on matters agricultural and horticultural—the
various conditions of their soil and climate.
The very best time to select the varieties of trees to
plant is when the ground has been ploughed and subsoiled.
The depth, condition, and quality of the soil throughout can
then be told without hesitation. Of course, it is not necessary
to leave the selection till so late—very few planters do so —
but on the points to be then determined, or ascertained by
testing the ground beforehand, depends to a large extent the
selection of the most suitable varieties to plant.
The raising of fruit trees in a nursery is a business in
itself, not to be confounded with the raising of fiuit for
market, though the two occupations may be combined. At
the same time, a knowledge of the methods employed in
nursery work is useful to the fruit-grower, both amateur and
professional. He may at some time wish to propagate a few
trees for his own use, and he should be able to pick good
healthy trees when purchasing in a nursery.
Sandy loam is the best soil for nursery purposes. It
should be well drained, naturally or artificially, and kept well


cultivated. The young trees will then develop plenty of fibre
on their roots, and will stand transplanting, and thrive better
when planted, than if grown in stiff ground.
Many writers recommend deep cultivation in the nursery,
and some nurserymen follow this plan in working between their
trees, but a system which has a tendency to encourage root
growth below the level at which the young trees can find
nourishment for their roots in the orchard is not a good one.
If the soil is loose and friable to too great a depth, the stocks
will sometimes develop tap roots at the expense of laterals and
fibre, and, when those tap roots are removed, will stand a poor
chance of making much growth the first year after planting.
If nursery ground is well worked to a depth of ten
inches, it will be found to produce better rooted trees than if
forked or spaded to twice that depth.
The same remarks as to manure apply to trees in the
nursery as to trees in the orchard, with the exception that too
heavy an application of manure to nursery trees is held by
some experienced growers to force the trees to make an
unnatural growth, which receives a check at transplanting
from which they take some time to recover.
Shelter is of even more importance to a nursery than to
an orchard, owing to the readiness of recently budded and
grafted trees to break off at the graft when struck by a high
wind. The stocks will also work about in the ground, and
sometimes lie over, in an exposed position.
Stocks-
Peach stocks are used for the working of peaches,
nectarines, apricots, and plums, and are always raised from the
seed.
Plum stocks are coming into favour for the working of
plums, and are sometimes used for apricots, peaches, and
nectarines in Victoria, though in the warm climate of Hew
South Wales the peach stock is still preferred for these latter.
Plum stocks are best raised from the seed, and almost
all Myrabolan plum seedlings are imported from France.
Cuttings of the Myrabolan plum, when rooted, are also
used, but are inferior to seedlings, from their tendency to
produce a mass of weak rootlets, instead of a well-balanced
system of strong fibrous roots.


Apples are budded, or grafted, on the Northern Spy,
Winter Majetin, Carrington, Irish Peach, or other blight-
proof stock. The commonest method of propagating apples
is by root grafting. The process will be explained further on.
Pears should be budded, or grafted, on imported seedling
stocks. The method of working pears on the suckers which
spring up round old trees is objectionable ; sucker roots are
seldom, if ever, evenly balanced, are deficient in fibre, and
when planted will take the first opportunity to throw up
suckers in their turn. The same remarks apply to plum
suckers, which are sometimes used as stocks for plum trees.
Cherries are worked on imported Mahaleb stocks.
Figs, olives, and some’other fruit trees of little account,
are raised from cuttings. Citrus trees are budded, or grafted,
on seedling stocks of several varieties. The most generally used
are the common lemon (which must not be confused with the
the Lisbon or Sicilian lemon), seedling orange, and the Citrus
trifoliata. The Seville orange stock has been altogether
discarded.
The question of stocks for citrus trees is a large one, and
has been repeatedly discussed and wrangled over.
Lemon versus Orange Stock.
Shortly, to sum up the result of a long and rather bitter
controversy, the following facts appear to have been proved :
The common lemon stock has the effect of hastening
bearing on both the orange and the lemon. In the case of
the former the quality of fruit is not so good as on trees
worked on the seedling orange stock. It has not been proved
that the common lemon stock affects the longevity of the
orange trees under very favourable conditions. When the
conditions are the reverse of favourable, on the other hand,
orange trees on lemon stock have a marked tendency to gum,
and die sooner than on orange stock. Orange trees grow faster
on the lemon than on the orange stock, but the inferiority, in
quality, of the first few crops is very marked.
On the whole, the orange stock has had the best of the
fight as far as orange trees are concerned.
The Lisbon lemon, with its various kindred varieties—
Sicilian, thornless, variegated ; and the shaddock, lime,


cumquot, and citron—are still generally worked on the
common lemon stock.
The Lisbon lemon tree, on any stock, must be regarded
as at best a short-lived tree, and a very difficult one to keep in
health for a long period. The orange stock, while slightly im-
proving the quality of the fruit, retards the growth, and
lessens the productiveness of the lemon tree to a much greater
extent than can be compensated for by the improved quality
of the lemons. At the same time the tendency to gum is
almost equally great on both stocks.
From a commercial point of view it may be remarked
that a lemon tree on the common lemon will yield more fruit
in ten years than a tree of equal age, under similar conditions,
on the orange stock, will in fifteen.
The Citrus trifoliata stock is coming into favour for
mandarins, and also, to some extent, for oranges and lemons.
It has a dwarfing effect, but is claimed to resist wet well, and
to throw strong hardy growth into trees worked on it. The
effect of this stock on the fruit has scarcely been tested yet in
this country, and planters will do well to exercise caution
before choosing it as an all-round stock for citrus fruits.*
Seedling orange trees are sometimes planted by growers
who can afford to wait a considerable time for the fruit. They
are hardy, strong growers, crop well when they come into
bearing, and outlast worked trees on every description of
stock.
Their disadvantages are : —Close, thorny, exuberant
growth, requiring much care in pruning, and picking fruit,
slowness- in coming into bearing, and variableness in quality,
the seeds from fruit from the same tree often producing
seedling trees bearing very different qualities of fruit.
Tahiti seedlings are largely imported for use as stocks
for the orange tree, and grow in popularity, owing to their
reputation in California.
Seedling stocks of every sort are planted into nursery
rows during the winter after they are raised. If large enough
to graft they are sometimes worked over at once ; if not, can
be budded the following summer. Another plan with large
stocks is to bud them as they stand, in the autumn, planting
* Since writing the above, I have been shown some lemons of very excellent
quality, from trees worked on this stock, by Mr. J. Allsopp, of Pennant Hills,
N.S.W.-J. S. H.


into nursery rows in the winter. Trees budded during the
autumn, or grafted the same winter, are fit for planting as
“ one-year-olds ” the following winter.
Apple trees are worked on imported seedling stocks, or
root-grafted, a slip of blight-proof root being inserted into the
side of the scion, which must be cut about six inches long.
The junction of the scion with the root must be tied tightly
with raffia or calico, but does not require waxing.
The operations of budding and grafting are easily per-
formed after a little practice. A practical lesson from someone
used to the work is of more value than the most elaborate
description, but a short account of "each process may be given
here.
Budding.
Budding is performed while the trees to be operated upon
are in full growth ; if performed early in the summer the stock
may be cut back above the inserted bud, which will then start
growing and mature a certain amount of wood before the
winter. If the buds are put in during the autumn, the stock
must not be cut back till the spring following. Early budding
BUDDING KNIFE.
(From the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales,)
can not be done until the trees from which the buds are to be
taken have matured their growth sufficiently ; and is not
usually practiced with apples, pears and quinces.
The knife used for budding should be of the sort specially
made for the work, the handle tapering to a rounded-flat
“point,” which is used during the process, as will be described.
The first thing to be done is the selection of the shoots
from which buds are to be taken. These shoots should be cut
from the ends of the main branches of the tree. They must
not be water-shoots, i.e., the long rod-like branches which
spring up from the trunk or the inside of the tree. They
must have large plump buds developed along them. Having
found these shoots, lengths must be cut, provided with suitable


buds (see Figure 1), and the leaves cut off, leaving about a
quarter of an inch of each leaf stalk on the stick. (See
Figure 2). These “ sticks ” must be kept wrapped up in- a
damp cloth in the shade until used.
Fia. I.—STICK FOR BUDDING, i
(From the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales.)
The buds from Ato B and above C must not be used. The length marked D
contains buds suitable for the purpose.
To prepare the stock to receive the bud, two cuts are
made in the bark in the shape of the letter T ; the one across
the top short, the long downward one perpendicular and
straight, and about one inch long, (See Figure 3). The


sharp handle of the budding knife is then run down each side
of the long downward cut to free the bark, and enable the bud
to slide into place.
The buds must now be quickly cut from the stick. Hold-
ing the stick firmly, the blade of the knife is placed half an
inch above the bud, and is then drawn steadily down under
the bud, and out half an inch below it. (See figures 4 and 5).
Fig 5.
(From the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales.)
\ Diagram showing method of cutting the bud from the stick. This
operation, it should be noted, is more frequently performed by
making the incision below the bud, and drawing the blade up, and
out above it. The operator will find this plan easier, probably,
than the one shown.


A boat-shaped piece of the bark, with a bud in the centre,
is thus separated from the stick. (The thin strip of wood
inside the bark is generally removed, the eye being left in the
centre, by the blade of the knife.) Holding the bud in the
left hand by the portion of leaf .
stem remaining, the edges of
the T shaped cut are gently
opened by the knife handle, p||
and the bud slipped down into ill
place. (See Figure 6.) The
knife blade is pressed across the wii
upper cut of the incision, to re- Jtffl
move any of the bark of the bud
which may protrude at the end, ||jM|
and the only thing left to be
done is the tying. For this jpg|
purpose strip s of calico twelve
inches long and half an inch fnjpSg
wide are generally used.
The tie is passed round to f
the back of the stock, the ends
are brought to meet above the ft, is
inserted bud, crossed, and again |Lj|
brought forward underneath
the bud, and the wrapping FIG 7 -
continued, care being taken a h siightfy a di
lis diagram shows
continued, care uemg taaen a sightly different
6 ‘ that the bark of the stock is method of tying
„ , , , , , j from the one des-
hrraly closed round the bud, cribed.
and the final knot made tight
enough to prevent the air from getting underneath the edges
of the cut. (See Figure 7.)
There are other ways of budding, and many ways of per-
forming the same operation ; the above is the simplest, and,
when properly performed, the safest method.
Grafting is performed in many different ways, of which
the most common is tongue grafting.
Tongue Grafting.
The same care must be taken in the selection of scions as
in budding, but, in this case, lengths of the wood must be cut
holding about four buds each.


The stock is prepared as follows :—The branch or shoot to
be grafted must be cut square off, the edges of the bark being
trimmed smooth with a strong sharp knife. A slice of bark
and wood is then cut off one side, an inch and a half long, and
the cut must be made smooth and straight. A downward cut
is now made into the wood left bare by this cut, separating a
thin tongue of the wood and bark at one side.
The scion must now be prepared to fit the stock in the
same way, the side being sliced off and a cut made into the
wood so that when fixed in place the tongue of wood protrud-
ing from the scion may fit neatly inside the corresponding
tongue of the stock. The bark of the scion on one side must
be brought to exactly meet the bark of the stock.
The scion is tied tightly into place with calico or raffia
fibre, and the junction covered with grafting wax or prepared
Fig 1.
Cleaving the stock.
(From the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales.)
Fig 3. Fig 2. Fig 4.
The scion The stock pre- The scion in-
prepared. pared to receive serted in place
r the scion. ready for ty-
' ing.


The diagrams show the successive stages of Cleft grafting,
and require no explanation.
Several recipes for making grafting wax are extant, a
good one is : —One part of suet, two parts of pitch, four
parts of beeswax, and three parts of turpentine ; melt over a
gentle fire, mixing and adding more turpentine if necessary.
On this subject, J. Cheal, F.R.H.S., says :—“ Grafting
wax is sometimes used, but for young trees worked near the
ground I do not think that there is anything better than clay.
In the case of working trees standard high, however, there is
some advantage in using wax, as it is less likely to be loosened
by motion.”
Clay for grafting is prepared by moistening and mixing
it with dry cow- or horse-dung. It should be free from stones,
and sufficiently adhesive.
The clay must be pressed well round the graft, and
smoothed with the hand ; a little fine soil thrown over the
surface renders it more malleable, because less inclined to
stick to the fingers.
Heading Young Trees.
Young trees in the nursery should be headed back at the
height of 15 inches from the ground. (For diagram see
page 54.)
Nurserymen, as a rule, object to doing this, as low
heading interferes with the packing of their stock ; but if this
is not done, and the trees throw out branches higher up, it is
sometimes impossible to induce them to form an evenly-
balanced head the next year, after cutting back—the buds
lower down the stem having dropped off. It is, therefore,
better, if low headed trees cannot be bought, to select smaller
trees with fewer laterals, as the buds on the stem will then be
still fertile, and will throw out branches when the tree is
headed back at planting.
Budded trees should have the “ spur,” or portion of the
stock above the bud, cut off long before being planted out, so
that the bark will have begun to heal over the cut. If this
spur is left on too long, the stock will sometimes die back
from it down one side.
Grafted trees should have all traces of the cut surfaces
healed over when planted out.


The bark of young trees should be smooth and plump.
When a number of trees are being purchased at a
nursery, the purchaser often stipulates that one shall be dug
up for the roots to be inspected by him. The roots of a young
tree should be strong and well balanced, with as little tap as
possible, and a good supply of fibre, on which depends the
speediness of its establishment in its new quarters.
It may be remarked that a strong opinion prevails
among many experienced growers as to the effect produced on
the tree by transplanting from one soil into another of
different nature. It is held that a tree grown in rich black
vegetable mould will be less likely to thrive in ordinary orchard
soil than a tree grown under similar conditions in poor, sandy
soil. Irrigation and over-manuring in nurseries are also
deprecated for the same reason, i.e., that a tree forced, under
peculiarly favourable circumstances, into a strong growth will
receive a severe “ throw-back ” when placed in its permanent
position, where such attention cannot be provided.
The effect of a change of climate is not to be noticed in
transplanting trees, those imported from a great distance
thriving equally with those from the same district as the
plantation is made in.


CHAPTER IV.
Planting Fruit Trees.—Time to Plant.
Deciduous fruit trees may be planted out, roughly speaking,
from the second week in May until the second week in
September, i.e., from the time that one season’s growth has
ceased until the next season’s growth commences, the fall of
the leaf being taken as a sign of this ; but the months of June
and July may be considered the best for planting most
deciduous trees in the colonies of Victoria and New South
Wales, and every effort should be made to get the business
done then.
Citrus trees may best be planted at two distinct periods
in the year : from after Christmas until March, and again in
August and September ; at both these periods growth in the
tops of the trees has ceased, and they may be shifted safely.
Some growers also plant citrus trees in June and July, but the
two periods named above are the best. Care must be
taken with citrus trees that the ground is moist ; hot sun
and drying winds are the great foes of successful planting,
and must be guarded against very carefully ; with proper
precautions the trees may be moved, if it is absolutely neces-
sary, at any time between January and September. Before
the trees are planted, however, the ground being left in the
condition already described in Chapter ll—ploughed, har-
rowed, and rolled—it will be necessary to mark out the places
the trees are to occupy, and to provide stakes for their
support.
Staking Out.
Many methods of performing this operation have been
described, some requiring elaborate apparatus in the form of
marked chains and tapes, pegs, notched boards, etc. ; the
simplest and most usual method of staking out in this
country is as follows :
The apparatus required consists of a 66 feet tape
measure, a pole cut the exact length of the distance at which
the trees are to stand apart, an axe, and a sufficient quantity
of stakes. The latter may be either split or sawn out of
hardwood, three feet six inches long, trimmed free from
splinters, and sharpened at one end.


The length of the pole depends upon the distance the
trees are to stand apart, and that depends upon the varieties
to be planted, and the quality of the soil—the richer the soil
the more room the trees will require. The following table of
distances at which to plant represents the usual practice in
Australia, though it should be noted that the greater part of
the existing orchards have the trees planted the minimum
distance apart.*
Distance Number of Trees to
! Apart. the Acre, Square
Variety. ft. ft. Planting.
Apples ... ... 20 to 30 ... 109 48
Pears
Peaches and Nectarines
Apricots ...
Plums
Oranges (worked trees).
Oranges (seedlings)
Mandarins and Lemons
Cherries ...
Figs
Quinces ..
Loquats (worked trees)
Persimmons
20 to 25 ... 109 69
18 to 22 ... 134 90
18 to 25 ... 134 69
18 to 22 ... 134 90
20 to 25 ... 109 69
25 to 30 ... 69 48
18 to 22 ... 134 90
18 to 25 ... 134 69
18 to 25 ... 134 69
16 to 20 ... 170 109
18 to 22 ... 134 90
16 to 18 ... 170 134
Three men are required for staking out. Selecting one
side of the future plantation on which to start (and this side
should be, if possible, on level ground, so that the stakes can
be sighted right down the line when knocked in) the first
stake is knocked in at a fixed distance from the boundary on
one side.
Walking down this boundary, whether a fence or not
does not matter, another stake is knocked in at the same
distance from it at the far end of the line. This last stake
may be whitewashed, to make it conspicuous, or a white rag
tied round the top for the same purpose. If it cannot be seen
from the first stake, a tall pole may be placed perpendicularly
against it, the top of which is visible. Returning along this
line, other sighting stakes are lightly stuck into the ground,
one of the party being stationed at stake number one, and
seeing that they are placed accurately in line between the two
end stakes. Their distance from each other is immaterial.
* In his report on mixed fruit orchards entered for National Prizes, Mr. J.
Gelding recommended the planting of fruit trees 16 feet apart in Quincunx form
in exposed positions and, presumably, on poor soil. See the Agricultural Gazette,
of JS/.5.W., 1893, page 350.


This line must now be run through from end to end,
stakes being knocked in, down to the subsoil, at the proper
distances apart, the pole being used to measure with.
In measuring, one end of the pole rests against the first
stake, the next stake is held with its further edge level with the
other end of the pole, and the man stationed at stake number one
sights through the line, accurately placing each stake in position
between the sighting stakes, which are pulled up when reached.
In going down hill the further end of the stake is raised,
so as to keep it horizontal ; in going up hill, the nearer end
is raised;
Very great care must be taken to keep this and the
other outside lines perfectly straight. For this purpose good
eyesight is required in the sighter, and patience in the
knocker-in and measurer.
Having completed this line satisfactorily, the line start-
ing from stake number one and running up the other side
of the ground must be staked the same way. If a boundary
road, or fence exists here also, it should be followed, measuring
from it for the end stake, and sighting through.
A square corner can be made with the measuring tape
as follows : —Sixty feet from stake number one, on the first
line of stakes, knock in a peg. Measure out from stake
number one, as nearly at a right angle from the first row of
stakes as can be judged, eighty feet, and knock in another
peg. The distance between these pegs will be one hundred
feet if the corner thus formed is “ square,” and the second peg
must be moved until it occupies a point eighty feet from
stake number one, and one hundred feet from the first peg.
The two other sides must be staked out in the same way,
and, if the work has been accurately done, the corner stake
opposite to number one, diagonally across the ground, which
should be the last knocked in, will be its proper distance from
its neighbours on each side.
The four sides of the ground being staked out, two rows
through the centre should be put down in the same way, and,
when a large area of ground is being staked out, it is best to
have other rows of stakes, as well as these, measured through,
so that the ground is divided into squares of not more than
two acres, each square surrounded by stakes at the proper
distance apart.
The pole may now be discarded, and the ground filled in by
sighting. One man knocks the stakes in, and the other two


take up positions on the sides of the ground from which each
stake can be sighted into place in two directions.
When carefully performed, this method of staking out
the ground is the surest and fastest.
If the trees are to he planted over twenty-two feet apart,
the distance will have to be measured with the tape, instead
of a pole, unless a phenomenally straight and light sapling
can be found.
Ground is sometimes marked out for fruit trees with the
plough, but this method also necessitates the pleasuring of
the four sides of the field, and is very seldom as accurate in
its results as the “ measure and sight ” system.
Quincunx Planting.
The arrangement of trees usually known as quincunx is
that in which they stand at an equal distance from each other,
however measured. When planted in squares, of course, the
trees on opposite corners of each square, diagonally across it,
will be found to stand a greater distance from each other than
the two trees on any one side of a square.
The advantages of quincunx planting are the utilization
of every available inch of the ground, and the possibility of
working the ground, after planting, in three different direc-
tions, instead of only in two, as is the case in square planting.
The disadvantage is the impossibility of working the
whole plantation satisfactorily with horse implements in any
direction whatever, corners having to be left in two directions,
and, in the third, the rows being too close together to admit
a horse and plough after the trees have grown to a fair size.
This objection refers, also, to the other two ways, in which
rows may be worked in quincunx plantations ; for whatever
distance apart the trees stand, the rows must be considerably
nearer to each other than in square planting. The argument
that in quincunx planting the ground is more evenly filled
with the trees, and that in square planting a small space in
the centre of each square is not occupied by roots may be
challenged. The roots of fruit trees will stretch in time
throughout the whole of the ground in which they are
planted, and will speedily occupy any space available for them
in any direction, growing longer and stronger towards the
quarter from which most nourishment is received. A tree on


Trees Planted Quincunx
10 feet apart
Bows wil be
8 feet 8 inches apart
12 „
»
... 10 „ 4 2 / 5 „
H „
1)
12 ,, g ,,
9 9
16 „
99 ..
... IB „ 10i m
9 9
18 „
>> ••• •••
... 15 „ 7 „
9 9
20 „
99 •••
... 17 „ 4 „
99
22 „
>9 ...
... 19 „ i „
99
24 „
9f •••
...
... 20 „ 94 „
9 9
the edge of a garden, or open cultivated ground of any
description,’’will send roots an immense distance into it in
search of food.
Quincunx planting may, however, though seldom em-
ployed, be sometimes the best on a steep slope, which can
only be worked in one direction, and where it is required to
plant as many trees to the acre as possible, while working the
ground with] horse implements as long as possible along the
slope.
The method of staking out ground for quincunx planting
may be the “ measure and sight, ’’ as described for square
planting, but becomes more complicated.
The first row of stakes having been knocked in as before,
the second row must be located by measuring from the last
two stakes at each end of that row, to a point equidistant from
each of them, with the tape measure. At these points the
two end stakes are placed. The alternate stakes up each
side line may be found by calculating the distance the rows
will be apart, and doubling that. This will give the distance
of the alternate rows, and when those are filled in, the job can
be finished by sighting through.
The following table gives the distances between rows of
trees, planted on the quincunx system, at the given distances
apart for the trees :
True or geometrical quincunx planting is very seldom
made use of ; it consists simply of square planting, with the
addition of another tree in the exact centre of each square.
Preparation of Holes.
The ground being staked out, the earth immediately
round-each stake is generally dug up with a fork hoe or dig-
ging fork, the grass beaten well out of it, and all lumps
crushed.


If it is intended to manure the young tree at planting,
the best time for applying fertilizers of any kind is when the
holes are being prepared, and the usual method is to work
two double handfuls of bonedust, or other fertilizer, up with
the earth round the stake. The ground, after this forking,
should be left level again as before, to enable it to retain
moisture.
The Operation of Planting.
All things are now ready for the actual planting, and
this may be proceeded with, during the planting season, as
soon as the weather is suitable and trees can be procured.
Fruit trees are usually dug in the nursery by two men, stand-
ing on each side of the row, who strike their spades well
down into the ground on each side of the tree to be lifted,
cutting lateral roots not less than ten inches from the butt.
One man then grasps the trunk of the tree and lifts it out of
the ground, the other thrusting his spade right underneath
to cut the tap.
The sooner trees are planted after being dug the better,
and, however short a time they may have to remain out of the
ground, their roots must be kept moist, and sheltered from
the sun. The usual plan is to sprinkle the roots with water,
and place wet straw round them; they are then tied in
bundles of convenient size for handling, and surrounded with
sacking.
On arrival at the field the roots must be carefully gone
over ; twisted, bruised, and interlacing growth removed ; taps
cut back ; and all the cut ends trimmed with a sharp knife or
a pair of pruning shears.
If the trees cannot be at once planted, they may be
“ heeled in,” i.e., placed with their roots in a trench dug for
the purpose, which is then filled up again with soil. In this
way they may be kept a considerable time, but the shorter the
better.
In planting, it is usual to employ three men. One digs
the holes, and finishes filling-in ; one holds the tree in
position in the hole, spreading the roots out with his fingers,
and holding in place springy roots which would otherwise
curl round or jump up ; and the third shovels in the soil,


gently shaking fine earth among the roots at first, and after-
wards filling up the hole with soil, and pressing it round
the butt of the tree with his feet. The roots of weeds must
be picked out of the soil round the tree. No. 1, having
finished opening-up, comes back and smooths over the earth
round the newly-planted tree with his hoe.
The roots of the tree, must point downwards, and to
attain this end a shovelful of soil may be dropped against the
stake in the centre of the hole, and the tree planted thereon.
In digging the hole, the earth must be thrown out evenly
all round. A fork hoe or flat hoe is generally used, and the stake
should be left firmly standing in the centre. A shovel is the
best tpol for filling in the hole with. The long-handled
shovel has taken the place of the hoe for this purpose among
the most advanced fruit culturists.
The tree, when planted, should stand at the same depth
as it has done in the nursery. Both shallow planting and
deep planting are to be avoided, but of the two, deep
planting is the worse, especially in shallow soil. Trees
are sometimes planted with their roots entirely below
the level of the surface soil, a hole being dug into the
hard subsoil to receive them. This practice is doubly to be
condemned. The deep hole draws the water from the
surrounding area, so that the roots stand in a pool after
rain ; and, as soon as the roots spread through the loose soil
in the hole, they come in contact with the hard subsoil and
receive a check, only recovering after a twisted and unnatural
course has enabled them to rise into the surface soil.
Shallow planting is to be avoided, because, during a hot
and dry season, the roots are liable to be scorched by the sun.
Some successful growers, in planting citrus trees, dig no
hole at all, placing the roots of the tree upon the surface of
the soil, and heaping more earth over them. In some planta-
tions the soil is raised in a mound round the young lemon or
orange tree right up its stem, and gradually worked level after-
wards. This course is taken to keep the fibrous roots of the tree
near the surface of the soil ; but as the surface roots are
bound to be cut in the course of cultivation, this method is
not to be recommended. The proper place for feeding roots
is just out of reach of the implements used in cultivation ;
any roots above this level will only he destroyed, and their
growth should not be encouraged.


Watering, Mulching, Tying, Trimming and
Labelling.
If trees have to be planted during dry weather, they
should be watered. This is best done before the hole is quite
filled in ; the water being poured round the tree, and earth
thrown loosely in over the moistened soil to check evaporation.
A large bucketful of water is sufficient for three trees, if water
is not sufficiently plentiful to justify a more generous dose.
Watering, however, is only necessary when the soil is really
dry below the surface.
Mulching with bush leaves, stable manure, ferns, or
grass is often done, to hold the moisture in the ground round
the newly-planted tree, and protect its roots from the sun.
Although beneficial, its use may be considered more of a
luxury than a necessity, except in very dry, hot seasons.
Many growers, after planting the trees against the
stakes, pull up the stakes and drive them in, in a slanting
direction, on one side of the trees, to minimize the risk of
rubbing the bark off against the stake in windy weather.
The trees throughout the plantation should be planted on
the same side of the stakes, namely, the leeward side, for
prevailing winds, so that the tree may be blown away from
the stake, not against it.
The trees being planted, stakes firm in the ground, and
the earth smoothed over, tying to the stakes is the next
operation to be performed.
Stringybark, Manilla fibre, strips of cotton material or
sacking, New Zealand flax, or unravelled rope may be used.
The tie must be thick enough not to injure the bark by
cutting, and strong enough to last without breaking or
rotting until the tree is established.
There are several ways of tying trees to stakes. “ Once
round the tree and twice round the stake,” —crossing the tie
between, and tying behind the stake—is perhaps the best. The
tie is thus prevented from slipping down, and is so arranged
as to prevent the tree from rubbing against the stake as much
as possible.
Trees brought from the nursery in bundles should have a
label on each bundle. The bundle should not be untied until
the trees are to be planted, and the labels must be carefully
looked over and the trees checked off as they are taken opt
of the packing and planted.


A plan of the plantation should be made, with the names
of the varieties of trees planted marked on it in the proper
places. By the use of a plan a great deal of confusion and
extra trouble at planting may be spared. The name of any
tree ordered can be ascertained on reference to it also, long
after the labels have disappeared.
The tops of the trees must be trimmed immediately after
planting. No fruit-grower who understands his business
leaves the top on a young tree when planting, with the single
exception of pear trees, which are often, if planted one year
old, too small to stand cutting back.
If the tree carries only a straight upright growth, without
laterals, it must be cut back to the height at which the head
is intended to be formed.
If the tree has been headed back in the nursery, and has
thrown out branches, these must be removed, with the excep-
tion of three or four—three are preferable—which must be
shortened back to not more than a foot in length, cutting to
an outside bud. High-headed trees, as remarked before,
should be avoided, for the removal of the head is an opera-
tion attended with danger to the tree. The buds low down
on the trunk may have withered away, or been knocked off,
in which case the tree can not be depended upon to make a
symmetrical head when cut back. The branches left on the
tree should not all start from the trunk at the same level : it
is preferable to have them starting a few inches above or
below each other. Narrow forks are to be avoided. They
encourage gumming, harbour borers, and prevent the proper
development of the branches, which are continually growing
into one another, instead of making separate and even growth.
The above remarks will help the planter in choosing
trees in a nursery, A few more hints may be added. Every
precaution should be taken that the trees are true to name.
Orange, lemon, and mandarin trees may be told at a glance,
but enquiries should be made about the source of the scions of
the varieties.
Many large nurserymen practice the injurious habit of
taking scions from young trees for budding or grafting their
next season’s stock. By this means the variety gradually
loses its distinctive character, and approaches more nearly to
the nature of the stock, which is recognised to have a con-
siderable influence on the tree worked upon it,


Most kinds of peaches, nectarines, apples, pears, and
plums resemble each other very much in foliage. Unless the
names of these trees are carefully registered from the time
of working, confusion of varieties will arise. Purchasers of
trees are often themselves to blame for not insisting on being
shown the records of varieties budded and grafted in a
nursery, and taking proper precautions to have the labels
written, and looked after until the trees are planted.
When all is done, however, the nurseryman’s reputation
is the best guarantee of honesty and care in this respect.
The notes on nursery work in Chapter 3 will enable the pur-
chaser to choose suitable trees as far as age and appearance go.
Subsoil Draining.
The subject of subsoil draining is discussed after the
planting of the trees has been described, as it is generally
found more convenient to drain an
orchard after the trees are planted ;
the drains can then be more easily
marked out, and the best position
for them —both as regards the
“lay ” of the ground, and the dis-
tance from the trees —can be seen
more readily.
(Block kindly lent hy
Messrs. F, Lassetter and Co.)
Fig. 1.
Depth. —From 2 feet 6 inches
to 4 feet is the rule in Australia,
though the subject is open to con-
troversy. In stiff subsoils the
drains should not be more than
3 feet deep, but the shallower the
drains the more likely they are to
be choked by the roots of the trees.
Size of Pipes. —Taking for
granted that pipe drains will be
laid, being superior to rubble, slab,
tile, log, brick, stone, and all other
subsoil drains in cheapness, effect-
stone drain. iveness, and durability, two inch
A and B, the trench; C, stones . n , , , , . * . ~
on edge; d, stones broken to pipes should be put in, in ordinary
3-inch guage ;E, large flat stones, g o i]g f or minor drains Up" 1 to 10
slabs, or turf ;F, soil. . ’ .
chains in length, and should run


into three, four, and six inch pipes—as the amount of water
to be carried away requires. No definite rule can be laid
down on this point ; experience is the best guide to the
amount of water likely to flow from a certain length of two-
inch pipes laid at any given inclination in any soil which it is
proposed to drain. It may be mentioned, however, that
a four-inch pipe should carry with ease all the water
coming from fifty chains of minor two-inch drains ; four
such four-inch drains may be safely run into a six-inch
pipe. These figures refer to ground with moderate and con-
tinuous slope which will permit the water to flow readily
away,
(Block kindly lent by
Messrs. F.]' Lassetter and Co)
Fig. 2.5
TILE DRAIN.
(Block kindly lent by
Messrs, F, Lassetter and Co.)
Fig. 3.
PIPE DRAIN.
A and B, the trench ; 0, flat tiles
or “ soil D, horse-shoe tile.
A and 8., the trench; C, the
pipe (which must be laid on
the bottom of the trench); D,
loose soil covering pipe.
Larger than six-inch pipes are rarely used for sub-drain-
ing owing to their weight, size, and expense. The prices of
agricultural drain-pipes in Sydney and Melbourne are ex-
ceedingly moderate.
Distance Apart. —This, again, depends largely on the
quality of the soil, inclination, rainfall, and other local condi-


tions. Two-inch drains, two feet six inches deep, will, as a
rule, draw the surplus water from a subsoil if laid forty feet
apart. The deeper the drains are laid, the further apart they
may be placed ; the stiffer the subsoil, however, the shorter
the distance they will draw.
Position of Drains.— Many orchardists labour under
the impression that subsoil drains should be laid at an acute
angle to the steepest slope of a hill, instead of straight up
and down a hill side. This is a mistake ; pipe drains are not
laid for the purpose of tapping springs, but for drawing off
the superfluous water from the subsoil underlying a given
PLAN FOR DRAINING UNDULATING GROUND.
t ßlock kindly'Jent by Messrs. F. Lassetter arid Co.)
AB, mam dram—A E four-inch pipes, EB, six-inch pipes-following the course
Mif of the principal depression ; 0 D, EF. branch drains of four-inch pipes
following the course of the minor depressions on either side, and emptying
into the mam at DandE. The other lines show the course of the minor two-
inch drams, the direction of which should be modified to bring them between
the rows of trees, in the case of orchard-draining.
area of ground. Springs, properly so-called, are very rare ;
a soakage from the lower part of a slope after rain is not to be
treated like a regular gush of water springing to the surface
from lower depths, and constantly flowing. Pipe drains
should be laid at regular intervals up the steepest slope of


the hill; they may be relied upon to draw the surplus subsoil
water away thorough!}' and rapidly, exhausting soakages and
miry places, and preventing that accumulation of stagnant
water in the subsoil, which is dangerous, if not fatal, to all
plant-life.
Catch Holes. —ln some formations of ground it is im-
possible to get a separate outlet, to a main drain, for each
minor drain. It then becomes necessary to run two or more
minor drains to one point and thence carry the accumulating
water away in a main. At such points it is a good plan to dig
catch, or peep-holes, lining them with bricks or stone, as the
swirling water is more likely to deposit silt than a regular
flow, and stoppage of one of the minor drains can then be
detected.
When minor drains are run into the main at right angles
the last few feet of the minor drain should be curved round,
so that the water may be let into the main at a sharper
angle ; this tends to prevent back-wash at its outlet, a
source of the deposit of silt, (See Illustration .)
Draining-tools.— Tools are specially made for digging
narrow trenches for pipes, the chief being the long narrow
spade, called a bottoming tool, draining spade, or spud ; the
scoop for cleaning up the bottom of the drain ; and the trench-
ing fork for taking the first spit after the loose earth has been
removed by a shovel. A hook is also made for laying the
pipes in the drain, but a suitable tool for the purpose can
easily be made on the farm,*
* The author recommends Waring' h “ Draining for Profit and Health ”to
the reader who wishes to study this subject further.


CHAPTER V.
Pruning.
The necessity for pruning is so generally acknowledged that
it need scarcely be insisted upon here. It is recognised in
Australia, as in every older country where fruit trees are
grown, that in order to induce a tree to develop its growth
regularly and evenly, to continue in health, and to bear good
fruit, pruning must be performed.
PRUNING KNIFE.
(From the Agricultural Gazette of N.S.W.)
Volumes have been written on this subject, and theories
innumerable formulated and contested. The aims of pruning
may be stated as follows :
1. The form of the tree is modified to suit the condi-
tions under which it is grown. In Europe, many of our
hardiest fruit trees can only be induced to bear when
trained upon a wall, their shoots being systematically
pruned and pinched so as to occupy the exact space allotted to
them and no more. In Australia and California the same
varieties of trees will grow rampantly as standards, and the
minute and incessant care devoted to their training in a cold
country is both unnecessary and unprofitable.
The form of tree usually adopted in Australia is known
as the “ vase ” form in California, and must not be con-
founded with the “ vase ” as understood in Europe.
The term, “vase,” as applied to orchard trees is a mis-
nomer ; this will be best understood by quoting Du Breujl’s


•5
•S
§
0>
£
&
V
cT
o
"3
O
■2
(8
£
o
a
cl
>
cu
m
u
s
CO
w
H
05
B
■s g
g O
V a
<- w
a
I |
hi D
» O
I


description of the true vase :—“ Trees in vase form should have
a diameter of about six feet six inches, and an equal height,
so that the solar rays may act upon the whole interior surface
of the vase. An interval of twelve inches should be left
between each of the branches. The method of proceeding to
develop the wood is as follows : Choose plants that have been
grafted a year, and apply the first pruning ; when they have
been planted out another year, cut them down to sixteen
inches from the ground. During the summer, select five
shoots, and maintain an equal degree of vigour by pinching.
At the second pruning cut off each of the branches to six-
teen inches from their base, above two buds growing laterally, so
as to make each of the branches fork ; lower the branches a
little, and dispose them regularly round the circumference of
the stem by means of a hoop. During the summer, equalize
the vigour between the ten shoots that have now been
obtained. At the third pruning, cut back each of the ten
shoots to twelve inches from its base, to make them fork a
second time. Incline the branches again, and equalize the
spaces between them by means of two hoops, the uppermost
being the larger. Treat the twenty shoots that have grown
during the summer in the same manner as the previous ones.”
The final treatment consists of grafting together the
branches of the tree where they cross, when the hoops may be
removed ; but this does not generally occur till the seventh
year.
This description is given, not only as a dissertation on
the “true vase” form in training, but also as an example of
the methods in use in Europe in pruning, and is quoted from
the standard author on the subject. It may well be remarked
that the result of so many years of patience and scientific care
does not justify the pains taken to produce it. It forms a
monument of the skill and assiduity of the gardener, but will
not compare, in either beauty or profitableness, with a tree
of the same variety, whose branches have been allowed to
expand, within certain limits, as Nature intended them to.
Let us then dismiss the “true vase,” with its accompany-
ing forms of training, the pyramid, fan, column, cordons—
vertical and oblique—and espaliers, and state at once that the
only form in which fruit trees are profitably grown in Australia
is the standard —which is known in California, and to some
extent here, as the vase.


Low versus High Heading.
The practice of low heading is almost universal, and is
generally recognised as the best in Australia.
Its advantages are the greater accessibility of the fruit,
and the greater ease with which pruning, thinning or spraying
can be performed, the greater strength and solidity of the tree,
causing greater security from wind, and
also the immunity from sun-burning
which low-headed trees enjoy.
The idea has been expressed, and is
still believed by the inexperienced, that
a high-headed tree can be worked nearer
to with horse-implements than a low-
headed one. Experience proves the
fallacy of this, for it is found that the
higher a tree is headed, the weaker the
branches it throws out ; and these
branches, being unable to stand upright
under the weight of their fruit, come
down to a horizontal position, and in-
terfere with the working of the plough
and scarifier.
By low-heading is generally meant
eighteen inches and under.
The tools employed in pruning are a
good strong knife with a curved blade,
a pair of secateurs or pruning shears
(which, for small branches may have two
blades, like a pair of scissors, so as not
to injure the bark of the limb cut, as
the one-bladed tools are apt to do), and
Diagram showing height at ® fine-toothed narrow saw. Of pruning
which young trees should saws there are two or three varieties now
(From Agricultural obtained ; probably the best has
Gazette of New South the blade screwed into the handle, which
Wales). j s g^ e( j w Jth three sizes of blades, and
hooked, so that it can be hung from a branch, or from the
pocket.
The tree having been headed back at planting, as
described, it will not be advisable to prune during the first
summer, except to remove early in the season any shoots which


are altogether superfluous, or which cross each other. In
cutting off branches, the cut must be made close to the trunk,
and smoothed over with a sharp knife, so that the bark may
grow over it. The three or four branches which are allowed
to grow will then make a strong growth.
(Some growers cut these back to fifteen inches long during
January, if they have made excessive growth, and thus get a
Diagram showing distance above bud at
which to prune. 1 and 2 wrong.
3 right.
'(From the Agricultural Gazette of New
South Wales.)
second branching, which
should be limited to two
branches on each of the
original three or four).
In cutting, an outside
bud must be left on young
trees, so as to throw the
growth outwards ; when the
trees get older, and begin to
bear, it is often necessary to
cut hard back to an inner
bud, in order to keep them
from spreading too much.
During the first winter after
planting, the young trees
must be headed back to
induce them to make strong
growth the next summer. The length from fork to fork of
the branch of a fruit tree is open to controversy, fifteen inches
may be called the average. As a rule, peach trees are allowed
to make longer shoots than apricots before pruning, plums
even longer. Apple trees are cut back the first year, and
each winter afterwards, but allowed to make long branches
through the summer. Some growers leave them unpruned
when they begin to bear, considering them more pro-
ductive with that treatment than if cut hard back con-
tinually, and caused to make too strong and upright a
growth. Some varieties of apple trees, however, require
more pruning than others ; one year’s experience will
generally show which trees will respond to the knife by
throwing out strong branches, and which will continue their
upright raking habit, however hard back they may be cut.
Pear trees are generally left to their own devices through
the summer, and many growers prefer to leave them un-
touched by the knife in the winter also, except for the


removal of branches which crowd or rub against each other.
Cherry trees are pruned every winter, and kept in shape by
pinching during the summer, until five years old, when they
are left unpruned. The less the knife is used, however, on
cherry trees the better, owing to their liability to gum ; if the
branches are allowed to grow, as with apples, they will
develop fruit spurs and gradually bend outwards.
Plum trees should not be pinched during the summer ;
if the shoots grow too long they may be cut back, and will
then branch out ; pinching seldom produces this effect (with
most varieties).
The main points to be observed in pruning are :
(1.) Remove at once harmful and exhausting growth, such
as water-shoots, and suckers, and branches which will cross
and rub each other.
(2.) Cut well back during winter to encourage the growth
of wood next season, and, at the same time, remove unnecessary
and superfluous shoots and dead wood.
(3.) Pinch the ends of strong-growing branches of peaches,
nectarines, apricots, cherries, citrus trees of all sorts, and cut
back apples and plums when they are growing very luxuriantly,
during summer.
(4.) Keep a watchful eye on citrus trees the whole year
round ; at once remove suckers and water shoots, and
pinch, or cut back, luxuriant growth, which only becomes
twisted and straggling if allowed to remain, and has to be
removed altogether eventually.
Pruning may be overdone, like most other operations.
On this subject Cheal writes as follows :—“ The old system
of continued hard pruning for several years certainly has the
effect of producing abundance of strong growth, but it is so
much growth in the wrong place, and to a wrong purpose.
The annual shortening causes the tree to become what is
known as mop-headed, with a quantity of rank wood growth
closely matted together, half of which has to be entirely cut
away. And, again, the repeated shortening, in the absence
of fruit buds, which cannot form under such treatment,
causes only a fresh outburst of useless side growth.”
The remaining objects which the fruit-grower has in view
in pruning his trees are :
2. The tree is induced to 'produce bearing wood , and
consequently fruit , all over. A fruit tree produces new bear-


ing wood every year ; fruit spurs are developed on the tops of
the branches, and old bearing wood extends. The result of
this on an unpruned tree is that the bearing wood on the lower
part of the limbs becomes exhausted in time, and dies ; many of
the fruit spurs die after bearing once or twice, or continue
to produce only inferior fruit, and the tree eventually becomes
a mass of dead and half-decayed wood. When the tree is
systematically pruned, and the bearing wood cut back every
year, the same branch continues to produce good fruit every
season, and the accumulation of dead fruit spurs is avoided.
3. Pruning has a favourable effect on the longevity of
the tree. This naturally follows from the fact that dead
wood does not accumulate on a pruned tree to the extent that
it does on a neglected one.
Each dead twig which is allowed to remain upon a
branch, even if it does not die further back into that branch
(which is often the case), occupies a certain space on which
new bark cannot form. The process of growth goes on year
after year all round it, but it remains as a portion of decaying
woody matter within the living tissues of the tree, and
becomes a harbour for borers as well as a source of disease.
In addition to this, the winter pruning of a tree causes
stronger, and therefore healthier growth, which is better
able to resist high winds, hailstorms, the excessive weight of
fruit, the carelessness of fruit-pullers, or any other cause of
the breakdown, and consequent ruin, of fruit trees.
4. Pruning causes the tree to crop every year , instead of on
alternate years. This results from the shortening in of bear-
ing wood, which enables the tree to mature a fair amount of
fruit, without entailing the exhaustion which follows on
too heavy a crop. Fresh wood is produced each year
instead of—as is the case with unpruned trees of any con-
siderable age —fruit one year with no wood, and wood the
next year without fruit.
5. The quality of the fruit is improved. The nourishment
which, in an unpruned tree has to supply a quantity of fruit
scattered over a large area of weakly branches, in the pruned
tree is concentrated on the support of a smaller quantity of
fruit, which is, invariably, better in size and quality in con-
sequence. In fact, cutting back bearing wood has the same
effect as thinning fruit.


Heading Back Old Trees
This operation is included in this chapter as, although
not an example of pruning proper, it is performed in the
same way with knife and saw. Old and unfruitful trees, when
sound in the butt, may be cut back to induce them to make a
new head of young wood. This wood may then, if desired, be
budded or grafted with an improved variety.
The plan generally adopted is to cut the head off the
tree above the first fork of each of the main branches. That
is, supposing that the tree has three main branches, which each
separate into two, the cuts are made above the second branch-
ing, leaving the six stumps not more than eighteen inches
long. If the tree does not respond to this “ heroic ” treatment
the first year, grub it out ; the roots have not sufficient
vitality to enable it to renew its branches.
In cutting thick branches with the saw, a cut must be
made underneath, before the limb is cut from above, so that,
when half sawn through, the branch may not break down and
tear the bark off one side. Large cuts should slope to allow
rain water to run off. All cuts must be smoothed over with
the knife, especially round the bark, and should be coated
with whitewash, paint, or shellac dissolved in alcohol to
the consistency of paint. Peach, apricot, plum, apple,
pear and citrus trees, may all be treated in this way.
Loquats, being susceptible to sun-burn if the head is removed,
and apple-trees which have a long stem should be protected
from the sun until the new limbs have developed sufficiently
to shade the trunk. Orchard prunings should be carted off
the ground as soon as possible and burnt : they are both
untidy and a hindrance to the working of the ground.
An implement for pruning tall trees without the use of
a ladder, may be mentioned here, although it has not come
into extensive use, and is open to the objection that cuts
made by it cannot be trimmed with the knife. The blades of
the shears are on the end of a long pole—to put it roughly—
and the stationary, or blunt side being placed against the limb
to be amputated, the sharp blade, of peculiar shape, is oper-
ated by means of a wire connected with a lever at the other
end of the pole. Without having seen it at work, the
apparatus appeared to the writer more suitable for rough
work than careful pruning. It would be difficult from such a


distance to select the exact place to make the cut to the best
advantage. Pruning had better be left undone than done
badly. Careless pruning reminds one of the Irishman who
dug up a larkspur in the garden, knowing no better. When
his mistress expostulated with him, he replied, “ a larkspur ;
well, well, so it is. Bedad, it’s a good thing it wasn’t a rose
bush !”
Root Pruning.
To induce an unproductive apple or other fruit tree to
bear, the following plans are recommended. The soil is
removed from the butt of the tree, and the roots exposed ; of
these, two of the largest, one on each side of the tree, are
cut off and pulled up. Another plan is to dig a trench all
round the tree at a distance of four, five, or six feet from the
butt, according to size, cutting all roots with a sharp knife.
Summer fruit trees scored with a sharp knife up the trunk
and main branches when in bloom are said to set their fruit if
no other treatment will induce them to do so.
Root pruning is also recommended for citrus trees, and
the following plan has been found effective: —A stout cord
is tied tightly round the butt of the tree, when in blossom,
and tightened by means of wedges ; the fruit will set all over
a previously barren orange tree if this treatment is tried. The
object of all these operations is to check the superabundant
flow of sap, which forces a tree into growth at the expense of
its productiveness.
Another method which is occasionally practised is to
half-ringbark the tree each year. The bark gradually
grows over the cut during the summer, and the next winter
the other side is treated in the same way.




CHAPTER VI.
Cultivation.
It is unnecessary to state here that an orchard cannot be ex-
pected to thrive, in Australia, at any rate, unless the ground
is kept cultivated. How clean that cultivation should be is
sometimes a subject for argument.
It may be stated at once that a certain amount of vege-
table matter in the soil is necessary for the growth of fruit
trees, while, at the same time, no plant grows in an orchard
without drawing upon the moisture which should go to the sup-
port of the trees. Weeds require not only moisture, but mineral
substances, which are necessary to the growth of plants, and
if their roots are allowed to compete with the fibres of the
trees for these substances in the soil, the result will be the
“ survival of the fittest,” and the fittest thing to survive such
a contest in Victoria and Hew South Wales is, undoubtedly,
native grasses, couch, and ferns —not orange trees and peaches.
Some of the soft weeds which grow on cultivated ground
during the winter, are, however, of very little detriment to
fruit trees, and it is contended by many experienced fruit-
growers that their growth, and annual turning in by the
plough, besides contributing vegetable matter, sweeten the
soil and keep it open and loose during the following summer.
In the summer, however, the ground must be kept as clean as
possible. War must be waged unceasingly with summer
grass during its season of growth. Couch, sorrel, nut-grass,
docks, bell-grass, and a hundred other weeds, must be fought
with and laid out stiff as long as they show their heads above
ground.
The retention of moisture, which is an important result
of clean summer cultivation, must be remembered when the
voice of the tempter suggests, “ let it go till the winter and
then break it up.” Hever let it go ! Keep a firm grip of it,


or it may “ get away from you ” altogether, and go back to
where it came from—the Great Uncultivated.
Four of the weeds enumerated—couch, sorrel, nut-grass
and docks, should be eradicated thoroughly as soon as they
appear, and burnt.
Summer Cultivation.
The soil in an orchard should be kept loose and well
stirred during summer, but not turned over. For this pur-
pose flat chipping hoes, Dutch hoes, and scarifiers are used in
preference to the plough and fork-hoe.
The harrow, either with sharp teeth or with “ duck-foot ”
teeth—an expression which explains itself—is used frequently
on most of our best-kept orchards, and the space immediately
round the trees chipped with the hoe.
Surface drains must be kept open and clean throughout
the summer, and open furrows left between the trees—one
every second or third land is the usual practice—so that the
water from thunderstorms may have a quick and safe get-
away. Some orchards are worked with an open furrow
between each row of trees through the summer, which is closed
in again in the winter, but this is unnecessary ; and to keep
so many open furrows clean entails considerable labour, even
if a plough, or scarifier fitted with mould-boards, can be used
for the purpose.
Besides this, the practice necessitates two ploughings,
when one may be sufficient ; and it is always found that a
certain amount of soil is lost down each furrow after rain.
Open furrows between trees are a hindrance to the scarifier
and harrow, and as few as possible should be left.
Headlands, the borders along fences and roads, the roads
themselves with their watertables, and spaces round buildings,
should all be kept free from grass and weeds, which hinder
the passage of water, scatter seed, and spread into neighbour-
ing worked ground, and increase the danger of fires.
Scarifiers of the Planet Junior type have now superseded
the clumsy iron implements in use until recently, and are fitted
with blades to cut off weeds below the surface of the soil, with-
out turning it over, for summer cultivation. Disc harrows and
cultivators are used on many large plantations, and a large area


may be worked in a very short time by their use. A disc barrow
or spader should not be used in an old plantation which has
not before been worked by one, as all roots reached by the
discs are cut, and considerable damage might thus be caused
to old and shallow rooted trees.
Winter Cultivation-
It is usual to plough as much of the ground as possible
in the winter, digging up what cannot be ploughed with a
fork hoe. Where hardpan has formed below the surface of
the soil, in consequence of repeated shallow cultivation, and
the trees will admit of it, two or more horses are sometimes
used, and the ploughing done to a considerable depth. At
the same time it should be said that many of the best citrus
orchards in Central Cumberland are never deeply worked, the
soil being described as, “as hard as bricks ” three or four
inches below the surface. “As hard as bricks ” is, however,
an exaggerated simile at the best ; probably the hardpan in
these orchards is never as hard as it becomes in the majority
of soils, owing to the presence of sand in considerable quan-
tities.
Wickson says : “ The finer the pulverisation the
shallower can be the surface layer, and vice versa , and this is
probably one reason why in practice the work of the plough
is, in so many situations, found the best formation upon which
to rest the year’s cultivation.”
If ground has been cultivated shallow for some years,
deep cultivation should be cautiously introduced. Cases are
on record of valuable orange orchards being destroyed by a
change to deep working after years of shallow cultivation.
When ground is cloddy a roller should be passed over to
break the lumps. A wooden roller fitted with shafts, and
capable of turning in a small space without dragging, is the
best to use.
In California, special harness is constructed for working
horse implements between trees. The greatest damage is
generally done to trees by the points of the hames, and the
ends of the swingle tree, and several ingenious devices have
been invented for guarding fruit trees from these dangers.


The Growth of Crops in an Orchard.
The growth of crops between trees is another question
which is open to discussion, like most other matters agricultural
and horticultural, neither of which branches of industry can
yet be palled an exact science.
A vegetable has this much of the nature of a weed, that
it thrives, while in the ground, at the expense of the tree roots,
into competition with which its own roots come.
If the substances taken from the ground by the crop are
returned in the form of manure, the loss is only temporary.
If the profit resulting from the crop enables the grower to
devote more attention to the ground, and to give it more manure
than he would otherwise be able to, by all means let him
grow vegetables between the trees. If, on the other hand, he
can afford to cultivate thoroughly, and manure generously,
without growing vegetables between the trees, he is better
without them.
The single exception in the case of peas may be made to
this statement, for peas, in common with all leguminous
plants, leave the ground richer in nitrogen than they find it,
so that, except for the moisture they require, and the trampling
of the ground between the rows in harvesting time, their effect
on an orchard is beneficial.
Ho vegetables, whether peas, beans, melons, tomatoes,
cabbages or pumpkins (they are placed in the order of their
harmlessness) should be grown near the trees. Some growers
say the distance they may be planted from the tree should be
its height, so that trees twenty feet apart and ten feet high
will not permit of the growing of vegetables between them ;
this is stating the case from an extreme point of view.
Corn, oats, or other grain crops should not be grown on
an orchard ; nothing exhausts ground sooner than the growth
of oats, corn, or sorghum for hay, while no moisture can
possibly reach the roots of the trees when they intercept it.
In the warmer parts of Hew South Wales, gooseberries,
currants and raspberries cannot be profitably grown—at least,
such is the general opinion. In colder districts, in Tasmania,
and over the greater part of Victoria, where it is intended to
grow “bush fruits’’ between the trees, the bushes must be re-
moved when the trees require the ground, if the trees are expected
to develop properly. (If the bushes are so profitable that the


health of the trees must be sacrificed to them, the question
arises whether it will not pay better to have no trees in the
plantation at all.)
In the neighbourhood of towns, where the question of
carriage does not trouble, strawberries can be grown between
young trees profitably, and are often planted in orchards.
Before leaving the subject, attention may be drawn to the
argument advanced by new-comers to this country who have
visited those counties of England immediately surrounding
London, which are famed for their market-gardens. In some
of these market-gardens vegetables are grown close up to the
butts of the fruit trees, which thrive and bear in spite of their
proximity.
The fact is that this ground receives so much attention
and manure—the moisture is either sufficient from the
rainfall, or is supplied artificially—that after the vegetables
have taken all that they require, enough still remains for the
trees. “ One hundred tons of dung per acre are sometimes
applied, at a cost of between £3O and £40,” says H. Evershed,
in the Royal Agricultural Society’s journal for 1872, of one of
these gardens. In parts of Spain, immense crops of melons are
grown among the orchards, by means of irrigation and heavy
manuring ; in fact, the melons are the main crop. The trees,
apparently, exist among them, and take their chance of
thriving.
The different conditions prevailing here must be taken
into account before acting—as is often done—on advice and
information obtained from other countries where climate, soil,
cost of labour, cost of manure, price of produce, all differ
greatly from Australian standards. The study of the
cultivation of the soil in other countries, and in all times, is,
however, a pleasant and improving subject for the professional
as well as the amateur horticulturist and agriculturist to “take
up.” Even the cultivation itself has classical associations,
when one remembers Thoreau and his two years’ warfare with
weeds at Walden, “ That’s Roman wormwood,” he says,
“that’s pig-weed, that’s sorrel, that’s piper-grass; have at him,
chop him up, turn his roots upward to the sun, don’t let him
have a fibre in the shade ; if you do, he’ll turn himself t’other
side up, and be as green as a leek in two days. A long war,
not with cranes, but with weeds, those Trojans who had sun,
and rain, and dews on their side.”


CHAPTER VII,
Manures for Fruit Trees.
The practical farmer who desires information on the subject
of manures, which he may apply in the operation of raising
crops, is often staggered by the language in which that in-
formation is conveyed by the learned. For instance,
Letourneau, on Growth in the Vegetal Kingdom, remarks as
follows:—“The nutritive liquids diffuse themselves into the
substance of the anatomical elements ; living molecules of
new formation intercalate themselves by intussusception with
the molecules primitively existing ; the cellular membrane ex-
tends ; the protoplasm grows ; then the form of the histo-
logical elements often modifies itself.” To which the farmer,
amateur, and professional, who wants to know all about the
process of growth in plants might be excused for replying :
“ I dare say you know what you’re talking about, but you
evidently don’t want me to ; or else you’d put your knowledge
into language that I could understand,” and comes to the
conclusion that the people who study, and write about the
growth of plants, and the people who actually grow plants for
their living, or their amusement, belong to two different
classes of mankind, and have no interests in common, and
this is a mistake. Even Letourneau, however, sometimes
writes in a more readable way for the public, as is shown by
the following: “ln the composition of any plant we find
mineral substances, ternary substances, non-azotized, and
proteic substances. Now, plants not eating each other
direct, like animals, it is needful for the vegetable organic
substances to be created by the plant itself, at the expense of
the mineral medium which environs it, i.e. the soil and air.
Brought back to their primary mineral elements, the complex
organic substances yield carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and a certain quantity of sulphur and of phosphorus. If we
add to these elements chlorine, calcium, potassium, sodium,
magnesium, lithium, iron, often manganese, and, in the


marine plants, iodine and bromine, we have nearly the whole
elementary sources, of alimentation in the vegetable kingdom.
The mineral elements taken direct from the air by the plant are
hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon. (See illustration.) All the
Portion of leaf showing the breathing mouths.
a, breathing mouths ; b, veins of the leaf.
other mineral matters, and almost the whole of the water, are
absorbed by the roots of the plant, penetrate into the vegetal
tissues, there ascend, there meet with, especially in the leaves,
the mineral substances derived from the air, and some of them
form complex combinations. To accomplish their office the
hairs of the roots need, like all organized cells, nourishment,
that is to say, need to be oxydized, to absorb oxygen, and to
exhale carbonic acid. Consequently, the penetration of the air
into the soil into which the roots plunge is indispensable to the
maintenance of the life of plants.” [ Hence the necessity of
drainage in tenacious soil, into which the air cannot otherwise
penetrate.']
Inorganic Substances.
“ Besides atmospheric gases, a number of mineral sub-
stances are introduced into the plant through the roots. The
principal are alkaline and terreous bases ; potash, soda,
ammonia, magnesia, lime, generally salified by sulphuric,
nitric, phosphoric, silicious, and carbonic acids. Many of
these substances do not contribute anything to the nutrition
of plants ; they are mechanically driven by the water, which
penetrates the plant, and are deposited in the deep tissues,
after having formed insoluble salts with the vegetal acids.”
This preliminary discourse on the Nutrition of
Plants, leads at once to the composition of fruit and
fruit trees. The following tables give the mineral constituents
of the various fruits named, compiled from several sources; and


demonstrate the exact extent to which the various substances
named enter into the composition of those fruits
Analyses of the Ashes of Fruits.
Showing the mineral composition, reduced to the proportion
per 100 parts.
Phosphoric Sulphuric
Potash Soda Lime Magnesia Iron Acid Acid Silica Chlorine
Apple ... 35 68 26 09 408 8-75 1-40 13-59 6-09 4-32
Pear ... 54'69 8-52 7-98 6-22 104 15 20 569 149
Peach ... 74-46 ... 2'64 6-29 0-58 16-02
Plum ... 59-21 0-54 10-04 5-46 3-20 15-10 3-83 2‘36
Orange ... 38-72 764 22‘99 6-55 0‘92 14-99 2'95 5-24 092
Lemon ... 34 00 4-37 12-90 8-66 0-25 34-85 335 035 145
Grape ... 63 21 0-40 907 5-04 o*o7 10-43 6-62 5-11 102
Fig ... 28-36 26-27 18-91 921 1-46 1-30 675 5‘93 2-69
Cherry ... 51-85 2-19 7-47 546 1-98 15-97 5-09 9-04 1-35
Quince ... 27-39 440 7-79 13-11 1-19 42-32 2-68 075 1-57
Strawberry 21-07 28*48 14-21 ... 5-87 13-82 3-15 12.01 P 69
Analyses of the Ashes of the Wood op Fruit Trees.
Pnosphoric
Potash Lime Magnesia Acid Silica
Apple 19-2 63-6 7-5 4-9
Pear 4-2 77-2 54 38
Cherry 20-8 28-7 9-2 7-7
Raspberry ... ... 14 - 2 38 - 2 10 - 8 23"6
Peach leaves and stalks 13 26 11 8 30
Of the substances essential to plant life, Carbon,
Hydrogen, and Oxygen are obtained from the air and rain.
Soda, Magnesia, Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine, Iron,
Silica, Manganese exist plentifully in nearly all soils, so
that it is unnecessary to add them in the form of manure.
Nitrogen, Phosphoric Acid, Potash, Limb exist in
the soil only to a limited extent, and are the substances which
have generally to be supplied to plants by manure.
Nitrogen exists in large quantities in the air, of which
an analysis is subjoined ; some plants, especially the legu-
minous plants—peas, lucerne, vetches, lupins, clover, etc.—are
found to increase the amount of nitrogen in the soil in which
they are grown, and this increase of nitrogen was long sup-
posed to be due to their power of assimilating the nitrogen of
the air, which was given to the soil when the roots and stalks
of the plant were turned over by the plough or hoe. A
recent discovery has demonstrated the fact that they owe
their property of increasing nitrogen in the soil to the pre-
sence of bacteria on their roots, and that these bacteria may
be developed by applying to the seed, or the land in which it


is sown, a preparation now offered for sale in Europe under
the name of Nitragin. See F. B. Guthrie on Manures and
Manuring. Farmers' and Fruitgrowers' Guide.
The use of this substance is unnecessary when the
bacteria develop freely on the roots of the leguminous plants
without it.
Composition op the Atmosphere.
Johnston and Cameron give the following table of the composi-
tion of the atmosphere :
(Nitrogen ... ... ... 77-95
Oxygen ... ... ... 20;6I
Watery Vapor ... ... 1-40
Carbonic Dioxide ... ... (K)4
Probably ( Ozone ... ... ... Traces.
Essential 1 Ammonia
-LiOOCHOmi ( XXLLL LLi. vJiliCti ... ... ...
{Nitric Acid ... ... ... „
Carbonic Monoxide ...
Carbonetted Hydrogen ... ~
c , , ~ j -ft J 6
Sulphuretted Hydrogen ... „
Organic Matter ... .„
100-00
Nitrogen.
The great source of nitrogen in nature is, as shown above,
the atmosphere, from which it is precipitated in small quan-
tities by electricity—this process takes place during thunder-
storms. Nitrogen also exists in the soil; an acre of land,
nine inches deep, has been calculated to contain about 3000
pounds of nitrogen, and 80,000 pounds of carbon. This
nitrogen is, however, unavailable for plant food, although it
becomes available during the decomposition of the soil. It
belongs to the class of soil constituents called “ the assimil-
able constituents in reserve,” by Professor Yille, the
“ dormant constituents,” by Professor Tanner, and the
“ unavailable ” plant food, by Professor Wrightson.
The process of converting this “ unavailable plant food ”
into “available” material is accelerated by tillage, by the ap-
plication of farmyard manure, by beat, and by the application
of lime. ( Wehb's Agriculture).
Worms and insects, especially boring insects like the
mole cricket, and the larvas of the cicada—commonly called


“ locust ” in Australia—contribute nitrogen to the soil by
their excrement and dead bodies.
Darwin, in Vegetable Mould and Earthworms , says :
“ The combination of any acid with a base is much facilitated
by agitation, as fresh surfaces are thus continually brought
into contact. This will be thoroughly effected with the par-
ticles of stone and earth in the intestines of worms, during
the digestive process ; and it should be remembered that the
entire mass of the mould over every field, passes, in the
course of a few years, through their alimentary canals.”
The higher fungi produce the same effect, feeding on
organic matter which they return to the earth in the form of
nitrogen.
Nitrogen may be added to the soil—and, as before
stated, it exists in soil only to a limited extent in an avail-
able natural state—in the form of the following manures :
Stable manure, guano, town sewage, fish refuse, bonedust,
dried blood, boiling down refuse, tan yard refuse, Sulphate of
Ammonia, Nitrate of Soda, Nitrate of Potash.
Phosphoric Acid.
Phosphoric Acid exists in the soil in small quantities,
generally as phosphate of lime, but it may be taken for granted
that the quantity in which it occurs in any soil in Australia
is insufficient for the support of plant life for many years.
The manures containing Phosphoric Acid are bonedust,
Superphosphate of Lime, Phosphatic Guano, Basic Slag, or
Thomas’s Phosphate and mineral Superphosphate, Stable
manure contains only a very small proportion of phosphate.
So far, the greater part of the manures used by fruit-
growers in Australia have been phosphatic manures, of which
bonedust is the best known, and, probably, the cheapest form.
It will be found necessary in time to use potash and nitro-
genous manures, as well as bonedust, for the continuous
use of the latter as a fertilizer causes plants and fruit trees to
draw very largely upon the supplies of potash and nitrogen in
the soil, and when these supplies are exhausted no amount of.
phosphates will take their place.
It must be remembered that plants require a certain
quantity of each of these substances for their growth, and


their existence depends upon the presence of all these “plant
foods ”in the soil. To give phosphates to a plant starving
for want of potash and nitrogen is as logical as to give a loaf
of bread to a man dying of thirst.
Liebig’s Law of Minimum.
“ Every field contains a maximum of one or several, and
a minimum of one or several nutritive substances. It is by
the minimum that crops are governed, be it lime, potash,
nitrogen, phosphoric acid, magnesia, or any other mineral
constituent.”
Potash.
Potash in the soil is derived from the decomposition
of felspar ; clay soils are generally rich in potash ; peaty and
sandy soils are generally deficient in potash.
It is probable that a clay soil, which has been cropped
for successive years without the addition of a potash manure,
would receive a new supply of potash, sufficient to last for
some time, if the subsoil were turned over and mixed with the
surface soil by trench-ploughing and deep digging. This, of
course, can only be done when the surface soil is free enough
to allow of the admixture of clay without deteriorating its
mechanical condition.
Potash is found in stable manure to some extent, and
also in forest scrapings ; the manures containing potash are
Kainit, Sulphate of Potash, Nitrate of Potash, wood ashes,
Muriate of Potash. A substance called suint is found in
wool, and contains a large amount of potash salts.
This substance is extracted from wool in France, and is
said to sometimes amount to a third the weight of the fleece.
In Australia, where such vast quantities of wool are produced,
it seems a pity that a valuable manurial substance, such as
this is stated to be, cannot be saved in the process of sheep-
washing. (See Webb's Elementary Agriculture , 1891.)*
* See analysis of refuse from wool-scouring tanks in the Agricultural
Gazette of N.S. W.


Lime.
Lime exists in soils formed by the disintegration of
limestone rock. It forms a large proportion of the substance
of all animals, being present in bones in large quantities. The
following is the analysis of human bones :
Animal Matter ... .. ... 83-30
Phosphate of Lime and Fluoride of Calcium... 53-04
Carbonate of Lime ... ... ... 11-BO
Phosphate of Magnesia ... ... ... 1-16
Soda and Common Salt .. ... ... 1-20
100-00
Bonedust, therefore, contains a large amount of lime, and
where this manure is applied a further application of lime
as plant food is unnecessary. Lime, however, has a benefi-
cial effect on the mechanical condition of soil, breaking up
stiff soils, and decomposing organic matter. It should never
be used with nitrogenous manures as it causes ammonia to
escape in the form of gas.
Lime unites with clay, setting free potash or other
alkalis. It neutralizes poisonous salts of iron and copper.
Lime is best applied, to obtain the greatest effect from its
sweetening properties, in the form of quicklime (oxide of
calcium.) The quantity applied per acre should be about a
ton, to sweeten and break up stiff soil. In England from six
to eight tons per acre are used, but frequent applications
of smaller quantities are found more beneficial, as lime has a
tendency to sink into the subsoil.
Price and Value of Manures.
The trade in bonedust and. other manures in Australia
is annually increasing in magnitude. Many firms are
engaged in the manufacture, preparation, and importation of
commercial fertilizers, and competition, being keen, leads to
the cutting down of prices, and also, unfortunately, to adul-
teration.
Copies of the analyses of commercial fertilizers, together
with their values, are published from time to time in the
Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales. In a publication
such as this, the reproduction of such a table would be out of


place, and might lead to complications with those firms whose
manures do not reach by analysis the standard of value which
they place upon them themselves. An analysis is not infal-
lible, whether of manure or soil ; but as it is the only guide
the purchaser has in judging the value of a fertilizer, and the
only check upon fraud, it should be consulted and weighed
before a purchase is made.
Quantity to Apply.
Taking a good bonedust, containing 4 per cent, of
Nitrogen and 20 per cent, of Phosphoric Acid, with the
addition of 2cwt. to the ton of Sulphate of Potash, as the
standard manure ; fruit trees on poor ground should receive
the Ist year
the 2nd year
the 3rd year
the 4th year
2cwt. per acre,
4cwt. per acre,
scwt. per acre,
6cwt. per acre,
half a ton to the acre being the maximum, sufficient for old
trees planted close together, with the addition of some manure
containing vegetable matter, or new soil.
The manures required by any fruit tree in special quan-
tity are enumerated under the headings of the various kinds
of fruits in Chapter YIII.


CHAPTER VIII.
The Apple.
The apple tree flourishes over nearly the whole of New South
Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania; in fact, almost everywhere that
the soil is in any way fit for cultivation in these colonies an
apple orchard may be planted, and, varieties suitable for the
district being selected, good fruit may be raised.
On the selection of varieties much depends. The best
apples undoubtedly require a cold climate, and in the warm
coast region and hot interior will not produce the best quality
of fruit ; but many varieties on the other hand —and
especially colonial seedlings raised in a warm district—will
thrive as well, and produce as good fruit in warm localities, as
in the cooler climates of Victoria and Tasmania.
Soil for the Apple.
The apple tree does best in a deep sandy loam, and
although not as susceptible to the ill effects of stagnant water
as stone fruits, requires well-drained ground.
Moisture is necessary to the proper growth of the tree
and maturing of the fruit ; on dry exposed hill-sides
apple trees rarely attain their full size, and seldom, if ever,
produce good fruit. A clay subsoil is not so detrimental to
apple trees as to most other fruit trees, the roots being strong
enough to force their way into a stiff subsoil; but a clay sub-
soil saturated with water is to be avoided.
Shelter for the Apple.
Apple trees require shelter for many reasons. The bark
is liable to scald when exposed to the direct rays of the sun on
a slope facing west, although this may be avoided by low
heading to a great extent.
Apples being often borne in bunches, and not having a
very firm grip of the branch, a high wind about the period of
ripening will strew the ground with half the crop, of many
kinds, in an exposed position.
The trees, moreover, are prone to develop “ top ” before
their roots obtain a sufficient hold of the ground to properly


support it. In this condition a high wind invariably blows
young trees over, unless very securely staked, especially when
the ground is wet after rain.
Distance to Plant Apples.
The minimum distance apart at which apple trees should
be planted is twenty feet, and ranges from this up to thirty feet,
and in some localities even forty. The rule is, the richer the soil
the bigger the tree, and consequently the more room it will
require. Where apple trees grow so slowly and weakly that
they will not occupy the space at twenty feet apart, they had
better not be planted. If the tree will not grow well, it is
certain it will not produce good fruit.
Planting and Pruning the Apple.
The directions given in preceding chapters will be found
sufficient for planting and shaping apple trees, the only
remark necessary being that different varieties have different
habits of growth, and, therefore, require different treatment,
which experience will point out.
Staking Apple Trees.
Apple trees, more than any other fruit trees, require to
be securely staked and tied, because of their liability to be
blown over by high winds ; the difficulty is to find ties strong
enough to hold two and three year old trees to the stakes.
The Garden , in a back number, contains the following :
“ The Pomological Institute of Reutlingen (Germany) offers
for sale strips of tape prepared with ludiarubber, which are
said to be very serviceable and durable for this purpose.
These strips are 2\ feet long, and about £ inch wide, and are
sold at the rate of 2|d. per 100.”
If these ties could be introduced into Australia, they
might supply “ a long felt want,” if their width should prove
sufficient, which is doubtful, and their durability be equal to
the strain. Some enterprising fruitgrower might import a
few and test them.
Blight-proof Stocks.
The use of blight-proof stocks for the apple is universal
in Australia ; the Northern Spy and Winter Majetin are
generally used, though several other varieties are blight-proof,
notably Carrington—which makes a good stock—lrish peach,
and Wolseley. Winter Majetin stocks are recommended for


sandy ground, their roots being stronger and more spreading
than those of the Northern Spy.
Thinning Apples.
In America the practice of thinning fruit is very
widely followed, and in the case of apples is found to give
excellent results ; it would be worth the grower’s while, in
Australia, to perform a few experiments in thinning on his
trees. The cost per tree should be noted down, and the dif-
ference in value of the fruit per tree, when marketed, be-
tween that from the thinned trees and that from the unthinned
ones • by this means a practical demonstration would be af-
forded of whether the process of thinning pays or not.
The following quotation is taken from the Agriculturist :
“ It takes no more time to pick off a little apple in the sum-
mer than it does to pick the same apple in the fall—and with
me the fall is the busiest season of the year. I used to think
that thinning fruit was one of the refinements of horticulture
which those of us who grow fruit largely for market could not
stop to bother with. But a friend’s experience convinced me
error. If there are two thousand apples on a tree in
the summer, and I let them grow, I have to pick them all in
the fall. If this is as many again as the tree ought to bear,
would fill, say, five barrels. Now, if I pick
off 1000 of the smallest, and poorest, and specked, and
wormy apples in the summer, the probabilities are that the
1000 left on the tree would grow so much larger that they
would fill the five barrels as before. We pick 2000 apples in
either case and get the same amount of fruit. What then, do
we gain ? In the first place, the 1000 apples do not exhaust
the tree as much as the 2000. There is as much fruit by
measure, butjt consists largely of material that takes little
from the tree or the soil. There is only half as much seed,
etc. We ought to thin out at least enough to leave the tree
strength enough to bear a full crop the next year. In the
second place, the 1000 apples are worth much more than
the 2000 ; and last, but not least, the trees will bear every
year. We do not remember to have seen the case stated in
a manner more concise or convincing.”
Diseases of the Apple.
These will be found enumerated in Chapter X, together
with the remedies generally recommended. The apple tree,


in Australia as elsewhere, is the prey of numerous insect pests
and fungoid diseases ; the worst of the former is the codling
moth ;of the latter, the so-called American blight. So great
have been the ravages of these two curses that many growers
in Australia have grubbed up their apple trees in despair of
finding a remedy for them.
Although the eradication of these diseases is impossible,
they may be fought and kept in subjection if proper care
be taken, and the result will be found worth the struggle.
The apple tree, it must be remembered, is hardy and product-
ive, and good varieties of apples almost always bring a
remunerative price. The trees may be counted on also to
live to a ripe old age, with proper care, so that a little extra
attention in bandaging, spraying, and washing, will not be
lost.
VARIETIES OF APPLES.
This list is compiled from Australian, English, and
American sources, many names of little known kinds are
omitted, and an endeavour has been made to make the infor-
mation as local as possible. Owing to the confusion in the
local nomenclature and descriptions of fruit, the task of
drawing up such a list is extremely hard, but it is hoped that
the information afforded is correct as far as it goes. In cases
where the same apple is known under two names, both are
given.
Adams’ Pearmain.—A favourite English dessert apple,
medium-sized, late, a good keeper, exports well.
Aitken’s Seedling. —Raised in Central Cumberland,
New South Wales ; a large, showy midseason cooking apple,
suitable for export, but deficient in juice and flavour, tree hardy
and blight proof.
Alexander, or “ Emperor Alexander.”—A large mid-
season cooking apple, not largely distributed, reported a shy
bearer in some places, good for export.
Alfriston. —Large midseason cooking apple, supposed
to be the same as “ Carpenter,” largely grown in England.
Allsopp’s. —Raised in Central Cumberland ; a large,
early dessert apple, moderate bearer, tender for shipment when
ripe.
American Mother. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
recommended by W. Clarson, supposed to be the same as
“ IVlother.”


Anlbzark. —Raised in Central Cumberland ; an early
dessert apple, not widely distributed.
Arkansas Queen. — Large, late, dessert, not widely
known.
Astbachan. — See Red and White Astrachan.
Baldwin. —Large, late, dessert, recommended for
export, does best in cool climates, largely exported to Eng-
land from America, tree hardy and productive.
Beauty of Kent. Large, midseason, dessert, a
favourite in England and California ; greenish yellow with
stripes of red ; grown in Tamworth, Tenterfield, Wagga
Wagga, Armidale, and largely in Victoria.
Betty Geeson. —Large, late, cooking, also suitable for
dessert, not widely distributed in Australia, nor recom-
mended now in England, where it originated.
Blenheim Orange, —Large, late, cooking and dessert,
widely distributed in Australia ; J. Cheal, England, calls this
the “king of apples.’ Tree vigorous, but a long time
coming into bearing.
Blue Pbarmain.— Large, late, cooking, not widely
distributed nor recommended for culture.
Boston Russet. —Medium sized, late, dessert, not
largely grown nor recommended.
Brown Russet.— See Golden Russet, which appears to
be the same apple.
Carrington. Medium-sized, early dessert, raised in
Central Cumberland, where it is a favourite, tree hardy and
prolific; fruit tender and inclined to come small.
Carpenter. —Large, dessert and cooking, midseason,
largely grown in Cumberland (the name is local) deficient in
juice and flavour.
Calville Blanc. —A favourite in France and England;
large, midseason, cooking; probably known by half-a-dozen
names in Australia.
Calville Rouge. —“ Red Colville,” “ Caldwell, ’ “ Col-
man,” etc.—Large, midseason, dessert and cooking, widely
distributed in New South Wales.
Cathead Codlin. Large, midseason, cooking, not
widely grown nor recommended for planting.
Cellini. —Medium, midseason, dessert and cooking,
recommended as a cooking apple in England, but tree liable
to canker.


Christmas. —Small, dessert, early, a moderate bearer,
grown in Central Cumberland, the name is local.
Court Pendu Plat. —Late dessert, not widely grown.
Claygate Pearmain. Medium-sized, late, dessert,
grown in Camden, Cootamundra, Goulburn ; a favourite in
England.
Cleopatra. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, a good
apple for keeping and packing, not largely grown under this
name; Crichton identifies it with “New York Pippin.”
Cox’s Orange Pippin. —Large, late, dessert, suitable
for export. See “ Orange Pippin.”
Creasy’s Seedling. Medium-sized, late, cooking,
grown in Central Cumberland, New South Wales, not of the
best quality.
Dutch Mignonnb. Medium-sized, late, dessert, not
largely grown in Australia, an old favourite in Europe.
Devonshire Quarrendon, —Medium-sized, early, des-
sert, widely distributed in Australia, a favourite in England.
Devonshire Redstreak. Small, midseason, dessert.
Duchess of Oldenburg.— Large, early, dessert and
cooking, not widely grown in Australia, reported an immense
and early bearer in Britain, largely grown in America.
Dumelow’s Seedling.— Medium-sized, late, cooking,
not well known in New South Wales ; an old favourite in
England ; also known as “ Wellington.”
Early Red June. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
not largely grown.
Esopus Spitzenberg.— Large, late, dessert, a splendid
apple, recommended by W. Clarson, and D. Crichton for
Yictoria ; not extensively grown.
Fanny. Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, grown
in Central Cumberland, subject to American blight, keeps
well.
Fearn’s Pippin. Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
an English apple not widely grown.
Five Crown Pippin. —Large, midseason, dessert and
cooking, a favorite in Yictoria and Tasmania, and the colder
districts of New South Wales, a good packing apple, liable to
mouldy core in some seasons.
Foxley. —One of the best cider apples (others are
Dounton Pippin, Fiji, Golden Pippin, Bittersweet, Devon-
shire Red Streak).


French Crab, Medium-sized, late, cooking, not
largely grown, recommended for export.
Gloria Mundi. —Large, midseason, cooking, grown in
England, a favourite show apple in America on account of its
size, not largely grown here, nor recommended.
Golden Russet. —Medium-sized, late dessert, an English
apple, not largely grown in Australia.
Granny Smith. — Large, late, cooking, largely grown in
Central Cumberland, a good keeper, and suitable for export.
FRENCH CRAB APPLE.
Flock kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassetter & Co .
Grayenstein. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, a
strong-growing tree, and heavy bearer in suitable localities, a
favourite in Europe and America for many years, and recom-
mended for planting in Australia.
Irish Peach. — Medium-sized to small, early, dessert, an
old standard early apple, but no longer a favourite.
Jonathan. —Medium-sized to large, winter, dessert,
sometimes comes small, an apple of delicate flavour and


attractive appearance, largely grown in California, stripped to
England from the Eastern States ; recommended for New
South Wales, where, as yet, it is not largely grown; largely
grown in Tasmania,
Jupp’s Surprise. —Small, early, dessert, a Cumberland
apple, not largely grown.
Jupp’s Seedling.— Small, early, dessert, raised in
Central Cumberland.
Kansas Queen ( syn. Arkansas Queen). — Medium-sized,
early, dessert, not widely grown.
Kentucky Red-Streak,— Medium-sized, late, dessert,
largely grown in California, scarcely tried in Australia, grown
at Camden, New South Wales.
Kenyon’s Red. —Medium-sized, midseason, cooking,
a Central Cumberland apple, superseded by better varieties,
Keswick Codlin. —Large, early, cooking, a favourite in
England, France and America, recommended for the cooler
parts of Australia.
King of Pippins.— Medium-sized, late, dessert, not
largely grown ; a great favourite in England.
King of Tompkins’ County. —Large, midseason, dessert,
scarcely known in Australia, largely exported from America to
England, not a universal favourite in California.
Lady. —Small, midseason, dessert, a pretty apple, no
longer grown extensively.
Lady’s Finger. —Small, midseason, dessert; probably
another name for “ Lady.” The name is a local one.
Lord Derby, —Large, late, cooking, largely grown for
market in England, where it is reported “ very large tree, a
strong grower and free bearer.”
Lord Nelson.— Large, early, cooking, a standard
variety for export and local market, but subject to blight.
Lord Suffibld. —Large, early, cooking, an English
apple. The tree is stated to be tender in many places; not
recommended.
Lord Wolselby.— Large, late, cooking, blight-proof,
recently introduced.
Luxemburg {syn. Triomphe de Luxemberg). — Large,
midseason, cooking.
Maiden’s Blush.— Large, early, cooking, blight-proof,
one of the apples exported from America to England, grown
in California, dries well.


Mela Carla.— Medium-sized, late, dessert, not exten-
sively grown.
Mere de Menage.—Large, early, cooking, not largely
grown.
Mobbs’ Royal.— Large, early, cooking, dries well, keeps
well, a favourite throughout these colonies.
New England Pigeon.— Large, midseason, dessert, not
a favourite.
New York Pippin.—Large, late, dessert, not much
grown ; a good export apple.
Newtown Pippin. —Large, late, dessert, not widely
grown in Australia ; recommended for export.
Nickajack. —Large, late,, dessert, a good all-round
apple, and an old favourite.
Nonsuch. —Large, early, cooking, grown in California,
not extensively in Australia; not to be confounded with
Feasgood’s Nonsuch, which is a better apple.
Norfolk Beefing. Medium-sized, late, cooking ;
largely grown in England, and in some places in New South
Wales (Camden, and Yass).
Northern Spy.—Large, late, dessert, occasionally a shy
bearer, and not extensively grown.
Orange Pippin (syn. Cox's Orange Pippin). —Large,
late, dessert. J. Cheal (England) says of this:—“The
king of dessert apples. There is no apple in the world that
can equal it in quality.” Worthy of a better trial in
Australia than it appears to have had.
Pbasgood’s Nonsuch. —Large, late, cooking ; a well-
known apple in New South Wales and Victoria.
Perfection. —Large, late, dessert, not extensively
grown.
Pohmb de Neigb. —Medium-sized, late, dessert (French
for “ Snow Apple,” which is probably the same.)
Prince Albert. —Large, late, cooking, recommended
for growing for profit in England, not well known, perhaps
the same as Prince Alfred.
Prince Bismarck. —Large, late, dessert and cooking,
grown in Armidale, Cootamundra, Camden, Tumut, Cumber-
land County, New South Wales ; a good apple.
Queen. — Large, midseason, dessert. This apple is
reported as grown in Yass, Maitland, Inverell and other
districts, but is probably a local name for some other variety—


perhaps one of the “Reinettes.” “The Queen” is a new
English apple.
Red Astrachan. —Large, early, dessert, the standard
early apple in California, recently introduced.
Red Bietigheimer. —Large, early, cooking, a com-
paratively new apple, highly thought of in California.
Red Caldwell,— See Colville Rouge,
RIBSTON PIPPIN.
Block kindly lint by Messrs. F. Lassetter & Co.
Reinette du Canada, —Medium-sized, late, cooking,
also suitable for dessert when ripe, an old favourite in Europe
(Du Breuil mentions two Reinettes du Canada ), no longer
considered valuable.
Ribston Pippin.— Medium-sized, late, dessert, requires a
cold climate (recommended by Clarson, for Victoria), grown in
Camden, Argyle, Cootamundra, Inverell; a good export
apple. Tree subject to blight.


Rome Beauty.— Large, late, dessert, a favourite in
America, well known.
Scarlet Nonpareil. Large, late, dessert, a good
export apple, in fact, one of the best for the London market ;
tree subject to blight.
Scarlet Pbarmain.— Medium-sized, late, dessert, suit-
able for export, a standard variety ; tree blights badly.
Schoolmaster. —Large, late, cooking, an English apple,
well known in New South Wales.
Shockley. Medium-sized, late, dessert, a heavy
cropper, not popular to any extent.
Smith’s Early.— See Carrington.
Smith’s Late. —Small, late, dessert, a Central Cumber-
land seedling, inferior.
Snow.— Medium-sized, late, dessert, grown largely in the
United States, and exported thence to England. It is
doubtful whether the real “ Snow” is grown in Australia.
Spice. —Small, midseason, dessert, not largely grown.
Stone Pippin. Medium-sized, late, dessert, a good
keeper but not extensively grown.
Striped Reefing. — Large, late, cooking and dessert,
also recommended for export to England, scarcely grown in
Australia ; non-blighting, a strong grower, recommended.
Sturmer Pippin. Medium-sized, late, dessert, not
well-known in Australia, recommended for the English
export trade.
Syke House Russet. —Medium sized, late, dessert,
recommended for export.
Trivett’s Seedling, Small, midseason, dessert, a
favourite in Central Cumberland, a showy apple, and packs
well.
Twenty Ounce. —Large, late, cooking, rather coarse,
not a favourite.
Ward’s Seedling.— Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
bears well (Inverell, Orange, Maitland, Taraworth, Central
Cumberland), New South Wales.
Warner’s King. Large, late, cooking, not largely
grown, a favourite in England.
Webb’s Winter. Medium-sized, late, des'sert, not
recommended.
White Astraohan. —Large, early, dessert (an apple
under this grown in Wagga Wagga is described as a,


s.
d.
Dunn’s Seedling, 850 cases, average
... 11
4i
Cleopatra, 3386 ,, ,, ...
... 10
Of
London Pippin, 167 ,, ,, ...
9
7
Strawberry Pippin, 771 ,, „ ...
... 9
Sturmer Pippin, 97 ,, ,, ...
... 10
3
Stone Pippin, 897 ,, ,, ...
... 10
6f
Fearn’s Pippin, 26 ,, ,, ...
... 14
4
Jonathan, 78 ,, „ ...
... 9
4|
Eome Beauty, 218 ,, ,, ...
... 8
11
Adams’ Pearmain, 59 „ ,, ....
... 9 10J
medium-sized midseason dessert), grown for shipment in
California to some extent.
White Nonpareil. —Large, midseason, dessert, grown
in Camden, New South Wales, not recommended.
White Paradise,— Large, midseason, cooking, not
recommended.
White Winter Pearmain. Large, late, dessert,
grown extensively in California, a good export apple. (See
Winter Pearmain.')
Winter Majetin.. —Medium-sized, late, cooking, fruit
inferior, tree a good stock, blight proof.
Winter Pearmain. —Large, late, dessert, a standard
market apple ; Cheal says, this apple, “ Scarlet Pearmain,”
“ Winter Queening,” and “ Ducksbill ” are one and the same
in Sussex. “ W kite W inter Pearmain” is a favourite in Cali-
fornia, recommended.
Worcester Pearmain, —Medium-sized, early, dessert,
not largely grown, nor recommended ; Cheal says of this apple,
“ Second rate, but makes up in appearance what it lacks in
quality.” Good cropper.
Yorkshire Greening. —Large, late, cooking, grown
in Inverell and Armidale, New South Wales, but not well
known in Australia.
Apples for Export.
“ The report of the South Australian Minister for Agricul-
ture for 1897, contains the following particulars of apples and
grapes exported to London during the season from that
colony.
Of the following varieties, 6459 cases yielded returns as under :
These varieties are those which have been recommended in the
past by the Department of Agriculture, and returned an average of


10s. sd. per case, or a net return to the grower of about 3s. 2d. per
bushel.
(Five varieties of grapes, comprising 379 cases, were also for-
warded. Of these the bulk were—White Daria, and averaged 11s. IJd.
per case; Red Daria averaged 12s. 6d.; and Doradilla, 10s. 3Jd).” —
Sydney Mail, January 1, 1898.
The following varieties are selected from several other
lists of apples recommended for export to England. Varieties
unknown, or not sufficiently .tested here, are omitted ; also
those about the fitness of which for the purpose there is
doubt.
Adams’ Pearmain, Baldwin, Blenheim Orange, Braddock’s
Nonpareil, Cox’s Orange Pippin, French Crab, Newtown
Pippin, New York Pippin, Ribston Pippin, Scarlet Non-
pareil, Sturmer Pippin.
In this connection the following list of apples exported
from America to England is interesting.
King of Tompkins’ County, Jonathan, Northern Spy,
Baldwin, Snow or Fameuse, Red Canada, Twenty Ounce,
Reinette du Canada, Golden Russet, Fall Pippin.
The Best English Apples.
As most of our best apples came originally from England,
the following list of the varieties at present most esteemed
there is useful.
Blenheim Orange, Cellini, Cox’s Orange Pippin,
Duchess of Oldenburg, Ecklinville, Frogmore Prolific,
Golden Noble, Keswick Codlin, King of Pippins, Lord
Derby, Norfolk Beefing, Lord Grosvenor, Lord Suffield,
Pott’s Seedling, Prince Albert, Stirling Castle, Warners
King, Wellington, Winter Queening, Worcester Pearmain.
Other English favourites are Beauty of Kent, Claygate Pear-
main, Dutch Mignonne, Early Julien, Gladstone, Golden Knob,
Queen Caroline, Schoolmaster, Sussex Forge, Yellow Ingestrie,
Yorkshire Beauty, Alfriston, Winter Reinette, Bismarck,
Peasgood’s Nonsuch, The Queen.
The Best Californian Apples.
White Astrachan, Alexander, Gravenstein, Newtown
Pippin, White Winter Pearmain, Yellow Bell Flower, Red
Astrachan, Ben Davis, Monmouth Pippin, Esopus Spitzen-
berg, Northern Spy, Jonathan, Roxbury Russet are the
varieties most recommended,


The Pear.
The pear tree flourishes in all climates where the apple
tree grows, and withstands hardships which would be fatal to
any other fruit tree. Its longevity in Australia is also
greater than that of any other fruit tree known, since pear
trees still remain alive in numbers which were planted in the
early days of settlement.
The pears produced in Australia, when the trees receive
proper care and attention, are inferior in quality to none in
the world. In Hew South Wales, unfortunately, the
varieties first planted were inferior and subject to disease,
so that pear-growing for profit fell into disrepute.
It is true the pear tree is slower than other fruit trees
in coming into bearing, but it is hardy and productive in com-
pensation, while the facts remain that canned pears are
worth more than any other variety of canned fruit, in the
markets of the world, and good varieties of dessert pears com-
mand a paying price at any time of the year.
Pear-growing in Australia will never reach the propor-
tions that apple and orange-growing may be expected to
attain, owing to the fact that the English market is too far
off, under existing circumstances, for our best pears to be
placed upon it in good condition. Doubtless, however, ex-
periment will prove that we have some pears which will
carry safely to England.
Soil for the Pear.
The pear tree prefers a deep, rich soil, but will thrive
and produce first-class fruit in a shallow soil with a stiff
clay subsoil. As previously stated, pear trees may be
planted in the most unfavourable positions in the orchard, not
because they prefer them, but because they will stand hard
ship better than any other fruit trees.
Stocks.
The seedling stock, imported at present from France, is
the best stock for the pear. Transplanted suckers never
give as evenly balanced roots, for several seasons, as seedling
stocks, when worked over and planted out.
The quince is used as a dwarfing stock, quince seedlings
are said not to sucker so much as suckers ; but this


stock is not recommended ; its chief advantage is in throw-
ing the fruiting of the tree earlier than the pear stock does.
For experimental purposes the quince is a valuable stock.
Test trees on the quince take up very little room, and fruit
early. All pears will not thrive when worked direct on the
quince.; as in the case of Paradise stocks, for dwarfing the
apple, double grafting has then to be resorted to.
. Two-year-old pear trees are generally planted in preference
to. one-year-old ; the trees are better shaped and larger
the second year, and as a rule have better roots. Pear seed-
lings have a tendency to develop tap the first year ; if taken
up, and the tap-root cut, they will develop fibre during the
second season, and make better growth when planted in the
orchard the following winter.
Many of the best varieties of pears require storing after
picking, in order to mature their flavor and ripen properly,
unless packed hard to distant markets ; this subject is treated
in Chapter IX.
Distance in Planting.
Pear trees, on the pear stock, require plenty of room.
Their growth, though slow, is sure, and when overcrowded
the trees will be stunted and the fruit inferior. Twenty feet
apart is the minimum.
Pruning.
Pear trees are pruned less than any other fruit trees, for
the reason that most varieties make a symmetrical growth
without the use of knife and saw. Some varieties, however,
grow thick and shrubby unless well thinned out; others are
prone to develop growth of the fishing-rod description un less
headed back. As with apples, experience is the best guide
in pruning.
Thinning is not generally resorted to with pears, as
they are found to properly ripen a larger crop than any other
fruit tree, without deterioration of quality ; the process is
nevertheless recommended in California.
List of Varieties.
The following is a list of the varieties of pears chiefly
grown for market in Australia. Out of the immense num-
ber of others in cultivation, doubtless many are worthy of a
place in the list, and much room exists for experiment in
their growth.


Alexander BiVort.—Small, late, dessert, not much
grown.
Bartlett (syn. Williams’ Bon Chretien). Barge,
late, dessert, fine flavour, packs well, tree a strong grower,
early and abundant cropper. - This pear is considered in
America by far the best for market purposes ; immense quan-
tities of Bartlett pears being grown for canning alone.
Bell (syn. Rotgut). —Large, early, cooking, packs well
green, will not keep, deficient in flavour, an old variety in the
county of Cumberland, both names are local.
Bell, Baking (syn. Pound). Large, midseason,
cooking, keeps well, very large and coarse, tree a-heavy
cropper and grows vigorously, inferior. ( See Gatillac.)
Bergamot Autumn. —Small, late, dessert, not so well-
known as the other Bergamots,
Bergamot, Brown. Medium-sized, midseason, des-
sert, flavour inferior, tree generally an uncertain cropper, fruit
packs well.
Bergamot, White.—Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
fruit has a much better flavour than the brown Bergamot, and
sells better, tree a shy bearer in most places.
Bergamot, Gansell’s.—Medium-sized to large, mid-
season, dessert, the best of the Bergamots, though not so
well known as the White and Brown, tree bears fairly well
in a cold climate.
Beurre d’Aremberg.—Small, late, dessert, not well
known.
Beurre Bose.—Large, late, dessert, one of the best pears
in cultivation, tree grows well, bears well, fruit of good
quality and flavour, largely grown for market in Europe and
America.
Beurre Clairgbau (syn. Golden Beurre). —Large, late,
dessert, a good pear to grow for market, packs well, hand-
some appearance, flavour good, tree a strong grower and
constant cropper.
Beurre de Capiaumont.—Medium-sized, midseason,
dessert, an excellent dessert pear, tree bears well.
Beurre Diel. —Large, late, dessert, fine flavour, a
general favourite in countries where it is grown, not sufficiently
known in Australia.
Beurre Brown.—Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, not
first class.


Beurrb Easter. Large, late, dessert, very good
flavour, a good packer (has been sent from California to Eng-
land). Messrs. E. Jacobs & Sons, Covent Garden, recom-
mended this pear as about the only one which might be
expected to carry to England. Should be more extensively
grown.
Beurre Range. —Large, late, dessert, not extensively
grown.
Beurre Yan Mons. — See Van Mans Leon Leclerc.
Bishop’s Thumb (syn. Lady's Finger). Medium-
sized, midseason, dessert, wanting in flavour, inferior.
Black Achan. —Large, late, cooking, an old favourite
in Scotland, and probably requires a cold climate, said to be
grown near Inverell, very little spoken of now.
Broompark. —Medium-sized, late, dessert, good flavour,
not largely grown.
Butter. —Large, late, dessert, good flavour, and keeps
well, a standard variety in Central Cumberland, the name is
local, appears to be identical with Easter Beurre.
Catillac. —Large, late, cooking, apparently the old
“ Bell Baking ” pear of Central Cumberland, the same as
“ Pound ” pear, according to Crichton.
Ch A.UMONTEL. — Large, late, dessert, not extensively
grown.
China.— -Medium-sized, midseason, cooking, only good
for preserving, tree grows vigorously and bears abundantly.
Citron des Cap.mes —Small, midseason, cooking, an
old pear, not highly esteemed now.
Colmar d’Aremberg. Medium-sized, midseason,
dessert, tree does not grow fast, fruit not first class,
Crasanne. Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, tree
crops well in some localities, not one of the best, an uncertain
cropper.
Doyenne be Comice. —Large, late, dessert, not recom-
mended.
Doyenne d’Ete. —Small, early, dessert, tree grows
slowly.
Duchesse d’Angouleme. —Large, late, dessert, grown
in California, also in France largely, one of the best.
Flat Baking. —Large, late, cooking, hangs well, sells
well as a rule, (Known as “ Hobart-town Baking ” in some
places.)


Flemish Beauty. —Large, raidseason, dessert ( Beurre
d’Avg, Beurr4 Spence , Belle de Flandre), bears well.
Fondante d’Automne. Large, midseason, dessert,
not well known.
Glou Morceau. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert,
fruit tender and very juicy, tree a moderate grower.
Golden Beurre. — See Beurre Clairgeau.
Green Seckel ( syn . Green Chisel ). —Small, midseason,
dessert, very fine flavour.
Jargonelle, Medium-sized, early, dessert, an old
favourite in England, and widely distributed in Australia,
probably the best early pear for market, tree grows fast and
bears well.
L’lnconnue. Medium-sized, sometimes small, late,
cooking, not extensivly grown, inferior,
Louise Bonne de Jersey. —Medium-sized, midseason,
dessert, requires a cold climate to bring it to perfection.
Marie Louise. Large, midseason, dessert, a fine
flavoured pear, liable to blight.
Napoleon. —Medium-sized, late, dessert, a well known
pear, recommended.
Pitmaston Duchesse. —Large, late, dessert, fruit of
very good quality and largely grown for market in England.
Seckel.— See Green Seckel.
Souvenir de Congres. —Large, early, dessert, a favourite
in England, but subject to blight, according to Wickson, in
California.
Stone. —See China with which it seems to be identical.
Sugar. —Small, early, dessert, grown under the name of
“ Christmas Pear,” inferior in flavour ; generally infested with
Codlin Moth, but sells well as a rule owing to time of ripen-
ing, not recommended.
Swan’s Egg. Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, not
well-known.
Uvedale’s St. Germains. —Large, late, cooking, a
standard cooking variety in Europe, not well known (under
its proper name) in Australia (recommended by A. H. Benson
for New South Wales.)
Van Mons Leon Leclerc (Sellec). Large, midseason,
dessert, tree bears well, an old pear and rather out of date.
Vicar of Winkpield. —Large, late, cooking, inferior
as a dessert pear, a standard cooking variety, tree bears well,
well known.


Windsor. —Large, midseason, dessert, terribly subject
to blight, and, in consequence, discarded almost everywhere,
a handsome fruit of strong vinous flavour; the name appears to
be a local one in Australia.
Winter Nelis. —Medium-sized, late, dessert, a delicious
pear which always commands a good price, the tree is an
uncertain cropper and straggling grower.
It should be easy for the intending planter to pick out
of the above list a selection of the best varieties to grow for
market and for home consumption. The list of pears, which
are grown in Australia alone, for private use and for market-
ing in small quantities, might be prolonged, but it must be
remembered that the fewer the varieties grown for market ,
for many reasons, the better.
Of the many fruits grown in Australia the pear offers
the widest field for experiment, owing to the neglect which
has prevailed in this branch of fruit culture ; experiment,
however, with new and unknown varieties costs time and
money—the grower for market had better leave it to the
amateur, who will reap a sufficient reward for the success of
an experiment in acclimatization in the “ consciousness of
having done a good action.” The reckless planting of a
number of varieties of any fruit spells failure in the fruit-
growing industry, from a financial point of view.
Select List of Pears
The following are recommended as the best proved
varieties for the Australian markets : —Bartlett or Williams’
Bon Chretien, Beurre Bose, Beurre Clairgeau, Beurre de
Capiaumont, “ Butter Pear,” Flat Baking, Seckel, Jar-
gonelle, Napoleon, Winter Nelis, Marie Louise, (in cold
districts.)
Other Pears not Mentioned in List.
The following pears have a great reputation elsewhere,
and are worthy of a trial:—Clapp’s Favourite, Conseiller de la
Cceur, Durandeau (England), Bloodgood, De Tongres,
Beurre Hardy, P. Barry (California).


The Quince.
The quince belongs to the same family as the apple and
pear, hence its position, immediately following those more
valuable and profitable fruits in this book. It is essentially a
cooking fruit, and is valuable for preserving, and ito some
extent for canning.
Unfortunately the hardiness of the tree and its prolific
bearing qualities, under circumstances the reverse of favour-
able, have led to a more extensive planting than the markets
available warranted. Hence the quince has not been a pro-
fitable fruit to grow for the last few years.
When grown, as is often the case, as a dense shrub, and
allowed to throw out a mass of suckers, the quince tree also
forms a convenient harbour for the CodlinMoth grub, of which
it hastens to avail itself, and from which it is impossible to
eradicate it.
To obtain good fruit the quince tree must be trained to
a single stem, and responds to care in cultivation and pruning
as generously as any other fruit tree, but the trouble neces-
sary to keep the trees in shape is considerable, and is only
repaid when a profitable market for the fruit can be found.
Varieties.
The following varieties are in cultivation : Apple-
shaped, Pear-shaped, Large Portugal, Orange, Rea’s Mam-
moth, Masters’ early, Chinese, Champion.
The Apple-shaped is considered the best, the rest differ
principally in shape and size.
The Loquat.
The loquat tree is generally grown in New South Wales,
South Australia, Queensland, and parts of Victoria, as an
ornamental tree, and wind- break, with an eye at the same
time to the profit to be obtained from the fruit.
The trees hitherto planted for this purpose have been
seedlings, the fruit of which varies very considerably in size
and quality. So many loquat trees have been planted—seed-
lings being obtainable gratis near an old plantation—that
inferior fruit has been quite unsaleable, when the crop has
been heavy. No attempt appears to have been made to turn


the small and inferior fruit into jelly (for which it is particu-
larly adapted) in New South Wales, as is done in Queensland,
and the result is that many of the trees now exist more for
ornament than for any useful and profitable purpose.
The fruit of the loquat is particularly awkward to pick
and market in good condition, being borne in clusters or
bunches which ripen unevenly. Each fruit has hence to be
picked separately, and must be pinched off with a portion of
the stalk, or it will turn black and spoil. To pick a bushel of
loquats when the fruit is small and scattered, often takes a
couple of hours.
The recently introduced improved varieties are very dif-
ferent from the majority of seedlings, the trees being budded or
grafted on seedling stocks, and bearing fruit of good flavour
and quality, and of considerable size. Their longevity and
hardiness have yet to be proved.
The best known, and probably the only one, of these as
yet marketed in any quantity is Heard’s Mammoth, which
originated in Ryde, Central Cumberland.
Locality.
The loquat requires a warm climate, and cannot prob-
ably be grown profitably over a large area of Australia.
Large numbers of loquat trees are grown in the south of
Spain, and Italy, and the fruit is marketed in considerable
quantities, but is inferior to the “Mammoth” of these colonies.
Thinning and Pruning.
The process of thinning has a marked influence on the
size of the loquat, and is best performed when the fruit has
set, and before it attains any size.
The loquat tree is subject to sun-scald of the bark, if the
trunk is exposed to the sun ; it should, therefore, be kept
well shaded by branches.
As the tree increases in age their weight gradually brings
the lower branches down till they sweep the ground ; in this
position they interfere with cultivation, the fruit is eaten by
fowls, and liable to fungoid disease. The branches should
therefore be gradually removed by a sharp saw, as they come
down, and the tree will then grow better, and produce better
fruit.


The Peach.
Of all the fruits in cultivation in Australia none embraces
so many varieties as the peach.
The peach grows readily from seed, more readily than any
other fruit tree in our genial climate, and the result of this
characteristic is the endless variety of seedlings—good, bad,
and indifferent—which now swell our lists of peaches.
In no branch of fruit-culture does anything like the
confusion exist, as to nomenclature, that there does in peach-
growing. Here, surely, was a worthy task for the Australian
Departments of Agriculture, to cleanse this Augean stable of
names, hopelessly redundant, ambiguous, and contradictory ;
and no attempt to classify them, and suppress those which
local opinion, individual caprice, or the ever fertile imagination
of nurserymen have evolved, has been made.
Take the case of any new and widely-distributed peach.
The same peach would probably vary in different localities
quite enough to puzzle the “ ordinary observer,” in size, colour,
flavour, and juiciness. Suppose, however, that the stones of this
peach have become scattered in different parts of the country,
seedlings have sprung up, and bear fruit, and are observed
to differ from their parent in some particular ; the confusion
now begins. Some are later than others, some redder, some
bigger ; they differ in size, in shape, in flavour, and presently
in name. We get Brown’s Seedling, Jones’ Superb, Robin-
son’s Admirable, and so on ; an unscrupulous nurseryman
gets hold of one of them and calls it the Maiden’s Blush, or
the Glory of Gladesville, or by some other euphonious desig-
nation. Only when the fruit is sent to market in quantity,
does the dealer or packer end the confusion by calling it by
the name of its parent to save trouble. But the nursery-
man, who only knows the name, continues to send out trees
under it, until the “ new and excellent variety ” is too well
known to be an old and respectable one to sell under that
name. Of course nurserymen who value their reputation too
much to resort to tricks of this sort, or who fruit their trees
before propagating, do not fall into this error ; but they do
not all do so, and the Sydney and Melbourne fruit markets
remain the standard authorities on fruit nomenclature until a
better one is established,


Many of our best nurserymen will scarcely propagate a
colonial seedling, until widely known, for fear of being blamed
for wrongly naming a peach which may have half a dozen
names in different places in the colonies.*
Locality.
The peach tree thrives and bears crops of excellent
fruit over a large part of Australia. Although not as hardy
as the pippin fruits, the peach tree will stand considerable
extremes of heat and cold, as is shown by thriving and abun-
dantly cropping trees in many of the coldest parts of Austra-
lasia, and also close up to the tropics.
The difficulty of carrying fresh peaches for long distances
necessarily limits the area of ground suitable for their growth
to the neighbourhood of the large towns, or places from which
a market can be reached in a short time.
In time, however, it is to be hoped that canneries and dry-
ing establishments will be erected ; when the area of land
suitable for the culture of our more tender fruits will be
considerably extended.
Peach trees do not require shelter so much as apple
trees, owing to the fact that peaches are not easily loosened
from the tree by the wind, nor do the trees so easily blow over.
Shelter is, however, of great benefit, as the trees do not grow
so shapely and well when exposed to high winds.
Drainage.
Peach trees require drainage, as do all the stone fruits ;
quickly gumming and dying when their roots are in soil
saturated with stagnant water. No tree appreciates attention
in this respect more. It must be remembered that
peaches and nectarines are among the tenderest of
fruits, and will not put up with the hardships which apples,
plums, pears, and even apricots, will bear with comparative
impunity.
Aspect.
Peaches of the highest colour and best flavour are produced
on sunny slopes, sheltered from high winds. Peaches of
* Since writing the above the Department of Agriculture, New South Wales,
has again taken in hand the very necessary work of collecting models of the
various fruits cultivated in the colony and properly naming them. By so doing
the Department will render immense assistance to fruitgrowers and nurserymen,
who will, it is to be hoped, assist the Department in making a comprehensive
collection of models, and avail themselves of it when made.


larger size but poorer appearance, grow on low-lying flats.
The best dessert kinds should, therefore, have the higher posi-
tions, the soil being good ; cooking and canning peaches may
be grown in low-lying positions, when the drainage is good.
Soil for the Peach.
Loamy soil produces the best peaches ; heavier ground,
when well cultivated, suits the peach tree well ; stiff soil is
unfavourable.
Manures.
The peach tree, owing to its vigorous growth and abun-
dant crops, when in health, requires plentiful manuring ;
potash is an essential to the health of the tree (see analyses in
Chapter YII.) and when absent from the soil must be re-
placed in the form of manure. Lime, Phosphoric Acid, and
Nitrogen are also required, and may be supplied by using
any of the manures previously named containing them.
A top-dressing of new soil is often found to bring back to
health peach trees which apparently are on the point of dying
off. Forest scrapings are also of great use as a manure for
peach trees. The leaves of forest oaks { Casuerirce ) are
said to contain a considerable amount of potash ; at any rate
they form a valuable top dressing for fruit trees ; they should
be forked well into the ground.
Distance to Plant Peaches.
Eighteen feet may be considered the minimum, and
twenty-two feet the maximum distance. Peach trees are
planted both above and below these limits, but the majority of
trees are planted eighteen and twenty feet apart.
Planting and Pruning.
The directions previously given for planting will be found
sufficient. Peach trees as a rule grow fast, and the stakes
may often be taken up, the winter after they are planted, and
stacked away for future use.
The peach tree requires a good deal of attention in pruning ;
without it the tree grows weedy and straggling, and the fruit
is small and inferior. The custom of pinching back peach
trees during the summer is coming into favour, though summer
pinching will not altogether supersede winter pruning, unless
carried to an extent much greater than has hitherto been the


Thinning Peaches.
It is now admitted among the most experienced peach
growers that thinning peaches pays well when the crop is
heavy, for the reasons stated in a previous page in reference
to thinning apples. The process does not take much time
when the trees are small ; on large trees, however, it is a dif-
ferent matter. Four inches apart is considered the minimum
distance at which the peaches should stand on the tree, aftet
thinning, and, if the bearing wood has been properly thinned
out in the winter, fruit of first-class quality will be obtained
at this distance, and the tree will mature as much fruit as it
can supply an adequate amount of nourishment to.
Diseases of the Peach and Nectarine.
These will be enumerated in the chapter devoted to the
subject of fruit-tree diseases and pests.
The peach tree is subject to a great number of fungoid
diseases and pests which may be fought with the proper
remedies. No disease of the peach has, however, wrought the
havoc that Codlin Moth and American Blight have among
apples.
LIST OF VARIETIES OP PEACHES.
The following are the varieties principally grown, and
found to succeed best, in the warmer parts of Australia.
Alexander. —Large, early, freestone (partially), a pale-
coloured peach, carries better than “ Early Rivers,” to which
it is similar.
Braddock’s. Medium-sized, early, freestone, dull-
coloured, liable to come small ; tree crops well but does not
make strong growth, (A superior yellow-fleshed American
peach has been recently introduced under the same name.)
Briggs’ Red May. Medium-sized to large, early,
partial freestone, bright red ; the most extensively grown of
all the early sorts ; does not pack well, and has been over-
produced in New South Wales.
Cider.— Medium-sized to large, midseason, clingstone,
greenish-white, a cooking peach, no longer grown to any
extent.
China.— Small, early, red, freestone ; the earliest of all
peaches, flavour too acid ; inferior, but sells owing to the time
at which it ripens, can only be grown in a warm climate.


China Flat ( syn. Button). —Small, early, freestone,
pale-coloured, flavour superior to the China , but fruit smaller,
not extensively grown.
Crawford. —See Early and Late Crawford.
Conkling. —Large, early, freestone, a yellow-fleshed
peach, not well known.
Devlin’s. —Medium-sized, early, cling ; inclined to come
small, packs well, tree hardy, recently introduced.
Downing. —Large, early, freestone (partially), of high
colour ; very like Briggs' Bed May , to which it is superior
and slightly earlier.
Early Albert. —Large, early, freestone ; inferior.
Early Crawford. Large, early, freestone, yellow-
fleshed ; a favourite Californian peach, good for canning, tree
healthy and productive.
Early Newington. —Medium-sized, early, clingstone ;
good colour; an old variety and largely grown for market ;
tree a strong grower and bears well.
Early Beatrice. —Small, early, freestone (partially),
not well known.
Early Silver. —Large, early, freestone ; good colour.
Early Rivers (syn. Soudan). —Large, early, freestone
(partially), good flavour, pale-coloured, too tender for market
purposes though largely grown in Cumberland.
Elberta. Large, early, freestone, good colour and
flavour. A. H. Benson recommends this peach, and though
it does not appear to be well known or widely distributed it is
in every way an excellent variety.
Foster. —Large, early, freestone, flesh yellow ; a good
cropper and should be more widely grown.
George the Fourth, —Medium-sized, late, freestone ;
colour bright; grown in California and the Western States
of America.
Governor Garland, —Large, early, freestone (par-
tially), one of the best early peaches ; good flavour and high
colour.
Grosse Mignonne. — Large, early, freestone, light
coloured, flavour good ; an old peach, and still extensively
planted.
Hale’s Early. —Medium-sized, early, freestone, pale-
coloured ; not well known.


Henrietta. —Large, midseason, clingstone, red-cheeked,
yellow-fleshed ; similar to, if not identical with, Red Italian
Cling.
High’s Early Canada.—Large, early, freestone, a new
peach, and not widely distributed.
Italian Red.—Large, midseason, clingstone, yellow-
fleshed; good appearance and flavour; largely grown for market;
tree a strong grower but delicate.
Italian Yellow Slip.—Large, midseason, yellow-
fleshed, dry and tasteless, good for preserving, and, therefore,
a standard market variety.
Italian Red Slip.—Similar to above but of better
appearance.
King’s Perfection. — Large, midseason, clingstone ;
fine colour and flavour ; tree does well ; recently introduced,
but will soon become popular.
Lord Palmerston. Large, late, clingstone, pale-
coloured ; a good market variety, packs well.
Lady Palmerston. —Large, midseason, freestone, yel-
low-fleshed, a good market variety.
Muir. Medium-sized, midseason, freestone, yellow-
fleshed, the best for drying, inclined to come small except
on good soil ; recently introduced from California,
Orange Cling. —Large, midseason, yellow-fleshed, not
well known in Australia (several Orange Clings are named in
California); recommended by A. H. Benson for New South
Wales.
Princess Royal. —Large, late, clingstone, of fine colour,
packs well; tree a strong grower ; a newly introduced variety.
Royal George Cling. —Large, midseason, good colour,
packs well ; tree hardy and a strong grower ; a standard
market peach.
Royal George Slip. —Large, early ; good colour, and
flavour ; tree grows well, a standard market variety.
Salway. —Large, late, freestone, yellow fleshed, well
known in England and valued in California ; should be more
extensively grown.
Shanghai. —Large, midseason, clingstone, pale-coloured,
tree slow-growing and delicate in some places, crops well.
Shanghai Seedling. —Large, midseason, clingstone,
pale colour, but brighter than Shanghai , grown in Central
Cumberland, a good market peach.


Strawberry. —Small, midseason, cling; inferior.
Stump the World. —Large, midseason, freestone;
not one of the best.
Susquehanna. Large, midseason, freestone, yellow-
fleshed, bright-coloured, juicy and highly flavoured; largely
grown in America ; reported a shy bearer in some places ;
recommended.
Walburton Admirable. Large, late, freestone ; a
good late peach but not widely distributed.
Waterloo. —Medium-sized, early, clingstone ; inferior.
Yellow Mundi. —Large, late, clingstone ; a good cook-
ing peach, not recommended for market purposes.
Many of the best peaches named above are of recent
introduction ; the intending planter should remember that a
prejudice exists against clingstones as dessert-fruit in Aus-
tralia, also to some extent against yellow-fleshed varieties for
dessert—both (like the prejudice against red apples for cook-
ing) equally groundless, but to be considered in planting for
market.
The Nectarine.
The remarks on pruning, planting, manuring, aspect, loca-
tion and soil for the peach apply to the nectarine.
Nectarines are never thinned, although some of the
large varieties might be profitably treated by that process ;
the fruit, being smaller than the peach, would take much
longer to thin out.
Few varieties are in cultivation, and many of the best
are scarcely sufficiently known.
Nectarines are best used as a dessert fruit, though ex-
cellent for jam ; they are not much used for canning and
drying, even in California, where every fruit and vegetable
suitable for the process is canned ; although, as a rule, nec-
tarines bring remunerative prices the market for them is,
therefore, necessarily limited.
VARIETIES OF NECTARINES IN CULTIVATION.
Albert Victor. —Large, midseason, freestone, not ex-
tensively grown.
Balgowan. Large, early, freestone, well known,
requires a cool climate.


Cowpbr’s.—Medium-sized, late, clingstone, keeps well,
tree hardy.
Devlin’s.— Large, midseason, clingstone, a good market
variety, cracks slightly in wet weather; Central Cumberland ;
tree hardy and productive.
Elruge. —Medium-sized, midseason, freestone ; a good
variety for market.
Hardwicke.— Large, late, freestone; one of the best ;
tree hardy and productive.
Hunt’s Tawny. —Large, early, freestone, fine appearance
and flavour ; tree hardy and vigorous.
Illawarra. —Large, early, freestone, earliest nectarine
grown ; a shy bearer in some places.
Lord Napier.— Large, early, freestone, pale colour with
red cheek ; a good bearer.
Newington Early, —Large, early, clingstone; not
widely grown.
Oldenburgh Medium-sized, late, clingstone ; not
widely distributed.
Pitmaston Orange. Large, early, freestone, fine
colour and good flavour ; tree fruitful, but not very vigorous ;
a standard variety.
Red Roman, Large, midseason, clingstone, fruit
slightly dry, keeps well and is delicious when shrivelled ; not
recommended for market.
Rivers’ Orange. —Large, early, freestone ; not widely
grown.
Scarlet. —Medium-sized, raidseason, freestone ; most
extensively grown, but inferior.
Stanwick Seedling.—Large, late, freestone, of good
colour ; a good market variety.
Stanwick Elruge. —Large, midseason, clingstone ; not
largely grown.
Stanwick. —Large, late, freestone, a splendid nectarine,
but liable to crack.
Victoria.— Large, midseason, freestone, good colour ;
a good market variety.
Weeping. --Large, midseason, clingstone, tree hardy
and prolific ; fruit of good size and colour, a good market
variety. Tree of weeping habit, so that cultivation with
horse implements is out of the question with trees of fair age.


The Apricot.
The apricot tree will grow in any climate where the
peach flourishes, but will not only stand greater warmth than
the peach, but requires a higher temperature to produce good
fruit. Parts of Victoria, Tasmania, and the coast districts
of New South Wales are particularly adapted to the produc-
tion of first-class apricots ; nowhere is better fruit produced,
when the trees are properly looked after and manured.
Many places in the interior are also famed for their
apricots, and in a dry climate the fruit contains more sugar
and less water, rendering it superior for drying to the product
of districts with a heavier rainfall.
Soil for the Apricot.
On the peach stock, which is almost universally used, the
apricot does best in deep loamy ground, but will thrive in a
much greater variety of soils than the peach. Apricot trees
are found to do fairly well on a stiffish clay and in shallow soil
where peach trees only grow weakly and produce inferior fruit.
Aspect.
The apricot delights in sunshine, and (although shelter
is of great benefit) will do better on the top of a hill than any
other fruit tree. As is the case with peaches, a warm hillside
produces good fruit, of high colour and good flavour ; while,
with most varieties, a comparatively small amount of moisture
between the blossoming and ripening of the fruit will suffice
to give a crop of first-class quality.
Pruning the Apricot.
The apricot tree requires considerable attention in the
way of pruning to keep it from growing long straggling
branches, which will only bear inferior fruit.
Many growers now practice cutting back strong-growing
trees twice in the year, at winter and again in the middle of
the growing season ; finding summer cutting better than
pinching. Fifteen inches from fork to fork is the general rule
in pruning the apricot. Sharp forks, i.e., branches separating
at an acute angle, are to be avoided, they harbour borers and
are a source of gumming, one of the worst enemies of the
apricot tree.


Gumming.
When this disease is present in apricots, peaches, o
plums, it is usual to remove the diseased bark from the trunk
with a sharp knife, cutting it away right down to the point at
which the roots branch out.
Drainage.
Bad drainage is a source of gumming. The apricot
requires drainage as much as, if not more than the peach and
nectarine.
Distance Apart.
This varies from eighteen to twenty-five feet, but from
eighteen to twenty feet apart is the rule where pruning is to be
attended to properly, unless on very deep, rich soil, when the
greater distance is necessary.
On exceedingly rich ground the apricot tree makes very
rapid and extensive growth ; trees are planted as far as thirty
feet apart in such places, but they are the exceptions to the rule.
Manures.
The apricot tree does not require as much potash as the
peach, and nitrogen is found to have a bad effect in excess,
causing gumming, and depreciating the quality of the fruit,
Phosphatic manures are therefore recommended, unless the
ground is exceedingly poor in other plant foods. Stable
manure causes wood growth in many varieties at the expense
of the fruit.
Uses of the Apricot.
Besides being a delicious dessert fruit when properly
grown, the apricot can be used in a great number of ways.
It may be said that its cultivation is in its infancy in Australia,
for when these processes of making use of the fruit are tried,
and found to be profitable, the market for the apricot will be
immensely extended.
Apricots may be preserved in the form of jam, canned,
dried, crystallized, made into brandy ; the kernels of the stones
are used in confectionery. As “ apricot pulp ” they may be
put up, with slight expense, into a form in which they will
keep an indefinite time and carry any distance. It is
hoped that a remunerative market may be found in Europe
for this pulp, which will then be one of our most valuable
products.


LIST OF VARIETIES.
Allen’s Early. —Large, early, commands the highest
price of any apricot, but tree a shy bearer, fruit deficient in
flavour, and dry if allowed to ripen on the tree. Central
Cumberland
Beauge. —Large, late ; a handsome fruit of fair flavour ;
tree a moderate cropper, not widely distributed.
Black American.— Small, midseason, of unique and
striking appearance ; not recommended for market.
Blenheim.— Large, early, handsome, of fair flavour, tree
grows and bears well ; should prove a good market variety ;
not well known.
Breda.— Medium-sized, midseason, not largely grown ;
inferior.
From the “ Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales."
Canino Grosso. —Medium-sized, late, handsome, firm-
fleshed ; fairly well known, but not grown extensively for
market.
//emsA/rAe.
Camden Superb, —Medium-sized, early, largely grown
and a good apricot, but tree delicate ; liable to shot hole
fungus.


Early Moorpark. —Large, early, pale-coloured, juicy
and fine flavoured ; liable to fungus, tree delicate in Central
Cumberland and similar climates.
Grosse Peche. — Large, late ; a standard European
apricot ; not well known in Australia, nor recommended.
Hattve d’Auvergne. — Medium-sized, early, pleasant
flavour, tree bears well, not widely grown.
Hemskirk.— Large, early, a handsome apricot, esteemed
in Europe and America, good cropper, tree hardy and
vigorous ; one of the best.
Kaisha.— Medium-sized, midseason, tree hardy and
prolific ; not largely grown.
From the “Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales.’’
Large Red. —Large, early, deep red with crimson and
russet markings, flesh deep orange, juicy, tree hardy and pro-
lific ; not extensively grown.
Moorpark. —Large, late, a splendid fruit and the best
known of all apricots, flesh deep orange, juicy, and of delicious


flavour, tree delicate, an uncertain cropper. The best of all
where it oan be depended upon to grow well, and give good
crops.
Mansfield Seedling. —Large, midseason, raised in
Tasmania, fruit handsome, of tine flavour ; tree reported a
shy bearer in some places.
Orange (syn. Royal George ). — Large, midseason, a
round handsome fruit of deep colour, flesh pale-orange, and
juicy, with fine flavour ; a splendid fruit but an uncertain
cropper.
Oullin’s Early Peach. —Medium-sized, early, round,
pale-yellow, inferior in flavour ; not recommended.
Pale Superb. —Medium-sized, late ; not well known.
Peach. —Large, midseason, handsome, of good flavour,
pale-coloured, a first-class apricot, not to be confounded with
Grosse Peche ; recommended for planting.
From the “ Kgricullurcd, Gazette of New South Wales.’
Pennant Hills Oval. —Large, early, showy, long fruit
with crimson cheek, flesh inclined to be dry, hangs better than
most apricots, a good variety for market where it will bear ;
supposed to be identical with St. Ambroise. Good for
drying, for which it Ims been successfully used at Mildura.


Royal.— Large, early, handsome, flesh pale-orange, with
good flavour ; tree vigorous, and a heavy bearer ; “ the lead-
ing Californian apricot ” {Wicfcson). Should be more ex-
tensively grown.
Red Masculine. Small, early, inferior, an uncertain
cropper.
Roman, Medium-sized, early, pale-coloured, largely
grown in California ; reported a good bearer when the tree has
attained a fair age.
Shipley ( syn . Blenheim ). —Large, early, oval fruit, orange-
coloured with yellow flesh ; tree hardy and prolific ; one of
the best, and should be more extensively planted.
Turkey. Medium-sized, midseason, pale-coloured,
flavour good, tree reported an uncertain cropper ; not re-
commended for growing for market.
Willis’ Early. —Small, early, pale-coloured ; a very
small apricot, deficient in juice though of good flavour. The
earliest of all ; useless except for dessert.
The Best Apricots.
Moorpark, Royal, Orange, Hemskirk, Pennant Hills
Oval, Peach, Blenheim, are the best all-round apricots in
cultivation in Australia, being suitable for drying and canning
as well as for marketing green.
The Plum.
The plum is in manyrespectsthehardiestof the stone fruits.
Properly selected varieties of plums may be grown in many
varying climates, and trees on the seedling plum root will
thrive in stiffer and moister soil than the apricot, peach, or
nectarine.
On the peach root the fruit is of better quality than on
the plum, but the tree is much more delicate, and requires
good drainage to succeed.
Pruning the Plum.
Summer pinching is found to be useless for the plum
tree, hard cutting back being the only way to check exuberant
growth and induce it to throw out strong laterals. The


Japanese plums require much the same treatment as the peach,
but they again are better without pinching, which only induces
a mass of weedy growth.
Plum trees are generally allowed to run up longer and
straighter in the branches than other stone-fruit trees, it being
found, as with apples, that with that treatment the trees make
stronger growth, and will form themselves into shape when
they commence to bear. Some of the plums which make
weedy, straggling growth, and are heavy croppers, require
hard winter cutting back for some years in order that the
frame of the tree may be strong enough to bear the weight of
the crop.
Situation and Aspect.
As previously stated, plums on the plum root may be
planted on stiff, low-lying ground ; on the peach root they
require looser soil which must be well drained.
Aspect is not of so much consequence to the plum tree.
If the orchard has a moderately good aspect, the plum trees
may be given the worst place in it, and will then thrive as well
as the other trees. The cherry plums, indeed, (South American
Red and Yellow), on their own roots, may be planted as a
breakwind, for which purpose they answer well during the
summer, but require so much attention in the way of pruning,
and removing water shoots, and lose so much of their crop in
a high wind, that they are not desirable as contributors to the
profits of the farm.
Cultivation, Manures, Etc.
In cultivation, manuring, planting, the plum requires the
same attention as the peach, except for the larger amount of
potash required by the latter.
Drying.
It is hoped that a plum will be found suited to the
climate of the fruit-growing districts, from which marketable
prunes may be made. The only use at present made of the
fruit other than its consumption green is to convert it into
jam. Prune growing and curing is, as is well known, one
of the great industries of California at the present day, and
has sprung from small beginnings until the Californian pro-
duct has dusted foreign prunes from the American market,
and bids fair to compete successfully with them in other
countries.


Here again is room for experiment. The attention of
those in a position to test the drying qualities of our plums,
and the acclimatization of the foreign prunes, is called to the
fact that they may be of signal service—“ deserve well of the
State ” —by proving the possibility of establishing this
industry. The climate of the coastal districts is too uncertain to
admit of sun drying ; but evaporating, which is a more satis-
factory and scientific process, can be readily done, once it is
ascertained that we have, or can grow, fruit suitable for the
purpose.
The best plums require a colder climate than that of
Sydney. The varieties now grown near Sydney are for the
most part inferior colonial seedlings. The Japanese varieties
do well in Central Cumberland, but the last few summers have
proved so many of them to be liable to scald that their culture
is not increasing. It is hard as yet to say which of them may
be fairly expected to stand a moderate amount of heat; the
summer of 1896-97 cannot be accepted as a conclusive test,
having proved too much for some of our hardiest fruits in that
respect.
LIST OF VARIETIES.
American Red. —Small, early, cooking and dessert,
largely grown for market in Central Cumberland, the earliest
plum of all, sells well, packs well ; tree an uncertain cropper;
fruit liable to be blown off by high winds ; known as Cherry
Plum in England.
American Yellow. —Small, early, cooking and dessert,
later than the red, harder and firmer, does not sell so well ;
bad bearer.
Angelina Burdbtt. —Large, midseason, dessert, hand-
some and of fine flavour, does well on the coast, and is about
the best plum grown near Sydney ; tree hardy and prolific.
Black Plum ( syns. Blade Damson, Cluster Plum). —
Small, midseason, dessert, good flavour ; tree slow-growing
but prolific and hardy ; a standard market variety on the
coast, packs well and keeps well ; its only drawback is its
size.
Coe’s Golden Drop. —Large, late, dessert and cooking,
a light-coloured plum which keeps and packs well, of good
flavour, but deficient in juice; suitable for canning ; requires
a cool climate.


Coe’s Late Red. —Small, late, dessert ; tree requires
good soil to produce the best quality of fruit.
Diapre Rouge. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert; a
handsome plum of good flavour, not widely grown.
Diamond. —Large, midseason, cooking ; a standard
market plum ; tree crops heavily and does well in the warm
coast districts; has been very extensively planted, and the
market is in consequence generally over-supplied.
Early Evans ( syn. Evans' Seedling ). —Medium-sized,
early, dessert and cooking; too small to be called a first-class
fruit, but ripens when there are few plums to compete with
it; a Central Cumberland seedling, and extensively grown on
the coast.
Early Tibbett’s {syn. Tibbett's Seedling ). —Small to
medium sized, early, cooking, inferior both in appearance and
flavour ; largely grown in Central Cumberland.
Early Orleans. —Medium-sized, early, dessert ; not
largely grown for market owing to its tendency to crack in
wet weather.
Fellenberg. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, of
good appearance and flavour ; not largely grown.
Gage, Green. —Medium-sized, midseason, dessert, deli-
cious flavour, requires a cold climate ; sometimes known as
Yellow Gage.
Gage, Purple. —Medium-sized, midseason, cooking,
a good market variety, tree bears well ; the same plum as
Reine Claude Violette.
General Hand. —Large, midseason, cooking, deficient
in flavour.
Ickworth Imperatrice.—Large, late, dessert, a hand-
some plum of good flavour.
Imperiale de Milan.—Medium-sized, midseason, cook-
ing, a good market plum ; not extensively grown.
Imperial Ottoman.—Medium-sized, early, dessert ; not
well known.
Jefferson, —Large, late, dessert, light-coloured, of fine
flavour, suitable for canning ; tree bears well but grows slowly,
recommended.
Kirk’s ( syns . KirTce, Kirhe’s Blue). —Large, late, dessert,
a dark-coloured plum ; not well known.
Loutherborough. —Medium-sized, midseason, cooking,
a Cumberland seedling ; inferior.


Magnum Bonum ( syn . Egg , yellow or white). —Large,
midseason, cooking, extensively grown in England, requires a
cold climate ; deficient in juice and flavour.
Magnum Bonum, Red. —Large, midseason, cooking;
not as well known as the White Magnum Bonum.
Pond’s Seedling. —Large, late, dessert and cooking,
a good market plum of fine appearance and flavour ; requires
a cold climate.
PruneD’Agen. —Large, late, cooking; the variety from
which the best prunes are made in France, and extensively
grown in Europe and California for that purpose; should be
planted, if only for experimental purposes.
Prince op Wales. —Medium-sized to large, late, cook-
ing, tree bears well ; not widely grown.
Prince Engelbert. —Large, late, cooking and dessert,
good for preserving or drying, of fine appearance and flavour,
a favourite in England and America ; tree a strong grower
and good cropper.
Rbine Claude de Bavay. —Medium-sized, late, dessert,
of good flavour ; not extensively grown but worthy of cultiva-
tion.
Royal Hative. —Medium-sized, early, dessert ; of good
flavour and packs wells.
Victoria. —Large, late, cooking and dessert, of hand-
some appearance, said to be an enormous cropper ; not well
known in Australia.
Washington. —Large, midseason, dessert and cooking ;
not extensively grown.
Winesour. —Large, midseason, cooking ; an old English
plum of distinct and pleasant flavour.
Wild Goose {syn. Mirabelle). —Small, early, dessert, of
handsome appearance and pleasant flavour ; tree prolific, but a
straggling and uncertain grower.
Japanese Varieties.
The recently introduced Japanese Plums have already
attained considerable popularity in this country, but opinions
still vary considerably as to their value ; and the exact position
they will in the future occupy among our fruits cannot yet be
defined.
In appearance many of them are unrivalled, and the
largest varieties are without doubt splendid as show fruits,


In flavour and juice, however, they cannot be called pre-
eminent, while some of the showiest are dry and tasteless.
Mr. Al’en, the fruit expert to the Department of Agri-
culture, Hew South Wales, has made the following remarks in
this connection:—“A few years ago many worthless varieties
of the Japanese plums were imported into our colony, and
were bought through ignorance, as anything in the shape of a
Japanese plum was taken for granted to be good. There are
a few really excellent varieties, and anyone having the inferior
varieties should make preparation for budding them over with
a 'good variety. Some of the very best are the following:—
Burbank, Satsuma Blood (a round-fruited variety with red
skin and flesh), Cyca Sumomo or Sinkwa Homo, a heart-
shaped variety similar in appearance to the preceding, Botan,
and among newer ones, Wickson, October Purple, and Giant
Jap. The two blood varieties are excellent croppers, and in
addition to being good for dessert make splendid jam and
bottle well.” —New South Wales Agricultural Gazette.
Mr. Allen also recommends the Kelsey, but recent
Australian experience is rather to its disadvantage.
The following are the best known of the Japanese or
Oriental plums. The descriptions are nearly all from colonial
experience:—
LIST OF VARIETIES.
Blood.— Large, dark red, of bright blood colour right
through to the stone, which is small; flesh very firm, juicy,
and of fine flavour when ripe, resists heat well, a splendid
cooking plum, only good for dessert when dead ripe, packs
well; tree grows well and crops well.
Botan. —Large, yellowish-red, one of the best in flavour;
tree grows well, and a heavy cropper, fruit packs well, scalds
slightly.
Burbank. —One of the newest, and scarcely tested fairly
yet; tree grows fast and strong, and is said to crop heavily;
fruit large, mottled red, of good flavour.
General Saigo. —Medium-sized, light coloured, of good
flavour when ripe, tender and liable to scald; tree a vigorous
grower and heavy cropper.
Golden Heart. —Large, yellow, white fleshed, very
good flavour and excellent for preserving; tree vigorous and
productive, but fruit liable to scald,


Kelsey,— Large, purple, with blotches of yellow, fruit
firm and of fair flavour when ripe ; tree vigorous and pro-
ductive, one of the newest; scalds badly.
Red Japanese.— Medium-sized, red, with blotches of
yellow, fruit firm, deficient in juice and flavour, a good variety
for preserving and packing, but inferior for dessert ; scalds
badly ; tree vigorous and a good cropper.
Satsuma Blood.— Not to be confounded with Blood ;
fruit large, red, of firm red flesh, and with a small stone,
flavour superior to that of Blood , packs well ; tree vigorous,
of weeping habit, and productive ; does not scald.
Several other varieties have been fruited in Australia, and
others again are constantly being introduced ; among which,
doubtless, some will be found worthy of the encomiums which
are lavished upon them by the introducers. The grower for
market will be wise to plant these only for experiment until
better known.
The Cherry.
The cherry tree requires a cool climate to enable it to
mature a fair crop of fruit, hence is only grown for market
purposes in the elevated parts of New South Wales. The
district surrounding Goulburn is especially famous for its
cherry orchards, which annually forward a large quantity of
first-class fruit to the Sydney market. The greater part of
Victoria is suited for its culture.
Uses of the fruit.
The cherry is, at present, like most of our fruits, only
used fresh as a dessert fruit. It may be anticipated that this
useful and valuable fruit will, in the near future, when the
production warrants it, be used in the manufacture of cherry
brandy, and dried and candied. Kirschenwasser is distilled
from the juice of the cherry. The liqueur Maraschino is
made from the fruit of a wild cherry which grows in
Dalmatia.
Soil Suitable for the Cherry.
The cherry tree thrives best in a moderately loose soil
over a porous subsoil ; a clay soil should never be chosen,
as no tree suffers from a [retentive [or moist soil and subsoil


more than the cherry. Sandy loam is suitable, but a very
sandy soil is not conducive to the health and longevity of the
tree. The two extremes of excessive moisture and excessive
dryness are alike fatal to the cherry tree.
Aspect,
The principal circumstance to be kept in mind in choos-
ing land for a cherry orchard is the early blooming of the
tree. A locality where late frosts frequently occur should
therefore be avoided, and ground selected of such aspect and
exposure as may insure the grower as much as possible
against their occurrence.
Pruning the Cherry.
The directions previously given for pruning apple trees
apply equally well to the cherry, and, as with apples, ex-
perience will show which varieties require cutting back heavily,
and which are best with as little use of the knife as possible.
The Morellus and cherries of that class, it may be ob-
served, of which the best-known are May Duke and Empress
Euginie require less cutting back than the stronger-growing
Bigarreaus and Hearts. Too vigorous a use of the knife
causes gumming in cherry trees.
Distance Apart.
The distance for cherry trees to be planted from each
other varies from eighteen to twenty-five feet, and in some
places thirty feet.
As a rule, the greater distance is necessary for cherry
trees in districts where they attain their full size, the cherry
being a remarkably vigorous and rapid grower under favourable
circumstances. Where climate and soil are suitable thirty
feet apart is not excessive, and at that distance horse culti-
vation may be employed until the trees reach a considerable
age ; the work of cultivation may always be done with horse
implements if the lower branches are cut away as they come
down, but the less this is done to cherry trees the better.
Diseases op the Cherry.
Cherry trees are very liable to gumming, which is due, in
addition to the ordinary causes (want of drainage and wet
seasons), to too free a use of the knife, as before noted.
Cherry trees are also liable to scald if the trunk and main


branches are exposed to the direct rays of a hot sun ; low
heading and shading the trunk by allowing shoots to grow,
pinching the ends off instead of removing completely, are the
preventives of this disease. The diseased bark, as with other
fruit trees, should be pared off and the surface beneath coated
with shellac varnish, paint, or whitewash, where gum has made
its appearance. Borers are a great scourge to the cherry tree.
A method said to be successful in destroying them is to inject
a few drops of oil into the burrow by means of a small machine
oil-can.
Borers in cherry trees and other fruit trees may generally
be killed by thrusting a strong, wiry, grass stalk or root down
their burrow, and working it up and down until bottom is
touched. The weapon, on being withdrawn, will generally be
found moist with the insect’s life-blood on the lower end.
Stocks.
Seedling Mahaleb and Mazzard stocks are most commonly
used in this country. Suckers have been used in the past, and
are still to some extent used as stocks, but are inferior to the
seedling stock in every respect.
LIST OF VARIETIES.
Archduke. —Dark red, large, early ; tree upright and
vigorous.
Bedford Prolific. —A large, black cherry.
Bigarreau (Common). —Large, pale-coloured.
Bigarreau Napoleon. —Large, late, red, one of the
best ; tree grows well and a heavy cropper.
Black Eagle.—Medium-sized, early, not one of the best.
Black Heart.—Large, early ; an old and esteemed
variety.
Black Tartarian, —Very large, early, one of the best ;
tree hardy and prolific.
Centennial. — Large, pale coloured, early; a Californian
cherry, not well known in this country ; recommended for
canning by A. H. Benson.
Florence. —Large, late ; more a cooking cherry than a
dessert variety.
Empress Eugenie. —Large, red, early ; a variety of
May Duke.


May Duke.—Large, red, early ; does better than any
other cherry in a warm climate.
Morello.—Large, late, dark red ; the best for cooking
or preserving.
Heine Hortense. — Large, late, not extensively grown ;
fruit tender.
St. Margaret. — Large, late, one of the best ; carries
Werder's Early Black. — Large, early ; fruit of good
quality ; tree an uncertain cropper.
White Heart. - Medium-sized, pale-coloured, late; not
one of the best.
Citrus Fruits.
The principal fruits of the Citrus family grown for profit
in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and parts
of Victoria, are the orange, lemon, and mandarin, the latter
including the two best known varieties, Thorny and Emperor.
Several other members of the citrus family are more or less
extensively grown, the citron, shaddock, lime and cum-
quat for example. Their culture is similar to that of the
lemon and orange, their manurial requirements the same, and
in pruning and shaping, the characteristics of the different
species soon develop and point out the lines that must be
followed. Straggling growers must be cut back, bushy ones
kept thinned out, suckers and water shoots removed, and the
main limbs of the tree kept well apart, strong, and properly
distributed.
To follow the details of management of these separate
species would occupy more space than is warranted by
the extent of their cultivation, which, except perhaps in the
case of the citron, is never likely to be greater.
Stocks.
The question of stocks for the orange and lemon tree has
been sufficiently discussed in Chap. 111. of this book, to which
the reader is referred.
Soil for Citrus Trees.
The subject of suitable soils and aspects has also been
couched upon. It is only necessary here to remark that
citrus trees are the tenderest fruit trees cultivated, to any


extent, in these colonies. To plant orange and lemon trees in
poor soil, in an exposed position, without shelter of any kind,
without proper preparation of the soil, and with the same
amount of care in planting and subsequent management that
a pear or plum tree might only be expected to exist, but not
to thrive under, is little short of madness.
Location, Climate.
There are places where an orange tree will grow and bear,
year after year, enormous crops, under great disadvantages,
in fact with no culture at all.
If the intending planter is unable or unwilling to give
the proper care and labour to his citrus trees, he will do better
to seek carefully for some such place wherein to plant them
than to lay out an orange or lemon orchard in the districts
which are generally considered the orange producing part of
New South Wales.
The Hunter River Valley and other equally favoured
spots on the Northern rivers of New South Wales, appear to
be particularly adapted to the growth of the orange. Their
principal advantage is the great depth and splendid quality of
the soil. As far as climate is concerned, the climate of
Sydney is eminently suited to the growth of citrus fruits, as
may be seen at a glance on comparing the mean annual tem-
perature and rainfall of Sydney with that of the South of
Spain, Malta, the Azores, and the Levant; countries where the
orange has been in cultivation for centuries.
The author, having visited Spain, Italy, Malta, and Asia
Minor, and thus knowing the climatic conditions under which
the famous Valencia, Jaffa, Maltese Blood, and other
Mediterranean oranges are grown, can testify to the fact that
the climate of Central Cumberland is, to say the least, as suit-
able for the growth of the orange tree as tljat of those
countries.
The following is condensed from an article on the
“ Parramatta Orange Groves,” which appeared in the first
volume of the Garden :
“ Parramatta possesses some far-famed orange groves.
In that owned by one gentleman, some of the trees are really
magnificent, being close on thirty feet in height. They were
planted nearly forty years ago, and are still yielding most
abundant crops. Such glorious trees, their glossy green,


starred with hundreds of golden globes, the boughs tipped with
snowy blossoms, and the air heavy with rich perfume, cause a
delicious languor to creep over the senses while reclining
beneath their cool and welcome shade.”
Unfortunately, the owners of many of these historic
groves have succumbed apparently to the “ delicious languor ”
which lulls the senses of the recliner beneath their shade, and
grown careless and forgetful of the needs of their trees, for
where, alas, are the trees of ’72—to say nothing of forty
years previous to that date ?
Still, it was not an “ unsuitable ” climate that killed
them.
Longevity op the Orange and Lemon.
It would be easy to quote examples of the longevity and
enormous size reached by the orange tree in Europe, as a
seedling. Suffice it to say that a seedling-orange tree of three
centuries age, although a veteran, would be by no means the
oldest orange tree living—not by a century or two.
Budded or grafted, the orange tree is not so long-lived,
though worked trees over forty years of age exist in many
places in Central Cumberland.
The lemon tree can only be considered a short-lived tree.
Here and there a fairly old tree may be found, but, as a rule,
twenty years is the limit, and very few lemon trees reach that
age.
The use of orange stocks has a marked effect in prolong-
ing the age of lemon trees, but smaller crops counterbalance
the advantage.
Orange Layers.
Orange trees used frequently to be obtained by means of
layering from the branches of a tree of good qualities. A
branch is bent down to the ground, half cut through at the
point where it touches the soil, firmly pegged down, and the
cut covered over with a few shovelfuls of soil, into which the
branch sends roots from the point where it is half severed from
the parent limb.
When these roots are sufficiently developed the cut may
be completed, and the tree is then obtained and ready for
planting. A layer has the longevity of a seedling and the
further advantage that it bears fruit of equal quality to that
of the parent tree,




Owing to the trouble of obtaining them, layers have gone
out of fashion lately, but many growers still advocate their
use. Layers, it should be added, came into bearing sooner
than seedlings, and make equally large trees.
Manures for the Orange and Lemon.
Citrus trees are heavy feeders, and the supply of plant
food must be kept up in the soil in which they are planted, or
they soon languish and die. Nitrogen and phosphoric acid
are the two manurial substances on which citrus trees make
the heaviest demands. Want of nitrogen produces a yellow
cast in the foliage of the trees, a danger signal which must be
promptly attended to. Potash is also required by the orange
and lemon.
Very good effects generally follow the application of new
soil and forest scrapings to an old citrus plantation, of which
the trees may scarcely respond to any other manure.
Owing to the delicate fibrey nature of their roots, all
citrus trees require soil of good mechanical condition in order
that they may obtain the nourishment contained in it. Their
roots are not strong enough to force their way through hard
cloddy earth. No matter, therefore, how rich in plant food the
soil may be, unless finely worked and open the roots are un-
able to penetrate it, and extract nourishment from it.
The practice of mulching orange trees thickly with forest
leaves, litter, or ferns and grass is beneficial while it lasts, but
should never be started unless it can be permanently kept up
The trees lose more than they have gained when the soil,
which has been long unworked, has to be broken up.
Growing vegetables between citrus trees is deprecated,
for the reason that the roots of the trees require all the moist-
ure in the ground when they have spread through it, as well as
coming into competition for food with the roots of the vege-
tables, while the latter are in the ground.
Distance Apart.
Seedling orange trees and layers may be planted from
twenty-five to thirty feet apart, the greater distance being the
most usual. Many trees are planted as far as forty feet apart,
but that distance, except in very rich soil indeed, is excessive
Grafted orange trees are planted from twenty to twenty-
five feet apart. In the coast districts twenty feet is con-
sidered sufficient by most growers.


Emperor mandarins and lemons are usually planted from
twenty to twenty-two feet apart. A good many are planted
eighteen feet apart, but that distance is insufficient, unless the
trees are expected to make poor growth (which is not generally
the case with the planter, whatever onlookers may anticipate).
Eighteen feet by twenty feet is the minimum for emperor
mandarins and lemons ; thorny mandarins will stand at
eighteen feet apart very well, and even less where the
plantation is to be worked by hand.
Tying to Stakes.
Great care must be taken that citrus trees are not cut by
ties, or rubbed against the stakes. For this end the stakes are
generally taken up the first winter after planting and driven
in aslant, to windward of the trees. A piece of sacking or
similar material is often wound round the butt of the tree
where the tie is passed round it, in order to prevent chafing.
Orange and lemon trees do not as a rule—should not if
they grow well—require staking after the second season,
generally getting a firm hold of the ground by that time, and
not being easily blown about, if headed low and kept shortened
back.
Care in Transplanting.
Citrus trees require the very greatest care in transplant-
ing from the nursery to the orchard. The roots of the trees
must never be exposed to sun or wind, but kept carefully
covered up with sacking, and surrounded by damp grass or
straw, until the moment the trees are to be planted.
The roots are always shaken free of soil before the tree is
planted, so that they may be carefully gone over, twisted and
bruised ones cut away, tap shortened, and ends trimmed off
with a sharp clean cut of the knife or shears.
Trees which show signs of gumming on the roots should
be rejected at once.
LIST OF VARIETIES.
The Lisbon Lemon is the only variety of lemon in
extensive cultivation in Australia and is undoubtedly the best
so far proved. The Sicilian Lemon has been recently intro-


duced, but has not yet been fairly tried ; in California it is con-
sidered inferior. The Thornless Lemon and Variegated
Lemon are not commercially grown. The Villa Franca
is of recent introduction, and is said to be of superior quality.
The Genoa is thornless, rough and inferior.
Varieties of the Orange.
Blood (Maltese), — A medium-sized orange, the name
being due to the peculiar colour of the pulp, which is mottled
with red. The tree is hardy and productive, does not attain
great size, and is thornless.
Jaffa. — A large oval orange, thin-skinned, of splendid
flavour. Largely grown in the Levant for the London
market, where it brings the highest price, extensively grown
also in California under the name of Joppa, not to be con-
fused with the California Jaffa which Wickson describes as,
“ a dwarf variety introduced from Florida .”
Mediterranean Sweet. —Medium-sized, thin-skinned,
with few seeds, fruit has a distinct and pleasing flavour, re-
cently introduced from California, although a European orange.
The tree is said to be thornless and of dwarf habit.
Navel ( Australian ). —Large, thin-skinned, seedless,
considered the best variety of orange in cultivation in Australia
until the introduction of new and superior varieties from
America. The navel is larger than in the Washington Navel.
Tree delicate and a shy bearer. In comparing the Australian
with the Washington Navel it should be stated that both
varieties have been grown in California, the one having been
introduced from Australia, the other from Brazil, and opinion
has been unhesitatingly pronounced in favour of the Washing
ton , which is said to be a far superior fruit, and the tree is a
much more reliable cropper.
Poor Man's. —Large, sour, coarse-skinned, only suitable
for preserving, for which it is not largely grown.
Parramatta.— The most extensively grown orange in
New South Wales, and, when true to name and well grown,
a first-class fruit. The “ Parramatta Seedling,” however, has
been so long in cultivation, and so frequently worked from
trees of ever deteriorating quality, owing to the use of the


common lemon stock, that fruit is very seldom to be obtained
of good quality, and trees rarely, if ever, worth growing.
The true Parramatta is large, thin-skinned, exceedingly
juicy, of good flavour ; the tree is hardy and productive. This
variety cannot be recommended to the intending planter unless
he knows that the scions are taken from old trees bearing fruit
as described.
Siletta.— Medium-sized, thin-skinned, juicy, of good
flavour, tree hardy and productive.
Siletta (white). —Large, and equal in quality to the
above ; a first class orange.
St. Michael (Azorean). —Medium-sized, thin-skinned
of good flavour, carries well, slightly flattened ; tree grows wel,
and is a prolific bearer. Many trees sold as St. Michael have
deteriorated in quality from the original, owing to constant
working from young trees onto common lemon stock. Two
other varieties of St. Michael are grown in California, the
Large and the Small, and are inferior.
St. Michael (Paper Rind). — Small, pale-coloured,
thin-skinned, of good flavour ; recently introduced from Cali-
fornia, where it is said to be a thorny tree of dwarf habit, a
good bearer.
Seville. —Large, suitable only for making marmalade,
for which purpose it is extensively and at present profitably
grown. Tree a strong grower and very prolific. The essence
Neroli which is 'used in the manufacture of Eau de Cologne
and other scents is made from the flowers and young leaves of
the Seville orange.
Tahiti. —Large, pale-coloured, thin skinned, of good
flavour, and very juicy ; this orange is extensively grown in the
islands of the South Pacific, and has been exported thence to
Sydney in large quantities of late years. It has not yet been
fruited in any quantity in New South Wales, so that it cannot
yet be said with certainty whether the climate is suitable for
its culture.
Valencia, Late. —Large, thin-skinned, with few seeds,
late in ripening, carries well, tree hardy and prolific ; a stand-
ard variety in California, whence it has been recently introduced,


extensively grown on the Eastern coast of Spain for the
London market; trees do not bear as young as most varieties.
Washington Navel. —Large, thin-skinned, juicy, al-
most seedless (in fact, very seldom is seed to be found), of
excellent flavour. Considered in America the best orange
grown, which opinion is borne out by specimens which have
been fruited here. The tree, however, is said to be delicate,
requires a warm climate and rich soil; bears more regularly than
the Australian or Common Navel , but is not so prolific as most
other varieties. In Australia this orange is not yet extensively
grown, but will be largely planted in the near future, from all
appearances ; should do well on the Northern rivers.
Diseases of Citrus Trees.
These are numerous and virulent. The dreaded Mai di
Goma, or collar gum, is generally due to defective drainage ;
but any cause which destroys, or interferes with, the free cir-
culation of the sap, seems to bring it. The treatment usually
pursued is to pare away the diseased bark and wood, and
cover the wound with paint, shellac varnish, or whitewash, to
induce new bark to form. When the tree gums almost all
round the butt it is almost useless trying to save it.
A species of aphis attacks the young growth of citrus
trees but seldom does serious damage ; it may be destroyed
by Paris Green. The scale insects, of which there are many
kinds, are inveterate and dangerous enemies of citrus trees,
especially the red scale, which prevents the expansion of the
bark of a tree which it attacks, kills the young growth, and
spoils the appearance of the fruit. Whale oil soap is recom-
mended as a remedy for scale insects (see table of diseases of
fruit trees, and remedies ).
Maori is caused by a small spider which penetrates the
fruit, causing the oil (contained in the cells of the rind of all
citrus fruits), to exude, which then turns black and hardens
in minute specks all over the fruit. This disease attacks
oranges and spoils the sale of the fruit.
Black Spot, which somewhat resembles Maori, is a
fungoid disease. The spores (or seeds) of the fungus lodge
in* the cavities in the rind of all citrus fruits, which the
fungus growth completely fills, causing the appearance of


minute black specks. The difference between this disease
and Maori is easily told by the feel of the fruit ; the Maori
disease causing a roughness of the skin which is absent in
fruit attacked by the Black Spot.
Fruitgrowers are indebted to the researches of Dr. Cobb,
Government Pathologist of New South Wales, for informa-
tion on the subject of this disease, which has caused consider-
BLACK SPOT ON THE ORANGE.
From the “ Agricultural Gazette of Few South Wales.’’
able damage to citrus orchards
for the last few years. Bordeaux
mixture is the cure recom-
mended.
The above are the worst
diseases of the orange and
lemon tree, and although some
of them are virulent and de-
structive they may all be kept
in check, at slight cost, by
•treating in the manner recom-
mended in the chapter relating
to diseases of fruit trees.
Spot Magnified.


The Vine.
The growth of grapes for wine-making is destined to be
one of the most important industries of Australia. !No one
who has seen the care lavished on European vineyards to
obtain results which in Australia are the outcome of natural
conditions of soil and climate, can fail to concede that this
continent possesses vast natural advantages in the competi-
tion with the older wine-producing countries. Great skill
and experience are needed in the treatment of wines, no
doubt, but the chief drawback to the popularity of Austra-
lian wines—a drawback which only persistent effort can
remove—is the prejudice of English consumers in favour of
known brands of French, German, and Spanish wines.
The reader who desires information on this subject is
referred to the very able and profusely illustrated articles on
wine making, contributed to the New South Wales Agricul-
tural Gazette , by M. Blunno, the Department’s expert in
Viticulture.
A simple form of wine press for home use is shown in
the accompanying illustration.
Z A. The box into which the grapes are thrown. B. The screw by turning
pressure is brought to bear upon a moveable lid to the box. 0. The
tap through which the expressed juice passes.


The great subject of vineyard management for wine-
making purposes is beyond the scope of this book. Techni-
cal and scientific information is needed, and should be obtained,
by those embarking in the industry. Every effort should be
made to turn out a product capable of competing successfully
with existing brands in Australian markets, and of helping
on the movement to obtain a footing for Australian wines
in foreign countries.
The Grape for Dessert.
Large areas of ground have been planted with vines for
the production of grapes for dessert purposes, and at one
time the growth of table grapes bade fair to be a remunerative
and extensive branch of industry.
The outbreak of phylloxera in some vineyards of New
South Wales unfortunately had the effect of closing many
markets to the grapes from that colony, so that prices for
table grapes in Sydney have been, in many cases, unre-
muneratively low lately.
This is largely due to he fact that growers persist in
the cultivation of one variety, the “ Black Hamburg,” which,
though undoubtedly the best, has only a short season, after
which the price immediately jumps up. The South Austra-
lian grapes which arrive in Sydney after the close of the
“ Black Hamburg ” season almost always bring good prices.
Soils for the Grape.
The soil for a vineyard is usually prepared by trenching
to the depth of two feet; the subsoil, therefore, must be
friable, as it is usually placed on the top. A friable clay is
found to produce table grapes of excellent quality. Deep
sandy ground produces grapes of better flavour, however,
although the crop is not so heavy.
Vines require plentiful manuring and clean cultivation to
produce good grapes. Potash is required in considerable
quantity and must be supplied in the form of manure except
on clay soils rich in potash salts.
Training and Pruning.
Vines for dessert grapes are generally trained to stout
hardwood stakes, which are placed, one for each vine, at equal
distances apart.


m
o
w
H
P
O
M
S 3
H
>
H
m
O
PH
<
r-
H
g
£
£q
«
5 §
1 °
« CO
W
I 5
§ s
3 rf
a
I g
O3
.§■ H
e a?
I 03
a O
1 °
I <J


The distance at which vines are planted apart varies
considerably, the minimum being sft. x sft., the maximum
10ft. x 10ft. In warm localities the vines are planted further
apart than in districts which have a cool climate. In the
moist coast districts the shorter distance is general, and is
found to answer admirably, in fact most vines are planted less
than six feet apart when land is expensive and hand work
necessary.
The pruning of a vineyard is a laborious and trouble-
some operation, as two-thirds or more of each year’s growth
are cut away each winter, the shoots are also pinched back
during summer, and only a certain number of bunches of
grapes left to ripen on each vine.
Constant care has to be exercised in the management of
vines ; pruning alone and training require a great deal of
attention ; in fact, one acre of vineyard requires more time
bestowed upon it than four acres of fruit trees.
As the young wood grows during the spring it requires
tying up to each stake, and for this purpose New Zealand flax
is very useful, the plant growing rapidly on the banks of a
creek or waterhole, and furnishing a large supply of leaves
annually, which may be shredded into strips and last long
enough for the purpose of tying up grape vines.
The cutting and packing of grapes for market take con-
siderable time, and the tender varieties must be carefully
packed to reach the market in saleable order.
About the period of ripening, grapes are attacked by
many species of small birds, which ruin the crop if not kept
from the vineyard.
Caterpillars also do an immense amount of harm among
grape vines some seasons, appearing and increasing as if by
magic. The usual treatment for caterpillars is to employ
children to pick them off the vines,—which they soon denude
of foliage if left on, and destroy the crop. Spraying with
Paris Green is more enonomical, and equally effective.
Diseases of the Vine.
That most dreaded of all diseases of plants, Phylloxera
Vastatrix, is the great scouge of the grape vine in Europe,
having done damage estimated at millions of pounds in
France alone,


Tne efforts of the Government of New South Wales to
stamp the Phylloxera out where it has appeared are worthy of
commendation, and in spite of the hardship to the victim of
the disease among his vines, the course pursued—trenching
the ground and destroying every vestige of the diseased
plants—is the best one to take.
Block kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassetier and Co.
;PHYLLOXE RA ON VINE LEAF.
Oidium, or Black Spot , is easily eradicated by sulphuring,
which is done by means of a sulphur bellows, which scatters
the powder finely all over the vines.


The disease is easily recognised. The leaves of the vine
are discoloured and gradually wither, the fruit is marked by
dark brown rusty-looking spots, and the whole plant presents
a sickly and languishing appearance.
Sulphuring should be performed, as a preventive measure,
early in the spring, when the young shoots have made a few
inches of growth ; the process should be repeated at least
twice, about the time of blossoming and again when the grapes
are “on the turn.” As a rule, five or six sulphurings are
advisable, and some varieties require them, being more liable to
oidium than others.
Propagation of the Vine.
Vines may be propagated by layers and cuttings ; eyes
or buds may also be induced to root and shoot out. Rooted
cuttings are usually planted and are easily struck. The
practice of working onto American phylloxera-proof roots has
been recommended, but is not a good one. The phylloxera
exists as much on the one vine, apparently, as the other, but
has not so disastrous an effect on the American vines. The
advantages of American vine roots are therefore dubious since,
once the disease makes its appearance, any plant harbouring
it should be destroyed,.*
Cuttings are taken from the wood of last season’s growth
and contain four buds, two of which are buried beneath the
ground and two left above. The ground in which cuttings are
placed should be moist and finely pulverised, the addition of
sharp sand hastens their striking.
American Grapes.
These are strong growers and heavy bearers, many of
them of exceedingly ornamental foliage ; the fruit has a
peculiar and distinct flavour, which is not liked by everyone.
A good wine may be made from the Isabella grape.
American grape vines should be allowed to grow over
a trellis, as they produce as good fruit, in greater abundance,
when trained long as when pruned hard back. The following
are the best known varieties: Anna, Catawba, Diana, Isabella,
Maxatawney, Eebecca, Wilder.
* In France, where tne disease is ineradicable, their use is necessary.


LIST OF GRAPES
Black Hamburgh.— The best table grape, extensively
grown, hardy and prolific.
Black Muscatel. —Large, midseason, of good flavour.
Black Prince.—Large, of good flavour; a good market
variety,
Bowood Muscat. —White, free bearer ; a fair raisin
grape, subject to black spot.
Chaptal.— Large, white, early, of good flavour.
Centennial, —A very large grape, not widely distributed.
Ohassblas Blanc. —Light-coloured, of good flavour,
early.
Golden Champion..— Large, light amber-coloured, early,
of good flavour.
Golden Hamburgh. —Large, amber-coloured, midseason,
a good table grape.
Gordo Blanco.—A raisin grape, not extensively grown ;
known also as Muscatel Gordo Blanco.
Lady’s Finger. —Large, white, late, very long berry.
Muscat of Alexandria.—Large, white, late, a good
raisin grape, subject to black spot, one of the best dessert
varieties.
Madrbspield Court.—Black, midseason, a well-known
variety, and one of the best.
Trentham. —Large, black, late, of excellent flavour.
Sultana. —Small, golden coloured. The “ Sultana
raisin ” grape vine, requires long pruning, bears well.
Thompson’s Seedless. —Small, light-coloured, a raisin
grape, resembles Sultana, but has not as good a flavour, vine
exceedingly prolific, grown in California.
Waltham Cross. —Very large, amber-coloured, solid, of
good flavour. Successfully packed to England in February,
1897 (under the direction of Mr. C. B. Cairnes, Parramatta).
White Sherry.—Large, midseason, vine hardy and
prolific, a good table grape.


The Fig.
The fig tree is not extensively grown, owing to the limited
demand for the green fruit. What little fruit is marketed,
however, brings high prices, and the tree is worthy of more
attention from planters than it has received hitherto.
The dried figs of Smyrna and the Levant can be
obtained so cheaply that it will probably be long before the
fruit can be profitably dried in Australia. Experiments
might, however, be made with the growth and curing of good
drying varieties ; the market for the dried fruit being larger
than that for green figs, which are not appreciated by every-
one.
Pruning the Fig.
The fig tree requires very little pruning ; in fact, beyond
cutting out superfluous growth, the less pruning it receives
the better.
The young growth should be encouraged to keep as
perpendicular as possible, all branches having a tendency to
grow outwards being suppressed, as the fig tree naturally
spreads with age, and takes up a great deal of ground unless
this plan is followed.
Fig trees should never be cut during the period of
growth, owing to the great loss of sap which takes place where
a limb is cut when growing.
Picking and Marketing the Fruit.
As soon as the figs get ripe they must be picked, as
birds soon destroy the ripe fruit if left on the tree.
The fruit is generally packed in small boxes and sold by
the dozen, as it will Hot keep long when gathered, and, the crop
ripening unevenly, unless many trees are grown it is not
always possible to send a large quantity of fruit to market at
once.
Cultivation and Manures.
The fig tree requires less cultivation and a smaller
amount of manure than most fruit trees, but will not bear
good fruit if neglected. Any ordinary soil kept moderately
loose and manured will grow good figs.


Propagation.
Fig trees are generally obtained by cuttings and trans-
planted suckers ; the former give the best results, and should
be taken from the previous season’s wood, about eight inches
long, and cut off at a joint at the lower end. They will be fit
for planting the next winter as a rule.
Fig trees may be budded by ring-budding, or grafted by
the cleft graft process, but the fig is not an easy tree to work
over by either of these methods. Figs may be grown from
the seed of the imported dried figs, but the process is not
recommended, being slow and risky.
Distance Apart.
Figs may” be planted from eighteen to twenty-five feet
apart; the lesser distance is usual, but where the trees make
great growth twenty-five feet is little enough, especially for
the strong-growing varieties. In countries where the fig is
grown for drying, trees are planted from twenty-five to forty
feet apart, and at the latter distance are found to occupy all
the space in time.
LIST OF VARIETIES.
The following are to be obtained, and are some of the
best :
Black Genoa.—Large, of good flavour.
Black Provence. —Small, productive.
Brown Turkey. —Large, brown, early, sweet and good.
Brown Ischia.—Medium-sized, sweet, productive.
Brunswick.—Large, yellow, hardy, poor bearer.
Castle Kennedy.—Very large, early, shy bearer in some
places.
Marseilles White.—Medium-sized, green, prolific.
Violette Grosse.—Large, purple, not well known.
White Adriatic—Medium-sized, yellow, of good
flavour ; one of the best.
White Genoa.— Large, only suitable for dessert.
White Ischia. —Small, good grower and bearer.
Yellow Ischia. —Medium-sized, of good flavour.


The Passion Fruit.
Australia is probably the only part of the world where this
delicious and valuable fiuit is properly appreciated. No doubt
the orange-producing countries of Southern Europe and else-
where will in time cultivate this plant, so valuable as a winter
dessert fruit, more extensively. At present it is scarcely known
in Europe and America.
Beyond its use for dessert the passion fruit has as yet
found no value—unless we admit the manufacture of passion-
fruit ices, “ passion fruit and cream,” and drinks flavoured
with passion-fruit juice.
Such large quantities are however consumed fresh, and
so widely is the vine cultivated, that the fruit -has forced itself
into the front rank of Australian fruits.
Training and Cultivation.
The passion-fruit vine is trained over trellises of varying
heights and at different distances apart, according to the
theories of different growers. Trellises should be constructed
of strong split timber, the posts at least sft. Gin, out of the
ground, and a split top-rail let into a half mortice-hole at the
tops of the posts. The top-rail is better than a wire, as it
cannot sag with the weight of the vines. If a wire is used
instead of this top-rail it should be stapled into the tops of the
posts, not passed through augur holes ; so that the weight of
each vine is distributed between two posts, and not dragging
on the wire for its whole length.
Two or one wires are passed through the posts lower
down, along which the vines may run, but the main weight
of the vines should be arranged to fall on the top rail or wire.
The trellises should he at least fourteen feet apart, as
passion vines are voracious feeders and will send their roots
out a considerable distance in search of nourishment. The
posts of the trellises should not be more than ten feet apart;
at that distance the strain on the posts and rails when the
vines are old and heavy will be quite great enough.
More elaborate trellises are sometimes made by erecting
a double line of fences, one higher than the other, or both of
equal height, so that a man can work under with a hoe, and
covering in on top with saplings and sticks, wire netting, or
fencing wire, stapled down to cross pieces six feet or so apart.
The latter plan is the best, as the vines can be easily got at


and spread over the top, which cannot be done with wire
netting, and the fencing wire does not break down, as sticks
and light timber do,
A trellis constructed in this way, of stout split timber,
with vines carefully trained over it, is a very pretty sight
while the fruit hanging down attains its full size, with sym-
metrical shape and good colour.
Locality.
The passion vine will thrive almost everywhere, but should
be well sheltered, and requires clean cultivation and plenty of
nitrogenous manure, with potash and phosphates, being a most
greedy feeder.
Propagation
The passion vine can be propagated by means of seedlings,
cuttings, and layers. Seedlings are the best, and are easily
obtained, as the seeds from ripe fruit germinate in any moist
soil, and the seedlings grow quickly and surely. Seedling
vines may generally be obtained in any number under an old
trellis, but the best plan is to select large sound fruit, and sow
the seed in a patch of loose soil in a shady place, watering
until the seedlings are big enough to plant.
Tying the Vines.
This operation is the only one connected with the passion
vine which requires any special attention.
As the young vines grow they must be tied in to the
support provided—long sticks are generally stuck into the
ground for them to climb up—until the top rail or wire of the
trellis is reached, when two or three shoots only should be
allowed to grow, and there tied carefully to the rail as they
make fresh growth. Two shoots must also be trained along
each of the lower wires of the trellis, until the whole is covered
with strong main branches, when side shoots will speedily
cover the space provided, and must, in the case of a double
trellis, be provided with supports.
All suckers from the base of the vine must be rubbed or
cut off as soon as they appear.
The passion vine comes early into bearing and continues
productive for ten years or more when properly looked after


and manured. After that time the vines generally begin to
die off, although they have been known to live to a much
greater age.
It is a common practice when passion vines become sickly
and the quality of the fruit falls off, to cut them back to the
main limbs and remove the rest of the laterals and vine ; they
will often make young strong growth after this treatment,
which gives them a new lease'of life.
One or two new varieties of the Passiflorica have been
introduced lately into New South Wales and Queensland, but
have not as yet been fruited to any extent ; among them are
the Grenadilla or Water Lemon , esteemed in the West Indies,
and the Passiflora Laurifolia producing a large, yellow fruit.
The Persimmon,
This fruit, introduced from Japan, has attained great popu-
larity in Australia already and its cultivation is rapidly
extending.
The persimmon tree is hardy and bears large crops of
delicious and profitable fruit at an early age.
The tree in autumn, when covered with ripe fruit and
autumn-tinted leaves, is perhaps the most ornamental object in
an orchard, rivalling the peach tree in blossom, and the orange
when loaded with its golden fruit.
Cultivation and Pruning.
The general directions for the cultivation and pruning of
orchard fruits refer equally well to the persimmon, with the
exception that the least possible use of the knife (or steel
instruments of any kind) in pruning is desirable. The knife
used should be kept clean, and free from sap, which forms a
compound with the steel detrimental to both wood and knife.
The tree readily assumes a symmetrical shape with very little
attention in pruning, however.
Cultivation should be clean, and a liberal application
of manure is repaid by increased growth and productiveness in
the tree.
Uses of the Fruit.
At present persimmons are only used fresh as a dessert
fruit in Australia, but in Japan they are preserved in many
ways, with great success.


They are said to make excellent jam, and are also largely
dried, losing very little weight in the process, compared with
many other fruits.
Propagation.
Most of the trees hitherto planted have been imported
from Japan, but as the persimmon is easily grafted there is no
reason why it should not be propagated by our own nursery-
men, stocks being easily raised from seeds which should be
sown when freshly taken from the fruit, as they do not ger-
minate readily when dry.
LIST OF VARIETIES
Dai Dai Maru. —Medium-sized, flat contains seed, ex-
cellent flavour.
Hakeya. —Large, slightly conical, very heavy and solid
contains few seeds.
Hyakume. —Large, long, oblong, smooth, of good
flavour.
Goshio Gaki. —Medium-sized, flat, of good flavour.
Masu Gaki. —Medium-sized, contains seeds.
Nitari. —Medium-sized, pointed.
Tane Nashi. —Medium-sized, conical, smooth-skinned
flavour good, useful for preserving.
Tsuru No Ko. —Long, medium-sized ; keeps well.
Yemon. —Large, flat, resembles a “ Trophy ” Tomato,
almost seedless ; one of the best.
Zengi. —Small, early and prolific, seedy ; inferior in
flavour.
Other Fruits Cultivated in Australia.
Almond. —Grown to some extent in warm districts, does
not bear well as a rule ; a most profitable fruit where it thrives,
and worthy of experiment. Varieties : Brands’s Jordan ,
Nonpareil , 1.X.L. , Paper Shell. Treatment : same as for
peach and nectarine.
Banana.— (Queensland and warm parts of New South
Wales), An ornamental plant, but not highly profitable,


Blackberry.—New and improved varieties well worthy
of trial are : Kitakinny, Himalayan, Lawton.
Cape Gooseberry. —Profitably grown to a small extent,
easily raised from seed, requires same treatment as the tomato.
Chestnut. —Requires a cold climate, might be profitably
grown in the highlands. Japanese Giant fruits in the coastal
districts.
Currant. —“ Bush fruit,” requires cold climate. See
page
Gooseberry. —Bush fruit,” does well in cold districts.
See page
Ground or Peanut. —Cultivated like peas or beans,
does well in warm districts.
GROUND OR PEANUT.
Block kindly lent ty Messrs . F. Lnssetter and Co.
Guava. — Yellow, Parker's Hybrid, skid Purple, grown to
some extent the Yellow is a superior fruit, requires a warrq
cliqiate.


Hazel Nut or Filbert. —Might be profitably grown in
cold districts.
KENTISH FILBERT.
Block kindly lent by Mesirs. F. Lassetter and Co.
Medlar. —Grown in colder districts ; fruits almost any
where ; an inferior fruit.
Melon. —Rock and Water, —Belongs to the cucumber
family, and require similar treatment, profitable fruits close to
markets, many varieties are in cultivation.
Mulberry. —Grown to some extent, good for cooking,
bears well.
Olive. —Grows well in warm climates, not commercially
cultivated, worthy of experiment on account of the valuable
oil obtained from the fruit. Olive growing is becoming one of
the chief branches of horticulture in California, where it is
found to return excellent profits.


Pine Apple. —Grows well in Queensland and on the
coast of New South Wales, requires rich soil and great
attention. Crops of this delicious fruit have been profitably-
raised near Sydney, but its culture is precarious owing to the
competition of countries more favourably situated for its
growth.
Pistachio Nut.— Valuable for flavouring, will grow in
warm parts of these colonies, and! is worth planting for
experimental purposes.
PISTACHIO NUT.
Block kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassetter and Go,
Pomegranite. —Grows and bears well in Queensland
and the coast region of New South Wales and warm interior ;
the fresh fruit is only saleable in small quantities; it is
valuable for medicinal purposes, which occasions some
demand for it.
Prickly Pear.—A worthless and troublesome plant,
which should never be cultivated, even for a hedge, owing to
the difficulty of eradicating it, and the rapidity with which it
spreads ; fruit of very little value.
Raspberry. —“ Bush fruit,” requires a cold climate,
largely grown in Tasmania, a valuable fruit, and should be
extensively planted in districts of suitable climate in the
colony.
Strawberry. —A valuable fruit for many purposes and
extensively grown in the coastal districts of New South
Wales, also Victoria and Tasmania, often between fruit trees •


many varieties are in cultivation, they require clean working
and plenty of manure and water.
THE LEXTON MONARCH.
Block kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassetter and Co.
Walnut. —Requires a cool climate, should be planted on
the interior tablelands, where it would prove a most profitable
tree.
The Growth of Bush Fruits in the Orchard.
The custom of planting gooseberries, raspberries and
currants between standard trees in the orchard is a common
one in England, where the large growing trees, apples, pears,
plums, and cherries are set out at great distances apart to
leave room for the smaller bush fruits between them.
In Victoria and Tasmania and those parts of Hew South
Wales where the climate admits of the culture of these plants
the same plan may be followed, though it must be remembered
that Australian labour conditions differ considerably from


European ones, and that here it is always advisable to lay out
an orchard so that some at any rate of the labour may be per-
formed with horse implements.
Raspberries may be planted from four to six inches apart,
and the canes must be tied to a stake or trellis to prevent
them from trailing on the ground. The soil must be well
cultivated and manured.
Raspberries are propagated by layers, suckers and
cuttings ; they require constant and careful attention in prun-
ing, the cutting out of old canes, and the pinching back of
young growth. The picking and marketing of the fruit is a
troublesome and tedious operation, only compensated for by
high prices. The best varieties are Carter’s Prolific , Gastolf,
Red Antwerp, Yellow Antwerp, Northumberland Fillbasket.
Gooseberries.— Can only be grown successfully in cold
districts, their culture in Victoria and Tasmania, and places of
suitable climate in New South Wales has increased consider-
ably of late years.
The fruit will stand a longer journey in the fresh state
than raspberries, and is not so troublesome to pick.
A great deal depends upon the choice of proper varieties,
not only those which will thrive and bear in the district in
which they are to be planted, but also varieties least liable to
disease.
The gooseberry is propagated by cuttings of the previous
season’s wood, and by layers ; the buds should be severed from
the part of the cutting inserted in the ground if the bush is
to be trained to one stem.
A great number of varieties are in cultivation —white, red,
green and yellow—of which the following may be obtained in
Australia, and are some of the best :
Billy Dean.— Large red variety.
Crown Bob.— Red, an old and esteemed variety.
Conquering Hero.— Large, red coarse.
Green Overall. —Green, a good variety.
Greenwood. —Green, of good flavour.
General Graham. — Green, medium-sized.
Lord Crewe. —Green, late.
Leveller. —Yellow, very large.
Ploughboy. —Red, large, and long.
Rifleman. —Red, late, of good flavour.


Roaring Lion.—Red, large.
Sulphur.—Yellow, late.
Trumpeter —Yellow, fine-flavoured.
Warrington.—Red, early, prolific.
Waterloo.—White.
White Eagle.—White, large, thin-skinned.
White Lion.—White.
White Prolific.—White.
Whitesmith.—White, of excellent flavour.
The Currant, like the gooseberry, requires a cold
climate, rich soil, and plenty of moisture.
In pruning the currant the only care necessary is to keep
dead wood thinned out and superfluous straggling growth
removed. Summer pinching hastens the maturity of the
wood, keeps the wood well sheltered by foliage, and increases
the crop.
Currant bushes may be planted from three to six feet
apart, and require clean cultivation.
It is usual to grow fhe currant in the form of a bush
instead of keeping it to one stem like the gooseberry, as it is
found to be more productive in this form.
Currants may be grown from cuttings which are managed
in the same way as cuttings of the gooseberry ; the buds on
the lower part of the cutting being left on, unless the bush is
to be trained to one stem when they must be removed.
A number of varieties are in cultivation, of which the red
kinds command the largest sale, followed by the black, owing
to their use for making jam. Shelter is necessary for the
currant, hence its value as a bush plant between standard fruit
trees.
Varieties.
Black Naples. —Stands warm climate.
Grape.— Large, black.
La Fertile.—Red.
Lees’ Prolific. —Black.
La Versailles.—Red.
M ammoth. —Red.
White Cut-leaved.
White Dutch. —Suitable for cooking.
Warner’s Grape.—Red,


CHAPTER IX.
The Picking and Marketing of Fruit.
The rule for picking and marketing fruit, with many growers,
is to clean the trees completely of fruit as soon as any of it is
“ on the turn,” grade by hand, and send to market at once.
Fruit of different sizes and all degrees of ripeness is thus
marketed at the same time, the ripest is sold for immediate
consumption, the hardest and greenest is packed to distant
parts, the small and worthless is sold at ruinous prices to jam
manufacturers or hawkers.
All fruit-growers, of course, do not follow this plan ;
many intelligent and progressive growers devote great care to
the grading and packing of their fruit, allowing it to attain
its full size on the tree, carefully packing and grading the
ripe fruit so that it shall present an attractive appearance
when opened up in the market, and command high prices
from the retail dealers, and either leave the rest of the crop to
ripen on the tree for local sale, or packing in proper cases to
markets where they know they will bring a remunerative
price.
Some of the choicest dessert fruit will not attain its full
flavour on the trees, many growers, therefore, pick fruit of
these varieties and ripen it in sheds or buildings set apart
for the purpose, before sending it to market.
No attention and care devoted to the proper marketing
of fruit are wasted. It is short-sighted and remarkably
unbusinesslike to devote time, money, and skill to the
cultivation of superior fruit, and then neglect to obtain the
full value of the product of this extra care, by careless and
slovenly packing, grading, and marketing.
Readers of this book will probably think that the author
has held up the growers of other countries for their admiration
too much already. They will, therefore, be comforted to know
that Australia is not much better or worse than other countries
in this respect. Wherever fruit is grown it is found that the
majority of growers devote their energy to raising a vast


quantity of badly selected, inferior varieties, while a few only
of the wiser and more enlightened ones prefer “ quality, and, if
■possible, quantity ” to “ quantity but never mind the quality."
The grower who insists on the latter rule, as the standard of
success in fruit growing, invariably grades and packs carelessly,
and obtains prices decreasing as the square of the decrease in
quality and attractiveness—to use a mathematical phrase.
The Necessity for Canneries.
No fact in the state of the fruit growing industry is
so disheartening to the grower at the present time as the
low and absolutely unremunerative prices at which good fruit
is often sold during a glut.
First class fruit, of which there will always be only a
small supply, generally sells at good prices (one may say
always), but really good fruit, in every way a credit to the
grower who produces it, and the country in which it is grown,
sometimes sells in Melbourne, Sydney, and the other towns of
these colonies at an absurdly low price.
There is not sufficient demand for this fruit to exhaust
all that is grown, in the green state, at fair prices ; the only
course remaining, and one which will sooner or later have to
be taken, is to establish canneries and evaporating establish-
ments which can use up the good fruit, especially plums,
peaches, and apricots—which now pays none connected with
it but agents, middlemen, and jam manufacturers—and return
to the grower a fair profit for raising it. This is done in
America, and it will have to be done here before fruit-growing
becomes the prosperous and expanding industry which it should
be.
It is absurd for “ experts ” and impractical writers on
fruit-growing to tell the growers that it is only bad fruit
which sells cheaply, and that better fruit is produced in other
countries than can be grown here. The reason for the low
prices which most fruit has lately brought in the Australian
markets lies not so much in the quality of the fruit as in the
way in which it is marketed, the fact that the export and dis-
tributing trade lies almost entirely in the hands of agents and
middlemen, and principally the impossibility of utilizing the
surplus which remains when the demand for fresh fruit is
satisfied,


Stone Fruits.
Very few of the stone fruits, peaches, nectarines, apricots,
plums, and cherries, can be stored, or kept long after they
become ripe. The trees must be constantly visited as the fruit
reaches the ripe stage, and that on the turn picked if intended
for a distant market while hard and comparatively green.
If intended for a local market it may remain until fully
coloured but not soft; the exact stage of ripeness at which
peaches and apricots must be pulled is only learnt by ex-
perience. Nectarines and plums should never be allowed
to soften on the tree before being pulled, as they will not
market in good condition if packed soft. As soon as a
few of the fruits on a tree become soft it is a sign that the
large proportion of the remainder should be picked and
marketed. All stone fruits should be carefully graded, both
for size and quality. The best should be tightly rowed in in
layers in the package most suited to the local retail trade, and
if the lid ties down (as is the case with the “ half-gin ” in use
for the Sydney market) the top layer of the fruit should be
protected from the lid with paper and grass, unless too hard
to bruise in transit. Medium fruit may be done up in the
same way for the retail trade, or sent simply shaken well down
into large packages for packing, preserving, and retailing,
according to the state of the market; or it may be packed
away to distant markets with the best of the fruit.
The small fruit (and, unfortunately, some is always
inferior to the rest) must be shaken down in the larger
packages and sent to take its chance on the market. Fruit
should be packed evenly on the tops of the boxes, after shak-
ing down, so that it may present a level and uniform surface
when opened up, but better fruit must never be put on the
top of the case than that lower down.
The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table remarks that one of
the signs of the coming of the millennium will be
“ When berries—whortle, rasp, and straw—
Grow bigger downwards through the box.”
But the shrewd Yankee grower knows better than to pack
fruit for the wholesale market the other way ; the lines refer
to small boxes sold with the fruit, in which latitude is con-
sidered allowable (though even in their case “ honesty is the
best policy,”)


Apples and Pears.
These are graded and packed in the same way as stone
fruits, but as most varieties may be kept on the trees some time
after they become fit for market, the trees have not to be gone
over so frequently. Some kinds of both apples and pears
will not hang on the trees after they ripen, and must be
gathered and stored, if intended for a future market.
Many apples also require very careful handling, as also
do many of the slipstone peaches and ripe pears. Each fruit
must be separately packed in the case, and the fruit must on
no account be rolled or dropped from one receptacle to another.
The following rules for packing apples for export to
London will be found useful by growers who contemplate
sending apples to the European market, and contain so much
valuable advice that they are worth perusal by all growers of
fruit, whether for home or foreign markets.
Rules for Packing Apples for London.
1. Size of case, 29in. x 13in. x Bin.
2. Do not send less than 20 cases of any one kind.
3. Apples must be of uniform size, not less than
in diameter, quite clean, well coloured, and, at the same time,
of good flavour.
4. Never put apples of two sizes in one case,
5. Wrap each apple in tissue paper, so that the fold will
come over the stalk.
6. The stalk should not be long enough to wound
another apple.
7. Fingernails of those handling the apples should be short,
and all other dangers of even slight damage should be avoided.
8. Pack the apples in rows, the first two layers nose or
eye down, and the rest eye up, so that a good face shows
whether the top or bottom is taken off.
9. Never put a small apple in to fill a vacant space too
small for one of the ordinary size.
10. Fill up spaces at ends or sides of layers, &c., with
clean, neat packing—a piece of crinkled tissue or other soft
white paper will do. A good packing for the purpose is
stationers’ paper shavings or trimmings.
11. Adopt a brand, and mark each case neatly with a
stencil plate.
12. Do not send soft-fleshed apples, and handle all
cases with care.


13. Let all cases be uniform as to quality and mode of
packing, and as nearly as possible as to either number or
weight of apples. —Farm and Field, S.A.
Storing Pippin Fruits.
The art of keeping back apples and pears till a re-
munerative price may be obtained is very little practised in
Australia. In Europe, buildings are specially constructed,
and fitted with shelves and racks, for the storage of apples
and pears. They are generally built of stone or brick, often
with double walls and roof, for the sake of maintaining an
equable temperature ; the space between the two walls and
roofs being packed with sawdust, straw, or hay.
The only pears which are considered by Cheal as worth
storing are Dajeune du Comice, Beurre Biel, Duchesse
d’Angouleme, Beurre Ranee, Chaumontel, Catillac, Easter
Beurre. Wickson recommends the picking and storing of
pears as soon as the fruit may be detached from the spur on
which it grows by gently lifting it in the hand. At this stage
they are also in the right condition for packing away.
Apples for Storing.— Cheal gives the following list,
which could be considerably added to, most likely, on experi-
ment with late colonial apples:—Wellington, Norfolk Beef-
ing, Claygate Pearmain, Winter Pearmain, Sturmer,
Alfriston, Ross Nonpareil, Prince Albert. Owing to the
large quantities of apples imported from California at the
close of the season for Australian apples it is not probable
that any considerable profit could be obtained by storing
apples in bulk for a future market. The ravages of Codlin
Moth grubs also diminish the chances of profit.
Marketing Citrus Fruits.
Oranges and lemons are marketed as a rule in Sydney in
gin cases, except those intended for export, which are sent to
market in ‘packets. ; They require careful grading, which is
almost all at present done by hand. Grades capable of deal-
ing with all kinds of fruit, from a cherry to a ripe tomato,
may be purchased ac moderate prices in America and would
pay to import where any quantity of fruit has to be handled.
Citrus fruit for local markets requires no packing material of
any kind in the cases, as it does not bruise to any extent to
impair’the quality.


ORANGES PACKED FOR MARKET BY MR. BEYAN.


Storage of Citrus Fruit.
Fruit-growers are beginning to grasp the possibilities of
storage for oranges and lemons. At the present time large
quantities of Sicilian and Californian lemons, and increasing
quantities of Sicilian oranges, are being imported to Australia,
at a time when our markets could, if a proper system of storing
were in vogue, be well supplied with our own fruit.
The method of procedure is simple. The fruit must be
cut, not pulled, from the trees, and carefully placed, as cut, in
baskets or buckets, which are then emptied in a shady place,
the fruit being left together in heaps to sweat. Blemished
fruit will not cure, owing to the germs of decay entering by
means of the broken skin. Bruised fruit will not cure, for the
oil cells of the skin are ruptured and decay sets in.
After remaining in heaps for three or four days the fruit
will be found to have exuded a certain amount of moisture.
This is wiped off and the fruit may then be wrapped in
paper and packed away in boxes. After two weeks the boxes
should be looked over, and decaying fruit thrown out ; this
having been done the remainder will keep in a suitable build-
ing with little shrinkage for months. The process of sweating
toughens the skin, rendering it impossible to bruise, and
impermeable to the germs of decay.
The room or building in which citrus fruit is stored should
be of equal temperature, cool, and not too moist. The roof
should be double and padded with sawdust or straw between,
or built of some new conductive material, and the building
should be in a shady place.
Handy clippers are made for the purpose of cutting
oranges and lemons from the tree and may be obtained at a
low price.*
* Since the above was written a company has been formed for the purpose of
carrying out these operations, the proprietors of which are the author and Mr.
Cocks, of Seven Hills, N.S.W.
The first season’s operations resulted in failure through various causes, the
principal being that the directions above given, which are taken from Californian,
Italian, and Riviera sources, were not carried out, and also owing to the stoppage
of machinery in the refrigerating works, to which large quantities of lemons were
entrusted during a heat wave. The author’s advice to intending experimenters is:
carefully follow Californian and Italian instructions, and look with suspicion on the
advice of Australian experimenters. To the best of his knowledge, none of these
experiments have been wholly successful, the variable Australian climate account-
ing for apparent success or obvious failure in most of the trials hitherto made.
The information on the construction of storage houses for fruit, tables of
temperature, etc., the reader is referred to ‘‘Bailey’s Principles of Fruitgrowing,”
obtainable from the publishers of this series.


The Export of Citrus Fruit.
From all appearances the culture of oranges is on the eve
of a great development, owing to the opening up of the London
market for Australian citrus fruit. The process of curing for
shipment is similar to that described, the only difference being
that the hold of the vessel takes the place of the storing
chamber or building, after the sweating, wrapping, and pack-
ing processes.
Cold storage is unnecessary if the curing has been pro-
perly performed. Numerous shipments, under the direction
and through the aid of Mr. C. B. Cairnes, the initiator of the
export trade in Australian oranges, have been successfully
made ; the fruit being shipped, at small expense, as ordinary
cargo. The cost of cold storage is thus avoided, and the fruit
landed in equally as good condition as that from the cold
chambers of the vessel.
The Export of Summer Fruit.
Great difficulties exist in the way of the successful ship-
ment of our choicest summer fruits—peaches, nectarines, and
apricots—to Europe, though the problem of conveying them
safely to the vast market awaiting them there, will one day be
solved. Apples are already exported, and to some extent
pears. The varieties suited for export have been mentioned.
Careful grading is the first essential to successful ship-
ment, and careful packing the next. Grading will be done
by the aid of machine grades before long, and their introduc-
tion will considerably help the fruit-growing industry.
In packing fruit for export from New South Wales to
neighbouring colonies, the “packer” case and “quarter-packer”
are generally used ; they are cheap, enable the fruit to be well
packed, and are open enough to provide proper ventilation.
They are sold with the fruit, “ returned empties ” being im-
possible to obtain from distant markets.
Citrus fruit for sending long distances is usually packed
in paper. Newspaper should not be used in packing fruit
special packing paper for wrapping fruit can be obtained
cheaply, and is in every way the best.
The art of filling a “ packer ” so that the fruit shall carry
well, the pressure being evenly distributed, and shall open up


well on arrival at it destination, requires practice, but is easily
acquired by anyone willing to be taught by an experienced
hand.
Picking Aprons and Shirts.
A picking apron, for gathering fruit into, consists of a
long wide apron, tied round the waist, with the two corners at
the lower end tied together. The head of the wearer is thrust
through the loop thus made so that the apron is gathered up
in the form of a bag hanging from his waist and neck, with
opening at the top and sides. This is a convenient appliance
for gathering hard fruit not liable to bruise into, as is also the
“ picking shirt,” which takes the form of a shirt, the fruit being
carried all round the waist of the picker. Other arrangements
have been used, some being exceedingly complicated, and a
few have been patented.
In picking plums (when the bloom is not to be rubbed
off), and tender fruit, a basket or bucket may be used, slipped
inside the apron, leaving both hands free to pull the fruit.
Strong baskets, either bushel or half-bushel are used for
gathering tender fruit liable to bruise, such as peaches.
Ladders.
All ladders but the longest should be self-supporting,
especially for one among citrus trees. A handy step-ladder
can easily be made, suitable for picking fruit and pruning
from, which can be folded up and carried easily about the
orchard. Those used by painters and plasterers are too heavy
and clumsy as a rule.
Self-supporting ladders are sometimes made out of round
poles, the support consisting of a sapling split down one end
and the two halves kept apart by a cross piece. This sup-
port is bolted into the end of the ladder so as to turn on the
bolt or bolts, and fold up against the rungs. The contri-
vance is a makeshift step ladder, and the picker from the top
rungs of it has an opportunity of studying the condition of
“ unstable equilibrium,”


The Gin. Case.
This chapter would be incomplete without a reference to
the much abused historic “ gin,” which continues the favourite
package for local fruit sent to Sydney market.
The gin case costs, at the present time, one shilling and
three pence, and holds a bushel and a peck. In order to
compensate for its outrageous price it is sold with the proviso,
expressed or understood, that it shall be returned when
empty to the fruit-grower. How, three-fourths of the fruit
grown in Hew South Wales, it has been estimated, is
exported out of the colony, and the gin, being unsuitable for
export purposes, has to be emptied into a “ packer,” neces-
sitating the cost and damage of re-handling the fruit to be
exported. If this is not done, and the gin is sent away with
the fruit, it does not return, and is lost to the grower. Gin
cases, moreover, are returned at the purchaser’s risk and
expense—the grower giving nothing for returned empties.
This—owing to the weakness of human nature when the
gratuitous performance of duty has to be faced, and no one
will be the wiser if the obnoxious duty is shirked—the average
purchaser fails to do. He sacrifices duty to ease, and
the not too-honestly-come-by “ gin ” to his lares and penates
on the domestic hearth. In other words, he cuts it up for
firewood and burns it. The agent accepts no responsibility,
and the grower has to deduct one and threepence from his
returns for each bushel and a quarter of fruit. Even if the
gin is sent with fruit to a jam factory, or a respectable packer,
who may be trusted to return it if possible, the case always
tempts the cupidity of every man through whose hands it
passes. Returned to the grower it has no value ; sold as
firewood or building material, or the brand eliminated and
the “ gin ” restored to its pristine purity as a new case, it has
a value ; the acquisition of this “ unearned increment ”
tempts many of the carters, packers, and hangers-on of the
markets from the path of virtue when the payment of a small
sum per case for returned empties would ensure their safe
delivery.
The “ gin ” is, however, the survivor of the time when
fruit brought ten shillings a bushel all the year round, and
marketing expenses were capable of being ignored.


Its days are numbered, and the fruitgrowers of the pre-
sent are alive to the fact that the system it represents must
be abandoned, A case must be used which can be shipped
with the fruit, without necessitating extra handling in re-
packing. Packers will be enabled, in buying fruit, to save
packing expenses, and will not have to keep a stock of pack-
ing cases. They will therefore be able to give more for the
fruit, ready packed, and prices will be higher in consequence.
The grower will give a fixed price for empties, and by so
doing he will get all cases returned which are emptied in
Sydney or any other town in the colony ; so that, supposing
his cases when new cost him fivepence each, his average
expense for packages all the year round will not be more than
2d. or 3d. per bushel, which is quite enough.
Agents’ Charges.
The usual fee charged by our agent for selling fruit in
the Sydney market is 6d. a case. This includes cartage and
market dues. The inexperienced reader will, therefore, by a
simple sum in addition discover that, supposing the cases are
lost, and that freight is Id. per case, the cost of marketing
fruit is Is. lOd. per case—an extortionate rate. As a matter
of fact, year in, year out, the cost of marketing to the growers
round Sydney is Is. per case, and, as before remarked, the
agent accepts no responsibility for the return of empties.
That the system pays the agent is vouched for by the
large number of men, women, boys, and girls who crowd the
Sydney market disposing of fruit. There can be no doubt
that the introduction of cheaper cases will be followed by the
establishment of the auction system which is in vogue in
more advanced centres, at an early date, for the disposal of
fruit, and reduced charges will follow as a matter of course.


CHAPTER X.
Diseases of Fruit Trees.
In compiling this Chapter, the Author has made exten-
sive use of the information on the subject published in the
Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales, and subsequently
epitomised in the “ Farmers’ and Fruitgrowers’ Guide,” to
which publication the reader who desires fuller details is
referred. Owing to the researches lately made so exhaustively
into this subject by Dr. Cobb, the Government Pathologist of
New South Wales, especially, and still being prosecuted, new
facts in connection with this subject are constantly being
published. The following claims to be merely a general
outline. It would be impossible within the limits of this
book to enumerate all the diseases and pests which affect fruit
trees. Those named are the commonest in Australia, and the
ones with which the fruitgrower will find it most necessary to
cope ;
American Blight, or Woolly Aphis— Attacks the
apple tree, root and branch ; an aphis pest which disfigures,
and eventually destroys the tree unless checked. Preven-
tives : The use of resistant stocks is the only way to prevent
this disease from attacking the roots. Top-dressing with
wood ashes and lime, and pouring hot water over the roots
have been recommended as a remedy when the aphis attacks
the roots. Remedy : Spray with resin wash or kerosene
emulsion as soon as the disease appears.
Aphis. —Aphides of different species attack the young
growth of fruit trees. On the peach, especially, they do
considerable damage, preventing the growth from starting till
late in the season, when it assumes a stunted and twisted
appearance. Some varieties are more liable to its attacks
than others. Remedy: Spray in winter, and again, if the
disease makes its appearance, with resin wash.


KNAPSACK SPRAY PUMP.
(Block kindly lent by Messrs. F, Lassetter and Co.)
Apple Scab. —This disease is said to be identical with
the Black Spot, which has wrought such havoc among the
apple orchards of Tasmania ; a fungus disease, closely
resembling the Windsor Pear Blight, and having equally
fatal results to the crop of the tree attacked. Remedy : Spray
with Bordeaux mixture twice, the first time as the buds are
bursting, and before the bloom has opened ; the second, as
the fruit is setting.
Beetles. —Beetles of several species live upon the leaves
and bark of fruit trees—two varieties in particular, a bronzy-
green beetle, and a smaller grey one have committed great
depredations upon the leaves of apricot trees in Central
Cumberland. The destruction of the leaves at once checks
the growth of the tree, and when, as has happened, the leaves
are completely stripped off before the fruit is ripe, the shock
to the system of the tree is considerable. Remedies : These
and other foliage and bark devouring beetles may be picked
off the trees and destroyed. Children can easily clear young
trees of apricot beetles by shaking them down to the ground,
and gathering them into tins and buckets, when they may be
killed by burning, or pouring boiling water over them. As
these beetles breed in the bush, it is impossible to eradicate
them. Probably, spraying with Paris green, or some liquid
likely to prove distasteful, such as an infusion of quassia,
might be beneficial.


The summer of 1896-97 was marked by a plague of
Cicadae, commonly called locusts, which in addition to the
annoyance of their ear-splitting music, do considerable mischief
to the young twigs of peach trees by boring into them to
deposit their eggs, when there is not sufficient dead wood in
forest or orchard for their purpose. Spraying the trees with
some bitter or strong-smelling liquid might be beneficial in
their case, and would at any rate interfere to some extent with
their “ happiness ” —to which we are told Anacreon devoted an
ode, —which is apparently attested by their continuous song,—
the principal element in which (we are told) is that they “all
have voiceless wives.”
Bitter-rot. —A fungus disease of the apple, appearing
on the skin in the form of soft, brown, slightly depressed
spots, which increase rapidly in size, and spoil the appearance
and value of the fruit. Remedy : Spray, as the fruit is ripen-
ing, with Ammonia-Carbonate of Copper.
Black Spot. —See Diseases of the Orange, Chapter
VIII. •
Borers. —Boring insects of several species attack fruit
trees, both citrus and deciduous. Their presence may
generally be detected by the accumulation of sawdust at the
mouth of their burrows, or at the foot of the tree in which
they are. Thrusting a stout and pliable wire, or grass stalk,
down the burrow generally destroys them. Injecting kerosene
is also recommended.
Bronzy Orange Bug. — A pest which is prevalent in
the warmer parts of the orange-growing area. The insect
lives on the juices of the fruit and young twigs, which it sucks,
causing much fruit to fall to the ground. The eggs are large,
and may be seen in patches on the leaves and twigs of the
tree. Remedy : Spray with Paris green when the insects are
young. Hand-picking, when the bugs are torpid in the
morning, is also recommended.
Canker. —This is a fungus disease of the apple, and is
also known as Fin Blight. The branch affected turns black,
the bark cracks, and the leaves shrivel. Diseased parts of the
tree must be cut out and burnt. Lime washing in the winter
is said to be efficacious. Some varieties are much more liable
to this disease than others ; it is also more prevalent in warm
climates than in the colder districts,


Caterpillars. —Many caterpillars and grubs devour the
leaves of fruit trees, such as the large lemon leaf-eating cater-
pillar, and the larvae of the Sphinx moth, which are destructive
to grape vines. Hand-picking is the best remedy unless the
caterpillars appear in large numbers, when spraying with Paris
green is the speediest and safest remedy.
THE CODLIN MOTH AND ITS EFFECT.
A, place of entrance of grub; B, place of exit; C, grub ; D. moth.
Codlin Moth. —This insect pest of the pippin fruits—
apples, pears and quinces—has been mentioned in preceding
chapters. Its habits are well known, and the damage done by
it annually is enormous. The following account of the life
history of the insect is taken from A. H. Benson’s article on
“ Fruit Culture ” in the Farmers and Fruitgrowers' Guide ,
issued by the Agricultural Department of N.S.W., 1897 :
“ During the winter the larvae remain hidden under pieces of
loose bark on the trees, in holes or cracks of the trees, in
stakes adjoining trees, in empty fruit cases, buildings where
fruit has been stored, fences adjacent to apple or pear trees
that have been affected, and other places where they can find
a snug and dry retreat. At the approach of spring the larvae
pupate, and when the trees are in blossom the moths hatch
out. Just as the petals are falling—that is, when the fruit
is setting—the female moths lay eggs in the calyx of the young
fruit, rarely laying more than one egg in each fruit. The
egg remains in the calyx of the fruit for a time before hatch-
ing ; but as soon as the young worm or larva emerges from
the egg it starts to eat round the calyx of the fruit, and then
burrows into the fruit, developing with the fruit until it reaches
maturity, when it either falls to the ground with the fruit or


else it lets itself to the ground with its spinaret. On reaching
the ground it at once proceeds to the tree, or other adjacent
shelter, seeks out a secure retreat, spins its cocoon, pupates,
and again turns into a moth. This time the moth lays its
eggs either in the calyx or anywhere on the fruit where there is
little chance of the egg being destroyed, such as where two
fruits touch each other. The egg develops, and the larva eats
its way into the fruit as previously described. In all parts of
the colony there are at least two crops, and in the warmer
parts three in a season.”
Remedies. —Spraying with Paris green as the fruit is
setting, and again in two or three weeks’ time, bandaging the
trunks of the trees with strips of sacking or other material
four inches wide. The bandages must be tied round the butts
of the trees and removed every ten days or a fortnight, and
the insects destroyed. By this means the larva will be killed
as fast as they attain full size, and the production of eggs
checked.
Fires and lanterns hung out at night have no effect on
the codlin moth, which is not effected by light.
Scraping the old bark off the trunks of the trees and
lime-washing during the winter is recommended as a means of
keeping the moth in check. Affected fruit should be des-
troyed by feeding to pigs.
Crickets. —These insects sometimes do an immense
amount of damage to young trees, nurseries, and orchards by
eating round the bark. They may be trapped in tins contain-
ing apple parings or other fruit refuse, sunk in the ground,
up the inside of which they cannot climb. Sacks spread on
the ground will attract the cricket under them, and they can
then be destroyed by beating the sack with a spade. Poisoned
baits containing Paris green mixed with bran are effective,
hut cannot be used where fowls, dogs, or cats, or other
domestic animals are kept.
Curl Leaf.—A fungus disease of the peach and
nectarine, to which some varieties are much more subject than
others. The leaves become twisted and bulged out of their
natural shape, and the growth of the tree stops. Remedy :
Spray the affected tree with Bordeaux mixture.
Elephant Weevil.— An insect pest affecting citrus
trees. Remedy : Spray with Paris green.


Fruit Fly. — Queensland Fly. An insect pest very-
prevalent in Queensland, and to some extent in New South
Wales. The fly lays eggs in the fruit as it begins to ripen,
which hatch out into maggots, which bore into the fruit, and
cause it to rot. This pest is exceedingly hard to cure, as
Paris green and other insecticides are powerless against an
insect which only devours the inside of fruit. Clean and
frequent cultivation, by exposing the pupa?, to the sun, which
destroys them, is a preventive measure. Remedy : Dress the
soil immediately surrounding the tree with gas lime, and work
it well in.
Gumming. —This disease attacks stone-fruit trees, and
is due to some cause which interferes with the proper
circulation of the sap, such as unsuitable stakes, wet seasons,
TRIPOD SPRAY PUMP.
Block kindly lent by Messrs. F. Lassetter and Co.
want of drainage, over-manuring, improper cultivation. The
only remedy is to cut away the diseased bark and cover the
wound with shellac varnish or whitewash. Narrow forks in
the branches of a tree frequently cause gumming, and should
be avoided in the shaping of the tree when young.
Harlequin Bugs. —Red and black insects which attack
the apple. Remedy : Spray with kerosene emulsion.


Lichens and Moss.— Lichen growth on the trunk and
limbs of a fruit tree should be destroyed ; this is easily done by
lime-washing, or spraying with Bordeaux mixture.
Maori.— (Rust Mite). This enemy of the orange con-
sists of a small insect which punctures the skin of the fruit,
causing a brown discolouration. The remedy to use is
soft-soap and sulphur, lib. of sulphur boiled in 2 quarts of
water for ten minutes, 3lbs. of soft soap are then added, and
the mixture diluted with 4 gallons of water ; this must be
sprayed on the affected trees. Resin wash is also recommended,
Mal di Goma. —(Gum Collar-Rot.) This disease re-
sembles the gumming of summer fruit trees in that it is due
to some cause affecting the circulation of the sap in the tree,
and, as a rule, it is due to defective drainage or the presence of
water near the butt of the tree. Californian experience of
irrigation proves that water brought into contact with the
collar of the tree induces mal di goma ; in irrigated orchards
great care is now taken to keep the water away from the butts
of the citrus trees. This fact bears out the theory that in
most cases stagnant water in the subsoil, or an excess
of water in the topsoil, is the cause of this disease.
Sub-drainage is, therefore, the best preventative. Remedy :
Cut out the diseased parts, and open up the roots
round the butt of the tree, covering the wound with shellac
varnish.
Mildew. —This is a fungus disease of the apple. Some
varieties, the Winter Pearmain among them, are more subject
to it than others. The young growth generally shrivels and
assumes a greyish appearance, finally dying, and often causing
the branches to die also. Remedy : Cut off the diseased parts,
and spray with Bordeaux mixture in spring.
Moss.— Remedies; Spray with Bordeaux mixture, and
apply lime wash.
Mouldy Core.—A fungus disease of the apple, which
makes its appearance in the centre of the fruit, and spreads
throughout the whole. The Five Crown Pippin is especially
subject to it. Climatic conditions appear to be the cause of
this disease, which attacks fruit, admitting the air to the
centre through an opening in the blossom end. In wet
seasons this opening appears to be present in more apples
than in dry ones, and the moisture is deposited in the centre
of the fruit, causing it to decay. No cure is possible.


Oidium. — A fungus disease of the grape vine. Remedy:
Sulphuring. (See the Grape Vine in Part VIII.)
Peach Freckle.—A fungus disease attacking peach
trees, and causing discolouration of the fruit in circular
patches. Late varieties are more subject to this disease than
early ones, perhaps owing to the slower growth of the fruit,
which has, therefore, greater liability to harbour the spores of
the fungus. Remedy: Spray with Bordeaux mixture.
Peach Rust. —This fungus disease of the peach appears
to be similar to the Peach Freckle. It is said to be due very
often to a deficiency of potash in the soil. Remedies: Spray
with Bordeaux mixture, dress the ground with sulphate of
potash, wood ashes, or some other potash manure.
Pear Mite. —This insect pest attacks the leaves and
fruit of the pear, causing swellings to appear. Remedy. Spray
with resin and soda wash.
Pear Fly. —An insect pest which attacks the foliage of
the pear and cherry trees, sometimes entirely destroying the
leaves of the tree. Remedies: Spray with Paris green,
and lime wash the trees affected.
Phylloxera. —An insect pest of the grape vine.
Remedy: Destruction of the affected vines is the only way
to stamp out this disease, which spreads with great rapidity
unless checked. (See the Grape Vine in Part VIII.)
Red Spider.— An insect pest attacking the apple tree
both in foliage and fruit. Remedy: Spray during winter with
lime, salt, and sulphur wash; or in spring with resin and soda.
Scald. —Sun scald of the apple, loquat, and other fruit
trees, can be prevented by keeping the trees headed low, with
the trunks well shaded by foliage.
Scale Insects. —Scale insects of various species cause
an immense amount of damage among orchards. The red,
white, brown (or black), and mussel scales are the worst of
those affecting citrus trees. The names are sufficiently
descriptive, and the remedy for all is resin wash, or kerosene
emulsion; but scale insects are remarkably tenacious of life,
and their eradication a matter of difficulty.
Pernicious Scale attacks summer fruit trees, but is
not common. Remedy: Resin wash.
Greedy Scale attacks pear and apple trees, but not to
a great extent, Resin wash is the remedy; spraying in
winter with sulphur, lime, and salt is also recommended.


Shot Hole Fungus. — A fungus disease of the apricot
which is very common and destructive. The fruit affected
becomes rough and discoloured, the leaves are full of holes.
SHOT HOLE FUNGUS IN THE PEACH.
(From the Agricultural Gazette of New South Wales.)
Remedy : Spray with Bordeaux mixture, once in the autumn
after the leaves are off the trees, and again when the fruit has
set in spring.


Smut. —A fungus disease of the lemon tree, which is
particularly prevalent among young trees. It is said to grow
on the exudations and excreta of insects, but the cause of its
presence is not yet ascertained beyond doubt. Ants are
considered to blame for it by many orchardists, and with some
reason, for the smut and ants are frequently found together.
Remedies : Clean infested trees of scale insects, particularly
the brown scale, by means of spraying, destroy aphides, and
dig up ant-heaps among the trees. Keep the centres of the
trees well open—all scale insects and many fungus diseases
harbour readily amongst thick foliage in the middle of the
tree, and are much harder to eradicate from such places than
from trees which have their branches kept well apart so that
light and air may penetrate them, and insecticides and fungi-
cides be distributed all over them by spraying. Remedies :
Lime, salt and sulphur. Take 40 lbs. unslacked lime, 20 lbs.
sulphur, and 15 lbs. salt. Mix 10 lbs. of lime and 20 lbs. of
sulphur with 20 gallons of water ; boil until thoroughly dis-
solved. Slack 30 lbs. of lime in a barrel with hot water, and
add 15 lbs. of salt. Mix this solution with the 20 gallons of
lime and sulphur solution already made. Boil the whole for
half an hour, add sufficient water to bring the amount up to
50 gallons, strain through a wire sieve, and stir well whilst
using.
Resin Wash.
Take 4 lbs. of resin and 3 lbs. of washing soda, and boil
in two gallons of water, adding water slowly to make up
5 gallons, boiling all the time. Boil until the resin is dis-
solved, when the mixture will be of a brown colour. Add
sufficient hot water to bring the amount up to 40 gallons.
Kerosene Emulsion.
Take 2 gallons of the best kerosene, \ lb. of soft soap,
and 1 gallon of water. Dissolve the soap in the water by
boiling, and add the kerosene, away from the fire. Churn the
mixture by pumping through a spray pump, or syringe back
into the vessel for five minutes at least. The mixture will
have increased about one-third in bulk, and should have the
consistency and appearance of cream. The emulsion should
be diluted, as used, with ten times its bulk of water. The
resin and soda wash is now considered preferable to kerosene
emulsion for destroying aphides and scale insects, being safer,
easier to mix, and more effective.


Paris Green.
Take 1 lb. of Paris Green to 160 or 200 gallons of water;
the addition of 4 lbs. of fine lime makes the mixture safer to
handle. Mix the Paris Green with a little water to a paste,
then slowly add more water and stir well. Paris Green should
never be sprayed on to the fruit trees within a month of the
ripening of the fruit. Three or four years ago an agitation
was got up by English fruit-growers against the American
apples so largely imported into England, on the ground that
poisonous insecticides were used in spraying them, thereby
making their consumption dangerous. Investigation showed
that no trace of poison could be detected on sprayed apples,
unless the insecticide had been used within so short a time of
their ripening that as a preventive of disease it was absolutely
useless, and the slight traces then discoverable on the fruit
could be of no danger to the health of the person eating it.
If Paris green is used of such strength that the amount
of the poison deposited on the fruit would be dangerous to
health, the effects of it will be very soon visible on the tree,
which may soon be expected to lose both fruit and foliage.
Bordeaux Mixture.
Mr. A. H. Benson gives the following directions for
making Bordeaux Mixture, which will be found simple and
complete.
Winter Strength. —6lbs. of Milestone, 4lbs. of unslacked
lime, 22 gallons of water.
Summer Strength. —6lbs. of Milestone, 41bs. of unslacked
lime, 40 gallons of water.
For the 40 gallon solution prepare as follows :—ln one
cask dissolve 6lbs. of bluestone in 20 gallons of cold water.
In another cask slack 4lbs. of unslacked lime in about 3
pints of water, and then add sufficient water to make up 20
gallons of milk of lime; stir this well and strain it. Pour
the 20 gallons of bluestone solution and the 20 gallons of
milk of lime slowly together into a third cask; stir well for
three minutes. The mixture is now ready for use. To test
whether the bluestone and lime are mixed in the right pro-
portions—an important matter, as an excess of bluestone is
liable to injure the foliage—plunge the blade of a steel knife


into the mixture; if bluestone is in excess copper will be de-
posited on the steel blade, and more milk of lime must be
added. Use water which is free from iron, and avoid iron
cans or buckets for making Bordeaux Mixture in. A quarter
of a pound of Paris Green may be added to this mixture as
an insecticide. For the 20 gallon solution use half the
quantities of water given above.
Soft Soap and Sulphur.
Boil lib, of sulphur in 2 quarts of water for ten minutes ;
add 31bs. of soft soap, and dilute with 4 gallons of water.
Spraying Apparatus.
Several different makes of spray pumps and nozzles are
to be obtained. For extensive orchards a pump may be
fitted to a 200-gallon tank or cask, and carted through the
orchard, or drawn on a sledge. For smaller orchards and
gardens the knapsack designs will be found suitable. Cata-
logues of spraying outfits may be obtained from the leading
ironmongers in the colony. Working parts should he of
brass, nozzles should be capable of throwing fine or coarse
spray, parts should be capable of being easily cleaned, as after
use it will be found necessary with many solutions to rinse
the pump out with boiling water.


CHAPTER XL
Fruit Preserving.
There are many methods of utilizing surplus fruit when the
market price for the fresh article falls below the limit of
profit to the grower. At present, the only method in exten-
sive use in Australia is to convert it into jam. Before long,
it is to be hoped, the industries of fruit canning, drying or
evaporating, and pulping for export, will be established on a
commercial scale. Movements in this direction have been
started among the growers, and so far have met with but
scant success. The drawbacks in the way of co-operative
enterprises in fruit preserving are want of energy, want of
capital, ignorance of business methods, conflicting interests
among growers, opposition on the part of some agents and
dealers, who derive their business from handling green fruit.
Whether these difficulties will be surmounted, and a co-
operative fruit preserving enterprise successfully launched, the
future will show.
Australia, with her splendid natural advantages for the
raising of such choice and valuable fruits as peaches, necta-
rines, apricots, oranges, and other citrus fruits, and the finest
varieties of apples and pears, should be able to successfully
compete with other countries in the different branches of fruit
preserving.
The greatest drawback to the fruitgrowing industry at
present is the absolute uncertainty of the market as regards
prices for green fruits, and the absence of any means of
profitably utilizing fruit when those prices fail to be profit-
able. As before stated, there are now immense quantities of
fruit produced here in every way fit for utilizing for canning
and drying, and the fault that nothing in the way of preserv-
ing this fruit has been done rests with the growers.


Jam Making.
At present the great bulk of the fruit which finds its
way to the Sydney markets is made into jam. Prices for
apricots, peaches, plums, and apples, during the gluts, have
been so low that the jam manufacturers have been enabled, to
buy fruit by the ton, at prices which would scarcely return
profit to the grower if paid per hundredweight. This has re-
sulted in the accumulation of large stocks of jam, and con-
sequent cutting down of prices, until the jam makers receive
scarcely larger profits than the growers.
The process of jam-making is simple. Sound ripe fruit
should be used, but small and inferior qualities will make as
good jam as the finest dessert fruit. To every pound of fruit
not less than a quarter of a pound of good cane sugar should
be used, and the fruit and sugar boiled—in a steam-jacketed
pan if possible —for a time varying according to the variety of
fruit. The jam, when cool, should be stiff enough to stand up
when turned out of the tins or jars. lib. tins are generally
used for factory work, the lids being soldered on. Properly
made jam will keep as well exposed to the air as in a hermetically
sealed vessel; it is usual, however, to solder the lids of tins on,
making them perfectly air-tight, both as a precautionary
measure and for convenience in packing.
The cost of jam-making plant, including machinery for
making tins and soldering on the lids when filled, is not by
any means heavy. The chief expenses to be met in jam-mak-
ing are labour, fruit and sugar.
Canning.
The fruit canning industry of California has attained vast
proportions, and placed that country in the forefront of the
world’s producers ; there is no reason why Australia should
not obtain her share of this immense trade, which, if established
successfully, might, in time, become one of the main industries
of these colonies.
A complete description of the plant required for canning,
and the processes adopted, would be both cumbersome and
out of place here ; suffice it to say that there is very little
mystery attached to the operations of canning, which very
much resemble those of bottling, a process successfully per
formed by thousands of housewives in Australia.


The demand for canned fruit in Australia is considerable,
and when the sugar duties are removed New South Wales
canners should be in a position to secure a large part of this
trade.
As with jam-making, the cost of plant forms a very small
proportion of the outlay necessary for entering on this indus-
try, although a large variety of machinery is made for simplify-
ing the processes connected with canning.
Labour enters more into the process of canning than into
jam-making, as the fruit has to be cored or stoned and neatly
cut into halves or slices.
Peaches are stoned and cut into halves, a specially made
knife or machine being used for clingstones; the skin is either
peeled off or scalded ; apricots are stoned ; apples passed
through a coring and paring machine ; pears either machine
or hand pared and cored ; plums are usually canned with the
stone left in. After the fruit has been prepared it is packed
into the cans, which are then filled with syrup of different
densities, the preparation of which needs expert control. The
cans are then capped and soldered on—by machinery, as a rule
—a small hole being left in the centre of the cap for the steam
to escape by. The next process is the cooking.
The cans are placed in frames, holding a large number
each, which are placed in the cooking tanks, in which the
water is kept boiling by means of steam coils passing through
it. This process also requires the supervision of an ex-
perienced processer, who knows to a minute the exact time
necessary to cook the different fruits. The vent-hole is now
closed, and the process is finished, the cans merely requiring
labelling and varnishing before being placed upon the market.
Situation for a Cannery. —Canneries should be
established as close to the orchards as possible, as the less the
fruit is handled and bruised before being preserved the better.
A good supply of water is necessary, as large quantities are
required by a cannery, and labour should be obtainable speedily
and at a reasonable rate, for the fruit must be prepared and
processed as soon as possible after its arrival at the works.
Fuel is required, but not in great quantity, for the engine and
boiler, tin plates, cases, or wood for making them, and it
should be possible to have any necessary repairs effected as
soon as possible, for fruit will not keep long after it has been
prepared for canning.


Drying and Evaporating.
Sun-drying fruit is only possible in districts which have a
settled climate which can be depended upon to furnish suf-
ficient hot days to perform the process properly at the time
required. The coast districts of New South Wales and
Victoria have too uncertain and treacherous a climate for this.
The interior of these colonies will eventually produce dried
fruit in abundance, as many of the districts eminently suited
to the growth of fruit of good quality have also a hot dry
summer, in which sun-drying could be successfully under-
taken.
The process of sun-drying is simple, the fruit being pre-
pared by stoning apricots, stoning and peeling peaches, coreing,
slicing and peeling apples, and dipping plums into lye to
prevent their skins from bursting. The fruit is then spread
on trays, which must be piled up and covered at night in
places subject to night dews, and also on the approach of rain.
The standard size of tray in California is made of half-inch
pine, 2 feet x 3 feet, nailed to a cleat at each end, with a lath
nailed over the ends of the boards to stiffen the tray and
prevent working ; much larger trays are used by some driers,
some being even 3 feet by 8 feet.
Machine Evaporators.— The Californian machine
evaporators are probably the best in use, though one or two
Australian inventions are in the market. They are of different
plans, some being horizontal and others upright, the aim being
in every case to secure the even distribution of hot air through-
out the apparatus. The hot air in passing over the fruit
carries away the moisture, and the resulting product contains
all the sugar and juices of the fruit, only in a smaller compass.
It is claimed by the partisans of machine-evaporating that the
process is superior to sun-drying, owing to the fact that in the
latter the process of decay is not retarded by the action of the
sun sufficiently quickly, and therefore goes on at the same
time as the drying. At any rate, the machine-evaporated
fruit is superior to sun-dried in appearance and flavor, and
commands higher prices.
Sulphuring.— This process is necessary after the fruit
has been cut and sliced, in order to make it keep its colour
during the process of drying. The trays are placed in a box


or chamber made air-tight, except for ventilation holes, and
sulphur is burnt on a shovel, or in an iron vessel, in the
chamber. The trays are left in the sulphuring chamber for
varying times, according to the variety of fruit and the
opinions of various authorities on the subject ; about half an
hour is the average time for sulphuring.
Dried fruit must be sweated before being packed, or
it will not keep ; it should be well packed into neatly made
boxes, as the appearance has a good deal to do with the sale.
Prunes-
Of all the different dried fruits which might be profitably
produced in Australia none is more widely consumed than
dried plums or prunes. Raisins, figs, and dates (dried, be it
understood), we may also at some future time produce;
prunes we certainly ought to supply ourselves with. The
Prune d’Agen, the plum from which the French prunes of
commerce are made, has been introduced, and a few trees
should be planted in every district, so that its suitability to
the varying climates of this continent may be tested. The
plums in a fresh state are a useful cooking fruit, so that no
loss need be encountered in planting the Prune d'Agen for
experimental purposes. The process of preparing for
market the best quality of prunes, or French plums, which
are put up in glass bottles and sold at fancy prices, is an
elaborate one, but the stewing prunes which are packed in
bulk in boxes do not go through any very elaborate process.
The Californians have already secured the American market
for prunes which formerly absorbed a large proportion of the
French output, and are largely exporting their surplus to other
countries. The profits of a prune orchard are very large, as
the trees are constant and heavy croppers, and there is no
waste of the crop and no uncertainty as to prices. The
market being so great, the grower knows with certainty that
his crop will bring in remunerative returns if it matures with-
out mishap, and has, therefore, an incentive to exertion in
caring for the trees which does not exist when he depends on
the vicissitudes of the market for fresh fruit.


Prunes are usually graded before being dried, for which
purpose a machine grader is generally used, though home-
made contrivances made of wire-netting of different meshes
will answer the purpose. The plums are then dipped in boiling
lye, which thins and cracks the skin, allowing the moisture
to escape during the drying without bursting the fruit. This
dipping is effected by placing the plums in wire baskets, which
are then plunged into the boiling lye for about a minute until
the skin becomes wrinkled, when the basket is plunged into
clean cold water to rinse off the lye. After sweating, the
prunes are ready for grading, finishing, and packing.
Finishing , which is done to impart a glossy, smooth
appearance to the prunes, is done in several different ways.
The most common plan is to dip the prunes into hot water in
which pure glycerine has been dissolved at the rate of lib. to
20 gallons of water.
Prunes should be tightly packed into neat boxes and the
top layer of fruit flattened with the fingers, so that, on open-
ing, the package may present a uniform and attractive
appearance.
Crystallized Fruit.
Almost all the crystallized fruit consumed at present
comes from France, where the trade has been in existence for
a considerable time, and the process of preparing the fruit has
attained great perfection. The process itself is simple, but
the performing of it so as to get a product of first-class quality
requires considerable skill and experience. Plums (generally
greengages), pears, small green oranges, apricots, cherries,
and small apples are the favourite fruits for crystallizing;.
The fruit, after being graded, is prepared as iif for
canning, with the exception that the stone is removedl from
the larger stone fruits without cutting them in two, and pears
and apples are not cored, but only pared with the stallks left
on. The fruit is then dipped in boiling water until a certain
degree of softness is reached, which can only be told Iby ex-
perience. It is then allowed to cool, and all fruit whicch has
become too soft rejected.


The fruit is then placed in jars and covered with syrup,
the preparation of which needs some skill, when it is left for
a week or more, according to size. After fermentation has
begun, the fruit and syrup are heated to boiling point, which
stops the fermentation. This heating is repeated as often as
fermentation begins, until the fruit has absorbed as much
sugar from the syrup as it will take up, which process
generally takes a month. The final process consists of
dipping the fruit in heavy syrup and allowing it to cool
slowly, when the product is ready for market.
CFvarles K. Gj at I iff.




tm
o
H
U
W •
£ <
° b
14 5
t 4
gHi
£ 4
(S
Q Hi
<< <j
rv H
os n
w .
a tj
<|J "
H Q
OS 2
Cd Q
0 7
Z K
D H
* ■
<
H
OS
td
P
Z
0 H
(H ■
pd
S 0
<3«
.tJ
SB
CQ
S
W
PARRAMATTA
(Opposite New Post Office).
xv cmv
A-bmiibh a?isoddo)
CHURCH STREET NORTH
xaaaxs a-iioav : soxtoraia
&
o
H
H
s U
H
S B
S &
1 a
a • B
C CO U
j SPt
■g s a
-4-3 J H
g B o
S p?
53 H n
S H
5 s
” a
•s >
O H
2 a
£ o
« a
-C «*
*1 2
-I a
g <1
« „ 2 nj,
S H raj
I 3
a h rs
51s i a
«! a H ra
Q<£ « P
§ S «
O D 2
2
02 °
PS “
a s
ft
ft
o
45 O
ft
s <
: a
<u ft
•a 3.
* i
c 3 ri
0 3j
- q ce
1 if
( li
■OO o
a \°°
*3 o
S £*
J-3 o
c 3 &
_Q Pi
« J


Ornamental
Trees,
Fruit Trees
Shrubs,
Bulbs, Seeds, Palms, Ferns
AND ALL OTHER
Horticultural Requirements
TK'Sr^^lb.
E. HTKINS,
EULALIA NURSERY, ERHINQTON,
399 and 401 GEORGE STREET,
No. 40 QUEEN VICTORIA MARKETS, SYDNEY.
HOPKINS & LIPSCOMBE,
Wholesale Fruiterers
°*F
COMMISSION AGENTS.
PACKERS AND SHIPPERS
„ * , 123 YORK ST, SYDNEY,
Special Attention 7
given to and
" ordeM ' Fruit Exchange, Bathurst St.
