

A
i-lnr •. -I
JF • #
n
-• A
\
THE PRINCE
OF THE
TOTEM
TARLTON
R AY M E N T


''.fry
% Wm Jr "P- ;
£ mr V.;v
// , W
TARLTON RAYMENT.
. Scientist, author, artist.


§-t/W tUj,
(Imuy.\ (V u) uh.\' IjuJjH cJr
l >vcuvl? Mtav 1
i jw Ilj.
V
"UVcwXl >f ILJ2»^l L J2»^
pa tunvw ft
§LI-1U !■ fa u;aiii ■ u/Ju M
OW-Cl tfa Vh-AM/




THE PRINCE OF THE TOTEM




The advent of the First Fleet under Captain
Phillip at Sydney Cove on January 26, 1788,
meant not only the acquisition of a continent,
but also the responsibility, on behalf of the rest
of the world, of the protection of primitive
aboriginal peoples and of a unique fauna and
flora. To modern man was suddenly presented
the opportunity of studying at close hand the
life of the distant past.”
Sir Colin Mackenzie, M.D.,
in his Introduction to
Ambrose Pratt’s The
Lore of the Lyrebird.


| V:;-‘
Frontispiece.
Ba-lum-bir, the Butterfly.


THE PRINCE OF
TOTEM
SIMPLE BLACK TALE FOR
CLEVER WHITE CHILDREN
TARLTON RAYMENT
President Entomologists’ Club of Victoria, 1930-1931
Author of “Bees in Australasia’, “Australian Honey-plants”, etc.
and the Film-picture “The Cliff-dwellers”
ILLUSTRATED FROM
CRAYON DRAWINGS
BY THE AUTHOR
MELBOURNE
ROBERTSON AND MULLENS LIMITED


Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission
through the post as a book
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
BROWN, PRIOR & CO. PTY. LTD.
Printcraft House
430 Little Bourke Street, Melbourne, C.l


WIG 100
CONTENTS
Chapter One Page
The Long, Long Thoughts of Deenyi 15
The Feast of the Sheoke Trees 21
Chapter Three
How Gor-ree Came to Wo-er-rung 27
The Magic Cakes of Mun-yer-roo 33
Chapter Five
The Waters of the Black Duck 40
The Water-babies of Wad-na-coorie 46
Kan-a-way, the Canoe-maker 52
Chapter Eight
How Wanmirri Put the Stars in the Sky 58
Chapter Nine
Gun-doo-ee, the Emu in the Sky 64
The Net of Ku-ran-dur 70
The Front Tooth of Gor-ree 78
The Stone Claw of Ir-rit-ja 84
Tul-kara’s Laughing Boys 90
Chapter Fourteen
The Black Hand of Gor-ree 97
Chapter Fifteen
When Wonjuna Made the Great Flood 103
The Music Pipes of Didgeri-doo 1H
Chapter Seventeen
The Black Swan’s Brother H7
Chapter Eighteen
The Teeth of Wini-thon-guru 125




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Ba-lum-bir, the Butterfly Frontispiece
Swish! The heavy Kirri broke the neck of the snake . . 19
The Birrahlees often found fine fat Dundars, for they
were keen students of Nature 2 5
"What name your Mother?” asked Ku-ran-dur 31
Nam-bur was of the Grass-seed Totem, but Dirra-bang
had a Black Snake outlined on his chest 3 5
Gor-ree did not know that Oolpa, in magic shoes,
followed him step by step 38
Tirtelak, the Giant Frog, had drunk up all the water . 41
Booran, the Pelican, knew a good snake when she saw one 43
As the Mist of the Hills” wept, a Water-lily came up
with every tear 52
Good luck, Cousin!” were Kan-a-way’s last words
as he went overboard with a spear in his chest . .56
They danced round Wan-mirri’s men with flaming
torches; strange lights were in the sky 62
Gun-doo-ee had plenty of brothers and sisters 65
The Sacred Stones or Churinga that put Gun-doo-ee up
in the sky
Some of the Tribespeople; Kan-a-way; Ku-ang; Eena-
weena; Yul-lo; and Oolpa 72
Dhom-ba was old, and cross-grained like the Red-gum,
but he was sound inside 75
"Are there any more teeth to come out,” asked Darral,
"while I am in the mood?” 80
With a swift stroke Nam-bur slashed the other leg of
the Hawk 8 5
The Euros scented the approach of the Warrigal .... 89
Jibben, the Parrot, all time Yabber-yabber 91
Bye and Bye, a fine big Gunda-warra come, and take
Tul-kara away 95
"What fella pass this way, Gor-ree?” asked Dirra-bang 98
"Durkan, the Crane, walk by” 100


Page
It is a dangerous thing to fight a Medicine-man who
has eyes painted on his back as well as on his chest 106
"Water! Give us Water!” the people cried 108
Didgeri-doo listened—"B-U-R-R-P!” someone was
mocking him 112
By-ah-mul, the Black Swan, was Gor-ree's brother . . 122
"Wuh!”; and every right foot was stamped deep into the
ground
The Tribe took all its belongings 151


MESSAGE-STICK
To my Brother, Unaipon*
Trusted and Wise Man of the Narrinyerri:
The Centenary of the White Man is at hand.
His stores of Food are great; his Tribesmen many.
Soon he will be shewing his Cherished Relics to
the young Men with much telling of Great Deeds.
But for your brown People there is no more Boorah.
The Euro and the Emu make way for the
Sheep; the Whirlwinds of the White Man’s Car
scatter the Seed of the IVlunyeroo; your sacred
Churinga rest in his Museums.
So I send to you Doo-100-boorah, the Message-
Stick, inviting you to live for an Hour in the
Happy Days of the Alcheringa of your Race.
Ka-vai.
*The name of this fine man is pronounced U-ni-epon.


*


MESSAGE-STICK
To all White Children;
The Aborigines of Australia are not black; they are
coppery-brown in colour because the sun has made them
so. They are not a low, savage-natured people.
In their pure native state the Aborigines lived a happy,
contented life; thieving was unknown, and they were an
exceedingly truthful, moral people whom one should
admire. Of course they were simple, and primitive; still
living in the Age of Stone. But never forget that, in
the dim past, we, too, were like them, and very probably
they are excellent portraits of our own ancestors.
They laughed; loved; painted their faces; danced;
sang their songs; told ghost stories; fondled their babies
and dingoes, liked tender meat better than tough; drew
curious pictures, and wrought clever tools; played ball
games, and wrestled; wept, and went into mourning when
a loved one died; all of these elemental things we
ourselves do every day.
This Message-Stick invites you to visit little Gor-ree,
and his brown brothers and sisters, for an hour or two;
you are sure to find in them many good qualities to
admire.
The Aboriginal words in the text are from many tribes
on the principle that all warriors are honoured in one
cenotaph. .
I he Author.
Acknowledgement:
Many of you are not strangers to Gor-ree, for much of his happy
life has been broadcast over the air from the National Station 3LO.
ihe Author appreciates the courteous help extended to him by
™ r , Manager; Mr. Shepherd, Educational Talks;
at ’ (Miss Nina Murdoch) of the Children’s Hour, who
was the first to suggest publication.




Chapter One
THE LONG, LONG THOUGHTS OF DEENYI
YOU want to be cug-gil Birrahlee (bad or ugly
baby), I think,” said Tul-kara, who was Gor-ree’s
pretty mother.
The little brown fella held up his chubby face, over
which a charming smile was breaking—no one could resist
it, let alone his mother.
Why so long? ” she asked a little less severely, but
still trying hard to be angry.
Gor-ree go Gul-lee Gul-lee: Goo-bean gilay-goo.”
What the little brown fella said was: I have been long
in much water, for a swimmer man to be.
When mother heard that she had to laugh, too, as she
looked down at her brown boy. "So,” she said, "I have
to carry heavy Gul-lee, while my bright Birrahlee in it
stops to swim? ”
" I big fella By-ah-mul, the black swan,” answered the
boy, puffing out his podgy tummy because he found that
easier to do than swelling out his baby chest; he wanted
to look big, but was not quite sure how his internal
anatomy worked.
"Yi,” said mummie, "so my small Birri is now a big
swan. Very well, I will pluck a few feathers from his
black head.” She reached for his hair, but Gor-ree ran
off again to the water and plunged in, but mother was
too close behind, and caught him easily. She did not
smack him, of course, because no Aborigine ever beats
the children; they are so very fond of them.
Just then, Daan, another brown Birrahlee, appeared on
the top of the river-bank. "Yi! Gor-ree, come out! I


sing you fine song,” said Daan. So Gor-ree’s mother sat
on the bank with the two boys singing:—
Flood waters strong,
Kind be, Kind be,
Swan Swim,
Flood waters strong,
Kind be to Swan.
When they finished, Daan related that his father, the
strongest Gunda-warra, or spearman, in the tribe, had
gone off early that morning to interview some strangers
who were having a walk-about in Bra-yak’s hunting
ground.
" Take spear, boomerang, throwing-stick, and Yutch-
a-wunta,” said Daan, who was getting excited over his
details.
" How know? ” asked Gor-ree with great interest, for
young as he was, he understood that armed visitors must
always give notice of their coming, otherwise, if they
came unannounced, they must be regarded as enemies.
Daan could not tell whence the news came.
But Tul-kara knew. "Yesterday,” she said, "a big
smoke afar off say be ready, so Bra-yak listen, he soon
know that message come —" Wild-cat men walk-about in
Bra-yak-alung.”
Tul-kara was anxious, and after warning the two boys
not to get into mischief, went back to the camp to see if
any further news had come to hand.
She found all the men sitting down very quietly. No
one was talking, and all seemed to be listening intently.
Presently Bra-yak spoke: " Deenyi, the Ironbark, say
many Wild-cat tribe, with Wini-thon-guru, come on our
land.”
At once there was a surprised chorus of " Wah!
Wah! ” and they fell quiet again to listen further.


Bra-yak received another message apparently out of the
air.
"They fight—Day-a-dee dead! ” he announced simply.
The women started to wail in sorrow, and some of the
men, too, shed tears, for Day-a-dee was a kind-hearted
Gunda-warra, half-brother to Bra-yak, and father of little
Daan, so everybody was very sorry indeed.
" Wild-cats flee! ” said Bra-yak finally, and the
marvellous news-service came to an abrupt end.
Nobody seemed a tiny bit surprised that the informa-
tion came miraculously, as it were, out of the very sky.
Certain it was that next day back came Deenyi and the
other Gunda-warras, bringing the dead with them, and
reporting many details, but not adding much to the main
facts which Bra-yak had already received as though they
had been broadcast from some invisible wireless
station.
As a matter of truth, the news which had passed so
rapidly and accurately, over a wide stretch of country,
was actually thoughts sent over the air by Deenyi, the
Ironbark, to Bra-yak. Some brown men most certainly
possess this extraordinary power of sending their thoughts
on in advance, but other people of culture cannot do so;
they have to rely on complicated machines to convey the
news to their countrymen.
Of course, the death of little Daan’s father did not
mean that the boy would have any less food or clothing,
or lack a Mia-mia to sleep in, because the brown man
manages much better than that. When a warrior goes
to fight, or carry a message-stick, he does not have to
enquire—" Who is going to look after my wife and
children while I am away? ” There is not any need to
ask, for he knows that all persons of the same totem,
which is somewhat like the clan of other races, are
brothers and sisters, and that food, shelter and protection


will be shared by all without exception, and without
direction.
While the exciting news was being received at the camp
in this wonderful manner, some excitement was in
progress down at the stream. After the boys had talked
for a while, and the day being a hot one, Daan had
jumped in for a swim and cool play-about. Gor-ree was
on top of the bank, full stretch on Moo-bil, which is his
tummy, watching some sawdust tumbling out of a round
hole in a gum-tree. " Ha! ” he said to himself, " a big,
fat Dundar (white grub) is in there.” He looked about
for a hooked twig to draw it out.
Suddenly little Daan’s terrified voice screamed out,
"Woma come! Woma! Woma! WOMA!!”
Gor-ree looked down, and saw a large black-snake
swimming towards Daan. Its wicked head, and six
inches of its body, were out of the water as it made
straight for the boy.
Without a moment’s hesitation Gor-ree cast himself
headlong down into the water, - and swam to the snake
just as it was about to strike. Clutching it by the tail
he flung it clean out of the water on to a sandy bank.
" Quick-fella, Daan,” he said.
But the snake was now thoroughly aroused to great
anger, and was not going to be beaten by two mere
brown boys, so as soon as he got over his first surprise at
being thrown out of the water so unexpectedly, he at once
slipped back into the stream again.
But Gor-ree was on guard long enough to let his play-
fella crawl out onto the bank. Then the snake was back
for the second attack. Gor-ree knew that the reptile
would beat him in the water, but small as he was, he
faced the Woma fearlessly, his mind made up to grasp
the poisonous reptile once more to hurl it where Daan
was waiting to disable it with a stick. If Woma struck
him on the hand he could treat the bite at once.


Swish! The Heavy Kirri Broke the Neck of the Snake.


The snake came on; its eyes glinting, and head
flattening, as it rose to strike
" SWISH!!! ”
A heavy Kirri, or throwing-stick, hurtled into the
water, striking the snake, and instantly breaking its neck.
The Woma sank, and Gor-ree clambered out 3 quickly
as a Kirri bounds from the ground. He looked up on
the bank, and there stood his father, Bra-yak, laughing
at him.
" Funny things walk-about inside! ” he told his father
with a wry smile.
" Gor-ree throw Woma out quick-fella,” Little Daan
was eager to tell how brave Gor-ree had been.
Bra-yak seemed not to want to hear. "It is nothing,”
he said shortly, " the son of Bra-yak runs not from any
—not even the stone claws of Wini-thon-guru.”
Gor-ree felt more funny things all walk-about inside,
because he knew he had done what his father and all his
tribe expected of him in the face of danger.
When he ran past Deenyi, the Ironbark, the great
fighter put his hand on Gor-ree’s head and said —
’'Kalang! Gor-ree, Kalang! ” His well-done, Cousin,
well-done, was very high praise from such a hardened
warrior.


Chapter Two
THE FEAST OF THE SHEOKE TREES
GOR-REE had a " sweet ” tooth, but then, every one
of his many brown brothers and sisters had a
” sweet ” tooth. Of course, they could not go to
any shop to buy a cake of chocolate, or a stick of toffee,
because the only sweets they could get, and then only at
rare intervals, were the nectar in flowers, and the large,
white sugary drops known as Manna, which fall from
certain kinds of trees. The red- and manna-gums, also the
apple-box trees, will sometimes drop large pieces of it to
the joy of all children, but Upirla from the mulga-tree 1 is
best.
The place where Gor-ree was born is a large piece of
flat country, at the foot of the mountains. It is a very
charming place, for two clear waters flow through
Gor-ree’s country. There are many kinds of pretty wild-
flowers, crimson bottle-brushes, needle-bushes, flowering
hops, forests of lovely big trees and plenty of sheokes,
which do not have broad leaves, only long, thin ones, like
pieces of green string; these trees grow best on the flats.
Every year, early in Spring, and just before the wild-
flowers came out and the trees burst into bloom, all the
men of Gor-ree’s tribe would gather together, and perform
a little play which was intended to make plants give
them plenty of honey, for all the brown people have a
" sweet ” tooth, just like many other girls and boys.
Gor-ree’s father, Bra-yak, was the wise man of the
tribe, and he sent out a messenger, to all his people,
P'Mulga” is a species of wattle-tree growing extensively in
the arid portions of Australia. The scientific name is Acacia
aneura. The dense hard wood is now greatly favoured for table
ornaments because of its rich brown and yellow colouring.


inviting them to come to the ceremony which was to be
held on the bank of the river. Of course, the brown
men do not call it a play, because it is not to amuse them,
like other peoples’ theatres. It was a very serious
meeting, and they looked more like people going to
church to pray for rain, only they weren’t dressed quite
as you might expect. Everybody was very serious over it,
and no one laughed, but all joined in a chorus something
like this: —
11-lu-lalla-i-alung,
G ul-len-doo-ree,
Alung-lu-lalla-lalla-lu.
Gul-len-doo-ree, Gul-len-doo-ree 2
" Oh, my brothers, the needle-bushes, I hope the nectar
belonging to you will be so much that my people will
have plenty sweet to eat,” said the wise man, Bra-yak.
This way of asking the needle-bush flowers to have
plenty of nectar could only take place on a special piece
of ground, where three big sheoke trees grew in a
triangle. The middle of the area had to be cleared of all
stones and leaves, and scraped with a stick until it was
quite smooth. Then old Belah 3 would go down to the
bank of a creek to get some white Equina (pipe-clay),
which was mixed with water to make white paint. The
brush was just a soft piece of wood, chewed at one end
until it had short stiff fibres. This was dipped in the
paint, and then dabbed on the smooth ground to make
white dots, which were supposed to be the flowers of the
needle-bush. Then a number of yellow stripes were
drawn, and these were pictures of the roots of the plant.
The simple designs were easier to understand than many
modern ones.
Before any of the drawings were made, all the women
2 A drink made from the nectar of needle-bushes ( Hakea )
mixed with water.
3 A species of Casuarina closely resembling a Buloke tree.
Like the Sheoke, the “leaves” are like lengths of green string.
This native was named after the tree.


were sent away to gather food, and after they were out
of sight, six of the young men had the same sort of
designs painted on their backs and chests, with the long
yellow roots running right down their arms and legs. On
their heads they wore a little tuft of Emu feathers, to
represent the leaves of the needle-bush.
When the six men had been painted up, and specially
decorated, they looked very fearsome, but they were
happy in their hearts, because they liked acting in this
way. Fiowever, when all were ready, two of the painted
men marched backwards to each of the three sheoke
trees, while the old men sat in the triangle, in the middle
of the ground, and around the painted picture.
Then one old man put his wooden shield on the
ground, and striking a loud blow, shouted, "Wah! Wah!
Wah! ” and the six painted men ran forward from the
sheoke trees, and squatted down together in the middle,
with their hands held up flat over their heads. Then
another old Gunda-warra poured water from a pitchi, or
wooden basin, over all their hands, and the drops that
fell through on to their backs were supposed to be rain
falling on to the flowers.
Of course, while this part was going on, everybody
was very, very serious, like people in a church. This was
a specially solemn moment, and no little brown girl or
boy has ever seen what is called the Rain Ceremony; it
is very sacred indeed.
Suddenly a loud scream of fear came from the women
down at the creek. All the men jumped to their feet in
great anger, because a woman was running on to the
forbidden ground.
" Wini-thon-guru come! ” " Wini-thon-guru, the wild-
cat, come! Achilpa come! ”
Before any could stop her, the woman had flung
herself down in the middle of the picture. It was
Gil-lah’s mother, and when one of the angry men struck
a blow at her with Illupa, his stone axe, the Gil-lah threw


himself forward, and taking the blow on his temple, fell
down beside his mother —dead.
Such a dreadful thing had never been known among
the tribe. It was just like a person dying in the middle
of a holy service, only the effect on the mourners was
much worse.
The men crowded round, and cried out in a loud voice,
" Now all the needle-bushes will die, and we will never
taste honey again.” Then the women came up from the
creek, and they, too, wailed loudly: " The needle-bushes
will die like the Gil-lah 4 , and the flowers will fall like our
brother.”
Poor Goo-100, who was named after the Magpie, was
dreadfully shocked over the death of his son, and like
everyone else in the tribe, he would never again go near
the spot where his boy had died. He would wander
away, and sit by himself, as sad as sad could be. He
would not talk to anybody, and looked so forlorn that
all the tribe felt miserable, too.
After that unhappy day, the people moved to a fresh
camping-ground where there were plenty of possums,
kangaroos, goannas and birds. But the poor brown
fellas could not be happy. One day, when Goo-100 was
sitting by himself, thinking, he noticed a very small, black
bee flying about in front of his face, and singing gaily,
oh, so happily, in a shrill voice like a young boy’s. It
would not go away, and Goo-100 made a slap at it with a
stick, but the tiny black insect dodged out of the way
quite easily.
"Do not hurt thy son, Goo-loo,” it said softly, " for
I have changed into Ka-vai, the bee, and I live in a hole
in a gum-tree. I, and hundreds of my busy brothers, have
stored up much honey for all our people.”
Now when Goo-100 heard the bee say that, his heart
grew happy once more, so he answered: "Welcome, my
son:
4 This beautiful pink-breasted Cockatoo is so abundant that a
flock resting on a dead tree resembles a fruit tree in full bloom.


>
The Birrahlees Often Found Fine Fat Dundars, for they were
Keen Students of Nature.


" Now I go back to tell all my brothers in the gum-
tree,” the bee answered gaily.
" But how shall I find you? ” asked Goo-100, as the
bee settled on his hand.
" I can fly faster than you can run, my father. So
that you can follow easily, gum a piece of white down
between my wings, and you will not lose sight of me.
But you must first bring the six men of the sheoke trees,
with their axes, and as they dance round the tree, and
sing, they must tap the trunk three times three. I will
then show you where to put in your hand to get the
honey.”
Now Goo-100 felt very contented to think that he
could thus see his son, although he was changed into a
bee. However, he did what he was told, and the little
insect flew into a hole. Goo-100 put in his hand, and
withdrew it full of golden honey. There was so much
that he filled up the Pitchis, or wooden dishes, of everyone
in the tribe.
Sitting under a sheoke tree, they thinned the honey
with water. Each aborigine then dipped in a tuft of
sheoke leaves (these look like a twig from a pine-tree)
and swilled them round in the dish, put them in their
mouths, and sucked the twigs dry.
After each mouthful they cried out together, "Thank
you, little brother.” Whenever they spilled a drop,
Ka -vai 5 and his brothers came down and joined the happy
feast.
So it came about, that while Gor-ree was brother to the
black swan, he was also brother to the bees, like many
other men of the tribe. This does not seem very clear,
but the Aborigines did not get bothered over these
remarkable relations, but then, none of them was ever
" poor,” and therefore did not ask for favours that made
them unpopular.
6 Thc residents of Queensland have abased this name to
“Kobbee,” but the Kabi tribe name was used for the stingless
native bee, Trigond cassiae.


Chapter Three
HOW GOR-REE CAME TO WO-ER-RUNG
GOR-REE’S people lived at Bra-yak-alung, which
means land belonging to the East man, Bra-yak.
It is an exceedingly pretty place, with sparkling
Gul-lee-Gul-lee singing over the rounded stones. On the
banks of the streams, in amongst the wattles and the purple
mint-bush, the grey gang-gang cockatoos cling all day
cracking wattle-seeds, and crying in a discordant chorus,
" Kar-Kar-Kar! ” The beautiful blue Wonga pigeons come
to eat the seeds, and bronze-wings, too, keep them company.
In summer time, the red- and yellow-box trees burst
into bloom and scent the whole bush. The Aborigines
get fat on the well-stored " sugar-bags ” —that is their
appropriate name for the small, black native bees’ nests.
The country is just like a fairyland for children to play
in, and all Gor-ree’s people were very happy indeed.
Then a dreadful thing happened. One morning, just
before sun-get-up, a host of savage Wild-cat men jumped
out of the river-bank, threw their spears at Gor-ree’s
people; hit many of them on the head with heavy Nulla-
Nullas, and gashed them with the dreadful Yutch-a
wuntas, or stone knives. In a few minutes, the once
happy people were dead.
Gor-ree did not know why his dear mother should be
killed; she was such a good mummie, he thought, for he
had never been beaten in his life. His big, strong father,
too, had been killed. His daddy, who used to show him
how to make toy spears out of reeds, and who had taught
him to chip a knife out of stone; to hunt kangaroo and
emu.


Poor little Gor-ree! When he saw the men of Wini-
thon-guru bound into the Mia-mia of his mother, he had
hidden himself in the leafy shelter of the break-wind,
sitting as quiet as a blackfish under a log in the river.
After a while the Achilpa, or Wild-cat savages, went
away, and Gor-ree crawled out just as the rising sun
shewed him all the dead people. He could not find his
Gubbah (pretty ) little sister, 80-ah-dee, but he saw his
play-mate, Daan, lying oh, so still. Poor frightened
Gor-ree could not stem his tears, and rubbed his fat little
fists into his eyes, just like other children do when the
tears are flowing freely.
No kind sister; no loving mother; no clever father left
to train him how to hunt. He cried a lot more when he
thought of himself being left in all that big country.
Gor-ree gave a last glance at the horrible scene, uttered
a queer cry of pain, and then ran off like a mad Douran-
Douran (the north wind) along the bank of the river,
leaping like a young kangaroo over the logs and bushes
in his path.
Yes, he must keep on running away from the fearful
sight. He remembered how, a long time ago, his mother
had told him that she came from a happy people who
lived at Wo-er-rung. Gor-ree had never seen his
mother’s tribe, for it lived many camps away. He ran
on —and on .
When it was noon, with the hot sun right overhead,
he halted, panting, for he had come a long journey. He
felt very thirsty, but he did not drink like many boys, by
scooping water up in his hand, neither did he lie down,
and lap like a dog, for he was far too clever to drink in
such uncomfortable ways. He simply broke off a long
reed, walked into a water-hole, plunged the reed in
deeply, and sucked up the coolest water from the bottom.
Gor-ree knew the water on top would be heated by the
sun, and that it was better to take cold drinks in small


quantities, just like other people who drink iced liquids
through a straw. But of course, Gor-ree’s brown people
found this out a long, long time ago.
As soon as he felt refreshed he ran on again, for he
was young, and much hardier than other boys. He only
wanted to leave the dreadful camp far, far behind. As
night drew on, he came to a cave, in the rocky walls of a
mountain, and finding it a good shelter, he crept in.
After a long search he found some fire-sticks, made a
little blaze, and gathered a pile of leaves for a bed.
But he could not go to sleep, for he kept thinking of
all he had lost. He would never again see his mother,
father, brothers or little sister. Horrible things flapped
eerily about in the air. Gor-ree concluded they must be
El-kin-tera, or bats; perhaps owls. Once a cold form
glided over his leg, and he jumped up quickly when he
felt a sharp prick near his knee. He thought a snake
might have bitten him, so he examined the place, but he
could see only one little prick, not at all like the two holes
made by the black-snake’s poison-teeth. Then he felt all
over his bed, and soon found that a few spines from a
prickly-box bush 1 had got mixed up with the leaves. It
was one of the thorns that had pricked him.
Of course, he knew just what to do when bitten by a
snake. First, he would at once take off his belt, made of
his mother’s hair, and after tying one of the strands
tightly round his leg, he would then cut the bite with a
sharp stone, until it bled plenty, then he would suck out
the rest of the poison. This is the correct way to treat
snake-bite.
Gor-ree was not bitten, but he sat near his fire for the
rest of the night, sometimes having a little cry when he
remembered all that had happened. As soon as the
iThis shrub has great clusters of small creamy-white flowers;
its botanical name is Bursaria spinosa, and is widely spread;
greatly favoured by the bees.


mouth of the cave showed as a faint grey hole, he sought
out something to eat, but all he could find was a few tiny
white berries from Chankuna, a wild currant bush. He
knew he must be getting along towards the vast open
plains, so he ran on all that day, and at night he found a
different kind of tea-tree, with very small leaves, and
many prickles. From some holes in a stunted gum-tree,
he fished out a few fat white grubs, and these appeased
his hunger for the time being. Soon after, he came to a
sheltered place, and camped that night under the thick
bushes. Tired out with his long journey, and weary from
want of food, he fell asleep. He dreamed that huge,
savage cats, carrying long poison-spears, were dancing
round in mad joy, and trying to jab him with the points.
He woke up early, and after finding a few more grubs
for his breakfast, he was off again to find his mother’s
tribe. The air seemed different; it was dry but sweet,
and Gor-ree could smell the change of land quite well.
It seemed to give him lots of energy, too, for he began
to run faster.
Presently he saw a sandy ridge ahead of him; a
strange kind of soil, with a few grassy tufts growing
along the top. When he was on the rise, he paused, for
he saw smoke signals in the distance. On he ran, until
he could detect the camp of a new people, and sniffing
the air, he could recognize, too, the smell of meat cooking.
Then he saw another sandy ridge, and walking slowly
to the top, he sat down, in full view of the new tribe.
He knew that he had little to fear, for he had no spears,
shield, club, axe, knife or any other weapon, and no brown
man ever attacks a stranger who shews that he is entirely
without weapons.
Gor-ree thought how nice it would be to have good
food and to play again with the Birris and Ejeejas. Yes,
the food did smell nice, and he did hope the tribesmen
would soon take notice of him.


The Aborigines are very polite; they never walk into
one another’s houses, or Mia-mias, without first standing
a long way off, and calling out —" Is anyone at home? ”
If there be no answer, they come back some other time.
When an Australian Aborigine visits another camp, he
sits down, afar off, but where all can see, and waits until
a messenger comes to welcome him.
Gor-ree felt that very soon he would simply have to go
on, but he did not wish to be rude. After a long, long
wait, a tall, finely made warrior came out from the camp.
“What Name Your Mother?” Asked Ku-ran-dur.
" I am Ku-ran-dur,” he said. " Where is thy mother’s
camp? ” Of course, the big Gunda-warra could see that
the boy was hungry, and very much tired.
"Some Wild-cat men speared my mother, and one of
them clubbed my father while he slept. They killed little
Daan, and 80-ah-dee, and everybody ”
While Gor-ree was telling his story Ku-ran-dur was


examining several curious scars of old cuts on Gor-ree’s
shoulders and chest.
" Wah! ” said Ku-ran-dur in surprise, " What name
your mother? ”
"Tul-kara, the quail,” answered the boy, "and I am
Gor-ree! ”
"Wai! Wai! I am thy brother, Gor-ree, for Tul-kara
was my sister.” Kur-an-dur, of course, meant tribal
brother and sister.
Ku-ran-dur turned, faced towards his camp, and made
some sign language to the tribe. Gor-ree could read that
Ku-ran-dur was telling them that father and mother had
been murdered by the Wild-cat, or Achilpa, tribe.
When they reached the Mia-mias, stern old Dhom-ba
was already calling a meeting of warriors to go out to
punish the savages who had attacked Gor-ree’s people with
such ferocity.
Food was given to Gor-ree, and while he ate, the
women cried over the death of Tul-kara, and cut their
heads with sharp yam-sticks to show how sincerely sorry
they were. Some of the men, too, cried, and cut them-
selves with sharp stones, because Bra-yak was greatly
respected, and, moreover, was related to many of them.
Ba-lum-bir, who was named after the butterfly, because
she was so pretty, became Gor-ree’s new mother, and he
was always treated with great kindness, being a brave
child to make such a long journey by himself. Was he
not one of Tul-kara’s Laughing Boys, and son of a great
man?
Henceforth, Gor-ree was cousin to many Birris and
Ejeejas, with whom he played, laughed, yes, and some-
times got into mischief, but he was such a fine Birri that
even stern old Dhom-ba, who was as rugged as his
namesake, the red-gum, agreed that it was good to have
Gor-ree about the camp. Of course, every man and
woman felt very sorry for the orphan boy.


Chapter Four
THE MAGIC CAKES OF MUN-YER-ROO
GOR-REE sat in the Mia-mia, the roof and walls of
which were made of a mixture of leaves and earth.
By and by, the leaves would rot, and make the
earth cake into a hard covering that kept off some of the
dreadful heat of the sun. It also kept out the rain, which
was very fortunate just now, because old Man-nil-lie had
been rain-making all the day, consequently everything was
wet.
Of course, when Gor-ree wanted to go outside, no one
said he must not, because he had no clothes to get wet,
and so he never " caught a cold ”. But the Aborigines
liked to have a dry place to go into when they had been
outside long enough.
" When will rain no more come down? ” Gor-ree asked
his new mother, Ba-lum-bir.
"No want rain go back! ” she answered. " Plenty
more rain, make plenty more Nardoo; plenty more
Mun-yer-roo; plenty more cakes for Gor-ree.” She
laughed at the little fella, because she had a bright happy
nature, like the butterfly after which she was named. " You
like Nardoo cakes, Gor-ree? ”
"Yes, mummie, but I like Mun-yer-roo better!”
"All right, Man-nil-lie make rain soon go back when
clay-pan is full, then Gor-ree help his mother to gather
Nardoo.”
" Gor-ree will gather plenty Nardoo for mother,” the
boy answered.
Very soon the rain stopped, and there were about three
inches of water all over the clay-pan.


But perhaps you do not know what a clay-pan is, so I
had better explain. It resembles a very shallow lake,
with a perfectly level, smooth floor like concrete. Being
of clay, the floor holds water like a big dish. Nardoo
grows so quickly that, in four days or so, leaves may be
seen floating on the surface like tiny water-lilies, though
they are shaped more like a four-leafed clover.
When the water dries up, which it does very soon, the
dark-brown seeds are all clustered about the stems. The
leaves quickly wither away, and the seeds drop off onto
the hard, smooth floor of the clay-pan. A little later the
black women took their wooden dishes, or Pitchis, and
began to sweep up the Nardoo seed with a broom made
of a bunch of twigs. Of course, Gor-ree had a little
brush and dish, so that he, too, could help collect the
harvest for his mother.
"My! What a lot of cakes Fll have to make for my
little boy! ” said his mother, each time Gor-ree brought
his dish full. This sort of praise seemed to make the boy
work harder than ever, so that they had more seed than
anyone else.
Then came the grinding time, and Gor-ree watched his
mother milling the seeds between two stones. She
crushed the thick, smooth shells, and ground out the dull-
yellowish, bitter flour from them with a stone called
Pid-dinnie. At cooking time, after the meal was mixed
with water, it was made into cakes, and cooked in the hot
ashes of the fire.
Nardoo cakes, to many tastes, are not very nice; they
are dirty-grey in colour, because the flour is not white to
begin with. Because Gor-ree had been so good when
helping at the Nardoo harvest, his mother cooked for him
a special cake of Mun-yer-roo; this is certainly nicer than
Nardoo, but more difficult to get, and the black fellas like
it very much indeed.
Well, every morning mother cooked a Mun-yer-roo


A V*'
Nam-bur was of the Grass-seed Totem, so he had a Whole Field
of it Painted Down the Middle of his Back; on Each Side were
Three Round Cakes Newly Baked, but Dirra-bang was
Woll-un-qua, and had a Black Snake Outlined on his Chest, and
Another on his Back.


cake for Gor-ree, and as soon as he got it, he would run
away out of sight. Mother and father were quite
surprised, because Gor-ree was not a tiny scrap greedy.
At last, Ku-ran-dur, Gor-ree’s new father, noticed
that, in spite of the special cake, Gor-ree did not get fat;
indeed, he seemed to be getting thinner, and his father
thought perhaps the boy had had an evil spirit put in him,
a really bad one, who was enjoying all the food that
Gor-ree swallowed.
" Some wicked person has put a curse on our boy,” said
his father, who was troubled in his heart, for he loved
Gor-ree with a great love.
At length father made up his mind to seek the advice
of a powerful medicine-man, to try to discover who had
put an evil spirit in his son, Gor-ree. He went off to ask
the wise old man, Oolpa, what was the best thing to do.
Gor-ree’s father found Oolpa sitting in the shade of a
leafy Wurley, for the day was very hot.
" Sit down, my brother,” said Oolpa.
" Some one has put an evil spirit into my son, and I
want you, Oolpa, to find out who it is, so that I may slay
the evil one before he kills my boy! ”
" Quite right,” said Oolpa, " but it is powerful magic
that a strong man is using. I must think it over for a
day or two.” Now this old medicine-man was a really
clever one, and he wanted to save little Gor-ree if he
possibly could, though he felt that this case was one he
did not quite understand. You see, he was like many
other doctors, he wanted more time to study the patient
before giving his final answer.
After a lot of thought, he sent for Gor-ree’s father.
" I have discovered a plan, my brother, to drive out
the evil spirits in thy son, but it will take several days,
and you had better call on me later. Tell the boy’s
mother to make the Mun-yer-roo cake, not in the morning,
but at night, after dark.


On the next night, the old medicine-man, Oolpa, took
out of his Kootechi, or magic bag, a pair of sacred objects
called Kurdaitcha shoes. These were very peculiar, and
did not at all fit on a man’s foot, but that didn’t matter
much, because the owner had only to put them on his
toes, or even tie them on to his feet, and he could go
where he pleased, without being seen, and no one could
follow his tracks. What fun one could have with them.
Well, Oolpa’s pair was made of the short feathers of
the Emu, and they were all stuck firmly together, on the
sole, with dried human blood. Oolpa tied them on his
feet with black string made from a woman’s hair. Then
he stepped out into the darkness, and went in the direction
of Gor-ree’s Mia-mia. Finding a shadowy bush he hid
himself —and waited.
To find out from which direction the Evil One might
come, Oolpa stood a stick straight up, and then let it
topple slowly over. It fell pointing in the direction of
the farthest Mia-mia in the camp.
" Wah! ” said old Oolpa in great surprise. "So there
is another magic man in this camp, eh!”
Just then Gor-ree ran out of the leafy break-wind, with
a hot Mun-yer-roo cake in his hands. Off he sped to
the farthest Mia-mia, with Oolpa right behind. Strange
to say, the magic shoes did not make the slightest sound,
nor leave the least track. Oolpa saw Gor-ree take in the
cake, and give it to a poor, very old blind woman named
Un-thip-pa, which means a very ancient ghost. She was
the oldest person in the tribe, and had no one left to care
specially for her.
"Yi, Yi,” said Oolpa in a whisper, "the young must
live, and the old must die. I must put a stop to this
somehow.” So he hid himself once more, and waited
until Gor-ree was halfway home. Then he made a
dreadful howling noise to frighten the boy, but he also
scared the wits out of everybody else in the camp, and the


B' •' ' ' "v.
iHgiS
_ mi
people huddled together in their Mia-mias, very still
indeed, not daring to look out.
Next morning Oolpa sent for Gor-ree’s father. " I
think I have driven out the evil spirit, brother; your son
will soon be well.”
" Wah! ” said Gor-ree’s father, " I heard him call out
last night. Did you, too, hear it, Oolpa? ”
Gor-ree Did Not Know that Oolpa, in Magic Shoes, Followed
Him Step by Step.
did,” said Oolpa, shielding his face, for a moment,
as though blotting out a strange vision.
"Thank you! Thank you! Oolpa, I cannot pay you
enough.”
But next night, the old man thought he should go to
make sure of his cure, so he put on his sacred Kurdaitcha
shoes again, and waited, to see if young Gor-ree would
again brave the fearsome things of the night, to take a
cake down to the old, blind woman, Un-thip-pa.


Sure enough, after he had waited a little while, out came
Gor-ree with another cake, and off he ran.
Old Oolpa smiled in the darkness. "The boy has a
great heart, in which there is no fear,” but he did not
follow Gor-ree. Instead, he went slowly back to his own
Mia-mia. "One cannot break a brave heart,” he mumbled
to himself, "but I can preserve it.”
So the next day Oolpa, the medicine-man, called all the
tribe together. "I have had a great dream,” he said,
" and Moora, the Good Spirit, told me of many things for
the welfare of my brothers. Cakes made of Mun-yer-roo
are not good for blind people, they make them more
blind. On the other hand, the meat from Ertua, the
wild-turkey, is not good for warriors; it makes them soft
in the bone. Such meat is good only for old, weak people
—especially blind ones; it does not matter if their bones
do get soft.” These seemed to be excellent reasons.
" Oolpa cured Gor-ree, and he has the greatest magic,”
said the boy’s father.
" Yi! Yi! ” shouted the others as they went away very
happy indeed to possess such a clever medicine-man.
After that, little great-heart, Gor-ree, gave up taking
his Mun-yer-roo cakes to the old, blind woman for fear
of making her more blind, as Oolpa had said. Gor-ree
grew plump, and his father and mother had no need to
worry any more about evil spirits as far as their son was
concerned.


Chapter Five
THE WATERS OF THE BLACK DUCK
TO-NIGHT,” said Dirra-bang. " I want to tell you
the story of the Blue Lake, or ' Wrang-yarn,’ the
Waters of the Black Duck. It is so hidden in
the ranges, that only a few people have seen it.”
" A long, long time ago, there were no people in
Bra-yak-alung, and there were no lakes in the land.”
Dirra-bang said there was no water because a huge frog,
named Tirtelak, had drunk it up, and everybody was
terribly thirsty. Gor-ree said the frog must have been a
very huge one. Dirra-bang answered that all animals
long ago were very big; much bigger than they are
to-day. That is quite true, and no one could contradict
him.
"Of course,” said Dirra-bang, " when the great frog
had drunk up the water, all the animals bellowed out,
*We want water! ’ ” But the poor fishes suffered most
of all; they were so dry that they could not even call out
for a drink. They actually lost their voices, and Dirra-
bang said that they never got them back. Of course,
everybody knows that fishes are always silent when spoken
to, and that’s why!
One fine day, a great giant fish, whose name was
Tambo, chased the big frog Tirtelak, and wanted to
gobble him up quick-time, as he was feeling very hungry.
The frog got a dreadful fright, and made a tremendous
leap from down near the sea, right up into the ranges.
The great frog came down with such a bump that he
made a wonderful big hole in a gully, and as he sat down,
he knocked a piece off the mountain side, too, and a lot
of ground and rocks fell across a deep valley, blocking it
up, and so hiding the giant frog.


Now, Tirtelak did not like having to stay so quiet; he
would much rather be hopping about, but he was
dreadfully afraid of Tambo, the big fish. One day,
when Tirtelak was thinking out some plan to hurt
Tambo, he gave another great leap, and shouted: " I
know how to kill the old fish! I’ll just wait until it gets
dark, then I’ll hop down, very quietly, and drink up all
the water.”
So after moon-sit-down and all the black fellas were
asleep, Tirtelak, the frog, hopped down to the lakes, drank
up every drop of water, and then struggled back to
his great hole near the mountain. When the brown
people woke up next morning all the lakes were dry, and
the poor fish were much too weak to move.
The Kookaburra was very cross. " I can’t live on fish
alone,” he said, " I must have a drink. What foolish
person let all the water run away? ”
When Booran, the Pelican, told him that Tirtelak, the
frog, had swallowed it, it seemed so absurb the
Tirtelak, the Giant Frog, had Drunk up all the Water.


Kookaburra burst out in a fit of laughing, and he laughs
again still, whenever he thinks of Tirtelak’s big drink.
The Pelican knew who had drained the lakes, because
she had been out hunting frogs, but the giant Tirtelak
was too big even for her. So she had kept very still, and
watched him swallow all the water. As Wooreen (that
is the brown man’s pretty name for the sun) rose up
from sleep, he got a great surprise, and he said boastfully
to Koorang, the thunder: "See how strong I am! Why,
I have dried up all the lakes.”
But Koorang only mumbled deep down in his chest,
and though nobody could understand what he was
talking about, he looked very black, and angry.
"I’ll shake the earth,” he grumbled, " and make the
hills rock so that Tirtelak, the frog, will be buried for
ever.” Just then everybody felt the ground trembling,
and Koorang, the thunder man, roared at the top of his
voice. All were terribly frightened, and a lot of earth
fell down on Tirtelak, the frog. But he was not a bit
afraid, for he was used to being covered up. Indeed,
when he had a good supply of water he rather enjoyed
being covered up. This must be true, because even
to-day, the frog goes down into the earth and waits until
Willung, the waterman, comes along to squeeze a cloud
to make rain.
At last, all the animals held a meeting to decide how
to make the frog put the water back, but they could not
hear themselves speak, because Koorang kept rumbling
away.
"I wish he would stop shaking things,” said a little
fire-tailed finch. "He will spoil all my eggs.”
"Braak,” the white cockatoo, screamed out, "Stop your
noise, and let me talk. I think if the Pelican, Booran,
and Kookaburra were to go to Tirtelak, and promise
never to hunt frogs any more, then he might let the water
come back.”


•. * l> **iii ii*
" I don’t think he would take the slightest bit of
notice,” said Toorung, the snake. " I’ve had a lot to do
with frogs.” Nobody answered, because they all knew
that Toorung would eat anyone he could swallow.
Nobody liked Toorung.
Just then a singing thrush came along. " May I
speak?” she asked so sweetly that all of them nodded
" Yes.”
Booran, the Pelican, Knew a Good Snake When She Saw One.
" Well, I think the task is much too great for any of
us. But down in a tree, there is my brother the waterman,
named Willunga. I sometimes go there to sing to him.
If you will agree, I shall go and ask him what is the best
thing to do.”
w I wish you would speak a little louder, said
Toorung, the snake, as he wriggled a bit closer, with eyes
glistening.
"You keep back,” a big goanna growled. He knew
how crafty the snake could be, and that what he wanted
really was to swallow the little bird.


Well, in the end, all the birds and animals agreed to
let the thrush ask Willunga what was the best thing to do.
So the beautiful bird flew down to the tree and began to
sing, " Where is my brother, Willunga, Willunga? ”
In a minute the waterman came out. " Hullo, my little
brother,” he said. The Aborigines say the birds and
animals are their brothers, and since Willunga was
brother to the thrush, he could not hurt it. So they were
very fond of each other.
Well, the thrush asked Willunga, the waterman, what
was the best way to make Tirtelak give back the water.
After they had thought for a long time, Willunga said
it was no use shaking the ground, like Koorang, the
thunder, was doing every day. It was not a task for great
strength, but it required cleverness.
" I think I have a plan,” said Willunga, " but I must
have a little water to begin with.” And with that he
reached up into the sky, and caught a cloud in his hand.
But when he squeezed it, no moisture fell.
Then he remembered that he had forgotten to put on
his special dress of black cockatoo feathers. So he went
back to his tree, and soon after came out with the feathers
stuck all over him. Next time, when he reached up, and
squeezed a cloud, a tiny shower of rain fell out, and
flowed down a creek. There was only just a trickle, not
nearly enough to let Tambo, the big fish, swim, but there
was sufficient to let the silver eels wriggle along.
When Willunga saw these long, slender things moving,
he squeezed another cloud, so that some more water
flowed down the river-bed, and the little eels swam all
the way up to where the giant frog was hiding. Just as
they reached Tirtelak, the singing thrush also arrived, and
sitting down near the frog she began to sing her loveliest
song.
Hullo,” said Tirtelak, " I suppose you’ve come here
to warble so that I will give up the water.”


" No,” answered the thrush, " I sing because I am
happy.”
" You really ought to let the water go,” said Toorung,
the snake, " It’s so selfish to keep it all to yourself.”
Toorung looked as though he would like to bite
somebody.
" Ha! ha! ha! He! he! Ha! ha! ” laughed the Kooka-
burra, "He’ll burst soon. Look at him! Look at
Tirtelak! ”
Just then the young eels stood straight up on the very
tips of their tails and began to dance. This made
Tirtelak laugh so heartily that the pent-up waters gushed
out of his mouth, and filled the big hole where he lay, and
so made the blue lake.”
Gor-ree thought it the most wonderful story he had
ever heard.
" When can I see the blue lake, Dirra-bang? ”
"Some day Kan-a-way will take you; he knows the
ways of the Great Waters.”


Chapter Six
THE WATER-BABIES OF WAD-NA-COORIE
OLD Dirra-bang, the clever artist of the tribe, was
giving Gor-ree a few lessons in nature study.
" Come with me,” said the white-haired old man,
" and I will show you the water-babies, Gor-ree.” So
the two Aborigines, one big and one little, made a long
journey until they came to a place of great rocks.
"Let us go softly, Gor-ree, because in the stone is a
treasured water-hole, made many moons ago. However,
Gor-ree and Dirra-bang walked very carefully, and the
old man told the boy that if either of them had ever
eaten too much Euro, or Kangaroo meat, or even Emu,
they would not see the water-babies, and while they were
there they must not kill, or eat, any snakes or lizards,
because if they were to do so all the cool water would
then dry right up, and the water-babies most certainly die.
So that no bad people could see the beauty pond of
the water-babies, a Moora, or good fairy, had sent
Woll-un-qua, a great snake, to hide in a hole in the rocks,
so that she could always be ready to kill wicked persons.
As they got nearer to the great stones, sure enough, a
huge black snake crawled out and stopped, lifting its
head up, and weaving it from side to side. Its eyes were
glowing with a strange, greenish light, and every little
while it shot out a long, forked, wet tongue. The snake
made a gentle hissing sound that sent little Gor-ree’s
blood all shivery inside him.
"Be not afraid, Gor-ree,” said Dirra-bang. "It is only
my sister, Woll-un-qua, whose real name is Wad-na-
coorie, or Broken Shell.”
At once the snake stopped moving its head, and began


to slide away, backward, between the big rocks. The
man and boy followed slowly after. Peering over a huge
stone, they looked upon the still water. Not a ripple
was to be seen. It was a wonderful fairy-like silver
mirror, or looking-glass. Gor-ree had never seen anything
like it, and he could only stare. Dirra-bang was holding
up in his hands an oval piece of smooth, bluish stone, and
singing softly to himself:
T hap-a-lu! T hap-a-lu!
W ah-kut-nimma,
Thap-a-lu!
Gor-ree was too utterly surprised to say or do anything.
Presently he noticed a few big drops of rain falling, but
as soon as each one touched the mirror, a beautiful, dark-
green, round leaf was formed, floating on the surface of
the water.
" They are the message-sticks of the water-babies,”
Dirra-bang whispered. Neither spoke any more, and soon
after they crept away very quietly, to a place nearby,
where they made a camp for the night.
Day after day, Gor-ree and his teacher went to the
water-hole, which was quickly being covered with the
floating, flat leaves. "Time soon come now,” old Dirra-
bang told Gor-ree, and sure enough, one day, when they
went down to the water-hole, they saw small white round
balls coming up from the bottom, and as soon as they
reached the surface, the balls opened out into beautiful
water-lilies.
" How come, Dirra-bang? ” Gor-ree could not hold
his tongue any longer, and he felt he simply must ask his
drawing teacher how all the lovely flowers could come up
out of the water.
" Hold thy tongue a little while, Gor-ree, and fill the
eyes, but not the mouth. Hunger will wait, but the
loveliness of the water-babies soon passes. To-night, at
the fire, I will tell the story of Wad-na-coorie.”


Well, at sun-sit-down, and after Dirra-bang had placed
his sacred stone, the Churinga of the Water-babies, in a
secret place, where it was guarded by Woll-un-qua, the
big snake, Dirra-bang said that once upon a time his tribe
was very hungry, because no rain had come to make the
grass-seed grow. All the animals had long since gone
away into a far country, looking for water. The yams
which they dug out of the ground were just withered, dry
shells; even the hardy bean-trees, from which they made
so many things, lost their leaves, and seemed about to die.
Still the rain did not come.
The famished tribe wandered about aimlessly—finding
no food, until at last the little piccaninnies were just skin
and bone, and the poor mothers could not carry them on
their backs any longer. It was a dreadful summer, and
some of the tribe crawled into the shade of their Mia-
mias ready for death. " Give us water,” they cried.
So the wise old men held a meeting. A wicked one,
named Tanjilli, said the babies would be happier if they
were dead, but the women cried so hard to save the
children that none was killed. However, an old woman,
who was known as Wad-na-coorie, asked the mothers to
follow her to a secret place, which she knew, and there
they could hide all the little brown piccaninnies until the
Gunda-warras, or best spearmen, went away to find food
elsewhere.
All one day and a night the women were absent with
their babies, and next morning they straggled back into
the camp, but not one child was with them. Of course,
the men were very curious to know what they had done
with the children, the little brown Birrahlees, who
everybody loved, but the women thought a few wicked
men only wanted to kill the children, so they remained
silent.
Then many of the men got so angry that the women
promised none had been killed, but the fathers would not


believe them, and the next morning the fathers and
mothers quarrelled so much that at last Wad-na-Coorie
said the mothers would go away, and bring back all the
boy Birrahlees. This was agreed to, and the men were
quiet once more.
The old woman led all the mothers back to the hiding-
place, which was a deep hole, closed in entirely by rocks,
but with a clean, sandy floor. Unless one knew the way,
it could not be found, so well was it hidden. Well, after
a frightful journey, the thin, weak mothers gathered
together all the boy babies, and started off back to the camp.
But they, poor starved creatures, now took a long, long
time, and many died on the way, but so careful were they
of the Birrahlees, that not one boy perished. Old
Wad-na-coorie herself died from hunger and thirst, and
all the other women were so sick and weak that none
could tell the men where they had the girl children
hidden.
After one moon, and while the women were still very
ill, the rain came, and Nardoo and Mun-yer-roo sprang
up everywhere in a day or two. There were all kinds of
plants good to eat. The tribe was no longer hungry, and
when the men got strong enough, they, too, went out in
all directions to try to discover the place where the baby
girls were waiting
For many moons the men wandered here and there,
searching for the tracks of the women, but the floods ran
over the land, after the rain went back, and all tracks
had been washed away. There was great grief in the
tribe, and the women cut their heads, smeared themselves
with white pipe-clay and Apirka (charcoal), and wailed
long into the darkness. Of course, other people, too,
dress in black and white when they mourn for some loved
one.
One night, old wizened-up Oolpa, who was the
medicine-man, said that the spirit of Wad-na-coorie had


come in a dream to show him where the babies were
hidden.
The next morning he took three good young girls
named Kal-bar the star, and Bu-ran the wind, and the
third was Ku-ang, or " Mist of the Hills.” They
journeyed out to a strange place of rocks, and one day a
large snake appeared, and Oolpa was about to kill it,
when, to his utter astonishment, the snake spoke to him,
saying: "Do not hurt me, Oolpa, for I am Wad-na-
coorie, looking after the babies who sleep. Follow me! ”
So the three girls climbed over the rocks, and there, in
a rocky basin, once dry and sandy, was a crystal mirror
of water dotted all over with water-lilies. " There are
the babies, my sisters,” said the spirit of Wad-na-coorie,
"and I forever watch over them.”
Kal-bar, the star, lost her brightness; Bu-ran, the wind,
was still, and as Ku-ang, " the mist of the hills,” wept, a
water-lily came up for every tear that fell.


As the “Mist of the Hills” wept, a Water-lily came up with
every Tear.


Chapter Seven
KAN-A-WAY, THE CANOE-MAKER
FOR nearly two years Gor-ree’s people had known
that Boorool (very big) flood was coming down
the river from a far country. Strange to say, the
country did not get swamped with its own rain, but with
the many feet of water that fell in the forest areas in the
far north, hundreds and hundreds of miles away.
Gor-ree had often heard of the time when all the land,
for a great distance round, had been under water, and
many of the tribes-people drowned. The boy was told
that all kinds of lovely flowers burst into bloom, and
food was very plentiful after the floods went away.
Gor-ree thought it must have been a wonderful thing to
see so much water, and so many miles and miles of
flowers. He hoped that some day he would see it all.
Old man Kan-a-way was uneasy.
"The young men of the tribe have never learned to
make floats; even some of the old ones do not know
how,” he said to Gor-ree.
"But Kan-a-way, it was such a long time ago, that
flood! ”
"I know, my son, but the big water will come down
again, and afterwards—there will be mothers without
sons.”
" Is it very easy to shape a float, Kan-a-way? ” Gor-ree
asked the old man, " because if it’s not too hard, I would
like to make one.”
"To-morrow, my son, I will take you on a long
journey, to where the big trees grow. There I will show
you how to cut a canoe from the bark, Gor-ree.”
The next day, the old man stuck his great, stone axe,


Illupa, in his waist-belt, which was made of hair. Then
he borrowed a smaller axe for Gor-ree, to whom he also
gave a very strong, sharp Yutch-a-wunta, or stone knife;
three light hunting spears, and a Kirra, or throwing-
stick.
They had a good breakfast of roast kangaroo-meat,
and after saying " Good-bye ” to the tribe, they set forth
on their long quest.
Day after day they travelled over dry country, where
the only plants were a few needle-bushes and red-mallees,
with a very rare box-tree at long intervals.
"My word, Kan-a-way, not much water,” said little
Gor-ree, as he began to feel very thirsty.
" Do not worry, my son, we will find plenty to drink.”
Late that afternoon, the old man dug away the soil
from the roots of some needle-bushes and mallee. Then
he got Gor-ree to help him pull out the roots, which were
chopped up into short pieces, and put to drain down into
a small dish, or Pitchi. That evening, from what drained
from these roots, they had water enough to satisfy their
thirst.
In this clever way, they found sufficient drink each day
to carry them over two hundred miles of dry, open
country. They caught snakes, and a large one called
Woma was much valued as food. Kan-a-way carried a
forked stick, with which he pinned down the neck of the
snake, while Gor-ree cut off its head with his stone knife.
The meat of the Woma is very white and tender, after
it is cooked by coiling it up on hot stones. Then more
fire is put on top. Sometimes they chased a paddemelon
—a little animal which is one of the wallaby tribe, and
makes a very tasty dish when roasted.
After many camps, Kan-a-way and Gor-ree reached a
fine stream with large, white gum-trees along the banks.
Plenty of fish were easily speared, and lots of animals
were there to provide them with rich food.


54 THE PRINCE OF THE TOTEM
Both rested thoroughly for a few days after their long
journey, and then Kan-a-way began to teach Gor-ree how
to make a bark canoe. First, the old man selected a tree
that had nice, clean, smooth bark, without any twigs or
knot-holes. Then on the tree he marked out a long, oval
shape, and chopped it all round with his stone axe. Next
he got a long stick, with a wide chisel-point at one end,
and showed Gor-ree how to lever off the sheet of bark,
which was over an inch in thickness.
Then they made a fire, and held the inside of the bark
over the heat to soften it. Having got it to bend into
shape quite easily, Kan-a-way tied a strong stick across
the middle to keep it open. Next he closed the ends, and
held them together while Gor-ree bored holes with a sharp
bodkin made from a kangaroo bone. Through the holes
old Kan-a-way sewed the bark together with strong sinews
from the kangaroo.
After all the sewing was finished, the ends were made
watertight with hard gum from the Mindrie plants, and
the canoe was then left to set into its proper shape.
When everything was ready they tried the canoe on the
river, and it floated beautifully. Kan-a-way shewed
Gor-ree how to manage the frail vessel, and they had a
wonderful time gliding up and down the wide waters.
Later on, they worked at building another bark canoe for
Gor-ree, and then the boy was allowed to make one all
by himself. Gor-ree made a very good one indeed.
When it was ready, the old man and the boy went a long
way up the river, in the little craft, and they were having
a glorious time exploring the new country.
Suddenly great shouts of "Wah! Wah! ” sounded
from both banks, and immediately hundreds of strange,
brown men appeared, threatening Kan-a-way and Gor-ree
with sticks and clubs. The old man tried to talk with
them, and to explain that he meant no harm, and would
like to be friends, and teach them also how to make
canoes.


But the angry warriors shouted back that Kan-a-way
had cut the bark from a sacred tree, where Moora, their
Good Spirit, lived, and they would not be satisfied until
they had killed him for doing this. All these threats of
death made the old man paddle faster than ever.
" It’s all right, Gor-ree, so long as the river does not
get narrow. So long as it keeps broad and strong we are
safe.”
But Kan-a-way did not know that, a mile or two lower
down, the stream surged through two long, narrow, rocky
walls, where spears could reach them easily, even if the
troubled waters did not drown both.
On they swept into the gathering darkness, with
hundreds of the angry tribe running along the banks on
each side, brandishing their fighting spears, and only
waiting for the narrows when they would be able to cast
their weapons with deadly aim at poor old Kan-a-way and
young Gor-ree.
Presently, they saw that the river was drawing in, and
that huge fires were being lighted all along the narrow,
but high, rocky banks through which the waters raged.
The river was growing stronger and stronger. "It is the
Boorool waters coming down; the floods, Gor-ree,” said
the old man, as he fought hard to keep control of the
bark canoe.
Presently they were dashed into a cauldron of swirling
water between narrow banks. A great shower of spears
fell around them, but Gor-ree turned the dangerous ones
with a stick.
" Well done, my son,” said old Kan-a-way. But he
had hardly finished speaking when a spear passed right
through his body and he fell back into the stream.
"Tutta Tharta, Gor-ree! ” brave old Kan-a-way said as
he disappeared. These were his last words, " Good luck,
Cousin! ”
Poor little Gor-ree, alone, on the crest of a flood,


pursued by a horde of savage men, and sweeping on to
a strange place in the darkness.
Another shower of spears sailed through the air, and
one passed through the calf of his leg. Gor-ree fell flat
down in the canoe, which, just at that moment, was swept
out into a wide expanse of flood, and beyond the reach of
the weapons of the enemy.
“Good Luck, Cousin!” were Kan-a-way’s last Words as he went
overboard with a Spear in his Chest.
All through the night Gor-ree in the canoe was swirled
on —and on. When daylight came he opened his eyes,
and became aware of the spear through his leg. Breathing
deeply through his nose, and clenching his teeth, he took
his sharp, stone knife and cut his leg deeply, so that he
got the spear out. Overcome with weakness then, he
closed his eyes and just floated on —and on —wherever the
flood carried him.


Long days and longer nights, and of food he had none.
The wound in his leg was fearfully sore, and he had lost
a lot of blood, but little brown boys have plenty of
courage; they do not give up easily.
At last weakness overcame him, and he knew no more.
Lying still in his frail canoe, he was carried away at the
will of the waters. How long he lay there who knows?
Coming to his senses at last, he heard shouting. Gor-ree
thought he could distinguish the deep voice of Dhom-ba,
old Red-gum, and the high treble notes of a girl of the
tribe named Pintie Pintie.
He opened his eyes, and to his great surprise he saw
Ku-ran-dur, and the slender girls Yul-lo and Bu-ran, and
the sweet singer of songs, Ku-ang.
Many more of his people were there, safe and sound,
in spite of the floods, but kind-hearted Min-ka (the Box-
tree) and some others had been drowned.
Of course, the tribe soon treated his wounded leg, and
gave him food and drink to make him strong again.
What a story he had to tell!
Then he taught all his tribe how to make canoes, so that
none would be drowned when the next great flood covered
the land.
Ku-ang, the singer, made a new song, and if you go
into Gor-ree’s country to-day you will hear the little brown
boys and girls singing:
Kan-a-way and Gor-ree away go.
Big water come down, come down.
Canoe float all the spears through.
Kan-a-way change into canoe.
Float it! Float it! down it float!
Gor-ree bring canoe Num-er-roo.


Chapter Eight
HOW WANMIRRI PUT THE STARS IN THE
SKY
GOR-REE had asked Win-kirn to tell him a story.
"Wanmirri was only a little fellow,” said the old
man, " but he was not at all like the other boys of
his tribe, for he would sit almost every night, looking up
into the dreadful blackness overhead.” There were not
any stars in the sky when Wanmirri was a child.
"It all happened so very long ago,” Win-kirri said,
" most people have forgotten the really true story of how
the stars got into the sky.” In any case, Win-kirri would
tell it to Gor-ree just as his father had told it to him.
The Australian Aborigines are very good story-tellers,
but they do not have any books in which to write them
down, so grandfather tells father, who then tells his sons,
and so the story goes on, year after year. Although it is
not printed on any paper, yet it is written clearly in the
brown man’s brain.
But let Win-kirri tell his story.
" Wanmirri’s mother told him never to run about after
darkness came on, because all sorts of cruel and Cug-gil
(ugly) things were hiding behind stones and bushes, ready
to grab any little Birri who might wander beyond the light
of the campfires, so Wanmirri would lie awake, gazing up
into the pitch-black sky, wondering why no lights were
there. Sometimes he would hear fearsome noises, and then
he would ask his mother who it was making the strange
sounds. His mother would reply: " The nasty
Wongupana, waiting to kill little boys who will not do
as mother tells them.”
" No fella cares to go about after dark, Gor-ree. No,


not even the oldest of them like Oolpa, Darral and
Dhom-ba.”
Wanmirri kept thinking over what his mother had
said, but he was not quite satisfied. So far as he could
make out, the horrible Wongupana was waiting for only
bad children. He did not tell anybody what he thought,
but he made up his mind to be a very good boy, and then,
of course, should he be out in the dark, he need have no
fear.
All through the day he would be thinking of what he
could do to be good. One morning, the old men of his
tribe sent all the young boys out into the forest with
orders to stay there for two days and one night. They
were not to eat or drink anything at all, until they
returned to their Mia-mias.
Well, during the night that all the boys were in the
forest, and after they had all snuggled down close to
each other for warmth and sleep, a dreadful storm woke
them up, and thunder sounded all around. They were
terribly frightened. "It’s the Wongupana,” they
whispered, and huddled closed than ever, in a circle, with
all their heads touching in the centre, and none daring to
look around.
When the noise grew louder, they shivered, and clung
still tighter together. But a lone one did not fear, like
the others; he was young Wanmirri, and he stood up,
looking out into the blackness. Presently he walked
right out into an open space, where the noise seemed
loudest.
"I am Wanmirri,” he cried, and every time he called
out his name the noise got louder and louder, until at
last a big, round ball of fire came out of the blackness
of the heavens.
When he called out for the third time, the fire-ball
opened, and behold! there was a glowing, red man
standing in front of Wanmirri, talking to him.


" I am Wonmanmirri, and you are my brother,” he
said, putting out his hands, and touching the wrists of
the boy. Wanmirri felt funny things running about in
him as the fire-man told him many mysterious things.
" Because you are not afraid, my little brother, I will tell
you how to put stars in the sky to light the night.”
" The next morning, as soon as the first pale light
showed in the East, all the frightened Birris opened their
eyes and looked about.”
" Where is Wanmirri?”
They were very frightened indeed, for everyone knew
what an Ullawaranna was awaiting him on the return home.
Some said Wongupana had got Wanmirri, but none knew
what had really happened, because they had been too
frightened to open their eyes. So they started off to reach
the Mia-mias, feeling very hungry, and also very sad and
and much frightened.”
When they had walked about a mile they gave a great
" Wah! ” for, lying on the ground, stretched out full
length, on his back, was Wanmirri. They called out his
name, and ran over to him as quickly as could be.
Wanmirri was fast asleep. They could not tap him
gently on the chest, because it is very dangerous to touch
a sleeping person. Presently he opened his eyes, but he
looked so different from their laughing playmate that
they all drew back, forming a circle around him. They
then noticed that every bush, and piece of stick, and even
the grass itself, was all burnt in a big, black ring around
them. Of course, this made them more scared, and when
they asked Wanmirri what it meant, he answered slowly:
" I have seen Wonmanmirri, the fire-man, who is my
brother.”
But the boy had changed; his big, soft eyes seemed to
be looking far away. So none of the children spoke any
more, and just walked slowly, in a quiet ring, with
Wanmirri in the centre.


Of course, as soon as the men saw the piccaninnies
walking in this peculiar way they ran forward, with lots
of questions, but the only answer they got was:
" Wanmirri has seen the fire-maker, his brother.” So
they led him before the old men of his tribe to tell his
story, which, of course, was a very long one.
When he had finished, the old men spoke to all the
tribe.
" Our fire-brother knows how to light the blackness,
and with his magic he will put lights in the sky to guide
our feet. What do you want, Wanmirri? ”
" I must find as many men as that,” he held up three
fingers, " and who talk without lies on their tongues, who
are not greedy, and who are unafraid to go with me.”
Twenty young men at once stepped forward.
"We will go with Wanmirri,” they all said together.
But old Duli-bah (bald) waved one away. "Did you not
take two big pieces of kangaroo meat when all others had
only one, you greedy fella.” Then two others were told
to stand back because they had stolen a spear, and two
more were sent away because they once ran away and left
a wounded brother behind, after a fight. But at last
Wanmirri got his three good men. Taking their stone
knives and axes, they departed on a long journey to find
a certain kind of tree on which grew large beans with
crimson seeds.
The men were away for a long time, many nights and
days, but when they returned, they had painted on their
chests a curious pattern; it looked something like circles
inside circles. Each man had two of these painted on his
chest, one on each side. They also had long, curious
sticks, shaped somewhat like boomerangs, and these also
had the funny pattern painted on in white and red clay.
Throughout the morning the long boomerangs were
stuck in the ground, and the women danced in front of
them, but during the afternoon, the weapons were all


They danced round Wan-mirri’s Men with Flaming Torches;
Strange Lights were in the Sky.


tied together with string made from the hair of six
women. They were then placed in a bough Wurley, and
all the men of the tribe danced round outside, crying
" Wah! Wah! ”
When darkness fell, the women and children were
marked with yellow, and ordered to stand in a long line.
All the men of the tribe were to kneel down, in a shallow
trench, with their eyes shut. While they were doing this,
Wanmirri’s men got their long boomerangs out of the
Wurley, and lighted one end from Wanmirri’s fire.
They stood in a line for a minute, then Wanmirri
shouted, " Kirri! ” and they threw their lighted boomerangs
over the heads of the women and children, who screamed
out in fear. But none was hurt, and they watched the
lighted boomerangs of Wanmirri circling up, and up far
into the sky. Then a loud " Bang! ” was heard, and a
great ball of fire swallowed Wanmirri and his men, and
they were never seen again. But up in the sky, the
lighted boomerangs are still going round and round in
big circles, and that’s why the stars never stop in one
place.”
When Win-kirri had finished, Gor-ree looked at the
old man and said: "You very clever, Winkirri! Do
Darral and Dirra-bang know who put the stars in the
sky? ”
" All men know,” replied the old man. " Our fathers
tell us, we tell you to make you much wise. All the men
tell you much. Dhom-ba to fight; Ku-ran-dur to fish;”
Win-kirri dropped his voice to a whisper, "and Tanjilli
to point the bone.”
" I would rather fight with the spear,” said Gor-ree.


Chapter Nine
GUN-DOO-EE, THE EMU IN THE SKY
ALL the brown Birris of the camp were enjoying a
game.
Gor-ree, Nim-may-lee, Tucki, Weedah, Mirri, and
a lot of other little brown children were playing what is
called Wha-goo, which is the Aborigines’ name for
"Hide and Seek.” They play it exactly like other
children do; that is, one child covers up, or shuts its
eyes until the rest have hidden themselves; it then has
to find one of the others.
They were having great fun; some climbed up the
Mulga or wattle-trees, others hid themselves in the Wurley,
which is a shade-hut made of branches of trees;
many ran into their mother’s Mia-mia, and little Gor-ree
jumped into the big water-hole, and held a piece of bark
over his head so that he would be entirely hidden.
Every now and then a shrill little voice would call out
" By-jer! ” which meant that a small boy or girl was very
surprised at being found in such a good place.
Then it came to the turn of a big boy, named
Gun-doo-ee, or Emu, to hunt for the others, so he ran all
over the place calling out:
" Nur-ra-gah! Nur-ra-gah! Oonah-noo! ”
which really means
" Come out and let me find you! ”
But none of the little brown children moved in their
" hidies.”
Poor Gor-ree, standing in cold water up to his neck,
began to get shivery, but he was too hardy to give
himself up simply because of feeling chilly.
But the Emu boy could not find anyone. He searched


• -
everywhere. His calls seemed to grow fainter and
fainter; they died away —at last Gor-ree could not hear
them any more.
Gor-ree laughed, although he felt miserably cold,
" Gun-doo-ee Wi Wi (clever), I think,” he said to
himself, but he really meant this: " The Emu is very
clever not to cry out; he thinks Gor-ree gets so cold that
he will come up out of the water and get caught.
Gor-ree stop here.”
Gun-doo-ee had plenty of Brothers and Sisters.
But it was getting near sun-sit-down, and little
Gor-ree began to feel that something must have gone
wrong with the game. He listened, and afar off he could
hear a great Ullawarranna. All his people were calling
out: " Wurra-will-ber-roo! Wurra-will-ber-roo.” Now
this means —A whirlwind debil-debil has taken poor
Gun-doo-ee.
As soon as Gor-ree heard that awful cry he splashed
out of the water as fast as his cramped cold legs would


let him. He hobbled up the bank, and then, as his blood
began to circulate better, he ran off in the direction of
the camp.
He could see Thun-dung, and Nambur and Yul-10,
Ku-ang and Ku-ran-dur all talking together excitedly.
As soon as they saw him they shouted out: " Here is
Gor-ree! Here is Gor-ree! ”
The boy answered: " I am all right, my brothers, but
where is the Emu, Gun-doo-ee? ”
Then old Dhom-ba, the Red-gum, stepped out of the
crowd, and waved with his hands for the people to form
a circle about him. Then he spoke: " A great magic
has come among the people, and Oolpa, the wise man of
this tribe, knows what has happened. He will speak.”
The old medicine-man walked slowly to the centre of
the people. He swept his two arms round in a circle,
and instantly all the women caught hold of their children
and took them away, out of sight, into their Mia-mias.
Down by the water-hole an eerie wailing sound seemed
to come from the trees. The men formed themselves into
two lines, and, squatting down on the ground, cast anxious
glances about them.
The sun sat down in his hole where he went to sleep
every night, and the only light came from the many small
fires of the tribe.
Oolpa stood alone.
"My brothers,” he said. " While the Birris and
Ejeejas played, hiding themselves in the Mulga, with
Gun-doo-ee looking for them, a Wurra-will-ber-roo came
down out of the north, and has taken away poor
Gun-doo-ee.”
" While the Emu was searching, he came to the spirit,
or Moora tree, where Dirra-bang had hidden a sacred
stone, or Churinga of the Water-babies, and as soon as
the boy saw the Churinga, debil-debil whirlwind carry him
right away, Up! Up! Up! ” Oolpa pointed his finger


towards the sky. "The boy is not dead, but he will be
swept round and round in the Wurra-will-ber-roo until
Alkira, the sky, fall down.”
Of course, all the men got a dreadful surprise when
they heard what had really happened, and Darral, who
was also one of the wise men, thought all children and
women should know of the great danger of going near
the secret places where the Churinga stones are hidden.
Oolpa agreed that they should learn the real facts so
that they would never suffer like poor Gun-doo-ee. But
they must not know anything at all for three moons, then
they would have a great meeting of the tribes, and Oolpa
would explain everything to them. In the meantime,
every man must keep a still tongue.
Next morning, the tribe was very, very quiet. The
men would not say anything, although the women and
children pressed them with all sorts of questions. The
Emu’s mother cut herself on the head with her yam-stick,
and blood flowed out quite freely. Some of her friends
sat near her, and cut themselves, too, just to show how
really sorry they were that she had lost her son.
The boys and girls felt too frightened to play Wha-goo
any more, for fear the whirl-wind debil-debil might take
them away like poor Gun-doo-ee. They did not venture
far from the camp, and played at ball, one throwing it
high in the air, and the others, all in a circle, crowding
in to catch it, the lucky or clever catcher being the next
one to throw. They had " sides,” too, a catch putting all
one " team ” out. So you see, when other men play at
ball, they are only doing what the Aborigines have been
playing for hundreds of years.
But the children did not leave the camp of Gor-ree for
long, because they might miss some of the events which
made a most wonderful story.
Since none of the women and children knew that old
Oolpa had promised to explain just what had happened


to Gun-doo-ee, they did not expect to hear any more
about it. Moreover, every Aborigine has a great dislike
to talk about dead men, and never does so willingly,
which is a very good rule for all people to remember.
The women gathered Yarm-mara, or grass seed, as usual;
dug up yams, which are called Gib-bon; cooked the meals
for the fathers and children, and looked after the house-
keeping generally.
The Sacred Stones or Churinga that put Gun-doo-ee up in the
Sky. 1. The Honey-bee. 2. Man’s Yam Charm. 3. The Honey-
ant. 4. Water. 5. Sand-rat. 6. Emu. 7. Woman’s Yam Charm.
8. Rain. 9. Bell-birds.
The men went off to hunt Euro, the great red kangaroo
of the plains; ground their axes; chipped out new stone
knives, and no visitor would think that anything unusual
had happened.
Then, when most people had almost forgotten about
Gun-doo-ee, the three moons had passed. It was a cold
clear night in late autumn, though the Aborigines have
a different name for that time of the year.
Oolpa had sent out messages to all the people to come
in to the camp, as he had something important to tell


them. So they were all there, men, women and children;
each little group with its small fire, and all listening
intently.
Then Oolpa walked to the centre of the camp, and
began to speak: " Everyone should know,” he began,
" that the Churinga stones are the writings of the Good
Spirits of the tribe made far back in the days of the
Alcheringa. Women and children cannot look at them
without suffering great harm. When all the Churinga
are gone, our tribe will be no more.
" Now when Gun-doo-ee was searching for his play-
mates, he accidentally happened to find the Churinga of
the Water-babies, and the Wurra-will-ber-roo at once
carried him Up! Up! Up! ” He pointed with his finger
to the starry blue. Gor-ree, too, looked up, and there, in
the sky, he saw a great dark emu.
" Wah! Wah! Wah! ” he cried out in so great
astonishment that all the rest of the tribe looked up, and
saw poor Gun-doo-ee high above their heads, changed into
a huge bird. Even to this day, the dark emu is up in
the sky as a warning to all brown Birris that they must
not pry into the secrets of the elders of the tribe. Up in
the sky poor Gun-doo-ce circles round for ever and ever.


Chapter Ten
THE NET OF KU-RAN-DUR
KU-RAN-DUR was a great favourite with everybody,
including little Gor-ree. Moreover, he was the best
fisherman in the tribe. Ku-ran-dur was not his
proper name, of course, because somehow or other the
Aborigines were very shy, and since they would never let
anyone use their real ones they very soon got nick-names.
Now some of these pet names were very good indeed,
because they suited the persons so well.
Ku-ran-dur was named after the Moreton Bay ash
tree, and since he was such a pleasant, well-built figure,
the name suited him excellently. Then there was
Dhom-ba, christened after the red-gum, because he was
old, and hard-natured, and covered with the scars of
many years.
The girls, too, had pretty pet names. Yul-lo was
slender, and light-hearted, and always had a smile for
everybody, so she was called after the graceful silky oak
trees that grow in the north. Another girl, because she
ran everywhere as swiftly as a young kangaroo, and was
full of untamed energy, was known as Bu-ran, the wind.
But Gor-ree’s favourite playmate was a shy, timid little
girl, Ku-ang, which means " Mist of the Hills.” The
name suited her, because she was a mysterious little thing
who sang wonderful songs which the other brown children
could only dimly understand.
But Gor-ree felt the meaning in the songs of Ku-ang.
They were tales of the famous men of the tribe, who
had lived a long, long time ago, and when she sang, he
felt that someone inside his breast was urging him to be
great man. To grow up strong, so that he could


overcome enemies; to eat only a little, so that hunger, if
it should come, would not make him sick; to speak the
truth, so that all could understand; to be kind of heart
so that the weak ones of the tribe would not suffer when
food was scarce.
So Gor-ree was trying to grow up into a really good
fella. He hoped when he reached manhood he might
be respected as the good and wise one of his tribe. That
is a great honour. However, it was the time of fish, and
all Gor-ree’s tribe had journeyed down to the coast, where
the river emptied into the sea, and where, it seems, a lot
of fish had come into the stream. The Aborigines were
catching some for breakfast every morning, and for
dinner every night. There were ever so many fishermen;
yes, and even the women, too, caught some. The tribes-
people have only two meals, for they do not eat mid-day
lunch as many people do.
As soon as Gor-ree had finished his breakfast, he
would go off, with Ku-ran-dur, a long way down the
river, to where the waters rushed into the sea. There he
would work hard with his teacher, learning to make a
big fish-trap of rocks, placing the stones so that the water
flowed in with the tide. Of course, a great many fish
found themselves trapped in among the rocks. Gor-ree
knew that to be a really good and wise man, he must
learn how to build rock fish-traps, so he worked very hard,
stacking up the stones for Ku-ran-dur.
Of course, while everybody was getting plenty of fish,
no one cared much where Gor-ree went all day. But in
a few days’ time not a fish was to be caught in the river.
The possums, also, had disappeared. Well, one morning,
when Ku-ran-dur and the boy had returned to the camp,
some of the others began to growl.
" Gor-ree’s a good boy,” they said, " and Ku-ran-dur is
great fisherman, but they do not bring any fish back
with them.”


I Eemaweehu
Some of the Tribespeople: Kan-a-way, Ku-ang, Eena-weena,
Yul-10, and Oolpa.


"That’s quite true,” said Nam-bur, who was named after
the tea-tree, " I’ve been catching fish almost every day,
and all Gor-ree does is to eat them.”
Then old Red-gum, Dhom-ba, had his growl. "If
Gor-ree is such a clever boy, why does he not go down to
the river and spear a few fish? Huh,” he grunted,
" Ku-ran-dur, too, is so very clever at building traps that
he hasn’t any time to get a fish for himself, to say nothing
about catching a few for the rest of us.”
Some of the others laughed at old Red-gum, but
Ku-ran-dur was too good-natured to want to fight without
good reason.
" Look here, Dhom-ba,” he said, " the boy Gor-ree and
I will go down to the river, to a place we know, and you
and Nam-bur will go to any other part, and we will get
fish, and you will get none. Nay, more, I, with Gor-ree,
will catch more fish than both of you together.”
Of course, this made old Red-gum more cross-grained
than ever, and he wanted to fight Ku-ran-dur with clubs.
" No,” said Ku-ran-dur, " we want fish, not bad blood.”
To tell Dhom-ba that he had "bad blood” was a
dreadful insult, and he threw his Nulla-nulla, or club, at
the fisherman, but little Gor-ree dashed in, and turned the
club with his shield so cleverly that all the men shouted:
" Kal-ang! Gor-ree, Kalang! ” which means: " Good!
Very good! little cousin.”
So they were soon all laughing again, and ready to
take an interest in the fishing competition. Ku-ran-dur
drew Gor-ree to one side, and whispered something to the
boy, who then ran off as fast as his brown legs could carry
him. He knew where he could find the thoughtful little
girl, Ku-ang, spinning fine thread from the fibre of a
certain plant.
" I want lots of string, Ku-ang! ” he said, so the girl
gave him all she had, and he sped back to Ku-ran-dur.
When the old Dhom-ba saw the fishing line he said,


" Gor-ree had better borrow a lot of magic also.” Old
Red-gum rolled the whites of his eyes.
"We can catch fish without magic,” replied
Ku-ran-dur.
" Yi! Yi! ” shouted old Dhom-ba in mockery. " Perhaps
you have a great power that will make the fish walk into
a dilly-bag.”
But Ku-ran-dur did not care, and he signalled Gor-ree
to follow him. After they had passed out of hearing the
boy asked, " How can we catch fish without spears, and
besides, our trap down by the sea is not yet finished? ”
" Noya! ” replied Ku-ran-dur, " they do not know
anything about fish. Dhom-ba knows more about
growling and fighting.”
" But I don’t want all the people to laugh at us because
we cannot get any fish,” said Gor-ree, with some doubts
in his head.
"We will get plenty fish, Gor-ree,” Ku-ran-dur told
him.
When they reached the stream, the little brown boy felt
quite sure no fish would be caught. " Everybody has
fished here,” he thought.
But instead of casting in a line straight away,
Ku-ran-dur just squatted down on the bank, and began to
talk about fish. "You see, Gor-ree, on a dull day, when
801-la, the lightning, is near, the fish swim about, waiting
for the grubs that Yu-rung, the rain, will soon wash down
into the river, so they will take bait because they are
looking for it. But to-day is very bright, and any fish
that comes out can be seen easily. The fish know, also,
that no rain is likely to wash down grubs to-day, so they
just dose off to sleep under the old logs until sun-lie-
down.”
All the time he had been talking, Ku-ran-dur was
deftly making a bag net with Ku-ang’s string. In a few
minutes it was finished and tied on to two sticks. Then


he stepped down ever so silently and softly on to a log
in the water, and held down the net on the upstream side
of the log.
"Take the axe from my belt, Gor-ree,” he whispered,
" and when I move my big toe, give a great blow on the
log”
So Gor-ree did as he was told; took the great stone
axe out of the hair-belt of Ku-ran-dur, and stood on the
log watching his friend’s big toe. Presently it rose and
fell, and Gor-ree gave a mighty bang with the blade of
the axe. Then he heard a great swishing of the water,
for sure enough, a fine fish, startled out of its sleep, had
made a tremendous dash up stream into the waiting net
of the fisherman.
"My word, Ku-ran-dur, you very clever fisherman, I
think,” said Gor-ree, with great surprise, as they watched
the big fish jumping about in the net.
They tried log after log, and almost every time they
got a fish, and little Gor-ree was soon able to do the trick
quite well.
When the sun was going to lie down they returned to
the camp laden with beautiful food in the shape of fresh
fish.
Of course, all the other brown fellas were very curious
to know how Ku-ran-dur and Gor-ree could catch so
many fish when all the rest got none.
In a little while, old Red-gum came back with
Nam-bur, and they had only one miserable little sprat of
a thing not worth bringing home. Everybody laughed at
their failure, and both got so cross that they wanted to
club each other because Nam-bur blamed Dhom-ba, who,
in his turn, accused Nam-bur of being a numb-skull,
whatever that is.
To prevent any fighting, Ku-ran-dur gave a big fish to
old Red-gum, and Gor-ree gave another to Nam-bur.
Then they gave away others, and at last only one was
left.


* •' ./
Dhom-ba was old, and cross-grained like the Red-gum, but he
was sound inside.


" This will be a good dinner for us, Gor-ree, said
Ku-ran-dur, as he wrapped up the fish in leaves. Then
he covered it all over with a thick cake of mud, before
he put it among the hot stones of the fire to cook.
After a while the thick mud covering was broken open,
and the fish was found to be cooked just right. It tasted
rather like food baked in a casserole.
" Um-m,” said Ku-ran-dur. " It’s good, but to-morrow,
Gor-ree, we will make old Red-gum come to help lift
those heavy stones down at the trap near the sea.
But little Gor-ree had seized his piece, and was bolting
away, as hard as he could run, to Ku-ang, to take back
her Woo-roo-marros, or string nets, and to leave a slice
of fish for her dinner.
" Gor-ree will be a great man for his people,” said old
Dhom-ba, for he has the wisdom of Ka-vai, the bee, and
the gentle heart of Wonagga-laman (the big blue pigeon).
As for me, I am all knots and cross-grain, like my brother
the gum-tree.”


Chapter Eleven
THE FRONT TOOTH OF GOR-REE
ITTLE Gor-ree was lying in his Mia-mia, waiting
for the day to break. As soon as the sky began to
glow with pinky colour, he would jump up, and
run outside, to see the sun come out of the big hole into
which, he thought, it dropped to sleep every night.
Of course, the other boys (who are called Birris) soon
appeared, and after all had eaten some cake made from
grass-seed, Darral, the wise old man of the tribe, sent a
message to all the Birris to hear what he had to tell them.
So they walked over to Darral, and sat down, just like
him, with their legs tucked in under them. Other boys
and girls cannot sit down on their heels like aboriginal
children do. Every Birri squatted down quite easily, and
listened attentively, for they thought they were going to
hear an interesting tale, and all Aborigines love a good
story.
But this morning old Darral did not have a tale to tell.
What he did say was somewhat like this:
" Now little boys, it is about time you learned
something more than playing about. Each of you must
leam how to become a fine, big Gunda-warra.” That is
the brown man’s name for a spear-thrower.
" I will catch a big grub! ” said little Dundar.
" I will snare a crane! ” Durkan cried.
" And I will kill a great grey kangaroo! ” boasted a
tiny brown Birri named Koorooma.
You see, each child bore the nick-name of the animal
he desired to chase.
Of course, all the others laughed out loudly at little
Koorooma trying to capture a great, strong kangaroo!


No Aborigine likes to be laughed at, and Koorooma
jumped to his feet. " I real big man-fella! ”he said
proudly. Then he saw his cousin.
" Here you, Gor-ree, what will you hunt and kill? A
Guna-gunar, I suppose. Mind he don’t bite, brave fella.”
This made the boys laugh more than ever, because
" Guna-gunar ” is the native name for the timid white
butterfly, and Gor-ree was the tallest boy in the tribe.
The happy sounds brought out all the Ejeejas, or younger
sisters, who also wanted to join in the fun.
Little Koorooma, the big kangaroo hunter, wanted to
" shoo ” all the girls away.
" This is only for big men ” he told them.
Now old Darral thought it time to say a word or two.
" Here, Koorooma, you’re not a man, yet, and you boast
too much. When the time comes to have your front tooth
knocked out I don’t think you will be so brave.”
Aborigines knock out the front tooth to teach children
to bear pain without complaining or moaning.
"Yes, Koorooma, the boaster, will make a great
squawk when his tooth comes out,” laughed Gor-ree.
"He is only a Birrahlee, buzzing about like a
Kurrumburra.”
Little Koorooma was now extremely angry, because the
Thooras, or older girls, too, had joined in the laugh
when Gor-ree had likened Koorooma to a baby crying out
like a blow-fly.
"If the tall Gor-ree is so brave, why does he still have
all his teeth? Yi, Yi, Gor-ree, too, is frightened of the
tooth-stone.” Koorooma’s big, black eyes were blazing
with anger.
Gor-ree did not answer, but rising to his feet, scooped
out with his hands a shallow hole in the sand to fit his
figure.
" Bring out the tooth-stone, Darral,” Gor-ree invited
the old man. Some of the little girls at once ran to tell


Mummie that Gor-ree’s front tooth was going to be
knocked out. Then they skipped back again as fast as
possible so that they should not miss any of the
excitement.
By this time, Thundung, who was Gor-ree’s tribal
brother, came along, and when he saw what was
happening, went over to help Darral with the dentistry.
“Are there any more Teeth to come out,” asked Darral, “While
I am in the Mood?”
After Gor-ree had fitted himself comfortably into his
sandy bed, Thundung took a chisel-shaped piece of wood,
and pressed down the gum from around the boy’s front
tooth. Having done this, he stood to one side to let the
old man perform his part. Darral then took a blunt
piece of hard wood and pressed it on to Gor-ree’s front
tooth. He gave the stick a light knock with a stone, and
then quickly struck a hard blow which sent the tooth
flying out over the sand.
Gor-ree did not utter a sound. He stood up, and one


of the older girls plugged up the hole, where his front
tooth had been, with crushed gum-leaf and clay to stop
the bleeding. When they were attending to Gor-ree, old
Darral asked if any others wanted their teeth knocked
out, while he felt in such a good mood for doing it. He
looked specially for Koorooma, but in the general
excitement the little fella had sneaked off, as hard as his
thin, brown legs could carry him. All they could see of
him now was a pair of flying feet, kicking up the sand
as he ran to hide in some distant scrub.
How they all laughed at the little braggart’s rapid
disappearance. Some of the boys wanted to chase
Koorooma to bring him back, and take out his tooth by
force.
"Let him be!” said the old Darral, "the blackness of
night will soon come to frighten him. He is only a
Birrahlee. He will be brave enough when he has eaten
more wallaby, and seen more moons. But a coward heart
must not talk, children. Koorooma, and all of you, must
try to be brave. Press your lips tightly together; open your
nose wide; draw in deep breaths of air; stamp one foot, and
then the other, hard, into the sand; grasp your shield and
spear with all your strength, and soon fear will be no
more.”
Just then, Jeeda, a little girl named after the blue
wren, because she was so bright and happy, spoke up:
"Darral, I will have my front tooth knocked out, but I
very frightened; cry out; make Ullawaranna.”
So Jeeda, the little Blue Wren, lay down in a shallow
hole and stretched out her arms full length.
"I afraid,” she said, "and I have no spear to clutch to
give me strong heart; make me Wallan!” (She meant to
make her strong.)
But Darral walked away, and called all the boys after
him. "It’s not good to see the little Blue Wren tremble,”
he said. Thundung, Gor-ree’s brother, called out to the


boys to wait for him, and he, too, went away, leaving poor,
trembling Jeeda lying on the ground.
Presently, a tiny dark figure crept out of the shade of
seme bushes that grew nearby. It was little Koorooma,
out of breath, panting, his large black eyes bright as a
bird’s. In his hands he held two small, rough spears which
he had made quickly in the bush.
Walking over to Jeeda, he said: "Close your eyes and
open your hands.” The girl did as she was told, and
Koorooma put a spear in each of her palms. "These are
to make you Wallan,” he told her.
Just then, two lubras came up, and they did to the little
girl what the man had done to Gor-ree. First, they pressed
down the gums with a sharpened stick, then a front tooth
was knocked out with the help of a blunt stick and stone.
Jeeda held on to the spears with a desperate grip.
"Ah-r-r-r,” she moaned; just a tiny little sound as the
tooth flew away.
Koorooma, looking on, heard the low cry of the girl, and
felt himself grow creepy all over. He was going to run
away again, but then he thought of how Darral had told
him to overcome fear. He closed his mouth tightly;
breathed slowly and deeply, and stamped over to where
Gor-ree had stretched out; then he, too, lay down, and
Jeeda placed a spear in each of his outstretched hands.
"Hold them tightly, little hunter,” she said.
Even while she was saying this, and while he was trying
to be brave, he felt something pressing on his gums.
"Bump!” The tooth was out before he had any time to
make Ullawaranna, which means a big outcry.
The women plugged up the holes in his and Jeeda’s
gums, and soon they were running about as though nothing
had happened. They played about all day, until it was
time for the sun to lie down in the big hole where he slept
each night.
Then the men returned from their hunting, and old


Darral brought the boys back into camp. As soon as they
saw little Korooma they ran forward, and formed a noisy
circle, with Jeeda and Koorooma in the centre. The boys
bared their teeth and tapped their teeth with forefingers.
" Poo-roo-na! ” they all sang in chorus. " Poo-roo-na! ”
which is Aboriginal for " Coward! Coward! ”
Suddenly they stopped, staring with astonishment, for
Jeeda and Koorooma had opened their mouths, and the
boys were looking at a pair of black spaces. The front
teeth were gone!
Koorooma and Jeeda burst into long, loud laughter, and
the big boys, seeing how the joke had been turned against
them, crept away out of sight feeling much smaller indeed
than little Koorooma.


Chapter Twelve
THE STONE CLAW OF IR-RIT-JA
OLD man Dhom-ba, Nam-bur, who was named after
the tea-tree, Kur-ran-dur, and Ir-rit-ja, who bore
the name of the eagle-hawk, were all sitting under
the shade of a big Mulga tree.
Dhom-ba was growling as usual. " It’s no use going out
to hunt the Euro,” he said, " without good Warrigals to
bring him down. I am getting too old to chase swiftly
all the time.”
"But I will do the running,” answered Ku-ran-dur, who
was lithe and thin and strong.”
"No!” grumbled Dhom-ba, "you stick to your fishing,
Ku-ran-dur, and leave the Euro to hunters who know how
to spear him.”
"I can run faster than Ir-rit-ja, the eagle-hawk,” Nam-bur
joined in eagerly. He, too, wanted to go hunting the big
red kangaroo, but knew that old Red-gum would have to
agree.
" Yi, Yi,” replied the cross-grained old Aborigine. " You
are thin enough to break off when the wind blows, being
a weak kind of plant.”
It was plain enough to all that Dhom-ba was in a very
bad mood, and there would be no hunting kangaroo that
day, so the four men just sat in the shade, with nothing to
do, and soon they, too, got cross-grained, and said insulting
things to each other. Usually, they were very happy, and
the best of friends, but they wanted to go hunting, and old
Dhom-ba was full of complaints, and sour; he simply
refused to go, which was very annoying, to say the least of
it.
Ir-rit-ja was a very fierce man, and for that reason he
got his name of "Eagle-hawk.” "You are all afraid of


Euro’s hind leg,” he sneered. "When the big toe kicks,
Nam-bur will be afar off.” The eagle-hawk looked down
at an ugly seam on his left leg, which reached from
the hip right down to the knee. It was the scar of a cruel
cut made by an "old man Euro.” Had the kangaroo
ripped him on the stomach, Ir-rit-ja would have been killed
outright.
"Poo-roo-na!” he burst out savagely, "Poo-roo-na!
Dhom-ba; Ku-ran-dur; Nam-bur; All Poo-roon-na!” He
rose to his feet, and was about to walk away. He had
called the three of them: "Cowards! Cowards!” Before
the fierce Eagle-hawk had gone many steps, Nam-bur had
With a swift Stroke Nam-bur slashed the other Leg of the Hawk.
jumped up. "A twig from the tea-tree makes a good stick
to beat the. crow,” he muttered, as he brought his Nulla-
Nulla down on Ir-rit-ja’s black head with a tremendous
thud.


"Kalang! Nam-bur, Kalang!” shouted Ku-ran-dur;
which praise, of course, means "Excellent work; give him
some more.”
Old Dhom-ba just sat still and looked on. "Let them
fight!” he mumbled. "A little drop of blood is good for
eagle-hawks, though it makes the white flowers of the tea-
tree blush red.” The remark shows how obstinate old Red-
gum still felt in his heart.
When Ir-rit-ja received the violent blow on his head, he
got dreadfully savage, and drew out his sharp Yutch-a-
wunta, or stone knife. It had a slight curve, and a handle
of hard resin. A fearful weapon when held between the
fingers, with the handle in the palm of the hand, and the
tip pointing down. The Eagle-hawk, bending his knees,
leaned forward and thrust out his hand holding the knife.
He waited for the attack. "The stone claw of the Hawk,”
said old Dhom-ba, "bites deeply.”
As soon as Nam-bur saw the knife, he dropped his Nulla-
Nulla, grasped his own stone blade, and fell into the same
position as Ir-rit-ja, ready for fight.
Both Ku-ran-dur and Dhom-ba knew that the men were
on guard, and one or both of the fighters might get badly
wounded, perhaps killed, but none could interfere until
some blood had flowed, because that is the law of the
Aborigine. So these two sat there, watching, to see that
both men got fair play. The fighters must not stab, with
a dagger blow; they must cut, as with a sword.
Nam-bur and Ir-rit-ja were backing and advancing,
striking and missing—it was dreadfully exciting when,
suddenly, Nam-bur made a swift movement, and blood was
streaming from a deep gash on the right thigh of the Eagle-
hawk.
"Stop!” shouted Ku-ran-dur, as soon as he saw the blood.
He seized his spear and stood close to the fighters, waiting
to see if either one would attempt a further blow, or
perhaps a foul, or unfair one. You should know that


that the Aborigines are very fair in all their fighting, and
though they were firm friends, yet Ku-ran-dur would have
instantly speared the one that did not play the game
according to their rules. Do not think that the Aborigines
are all very cruel-hearted because of this fight, for other
much more highly cultured men often quarrel, and shoot
with a gun, and sometimes do not fight fair; one stabs
with a knife, while the other uses only his fists. Aborigines
are exceedingly sporting in their fighting.
However, neither Nam-bur nor Ir-rit-ja had any thought
of further war. Indeed, when old Dhom-ba told the
Eagle-hawk that he could fly better, now that both legs were
cut equally, the wounded man actually laughed heartily
at Red-gum’s joke. They all joined in the fun, for the
native man’s anger soon evaporates.
On an instant, they all stopped talking. The smiles died
away on their faces. Astonishment was in four pairs of
big, black eyes.
Then Dhom-ba found his voice. "How long you stand
there, Birri?” he asked sternly.
Sure enough, little Gor-ree had watched the fighting, and
the men had not noticed him because he was taking it all
in very quietly indeed, and not making any comment. His
silence showed his wisdom.
"I saw my brave brothers fight like this.” The boy held
a flat piece of wood between his fingers, and danced round
at them just like the two men had done. "I must learn
how to fight with Yutch-a-wunta,” he laughed. They all
enjoyed the boy’s antics, and they were very good friends
once more; none harbouring any ill-will. Ku-ran-dur
allowed himself to be killed outright by a blow from
Gor-ree.
Presently, little Gor-ree stopped, looked at the big cut
in the Eagle-hawk’s thigh, and dashed off as fast as his
thin legs could carry him, but he was soon back again with
ashes, and gum-leaves, and string to tic up the wounded


limb. "Soon make it better, Ir-rit-ja!” he said, and bound
up the big cut really well.
"Kalang! Gor-ree, Kalang!” commended the Eagle-hawk.
When the fight was over, old cross-grained Dhom-ba
actually wanted to go hunting. Of course, everyone agreed
immediately, for they soon forgot all about the fighting
and bad temper; the Aborigines are like that.
"Can I bring my puppy, Warrigal, to chase the Euro?”
asked Gor-ree. You see, the little brown boy had a tame
dingo, and he had trained it to hunt the red kangaroo of
the plains.
"Yi, Yi,” said Dhom-ba, "the puppy is only a plaything
for a Bird.”
"He can run faster than the Euro!” Gor-ree said this
so charmingly that at last Ku-ran-dur gave permission.
"Even my old legs can run faster than the Warrigal,”
barked Dhom-ba. But they all went off hunting, and soon
after came to a clear, grassy place surrounded by Mulga
trees, and right out in the middle were eight Euros feeding
on the sweet grass.
Old Red-gum was disgusted. "How can I get near
enough without any cover,” he grumbled to himself as he
took a big bush to hold in front as a disguise, as he
advanced with his spears towards the animals.
While Dhom-ba was getting his bush to hide behind,
Nam-bur was preparing his boomerangs. Presently he
would send one after another sailing across the sky in
great circles, and while the curious animals watched them
Dhom-ba would get close enough to throw his spear. That
is the true use of the returning boomerang.
Gor-ree watched all the hunters, then he said softly,
"Ku-ran-dur, tell Dhom-ba to come back. I will take
Warrigal round in the scrub, then tell him to go, and he
will chase the Euro back to you.”
Before the men could stop him, Gor-ree and his young
dingo were away like the wind. The men rested in the


\ i : v I i fMr
J - wW *v'>' '*s VJ'' it! V'lf
te / »J ' \ilhi" ,T* J\ ft iJss**
-^/fMh . vv .4""™ S3
•tr ' iirjli'..\;., l%l
v - x c rlir' f?
scrub. After a while, they saw Warrigal bound out over
the grass, separate a big kangaroo from the others, and
drive it towards them.
They were all alert, with spears raised. Suddenly the
beast fled by, and four spears flashed together through the
air. Down went the big red Euro, kicking savagely with
his great powerful hind legs. Nam-bur was the first to
The Euros scented the approach of the Warrigal.
reach it, and saw the wounded Eagle-hawk’s spear that had
struck the Euro down. 'Tr-rit-ja is a fine hunter,” said
Nam-bur, for he cherished no bad wishes.
"I told you the hawk goes better when both legs are
cut!” said old Red-gum.”
"Oh, o-o-o-o-!” howled the young dingo who got no praise
at all.
Gor-ree patted the Warrigal on the nose. "I think you
are the best hunter,” he whispered softly, so that Dhom-ba
should not overhear.


Chapter Thirteen
TUL-KARA’S LAUGHING BOYS
IITTLE Yul-Io was continually following her mother
j about, asking all sorts of questions, and making
herself very troublesome.
" How come, Mummie,” she asked, with the persistent
curiosity of little girls, " that Gor-ree laugh all day; no
get tired; no cry like Yul-lo? Dhom-ba no like Yul-lo:
say she too much Yabba, like Jibben, the parrot.
"Ssh, little one, Ejeejas must not try to be boys;
besides, Dhom-ba is a cross-grained old stick, but he has
sound wood inside. Yul-lo think too much of Gor-ree;
Oolpa, Nam-bur, Dirra-bang—everybody think much of
Gor-ree. Some day he grow into a very wise man, I
think.”
Yul-lo was a sweet-natured Ejeeja, with a sunny heart
which, she said, went all shivery, like grass-seed in the
wind, when she listened to the songs of Ku-ang, who was
also called " Mist of the Hills,” which is a very pretty
name. Yul-lo did not perceive the great wisdom in the
well-built Gor-ree, because she was far too young to peer
into the hearts of other people. But she did really like
the laughing, good-natured Gor-ree.
" He is much wise in his head, Mummie, but I like him
to laugh best,” Yul-lo answered her mother.
" I think my little girlie had better gather Mun-yer-roo
for the cakes, and think not so much of Gor-ree. Come
here, my Birrahlee!”
Yul-lo’s mother was named Ba-lum-bir, the butterfly,
because she was so lovely, flitting here and there lightly
as she did her work. She bent over, and talked to Yul-lo
in a low voice. " Gor-ree is fine boy, and he laughs much


because Moora, a good spirit, passed by the place where
Gor-ree was born. Oh, yes, all the bad things in Gor-ree
passed out into a strange Wild-cat, when Moora touched
the boy’s head, that is why he is brave, and good to look
on, and makes all others happy when he smiles. When
the men are by themselves, they call Gor-ree the
* Laughing Boy.’ Some day you ask Darral to tell you
the story of Gor-ree.”
Jibben, the Parrot, All-time Yabber-yabber.
"You tell me now, Mummie! ” pleaded Yul-10, who
was full of interest.
" No, my Ejeeja, only Darral, the old story-man, knows
the real tale of the Laughing Boy, and he can speak only
when Gor-ree is not about. If Gor-ree hears, then the
Moora would come right back, and change him. Gor-ree
would forget how to laugh altogether; his head swell up,
big-fella, like that! ” Yul-lo’s mother made a large circle
with her hands. "His blood would go black, and he would
get cross-grained to look at, like Dhom-ba, old Red-
gum.”


All these curses seemed so utterly dreadful to Yul-lo
that she did not wait to hear of any other frightful things
that might happen to her light-hearted cousin, so she
hurried off to gather the Mun-yer-roo seeds for her mother
to grind into flour for cakes. But she could not altogether
forget the extraordinary story of the " Laughing Boy.”
Many moons passed
One morning, Yul-lo walked past that very clever
tribesman, Boor-reen, who was grinding a big stone axe
on a flat, smooth piece of rock. Everybody liked this old
man because he had a gentle heart, and was so good at
making axes, and knives, and dishes to carry water, and
all sorts of useful things.
" The young Silky Oak sapling grows pleasant and
straight,” Boor-reen greeted Yul-lo as she passed. This
pleased the little brown girl because she was named after
that graceful tree. But that evening, just before sun-lie-
down, she passed that way again, and Boor-reen was still
grinding his axe. The handle was not yet fitted, and the
tool-maker held the head in his two hands, grinding it
backward and forward with a slow regular action as he
squatted at his work.
"How so hard, Boor-reen?” asked the girl when she
paused. " I want a wonderful axe, little Silky Oak, for
when another moon sits down, Gor-ree is coming away
with me on a long, long journey.”
" What place go? ”
"We walk many moons away,” he answered slowly,
" where grows the White-gum by big waters.”
The girl turned away, with the soft, regular grinding
still echoing in her ears.
"Tutta tharta, Boor-reen,” Yul-lo called back, for
those are her words for saying: "Good luck! Boor-reen!”
The old man did not cease his grinding, but he let his
head fall forward in a gentle way that Yul-lo knew meant
" Good-night, little one .”


All the Ejeejas, or young girls, knew that something
unusual was about to happen, though the men did not
tell them any news. At last the time came when
Boor-reen and Gor-ree slipped the stone axes into the
Goomilla or belts of hair, and started off on a long journey
into a far land, where there was much danger. At first,
Yul-lo ran beside them until they were out of sight of the
camp; then Boor-reen sent her back home.
He pointed to the far horizon: ”No Silky Oak can
grow out there! ” he said quietly, and Yul-lo understood
that she must not go further.
"Tutta tharta! ” she called out to them, and then
turned to run back to the camp. She did not specially
wish to go with them, but she wanted to make quite sure
that Gor-ree was really far enough away in case Darral
should tell the story of the Laughing Boy. She did not
want any harm to befall her cousin.
But she had no need to be anxious, for many moons
were to pass before Darral told his tale.
One evening, when everything was still, and the
Birrahlees did not quite know what to do before going to
sleep, Darral said he would tell them the tale of the
Laughing Boy. It was a native bed-time story.
" Bah-100, the great moon, paint himself all white with
pipe-clay,” the old man began, and every little brown
Birrahlee opened its ears as wide as it could, but kept its
mouth shut tightly, and peered away into the darkness
where Darral had pointed, " and all the people were
resting about their fires, for the night sit-down-close-up,
and make them feel very cold, just like it is now.”
"By and by, a frilled lizard, much big-fella, walk by,
and Wini-thon-guru” who was named after the Wild-cat,
was about to kill it with his Nulla-nulla, but a little girl,
with the quail’s name, Tul-kara, stooped down to pick up
the lizard, who was her brother, because she was lizard
totem. Just then, Wini-thon-guru struck his blow. The
Quail’s hand was broken; her little wrist all screw out.


94 THE PRINCE OF THE TOTEM
" But the Lizard he sit up, and look fierce-fella at the
Wild-cat, and say: ' Snarl all the time, and spit out
anger, which will change into white spots.’ All the
people looked on with much fright inside, and Wini-
thon-guru slowly change into a bad man; he splutter,
splutter all the time, and long hair and a thin tail come
on him quick-time. White spots come on foot, on chest,
on arms, and Wini-thon-guru fall down and run on hands
and feet for many moons. At last he find a big rock,
and sleep all day, but walk about all night, snarling and
wanting to eat sleeping little birds.
" While Wini-thon-guru grow much small into a cat,
the Lizard grow up quick into good-fella. All the people
see him change into big Moora. Then he touched
Tul-kara on the broken hand, which grow all straight
quick-time.
"'Tul-kara much laugh, and grow soon into a fine
woman with a bird’s light heart,’ say the Moora.
"All the people see Tul-kara’s hair get more black.
Tul-kara’s eyes grow much big, all more better, feet,
hands, everything.
"Then Moora talk more: 'I will send Tul-kara
Laughing Boys, and always they will be brave, bearing
much pain, with no cry-out, no making Ullawarrana.’
'"Yet they will be gentle as quail!’ All Tul-kara
boys have a smile so people know that the Moora pass-
by-close-up, and make great men for Tul-kara’s tribe.’
" When the Moora speak no more, sky fall down and
cover him up. People see him no more, but feel much
fright inside when they lie down in the dark.
"After one moon, a much big, fine Gunda-warra, named
Bra-yak, come down from many moons away, and take
Tul-kara to his country. They walk all the time by big
star, into much good hunting; make big tribe; good
hunters; all fine Gunda-warras, wise men with laughing
Birrahlces.”


t - „ . idvcSi
Bye-and-bye, a fine big Gunda-warra come, and take Tul-kara
away.


Darral stood up, and stretched his hands in the
direction where Gor-ree had gone. "Wah!” he cried out
into the night, " Gor-ree, our cousin, is Tul-kara’s
Laughing Boy.”
" Yi! Yi! ” shouted all the tribe as they went away to
sleep, and then little Yul-lo understood why Gor-ree was
such a wonderful boy, and that he could never become her
Gunda-warra because of the tribal laws which prohibited
Emu totem girls having Emu totem boys, for they were
all totemic brothers and sisters. Yul-lo and Gor-ree were
both Emu, though they were in different sections, Gor-ree
being Black Swan, and Yul-lo Beer-won, a kind of
swallow. But she could have Beef wood, Mub-boo,
because he was of the Bandicoot totem. Ku-ang could
have Gor-ree, for she belonged to the Bee-wee, or goanna
totem, in the section Yarra-gerh, or spring wind. Yul-lo
thought Ku-ang was a very lucky girl.
She sighed deeply: " Cannot have! ”


Chapter Fourteen
THE BLACK HAND OF GOR-REE
GOR-REE was watching old man Dirra-bang painting
pictures on the ground.
How do you make white paint, Dirra-bang? ”
he enquired, full of curiosity.
"Does the little cousin want to be a great painter of
pictures? ” the old-fella asked the boy.
"Yes,” answered Gor-ree, "I want to draw big
kangaroo; all to go hop; hop; hop; like this.” The boy
bent his legs at the knees, and then sprang forward,
holding his hands near his chest to imitate the kangie’s
front paws.
"The Koorooma is very hard to paint, Gor-ree, and you
will have to wait until you are old, like me. Then you
may be able to make a picture of him jumping, Hop!
Hop! Hop!”
Dirra-bang dabbed his white paint on the ground; it
seemed in a careless way, but Gor-ree saw at once that
the white marks were made to look like the footprints
left by a leaping kangaroo.
Little Gor-ree thought that was very clever indeed.
" I see, Dirra-bang,” he said laughingly, when you want
a leaping kangaroo in your picture, and it’s too hard to
paint, then you just put in the tracks, which are easy to
do.”
"It is not easy, little one. You must first learn to
measure how far the footsteps are when Koorooma is
feeding: like this.”
The old man put little white dots close together, which
meant that the grey kangaroo had touched the ground
with its front paws, and then he made two long, wide


marks, close together, and near the small ones. These,
of course, showed that the animal had moved slowly
forward, and had rested the lower part of the hind leg
on the ground.
"My word, Dirra-bang, you very clever,” said little
Gor-ree. " How did you learn to do all these things?
You very smart-fella.”
Certainly, the old man liked to hear such praise, so to
show Gor-ree just how clever he really was, he painted a
short narrow white stripe, and a slanting one on each
“What Fella pass this Way, Gor-ree?” asked Dirra-bang.
side; then he repeated the three stripes a little distance
away.
" What pass that way, Gor-ree? ” he asked.
The boy replied at once: " Durkan, the crane, walk
by.” Sure enough, old Dirra-bang had imitated the
exact foot-prints of the bird.
While Dirra-bang was showing how to make the dingo
walk, and run, and jump, little Gor-ree stood at his side,
taking it all in like a young artist at a drawing school.


Snakes, emus, frogs, and turtles were all drawn so that
Gor-ree, too, could leam to make pictures.
When the lesson was over, the boy put his hand on the
white head of old Dirra-bang. " What time, Dalara,
the snow, fall down, and paint hair so white? ” he asked.
" Many moons go by, Gor-ree, since I was a little
brown boy like you. I came here just as you do, to see
old Oolpa make the sacred drawings. We sat in the
shade of Nyora, the native cherry tree, and make much
big talk, much big Pyalla. By and by, Gor-ree, you
grow into fine man, and make sacred paintings of
Byamee, the Big Spirit.”
So these two, old white-haired Dirra-bang, and little
black-haired Gor-ree, were very good friends, and the
teacher was so patient, that it did not seem like going to
school for Gor-ree to learn to draw and paint. Of
course, the old men of the tribe did not let every boy and
girl learn to draw, and paint, the cherished pictures; only
special lads were taken. Those that were chosen had to
be brave, and Gor-ree had proved to have a stout heart,
because, as you know, he did not cry out when he had his
front tooth knocked out.
Then again, the lad selected for training in making
the valued drawings had to be very truthful; he must
never tell " fibs.” If he were greedy, a very big black
mark would be remembered against him. But no one
had ever seen Gor-ree choose a large slice of kangaroo
meat. Indeed, he always took a little piece. When he
went out hunting, and had caught or killed a wild turkey,
he always carried it back to the camp, so that the tender
flesh from the bird’s breast could be given to old
Dirra-bang, his drawing master.
Every day a picture was made in two colours, along
with black and white. The red colour was very precious,
for it had to be carried by men from a far place in
Central Australia. Long journeys had to be taken,


because in Gor-ree’s part of the country there was not any
red, but his tribe had a wonderful supply of hard, greenish
stone that they shaped into axes and spear-heads.
When the supply of red colours ran out, then the long
walk into Central Australia had to be done to get more.
Gor-ree’s people would take their fine, stone axes and
knives to exchange for big balls of red ochre.
The Aborigines could not hold any of their wonderful
plays without the drawings on the ground, because they
were like the scenes in other men’s theatres, and they are
“Durkan, the Crane, Walk-by.”
often dull places without the pretty scenes to hold one’s
interest.
The black for their pictures was not hard to get,
because the Aborigines had only to burn bark, or leaves,
to get good black; the yellow, too, was easy to find, for
they just dug it out of the ground, like clay, though they
do not call it yellow ochre.
But the brown artists used more white than anything
else; perhaps because there is plenty of it, or that it
shows up better on their dark skins when they paint


themselves. When Dirra-bang was teaching Gor-ree
how to make pictures, he would send the boy down to
the bank of the creek, where a big white line ran below
the dark earth. This was the place where the Aborigines
got their supply of white paint.
This pale earth is pipe-clay or kaolin, and they dig it
out, grind all the lumps down smooth, and then use the
paint to whiten the Boor-reens, or shields, weapons, and
even the widows’ hats. But they do not make chinaware out
of it, neither do the women use pipe-clay to whiten their
fire-places, for they do all their cooking in the open air.
When Dirra-bang wanted some more white paint he
just picked up a clean piece of the clay, popped it into
his mouth, and then ground it with his strong teeth until
the paint was all creamy-smooth. He then spat it into a
little bark dish, and thinned the mass down with some
water until it was ready for use.
Of course, when Gor-ree saw how easy it was to make,
he, too, started to chew the clay into paint, just as he
saw Dirra-bang doing. The old man told the boy that
the grinding in the mouth made the paint stick on better,
so that it would not wipe off like powder after it had
dried.
Often when Gor-ree was going down to the creek for
some more clay he would pop in a piece, and chew as he
walked, so as to have it all ready for his teacher when he
returned.
Well, one day he had his mouth crammed full of fine,
creamy, white paint, and he was just going back to
Dirra-bang when he saw Eenaweena on the opposite bank.
Now Eenaweena was the tiniest girl, for that is how she
got her name, which means " very small girlie.” She was
also full of fun. She did not see Gor-ree on the other
side, for she was out hunting. When Eenaweena came
to a great hole in the creek-bank she thought she ought
to step inside to see who lived there.


So in she went. Just then, something gave a
tremendous grunt, and a sleepy wombat suddenly butted
Eenaweena right out backwards into the creek, where she
made a great splash.
Gor-ree could not help himself. He gave a huge
splutter of mirth, and so blew the paint out from his
mouth in a great shower, and all over his hand, which was
resting on the dark stone on the creek-bank. He
laughed, and laughed again, at little Eenaweena, but she,
poor girl, just stood up in the water, staring at the dark
rocks of the bank. Presently she made a great
Ullawaranna, and fled headlong home to tell her mother
what a clever boy Gor-ree was, for he had stencilled with
white paint an exact picture of his hand on the black
rock.
Of course, everyone in the tribe was dreadfully excited,
and their loud cries of surprise soon sent Dirra-bang
rushing down to the creek to find out what was wrong.
When he saw the wonderful imitation of a hand on the
rock he was astonished. Turning to the tribe, he called
out:
" The great Oolpa, father of all painters, has sent a
clever boy to teach us how to draw hands. Murrumba,
Yi! Yi! ”
" Wahl! ” (no) said Wul-gun-dee, who was uncle’s
wife, and a hard old aunt —" More better to draw Piggie-
billah 1 from his log, or Goo-doo (codfish) from the water.”
but then Wul-gun-dee was what is called a very " practical
woman.” When she was not near, uncle said, " Birrah-
noo-loo” (hatchet face), which is another name for a
kill-joy person.
iThis is the native name for the Porcupine or Ant-eater (Echidna
aculeata ). —T.R.


Chapter Fifteen
WHEN WONJUNA MADE THE GREAT
FLOOD
EVERY morning, big black clouds would roll slowly
down from the north, and old Tanjilli would listen
for the sound of thunder. At night, the clouds
would roll slowly back again to the north, the sky would
be of a clear, deep blue, with thousands of Wanmirri’s
stars winking down at old Tanjilli. It seemed that the
rain would never fall.
Of course, it was a dreadful thing for Gor-ree’s tribe,
because all the waterholes would soon be dry. The grass
was already dead, and no seed could be gathered to make
into cakes. The Euros and the Piggie-billahs, and even
the black cockatoos, had all gone away, and food was
very scarce indeed. Even the rats and snakes seemed to
have wandered away in search of water to drink.
Tanjilli was not respected, but somewhat feared, as a
very great medicine-man by all his brown tribesmen, for
he was able to send a wicked Moora-Moora to hurt bad
Birris, and to call up a good Moora when someone did
anything that pleased him. Should any of the tribe get
ill, he made them well, and if a brown-fella felt too well,
Tanjilli often made him sick, just to show his great
power as a medicine-man! Of course, it will be seen that
he was also a dreadful " fibber.” Gor-ree did not like
him; no, not the least little bit.
Now Umbirri was a bad man who did not really belong
to Gor-ree’s tribe, but he had been chased out of his own
for stealing a sweet little Ejeeja, or young girl. Umbirri,
also, did not favour Tanjilli, the medicine-man, very
much.


One day he got frightful pains in the head, and felt
very ill. So he crawled into his leafy Mia-mia, and
rolled about on the sandy floor. Gor-ree, who happened
to be passing by, heard him calling out in pain, so he ran
to ask Tanjilli to go to have a look at him. At first the
medicine-man would not go, because Gor-ree requested
him, but when old Dhom-ba growled, he consented.
The medicine-man called, and felt his patient all over,
just like a clever medical man would do. Then he looked
wise, and said that Umbirri was very sick because some
bad-fella had made him swallow a poisoned bone while
he was asleep. Of course, all the tribespeople were
greatly concerned to hear of such a cruel thing, though
they thought the rogue had brought it on himself.
Umbirri was most surprised of all, because he could not
remember anything at all about having swallowed a bone.
He also felt uneasy about some spears he had stolen from
Ku-ran-dur.
However, Tanjilli said he could actually feel the
poison-bone in Umbirri’s chest, but no one was to fear
anything, because he, Tanjilli, was going to take the bone
out by way of Umbirri’s ear. Nobody knew just how
this wonderful bloodless surgery was to be carried
through, but Tanjilli seemed quite cool, and quickly
began his cure.
First, he tied a Way-wah, or magic cord, tight round
Umbirri’s waist. This string was made of human hair, and
at each end of it was a sharp claw from an eagle-hawk; not
Ir-rit-ja’s stone one. When the cord was pulled so hard
that the sick Aborigine made a cug-gil (ugly) face, the
Medicine-man explained that it had to be very tight to
prevent the poison-bone from slipping down into Umbirri’s
stomach. Well, all the tribe thought that was quite right.
Moreover, old Tanjilli said the hawk’s claw could get a
better grip on the poison-bone, and that seems quite right,
too.


At last everything was ready. One of Dhom-ba’s
brothers held the sick man’s head while the medicine-man
began to push the poison-bone up towards the throat.
He had to press very hard indeed to do this, and got
quite hot over his work. Then he paused, and told
everybody that, in a few minutes, he would take the bone
out of Umbirri’s ear. He massaged the throat, then the
cheeks, and at length placed his two hands over Umbirri’s
cars, and kept them there while he muttered several
strange words, which sounded like —" Da dun wurri, Da
dun wurri.”
When he lifted up his hands, sure enough, a long, fine,
sharp piece of bone was lying in the sick man’s ear! The
medicine-man picked it up, and handed it round for
everybody to see and feel. Strange to say, there was not
a drop of blood to be seen! It was a splendid job,
without anybody being all cut up about it.
The sick man soon got well again, and many of the
tribe thought Tanjilli greater than ever. But Umbirri
himself was not at all satisfied. He knew that the
medicine-man must be very clever indeed, but he felt
uneasy. If Tanjilli could take out the poison-bone, he
would never know when the medicine-man might put it
back again, while he was asleep. Of course, such a horrid
thought would make anybody unhappy, so Umbirri
concluded that it would be a good idea to kill the
medicine-man, before he himself was doomed. " Tanjilli
was the only man who knew that a poison-bone was
inside, therefore, Tanjilli himself must have put it there,”
he thought.
But how could he make Tanjilli go dead. It was a
very dangerous thing to fight a medicine-man who
walked about with two large, red eyes painted on his back
to let him see what was going on behind. At least, that
is what old Tanjilli said, and none was plucky enough
to contradict him. At first, Umbirri made up his mind


1
to steal some of the magic things out of Tanjilli’s
Boon-durr, or magic pouch, while the medicine-man was
asleep, and see whether it made any real difference to his
cleverness.
But it didn’t.
Indeed, next morning, old Tanjilli appeared as calm
as usual, but he had painted a fresh white pattern on his
chest. It looked like a horseshoe and two spectacles, and
It is a dangerous thing to fight a Medicine-man who has
Eyes painted on his Back as well as on his Chest.
therefore should have been doubly lucky, but the pattern
only meant that, as a medicine-man, he was greater than
ever.
His new claims to higher honour annoyed Umbirri very
much, so he thought of a deep plan to spoil the medicine-
man’s fame. One day, when the tribe was seriously
thinking about the great thirst that was on the land,
Umbirri said to all the people: "Why docs not the
mighty Tanjilli tell rain to come? ”


When the old men heard this, they said, "Yes,
Tanjilli ought to make the rain come.” So they called
the old medicine-man, and told him what they wanted in
very plain terms.
Dhom-ba did not mince his words.
" Very good,” Tanjilli replied, " I will make the waters
flow like a river, to show what a great medicine-man I
am. All the land will be covered ” —then he looked with
a black scowl at Umbirri —" and someone will be
drowned. Send me Nam-bur and Ir-rit-ja, each with a
long spear and two throwing-sticks, and we will go away
and make the rain come.”
So he went to a secret place and, with the two men,
began to make a most curious thing. First he tied a
cross-stick at the top of a spear, then he fastened the
other one much lower down. Next he brought out a
whole lot of black string made of Tekkul, or human hair.
This he wound up and down between the cross-sticks.
The strings, he said, were rain falling. On the top of
the spear he gummed a tuft of the tail-feathers of a black
cockatoo, because these birds always go where water is.
Then he put broad white bands of pipe-clay across the
black threads, and these were the lightning. On the very
top he stuck on some white bird’s down, for the clouds.
While he was finishing this kite-like totem, the other men
gummed two lines of white down their chests, and right
down on each leg. They also put three white lines across
their faces.
When everything was ready, the two men carried the
totem back to the men of the tribe; they walked "in
step” in a curious way, as though their legs were tied for
a Siamese race, but of course none had ever heard of that
interesting country.
Still the rain did not come, and Umbirri mocked the
medicine-man most cruelly. Old Tanjclli tried almost
everything he knew, and yet it would not rain. He got


“Water! Give us Water!” the People cried.


very angry indeed, so did Nam-bur and Ku-ran-dur, and
they refused to assist him any further.
At last, he decided to go to a very secret place, and ask
Wonjuna, the Great Spirit, to send down rain, to show
all people what a great medicine-man could do, but no
rain fell, and some of the Piccaninnies began to die. So
one dark night all the thirsty women cried out to the
Great Spirit to make rain for the sake of the little brown
Birrahlees. Almost at once, drops began to fall, and
then heavy rain kept on falling until everything was
soaked. Of course, old Tanjilli claimed that he had
caused it to come, so he strutted all over the place,
boasting of his deeds, until Oolpa, a fine old man,
threatened him with a Nulla-nulla.
Well, it did not stop raining, and great floods began
to flow over the land, and the tribe got very frightened,
for they would soon be all drowned.
So they held a meeting, and that wise old fella,
Darral, said: " Tanjilli started the rain; let him tell it
to stop.” The sly old medicine-man then tried to stop
the water falling so heavily. Looking up into the sky
he cried out: " Water go back! Water go back! ”
But it kept on pouring for forty days and forty nights.
It simply would not stop, and one evening the floods
washed away old Tanjilli, the medicine-man, also the
wicked Umbirri, and both were drowned. Gor-ree’s
tribe did not mourn very long for either of them.
When the people found they had no medicine-man to
do miraculous things for them, they were getting
unhappy, because no one knew how to stop the rain.
Just then old man Oolpa called out —" Oh, Great Spirit,
tell rain no come down any more.”
Almost at once the drops ceased falling, and soon after
the blue sky showed out; the tribe was saved.
"Now we know it was not the medicine-man who made
the Great Flood,” they cried out in a loud voice.


n Q ci o ° ° ° °° 0 0 o
fj O O o „ 0 «3^
In the face of such a convincing demonstration, the
people could do no less than regard Oolpa as an
exceedingly clever man.
" What do you think about it, Gor-ree? ” asked old
Dhom-ba.
" No understand! ” replied the boy, which indicated his
wisdom.
"And you, Beefwood, what is your opinion?” Red-
gum turned to the redoubtable fighter.
" I think! ” was the ponderous answer.
" Beefwood is very Wi-Wi (clever),” said Dhom-ba,
giving Mub-boo a substantial crack with a Nulla-nulla
to mark his appreciation of so much a wisdom.
Churinga of the Euro Totem, Arunta Tribe, Central Australia.


Chapter Sixteen
THE MUSIC PIPES OF DIDGERI-DOO
THERE was simply nothing to do. Of course,
Gor-ree did not feel like doing very much, but for
the moment he could not find even that small
amount to fill in the time. He thought he was going to
have a really quiet day. The sun made the sand so hot
that it burnt the soles of his feet, but as he was only a
young Aborigine, whose skin had not yet got leathery,
like that of the old men of his tribe, he soon got tired of
running about during the great heat of the day.
Early that morning all the other boys had gone off
hunting with grey-headed Didgeri-doo. This old
Aborigine’s nick-name means " Drone-pipe,” after a long,
hollow stick, which is blown at the Corroborees, and
makes a deep, droning sound like a full-dress meeting of
father-bees.
The name suited him, too, because he was always
droning about the cheeky boys, or the lazy girls, or the
thin possums, or the wombats, which were too fat. Even
the emus got "talked about” by the old man, because
they ran so fast. Everybody said he was a confirmed
growler, and so they gave him the nick-name of
Didgeri-doo, or " Drone-pipe.”
Although Didgeri-doo grumbled such a lot, he had a
very kind heart for the little brown boys, or Birris. " The
young girls,” he said, "all the time yabber-yabber, like
Jibben, the parrot. No good.” But he loved little
Gor-ree, who was like Wibbi, the wind, here, there,
everywhere, but never where it was wanted.
Now there was a reason for Gor-ree’s being left behind
when all the other boys had gone away to learn to hunt.


The previous afternoon Gor-ree had found a long piece
of wood, with a hole bored right down the middle by a
big white Dundur, or grub. The little Aborigine got a
thin twig, cut a hook on one end, and soon fished out the
fat Dundur, which he roasted until it turned brown, like
a piece of toast; then he ate it. The white grub has a
flavour rather like a nut, and is nice enough on the
tongue. But Gor-ree thought it specially good, so he
peered down the hole to see if anything else were left
behind.
Didgeri-doo Listened —“B-U-R-R-P!” Someone was Mocking
Him.
As he could not see any more grubs, he put the stick
in his mouth and gave a great blow, " Br-r-r-r —
Dr-o-o-n-e.” Gor-ree thought he was a wonderful boy to
have a little music pipe of his own, and to be able to play
on it so well. He gave an extra strong blow, " Bur-r-r-r.”
Just at that moment old Didgeri-doo happened to pass,
and when he heard little Gor-ree practising away at the
bottom of his voice, he thought the Birri was mocking
him. So he listened, for a moment, " DR-O-O-O-N-E.”


Then a still louder "D-R-O-O-N-E, B-R-U-P—BURP.”
Old Didgeri-doo could not stand it any longer. Yes,
some fella was mocking him. So he danced over with
anger in his black eyes, and had it been a man-fella he
found making the noise, he would have clubbed him on
the head with his Boon-dee, a heavy club.
But instead of another full-sized Aborigine he found
only the little chocolate-coloured Birri.
" Here, Gor-ree, you altogether bad-fella! You bush-
rat, Korinya. May Karawora pick you up and bite out
your tongue —may you grow Jindy-neelingo.”
By this time Gor-ree was really frightened, because old
Didgeri-doo had called him a bush-rat, and had said that
he hoped the great wedge-tailed eagle would swoop down
on him, and pick him gaunt and thin.
At first, he could not quite understand why the old
man was so cross, then he suddenly realized what it was
all about, so he sprang up, and ran for his mother’s
Mia-mia as fast as his thin brown legs could carry him.
Once in there he felt safe, but he could not help laughing
quietly to himself.
" Bur-r! Bur-r! ” he said softly, so that no one could
hear. He had found a very good plaything, a baby
drone-pipe that mocked old Didgeri-doo, and made him
very cross, but he would have to find his wonderful music-
stick again, for in his excitement, he had dropped the
precious pipe, and he would have to go back for it.
Perhaps old Didgeri-doo would burn it, the old kill-joy!
When everything was quiet, Gor-ree crept out, and
searched all round the Mulga tree where he had been
sitting. But he could not find his wonderful drone-pipe.
"Old Didgeri must have put him along a fire,” he said
sadly. However, his troubles were not yet over, for next
morning, when all the boys were leaving for the hunt,
Didgeri-doo made him stay behind for the day, all by
himself. To give him something to think about, he


handed back to Gor-ree his precious pipe. Alas, as soon
as the boy touched it, he knew that Didgeri-doo had
changed the stick so that it could not be used again. It
was now heavy, and when he examined the pipe he cried
with vexation, because the old man had plugged up the
whole length of the hollow with a piece of very hard
wood which Gor-ree could not get out. He tried over
and over again to knock it through, but it only stuck
tighter. Of course, the pipe would not make any noise
at all now. To make matters worse, old Didgeri-doo
had laughed back at him as he marched out of camp.
You see, the native children are never beaten, and
since all the Birris are greatly loved, Didgeri-doo would
not even burn the boy’s plaything, because that would be
stealing it, in a way, and the Aborigines were far too
honest to thieve. Moreover, there is a curious law among
the tribes, that if anything which is greatly used every
day be stolen by another, then a lot of harm will come
to the owner. Didgeri-doo, then, did not wish any real
danger to befall little Gor-ree, so he did not destroy the
pipe, only he made it so that it could never be blown
again to offend him.
" Good-bye, Gor-ree,” Didgeri-doo had called out,
" Mind Karawora does not carry you off. If he docs,
make Ullawaranna, a great cry out, and I’ll run back and
save you. Yi Yi! ”
So there was little Gor-ree, all by himself, sitting in the
shade of a Mulga-tree, too sad to sing, and too sorry for
himself to run about. Nobody can find much fun
playing by oneself. However, as he sat there, looking
miserable, and feeling ever so much worse, a very wicked
idea came into his head. Of course, he did not quite
know where the bad idea came from, but there it was, all
the same, right inside his head! Now how did it get
there?
This bad idea told Gor-ree to go down to the Wurley, or


native hut, made of branches of trees, in which were kept
the great big drone-pipes, or Didgeri-doos, that are blown
only at the grand Corroborees, and to plug up the biggest
one which was used by the old man. Certainly Gor-ree
knew it was very wrong to touch any of the men’s play-
things, but the bad idea told him not to touch the pipe
with his hands; all he had to do was to drop in a nice
round stone that fitted in very tightly.
So he dropped in one after another, but none would
stick; all ran out at the bottom. At last one seemed to
stop in, but Gor-ree could not be sure, because he was too
scared to touch the big pipe with his hands. By this time
he was really frightened, so he crawled out of the Wurley
and ran away as quickly as he could.
"My word,” he thought, "won’t Didgeri-doo get a sur-
prise when he goes to blow his pipe.”
Just as Gor-ree had run off, a big red and black wasp,
named Moon-doo, came along, looking for a place to build
her mud cells, and when she found the drone-pipe, she
thought it a wonderful place, and she carried in lots of wet
mud, and when this dried it set as hard as a rock,
completely blocking up the tube. Not a single person had
noticed her, because Moon-doo went about her work so
quietly.
Well, Gor-ree forgot all about his pipe, and old Didgeri-
doo forgot all about spoiling it.
About a month later, the neighbouring tribes were invited
to be present at a great Corroboree at Gor-ree’s camp.
Hundreds of native-fellas were there, gathered in two long
rows, waiting for the play to begin. Presently old Didgeri-
doo appeared at the end of the line, where everyone could
see, lifted up his big drone-pipe, and gave a tremendous
blow.
Not a sound came forth! He filled his lungs with air,
and made another great effort that almost burst his
cheeks.


Not even a tiny squeak was heard in the camp!
All the Aborigines were too surprised to do anything
other than sit and look on. Little Gor-ree felt himself
getting all cold and sick. He remembered about the stone
he had dropped into the drone-pipe, and he felt fearfully
wicked, as he, too, stared at old Didgeri-doo.
Just then the old man flung the great pipe to the
ground, and began to spit something out of his mouth.
"Debil-debil bite tongue,” he bawled out in pain.
Almost at once the poor fella’s tongue swelled and
swelled. All the tribe were greatly excited as the men
carried Didgeri-doo down to the water, for the old man said
his head was on fire, and they sought to put out the flames
they could not see, but which Didgeri-doo could most
certainly feel.
However, next day, when Didgeri-doo was all right
again, he went over to Gor-ree, and told him that he
believed Moora-moora, a bad spirit, had put fire-fella into
his mouth to punish him for spoiling Gor-ree’s pipe. But
the boy was very sorry, too, and said that he, also, had
been very bad, and had dropped a stone down the big
Didgeri-doo, but he would never do such a wicked thing
again, and they would always be the best of brothers.
When Didgeri-doo went to knock Gor-ree’s stone out of
his pipe, he found only the little bits of dry clay, and both
felt so proud that Didgeri-doo could break a hard pebble
into little pieces simply by blowing with his mouth.


Chapter Seventeen.
THE BLACK SWAN’S BROTHER.
GOR-REE gathered up his war spears and stood up
straight, looking into the kindly, dark-brown, soft
eyes of the old men of his tribe. No words were
spoken, nor was there any need for speech; all knew that
hunger was close at hand for their people, brothers, sisters,
and even the little Picanninnies, who were loved by every,
one.
Yes, a great drought had fallen upon the land. The
Euro and the Emu had long since been driven away, or had
perished. Here and there on the desert a pile of bones
seemed to be attached to a dried skin, and these sun-baked
mummies looked very weird indeed. It was a very
depressing time for everybody.
Gor-ree’s tribe had just completed a great, wearisome
march over eighty miles of open country, entirely without
shade, and finding only a little water in the widely
separated native wells. They had just managed to reach
the "Place of Yams.” The district where they had made
camp was noted for its Gib-bon, and at the proper season,
all Gor-ree’s people would travel there to dig up the native
potatoes. But this year they had travelled in vain
Anxiously they dug up the hardened soil with pointed
sticks.
Lo, the yams were just empty, dry skins, utterly useless
for food.
The tribe was far too weak to travel further in the
dreadful search for food and drink, so they sat about in
the shade of the Gunyahs; thin, hungry and forlorn.
"Gul-lee! Gul-lee! ” (Water! Water!) they cried.
But the old men of Gor-ree’s people were holding a
council. Something would have to be done, and that


quickly, or else all would die. So they cast about for a
suitable man to travel in search of "Gul-lee.” Maybe
another yam patch might be discovered. Their choice fell
upon Gor-ree, who, after all, was little more than a boy,
he having been not long initiated as a young man of his
people.
He was tall and well-formed, with the big, soft, dark-
brown, limpid eyes possessed by all Australian Aborigines.
True, his great, deep upper lip was far too large to please
certain other people’s sense of beauty, but he was as
supple as a snake, tough as red-gum wood, and no
long journey had ever found him weak. Each muscle was
trained to endure hardship, and where animals could not
survive, Gor-ree still managed to exist.
So old Oolpa’s selection was a wise one, for among a
hardy people Gor-ree was the hardiest. When he appeared
before his elders, he saw in their eyes the urgency for
speed. He had his spears, two or three boomerangs, an
odd-shaped bone, a piece of thin string from the hair of
some native woman, a few feathers from his brother, the
Black Swan.
The young man having been told to direct his course
to the East, set out at once on his mission. As he walked,
he seemed to be entering a huge bowl of pale greyish-blue.
Overhead, and afar off, the colour was the same; the pale,
greyish, powdery-blue like that of carnation leaves. As
far as his brown eyes could see, the prickly spinifex covered
the landscape. Mile after mile he strode along narrow
tracks through the spiny plants, for nothing could walk
over that terrible maze, so both animals and man used the
same narrow ways.
Night began to creep down over the land, as Gor-ree
discerned a few rocks right ahead. Flat stones, they were,
with a small round bore-hold in one of the largest.
Radiating from the hole, like the spokes of a wheel, were
several channels cut into the stone, so that when any


precious rain did fall—it came far too seldom, alas —it ran
in little rivulets down the grooves, and so filled up the bore-
hole, which was covered on top with a large round stone,
so that animals could not reach the water stored therein
so cleverly.
Oh, no, you must not think that these small reservoirs
were made by nature, because they were not. These tiny
reservoirs for water are made entirely by the Aborigines
without the assistance of any learned geologist. These
valued storages have been in use from time immemorial,
and have saved the lives of hundreds of brown men, so such
watering-places are very precious indeed to the natives of
the interior.
When Gor-ree had come to the water, he decided to
stay nearby for the night. He did not, of course, camp
right near the water, for he would be too easily seen should
some unfriendly Wild-cat tribe happen to pass that way.
So he sat a little distance off, out of sight, in a hollow of
the ground, and then proceeded to make himself
comfortable for the night. Of course, like all Aborigines,
he was just a little afraid when left in the dark.
After all, he was very young, and this was to be his
greatest journey alone. He laid on the ground his narrow
Boor-reen, or shield-shaped piece of wood, and then
squatted down beside it. Then he produced one of his
thin, round sticks, and standing it upright, with one end
resting in a shallow hole in the shield-piece, he held the
upper portion between the palm of his hands and made the
stick rotate rapidly. Previously, he had placed what looked
like fine, teased-up bark around the hole, and as he twirled
the stick, he gazed down intently. Presently a tiny wisp
of smoke rose up, and in an instant, Gor-ree seized the
little ball of bark, and blew very gently with his mouth.
Then, quickly, he threw the ball of bark away, and the
sudden rush through the air caused it to burst into flame.
In a minute he had placed a few sticks around, and had a


crackling fire almost as quickly as though he had matches.
Gor-ree felt more comfortable, and safer, now that he
had a fire. Food he had none, though he had searched
very carefully as he walked. He had a small drink o
water —much less than you would expect a thirsty Aborigine
to swallow—curled up alongside his little fire, and
prepared for sleep. He had a last look at the feathers of
his brother, the Black Swan, and wondered whether he
would ever find the big water-holes where the bird nested.
If only his brother would appear in the sky to guide him
to water —with fish, and ducks, and food for all his people.
He thought of the Water-babies of Wad-na-coorie, and
how all the little brown girls had died of thirst. Yes, he
must find water.
He gazed up into the blue, star-powdered sky. He
thought he might hear his brother give that low wailing cry
as they crossed the sky arranged in flight like the letter
V.
No call reached his ears, and sleep at length sealed his
eyes.
He awakened just as the first light touched the sky. He
stretched himself joyously. Every muscle was exercised
before he sprang to his feet. He had another small drink
of water, and collecting his few belongings, he again set
off on his long, long march. All that day he journeyed
into the everlasting surrounding blueness, and when night
came, he was again without water, but he did not mind —
as yet. Perhaps, to-morrow, he would find a mole, or a
rat, even a snake, or else a colony of white ants, anything,
in fact, to keep him alive until he could find help for his
starving brothers and sisters and especially the little
Piccaninnies.
All the next day he pressed forward, and the next, too.
Gor-rce’s heart began to sink, not because he was hungry,
and dreadfully thirsty, but on account of the sufferings of
his people. He had been trained to go hungry and thirsty,


so the pangs of appetite did not trouble him at all. But
what of his people? They would all die, and he seemed
powerless to help them.
Oh, if his brother, the Black Swan, would only appear
in the sky to guide him! Gor-ree knew that the Black
Swan was his brother because every one of the old men
of the tribe had told him so. Some less fortunate
Aborigines had a goanna for a brother, while others were
related to the kangaroo, but he liked his brother, the Black
Swan, better than all the rest.
Sometimes, he remembered, in the night, when the sky
was just a huge, luminous blue bowl, Gor-ree would look
up, and there, crossing the sky, with the leader at the tip
of the arrow-head, his brothers would call down to him, in
a plaintive note. Yes, Gor-ree liked to think of himself as
the point of the arrow cleaving the way for the others.
These thoughts seemed to sustain him for a while, but
once or twice he stumbled, and later, he fell headlong to
the hot earth. His tongue was swollen, and he seemed to
have a fire inside burning him up. But oh, all his poor
people
Gor-ree groaned in anguish; he had failed them when
they had trusted him with their lives. Even his Black Swan
brother had deserted him. Yet, he had always been careful
not to injure any of his brothers; he had eaten duck, and
possum and kangaroos, but that was all right, because they
were not his relations, though they might be some other
person’s. All these thoughts were in his mind as his poor
tortured body lay prone under the terrible sun. He tried
once more to rise, gave a groan, and never moved. All
things faded from his mind. He awaited death, for even
his hardened body could endure no more.
Then a miracle occurred. Gor-ree seemed to catch the
sound of whirring wings. It came closer and closer. A
great Black Swan came to rest beside him. The bird was
sitting flat on the ground, with its huge wings outstretched


I. ***•.y. , O
) >^FxxS^ p x^W y '' -
ywiSWu: I'.T^p"" - --- "
to form a support on either side. It spoke to Gor-ree, and
told him to sit astride, and his brother would bear him
away to safety, by cool water, with fish, and yams, and
possums in the Coolibah trees.
By-ah-mul, the Black Swan, was Gor-ree’s Brother.
Gor-ree knew that his brother had come to the rescue, so
he thanked him in swan language, which both understood.
The black bird then took a long run, and was soon aloft,
cleaving the cool, fresh air. On, on, they flew. Gor-ree
resting in perfect ease. At length the Black Swan came to
earth near a lake. Trees fringed the banks, and fish
rippled the surface. Gor-ree ran to drink —the cold, pure
water splashed up into his face.
He opened his eyes; rain-spots were falling on his arms,
and chest, and legs. Overhead a great V-shaped flight of
swans called down to him: ’'Follow! Follow! Gul-lec!
Gul-lee!”


Gor-ree smiled, for was he not one of Tul-kara’s
Laughing Boys. He rose, rather unsteadily, ’tis true, and
walked slowly after the swans. Soon he found a large
white-ants’ nest, and helped himself to a very good meal.
"I like them better cooked,” he smiled.
That night he saw trees, and was glad, because there he
would find fish, and possums
When he camped for the night, he cut a bark dish from
the green trunk of a gum-tree. Into this Coolamon, a
shallow vessel, he scooped a lot of white-ants, and holding
the dish over his fire, he cooked the food with the steam
arising from the wet bark. " More better that way,” he
said, feeling rather pleased with himself.
After many days he came to a beautiful land that looked
strangely familiar. The river was so clear, with Wonga
pigeons, and possums, and cranes. It was a land of plenty,
and he was glad at heart, as he wandered along the stream.
"Wah!” Gor-ree could not restrain his surprise, for
lying on the ground was a Day-00l or grinding stone, and
beside it was a boomerang of his father, and his own little
toy shield.
At first he wanted to run straight away, then "some
strong-fella stand right up inside,” he said later, and told
him that he was on his own tribal land, and that he must
fight all men who trespassed on it.
But he did not find any other men. He did discover
many bones, which he thought might be those of his
parents, and even some that might have belonged to little
Daan, the playmate of his infancy. Then he remembered
that some of the hated enemy’s might also be among them,
so he broke all the largest ones, such as the leg-bones, with
his stone axe, so that any wicked Moora belonging to the
Wild-cat tribe could never come back to use them again.
He then planted all the pieces in a certain tree, and
promised himself not to come back to that old camp-site
again.


He did not know all the laws of his tribe yet, but he
hoped that he had attended to everything, and he must now
hurry back to Oolpa, Darral, Yul-10, and especially Ku-ang,
to tell them about the lovely country of his father which was
full of everything.
He went back to the tribe by a strange route. It was
much shorter, too, with more food and water, so he was
soon back again among them to tell them of his
wanderings.
After a long consultation with the wise men, it was
agreed that the whole tribe should move to Bra-yak-alung,
as it was, in a way, part of their tribal ground, since it had
once belonged to relatives.
However, under Gor-ree’s guidance, the people went
slowly into the new country, trusting not to meet with any
enemies while they were so weak. But though they passed
signs of the Wild-cat tribe, yet Gor-ree, Dhom-ba and
Ku-ran-dur were such excellent ''trackers” that all arrived
at Bra-yak without injury.


Chapter Eighteen.
THE TEETH OF WINI-THON-GURU.
GOR-REE somehow was different. He laughed just as
heartily as ever; had a soft word for all the brown
Birrahlees, and ate no more and no less than usual;
wrestled with the men, and came out on top, but everybody
noticed a subtle change.
Ever since the night when the weird voice of Gay-andi,
the bull-roarer, had sounded through the camp, and the
old men, Oolpa and Darral, had taken Gor-ree away into
the Myall scrub to be tested for manhood, Gor-ree was
different. The Gunda-warras, or spearmen, said that it
was quite proper for Gor-ree to change after he had been
made a full man of his tribe, but the Birris and Ejeejas
missed him very much, for he was such a good play-fella.
Of course, Gor-ree’s courageous and successful journey
to find his old country, so soon after he had been made a
young man, may have had a lot to do with the change, for
it was a horrible trial; no food, no water, and no shelter for
many, many days from the fierce rays of Yhi, the sun.
After all, Gor-ree was not much more than a boy, yet he
had brought all the tribe back safely to his own country
at Bra-yak-alung.
True, they took special care never to go near the old
camp, where Gor-ree’s people had been speared, because that
place was now haunted by Wee-wee-mul, a bad ghost, who
snatched away the bodies of the dead that had not been
buried properly. That place was now Gum-marl, or
haunted. However, they were all very happy once more.
The beautifully clear waters of the rivers sang their way
over the rocks, and Du-mer, the brown pigeon, came to
drink with 800-loon, the white crane. Plenty of honey-


trees for the bees, and roots of all kinds provided them with
abundance of food.
Gor-ree, now that he had become a young man, felt
proud to be back in the country of his father.
He was contented to know that he had been the means
of bringing all his mother’s tribe to such a beautiful land
of plenty. Everyone was so glad that the old men decided
to hold a grand Corroboree to celebrate Gor-ree’s
marvellous journey to save the tribe. The women made
plenty of cakes, and the hunters caught a number of
Piggie-billah’s, or porcupines, which were first smoked over
a fire, so that they could be plucked easily; but sharp spines,
not soft feathers, were taken off the fat little bodies before
they were put into a hole near the fire, which was then
filled in with hot ashes to roast the animals.
It was just after sun-lie-down, and Gor-ree’s people
were sitting and talking round their fires after having eaten
their dinner. Of course, now that Gor-ree was a man he
did not stay with the women and children any longer, but
lived with the other young men at another part of the
camp.
"He wants a Wir-ree-bee-un (young woman) to look
after him,” said that old shrew, Wul-gun-dee, who was
Uncle’s wife.
Pretty Yul-10, of course, stopped with her mother, and
when their fire burnt down, Yul-lo went over near a clump
of trees to get another piece of wood. The night was dark
on earth, but oh, so starry in the sky, and everybody could
see the unfortunate Gun-doo-ee up in his place in the
heavens. One of the men was telling how Wan-mirri put
the Stars in the Sky.
"Nurra-gah! Gor-ree! GOR-R-E-E! ”
A girl’s sudden screams pierced the still night air. It
was Yul-lo calling wildly on her cousin to save her. Just
as quickly her cries ceased.


Every man sprang to his feet and grasped his spears and
shield. Gor-ree did not say a word, but darted off in the
direction Yul-lo had taken. Uttering loud cries of anger
Ku-ran-dur, Oou-yan, the Curlew, the fierce Ir-rit-ja, the
Eagle-hawk, Old Dhom-ba, Thun-dung and all the other
Gunda-warras followed him.
But they had not gone many paces before a shower of
spears fell amongst them, and one Billah, glancing from
the Curlew’s shield, cut Gor-ree on the shoulder. "It is
nothing,” he said, as another flight of spears kept everyone
busy warding them off with their narrow shields, or
Boor-reens.
"Spread out to cover,” growled old Dhom-ba, and the
warriors backed into the shelter of a fold in the ground.
There they waited, with brave hearts, for the onslaught of
a hidden foe. But no enemies came.
The Eagle-hawk fingered his terrible Yutch-a-wunta, or
stone knife; no fear was in him.
"Put away your claw,” advised Dhom-ba, "the slayers
come not.”
"How know, Dhom-ba?” asked Gor-ree.
The old man held an enemy spear in his hand. "See,”
he said, "a tooth from the Wild-cat, Wini-thon-guru.”
When Gor-ree heard that dreaded name his blood burned
like a fire within him. So, here, close at hand, were the
slayers of his dear mother and father. Well, so be it. He
felt none of his usual kind nature. His inside had gone all
white hot. Just then Tuck-an-dee, who was younger
brother to the unlucky Nam-bur, came running up to tell
them that Yul-lo had been carried off into the night, and
could not be found.
"Wah!” Gor-ree shouted in great anger. "Follow me.”
But Dhom-ba held him back. "The night is for the
Wild-cat,” he said, "and he is the enemy of thy tribe, but
Tul-kara’s Laughing Boy will kill the Cat and all his
young. At sun-get-up we hunt.”


"But Yul-lo! My little playmate! She is her mother’s
Go-wun.” What Gor-rce meant was that Yul-lo had no
father, and was her mother’s only child.
"Nurra-gah!” he said mournfully, "Nurra-gah!” which
was Gor-ree’s way of saying: "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” Like
many more people, he could not find suitable words to
express his great grief.
Early next morning the Gunda-warras had their spears
and shields ready. They carried heavy war-boomerangs,
too, and each man also had his terrible Yutch-a-wunta, or
chipped stone knife for close-in fighting. Much blood
would flow that day.
Oolpa and Darral had painted curious white marks on
the fighters’ bodies, and in addition, each had drawn some
blood from a vein to stick white birds’-down on their bodies,
and which made them look exceedingly ferocious indeed.
Then they all stood together closely, in a circle, with their
spears, and sang songs to strengthen them to carry out the
laws of their tribe. 1
Then off they departed in a slow march, each man
wanting to be first at the head of the line, for they walked
in single file. Old Dhom-ba placed Gor-ree in the lead,
and faced him in the direction of the Wild-cat’s camp.
"Wuh!” and every man’s right foot stamped deep into
the soil.
"Wuh!” and the left foot did likewise. In this slow,
methodical way the men, giving horrible "Wuhs!” with each
stamp of the feet, passed slowly out of the camp. Wuh!
Wuh! Wuhl The sound faded with the distance. In
no country does justice stand on firmer feet as she walks to
enforce her verdict.
All that day, with neither food nor drink, but every man
iThe killing is not just a wild running amok. The execution
party, known as the Atninga, is properly organized, and its
weapons consecrated, to carry out the law. It is every bit as
formal as our own legal system. All tribes people respect and
support it.— T.R.


still concentrating on his frightful task, they travelled like
a huge angry snake; even the earth trembled under that
avenging stride. Justice had made legal executioners of
them all.
Just before sun-lie-down they paused; before them were
“Wuh! And Every Right Foot was Stamped Deep into the
Ground.
the homes of the Wild-cat and his tribe. Gor-ree looked
round for the big Mia-mia of the young warriors, and then
sent a spear to lodge quivering in the ground before it.
Even in his anger he would not kill a defenceless man.
The swish and thud of the weapon brought out the Wild-
cats in a flurry of excitement. A great warrior, spotted
with white, walked towards them with his spears and Nulla-
nulla. No friendly glance, only hot hatred glowed from
his eyes. He avanced fearlessly.


"How come?” he snapped, "to the land of the Wild-
cat?”
"It is our land, Wini-thon-guru, and it was the hunting
ground of my tribe when you murdered my father and
mother, and took it for yourself. You stole Yul-10. Well,
I will kill you!”
By this time the fierce warriors of the Wild-cat had
ranged themselves in line opposite to Gor-ree’s men. The
next moment a shower of spears fell on both sides. The
two lines of tribesmen advanced a step, and again cast their
spears. Many were cleverly turned by the narrow wooden
shields, but old Oolpa had one right through his chest.
Darral, too, was down, and Wam-ban-eah, and several
others. The fight was continued with the boomerangs, and
the thudding of these heavy weapons dominated the fight.
Still it waged without pause. When all the throwing sticks
had been cast, they closed in to kill with the terrible Yutch-
a-wuntas.
Gor-ree fought his way to the great Wild-cat,
Wini-thon-guru, and then began a dreadful duel. Both
whirled round, slashing with fierce cuts at naked limbs.
Gor-ree drew back, the Wild-cat thought with pain.
Instantly he sprang in, and as instantly he fell back with
the tendons of his thigh slashed in two by a single stroke
from Gor-ree’s stone knife.
The Wild-cat was very still.
Gor-ree looked round, neglecting a great gash in his own
leg, a smaller one on his arm, and another in his breast.
Mub-boo, who was named after the Beef-wood tree, because
he was so strong, had killed his man at the first blow, but
he was watching to see if Gor-ree could overcome the great
Wini-thon-garu.
When he saw the Wild-cat fall he shouted: —"Kalang!
Kalang! Gor-ree! ”
The Wild-cat warriors heard that cry of "Well-done!
Well-done! Cousin! ” They suddenly ceased fighting, and
fled headlong from the place.


Beef-wood wanted to follow them up, "for more practice
in cutting up,” he said; and Ir-rit-ja’s deadly stone claw
still looked red.
"Kill all the camp,” said the Eagle-hawk, "as it killed
yours, that’s the law.”
"No kill women —or Birrahlees,” ordered Gor-ree.
Poor old Dhom-ba dead; Ku-ran-dur nearly dead; Oolpa
dead; Gor-ree was very sad; but he had chased the Wild-
cat out of his tribal ground for ever.
They carried away their dead, for fear Wee-wee-mul
might take them. They were all mourning the wise old
men killed, and the many strong, young ones. Alas!
The Tribe Took all its Belongings. There was Dirra-bang’s
Waist-belt with its Tassel, and his Head-band with a Fringe of
Euro Teeth; Tanjilli’s Magic Girdle Adorned with a Hawk’s
Claws; Kan-a-way’s Pick and Axe; Ku-ran-dur’s Two Womeras
or Spear-throwers, and His Spear; Oolpa’s Beak Boomerang and
Shield; Yul-lo’s Coolamon or Dish; Nam-bur’s “Churinga or
Sacred Stones"; Dhom-ba’s Club, and Gor-ree’s Yutch-a-wunta
or Stone Knife.


When they returned to their camp there was much griev-
ing and wailing; the women painting themselves with pipe-
clay and charcoal.
Presently, Wul-gun-dee, who was a hard old woman,
cried out, "Is there no Wir-ree-bee-un (young woman) to
bind up Gor-ree’s wounds.”
Ku-ang, the "Mist of the Hills,” came shyly forward,
with gum-leaves, and ashes and string.
"I will go,” she said, "with our great man to heal his
wounds, and cook the Euro!”
"Stand not: Go!” said Wul-gun-dee.
The pair went off to set up house-keeping in a new
Gunyah which Gor-ree had built near the clear stream of
his childhood days.
At last he was really home.
Brown, Prior & Co. Pty. Ltd., 4!*) Little Bourke St., Melbourne. C.l.


V


*




