

PetH
Son t
iMt'sstons to die
No. XXV.
DIOCESE OE ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
THE
POOMINDIE MISSION,
DESCRIBED IN
A LETTER
FROM
THE LORD BISHOP OF ADELAIDE
TO THE
Sntktg for % |)roj}agalimt of % gospel.
“ The Heathen'shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when
I shah he sanctified in you before their eyes.”— EzeJc. xxxvi. 23.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR
THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL;
AND SOLD BY THE
SOCIETY EOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE*
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS ;
RIVINGTONS, BELL, HATCHARDS, AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1853.
20.8.53. Price Twopence .


London:
I*. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAK STREET HILL.


The following Letter from the Bishop of Adelaide,
besides giving an account of the present state of this in-
teresting Mission to the Heathen Aborigines of South
Australia, contains many references to previous proceed-
ings at Port Lincoln, the history of which may be found
in the following places :
The barbarous and disgraceful murder of natives, by
which Port Lincoln acquired an evil notoriety in 1849,
is described in the Annual Report for 1850, page civ.;
the marriage of two converted natives. Annals of the
Diocese of Adelaide , page 70; the original plan of the
establishment at Port Lincoln, Colonial Church Chronicle ,
vol. iv. page 353; the removal of the Institution from
Boston Island to Poomindie, and a detailed history of
its first year, Colonial Church Chronicle , vol. iv. page 467,
and vol. vi. page 63.
The Native School at Adelaide, from which the present
Mission may be considered to have originated, has given,
not long since, gratifying evidence of its good effect; see
the account of Takan-arro in the Gospel Missionary ,
vol. ii. page ] 61.
A valuable account of the superstitions of the natives of
the adjoining colony of West Australia was published in
the Colonial Church Chronicle , vol. v. page 346.
79, Pall Mall,
August , 1853.
A 2


NATIVES OF NEW HOLLAND, SEEN DURING CAPTAIN COOJI S
VOYAGE.


THE
POOMINDIE MISSION,
PORT LINCOLN, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Port Lincoln, Feb. 14, 1853.
My dear Sir, —Having long been desirous of
visiting the native Mission at Poomindie, under
Archdeacon M. B. Hale, to ascertain its progress,
and report to the Society upon the degree of suc-
cess with which his disinterested efforts have been
blessed, I gladly avail myself of a favourable oppor-
tunity ; and, embarking in a small coasting trader
of fifty tons, “ the Banderoot,” which plies between
Adelaide and this place, reached the settlement on
Thursday, Feb. 3, having left home on the preceding
Monday. It lies 190 miles by sea west of Adelaide.
Like every other district, it has been temporarily
drained of its male population by the gold-diggings
of Victoria; but since my last visit in October, 1849,
a few cottages, and the pretty church of white lime-
stone, have been erected, showing signs of progress
even in this thinly peopled township. On the first
occasion, when I visited this place in July, 1849,
I gave you the particulars of a melancholy ride to
the scene of destruction, where five natives had


fallen victims to flour, mixed with arsenic, which
they had stolen from a shepherd’s hut. On my
second visit, I had the satisfaction of joining in
marriage a native couple, Nytchie and Kilpatko,
in the presence of the Governor, Lady Young, and
Mr. Moorhouse, the Protector of natives, and many
others, in the Court-house. It is with gladness of
heart that I now am able to report finding this same
couple living happily together at Poomindie, under
the Archdeacon’s eye; the husband shepherding
1,800 sheep, and his wife hut-keeping for him, at
regular wages, with rations. This omen of success
is happily corroborated and followed up by other
instances of solid progress in industrial habits,
civilized life, and Christian behaviour. After
officiating, together with the Archdeacon, in the
church, (St. Thomas’s,) on Peb. 6th, when I con-
firmed five young women, residents ol the place,
we left for Poomindie early on Tuesday morning.
The road winds along the picturesque shores cf
Boston Bay, and after crossing the pretty little
valley of the river Tod, brought us to cottages and
huts, which form the Mission settlement ol Poo-
mindie. Besides the clap-boarded cottage in which
the Archdeacon lives, three others accommodate
the schoolmaster, the overseer, and the working
foreman. Fourteen smaller huts contain eleven
married native couples, and the other, children of
both sexes. A kitchen and offices, washing-shed,
&c., complete the present hamlet of Poomindie; at
some distance above and below which, on the river,


three other stone detached cottages also belong to
the Mission, The “ Native Reserve,” set apart by
the local government for the use of the Institution,
comprises a fine grassy park-like plain, at the base
of a range of hills of moderate height, which afford
pasturage for between 3 and 4,000 sheep. This
Native Reserve is so essentially connected with the
plan of the Mission, that I must here enter at some
length into the peculiar nature and difficulties of a
Mission to the Australian Aborigines, which not
having been sufficiently provided against, have
caused the failure of every attempt hitherto made
in this and the neighbouring Colonies to reclaim,
civilize, and convert these interesting though de-
graded relics of our common humanity.
Unlike the other portions of the Malay race, which
appears more or less to have peopled the various groups
of the Pacific Polynesia, the Australian possesses not
even the simplest implements or arts of social civili-
zation. The inhabitant of the South Seas cultivates
his provision -ground, owns property, builds houses,
canoes, makes cloth or matting, fish-hooks, stone
adzes, builds temples, worships idols, acknowledges
a kind of feudal chieftainship; the Australian, on the
other hand, makes nothing beyond a spear, or cloak
of skins, a small net or mat of grass to hold the roots
he digs up, or the opossum skins which he preserves.
A few branches torn from the trees form his shel-
ter; he owns no superior in his tribe, holds all
property in common; is but a wandering hunter
within the limits of a certain territory; engaged in


frequent feuds with neighbouring tribes; treating
the wives as slaves, and by a tyrannical polygamy
appropriating them to the old men of the tribe, or
from time to time relaxing this custom into pro-
miscuous intercourse, occasionally driven by starva-
tion to practise infanticide, and even cannibalism.
Such is the degraded state of the native Australian,
and such the difficulties of taming, educating, and
Christianizing these bond-slaves of Satan.
In the conversion of the South Sea Islanders, it
is well known how much native agency was em-
ployed, and how the conversion of some chiefs
facilitated the overthrow of idolatry in many of the
islands. The Missionary in Australia is deprived
of all such instrumentality. He has no mind suf-
ficiently developed on which to work ; and there is
no native authority which, when converted, is able
to teach and influence others. The intellect of the
wild Australian adult appears incapable almost of
being reasoned with. The next step was obviously
to bring the young under education. This accord-
ingly was successfully attempted, and the young
Australian was found as capable of being taught as
his white brother. Nevertheless, here also many
drawbacks and difficulties were to be encountered.
If the schools were established in the “ bush,” then
there was the counteracting influence of the elder
natives, the filth of the “ worley,” the contamina-
tion of native customs and rites, and the seductions
of the immemorial “ corobbery.” No sooner was
the grown-up girl or boy in some measure tamed*


instructed, and impressed with the truths of reli-
gion, than the former was claimed as the affianced
wife of some elder kinsman; and the latter was
summoned to go through the initiatory rites by
which he was admitted to the rank of “ young man,”
and permitted to have a wife, if he could get one,
as the number of men appears to be considerably in
excess. Even in Adelaide, where a flourishing
school was established near Government House,
under the watchful superintendence of successive
governors, the attention of the Protector of Natives,
the care of a really Christian schoolmaster, and the
pains-taking instruction of several earnest-minded
Sunday teachers, the above difficulties disappointed
the hopes, and frustrated the endeavours of those
who wished to preserve and convert the remnant of
the native tribes.
No sooner had the parents of the school-children
paid their autumnal visit from the banks of the
Murray to Adelaide, than a message, secretly con-
veyed, would empty the school of the elder girls;
or, suddenly, several of the older boys would dis-
appear, leaving their clothes behind them by the
bank of the Torrens, or the trees of the park
lands. It became evident, therefore, that unless the
children could be isolated from native associations
and influences, nothing permanent could be effected.
Hence the idea of removing the elder ones to an
adult Institution at Port Lincoln, on the western
shore of Spencer’s Gulph.
Again, although the situation of the native school


in Adelaide accustomed the children to the sights
and sounds of civilized life, while daily schooling
and attendance on Divine worship every Sunday,
with religious instruction, could not fail to tame the
savage nature, open the mind, and, perhaps, impress
the feelings, or awaken conscience; yet the examples
and opportunities of vice were abundantly supplied,
counteracting, no less effectually than native in-
fluences, all efforts at conversion. Religious impres-
sions were produced from time to time, hut were
subsequently impaired or effaced by European con-
tamination. There was no asylum or refuge for the
youthful convert or catechumen. Hence the plan
of an extensive “Native Reserve” in the country,
annexed to the Mission Training Institution. It
had also been the defect of the school-system in
Adelaide, that industrial education was not suf-
ficiently employed. The natives were taught to
read, write, and cypher. They were put in posses-
sion of the signs of ideas, without having acquired
the ideas themselves. They could do a sum in
addition, but knew not practically the value or
proper use of money. They were not educated to
be labourers or mechanics. Their play-hours were
spent in practising throwing the spear, or in dancing
c< corobbery.” I repeatedly saw and heard them
while visiting at Government House.
Much has been said in proof of the impossibility
of converting the natives—of two girls who, after
having been employed as servants in that establish-
ment, subsequently returned to native life and habits.


But what are the facts ? They were not suitable
wives for Europeans; if married to natives, they
must needs belong to their affianced husbands, or
run the risk of being speared. Few or no colonists
would have taken them as domestic servants, unwil-
ling to take the necessary trouble with them, or
exercise the requisite patience; and thus, after a
few months or years of schooling and superficial
civilization, together with a little Christian know-
ledge, rather than a real change of heart, they were
thrown back upon native life, or became the degraded
victims of European vice. Their case only demon-
strated the necessity of an Institution, such as the
Archdeacon has succeeded in setting on foot, for the
reception of the elder native children who had been
partially educated at Adelaide, at the most critical
period of life, when approaching manhood. He
devoted himself to the holy object of converting, if
possible, the remnant that w r as left, and saving them
from the ravages of disease and infamy. The prin-
ciples on which he proposed to proceed, were pointed
out by past experience and former failures. They
were isolation, industrial education, as w T ell as the
usual schooling; marriage, separate dwellings, hiring
and service for wages; gradual and progressive moral
improvement based upon Christian instruction, Chri-
stian worship, and Christian superintendence. With-
out disturbing the school at Adelaide, (which he
proposed to leave as an elementary training esta-
blishment,) he desired to draft, from time to time,
the elder boys and girls to the Mission Station at


Port Lincoln. Thus, isolated from native pollution
and temptations to vice in Adelaide, he proposed
to educate, to employ , and to Christianize them.
Hence, a considerable tract of land became neces-
sary as a Native Reserve, on which they might be
maintained and employed in the various occupations
of an Australian farm and sheep station. For this
purpose, Boston Island, which closes Boston Bay,
Port Lincoln, to seaward, containing about four
square miles, was pitched upon for the Mission.
It affords pasturage for 1,200 sheep, as well as
land fit for agriculture and garden-ground —the
opportunity of fishing—and is near enough to the
settlement to procure medical aid, and the supply of
other wants of civilized life. Here accordingly the
Archdeacon landed, Sept. 9,1850, with five married
couples and one native lad, besides a schoolmaster
and carpenter. A tent was pitched for the females,
and a hut, quickly constructed, for the Archdeacon
and his companions.
Here evening prayer was held by the little band
of Christians and Catechumens, the commencement
of that system of social worship for the Mission at
which, during the last week, I was privileged to
assist on several occasions. The inability to find
fresh water, after sinking several wells, necessitated
removal, after a sojourn of a few weeks, to some
better watered spot. Poomindie, on the river Tod,
was accordingly selected ; and, in order to carry out
the system of isolation and industrial employment,
the surrounding district was proclaimed a Native


POOMINDIE MISSION STATION, 1853.


Reserve, exempting it, therefore, from sale to private
individuals. It includes a small run for 3,000 sheep.
Fear of being put to death by the wild natives,
according to the prevailing custom among the native
tribes, was thought a sufficient restraint upon the
Adelaide school children, to prevent them from
leaving the station; while the various duties of farm-
ing sheep and cattle herding for the young men
offered the best means of training these young
people to the habits and duties of civilized life. The
Archdeacon had first to gain their confidence, and
win their affection. His simple, kind, firm, Chris-
tian earnestness —teaching, controlling, reproving,
governing in short, with enlightened charity, these
children of the bush —has at length been blessed
with a considerable degree of success. Many young
adult natives, who would have belonged to the most
degraded portion of the human family, are now
clothed and in their right minds, sitting at the feet
of Jesus, and intelligently worshipping, through Him,
their heavenly Father.
The Mission now consists of fifty-four natives,
comprising eleven married couples ; the rest children
of either sex, thirteen being from the Port Lincoln
district. The married couples have each their little
hut, built of the trunks of the shea-oak set up in
the ground, the interstices being neatly plastered
and whitewashed, roofed with broad paling. The
other children in small divisions occupy the remain-
ing ones. They have their meals in common in the
general kitchen; the working party first, then the


women and children. Naming, one of the elder
young men, assisted by two mates, is steward,
butcher, and cook. At half-past six in the morning,
and after sun-down, all assemble at the Archdeacon’s
cottage, for the reading of Scripture and prayer.
The Schoolmaster, Mr. Huslop, leads the singing of
a simple hymn, and the low soft voices of the
natives make pleasing melody. A plain exposition
follows. After breakfast they go to their several
employments: the cowherds milk, &c.; some were
engaged in putting up posts and rails for a stock-
yard ; the shepherds were with their flocks ; two
assisted the bricklayer, one preparing mortar, the
other laying bricks. At the proper season they
plow, reap, shear, make bricks, burn charcoal, cut
wood; do, in fact, under the direction of the over-
seer, the usual work of a station. Six hours are
the limits of the working day; they are unequal to
more. Shepherds and first-class labourers receive
Bj>*. per week and rations; second-class, 55., third,
3 s. 6d., fourth, 2s. 6d. The younger children attend
school; the married women wash, and learn sewing
clothes, making and mending. Such is an outline
of the occupation, education, and religious training
adopted at Foomindie, which, begun with very
limited means, and with no previous instance of
success to encourage hope, has nevertheless, through
a blessing upon the Archdeacon’s patient, untiring,
quiet zeal, reached a very promising state of matu-
rity. Thus far the Institution is an exception to
the list of Australian Missionary failures.


Let us look at the present results, under the heads
of Civilization, Moral Training, and Christian
Attainment.
Ist. We find eleven married couples decently
clothed, clean in their persons, keeping their own
huts and clothes in order, and much attached to
each other —in the place of the promiscuous un-
chastity, and the brutal degradation of the native
women in their wild state. A farm of twenty acres
has been fenced, plowed, reaped, and stacked, by
these children of the soil; two flocks are wholly
under their charge. These they have shorn, besides
two other flocks belonging to settlers; and five were
just about to shear the lambs of Mr. Peter, at eigh-
teen shillings per hundred. I saw an excellent kiln of
bricks which, under the direction of a brickmaker
from Adelaide, they had helped to make, mould, and
burn. In fact, while the other settlers at Port
Lincoln were much hampered by the migration of
their servants and shepherds to the Victoria Diggings,
the Archdeacon was able to carry on the improve-
ment of the Mission premises, the labours at the
farm, as well as assist his neighbours with native
shearers, who shear remarkably well.
2d. In regard to Moral Training, the wild native
knows little or nothing of the value of money or
property; but at Poomindie the Mission lads earn
weekly wages, and, what is more, “ shop ” for them-
selves at the store in Port Lincoln, or even send up
orders to Adelaide for goods. This indicates a real
mental and moral development. The following


purchases were made by one of the Mission natives,
Kewrie, for himself and friend, while I was present :
a pair of shoes, two pairs of trowsers, a blue woollen
shirt, a packet of currants and raisins for puddings,
a flask of salad oil for the hair; a bonnet w r as
looked at for his wife, but left for her determination,
and a shawl for the throat rejected as being too
dear. The same youth, had he been left to native
influences upon leaving school, would probably have
become, after a short time, a dirty, ragged, diseased,
lazy sheep-stealer, or an occasional hewer of wood
and drawer of water for some of the inhabitants of
Adelaide, or settlers in the Bush. He is now a
nice-looking, decent, intelligent, well-conducted
young man.
3dly. With respect to Conversion. When the
Archdeacon came in from Poomindie to meet me, he
was followed by ten of the elder boys and young
men, who asked leave to go and meet the Bishop.
Some I had known in the Sunday School at Adelaide.
I was agreeably surprised to see them nicely dressed
in the usual clothing worn by settlers; cheque
shirts, light summer coats, plaid trowsers, with
shoes and felt hats—articles mostly purchased with
their own earnings. They were better dressed than
the labouring class in general at home. They had
brought their blankets, blacking, brushes, &c.,
making the broad verandah of a wool shed their
sleeping-place, and cooking their meals at a fire in
the yard. Not far off was a small native camp, and
the contrast between these two groups would have


convinced any candid observer of the truth for
which the Archdeacon has always steadily con-
tended, viz. that the Aborigines are not only en-
titled to our Christian regard, but are capable, under
God’s blessing, of being brought out of darkness
into light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
It was very pleasing to see these young men, on
Sunday morning before church, sitting together
reading in their Testaments or Hymn-books, which
they had brought with them, and afterwards filling,
at both services, two benches in the pretty little
church. Most of them were Catechumens, whom
the Archdeacon thought he could recommend as fit
to be baptized. Accordingly, on Thursday the 10th,
at Poomindie, I conversed severally with ten men,
and Tanda, the wife of Conwillan, in the presence
of the Archdeacon. The native manner is natu-
rally shy, reserved, and incommunicative, but gentle
and unimpassioned. After hearing them, and asking
them questions, I agreed with the Archdeacon that
there was good ground for admitting them by baptism
into the ark of Christ’s Church, believing them to
be subjects of God’s grace and favour. We held
regular evening service at sundown; and after the
second lesson, I baptized Thomas ISTytchie, James
Narrung, Samuel Conwillan, Joseph Mudlong, David
Tobbonko, John Wangaru, Daniel Toodko, Matthew
Kewrie, Timothy Tartan, Isaac Pitpowie, and
Martha Tanda, wife of Conwillan. The other
women and girls are not yet so advanced as Martha
and Annette, a little Swan River native, who has


long formed part of the Archdeacon’s family. Each
native answered for himself distinctly, according to
the service for Adult Baptism, and, from their
devotional manner and previous answers, I have
reason to believe that they understood and intended
to keep the vow which they then voluntarily made.
On the following morning I consecrated the ceme-
tery, where the remains of those who have died
repose. Of these, eight in number, three in addition
to Takanarro (of whose last illness and happy death
I sent you a printed account), gave strong evidence
of their dying in faith and assured hope.
I must here observe, with respect to this mortality,
that, compared with Europeans, the ordinary native
is slight in frame and feeble in constitution, easily
brought low by sickness, and pining away often
from unaccountable causes, principally pulmonary
complaints, aggravated by their own thoughtlessness
and roving mode of life. The seeds of disease
have also been widely spread through the native
tribes since their contact with Europeans; and
hence the dwindling away of the race from prema-
ture death and fruitless marriage.
One more incident I may mention in proof of
their progress in civilization; a cricket match
played by the Poomindie lads and young men, on a
holiday given on the occasion of my visit. I was
pleased at watching, with the Archdeacon, two
Australian native “elevens” thus enjoying them-
selves ; and remarked, not only their neatness in
" fielding and batting,” but what was far more


worthy of note, the perfect good-humour which pre-
vailed throughout the games; no ill-temper shown,
or angry appeals to the umpire, as is generally the
case in a match of Whites,
I have little more to add, than that the Mission is
again strengthened by the accession of Mr. George
Wollaston, son of Archdeacon Wollaston, who will
act as overseer of the sheep and farm-labour. A good
schoolmistress is shortly expected from England, and
thus the education of the younger boys and girls will
be well carried on. A new school-room is projected,
and subscriptions are collecting for the purpose. It
appears to me that the Mission is so consolidated as
to admit of gradual enlargement. There is now a
small body of trained Christian natives, the nucleus of
the native Church. The Archdeacon, and all friends
of Missions, have reason to thank God and take cou-
rage. His blessing will never fail to attend enlight-
ened zeal, chastened and sustained as that is, in Mr.
Hale, by Christian love and firmness of purpose.
I sail in a few days for Adelaide when the wind
serves.
Yours truly,
Rev. E. Hawkins. Augustus Adelaide-
P.S. We set sail on Saturday the 19th, and
reached Adelaide on Monday morning, after a quick
passage.
K. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL
