

THE ADVENTURES
OF AN
Australian Traveler
(CAPTAIN J. REID,)
IN SEARCH OF THE MARVELOUS,
GIVING A GRAPHIC ACCOUNT OF THE
DISCOVERY, CAPTURE AND SEMI-CIVILIZATION
OF THE
WILD AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN
TOM AND HETTIE,
TOGETHER WITH A
Sketch of the Savage Tribes Inhabiting the Interior of Australia,
with a brief Account of the Customs, Manners, Heathen
Beliefs, Superstitions, Traditions and Origin of
those Barbarous and Curious Islanders.
NEW YORK:
TORREY & CLARK, PRINTERS AND ENGRAVERS,
Nos. 2 & 4 SPRUCE STREET.




SUCCINCT ACCOUNT
OF THE
Wild Australian Children.
HOW AND WHEN THEY WERE CAPRURED.
Early in the commencement of the year 1864, a number
of persons sailed from the city of New York for Australia,
They were all intent upon different missions; some in quest
of wealth; some in search of new homes; some to collect
claims; others to propagate the gospel and inculcate divine
truths in the breasts of the people, while others were anx-
ious for the witnessing of new scenes and experiencing
new sensations.
Among the passengers was one who fully realized the
motive of his journey. He was young and ambitious, but
of sterling character. Endowed with but limited means of
his own, but furnished with thousands of dollars and letters
of almost unlimited credit, he left the land of his nativity,
hopeful of success, yet fearing lest the object of his mission
should fail.
He was the agent of Van Amburgh & Co., the world-
renowned animal exhibitors and proprietors of the greatest
menagerie the world had ever seen. He had served as a
boy under Van Amburgh, who had viewed his career with
pride and pleasure—that boy who had so conducted himself
that his employers and co-laborers felt a confidence in his
judgment, and a firm reliance in his ability to successfully
carry out any enterprise intrusted to his caution and fidelity


so that they gave him his agency, and sent him far away
to act for them. That young man was Captain J. Reid ; his
business was to capture or to purchase all the rare speci-
mens of Nature to be obtained in Australia.
After a journey alike pleasant and unpleasant, as all jour,
neys invariably prove to be, whether they be long or short,
the Captain and his co-voyagers landed at their desired
haven. Each one of the party lost but little or no time in
commencing the preliminaries of their main object. With
the Captain, but little time for consultation with himself
was required. He knew by what he was actuated: to ren-
der his trip a success was his main object.
By close business tact and an untiring industry, he soon
succeeded in purchasing a number of rare animals and al-
most marvelous birds. These he shipped immediately to
the metropolis of America, where, in the Zoological Insti-
tute of Van Amburgh & Co., on Broadway, they were ex-
hibited to the public, who until then had never realized the
fact that the concern did employ men of brains and business
superiority to search the world for all that was new, rare
and interesting in Nature.
Captain Reid, having exhausted all the seaports for “new
things.” determined upon going into the interior in order
to secure, if possible, something that would eclipse all his
former triumphs. To attempt this undertaking alone, would
have been an absurdity; so he was forced to bide his time,
until other parties should be willing to join him in what was
then deemed a perilous pilgrimage. At length, a party of
Jesuit missionaries, a few gold seekers and some English-
men bent upon sport with the rifle, formed an expedition.
Our hero joined the band, and soon became the hero of the
party.
The Captain was replete with story and experience. He
had been abroad, in Asia and Africa-had enjoyed luxury
in the capitals of the continent, and suffered tribulations
upon arid plains and in malarious jungles. He could cheer
the despondent heart, buoy up the spirits of the weary, and
sustain the broken constitution. He made friends with the
natives, and through his urbanity and conciliatory manner


succeeded in obtaining the services of a valuable guide from
among the wild and untutored Australians.
SEMI-CIVILIZED COAST INDIANS.
There are, it would seem, two distinct varieties of the
native Australians, one of which lives on the coast, and
subsists mostly on fish, and from occasional association with
runaway convicts from Botany Bay Colony, has become
partly civilized, but the other lives far in the interior of the
island, and is very rude and degraded, existing on wild
fruits, berries, roots, grubs, worms, frogs and snakes, and
whatever is killed in the chase. The mildness of the climate
permits them to go almost naked, so that a few simple gar-
ments made of the bark and leaves of trees are all they
require/ Here, amid the sunny glades of the forest, or along
the winding banks of silvery streamlets, breathing light and
balmy air, delighted with sweet music of birds, the hum of
insects, and flowers of dazzling hue, with cloudless skies
spread out above them, they have lived for centuries, un-
knowing and unknown of all the world.
3
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.


Between these two varieties there has ever existed con-
enmity and war, the consequence of which has been
that those in the interior have become nearly extinct, one
of them being rarely seen, even by the boldest traveler or
most straggling convict, so that their present existence had
come to be doubtful.
The Australians living near the coast, although not quite
so ferocious and brutal as those of the interior, are very low
in the scale of humanity. Our travelers, however, found
them mostly quite friendly, and one of them —their guide
was rather intelligent, and not without a degree of courage
and a sense of moral obligation. They are a slight built
race, and have generally but very little of that bold fierce-
ness which is considered a part of the character of the savage,
and which sometimes inspires something like respect. There
are neither bears, lions, elephants nor tigers here, and that
may be the cause of their being so unheroic.
The Australian natives have rambled for ages over these
vast regions, and have left no monuments or lasting traces
of their abode amid them. 1 hey have been always wan-
dering, but never seem to have advanced, d hey have
never cultivated the ground, though they see what luxuries
and comforts the Europeans obtain from it, and which these
savages like to enjoy. They have neither flocks nor herds,
nor do they manufacture anything except their rude weapons
and a few baskets; and though they have roved oyer their
country for ages, where the gold has been glittering in grains
and nuggets, they have never discovered its value.
As our explorers advanced, they found the country more
sparsely peopled, and the inhabitants in a more normal
condition. At times, however, they came across some well-
conditioned huts, that were made of branches arched over
in the form of a bird-cage, and thatched with grass and the
bark of the drooping tea tree. Other structures were seen,
composed of four large sticks driven into the ground, sup-
porting crbsspoles placed in their forks, over which bark was
spread sufficiently strong and spacious for a man to lie upon.
In another part they found an old camping place, where there
was a hedge or long niimi of dry timber, and opposite to it


a row of places constructed of stones where the fires had
been. Besides these, there were several huts of the form
of a bee-hive, closely thatched, like the former, with straw
and bark. Their only opening was so small that a man
could scarcely creep through it. They afterward saw others
of these rounded huts, looking just like huge nests of the
white ant.
CHARACTER OF THE NATIVES.
The real Australian is an eater of human flesh—a cannibal
—not from necessity, but from choice. Not content with
fiend-like devouring the carcases of the enemies they have
slain in battle, they invade the sanctity of the home, and
amid the tears and protestations of the mother, seize the
female infant from her breast, and bear it away to devour it
in one of their beastly epicurean orgies.
Polygamy is allowed. Men buy women according to
their means. Parents sell their daughters —men their wives.
Love is unknown there; affection is a holy feeling never
entertained.
THE RELIGION OF THE NATIVES
Is founded upon just as absurd traditions as those that dis-
tinguish all other Pagan and some more enlightened people.
They are superstitious, dreading the night as the home of
the dark spirits. They entertain an idea, that at the Crea-
tion, a woman, the daughter of “an old man ” determined to
render mankind a kindness, and forever protect them. She
found them unclothed and famished, sitting upon the ground.
Her father, Pungil, who was their God, held out his hand to
the sun, and made them warm. The caverns of the earth
were unlocked, and a multitude of persons came upon its
surface. But a winter came, and the inhabitants of the
island had nothing to keep them comfortable. Their food
was uncooked —their diet the same as that of a dog. Kar-
ackarack, the divine female, came at the command of her
father, armed with a long staff, and commenced the work of
extermination of all obnoxious creatures. But the maiden
broke her staff, the implement that was to prove the efficient
instrument of her laudable undertaking, and a portion of the
5
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.


objectionable things yet remained. She, true to the instincts
of an arduous nature yet excited, so warmed the remains of
the shattered weapon, that fire came from it. The natives
never suffered it to die out, and until this day, they bless the
tair goddess for giving them the means for cooking their
food, and enabling themselves to be comfortable when old
Boreas blows his chill whistles around them.
They have also a legend about the flood, and a faith that
after death they will become white people. Such are the
crude principles of religion that govern the ideas of a creation
and a destiny among the wild natives of Australia.
THE CAPTURE.
After many weeks of weary travel, but numerous ones of
interest, Captain Reid and his party came to a mountainous
district; one of the most beau-
tiful of the interior of the coun-
try. The party, glad to enjoy
repose in a pleasant place, did
not stop to admire the sub-
limity of the grand and pic-
turesque surroundings, but
stretched themselves upon the
green sides of the hills, and
sought rest. Soon, however,
were they awakened by a sig-
nal from their guide, who with
fear and emotion, directed
their attention to a group of
objects, that appeared to be
drinking from a gurgling
stream, that flowed over a
CAPTAIN REID'S AUSTRALIAN GUIDE.
precipice and through the valley below. At first the figures
were supposed to be animals, but Captain Reid, by means
of a powerful glass, declared them to be human beings.
He at onc.e, with his quick mind, resolved to capture them,
and thus present them to the civilized world. Getting some
aid from his traveling companions, he proceeded down the
cliffs and stood upon a pendant rock that overhung the spot
6
HISTORY OF THE


where the wild, weird creatures were assembled. The
Captain, having a knowledge of the natives’ desire for raw
animal food, ordered a kangaroo to be instantly killed.
Skinning the animal hastily, they cut it into pieces, and
throwing them below, were soon gratified by finding that
the bait attracted their notice, and would soon engross the
undivided attention of the strange beings. Getting the
lassoes ready, he gave his orders in a subdued tone, and
soon had the satisfaction of having in his possession the
whole four of the coveted objects —three boys and one girl.
They proved to be wild, savage and perfectly intractable.
Captain J. Reid, aided by the efforts of two of the Holy
Fathers, of the Missionary Expedition, and the kind offices
of the Sisters of Charity, at once set to work to make them
understand that they should be treated with kindness.
Whether they were of the lower order of man or the higher
grade of the brute creation, none could determine ; even
the native guide could offer no explanation as to what race
of people they belonged, or of what species of animal they
were—he had never seen the like before! When captured,
they evinced no affection, but soon became reconciled to
the society of those who had them in charge.
On arriving at one of the branches of the Darling River
not far from Sidney, our guide declined to cross, as was
then supposed from antagonistic notions in regard to Aus-
tralian coast civilization. He having accomplished his task
as guide to the interior with satisfaction to all, the Captain
determined to reward him liberally, and was proceeding to
bestow on him such indispensable articles to a journey into
the interior, as he now no longer needed on reaching a
civilized country, when imagine the surprise of the Captain
and his party, at the guide’s sudden departure at a pace
equaling the fleetest race-horse, and after an absence of
scarcely half an hour, he returned with a squaw and three
children, to participate with him in the pleasure of receiving
what the Captain declared to be a merited reward to his
faithful guide. The acquisition of a few beads and three or
four yards of brass wire, was all the compensation the guide
had bargained for at the commencement of the journey, and
7
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.


to be the recipient of so many things unexpectedly, caused
him unspeakable delight, in which the others joined with all
the antics and grimaces, for which the untutored savages
are notorious. It was an impressive scene of barbarous
hapoiness not easily forgotten.
dhe Captain started for Sidney, but on reaching that
City, two of the captured children died , leaving in his hands
the only hvo living specimens of the supposed extinct race,
that the civilized world would in all probability ever have an
SCENE OF THE CAPTURE.
opportunity to study and inspect. These two beings, for
beings they undoubtedly are, appeared to express neither
surprise nor regret at the demise of their companions. They
arrived in New York, in the fall of i 865, and gave their
first exhibition shortly after their arrival. Their levees were
largely attended, and they are now, according to the verdict
of the press and the public, the greatest curiosities of the
world.
8
HISTORY OF THE


AN EXTINCT RACE.
The amazement of the travelers on beholding the wonder-
ful beings they had captured were unbounded. The forma-
tion of their bodies is in every respect comformable to the
human figure, while their small heads and wild antics,
together with their inarticulate chattering, would seem to
indicate that they belonged to a superior species of the
monkey tribe. Their bright, intelligent faces, however, con-
tradict this theory, while their stooping posture in walking
or running would seem to confirm it. Or, could it be possi-
ble, they thought, that at length the connecting link between
mankind and the brute creation had been discovered in
these individuals.
THE EXHIBITION.
The immortal Pope has proclaimed that “the noblest study
of mankind is man,” a sentiment that is endorsed by the
good old book in many places.
The subjects of our exhibition are two native Australians—
mere children when captured—and taken while running wild
amidst the woods and mountains of their native land. From
this state of nature, notwithstanding every art and appliance
consistent with humanity and kindness has been resorted to
for nearly two years, their keepers have not been wholly
able to reclaim them.
Their captors, with a view of promoting the interests of
science, as well as gratifying a commendable curiosity that
every inquiring mind must feel towards these truly wonder-
ful beings and reimbursing themselves in part for the enor-
mous cost, labor and anxiety attending their enterprise, have
made the Wild Australian Children the objects of a public
exhibition, placing the price of admission at so low a figure
as to induce all who feel an interest in the wonders of ani-
mated nature to avail themselves of the opportunity now
afforded.
Our subject belongs to the department of natural science,
that most interesting and engrossing subject to the human
mind, especially when it relates to those inferior orders.
9
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.


which approximate to the human species. It is in the field
of the natural sciences, that the most interesting and instruc-
tive lessons have been collected for mankind, the wisdom
they afford is certain and permanent, while the theories and
speculations of philosophers in other departments of knowl-
edge are often vain, delusive and perplexing to the common
mind. It is not a mere idle curiosity, but rather a noble
faculty implanted by the Creator, for the wise purpose of
awakening in His creatures, a sense of His greatness and
power, and of continually leading their minds to contem-
plate the wonders of His works, and to “ look through Nature
up to Nature’s God.”
But vast as have been the labors and discoveries of the
greatest authors and travelers, they have not exhausted, nor
was it possible for them to exhaust, the field of discovery.
Since their day the mysteries of Nature have been still more
unfolded, and the marvels of creation still more brought to
view. The greatest of these, undoubtedly, are the subjects
of this exhibition, the Australian Children. Nothing like
them has ever before been exhibited to the world. They
are now the greatest curiosities in existence.
Every one is aware that there has been much discussion
and speculation going on of late years as to the “unity of
the races,” the “types of man,” etc., which gives the highest
interest to any discovery calculated to shed light on the
subject. It is contended by some that the creation of man
is the result of a gradual development from the inferior
forms of animal life, until it reached the perfection of the
human species. The argument is that the monkey, the ape,
the orang-outang, and the Congo negro even, are but links,
in the chain which ends with man. One link, however,
next beyond the orang-outang, has always been wanting to
give symmetry to this theory, which is now supplied by the
discovery of the Wild Children of Australia. There are,
unquestionably, some plausible reasons in support of this
theory of certain philosphers ; and there can be, certainly,
no impropriety in earnestly investigating this great question
of the age—the “ unity of the races.”


BRAINS —REASON—INSTINCT.
It has been suggested by some, upon a casual or a first
glance at the Australian Children, that they ar'e deformed in
brain—mere idiots. The smallness of their head seems to
encourage such an opinion with those who are not familiar
with the subject. Nothing can be more erroneous, either in
principle or in regard to the individuals in question. It is
not the quantity, but the quality of brains that forms the
mind or gives character to the individual, whether man or
brute. In the every day observations of life, we find this
frequently illustrated. Big-headed men are not invariably
THE GUIDE RETURNING HOME WITH HIS PRESENTS.
wise, while we often notice craniums of small dimensions
gracefully resting upon the shoulders of men of sense.
Phrenologists and other scientific men who have exam-
ined the Australian Children, are of the opinion that the
specimens here exhibited are neither idiots, Lusus nattirce ,
nor any other abortion of humanity, but belong to a distinct
race hitherto unknown to civilization, who possess all the
faculties —such as they are —of their kind, and that they


are the long*sought connecting link between the mere
animal and the human species.
“ The fabric of the human mind,” to use the words of
Dr. Reid, in his inimitable essays upon the human under-
standing, “is curious and wonderful, as well as that of the
human body. The faculties of the one are with no less
wisdom adapted to their several ends than the organs of the
other. Nay, it is reasonable to think that, as the mind is
of a nobler work and of a higher order than the body, even
more of the wisdom and skill of the Divine Architect hath
been employed in its structure. It is, therefore, a subject
highly worthy of inquiry on its own account, but still more
worthy on account of the extensive influence which the
knowledge of it has over every other branch of science.
Wise men now agree, or ought to agree, in this : that there
is but one way to the knowledge of Nature’s works—the
way of observation and experiment. By our constitution,
we have a strong propensity to trace particular facts and
observations to general rules, and to apply such general
rules to account for other effects, or to direct us in the pro-
duction of them. This procedure of the understanding is
■fimiliar to every living creature in the common affairs of
life, and it is the only one by which any real discovery in
philosophy can be made.”
It was supposed at one time that Dr. Robinson, a cele-
brated traveler in Africa, had discovered the great curiosity
of the age —a species of the negro or African having a tail.
But although he found a tribe having an unusual elongation
of the spinal column, and a good place for a tail, he could
nowhere find a vertebral continuation beyond the surface.
Professor Lobdell, of the Humane Douglass Institution,
Bridges Street, London, has, indeed proclaimed to the world
that all negroes born in Africa, are endowed with tails ; but
that their mothers, for convenience, invariably pluck them
out by the roots the moment they come into the world.
The learned professor makes this declaration from facts
which have come under his own personal observation, in
various examinations made by himself on adult*- negroes,
after their arrival in England, during his brief sojourn in


that country. He also asserts that in these personal exam-
inations, he could clearly perceive the scar or mark, left in
consequence of the violent eradiction of the caudal extrem-
ity.
Conjectures and theories, however, are creatures of men,
and will always be found very unlike the creatures of God.
If we would know the works of God, we must consult them
with attention and humility, without daring to add anything
of ours to what they declare. A just interpretation of
Nature is the sound and orthodox philanthropy ; whatever
we add of our own, is apochryphal, and of no authority.
The lowest degree of social life will bring to light some
of those principles which lay hid in the savage state; and
according to his training and company, and manner of life,
some of them, either by their native vigor or by the force
of culture, will thrive and grow up to great perfection ;
others will be strangely perverted from their natural form ;
and others checked, or perhaps quite destroyed.
THE WILD CHILDREN.
The names given to the two wild Australian Children by
their captors, are Tom and Hettie. Apparently they are
brother and sister—the age of the boy being now about
twenty, and the girl seventeen. Their complexion has some-
thing of the cast of the North American aborigines —proba-
bly a shade lighter. Dr. Dutton believes them to be a shade
and a half lighter, at least, which of itself is a curious fact.
When first caught they were exceedingly wild and fierce;
but kind treatment has given them confidence, and they even
show great affection for those having them in charge.
Judging from their long, sharp teeth, the presumption is
that they have descended from a race of cannibals—perhaps
the only ones left alive of the tribe. The boy occasionally
shows signs of fingerings of his former wild and savage na-
ture. This is manifested in his greet dislike to wearing
clothes. He will sometimes, in a fit of anger, if not closely
watched, tear in fragments every garment from his person.
But, notwithstanding all this they have made considerable


progress in the arts of civilization. 1 hey can, to a great ex-
tent, dress themselves, wash their faces and hands, eat with
a knife and fork, comb their hair, put to rights the things of
a room, shake hands, etc. The boy when in the right humor,
can make pretty good speed at dancing, and has even learn-
ed to speak a few words in English, but very indistinctly.
The girl has no language, except a kind of gibberish, which
seems to be well understood by the boy. I hey have by far
the smallest and most curiously shaped heads of any human
beings ever seen.
These, however, just adapt them for creeping through the
tall, rank glass of their native plains, and springing upon the
sleeping game or unsuspecting foe, and not only in this, but
in their entire formation, actions, disposition, and all other
respects, they are widely different from anything ever be-
held, belonging to the human species. I hey move about
upon the stage as noiselessly as the skulking Indian in his
native forest. They cannot be still for a moment. Iheir
eyes have the quickness and cunning of the wily serpent.
They are as playful as kittens, and exhibit a strong and child-
ish fondness for toys. To witness their curious antics upon
receiving a new toy, fills the spectator with delight. They
will examine it with a most inquiring look, and express their
ecstatic joy in a thousand strange and diverting ways. But
to appreciate their oddities, one must see them, when it will
be found that the half has not been told.
These children are decidedly the greatest living curiosities
in the known world. To all classes of society they are alike
objects of deep interest and profound mystery. I hey offer
a new study for the philosopher, the historian, the phrenolo-
gist, the student and the scholar. No one who has not seen
them, no matter how fruitful his imagination, can form the
faintest idea of them.
There is that about them which fascinates you completely.
You never get tired beholding them. Nor deceptive wiles
nor alluring charms of art prompt them to amuse. We see
in them nothing but N ature, whose works always are attractive.
Unlike most savages, they are modest and decorous in
their deportment, and cleanly and decent in their persons


and habits. They seem to understand each other best when
conversing in pantomimic action, which they frequently carry
on with great vivacity and earnestness. They sometimes
attempt —or rather feign—to speak, but it is mere imitation,
for they have never been able to articulate any more than a
few incoherent words. Their faces are exceedingly animated
at times, particularly that of the girl, whose bright, black
eyes express intelligence and good nature continually. Their
gait is awkward, stooping forward as if inclined to go upon
all fours, and they are constantly romping and playing to-
gether. Captain Reid hopes that in the course of time they
can be taught to speak and even read understandingly.
PUBLIC SHOWS.
As there are many well-meaning but mistaken people who
are anxious to restrict as much as possible every description
of public shows, and even to begrudge to the rising genera-
tion and the working classes the few and scanty hours of
relaxation from study and labor, or any indulgence in rational
recreations, pastimes or spectacles, we feel that the objection,
however applicable to some species of public amusements,
cannot apply to such an exhibition as is offered in tbe Wild
Children of Australia. The intense interest manifested by
all beholders of these strange and mysteriously formed crea-
tures, sufficiently attests the importance of the subject, and
affords ample apology for offering them to the public gaze.
But we can see no necessity for proscribing any public
amusement that is properly conducted and not injurious to
public morals, nor inimical to thegeneral welfare of the people.
None but a pompous blockhead or solemn prig will pretend
that he never relaxes, never indulges in pastime, never wastes
his brenth in idle waggery and merriment. Such gravity is
the very essence of imposture, when it does not spring, as is
frequently the case, from a morbid austerity or morose
ignorance.
Although toil and sorrow, the penalties of the fall, seem to
be entailed upon the bulk of mankind as their sole and melan-
choly inheritance, we read not of any canon that prohibits


a temporary alleviation of their doom by means of sports,
sights, pastimes and amusements. These indeed may be
said to form a portion of our very nature, the constitution
both of the human mind and body unfitting them for inces-
sant occupation, and imperatively dictating occasional diver-
sion as an indispensable condition of their healthy exercise.
To trace the variation in the nature of these respites from
anxiety and drudgery, would be to record the progress of
the human mind, deriving our data from the pleasant fields
of public sport and private recreation, instead of exploring
those revolting fields of battle and not less repugnant scenes
of crime, violence and misery, which offer such abundant re-
sources to the historian.




