

THE SYDNEY OBSERVATORY
AND
THE “SYDNEY MORNING HERALD”
A PLEA FOR
ASTRONOMY IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY JOHN TEBBUTT,
Fellow af the Royal Astronomical Society of London; Member of the Royal Society
of New South Wales, the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, and the British
Astronomical Association; Corresponding Member of the Society Ethno-
graphique of Paris, and Honorary Corresponding Member of the
Queensland Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia.
SYDNEY:
GEO. MURRAY & CO., LIMITED, PRINTERS, 91 CLARENCE STREET,
MDCCCXCI.




THE SYDNEY OBSERVATORY
AND
THE “SYDNEY MORNING HERALD”
A PLEA FOR
ASTRONOMY IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
By JOHN TEBBUTT,
Fellow af the Royal Astronomical Society of London; Member of the Royal Society
of New South Wales, the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, and the British
Astronomical Association; Corresponding Member of the Society Ethno-
graphique of Paris, and Honorary Corresponding Member of the
Queensland Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia.
SYDNEY:
Geo. Murray & Co., Limited, Printers, 91 Clarence Street
mdcccxci.




THE SYDNEY OBSERVATORY
AND
THE “SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.”
QN September 9th, 1891, the Hon. J. H. Carruthers, Minister for
Public Instruction, laid on the table of the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales a return having reference to the
number of persons employed in the Government Observatory,
Sydney, and salaries paid for the years 1880 and 1890, together
with the total cost of the establishment for the ten years ended
1890. It appeared that the number of persons employed was nine
in 1880 and twelve in 1890, that the total cost of the establishment,
including instruments, for the ten years was and that of
this sum was paid for the maintenance of the meteorological
department alone. The document was subsequently printed. In
the Sydney Morning Herald of September 15th there appeared an
anonymous letter drawing attention briefly but strongly to the com-
parative outlays for the two departments, astronomy and meteor-
ology, and complaining of the small results which had accrued
to astronomy. After waiting a few days to see if any discus-
sion would arise on this important question, I forwarded to the
Herald the letter contained in this pamphlet, the said letter being
duly authenticated by my signature and address for publication. I
was obliged to send it to a newspaper because it unfortunately
happens that our colony, how prosperous soever it may be in other
respects, cannot yet boast of a periodical devoted to astronomy.
The letter, however, did not appear. Although I have applied to
the newspaper for the return of the manuscript, and have sent the
necessary postage stamps for that purpose, my application has not
even been noticed. But I am determined not to be thus quietly
snuffed out. The Herald seems oblivious to the fact that if by the
daily acquisition of copious weather maps and rain tables it can
quench its meteorological thirst at the fountain provided by a
paternal Government, there are others who have an astronomical
thirst which has equal claims to be satisfied, and it was in advocacy
of the claims of this latter class that I sent my letter for publication.
An English scientific journal, in acknowledging some time ago the
receipt of the previous year’s meteorological work of the Sydney
Observatory, congratulated the director on the fact that he had a


Government which could afford to expend so much on the publica-
tion of bulky meteorological volumes. The colonists may form
some judgment of the comparative attention paid by the public
printing department since 1862 to astronomy and meteorology
when I say that while a linear inch of horizontal space on a library
shelf is sufficient for the accommodation of astronomy, about twelve
times that space is required for meteorology. It is very well-known
that in European astronomical circles the Melbourne Observatory
has long been regarded as the chief astronomical establishment in
Australia, and this circumstance has arisen from the fact that its
astronomical work has not only been steadily carried on, but as
systematically published. There are at this moment in my library
seven handsome volumes containing the Melbourne annual meridian
results from 1863 to 1884, and it is probable that another volume
will soon be added. Besides these volumes, there are two catalogues
of stars founded on the results and comprising 1227 and 1211 stars
reduced to the epochs 1870 and 1880 respectively. In addition to
its meridian work, its observations of comets and other phenomena
are abundant, and these have been published soon after they were
made in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
and in the Astronomische Nachrichten. The latter periodical is an
international one, and a medium of communication for all profes-
sional astronomers. By its long establishment and its excellence
it holds the highest place among astronomical journals. Our first
Government Astronomer used to send his extra-meridian work for
publication in its columns; the Royal Observatory (Cape of Good
Hope), the National Observatory at Cordoba, and the Melbourne
Observatory send their extra-meridian work to it; but it is a
remarkable fact that since Mr. Scott’s time seventy volumes have
been published, and yet not one communication has appeared from
Sydney. Considering its profuse publication of meteorological work,
its non-publication of its annual astronomical results, and its sparse
communications to the astronomical journals, is it to be wondered
at that the Observatory is regarded as chiefly a meteorological
establishment, and therefore placed in the second class ? As I
said before, the Herald may satisfy its cravings by the daily acqui-
sition and publication of copious weather maps and rain tables, and
may highly disapprove of my conduct in criticising such a public
institution as the Sydney Observatory. The public, however,
although they may not know much of the technicalities of
astronomy, will still be desirous that their Observatory shall
occupy a higher position among the educational institutions of the
Southern Hemisphere, and will accordingly approve of my efforts
to bring about a more desirable state of things. Of the sympathy
and support of all lovers of the science I feel assured. When I
sent my letter to the Herald , I considered that, as a contributor to
the revenue out of which the Observatory is maintained, and a
gratuitous promoter of the science of astronomy for upwards of
thirty years, I had an undoubted claim to discuss the question


raised by the anonymous correspondent referred to, and in my dis-
cussion of it I do not think I have in any way transgressed the
limits of fair and honest criticism. It is refreshing to think that,
even in the small scientific world of New South Wales, it is not in
the power of any newspaper altogether to prevent freedom of dis-
cussion, and so I here give verbatim the rejected communication.
Having thus drawn attention to the question discussed in the
letter, it remains to be seen if there be sufficient public spirit in the
Colony to remedy the evil complained of. Until it be so remedied,
I unhesitatingly assert that the Government Observatory will not
fully answer the end for which it was originally established. At all
events, this pamphlet will serve as a protest 5 until the remedy be
applied.
THE REJECTED COMMUNICATION.
OUR OBSERVATORY.
(To the Editor of the “ Herald.")
Sir, — In the Herald of the 15th instant their appeared a letter
under the above heading, in which the writer, evidently a person
who takes an intelligent interest in colonial astronomy, justly
complains of the inadequate results which have been published by
the Sydney Observatory in connection with the science. That the
complaint in that letter has not yet called forth any reply is only a
further proof of the want of interest manifested by the people
generally, and the authorities particularly, in the establishment
referred to. When our first astronomer, the Rev. W. Scott, took
charge of the Observatory, a Board of scientific persons was at his
suggestion appointed by the Government to look after the interests
of the institution. This Board met annually at the Observatory to
receive the astronomer’s report of the work done during the
previous twelve months and to confer with him as to the work
proposed to be done during the ensuing year. During the period
of office of both Mr. Scott and Mr. Smalley, and I think at the
outset of Mr. Russell’s career, the usual annual visitation was made
and the astronomer’s report presented; but for many years past it
would seem that the Board has had no existence and there has
been no annual report. I have myself applied for the annual
reports for the period elapsed since Mr. Smalley’s time, but have
failed to get any; hence I am ignorant of what the Observatory
has really done for astronomical science. If the astronomical work
accomplished during the past twenty years is represented by that
which has been published in the Notices of the Royal Astro


nomical Society, the Journal of the Royal Society of New South
Wales , and in the separate publications of the Observatory itself,
then I can safely say that working astronomers cannot but regard
the production as quite unworthy of such a highly-equipped
establishment. When Mr. Scott took charge of the Observatory
the main object he had in view was to re-observe the stars of
Lacaille and Brisbane, and thus form an extensive southern
catalogue which would be of the highest value to the extra-meridian
observer/" The publication of such a catalogue would have conferred
imperishable renown on the Sydney establishment. Unfortunately,
Mr. Scott, whose foresight in this matter was exceedingly creditable,
did not get the sympathy of those whose assistance was so much
needed to carry out his plans. His great difficulty was to get the
instruments for the purpose, an obstacle which in later times
appears to have been more readily surmounted. In the year 1877
the Observatory was provided with an excellent transit-circle, but
notwithstanding this circumstance the only published results we
have from this instrument are, I believe, two small catalogues for
1877 and 1878, of 167 and 254 stars respectively. These embrace
the usual clock stars of the Nautical Almanac and a few others
observed specially for the trigonometrical survey and in connection
with the opposition of Mars. According to a short sketch ema-
nating from the Observatory in 1882 and entitled The History and
Progress of the Sydney Observatory , the meridian results for
1879-80-81 were ready for the printer, but I am not aware that they
have yet appeared. Now what is the consequence of all this
inactivity in the meridian department of the Observatory: simply
that the Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope has
forestalled us of the honour which our first Government astronomer
proposed for us, namely, that of presenting to the scientific world a
catalogue of upwards of twelve thousand accurately determined
southern fixed stars, a catalogue which has secured for Mr. Stone
the admiration and gratitude of every extra meridian observer in
the southern hemisphere. Scarcely a planet or a comet south of
the parallel of 25 degrees south declination can be observed with
the micrometer without our being able to find some point of re-
ference in the noble Cape Catalogue for 1880. The value of this
catalogue is supplemented by the publication of the Zone Catalogue
of the Cordoba Observatory and the two together leave the extra
meridian observer little to desire in the way of comparison stars.
Doubtless much has been done at our Observatory in the way of
astronomical observation which has not yet seen the light, but
what, may I ask, and I ask in the interest of the public at large, is
the use of amassing a large number of manuscript observations and
leaving them unpublished. In this state they may be destroyed by
*Note since added. —See Paper by the Eev. W. Scott, read before the
Philosophical Society of New South Wales, and published in the Herald of
June 25, 1860.


accidental fire or devoured by the white ant, which latter pest is
supposed to have destroyed some of the work done at the private
observatory of Sir Thomas Brisbane at Parramatta.
Let us by all means have the results published, and if they are
destroyed in one place they will be found in another, and thus be
preserved to science. To show the uselessness of expending large
sums of money for the mere making of observations, and putting
them away in manuscript without publication, I will give the
following illustration:—ln the years 1861 and 1862 I gratuitously
calculated for the Sydney Observatory all the occultations of Nautical
Almanac stars, which would be visible at that establishment during
the sixteen months ending June, 1862. I did this because I had great
faith in the observations of occultations as a means for determining
the longitude of the Observatory with greater accuracy than could
be attained by the ordinary method of moon culminations. My
views with regard to this method were laid before our local
Royal Society in 1878 and 1880, but were treated with indifference.
Only recently, however, they have been warmly supported by one
of the highest astronomical authorities in Germany. It appears,
from Mr. Scott’s fourth annual report to the Observatory Board,
that many of the occultations, which I had thus computed, were
observed with the 7-inch equatorial, but these observations are lost
to science, simply from the circumstance that they remain un-
published. In 1884, Dr. Auwers, of Berlin, the head of the
German Transit of Venus Commission, was anxious to obtain
Australian observations of occultations in order to establish a
fundamental meridian in Australia, for the more accurate determi-
nation of the longitude of the outlying Transit of Venus stations.
Having searched for the much-desired data, he came upon the
Windsor occultation-observations, which had been published in the
R.A.S. Notices and the Astronomische Nachrichten, from 1864 down
to 1876. He adopted the Windsor observations, seventy-six in
number, made in the period 1873-76, and fifteen observations made
at Melbourne in 1874, as the basis of one of the most elaborate
investigations ever undertaken in connection with terrestrial
longitude. The numerous Sydney occultations observed in 1861,
which would have been of the highest value in such an investi-
gation, were unavailable, for the simple reason that they were
buried in oblivion, and thus my own labours in computing the
occultations, and Mr. Scott’s additional labours in observing them,
have been frustrated. This is one illustration, out of many, which
might be adduced of the inutility of making observations and
leaving them unpublished, and it therefore becomes the imperative
duty of those in authority to see that your correspondent’s sug-
gestion is carried out. So long ago as 1874, M.M. Andre and
Rayet in their work, entitled, L'Astronomic Pratique et les
Observatoires en Europe et en Amerique , S=c. wrote as follows
respecting our Observatory :—“ L’Observatoire de Sydney a done
conquis un rang fort important parmi les etablissements astrono-


miques: il est a regretter que la publication des observations
n’ait pas marche de pair avec les observations elles-m6mes. Depuis
les deux volumes des Astronomical Observations made at the
Sydney Observatory parus en iB6O et 1861 par les soins de
M. Scott et relatifs aux annees 1859 et iB6O 1’ Observatoire de
Sydney n’a communique au monde astronomique aucun de ses
nombreux travaux. II y a la une lacune qui sans doute sera
bientot comblee. Un Observatoire ne devient reellement utile que
le jour ou ses observations son/regulierement et methodiquement
publiees.”
From an astronomical point of view we have done but little to
remove the ground of complaint stated in this extract. I may add
that, at the suggestion of Professor Newcomb, of Washington, I
am still engaged in observing lunar occultations of stars, with the
object of providing material for the improvement of the lunar
theory, and tnus assisting in throwing light on the much vexed
question of the secular acceleration of the moon’s mean motion. I
shall have an unusually good record for the current year, and this
result is in a great measure due to the interest of Mr. Innes,
F.R.A.S., of Sydney, who has kindly volunteered to provide me
with the prediction calculations of the occultations of Nautical
Almanac stars. lam thus enabled to observe a better proportion
of occultation reappearances than I have hitherto done, and these
are necessary for the investigation which Professor Newcomb has
in view. Perhaps I may be pardoned for suggesting that the
Sydney transit circle could do excellent service in this connection
by fixing with precision the places of the occulted stars. The star
places for Dr. Auwer’s investigation before referred to were deter-
mined with the transit circles at Le) den, the Cape of Good Hope,
and Melbourne.
In conclusion, I may say that by far the greater force of the
Sydney Observatory is devoted to the cause of meteorology,
to the obvious disadvantage of the sister science. That the efforts
of the establishment on behalf of meteorology are praiseworthy and
effective no one knows better than myself, and the results will
become more and more valuable as years roll on; but I would
suggest the high importance of publishing all that has been done
there for astronomy, and also of separating the two departments,
so that while the present efforts on behalf of meteorology are con-
tinued, a better contribution may be made for -the improvement of
astronomy.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
The Observatory, Windsor,
September 21, 1891.
JOHN TEBBUTT.




