

The Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
AN ADDRESS
BY
SIR HENRY WRIXON,
Late Attorney-General of Victoria, and Author of SOCIALISM;
being Notes on a Political Tour.
Melbourne:
MELVILLE, MU & SLADE, COLLINS STREET.
1901.


J PUBLISH the following Address, which
I had intended to give at a public institu-
tion, because it calls attention to some features
of the new Constitution of Australia that
deserve the consideration of the Electors, to
whatever political party they may belong.
H. J. WRIXON.
X4TH Jan., 1901.


THE
Constitution of the Common-
wealth of Australia.
Let me, in the first place, congratulate you upon the fact
that we are now a nation—one Australian nation, under tne
Crown. The object of the hopes and efforts of years—not to
mention the speculations and forecasts of the past half cen-
tury —are now secured. The period of discussion and un-
certainty is past. The union of Australia is a fact. On
the first day of this present January, we all became citizens
of a Commonwealth that is nearly as large as the United States,
and only a little smaller than Europe. We are the founders,
the forefathers, of this Australian nation. Fate itself cannot
take away from us this distinction.
And let me say that there is one feature in our Federal
movement of which we may be fairly proud. It has been
unique in this, that no outside pressure has brought it about.
It has been sought for and carried through by ourselves
alone, and solely from considerations of political prudence and
foresight. If we liked, we could have gone on safely, if un-
gloriously, as we were. The United States were driven to
union by the needs of their new national life, commercial and
warlike, after their separation from England. Union was a
necessity for the Swiss, squeezed in, as they are, by the prox-
imity of the great Powers of Europe. The Canadians were


put upon their self-defence by the great Republic across the
border, that threatened to absorb them, and were warned towards
union by the racial diversity of its people. We here, apart
to ourselves, in the new world, have determined for Federa-
tion, because we deliberately judged it to be better for us.
We have only now to show the same political wisdom in guiding
our Commonwealth, which we did in creating it. Allow me to
add one other general consideration. If this Federation is
good for us as Australians, it is equally so for us as a portion
of the British Empire. Benjamin Franklin proposed some-
thing like it for the American States, before the difficulties
with England arose, and to the end of his life he maintained
that if his plan had been adopted, it would have prevented
the separation of America from the motherland. Recent
researches into the history of tne Taxation movement fully
bear out his conclusion. ;
But, as I have said, we are now a Federal Commonwealth.
Since the first of January ,we have each possessed a double
citizenship. We are citizens of the State of \ ictoria, surely ;
but we are also citizens of the Commonwealth, and bound to
think of its interests and to guard its honour and its welfare.
The Commonwealth governs and taxes us directly as its own
subjects, by the independent authority conferred upon it.
Let us think for a moment of all that this involves. The
new nation contains some three million square miles of terri-
tory —a good deal of it is barren, certainly, but so is a good
deal of all the rest of the world. It is 1,970 miles from north
to south, and 2,400 miles the other way. Little Victoria
is bigger than England and 'Wales ; New South Wales is as
large as France, and a half again of France ; South Australia
could embrace nearly four of the Austro-Hungarian Empires ;
while out of Western Australia you could carve about five
German Empires. In fact, you could hide away the German
Empire in some part of the State that Sir John Forrest repre-
sents, so that there would be some difficulty in finding it
again. It follows from all this, the Commonwealth being
as yet mostly an unsettled country, that the. centres of popu-
tion in it are very widely apart. Ade’aide is nearly l,ioo
miles by rail from Sydney; Brisbane is nearly 1,300 miles
from Melbourne ; Perth is 1,500 miles from Melbourne, and
2,000 miles from Sydney. The leading colonies are small in
territory compared with the whole, though considerable in
population. If we divided the Australian continent into 100
parts, Victoria would only represent 3 parts, and New South
South Wales 10; while West Australia would stand-for 34
parts, and South Australia for 80. Over this continent, with all
its manifold and diverse interests, the watchful and intelligent
care of the Commonwealth Parliament and Government must
for national purposes extend. If we cast our view forward a
little to the time when there will be new States in the far


north and the tar east, differing from us here in climatic
conditions and industrial needs, yet one with us for Common-
wea.th objects, we shall realise how vast is the scope of our
umv dutms. It is estimated that in 1925 there w m be in
thite C "X° * Poi>uiation of SCTe ” millions of the
.* s I true ) several of the most important matters of
domestic legislation are reserved to the States— matters that
must come home to mens bosoms and business such as
education, criminal law, land laws—and are not conceded to
the Commonwealth Legislature at all. You could not indeed
rry on government over States so widely apart other-
Mse. The citizen will continue to have very strong and
™ te6 i "f fOT , bb > State. As the phrase goes hlshh.rt
neaier to him than his coat. But still, the Commonwealth
has power over a wide range of subjects, which are
n loini - m leir aspect. At first its control may not be
felt so directly; but as time goes on, probably both its direct
authority and the indirect effects of the growing union wh
become more and more developed. We cannot secu're a
strong centra] Government without surrendering L U some
° f v‘! t P “’ W6rS t iat lve as S * ates enjoy; but then what we love
as V ictonans, we gam as Australians.
To govern, then, ourselves and this vast territory for
purposes that are common to all we have tbp «p n ’
wealth of Australia Constitution Act/’ a LtmenW “a°w
f oveTirLm the. Zl t'^fi
=» zssr&i 3
01 ms the charter of cur rights and our obligations to one
toother, as citizens of this vast country, and it truly const!
totes, as it declares in the preamble, “One indissoluble Fede-
ral Commonwealth. No State, you observe, can retire from ‘
t, so long as the Act stands Also there is the Imperial
fertS en LLTB eal to n the kSt resort; an extreme course,
certainly, but still possible in case of State rights becoming
tio“ra"r^™Sm nd being UnreaSOnab,e obst ™-
. prpose this evening is to ask you to consider some
attenHon “TwV* +“1 r tional f harter ’ which 1 think need
attention I will not delay you by dealing with all the de-
lith the'Act aVe But 7°? wT JOU are ac( l uainted generally
vim toe Act But I think that an inquiry into some of its
leading principles may not be without profit at the preset
time, when we have just entered upon our new citizenshm
CoL'LMonSrtf b° UtSid f e i the inBtructive ' de bates of the
° n ltself ’ there has not been as much popular discussion


upon some of the provisions of the Act as might, perhaps, have
been expected with regard to a law that concerns us all so deeply
and so nearly. The two referenda were upon the Bill gener-
ally and the question whether we would have Federation or
not. Nor was there any consideration of the principles of
the Constitution in the Imperial Parliament. There, they ex-
pressly disclaimed touching or criticising anything except that
which concerned Imperial interests, since, as Mr. Chamberlain
more than once observed, all that concerned Australia was
for the Australians to determine for themselves. We have
framed the Bill for ourselves ] we have stipulated to keep the
interpretation of it to ourselves, upon political matters, and
we must work the Bill ourselves.
It has been said that the Federal is a form of govern-
ment that demands for its success a high type of political in-
telligence and character from the pecpm who are to live under
it. This is quite true. It demands, more than is called for
in a single direct form of government, a readiness of both
States and people to accept the rule of the majority as ex-
pressed by the central authority ; and also the States are apt
to be more difficult to deal with than individual citizens.
Further, it calls for a willingness on the part of the majority
not to push things to an extreme without regard to the feel-
ings and wants of the minority. Moreover, this need for
political intelligence arises from the inherent complexity, not
to say possible contrariety involved in the different rights,
under a Federal union. No Bill, however skilfully framed,
can wholly avoid such difficulties ; for they arise in the prac-
tical working out of what you want to do. It seems simple
to say that you have only to give to the central authority
the right to deal with national objects that are common to all
the States in the Federation, while you reserve to each State
the power to deal with what is local to itself. But, in fact,
these two often blend off into and mingle with one' another,
in the complexity of the dealings of political and industrial
life; and SO 1 friction may arise in the exercise of those mutual
rights. Hence the need for the political intelligence and
forbearance of the people who, in both State and Common-
wealth direct the whole.
And here the political experience which all the Australian
States have enjoyed for more than a generation, and the train-
ing in the exercise of political powers and rights, and poli-
tical discretion too, that our peoples have had, will stand us
in good stead, and indeed will be found necessary for working
out our new Constitution successfully. For our Federation
is no exception to the general rule I have alluded to —that
Federations demand advanced intelligence from their peoples.
In truth, few constitutions rely more confidently, or make
o-reater calls upon that British political instinct and common
sense which has so often guided our forefathers in critical


times, than does the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Australia. For it leaves everything to the people ;it boasts
of no elaborate machinery. Its motto is that Australia ex-
pects every elector to do his duty. Its guiding law is govern-
ment direct by the people. The folds of its flag as they
floated out on the first of January disclosed, as its motto of
government, the foundation principle of one man one vote.
Let us now look at this Constitution under which we are
to live,, since the time is come for us to practically work it.
It is no trifling business that we have in hand." It is a
Federation under the Crown. And we are lucky in haviim
a Crown to unite under, as, quite apart from the general feeb
ing of loyalty, it is useful for constitution-making purposes
to have one undoubted centre of sovereignty. In our Com-
monwealth each State is independent in itself of the Federal
Government, except in so far as it or its citizens are bound
upon the matters delegated to the central authority; but
they are all under the common sovereignty of the Crown, as
is the Commonwealth itself. Both Commonwealth and State
exercise certain powers over the people in a State, but all in
the name of the one ultimate Sovereign, the Queen. Thus,
no # dispute as to Sovereign rights can arise between them, as
neither Commonwealth nor State have sovereign rights to l
claim or give; the sovereignty stands outside both.
The practical government, however, of this Federation
is provided for by the Parliament, and I think that I am
justified in describing it as leaving all to the people. You
know the provisions of the Act. Speaking generally, the
Senate and the House of Representatives are elected by
the people at large, upon the same principle of one man
one vote. There is no qualification for membership, other
than being an elector. Members of both Houses are paid.
If_ the Houses differ they may be both dissolved, and at
a joint meeting, the proposed law is decided by an absolute
majority of the two. True, to the Senate, the smallest
State sends six representatives, as well as the largest,
since it has been maintained as a principle of Federation
that for matters of legislation you should get the assent of
the States, as well as the assent of the people as a whole.
But whatever objections may he to' this upon other grounds,
I think it cannot be fairly urged that it impairs the demo-
cratic force of the legislature. The Senate will probably
be the more completely popular body of the two, since for the
election to* it each State is to be 1 polled as one electorate, and
the cities will necessarily have a preponderating voice in the
result. Though Adelaide is smaller than Melbourne, and
Biisbane than Sydney, the popular political feelings in the
smaller cities are the same as those in the larger. There is
thus no impairing of the strength of the principle of popular


Government. It does not matter whether you draw from a
cask or a firkin, if the wine is the same.
Further, our Constitution embodies by necessary implica-
tion that great engine of popular rule, Responsible Govern-
ment. This is an experiment in a true Federation, though
it exists in the more unified form of Federation that is to be
seen in Canada. For it gives government to the House in
which the people as a whole, distinct from the States, are re-
presented, and thus necessarily dwarfs the other House in
which the States are to be heard. In the United States, as
you know, the Executive is outside both Houses. But at
least, this Responsible Government is a powerful means to
enforce direct Government by the people. No more potent
engine for this purpose has yet been devised in political
history.
Thus in our Commonwealth Constitution all is left to our-
selves. There is no attempt to vary in any way the deposi-
taries of the people’s authority, or to provide any devices tor
delaying the prompt execution of their will. In the Ameri-
can Republic the elections for Executive officers, and those-
for the legislature, are so timed as to secure varying expres-
sions of the public will. The President has a real power of
veto; but he is not elected directly by the majority of the
people. We are given free power to mould our own destiny
in our own way, for our own purposes, in full reliance upon
the British political prudence of our people.
Having thus got our Parliament, the crucial question next
presented itself to the framers of our Constitution how they
should distribute legislative powers between the central author-
ity and the members of the Federation —what they should,
give to the Commonwealth, and what reserve to the States.
This is the problem in all Federations, and there is sure to
be some difficulty however you settle it. It reminds me of
what used to be said in the old coaching days here about the
best road to take over certain pieces of bad country that lay
in the way, especially in winter journeys, to Gippsland and
to Beechworth. In answer to the question which was the
best track to follow, the time-honoured reply was, that which-
ever way you took, when you got on it, you would regret
that you had not taken the other one. We are in no such
difficulty as that with our new Constitution, though on the*
road that we have taken there are some slippery bits where
we shall need careful driving. In forming a Federation,
you might give certain powers exclusively to* the central
authority, and reserve all the rest to the States; or you
might give specified powers exclusively to the States and
hand over all the rest to the central authority. Now, in
our Constitution, we give—except in a few distinctively Fede-
ral matters —concurrent powers of legislature to the Common-
wealth and to the States, with the proviso that where the


Itiw of a State is inconsistent with the law of the Common-
wealth it shall be invalid in so far as it is inconsistent. There
is a long list of subjects given, with respect to which it is
declared that the Commonwealth Parliament may legislate.
But the State Legislatures are not thereby excluded from deal-
ing with them. Some of those subjects the Commonwealth
Parliament may not care to take up. Until it does deal
with them, the States are free to legislate as they choose ;
and when it does take them in hand, the State laws are still
valid, except in so far as they are inconsistent with the Com-
monwealth law. All the rights of the State Parliaments not
exclusively given to the Commonwealth, nor withdrawn from
the States, remain. In this way we escape difficulties mat
have perplexed other Federations about the power of State and
central authority to legislate upon certain subjects; and it
is left to the good sense of the politicians and the electors to
see that there shall be no clashing in the work of legislation
or government between the State and the Commonwea.m.
And as the same body of electors will send in the representar-
fives to- both State and Commonwealth Parliaments, we may
fairly expect that one general public opinion will direct and
control both. But were this direction to be found wanting,
there might be jarring between the State laws and the Com-
monwealth laws, and the great object of uniformity of legis-
lation throughout the Commonwealth might be impaired.
To take, for example, a subject that has lately attracted
some attention in all the States—the subject of State Pen-
sions to the aged. It is open under the Commonwealth Act
for both State and Commonwealth to legislate upon this
subject. If the Commonwea th passed a law making a gene-
ral arrangement for the aged poor throughout the Common-
wealth, any State might enact for its poor further liberal pro-
visions, as that would not be inconsistent with the Common-
wealth Act. Legislation for conciliation for the prevention
of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one
State must also, for another example, be made in harmony
with State laws upon the subject. Or take the subject of
divorce. This is given to the Commonwealth ; but the
State is not expressly excluded from dealing with it. Is it
impliedly so ? If the Commonwealth made desertion a ground for
divorce, could a State add for its law incompatibility of
temper ? As to taxation, too, both State and Commonwea th
will tax us. Necessarily concurrent powers are here given,
though, indeed, the wording of the section dealing with the
subject seems to give the Commonwealth power even over
taxation of the States themselves. But, in taxing, each
authority must have regard to what is done by the other. In
a I I these matters, if the two powers were not to act in unison,
friction might ensue, and the purpose of uniformity of legis-
lation might be defeated. Security must be found in the


fact that the one people are the master of the two, and also
in the political prudence of that people. A similar difficulty
arises at times under the constitution of the United States;
but under the Commonwealth Act it will more frequently
present itself.
Turn to another important feature in the Constitution,
and we shall see equally the reliance placed upon the- good
sense of the Australian electors. It is a fundamental part
of the plan of our Federation that trade-, commerce, and inter-
course among the States shall be- absolutely free. This be-
comes a fact upon the imposition of uniform duties of cus-
toms by the Commonwealth —not before. But there is no-
thing to determine the date when this uniform opposition
shall take place, except the good sense of the people. True,
the Act says that they shall be imposed within two years ;
but this is an injunction that is incapable of being enforced.
No means are provided, or could be provided to compel the
Commonwealth Parliament to act if it did not want to. If
any inferior body in the State were directed by law to do- a
thing, you could compel them to do- it by appropriate legal
process. But the only Mandamus that can go to a Parlia-
ment is that from the- public. It is to the intelligence and
public spirit of the electors again, and their representatives,
that we look to see the boon of internal freedom of exchange
conferred on Australia, not merely within the two years, but
let us hope much sooner.
I might also illustrate this reliance upon the public of the
Commonwealth by referring to the powers of amending the
new' constitution that the Act confers. Some observers have
objected to different parts of that constitution, and complained
of having to take it with the defects that they objected to.
But this is as if a man who had been given a fine new house
stood outside, looking in through the windows, and grumbling
at the way the furniture was placed, when all the while he
has the key of the front door in his pocket, and has only to
walk in and change things about as he pleases. If the
people generally desire any change, not interfering with the
•rights of a State, they can make it directly. The Act en-
ables an absolute majority of either House to alter the Consti-
tution as it thinks right, if it is backed, upon a referendum,
by a majority of the electors. Certainly it is to be a majority
of the electors voting in a majority of the States, and also a;
majority of all the electors who go to the poll; but this is
mere verbal amplification—if the people want it. It only
demands that the change shall be generally desired, and
public feeling, we- know, is very uniform, whether in one State
or another, upon any matter that has once become popular.
When we remember the difficulty there is in making amend-
ments in the constitutions of the United States or Canada,
we realise the enlarged powers conferred upon the Australian


people by their instrument of government. I think that we
shall also see here another occasion for the display of An<do-
Saxon discretion. For it is a tremendous power. One House
can do what it pleases with the Constitution, except as to
State rights, if backed as I have stated. It will be more
troublesome to the Legislature to pass an ordinary Bill about
which the Houses dispute than it will be to alter the Constitu-
tion altogether. The general feeling, I believe and I
hope, will be for us to stand by awhile and observe how the
now Constitution does work; and, when we have to change,
to be guided by experience of some real defect that needs
amending. Let the need for amendment lead to the change.
Some early impressions of defects will be discovered not°to
be well founded as time goes on; other difficulties, real at
first, will, after a while, be found to have worked themselves
clear, without legislative action. Some, no doubt, will re-
main requiring direct amendment. But let our judgment be to
exercise our large powers of altering our new Constitution
with deliberation, and rather to cultivate a feeling of defer-
ence for the charter of United Australia.
Let us not forget that nothing is more certain than that
a free people will insensibly mould any constitution which
they _ may live_ under, by the mere attrition of its daily
working, to suit their own wants and wishes. As witness
the difference between the constitution of the United States,
or of England, as they appear written down in books, and as
they exist in fact for the work-a-day political world.
I might further illustrate the demands that the new
Constitution makes upon our discretion, by referring to the
manner of election prescribed for the Senate of the Common-
wealth. The principle that the majority should rule is in-
disputable; but most men will agree that in the political
world the minority should be heard. To secure this, in a
rough and ready way, is one purpose of the division of the
country into electoral districts, as it is considered that one
phase of opinions and interests will be dominant in one lo-
cality, and a different phase in another. Nay, with us, in or-
der that the country should have all fair play, a larger repre-
sentation than by population they were entitled to was secured
to them. The fact that one-third of the population lives in
the metropolis justifies, I think, this concession. This is all
brushed away, as far as the Senate is concerned, in the Common-
wealth Constitution; for you take the whole State as one elec-
torate for the elections to it. If the dominant party so de-
sire, it is obvious that they can sweep the board with their
ticket as is done in the United States, only here there would not
be that alternation in different years which the l powerful or-
ganisation of rival parties sometimes secures there. In the
Convention I think it was contemplated that the States


might adopt some plan of Proportional representation; but
this has not been done. Quite a new kind of electorate is
created, but no new method of dealing with it is provided.
It is left to the political discretion of the people to use wisely
the power that the majority will possess in the Senate elec-
tions for the State. Personally I should have liked to see
Proportional representation applied to the State electorate.
But in any case, I hail the idea of a national constituency as
freeing us, at any rate, from that localism which, more than
any other influence, has lowered our politics.
There is another principle in our Commonwealth Consti-
tution that only asks for reasonable discretion in its workings
—I mean that for settling disagreements between the two
Houses. The Act provides, a,s you are aware, mat in case
of a difference, after a dissolution of the two chambers, tuey
shall meet together and an absolute majority shall prevail.
I certainly doubt if this remedy will often be wanted, for me
House of Representatives is wholly popular in its constitution,
and the Senate is of the same character, only more so.
when required, I think it will be found to be a useful pro-
vision, and that, fairly worked, it will support the intelligent
rule of the people, and also tend to promote the independence
of politicians.
There is in every community; fitted for self-government,
a certain element of what may be called conservatism among
the people themselves. It sometimes is wise in its instincts
—at any rate it is natural to man. If no representation is
allowed to those instincts in the political arena, they are not
thereby extinguished. They form an element of weakness to
government outside the political arena, instead of being heard,
and possibly being of use, inside. Further, all admit mat
it is the duty of every representative to say truly what are
his own convictions upon each public question, and to support
them with his vote and voice. He owes it to the people to
give them faithfully his opinion, be its value what it may.
In no other way can you get at the sum total of the public
intelligence and prevent your representative men from all
sounding the same note, with depressing uniformity.
But an essential condition of this is, that it shall be
understood all round that what the majority want is, after
deliberation to be certainly done, and done in the way mat
they want it done. The ideas of absolute resistance and com-
pulsory compromises are possible in a balanced constitution
such as England had a hundred years ago, but are not only
useless, but are pernicious to attempt under the democratic
Governments of to-day. They irritate without controlling,
because they give the appearance of resisting the people’s
will, though, in fact, they cannot do so. They discredit all
opposition to popular views, as being a sort of covert treason
to the popular rule, and while they do not prevent the


majority having what they desire, they weaken the sense
of responsibility in the dominant party, and prevent uie
lessons of after experience being properly heeded. And,
after all, experience is the lesson-book of peoples. There
is no other means possible in our time for progress, or
even daily government, but through general public opinion.
Let each, then, seek to strengthen and enlighten uiis
public opinion by truthfully contributing to it wnat
convictions and ideas are in him, and then let
all loyally obey its rule, giving the majority freely the power,
and also the full responsibility of government. This is done
by this provision for settling differences between Legislative
bodies which the Act provides. It is, as far as I know, new
in Constitution making. I regard it as being conserva-
tive in its tendency.
There _ is another important phase of the duties and power’s
that come into activity under the Commonwealth Constitution,
which will make claims upon the discretion of both sets of our
rulers—the rulers of our States and the- rulers of our Com-
monwealth. Their respective executive functions may at
times move in orbits that come l near to one another, owing to
the possible overlapping of their legislative power and action,
to which I have referred. In some matters, no doubt, the
High Court would hold that the fact of the Commonwealth
Parliament having power to deal with a subject, excluded
State dealing with the same subject, where it was of such
a nature as to preclude l its being properly dealt with piece-
meal. Still, there are many others to which this limitation
would not apply ; and when there might, as has been said,
be both State and Commonwealth legislation, not inconsistent
with one another, upon the same subject. Here would come
in the need of care to prevent any jarring of Executive func-
tions in carrying out the respective laws.
I have mentioned the High Court of the Commonwealth,
and as to it, too, the full scope of its usefulness may at times
depend upon the high political principle of our statesmen.
Appeal is allowed from it upon private matters to the Queen
—just as it is from the State Courts—but there is no appeal
from the High Court, without its leave, upon questions con-
cerning the limits of constitutional powers, arising between
the Commonwealth and a State, or between two States.
Yet these are the subjects, and the only subjects, that have
once or twice impaired the predisre of the grand Supreme
Court of the United States, and have led to appointments
being made to its Bench to carry out a political purpose. But if
we may judge by the past in all our States, we may surely
look with confidence to the administration of justice in the
Commonwealth.
You will have observed that Mr. Barton, the leader
of the first Ministry, just appointed, is designated Prime


Minister for the Commonwealth, and Minister for External
Affairs. These last are weightly words. They remind us
of the great change that has come over us, and the new
inheritance, and with all responsibilities, into which we have
entered. We have now to extend our thoughts beyond our-
selves, our district, our State—nay, even our Commonweanii.
We are given power to deal with external affairs, the rela-
tions we may have with the islands of the Pacific —the de-
fence of a continent, the commerce! of an ocean. What a
scope of duty this opens for the future, and, possibly, the
near future. It is the manifest destiny of Australia to
dominate the South Seas. Vast Archipelagos, distant races
of men, new roads of commercial enterprise, rude communi-
ties, slowly rising out of savagery into the early stages of
civilised and industrial life, will come under our influence.
We have also the difficult question of the settlement of our
own tropical areas, far distant from us here, but as much
entitled to our care as Sydney, or Adelaide, or Melbourne,
or Hobart. We have China, too, at our doors, apparently
making up. The great Napoleon used to say that if its
people were trained to arms, they would dominate the world.
What if the present outburst led hordes of its population to
swarm abroad, seeking restlessly and ceaselessly to penetrate
into new lands? Nothing has tried the wisdom of popular
governments more than dealing with distant dependencies
and foreign races. It is well that we are an united people
for dealing with such problems and dangers.
I may add here that the designation of the new Ministers,
as “ Ministers of State,” is in accordance with the Act which
says, that they “ shall be the Queen’s Ministers of State for
the Commonwealth.” This has an important significance,
for it enables those Ministers to do acts even as regards out-
side affairs in Her Majesty’s name, which have the force of
acts done by the Queen, unless they should be afterwards dis-
avowed by her. It was stated in the debate in the Imperial
Parliament that this was “a convenient designation” for Minis-
ters. I think that it wall bei found to be a little more tnan
this. The Queen is as much Queen of Australia as she is of
England, as much Queen at Sydney, or Melbourne, as at
London. And these gentlemen who were sworn in the other
day, being declared to be “ Queen's Ministers of State for one
Commonwealth,” are entitled to exercise, in her name, all
those prerogatives on behalf of the which
her Ministers in London can exercise, or which our Ministers
could exercise, were Her Majesty resident here herself, and
they were advising her. There is the more significance in
this title of the Queen’s Ministers, as the Parliament is given
express authority to deal with “ external affairs,’ and with
the relations of the Commonwealth to the islands of the
Pacific. I will only add that the first Commonwealth Minis


ters are entitled to the patriotic support of all Australians, in
the difficult work which they and the new Parliament have
in hand. For there is no doubt that it is difficult. It
would be so in any cage; but it is made more so by the
policy which has been adopted of remitting all the real
problems to be dealt with after the Federation was launched.
Its way has not been smoothed for it by any previous agree-
ment among the States in Convention, or any arrangement
as to the subjects that must now be faced. The tariff has
to be settled both in principle and in detail. The financial
arrangements between Commonwealth and States have to be
dealt with; the subject, so necessary to full Federation, of me
State Railways and the State Debts, will have to be grappled
with. Responsible Government in the one House has to
be combined with the Federal principle in the other. ror
their work the Government will need, and should get, me
loyal aid of all men.
In thus discussing the leading principles of the Consti-
tution under which we and our children are to live, I
have called attention to those provisions which, I believe,
will require for their successful working, political wisdom
upon the part, as well of the people as of our rulers. They
are worth thinking over, so that we may intelligently
deal with them when faced by the practical work of
government. Almost as much depends upon how we work
the Constitution as upon what is in the Constitution itself.
Some friction at first is inevitable, but small indeed do our
difficulties seem when we contemplate all that we have
gained in securing an United Australia. They appear lucie
when we survey the great work itself. Travellers in Egypt
tell us about some of the monumental wonders of ancient
days there, parts of which have been despoiled and strewn
about by rude hands in later times. When you look at the
debris cf the excavations all around, you think what a vast
quantity has been displaced; but when you turn to tire
grand structure itself, it seems as if nothing had been taken
away. Even so do we now look upon the broad proportions
of tbe Constitution of the Commonwealth.
Never did a people start with more favourable conditions
for Federation than we do. Here, to ourselves, surrounded
upon all sides by the protecting ocean, we are to work out
our own destiny. We are already a united people in all the
conditions that go to make up a common nationhood. We
have no difference between French and English, as they had
in Canada; no deadly problem like slavery, as they had in
the United States, no diversity of language among the people,
and no fear of powerful neighbours as they had in Switzer-
land. We have no swarms of fierce native tribes to deal
with. Our territory, though vast, is not parted by natural
barriers, such as almost separate the Pacific side of the




