

THE CALVARY OF
SUPERSTITION
OR
The Downfall of the Scaffold.
Jk N pSSAY ON PAPITAL J^UNISHMENT
BY
JOHN CAMILLE WEALE.
TWICE— O. t ■SHILL LA G.
Brisbane;
A. KEITH, PRINTER, LEADER OFFICE, ALBERT STREET.
1 8 8 6.




* i /J)
oy o £y &r r t Sftc ~*JY*r*vt.-c^,
(’A) (4 S/c A'/t «, 't't-A.e-n
CX A -Al, t-[) C'o~> 2- &--t^tx4e^i/'
<y
v/ft. > ; * *
c v> -, ;


THE CALVARY OF
OR
The Downfall of the Scaffold.
/tn fSS AY ON pAPITAL j^UNISHMENT
BY
JOHN CAMILLE WEALE.
T72ICU— ONJEJ SHIZZIA G.
Brisbane:
A. KEITH, PRINTER, LEADER OFFICE, ALBERT STREET.
1 8 8 6.


Jplo tfte <®lfocmorg of
"VICTOR HUGO.
THIS FEEBLE ESSAY IS DEDICATED
by his humble disciple
THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE.
e||||OßE than eighteen centuries have elapsed since
the Founder of Christianity laid down this law,
“Thou shalt not kill;” and for eighteen centuries His
professed followers have refused to obey the same.
Preferring the barbarous traditions of Israel to the
teachings of their humble Master, they justified Torture
and inflicted Death. The rack and the wheel, the
thumbscrews and the pillory have already been swept
away by the wave of Progress, but in the midst of this
ruin there still stands the Scaffold. Let us remove
this last relic of Judaic Superstition.
JOHN CAMILLE WEALE.
Thargomindah, July 4th, 1886.


The Calvary of Superstition.
»fERE one to ask a number of persons to divide the history
PlpT of mankind into epochs of periods, the answers given
would probably be as various as they would be numerous,
for to every thinking man this great study presents some
peculiar features which to him seem to be of paramount
importance, whereas to another person they may appear to be
■worthy only of secondary consideration. Thus the geologist
would speak of stone and bronze periods ; the poet, of Homeric
and Sbakesperian ages ; and the warrior of the days of Hannibal
and Napoleon. The theologian would date the various eras from
the vise or fall of the many altars at which blind humanity has
worshipped, while the philosopher would adopt the great social
and scientific revolutions which the world has witnessed, as the
landmarks of his chronology. For my part, I would divide the
history of mankind into three great periods—the past, the
present, and the future —which might be respectively called :
the brute force, the period of transition, and the period of
brotherhood. During the first of these man was the mere child
of Nature differing from the brute creation in nought save
physical build and appearance ; in the second he is the child of
Mind struggling against nature for existence; —the chief
characteristic of this period is the evolution of Intellect; in the
third he will be the child of Love, be will have conquered Nature
whose every force be will have subdued to bis will, crime and


disease will have been banished from this earth, which will then
know and recognise but one law —the Law of Brotherhood.
The period of brute force extended over that countless
number of years during which man sought to establish his
supremacy over the brute creation. He felt no moral obliga-
tions, and knew no law save that of might; in his struggle for
existence he was criminal by force of necessity. Gradually the
instinct of conscience asserted itself. This event marked the
commencement of the period of transition. Man then deemed
it wrong to injure those to whom he was bound by Nature’s
ties ; clans were formed consisting originally of one family, but
developing in the course of time into tribes, the members of
which were bound together by a common interest. To rob,
murder, or defraud a clansman was a crime ; to inflict a similar
injury on a member of some other tribe was a virtue, an exploit
to be boasted of. Among certain savage races the instinct of
conscience has not, to this day, been developed beyond this
stage. "With civilised nations, however, the case is different,
and offences which were formerly regarded as crimes between
clansman and clansman, are now declared to be crimes between
man and man, except, indeed, when the outrage is committed by
one nation on another. Thus, theft is no theft if it be called
annexation, and murder ceases to be murder when, under the
more euphonious title of war, it is perpetrated on thousands of
inoffensive persons, who, to gratify some vain monarch’s
ambition, wage deadly battle against their fellow-men. Thanks
to the spread of education, and to the progress of democracy,
the death-knell of warfare is e’en now being tolled. It has been
said that “ coming events cast their shadows before them and
in events that have recently occurred in Europe, I distinctly see


the shadow of International Arbitration, by which, ere many
more years will have rolled by, all disputes between people and
people will be settled.* The genius of Education is fast
asserting its omnipotent power, and demonstrating the truth of
those prophetic lines of the sweet poet of the West: —
Were half the power that fills the world with terror,
Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts
•Given to redeem the human mind from error
There were no need of arsenals nor forts :
The warrior's name would be a name abhorred !
And every nation that should lift again
Its hand against a brother on its forehead
Would wear for evermore the curse of Cain.
Once the principle of right and wrong established, punishment
was invented. The object originally aimed at by its infliction
was revenge, and this was executed by the injured person or his
near relations. This system of retribution gave rise to fresh
and terrible complications, for the family of the offender would
oftimes espouse his cause, hence those dreadful vendetta which,
but a few years since, still disturbed the internal peace of various
states, and presented a formidable barrier to the advancement
* As Victor Hugo says at the conclusion of his excellent work “ The
History of a Crime/’ — <( One day, before long, the seven nations, which
combine in themselves the whole of humanity, will join together and
amalgamate like the seven colors of the prism, in a radiant celestial
arch; the marvel of Peace will appear eternal and visible above
-civilization, and the world, dazzled, will contemplate the immense rain-
bow of the United Peoples of Europe.” The great American philosopher
Emerson holds somewhat similar views; he says: “ Bayonet and sword
must first retreat a little from their ostentatious prominence ; then quite
hide themselves, as the sheriff’s halter does now, inviting the attendance
only of relations and friends; and then, lastly, will be transferred to
the museums of the curious, as poisoning and torturing tools are at this
day,” Emerson’s Complete Works (Riverside Edition) Vol. XL,
Page 193.


of civilization, and to the establishment of order. It became-
therefore absolutely necessary to frame laws, and to choose
officers to administer the same. “An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth,” was the fundamental principle of all early
criminal codes. Thus it was that the murder by the State of the
individual came to be legalised. Fifty centuries have elapsed
since this false, immoral, and iniquitous doctrine was accepted
by mankind ; for fifty centuries have civilization and humanity
struggled to overcome the same, and yet we have made but
scant progress since the day when, about 160 years before the
advent of the founder of Christianity, Subaco, king of Ethiopia,
abolished Capital Punishment throughout his dominions. It is
true that at various times there have arisen good men and true
men, who, fearlessly challenging the authority assumed by
society, have thrown a vivid light on the path to which Truth
and Justice point; it is true that some few nations, more
enlightened in this respect at least than their neighbors, have
overthrown the scaffold, that last relic of the ignorant, super-
stitious, and brutal barbarism of the Dark Ages which survives
to disgrace modern civilization ; but it is, alas ! equally true that
the principle of the absolute inviolability of human life is but
slowly forcing itself upon the minds of the masses.
Let us now consider the great question —should Capital
Punishment be abolished ? I have already had occasion to
mention the fact that the object originally aimed at by the
institution of the Death Penalty was revenge. Since then,
however, mankind has, in a great measure, yielded to the
humanising influence of civilization, I*' 1 *' and although the barbarous
* In a very interesting article on “ Inequality in Punishment ” Lord
Justice Fry remarks: “ Historically, no doubt, revenge may be the


punishment is still inflicted, the spirit of vengeance that gave
birth to it has ceased to be the raison-d'etre of its retention
which is defended on the ground of expediency.t We are fold
that if Capital Punishment were abolished, society would be
deprived of its only safeguard, and that the country would
abound with murderers. Conceived by ignorance and fostered
by bigotry, these wild and reckless assertions are made by
thoughtless men who can in no w'ay substantiate them, seeing
that they are totally opposed to the true verdict of history.
There are, however, many able, and deep-thinking men who
advocate the retention of Capital Punishment on the ground
of expediency ; they sincerely believe that it acts as a deterrent,
and that it is the only means of ridding this world of a being,
who, if not executed, must become a burden, and may prove to
be a curse to society. Let us examine how far this belief is
founded on fact. One would naturally imagine that were the
parent of punishment, but in its transfer from the injured party to the
judge, it has struck a deeper and purer spring of righteousness in man’s
nature, and now draws from it alone its true supply.” The “Nineteenth
Century,” No. 79, Page 522.
f In my opinion what Lord Justice Fry terms the “secondary
elements in punishment,” namely : (1) the reformation of the culprit;
(2) the prevention of further offences by the culprit; and (3) the
repression of offences in others, are conjointly the sole justification for
punishment; and notwithstanding the arguments adduced to the con-
trary by that eminent judge, I assert that “if the state could reform the
prisoner, prevent his further offences, and repress like crimes in others,
without the imposition of pain, it would be the duty of the State so to
do, and the suffering inflicted would be a gratuitous and unjustifiable
evil.” It will be observed that in this quotation the conjunction or
has been omitted in one place, and replaced by and in another. Lord
Justice Fry argues erroneously that if what he is pleased to term the
secondary elements in punishment were the sole justification of punish-
ment, the State would have no right to inflict suffering on a criminal.
Could any one of the three objects aimed at be obtained without the
imposition of pain.


fear of death so horrible, nothing could strike greater terror
into the criminal mind than the sight of a man undergoing the
last dread penalty of the law. Yet we know that the effect
produced is diametrically opposed to that which we would
anticipate; so true is this that it was deemed necessary to
abolish public executions by Act of Parliament, because they
did nought save brutalise the spectators. In the days now gone
by for ever, when a man was to be hanged, the townspeople
took a holiday. Gay and festive lords with their proud dames
crowded to the windows which commanded a good view of the
scaffold, paying a handsome price for the privilege they enjoyed.
A vast concourse of people who could not afford the luxury of
reserved seats, assembled on the square, or place of execution :
in order to enjoy a good sight of the dreadful tragedy about to
be enacted, they would flock thither ere the break of day, and
would take up some favorite position. The hours immediately
preceding the execution were devoted to the wildest, maddest
debauchery ; as the murderer proceeded from the prison to the
scaffold the crowd cheered or hissed him as the fancy took them;
and when at length the doomed wretch stood with the hang-
man’s rope around his neck, ribald songs howled out by drunken
men and women, foul oaths and curses, low, disgusting jests
these were the final salutations that greeted him, and drowned
the words of comfort whispered by the prison chaplain. And
somewhat similar to the effect produced by the sight of an
execution must be that created by the reading of the graphic
but ghastly details published by the Press, Descriptions of
scenes such as occurred in Durham towards the close of
Marwood’s career; descriptions of scenes like that recently
witnessed in Ballarat, where, owing to the criminal negligence


of the executioner, an unfortunate wretch writhed in agony for
twenty minutes ere death put an end to his misery; descriptions
of the scenes, which, some short time since, were enacted in
Austria and England when the culprits’ heads were completely
severed from their necks —descriptions of scenes such as these
can but degrade the reader to the level of a brute, unless, indeed,
they revolt and sicken him.
I sincerely trust that the foregoing remarks have not given
rise to any misunderstanding, that the reader has not been led
to believe that I condemn the Press for their action in giving
full publicity to the terrible scenes amid which the victims of
the majesty (!) of the law pass aw r ay from this life to that
bourne whence no traveller returns. While the evil exists, the
Press is but accomplishing the sacred duty which it owes to
society in following the course that it now adopts ; and, though
deeply deploring the evil effects which the publication of such
literature must necessarily entail, 1 readily admit that these are
more than compensated for by the impetus which those ghastly
tales give to the movement I have so much at heart, through the
influence which they exert on wavering minds that are not
perverse or callous.
Now, if neither the sight nor the description of an execu-
tion acts as a deterrent, what does ? You may answer: “ the
fear of death.” If so, you are mistaken. When a pinioned
wretch stands on the gloomy scaffold; when the cap is drawn
over his head, and the fatal rope hangs loosely round his neck;
when the last ray of hope departs, and nought but blank despair
retains possession of his mind ; when the sw r eet memories of
childhood rush through his throbbing brain, and he thinks of
his loving mother, father, sister, or brother, the guardian or


friend of his youth, whose fond heart he has filled with anguish
and with shame ; when he dreams of the loving wife whom he
had sworn to cherish and protect, and of those sweet innocent
cherubs who shall go forth into the world branded as the off-
spring of a felon ; when he realises that within a few seconds’
time that life to which he would cling (to repent and atone for
the past) will be violently torn from him—then, indeed, may
death seem to him the greatest punishment which man or fiend
could invent. But years, or months, or days before, when, in
the heat of a momentary passion, he fired the fatal shot, or, with
cool deliberation, administered the deadly drug, what thought
had he of the hangman’s rope? Catherine of Russia was only
echoing the verdict of fifty centuries when she said: “Experi-
ence shows us that the frequent repetition of Capital Punishment
has never yet made men better.” Look at Belgium, Holland,
Switzerland, India, and the United States, where the accursed
Death Penalty has been abolished, and learn the eloquent lesson
which their criminal statistics teach. In the Netherlands the
law does not forbid Capital Punishment, but the result of
omitting to inflict death has been so satisfactory that the law
has become absolete, and murderers are never executed. In the
presidency of Bombay forty-seven persons suffered death during
the seven years 1756-68; no executions took place during the
seven years 1801-11, yet the crimes committed during the latter
period were not, in proportion to the population, more than bno-
third of those committed during the former period. In 1864,
the Grovornors of Rhode Island, Michigan, and Winconsin,
replying to a circular letter addressed to them by John Bright,
assured that statesman that since the abolition of Capital
Punishment in their respective states, life was not less secure


than before the change was made, and that public opinion was
against the restoration of the Death Penalty. The history of
England itself suffices to establish the truth that Capital
Punishment does not act as a deterrent. “ Prom the Restora-
tion to the death of George 111. —a period of IGO years —no
less than 187 capital offences were added to the criminal code.
The legislature was able every year to discover more than one
heinous crime deserving of death. In the reign of George 11.
33 acts were passed creating capital offences ; in the first 50
years of George lll.no less than 68.” “ fhe lives of men,”
says Sir T. Erskine May, “ were sacrificed with a -reckless
barbarity worthier of an Eastern despot or African Chief than
of a Christian State. Life was held cheap compared with
property. To hang men was the ready expedient of thoughtless
power.” To convey to the reader’s mind an idea of how
popularised Capital Punishmeut became, I may mention the fact
that from 1810 to 1815 upwards of 1400 persons suffered death
for dimes since ceased to be capital. Did the fear of death act
then as a deterrent ? Ear from it: let the eminent authority I
have just quoted speak again: “ Crime was not checked, but, in
the words of Horace Walpole, the country became ‘ one great
shambles.’” And yet there were then to be found legislators
who opposed the abolition of the Death Penalty in cases of
forgery, larceny, etc., as strenuously as their modern repre-
sentatives are, at the present time, opposing its total abolition.
The humanitarians of that day were denounced as sympathisers
with crime ; their horror at the wholesale legal murders then
perpetrated was derided as morbid sentimentality; and it was
argued that if the agitation then on foot for the reform of the
criminal code were ever to prove successful, such crimes as should


cease to be capital would increase rapidly. But the humani-
tarians triumphed then as they will triumph again; the wholesale
legal murders were put a stop to ; and the alarming warnings
of the obstructionists were proved to be unfounded, just as,
in the not far distant future, the predictions of our croaking
legislative prophets will be proved to be false. Mindful of the
overwhelming evidence I have adduced in support of my
argument, I ask in all sincerity, the question which, in 18G-1, fell
from the lips of John Bright: Is there any man with one
particle of sense or the power of reason who believes that human
life in this country is made more secure because ten or twelve
men are put to death everv year P ”
Having conclusively proved that Capital Punishment does
not, as is alleged, act as a deterrent, I now proceed to discuss
the second objection raised against its abolition, namely, that
death alone can prevent a repetition of the offence. In support
of this assertion, cases are quoted similar to that of the unfortu-
nate youth Johns executed some few months since in Darling-
hurst gaol. A hile considering this question we must bear in
mind that there are three classes of murderers. There is the
man who, under the influence of some great excitement, kills a
fellowman ; there is the unfortunate victim of homicidal mania ;
and there is the confirmed murderer. To the first of these the
argument I have quoted cannot be reasonably applied, for, when
the demon passion that prompted him to commit the crime,
ceases to exert its maddening sway, and the enormity of the sin
he has committed dawns upon him in the fulness of its awful
heinousness, he would willingly —aye, cheerfudy shed to the last
drop his life’s blood could he but thereby recall a smile to the
face that lies there distorted m death. How many murderers


are there not who have endeavoured, by a life dine of penance,
to atone for one crime ; how many are there not who, well-nigh,
driven to dispair by remorse, openly avow their guilt, and,
surrendering to the officers of justice, court that death which we
are told is so terrible to the murderer. By men such as these
the hangman’s rope is hailed as a friend that will rid them of a
life which has become a burden to them; their crime brings with
it its own punishment —that of a self-accusing conscience.
The unfortunate victim of homicidal mania* is generally
# In an article on “Insanity and Crime ’’ the Eight Honoralde Lord
Bramwell, unable to rise above the brutal narrow-mindedness and
traditional prejudices of his caste, advocates the execution of all
murderers afflicted with homicidal mania. He says : —“ It is said that
it must be admitted that from the excitement and irritability which
accompany his insanity he (the lunatic) has less chance of keeping clear
of crime than a sane person The lunatic committing a
crime is certainly less an object of anger and hate than the man who in
full possession of his senses commits one. But the law does not punish
for revenge, but for prevention. And further, if the argument is good,
it might be used by others than the lunatic. Let alone his physical
constitution, which may drive one man to some crime, take the case of a
criminal, who being called on to say why he should not be punished,
should say, “ It is hard on me, I never had a chance to behave well; my
parents were drunkard- 0 and thieves, and so were my companions ; and
instead of being ashamed before them if I stole, I was applauded if I
did it without detection.” Take another case—excessive temptation.
A rich person drops a sixpence, a mother picks it up, and buys bread for
her starving children. Could not all these put forth a case as well as the
lunatic, aud say, “It is hard on me ?” And is it not ? But no excep-
tion can be made on such considerations Bentham said the greater the
temptation the greater should be the punishment. I suppose the same
remark would apply where the power of resistance was less in any one,
whether from education, disease, or other cause. “ Has Lord Bramwell
never heard of extenuating circumstances that he asserts that no
exceptions can be made on considerations such as he quotes ? As for
his argument that the greater the temptation the greater should be the
punishment, it is as absurd as it is repulsive to the natural feelings of
any sensible man. Take the following cases : —A is a married man,
who, suspecting his wife of infidelity, leaves his home one day apparently
for a week’s absence; he returns however late at night and finds his
faithless wife in the arms of her seducer whom he kills. Bis a man.


acquitted on the ground of insanity, and confined in a lunatic
asylum. To him consequently cannot be applied the argument
I have quoted.
I now come to the third and worst kind of murderer, who has
become what tho world terms a “hardened criminal,” “whose
existence” we are told “insults humanity and cries aloud on
justice for very mercy’s sake to cut it of£.”t Beared in sinks of
vice, poverty, and crime, the very existence of which is a disgrace
to a civilized nation, he is, from his very childhood, taught to
look upon society as an enemy who crushes him —an enemy
against 'whom he must wage continual war from the cradle to the
grave. Ignorant of bis moral duties and responsibilities he,
claims our pity and sympathy, while his sin calls for punish-
ment. + Had he been brought up by a tender, loving mother ;
who disappointed in love, kills his more fortunate rival. According to
his Lordship, A should be more severely punished than B. Similarly, the
woman who steals a loaf of bread to feed her starving children should
receive a heavier sentence than the vain woman who purloins a cashmere
shawl which she cannot afford to buy. The greater the temptation the
greater the punishment! Again, the ignorant crossing-sweeper who
plays at pitch and toss for a few half-pence should be dealt with more
severely than the aristocratic roue who stakes a “century ” on a hand
at dearie, for is not the sweeper’s power of resistance less than that of
the noble lord, owing to defective education? The grea'er the
temptation, the greater the punishment. The greater the provocation,
the greater the guilt! The poorer the man, tho blacker the sin !
Axioms truly worthy of a member of that effete aristocratic institution
the House of Lords,” (For Lord Bramwell’s article see the “ Nineteenth
Century,” No. 106, Page 896.)
f “ The work of Victor Hugo,” by Algernon C. Swinburn. The
“ Nintenth Century,” No. 106. I cannot express the regret I felt
on finding that an illustrious friend and disciple of the humane
Victor Hugo had entered the lists to defend with his mighty pen the
cause of barbarism and superstition.
+ There are of course some criminals, c.g. dealers in professional
infanticide by starvation, for whom we can feel no pity. We must,
however, oppose their execution on the ground that Capital Punish-
ment is both immoral and inexpedient.


had he been blessed with a good education; had he enjoyed the
social advantages which have fallen to our lot, it is hard to say
whether he would not have become a worthy member of society.
What I would say with regard to murderers of this class is that-
sentenced to imprisonment for the term of their natural life, they
would have no opportunity of committing a second crime, xvere
strict discipline enforced, and careful supervision maintained.*
As for the much tallied of case of Johns, who, from my very
soul's depths, I believe was not a hardened criminal, but a
sinning brother, who, in the passion of the moment —burning to
wipe out an affront that galled and humiliated him—stabbed a
fellow-prisoner, I say that his blood rests on the head of some
one or other of the gaol officials, for had the prison regulations
been strictly carried out, he would, nay, could, never have struck
the blow which sent him to the gallows. The final assertion I
have to consider is that unless executed, a murderer becomes a
burden to society. I am extremely surprised that any person
reared in this age of philanthropy should bring forward an
argument which, if carried out to its full and logical issue, would
justify the extermination of all persons existing on public
charity. Did 1 not accept the doctrine of the absolute
inviolability of human life as a fundamental principle of true
ethics, I would denounce what a celebrated English Avriter terms
“the sentimentality that esteems it unlawful to kill idiots, or
drug to death incurables suffering fiom elephantiasis or leprosy.”
But the argument is after all but half-true, for the sheriff’s
halter of times deprives society of a man who might become a
useful servant thereof. Who can tell how much “ might and
* The history of the Maison Centrale of Louvain (Belgium) conclu-
sively proves this.


force of brain,” how much “power of genius” has been
extinguished on the scaffold ?
The only disadvantage, therefore, that could possibly result
from the abolition of Capital Punishment would be a slight
increase in the taxation of the country. It would certainly pay
us to put up with this temporary inconvenience seeing that the
change would be attended by the great benefit of increased
security of life. This assertion may seem strange —to the
thoughtless it must appear ridiculous. Yet it is perfectly true.
Sir T. Erskine May tells us that “ certainty of punishment is
more effectual in the repression of crime, than severity.” The
truth of this assertion is undeniable. It is likewise a fact that
were the Death Penalty abolished, conviction and punishment
would be more certain than under the existing law. This is
easily demonstrated. In cases where their verdict will set a
prisoner at liberty or doom him to the gallows, conscientious
jurymen who entertain the slightest doubt as to his guilt, will
refuse to choose the latter alternative however damning the
evidence may be, for they know that to an innocent man
unjustly executed society can make no atonement whatever.
Thus it is that from time to time murderers are let loose upon the
community who would have been convicted had they been liable
only to penal servitude for life ; for the jurymen would have felt
that their verdict would not have been beyond recall, and that if
their trilling doubts had eventually proved to have been but too
well founded, the prisoner would have been released and com-
pensated once his innocence was clearly established. Sergeant
Hallantjuie, an authority eminently qualified to speak on such
matters, says that more murderers escape owing to the counsel
for the defence concluding his address with the words “ remem


ber your verdict is final ” than through any cause whatsoever.
It must be admitted that this is a most potent reason in favor
of the change I advocate ; but there is yet another which will,
I am sure, be deemed far more important by all thinking men.
It is this—despite the carefulness of judges and juries, men
have been hanged whose guiltlessness has been subsequently
proved beyond a doubt. Words would fail to express all that
I feel when I think of these terrible miscarriages of justice,
these legal murders which must bring down a curse on the land
where they are perpetrated. Finally, I advocate the abolition
of Capital Punishment because retributive blood-shedding is
absolutely immoral, being totally opposed to all the nobler
feelings and purer instincts of man. I fancy I hear the loud
disclaimers of reverend clergymen and other worthy Christians
but one cannot get away from the fact that, if retributive blood
shedding be not immoral, the patriots who blew up the infamous
Czar of Russia, and O’Donnell who shot James Carey, the
greatest scoundrel of all times, were deserving of great praise.
Even if I did not believe in the absolute inviolability of human
life, I would maintain that Capital Punishment is immoral, on
the following grounds : —(1.) It does not aim at the reform of
the criminal. (2.) It does not repress offences in others. (3.)
Being inexpedient, it is a gratuitous and unjustifiable evil!
An essay such as this would he incomplete without a few
remarks on crime. It is my firm belief that all criminals suffer
from nervous disorganisation of the brain due to heredity, that
remarkable force which occasionally reproduces in a person, with
great exactness, the character of an ancestor, sometimes after
hundreds of generations. Thus the child often reverts to its
grandfather or grandmother, or even some far more remote


ancestor. To the laws governing heredity, still for the most
part unknown, do I attribute the existence of mime among us.
This theory has indeed been enunciated by no less an authority
than the celebrated and illustrious Charles Darwin, who, in his
oft-quoted work “The Descent of Man,” says ; “ With mankind
some of the worst dispositions which occasionally without any
assignable cause make their appearance in families, may perhaps
be reversions to a savage state from which we are not removed
by very many generations.” Now, if this theory be correct —
and it must be admitted that all the weight of evidence is in
favor of the supposition—is it not wonderful that there are so
fcAV murderers in the commuuit}’ ? The gradual diminution of
crime is due to the evolution of Intellect, the spread of educa-
tion, and the reform of our social laws. The reader may perhaps
have watched with feelings of surprise not unmixed with
admiration, the transformation of the dull, insignificant chrysalis
into the beautiful butterfly. No less wonderful has been the
development of the human conscience. In our ancestors, all
the noble sentiments that now animate enlightened humanity,
wire dormant and confused. By degrees moral principles
asserted themselves, and as day by day we are becoming more
and more civilised, and the rocks of bigotry, superstition, and
intolerance, are being crumbled to dust by the wave of progress,
we are fast approaching that epoch of light when the entire
human race will be united by the adamantine bonds of brother-
hood. But ere we reach that stage of perfection, we shall have
to change many of our laws, habits, and customs. Certain it is-
that we shall have to reform our present criminal code, and
abolish the existing system of treating offenders against the law,
than which. I can conceive none more absurd, none more repre


hensible. We must punish, crime without imitating it; we
must aim at reformation and prevention rather than revenge;
we must endeavour to cure, instead of being satisfied with
checking crime; we must, as far as lies in our power, help to
remove the secondary causes of crime, poverty, and ignorance ;*
finally, such of us as have the cause of humanity and progress at
heart must never cease to expound our views through the
and on the public platform. We must band ourselves together
and agitate for the reform of our criminal code. The battle
will be severe, and may be long, for the bigots of church and
state —whose ancestors struggled so hard for the retention of
the stake, the rack, the pillory, and the thumbscrews—will rally
in defence of the time-honored scaffold. We must prepare for
a great constitutional agitation, and compel our representatives
to wipe out from the Statute Book that infamous lie which
affirms the right of society to murder the individual. And if
our efforts are not crowned with immediate success, let us not
be in any way disheartened, but, strong in the justice of our
cause, and mindful of the many glorious triumphs which the
humanitarians of bygone days achieved in the teeth of a powerful
opposition, let us rally again and again, until at length we
trample under foot the shattered ruins of the Calvary of
Superstition. Let ns remember that Truth must prevail; it is
a torch which, fanned by the winds of Time, glows with a more
vivid light as year succeeds year, and century follows century in
the unceasing eddy of Eternity.
And now I must bid the reader farewell. If he has had the
* The recently published French criminal statistics for 1884 show
that out of a total of 3969 persons tried in the assize courts, only 214
had received a good education.


patience to follow me thus far, I trust his sympathy has been
gained for the cause I have too feebly advocated ; if not, I have
one favor to request; it is that he will think this matter over in
hours of leisure, that he will ponder over the arguments that I
have adduced, and the facts that I have quoted. Could I but
be assured that he would do this, I should feel that I have not
labored in vain, for I am certain that a careful and unbiassed
study of this deep and most important question will lead him to
the fold of that great humanitarian party on whose muster-roll
are inscribed the ever-glorious names of Lamartine, Victor Hugo,,
and John Bright.


Brisbane :
FEINTED BY A. KEITH. LEADER OFFICE, ALBEET STEEET.
