

THE LAND OF MYSTERY
TIBET
J.H. EDGAR.




The
Land of Mystery,
Tibet


MR. J. HUSTON EDGAR


The
Land of Mystery,
Tibet
BY
J. HUSTON EDGAR, F.R.G.S., F.R.A.I.
Missionary of the China Inland Mission
on the Tibetan Border
CHINA INLAND MISSION
311 Collins Street, Melbourne, Australia.




CONTENTS
Page
The Land of Mystery . . . . , 13
Face to Face with Death 18
The Highest Town on Earth, and the Dirtiest 24
Does China, the Ancient of Nations, Need the Gospel? . . 32
The Wonderful Religious System of the Tibetans . . 38
Midst Robbers and Earthquakes 43
Imprisoned with a Madman 48
Curious Religious Customs . . . 53
Perilous Experiences in Bible Circulation 58




PREFACE
By
DR. J. J. KITCHEN
Australasian Director of the China Inland Mission
Tibet, being still a land of mystery and exclusiv-
ism, any information concerning its people is of
special interest. These addresses, by Mr. J. H.
Edgar, are published in the expectation of arousing
the sympathy of Christian friends. Tibetans are
exceptionally religious, but their religion is not one
of holiness, but of formalism and superstition. Like
other heathen races, they need the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, which alone is the power of God to salva-
tion.
Few are better qualified for the task indicated
than Mr. Edgar. Designated by the China Inland
Mission to the border line of Tibet in July, 1901,
he has steadfastly laboured on its behalf. He pos-
sesses keen powers of observation, is an original
thinker, and has proved himself an intrepid mis-
sionary pioneer on “the roof of the world,” tra-
velling frequently where no other European foot
has trod. Death has had no terrors f or him; his
quiet blue eyes have looked it in the face unflinch-
ingly again and yet again; lawless, dare-devil bri-
gands, prejudiced lamas, wild animals, mad dogs,
frostbite, rugged precipices, dangerous mountain
torrents, cholera, typhus and other fevers, have not
deterred him from pressing on to the regions be-
yond with the impelling motive force of love. Mul-
titudes have heard of the one true God, and the
only Sayjour of mankind from his lips, and an
enormous amount of literature, printed in their
own tongue through his strenuous and devoted
labours, has filtered through into their lamaseries
and otherwise unapproachable fastnesses.


FOREWORD
The subject of most of the following addresses, deliv-
ered in Australia and New Zealand, is Tibet and the
Tibetans. Both terms require some explanation. Tibet
is the European name for Bodyul, the country of the
Bod. One of the poetical names for the “roof of the
world” is Ngam-grog-ch’e—the land of deep corrosions,
a rather appropriate designation for the birthplace and
nourishing ground of eight of Asia’s large rivers. But
Tibet, in the wider sense, is just as truly a region of
towering tablelands and sky-piercing ranges. It is a
country nature intended for a few hunting and nomadic
hordes, and the present permanent occupation of such a
vast and inhospitable territory by an alien people has in
it, to some at least, a suggestion of the miraculous.
But who are these wonderful Bod of the elevated
deserts of Asia? Although no claim for racial purity may
be advanced, yet they are more Mongoloid than any-
thing else. The reason of their being in Tibet is not
very clear, but history suggests that centuries ago this
land was like an Adullam fortress, to which streams of
the unwanted, the persecuted, and the condemned, fled
for refuge. But the change must have been from the
frying pan into the fire. Nature made terms far more
exacting than our immigration laws. Indeed, only limbs,
lungs, hearts, and heads of the strongest could survive
her formidable tests. Still the conditions of the new
environment were simple and rigidly uniform. And these,
by a relentless process of elimination, finally produced
what might now be called the Tibetan type, which is,
perhaps, the most perfect machine in high altitudes ever
known.


But the physical man is not the only product of these
relentless forces. We have just as truly a temperament
which has reacted to the terrible conditions in a way
that will always interest the students of man, and his
nature. The Tibetan, cut off from intercourse with sur-
rounding states, and debarred from benefiting by the
experience and knowledge of older civilisations, was
fitted to specialise in the wrong things thoroughly, and
he uninterruptedly continued to misunderstand the
operations of the unkind natural forces with his whole
heart. The result was a profound belief in a spirit world
inhabited by beings bent on doling out misery to human-
ity. Such an error dogmatically held, if existence was to
be endured, logically enough, demanded a class versed in
the psychology and activities of the other world, and
with means at hand to confound its machinations, and
defeat its activities. The lama and his magical devices
seemed to answer the requirements admirably, and to-day
Lamaism is viewed locally as a grand redemptive scheme
with ample machinery for safeguarding man’s welfare
here, and in the hereafter.
So the religion of Tibet is first of all Animism, but with
much Buddhism, some Manicheism, and perhaps Nes-
torian Christianity grafted on. The mysterious force,
however, that has moulded them all into one system, and
affixed its indelible stamp, is to be found in the geo-
graphical peculiarities of Tibet. Moreover, it is just here
that the missionary seems to be face to face with an
impassable chasm. The widely proclaimed difficulties
which might hinder the average missionary from resid-
ing permanently, or travelling safely, or remaining nor-
mally efficient in Tibet, have been, in my opinion, unduly
stressed. But the problems raised by the above-mentioned
unchanging forces would test the faith, and daunt the
courage of Greatheart himself.
No doubt the Tibetan, if articulate, would aver that a
general change of religion must mean racial disintegra-
tion, and national extinction. Would England, for in-
stance, readily scrap her naval and commercial fleets, and
trust to the mercies of European neighbours ? It is hardly
likely. For the same reason the Tibetan would not forego


Lamaism, because Tibetan national existence and Lama-
ism are pne and the same thing. But Christianity is the
enemy of Lamaism, and must, therefore, be rejected. It
is as if the Tibetan were being asked to dismantle his
time-honoured fortress, and required to begin again and
painfully, with strange tools and unusual materials, to
rear an entirely new edifice. Or, in other words, to sacri-
fice his national existence for his soul’s salvation. The
Tibetan, of course, would never consider such an alter-
native. And it is difficult to make him understand that
no such demand has been made. He is ignorant, you say.
“Yes.” But the missionary may be unconsciously unfitted
to appreciate his difficulty. If so, the solution is for
them both to more fully understand the spirit of our
Lord. Then, both will see that in Lamaism there is very
much that true Christianity could never condone or
endure. At the same time, both will admit that Lama-
ism has recognised and applied great fundamental prin-
ciples that have made national life in Tibet possible. But
all the same, the best human system will never permit a
true and full expression of national or individual life.
Christianity, however, is Divine, and suited to all men,
and all conditions everywhere. Geographical anomalies
will not hinder its triumphant march, and it will present
everywhere opportunities for the application of good and
useful principles to an extent never imagined by natural
religions.


The Land of Mystery—Tibet
I DESIRE to draw your attention to a portion of the
ninth verse of the second chapter of ‘2 Timothy—“ But
the Word of God is not bound.” Paul, the great apostle,
was in prison, suffering as prisoners must have suffered
at that time. Before him was the prospect of a trial, the
result of which he knew only too well. But he was not
greatly concerned about that; he knew that there was in
the world an unseen power that could carry on the work
of God better than he could. He knew that the Word of
God was not bound.
To-night I want to speak about that great mysterious
land of Tibet and the missionaries there, who in some
ways appear to be bound, but I can testify to
the great and glorious fact that, even in Tibet, the
Word of God is not bound. On the contrary, it has pene-
trated to the most distant parts of that sequestered and
almost unknown land, and has reached men and women
in hundreds of monasteries unknown to the geographers
of Europe. During the last four years I have received
about nine tons of Christian literature from the different
Bible societies, all of which has been delivered to me by
the Chinese Imperial Post Office. I have also received four
or five tons of Christian literature from other societies
and agencies. Almost all of that literature has been
scattered far and wide along the great frontier between
China and Tibet, and has been read by men and women
in those unknown regions. Tibet will always be a closed
land to the majority of men and women who have not
been born and bred in that great country. In Tibet there
are great tablelands from 13,000 to 16,000 feet above the
sea. Some of the mountain passes are 18,000 feet high.
Tibet also contains the deepest gorges and valleys on


earth. I could speak of the dangers from swollen rivers,
severe frosts and blizzards, but time will not permit.
Tibet will never be an ideal home for the majority of
Europeans. It is too high, and for climatic reasons alone
must always remain a closed land to most.
But Tibet is also a closed land in a legal sense. Travellers
who cross certain clearly-defined borders may be recalled
to the treaty ports, have their passports cancelled, and
run the risk of being prosecuted for having been illegally
on prohibited territory. It is true that two-thirds of the
land is open, but the greater portion of that open territory
is ruled by anti-foreign princes and lamas, who have per-
sistently shown suspicion and fanaticism. To enter such
regions is exceedingly dangerous. In diplomatic circles
they are regarded with suspicion, and Europeans—mis-
sionaries and others—are warned against entering them.
Some may say that missionaries of the Cross should not
fear dangers and difficulties, but any Britisher who per-
sists in attempting to enter those regions may be recalled
to the treaty ports, hundreds of miles from his sphere
of labour, and, possibly, prosecuted for inciting to a
breach of the peace. I have said enough to show that
when we speak of Tibet as a closed land we are not exag-
gerating.
But let us return to the apostle Paul. He was not
unduly concerned because he was bound and in prison.
Nor are we to-day, because, like him, we know that the
Word of God is not bound. It never has been bound,
and it never will be. To-day that Word of God is doing
its work in Tibet. It cannot be prosecuted for being
illegally on prohibited territory. It cannot be accused of
inciting to a breach of the peace, and it cares nothing for
blizzards, snows, frosts, or other unfavourable climatic
conditions. The Word of God is not, and cannot, be
bound. But how are we sending that life-giving Word into
that sequestered and unknown land ?
Many are in our favour. For instance, Lhasa,
the capital of Tibet, hundreds of miles to the west near the
Indian border, gives the Tibetan his religion. But the


Tibetan requires more than religion; he requires tea. And
Tatsienlu, where Mr. and Mrs. Cunningham and Mrs.
Edgar and myself reside, is the great tea centre on the
Tibetan frontier. From all parts of Tibet the traders
come to it for this precious commodity.
To see the caravans is an inspiring sight. Imagine one
of them with probably 600 animals coming into
the city. Let us, in imagination, go out and meet it.
In the distance we see the dust raised by the
animals; we know that a caravan is approaching. In a
short time we see the wildest and shaggiest animals
imaginable. We watch them pass, and then follow at a
distance, finally arriving at their camping ground. We
notice that the loads have been taken off the backs of the
yaks and stacked up some distance from the road. Here
the dogs are tied. The animals, relieved of their
burdens, are turned out. Only the dogs are left
in the camp, and their demeanour convinces us
that this is not the place to preach the Gospel.
We therefore leave them, and proceed to the Gospel Hall,
where we load a table with books and carry it out into
the street. By the table we wait, knowing that soon the
traders will make their appearance. Whjen they come
they regard us as strangers, because many of them have
never previously seen Europeans. They stare at us as
you stare at the hippopotamus and the rhinoceros in the
Zoo. After a while I offer them literature —Gospel por-
tions, catechisms and books dealing with the Christian
religion. They accept them. Then I preach to them. I have
prepared a great number of addresses in the Tibetan lan-
guage, which I have memorised very carefully. An
address lasts for about five minutes; that is about as
much as they will endure. After one band has dispersed
another comes along: To them also I giye literature,
and a short address. This goes on for hours daily. Indeed,
during 1924 and 1925 I delivered 1700 addresses of this
kind.
Perhaps you wonder whether these men can all read. I
assure you that they cannot. But every Tibetan pos


sesses a large amount of curiosity, and also a supersti-
tious reverence for the Tibetan script. Every family also in
Tibet aims at having one of its members a lama or priest.
We therefore have little doubt that most of the literature
that we hand to them will be carried away with them into
the interior, where the natural curiosity of the Tibetan
will, in some way, find out its meaning. In most cases
the services of the lama will be obtained to read it. And
it is possible that most of the people in the settlement
will in time hear what is contained in the strange book.
We therefore go forth sowing in tears, knowing that
some day we shall reap in joy.
In Central Asia there are regions where Jesus Christ
is unknown, where hundreds of thousands of men and
women are living and dying without a knowledge of the
Gospel. One tribe especially, known as the Jah-rung,
numbers nearly half a million. If you were to ask the
geographical societies of Europe about the people of that
tribe, they would stare at you. Probably no European
besides myself knows one word of their language.
A short time ago a strange, wild-looking man came into
my office and informed me that he was willing to help me
to study the Tibetan language. I told him that I was not
in need of instruction in that language, but that I was
desirous of learning the Jah-rung language. I asked
him if he could help me. He was able, and quite willing
to do so. We therefore set to work. I had a Tibetan-
English lexicon, which was translated into Jah-rung. We
then composed a tract containing about 2000 words, deal-
ing with the love of God. That tract is still in manu-
script. A Tibetan Christian catechism was then dealt
with. Here I added a chapter on the Devil. While
doing so I noticed that my assistant, or, perhaps I should
say, my teacher, became very excited. When I inquired
the reason he said that he knew all about the devil because
he was a devil worshipper. Later we translated the Apos-
tles’ Creed and the Lord’s Prayer. I found that the old
man was greatly interested in the Christian conception of


the Creator being the father of all mankind. The idea of an
Almighty God being pure and holy also impressed him
greatly, as did the prayer that God’s will should be done
in earth as in Heaven, But when we eame to the petition,
“Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that tres-
pass against us,” I noticed that the old man began to
tremble, lie then put down his pen and besrau to roll
Lamas of the Jah-rung Tribe.
up his writing materials. When 1 inquired what was
wrong, he replied, “This is holy; I am a sinful
man; 1 dare not translate that.” He was afraid
because he had been a robber, and had probably killed
many of his enemies, and injured others, I saw his diffi-
culty, and tried to help him, but only after considerable
argument was I able to persuade him to continue with the
translation of the Lord’s Prayer. When it was com-
pleted he left me. In conclusion, please remember that
away in Central Asia there is plenty of work for men
and women who cannot adequately express themselves
here in Australia. In those regions there are hundreds of
thousands of men and women who have not yet heard
the Gospel. May God help you to hear their cry, so that
missionaries may be sent forth to carry to them the
message of salvation, and that the whole world may be
led to a knowledge of Christ.


Face to Face with Death
THE MISSIONARY EXPLORER.
«T"AYERY place whereon the sole of your foot shall
tread shall be yonrs.” Thus saith the Lord, but all
the same, we are, generally, rather afraid of speak-
ing of the missionary as an explorer. Still, is not such
hesitancy the outcome of unsanctified prejudice rather
than Christian common sense? Even if Livingstone and
Chalmers are ruled out, it still remains true that some-
one must explore the uttermost parts; and as long as the
missionary keeps away from the Poles and the unin-
habited deserts, the claim that lie is an explorer should,
as a rule, carry with it a compliment. For is not the
pioneer missionary to the Mission Boards what the scouts
are to the armies? And because both organisations are
not as a rule prepared to take unwarranted risks, they
endeavour to have at their disposal a mass of facts
relating to climatic and geographical Conditions, as well
as the density and distribution of populations, and the
customs and temperaments of the different tribes and
races. So 1 can say without exaggerating that there is a
need to-day for men who will be able, with incontrovert-
ible facts, to emphasise the needs of heathendom.
Still, even now it is with some hesitation that I present
for your consideration an investigation of a part of
unknown Asia. Tire journey was in one respect frankly
negative in results. On the maps of China about a
generation old we find a town called Lakiang,. which
might have influenced missionaries interested in an un-
known region north of (Tiongtien, in Yunnan. But in
1907 Mr. Muir and I found it was not in the position
claimed for it on the best maps, nor had it ever existed
in any other part of China or Tibet. But Lakiang was prrt


off the map to make room for something more important.
In July of 1907 Mr. Cecil Pol hill, the China Inland
pioneer in Tibetan lands, and one of the Cambridge seven,
sent me to report on conditions along the eastern frontiers
of Tibet proper, and then proceed south-west and explore
some blank spaces, probably Tibetan country, south of
Litang. This programme, although Hsiang Cheng was not
on the maps, was intelligible enough to me, but must
have been very much like double Dutch to the authorities
in Shanghai. As a rule, such regions have been traversed
by non-missionary expeditions. But Hsiang Cheng was
terra incognita. The Chinese, however, told of a moun-
tainous region with a cruel, turbulent population, which
openly defied China. Indeed, in 1902 one of the agents
of the Suzerain had been inhumanly flayed alive, and his
skin exhibited in the Lamasery Museum of curios and wild
animals. The Hsiang Cheng people were an unknown
migration—mentioned by Du Halde—who had accepted
Lamaism, and had become thoroughly Tibetanised. The
plague spot of the region was an enormous monastery
inhabited by 2000 warrior monks, who, by years of unre-
mitting labour, had made it a veritable castle of misan-
thropic giants. Under Litang in theory, this fortress took
its orders from Lhasa, and remained a thorn in the side
of China. Impudent slavers preying on Chinese victims
passed through its territory to the Salwin, and neither
the wisdom of Confucius nor the logic of Mencius could
modify their barbarian instincts. And Hsiang Cheng
was anathema to the rulers and people of the frontiers,
and certainly not without reason.
The continued atrocities of the Hsiang Cheng outlaws
at last aroused China to vigorous action, and during 1907
the region was being “pacified,” that is, experiencing the
fury of an unsympathetic enemy. But the foresight of
the lamas had provided against such a contingency. They
had early retired to their great monastery. The walls
were thick and well built; they had food in abundance,
and underground pipes conveyed water from secret
springs. Moreover, innumerable instruments of worship
made their religious exercises a series of rollicking con


certs. So they remained safe from the Chinese fury, and
their joyful worship and ironical remarks ate into the
souls of their starving and depressed enemies. As time
wore on, incipient mutiny was at work, and it seemed as
if China’s most successful general was to retire from the
field baffled by the men he most wished to ruin. But
just in time a traitor, under torture or for gain, divulged
Crossing a River in Tibet by Gliding over a Bamboo Rope.
the secret of the water supply, and, that being cut off,
Hsiang Cheng was doomed. And one morning not long
afterwards the head abbots concluded-act one by hang-
ing themselves and their wives in full view of their
astonished enemies. Act two soon followed, and it has
little to record of a humane or merciful nature.
It was about this time that Mr. Muir and I made an
effort to visit Hsiang Cheng. And later, one afternoon,
from a low larch-clad pass, we viewed not Lakiang, but
the most interesting and most infamous monastery in the


land of the lamas. Ours were the first European eyes to
behold this stronghold of iniquity, and mine might easily
have been the first Anglo-Saxon grave to have usurped a
position on the thorn-clad slopes of its environs. We
found the Chinese army in possession of the town, and
an unfriendly official occupying the quarters of the high
priest. We were distinctly unwelcome to the conquerors,
and the Tibetans saw no reason to court persecution by
taking sides with the aliens. Indeed, to annoy us might
be considered as good service. Moreover, in such places
there are always sycophants who are in readiness to take
hints of this kind. And the opportunity to act came in
due time. We were making excursions in the adjacent
valleys, and using the Government animals. Naturally,
the Tibetans do not bring out the best, and the continual
changing is not the surest guarantee of safety. So far,
however, we had escaped unpleasant incidents. But my
last mount had a restless eye, and was giving disquieting
exhibitions of his kicking propensities. It was emphatic-
ally condemned, but someone in a rollicking mood offering
to lead it, I jumped into the saddle. Then, with an hilari-
ous shout, the mad, unbridled brute was turned loose.
There was no means of controlling it, and to keep my
seat was impossible, so, unsaddled, and with my foot
firmly caught in the stirrup, I was soon a plaything of
fate, an actor in one of the wildest performances ever
staged. It may have been light opera to the Tibetans,
but it was tragedy to Muir, and I was certain that my
last hour had come, for the maddened brute not only
jolted me over bushes and boulders, but ever and anon
would stop and give classic exhibitions of footwork—
dancing on me, and jabbing savagely. Fortunately, owing
to an unusual amount of clothing donned for climatic
reasons, the force of the vicious attacks was consider-
ably softened, although the dragging and bumping were
not a bad imitation of Hsiang Cheng’s speciality of flay-
ing alive. At one time I nonplussed the animal, and cur-
tailed his activities by holding up a foreleg, but the real
climax was only averted by the stirrup leather breaking
just before my senses fled. With a badly skinned back.


many bruises over the loins, and fractured ribs, I was
escorted to the lamasery, where I remained for some days
And then, far from well, I set out through a region abso
lutely unknown, for Litang, 200 miles distant. On the
way pleurisy attacked me, which, with bruises and frac
tured ribs, made my work on passes 15,000 feet, in autumn
hail and snow, little less than slow torture. And finally,
a circuitous entry into Litang about 11 p.m. one cold night
was anything but triumphant. But all the same we had
been through the heart of an unknown No-man’s land,
and were loaded with information that no one else could
give. That, to the pioneer, compensates amply for any
inconvenience in the valleys of the shadow of death.
The subsequent history of the Hsiang Cheng region
has been as bad as anything could be. Apart from some
French travellers and the missionaries, Ogden and Shel-
ton, European visitors have not visited it. Chinese colon-
ising schemes, too, have failed, and rebellions and mas-
sacres have upset China’s policy again and again. Now
much of the country east of the Yalung and south of
Litang is controlled by persevering and ferocious bri-
gands. No Chinese visit the greater part of the region,
and it would be suicide for Europeans to attempt to
carry on mission work in any part of it. But the, Hsiang
Cheng people confine operations not only to Avhat may be
called their legitimate sphere. They also wander far
afield, and their depredations are reported from the most
unlikely places. They cruelly murdered a French priest,
and the American missionary, Dr. Shelton, was probably
one of their victims. Litang, also one of the most impor-
tant of Tibetan towns, has been closed for many years,
largely as a result of their politics. We visited it in 1924,
but only escaped injury, if not death, by a narrow mar-
gin.
The result of such a journey was a vast amount of
information about an unknown region within the mis-
sion’s sphere of operations. Its possibilities and diffi-
culties are now known. It also showed conclusively that
Litang was its true base, and from this town literature


could be sent to regions where missionaries dare not go.
And to-day the Light has its agents where the seat of
Satan is. In 1924 18,000 Gospels, catechisms and tracts
were put in circulation at Litang, and xmevious visits
before 1911 would total a similar amount. A fair pro-
portion of that would no doubt reach the Hsiang Cheng
people. But, in view of the importance of the region
under discussion, it may be hoped that these efforts are
only a pioneer’s beginning. In any case there is some-
thing more. God said to Joshua : “Every place whereon
the sole of your foot shall tread shall be yours.” What
if that promise, in a sense, is for me also? I have been
over the Hsiang Cheng land, and may at least claim it
for God and His Kingdom. Most of my hearers may never
hear of it again, but you also have an onnortunity of
making a claim similar to mine. And while this new
knowledge means added responsibility to you, it also
means blessing to the land of brigands. But how shall
such regions be evangelised? And the answer is that of
another and older question: Ilow shall one chase a
thousand? And two nut ten thousand to flight? Only by
an alliance with the Omnipotent Lord.
A Fortified Lamasery.


The Highest Town on Earth
and The Dirtiest
TIBET Is such a huge subject, and its quaint and
complex problems admit of such varied interpreta-
tions, that my treatment to-day will be suggestive
rather than detailed.
One of the Mountain Passes that has to be Climbed. Thirteen
of these on the way to Litang are over 15,000 feet high.
The Tibetan town of Litang, 2300 miles west of Shang-
hai, will answer my purpose admirably. The highest
point in New Zealand is 12,349 feet high. My subject is


about regions more than 1500 feet higher. You will
accept my statement that the Tibetan snow line near 30
N. latitude is about 19,000 feet. It is a fact also, that
travellers have crossed passes 17,000 feet in midwinter,
and found them free from snow.
Litang, as stated elsewhere, has been described as the
richest town in Tibet. It is about 14,000 feet, or more
than 21 miles above the tide. This means that life there
is not quite the same as here. For instance, at sea level
boiling water is hotter by 26 deg., which implies that cook-
ing in Litang is a much prolonged process. But, perhaps
the most striking way to illustrate the inconvenience of
living in high altitudes is to mention the fact that 100*
men working above 12,000 feet are required to do work
easily completed by 50 at sea level. Indeed, when 2|
miles up exertion is painful, you get giddy when stoop-
ing, and may suffer in much the same way as do the
victims of violent mal-de-mer. And, although Litang is
much nearer the sun than Shanghai, its temperatures
may average from 20 to 30 degs. lower. It has been
affirmed that only one month of the twelve, August, is
free from frost, therefore no cereal will ripen, and
vegetables never grow to any size.
Litang, a plain, a town and a lamasery, is 200 miles
west of the frontier mart of Tatsienlu. It is not reached
by shooting up in a captive balloon, but by ten arduous
days ’ travel, which include the crossing of thirteen passes
over 15,000 feet. The scenery en route is wonderful—on
one plateau, 15,000 feet, more than 40 peaks over 20,000
feet may be counted. Among them is one unsurveyed
giant which the unduly optimistic might consider a rival
of Everest itself. The plain of Litang is a depression
amid rolling downs and bare, rugged mountains. No
trees are to be seen, and in winter, when the north winds,
chilled to zero, blow with hurricane force, the traveller
readily imagines himself on Siberian tundras near the
pole of maximum cold. But in summer the scene is agree-
ably changed. Nature smiles, and a general reincar-
nation is the result. The adjacent downs are robed with


grass, the greenness of which might put the Emerald isle
to shame, and the plain is carpeted with flowers of all the
shapes and shades an artist could desire. If you add to
this a soft and soundless atmosphere, tinted with the gold
of dancing sunbeams, Litang might suggest a land little
different, in essentials, from the Happy Valley of
Rasselas, the Abyssinian Prince. The plain has an area
of 100 square miles, and its value may be, gauged by the
official statement that during June, 1924, 60,000 sheep,
40,000 yak, and 1000 horses were fattening on its green
pastures. But the fertile land of Litang will produce no
vegetables nor fruit trees; neither will cereals ripen there.
This is a mystery alike to Chinese and Tibetans. Hence
they confidently assert that Litang, like some heroes in
fairy tales, is the victim of a magician’s curse. Years
ago a lama master of black magic, annoyed at China’s
death sentence, on the execution ground cursed the land
for ever with sterility. A wily Chinese official, 150 years
later, visited me Avith the object of obtaining my serAdees
against the black magic of the Tibetan martyr.
The secular population of Litang city and environs
may be 3300 souls. A mass of flat-roofed houses about
ten feet high joined together, it gives the impression at
a distance of a number of small fields with flags, poles,
and incense shrines erected in a haphazard and inconse-
quent manner. These are the magical machinery to insure
the peace and safety of the settlement. When, some-
what nearer the visitor finds that a passage like a rugged
ditch ten feet deep rims through the fieldlike features. This
is really the main street of Litang, Avhich divides the town
in tAvo equal halves. As you proceed doAvn this alley,
doors are seen which grrard the entrance to artificial
caves 180 feet deep and nine feet wide. These burrows
are the homes of the Litangese. They are dirty, musty,
highly uncomfortable, and, being all joined up in one
mass, the doles of light and sunshine filter in from holes
and cracks in the roofs. Through these also the heavy
unfragrant smoke from constant coaa t manure fires finds
an exit leisurely by devious paths, and very circuitous


routes. You will pardon me for taking you into my con-
fidence. Well, I have wept bitterly in .Litang houses, not,
it is true, for friends in happier lands and fairer climes,
but because of the quantities of pungent smoke emitted
by green brushwood and cow manure fires in the highest
town on earth.
The ditch-like feature referred to above—the main and
only street of Litang—is nine feet wide, and probably
2000 feet long. It is so atrociously paved that human
purpose might be questioned, and so filthy that its coun-
terpart might reasonably be sought in some department
of Dante’s Inferno. Early in the morning men have tied
mules, horses, yak, and sheep to posts and rings in the
wall. These creatures, at first extending themselves at
divers angles 4 and comporting themselves in sundry atti-
tudes, are soon only confused items in a surging mass so
packed that a man in a hurry could hardly squirm
through. What a motley mass it is! Hordes of the
wildest, dirtiest men on earth, and the ugliest women in
Asia, shout and jostle as they work their way through the
seething crowd, and almost every beast of burden known
to the steppes. Such masses in Litang, foul-smelling
nomads, fearless brigands, portly lamas, and women with
bizarre coiffures and faces “uglified” as a protective
measure, usually repel, and often unnerve, the missionary
because it is always suggestive of an accident about to
happen.
But the glory of Litang is its lamasery, with a roll call
of 3700 clerics. As every family aims at having one of
its members a lama, we assume that this number repre-
sents the families under two famous princes who for-
merly lived in fine ancient Egyptian-like castles not far
away. This double principality had seventeen political
divisions, and each division had a lamasery, with an abbot
and lamas in Litang. Then, to insure order and efficient
co-operation, one Abbot-General—an important Incar-
nation—has jurisdiction over the entire community. In
this way the lamasery, having within its walls represen-
tatives of all the families in the principality, became the


centre for rich and poor from its very gates to the most
distant tent; and when we remember that the Litang
lamasery is only one of hundreds linked up with the Holy
City by a common faith, we begin to realise how Lamaism
and Tibetan solidarity are one and the same thing. But
the lamasery is also the true rendezvous of the trader,
and the native prince and the Chinese agent find it the
most convenient political centre. Naturally, much of the
The Lamasery at Litang, where 3700 Lamas Reside.
country’s wealth is also there, and at times the impres-
sion is given that the lamas are often puzzled about suit-
able outlets for the riches that pour into their coffers.
They may not speculate in wives, and horses, and yaks,
and apes, and peacocks, hut certain roofs, and turrets,
and towers, and other parts of the temple building may
ho plated with gold from 1-16th to 1-Bth of an inch in
thickness.
Litang lamasery has a printing press, where an 108-
volume Tibetan “Bible” is produced. The blocks required
for such an effort are about 40,000 in number. When
this amazing print is finished and bound, a caravan of
36 yak would be required to deliver it at the doors of
the purchaser. But 1000 animals would find difficulty
in transferring the heavy printing blocks to new quarters.


Inside, the great buildings suggest a series of desper-
ately haunted halls, immersed in eternal twilight gloom.
Silent spectral forms, the lamas on duty, seem to be always
moving to and fro, and a ghostly orchestra not infre-
quently interprets what might be the bliss of the Nirvana
negation after a rough and tumble conflict with spiritual
enemies in high places. I have seen many Europeans
enter a large lamasery indifferent, or slightly curious,
but as a rule they leave it deeply impressed, and often
mystified. Why? Can you imagine the feelings of the
man who has sailed with the Flying Dutchman? Or of
one who had dined with the wandering Jew, or slept in
the halls of Prester John? I can, because I have been in
Tibetan lamaseries. The ritual is ornate, and the music
suggests a tumultuous delirium. On one occasion, to me
at least, it suggested something else. One morning, when
about 1000 instruments were about to perform, without
being invited thereto, I took up a position which would
enable me to watch the progress of the performance. They
began. Fortune at first seemed to favour me, but later
played me an unkind trick. A lama musician, tired of
his part, looked up and beheld* not the face of
his mistress, but the hateful blue eyes of an
intruding European. This was serious. Word went
round like magic, the while surging music ceased, and
2000 blazing eyes fixed me with a power equal to that of
the ancient mariner. But in my case the compulsion to
fly was more than a match for the mesmeric gaze, and I
was soon escaping from the building with a precipitance
that might have suggested the leaving of the district also
as part of my programme. But almost immediately my
soul was comforted and my fears calmed, for the grand
orchestra had resumed its tempestuous course, and that
meant the danger was . past. Litang is one of the few
religious centres in Tibet where the priests are allowed
to eat meat. The slaughter of 1000 yak yearly indicates
that the indulgence is appreciated- Bixt the staple diet
of the lamas here, as elsewhere, is parched barley meal,
and butter mixed together in a small wooden basin. This
diet suits the Tibetans admirably. It is very nourishing,


slightly stimulating, and requires the least amount of
cooking in a treeless land. The barley is roasted and
ground; the butter is always very dirty, and often objec-
tionably rank, and the vile tea is stewed until it is thick'
and black. Then, to make it more undrinkable, from
our .point of view, salt and washing soda are usually
added. Before using, the leaves are carefully strained
from the liquid. In Litang the quantities of meal, butter
and tea required are enormous. In the kitchen there are
many cauldrons of copper, about eight feet in diameter
and four feet deep. In these the tea is boiled, and the
furnaces, fed by huge logs, remind one of factory engines,
or suggest a colony of Brobdignagian gourmands, rather
than ascetic Buddhists. The inmates of the Litang lama-
sery disprove the inference that cleanliness and godliness
are closely connected. Litang is very religious, but
notoriously dirty. However, to be fair, the only reason
known to me why anyone there should wash is a religious
one. The people wash once a year, and the custom is
explained in this way. Thousands of years ago a famous
Buddha formed the habit of bathing once a year in the
adjacent hot springs, and the Litangese,_ who admire him
greatly, soak themselves in the same waters annually,
whether they require it or not. The Tibetan insists that
dirt keeps the heat in and the cold out: hence it is neces-
sary to remind a correctly trained European that he
would accomplish no useful purpose, but lose much in-
fluence by stressing the opposite view.
The lamasery of Litang is an important pilgrim centre.
Many devotees cirenmnambulate it scores of times dur-
ing the year, and at least one old woman worshipped it
so fervently, and with such regularity, that her constant
kneelings had worn grooves in the tough sward. Around
Litang at times “prostrating pilgrims” may be seen. The
programme of such men is to prostrate themselves for
years over the terrible country between the Chinese fron-
tiers and Lhasa.
Litang, as you may imagine, is not''One of the pleasant
places of the earth, hut the missionary must always


remember it is one of the great educational centres of
Tibet. So, since 1903, it has been my most important
objective, and in 1911, when a mission hail had been
rented, with the lamas in full sympathy, it seemed as if
my day dreams were being fulfilled. But in 1911, also,
came the Great Revolution, and one of its details was the
closing of Litang to Europeans for thirteen years. In
1924, however, Dr. Crook and I again walked its dismal
streets. Our journey had been anything but pleasant. It
had rained every day, and the brigands were so numerous
that an escort of twenty rifles accompanied us. One night
we camped on a bog at 14,000 feet in a cold, drenching
rain. By 2 a.m. we were so uncomfortable that someone
began to boil tea, and the party was well on its way two
hours later. That early start, no doubt, saved our lives,
because, later on, we turned a corner and beheld a strong
band of brigands preparing to ambush. They knew of
our approach, and intended to exterminate us, but had
misjudged the time, and we were able to face them in
the open. But it was a touch and go; such men shoot to
kill, and rarely miss. But our guardian angels had con-
founded their politics, and saved our lives. Our sojourn
in Litang was very pleasant, and quite successful from a
missionary’s standpoint. On the last afternoon we visited
the famous hot springs, and, with the local official and
an imposing escort, galloped over the brigand-infested
plain. Scores of encampments were visited, and, in spite
of baying bloodhounds and grunting yak, with tails erect,
eyes ablaze, and jets of steam pouring from dilated nos-
trils, we were able to put large quantities of literature
into the hands of nomads, lamas, and brigands. Never
perhans did missionaries complete their task with such
'•nllicking abandon.


Does China, the Ancient of Nations,
Need the Gospel ?
THE prejudices and misconceptions regarding the
Chinese are amazing; and the contemptuous indif-
ference about the facts that explain their perma-
nency as a nation is as irritating as it is dangerous.
These, to us, quaint and inferior people, have an over-
plus of qualities which are of first importance on the
earth. The number of their years is proof of this. Egypt,
Assyria, Rome and others were full of years, and made
names for themselves in the records of the ages, but they
were as young men and maidens compared with this
Methuselah among the nations. And such longevity is
not explained by a concatenation of chance circumstances.
We must look for the secret in the philosophy, moral
ideas and industry of the people themselves. It has been
suggested by some that the really effective force in a
nation is its social organisation; that its poAver to attract
and use human material is the true index of its civilisa-
tion. Like crystals, the national genius must express
itself in a definite way. The civilisation of the Australian
blacks gives us unfederated hordes of 100 to 150 souls.
The social organisation is very w r eak, so we class them
socially about zero. The indicator from this point begins
to ascend, and we note the South Seas, African tribes,
Abyssinia, higher and higher, until Tibet is reached, where
we find the cohesive power of the social organisation at
the five million mark. Now this means that Tibet is in
possession of, and can use a secret, that entitles her to be
classed with “highly civilised races.” With some such
norm as the above in view, where shall we place China,
which has been a nation of many millions for 4500 years ?
Is she a miracle? Perhaps so. But in any case we should


be done with jibes about chopsticks, edible dogs, and
birds’ nests, for our contempt and ill-will may react very
seriously on our children. For China may yet inherit
the earth.
The religion of China, like that of the Israelites, was
to a large extent part of their everyday life. This may
be, in a measure, the reason why Europe has not yet
invented a name for what the Chinese call the Triple
Faith, or Sanchiaoism. Whether native or foreign, the
elements have been put through a clearly recognised
mould, and stamped with a “made in China” seal. In
this composite system we find an ancient Dualism, a pro-
nounced animism, and Indian pessimism. The animistic
element appeals to the ignorant and mystics, while the
other two take root Avhere training and temperament
have produced suitable ground. The worship of the
proto-historic Chinese was perhaps the most perfect
natural religion ever conceived. But the Triple Faith
to-day has become a thoroughgoing Animism, with an
army of malignant or beneficent spirits capable of resid-
ing in natural features, trees and works of man. The
old and wonderful conception of “Then,” or the Vault
of Heaven, a term which the Jewish colonists of Kaifeng
used to express the ineffable Name, has lost its value, and
has little effect on the morals or polities of the nation.
In a hazy way, however, it might be held that the many
spirits are either local expressions of T’ien, or gods of
foreign origin, in subject to him. The distinctly evil
ones, of course, have, a different origin. They are the
deification of wickedness, and must be considered as
exercising an authority as limited as that of evil men.
This belief in evil spirits, with a keen sense of guilt,
implies a perpetual effort to square accounts with the
offended and malicious deities, and affords ample evi-
dence that the Chinese are a very religious people. For
instance, if the cost of their worship in the form of
temples, shrines, idols, sacrifices, pilgrimages, funerals,
and superstitious paraphernalia could be presented in
figures, it would stagger humanity. I make no claim to
speak with authority, but would suggest £120,000,000


yearly as a moderate estimate. With the exception of a
small proportion for constructive works, all this is waste
of an unwarranted kind.
Christianity would supply a great need in China, and
remedy her crying evils. Idolatry and superstition would
flee the country, and she would be happy to find herself
according with the wisdom of the early worthies. Those
who advocate leaving China to the controls of her degen-
erate age are either unable to appreciate true values or
they are callously prepared to exploit ignorance in the
interests of paltry dividends. No; China is in a back-
wash, with very crude conceptions of progress. Indeed,
this must be expected of men and women who worship
mud and unpleasant demons who make their abode in it.
Such people, of course, can never have the mental
alertness necessary for successful conflict in this age
of wisdom. But a mentality of that type may allow them
to condone cruel and stupid customs, which will remain
right across the patli of healthy development, or leave
them on the plane of eternal mediocrity. Alas! she has
been far too long there already. Her 4500 years of
national life forces us to admit much in her civilisation
that is noble and virtuous, but her commonplace position
among the nations to-day, and her relatively meagre con-
tribution to art and science at any time point to errors
of a serious nature in her national constitution. The
object of Christianity would be to conserve all that is
good in the old system, eliminate what is harmful, and
give her a new definition of progress ; in other words, to
give her a new heart, and free her from, the domination
of infantile controls. Surely that is a boon to any land,
and undoubtedly that is what Christianity would do for
China. But it is not her custom to listen to the voice
of the prophets, especially if they come from the Land
of the Setting Sun.
The story of Christianity in China is romantic and
heartbreaking. The Nestorian and Manichean mission-
aries were at work there during the seventh century, and,
600 years later Marco Polo mentions thriving colonies


of the former in many towns in the provinces and
dependencies. Later, the early agents of Rome arrived,
and were not without striking success, but about the
time of the Reformation both forms of Christianity seem
to have been swallowed up in some unrecorded cataclysm.
But, about the end of the sixteenth century, Rome again
renewed her attacks, and soon had agents in many parts
of the provinces. They were clever, carefully trained
men, and their success was phenomenal. They preached
Christianity, taught mathematics, rectified calendars, lec-
tured on science, cast cannons, and made themselves in a
general way indispensable. For instance, they intro-
duced clocks into the Imperial harems. But, before long,
the innovations soon required regulating, and, at times,
important repairs. Only the Europeans could render such
aid, and, as their services were frequent, an entirely new
board was formed to meet the difficulty. And one of the
fathers was made President. In this extraordinary way
Christianity was propagated in the most unlikely quar-
ters. Not only did the masses and officials respond to
their teaching, but the most coveted honours of the land
were bestowed upon these pilgrims from the West. In
this way their social standing was insured indefinitely.
In China, when the “blood was ennobled,” the patents
not only included the subject’s descendants, but his
ancestors as well. The recipients in this case, however,
were men without hope of posterity; the parents and
grandparents alone could share in the honour. But the
difficulty was adroitly evaded by recognising the mem-
bers of the Order as brothers, and legally qualified to
take advantage of the privileges. But quarrels between
the different orders estranged the Emperor, and brought
evil days upon them all. They suffered cruelly, but, like
heroes, remained at their posts in the interior. And
from 1600 A.D. to the present they have never relin-
quished their hold, and at all times willingly, when the
occasion arose, gave their lives for their Church. But
why were the Protestants not there also? Enterprise in
discovery, trade, and war proves that they were no
cowards, hut it suggests they were putting first things


last. Hence, it is a matter of history that Morrison only
began to labour in Canton when the nineteenth century
was born, 200 years after Ricci, and in 1834 there were
only two Protestant missionaries in coastal China. It
was not till 1865 that Hudson Taylor perfected plans, and
found men willing to open up the inland provinces of
China. This mission, the China Inland, asks for neither
money nor men, but trusts to God to influence candidates
for service, and the donors for supplies. It has now about
1200 workers from most evangelical denominations, and
many European countries. It never goes in debt, although
£4OO a day is required to run the 264 stations, 1947 out-
stations, and 3407 Chinese workers. The China Inland
Mission works in fifteen out of the eighteen provinces,
and on the church roll there are 68,256 members (1926).
There are other Protestant missionaries almost innumer-
able in many parts of the Empire, but their activities are
beyond the scope of my address. Nevertheless, enough
has been said to show that China is not now ignorant of
Protestant Christianity.
When some think of the money spent, and the talent
diverted on, and towards, China, the question comes with
the persistency of a repeating decimal, “Are the ChinesS
worth all this sacrifice of men and gold?” Yes, emphatic-
ally, but two reasons, a material and a spiritual one, may
give a new turn to the inquiry. (1) The Yellow Peril may
be more imminent than is generally imagined. China
lias endured as a nation for four and a half millenniums
a record unique in history. Her power to absorb king-
doms and tribes is unparalleled. Like an avalanche, she
has moved on in the past, and to-day four hundred mil-
lions is a big start on the way to a yellow world. Her
people are indifferent to climatic conditions. Alike in
New Guinea and the pole of maximum cold, they live and
thrive. Our civilisation is a piece of wonderful machin-
ery too delicate to last, but China is crude and more
robust, and in any case has the secret of renewing her
youth. What if she hibernates till the phase of annoy-
ance, modern Europe and America, passes away? Will


the earth not then be hers! God only knows, but if so,
it will make a vast difference if her ideals have been
purified, and her conduct is guided by Christ’s teaching.
If not, God help the world, and especially the non-
Christian people. (2) But there is a spiritual reason.
Christianity is for China as well as for us. To question
this is to question the authority of God’s Son. What
right had England to the privileges of the Christian faith!
Her people were savages sunk in superstition and immor-
ality. They were not the chosen of God, nor beloved by
Greece or Rome. They were Gentiles to one, and bar-
barians to the other. But Jesus implied what Paul
stated, "For there is no difference between the Jew and
the Greek.” So men who loved the Lord went west, and
not east. It might have been the other way about. Why,
oh, why, then, should any Christian question China’s
right to the Gospel, or the duty of England, who has
benefited so much by it, to bring the glad news to the
nation that temporarily Christ seemed to pass by? "But
you do question it!” Then prove to mo that China has
no right to Christ’s sacrifice, and by your identical argu-
ments I shall prove that the privileges and consolations
of the only supernatural religion are not for you and me.
May God help us all to "think white,” so that the yellow
man may be born into the Kingdom of the Lord and His
Christ.


The Wonderful Religious System
of the Tibetans
DU HALDIi, centuries ago, called certain regions
“The Land of the Lamas,” and the designation is
so apt that it might well have a wider application.
The Lamas are priests in Tibet, and Lamaism is the
wonderful religious system of that great land of mystery.
The centre of Lamaism is Lhasa, the Holy City, in
which resides the Dalai, the Pope of the system, and
believed to be a Light Incarnation of one of the celestial
Buddhas. He is the temporal ruler of much Tibetan
country, and “the Saviour of all Tibetans.” In Lhasa,
also, are the colleges where the priests of Lamaism study
and obtain their ordination privileges; it is also the
objective of myriads of devout and fanatical pilgrims;
and the centre of caravans from all parts of Tibet. But
Lamaism demands hundreds of monasteries at strategic
points all over the land. These are, in fact, miniature
Lbasas, and are linked up with the Holy City in the
same way that they are, each, with the settlements and
encampments of their own districts. So in this way the
power of the Dalai is felt in the poorest tent in the most
distant part of the Tibetan world.
Lamaism, as the name would imply, demands lamas, or
priests. The Dalai, the Grand Lama, is an emanation
of light residing permanently in a male human body. But
there are in many places inferior functionaries, really the
spirits of saints, heroes, and even Emperors, who from
time to time, overcome with pity, have deigned to live
indefinitely on the earth. These lacings, midway between
the gods and ordinary men, are not so imposing as wo
might imagine, for on one occasion an Imperial decree


from Peking- prohibited one fiom reappearing again on
the earth for ever. But, apart from such an exceptional
incident, these more important functionaries are not the
real force in the Lamaist system. This is undoubtedly
the ordinary lama, lie is the most obtrusive feature on
A Grand Lama, Believed by All Devout Tibetans
to be a Reincarnation of a Buddha.
the Tibetan landscape, and the magician of the people.
They are made, not, born. Every family aims at having
one, at least, of its members a lama; but the process is
an involved one, and the period of making a long one.
The child set apart for the church begins his studies in
the home or tent at an early age. Later lie enters the
local lamasery for an indefinite period; and, finally, takes
a course in Lhasa, which fits him to take up the duties,
and share the advantages, of a priest. This training


includes a preparation for the exploiting of local oppor-
tunities, in which the ungentle art of brigandage is not
excluded in some regions at least. Indeed, Friar Tuck
would find his counterpart in many wild States in Eastern
Tibet.
The district lamasery, which may have from 100 to
3500 clerics on the roll, is like the hnh of an immense
human wheel. It is a fair index of the population in
families; the religious, educational and commercial centre;
and the representative of what is called the town in
other lands. The poorest and most distant nomad has a
relative there, and, by the lamasery, is indirectly in touch
with the culture of Lhasa, and shares in many advan-
tages which it alone could create. But human relation-
ship is not the only weapon of Lamaism. The lamasery
as surely expresses the Tibetan culture and art as the
churches portrayed the civilisation of Europe in the
Middle Ages. Many of the roofs are plated with pure
gold, and the imposing structures, with rich upholster-
ings, paintings, statuary, and carved woodwork, cannot
but powerfully impress the smoke-stained nomads of the
mountain wastes.
The services performed by priests in strange and im-
pressive vestments, and on a great variety of instru-
ments of worship, are fascinating and bewildering. Inside
the temple all is gloom and mystery; you might be in
massive haunted halls. Spectral forms move to and fro;
fumes of incense seem to come from damp caves in the
nether gloom, and ghostly orchestras perform on the bal-
conies of the unknown. Someone speaks “of the droning,
chanting, mumbling voices of the priests, some of them
rumbling in heavy bass, others giving their clear little
boy-notes to the Song of Praise. There is a continual
dum-dum-dumming of drums, the rising and falling notes
of the trumpets, the squawking of flutes, the clank, clank
of the cymbals, slower at first, then all finishing the
measure with a terrible clash of sound.” Naturally, such
services would appeal to an ignorant and superstitious
people, and the lamas vary the religious performances


by holy festivals, auction sales, eockfighting, horse rac-
ing, and theatricals of all kinds. And in one region where
the need of physicians is great, the demand is met by
erecting a large hall over a disease-healing locality,
where charms are sold and panaceas provided. Indeed,
Lamaism is the fruit of the Tibetan’s attitude towards
nature, and that attitude is wrong fundamentally. It
has done much for Tibet, but, even if it has proved bene-
ficial, it is still at best a useful error, and that is never
truth. But, as the missionary is abroad to proclaim
truth, and to aid men to recognise true values, the down-
fall of Lamaism is one of its aims, and a foregone con-
clusion, apart even from Christianity.
Lamaism, as a matter of fact, is right across the path
H Christian progress, and yet it is not entirely antagonis-
tic. The ignorance of the lama is unfathomable in many
ways, and the impudence of his magic is colossal. More-
over, the abounding superstition, and faith of the people
in Lamaism are pathetic. The Tibetan imagines that all
his progress, the result of centuries of determined effort
and unrelieved suffering, is the fruit of Lamaism, and it
and his civilisation stand or fall together. Ho cannot
see that Lamaism, although applying many excellent
principles, is hampered by much that is idiotic and evil.
But, because Christianity asks him to reject the dross,
ho is certain that to do so is equivalent to relinquishing
the gold. And it is a hard matter to make him think
differently. But, while Lamaism is distinctly and fanatic-
ally opposed to anything inimical to the national solidar-
ity of the Tibetan, there seems to be no real antagonism
to the principles of true Christianity. God, moreover,
used Jewish theology, Greek culture, and Eoman con-
quests as the forerunners and handmaids of Christianity,
so would it not be reasonable to believe that He will
employ the unique culture and commercial system of
Tibet to evangelise regions where the missionaries of
England may not go? Think for a moment how Lamaism
centralises the people, creates trade, directs pilgrims, and
educates the masses, and you will realise that the mis


sionary has not only a constituency provided, but the
means of reaching it and influencing it by the most
insidious of all agents, Christian literature.
For some time now I have made a point of dealing with
these educational and cultural centres, and, during one
year, must have touched sixteen large lamaseries, with
a priestly population totalling 15,000. Naturally, one
would not expect them all to be friendly, and it is true
they have threatened me with knives, poison, madmen,
and dogs; but on many occasions they have atoned amply
for any lack of courtesy. Indeed, the abbot of the
Atuentze Institution one day saw to it himself that my
stores of Gospel portions were put in circulation in his
district. The abbot in K’ong Yu, also, once spent pari
of the night in prayer on my behalf, and the high priest
of Tan Tong gave me the blessing of his church when
such an action might have saved me from death.
But I must again insist that Lamaism is based on ignor-
ance, and a misunderstanding of Nature’s laws and the
ordinary happenings of everyday life. It has multiplied
spirits as a culture field multiplies microbes, and a cor-
responding increase of magical rites and formulae has
perforce been necessary. Introduce, then, a true know-
ledge of God and His laws, and the structure will col-
lapse. But more than human knowledge is needed; edu-
cation, without the modifying influences of Christianity,
will make Tibet Bolshevik, and that may prove to be
worse than Lamaism for Tibet and the wordd.


Midst Robbers and Earthquakes
CENTRAL Asia lias many strange and interesting
people. Ages ago, force of diverse circumstances
sent men to the inhospitable tablelands of the
Tibetan ranges. Folk do not move from good climates
and fertile regions to less favourable ones without cogent
reasons, and we might assume over-population, desert
encroachments, party strife, and dread of law courts as
the immediate causes of migrations to Tibet, The his-
tories of China, indeed, speak much of the inrush of rebels
and law breakers from many lands. But, having
escaped from one enemy, they were soon confronted with
others, the geographical features of an alien land. And,
like soldiers in a garrison, they had to make the best of
local conditions, unaided by the old supplies that seemed
necessary to their existence. So, in time, only the con-
stitutions and temperaments suited to the new and un-
kindly environments would survive; the others would be
ruthlessly and completely eliminated.
The most interesting of these old fugitives are the Hor,
a mysterious survival now domiciled in the fertile upper
valleys of the Va lurig, 240 miles north-west of Tatsienlu.
Who are they? It is almost certain they are a remnant of
Asiatic Goths. About B.C. 180, an important people,
known as the Yueh Ti, whose home was in North-West
Kansu, were defeated by the Hsiung Nu, or Huns, and
hurriedly set out for lands beyond the western con-
fines of China. In time they spread over Transoxania,
and, as a detail, about 130 8.C., conquered the Greek
kingdom of Bactria, founded about 200 years previously
by the armies of Alexander. But, during the debacle
from China, a remnant left the main horde and passed
beyond human ken “somewhere in Tibet ” But were


they lost? Two thousand years later 1 had unearthed evi-
dence which seems to show that the Hor of the Upper
Yalung are their descendants. This evidence would be
of little interest to the public, but it might satisfy ethno-
logists just now to say that the Hor and the Yueh Ti are
the same people, and the names, as well as the historical
references to them, would indicate a Gothic origin.
The political centre of the Ilor is at Kanze, a town
and lamasery in the centre of a rich plain about 11,000
feet above the sea. The agricultural region at the head
of the tableland has been called the garden of Tibet. The
Hor also occupy a rich agricultural valley to the south-
east, where there is another large lamasery and many
settlements. These people not only own large flocks and
herds, which graze on the rolling downs and mountain
slopes, but, being the traders par excellence of Tibet,
their caravans travel far afield. Then, as builders and
artificers, they have few to equal them, and none to
excel.
The Hor may number about 50,000 souls, grouped in
settlements varying in size and importance in Drango,
Chuo, Kanze, and Rongpa-tsa. But the tine centres of
the Hor are the four large lamaseries built in strategic
positions, with a population aggregating 8000 monks. The
missionary could hardly find more suitable groupings
anywhere in the land of the Lamas. In politics the Hor
strive to divide their favours equally between China and
Tibet, an Oriental Condominium which, although at times
the cause of trouble, enables the Hor to exploit both
Governments. They must be considered the most civilised
and cultured of the Tibetan people, and to some the
Kanze Lamasery might be quoted as proof. It has a roll
call of 3000, and is a wonderful mass of buildings, with
roofs plated with gold, and walls and panels shaded
with many brilliant colours.
If the Hor are a survival of Asiatic Goths, they are
the last of the race to hear the Gospel. And circumstances
seem to be in favour of a thorough and speedy evangelisa-
tion. Their trading instincts drive them to the mission


ary. They throng the streets of Tatsienlu, and probably
30 per cent, of those who hear street sermons and read
Christian literature, are Hor. Bands of them, also, pass
through our European house like visitors through a
museum. Art and nature have also fitted them
to profit by contact with the missionary.. Their
social efficiency, in a general way, is higher
than their neighbours, and a lama population of nearly
10,000 within a 30-mile radius, shows that educational
advantages are many, and also appreciated. But the
missionary also may go to the Hor. Their districts are
ideal for itinerant work. The settlements are grouped
regularly in the open valleys and plains, which are
never much above 11,000 feet. Again, as a rule, they
are in the vicinity of the great northern road. This, of
course, gives the missionary exceptional opportunities to
deal with strangers from unknown Asia. My methods are
very simple. I do a large amount of personal work,
speaking to my companions, and dealing with nomads and
villagers wherever I can persuade them to linger In
groups. It is a common plan, also, to pitch my tent near
the settlements, lamaseries, and the camps of nomads,
where the natural curiosity of the “Men on the Roof”
soon insures me an audience. On rare occasions I deal
with a caravan in this way. Imagine a broad valley with
winding streams meandering through hundreds of acres
of grass gloriously green. On terraces on both sides are
sombre forests stretching into the unknown Hinterland.
The air is clear and crisp, and the silence of the long
twilight is almost oppressive. A wolf has you under
observation, and an ambushed robber may be waiting
for you behind a holy mound. Suddenly you turn a
corner, and see before you an enormous caravan camped
for the night. There are about 1000 animals, and they
are fastened to rones and stakes, so as to form an enor-
mous circle. Inside are scores of wild men and valuable
baggage, and at strategic points are the guardians of
the camp, dogs of great size and ferocious tempers. Now,
to appear suddenly before such an assembly might mean
an unromantic death, but if you quietly pitch your tent


some distance away, you will accomplish your object,
and no ill-will or suspicion need be engendered. But it
requires tact and what may be called sanctified impu-
dence.
The land of the Hor is visited by earthquakes of the
most devastating kind. In March, 1915, one such calamity
wrecked 95 per cent of the houses, killed 50 per cent of
the people, and 75 per cent, of the domestic animals.
Among the casualties urns a Roman Catholic, with 49 of
his flock. A great rent ran for tens of miles up the main
valley, and in one place a hilltop was shattered into great
blocks a yard square, and in places even small bushes
were overturned. The dead bodies of animals and men
blocked the stream, and the stench from them and the
fetid discharges from the wounds of the living suggested
a zone in Dante’s Inferno. Dr. Andrews and I spent
six weeks attending to the injured survivors. The burns
were awful. Great cauldrons of boiling tea were thrown
over hundreds of unfortunate women, scalding them in
a most pitiable and often fatal manner. A strange illus-
tration of the “tender mercies’’ of the heathen was forced
on our notice. Beyond the mountains are wild, unsub-
dued robber tribes. As soon as the calamity among the
Hor became known, these unregenerate harpies came
out in strong bands and took from the defenceless sur-
vivors of all that the earthquake had left. One night
a strong party came across the river to wipe us out, but
■the Tibetans turned loose about a dozen dogs, and these
brutes, attacking the over-confident raiders, put them to
ignominious flight. Later a demented Chinese official
ordered us to be trussed up and shot, but no one obeyed
his insane orders.
The Hor are independent and conservative, and tra-
vellers have given them a bad name. But they have shown
no anti-foreign activities for many years. I have tra-
velled among them freely, and have been allowed into
their beautiful temples in the gorgeous lamasery. More-
over, during the last visit the lamas permitted it to


“leak out” that if we cared to open settled work in
Kanze, no opposition would be offered. The only fear
was that we might alienate their land, and foster Chinese
colonies; but we could set their minds at rest on that
point. Still, we are yet far from the goal. The Hor
are the last of the Goths to remain unevangelised. The
strong fetters of Lamaism are around them, and such are
not easily broken. Lamaism, too, multiplies the dark-
ness, and harvests only ripen in the light. Have we
come too late? That is only known in Heaven, but we
can pray the Lord of the Harvest, that even here, the
reapers may find their sheaves of golden grain.
Camping Out when Travelling, The Mountain Above is said to
be 28,600 feet in height.


Imprisoned with A Madman
OF the four gateways into Tibet, Tatsienlu, the capi-
tal of the Szechwan Marches, is the most impor-
tant, and offers not only admirable opportunities for
the itinerant missionary, but is also the great rendezvous
for the caravans from the interior. But it is not my
intention to speak of Tatsienlu; my primary object is to
impress upon my hearers the need for pioneers and lin-
guists in the great "Never Never" of Central Asia.
Most of us, I am sure admit that Christ died for all
men everywhere, but are we all convinced that those who
have most benefited by the Saviour’s sacrifice should be
most diligent in proclaiming Christ where He is still
unknoAvn? I am a full member of the China Inland Mis-
sion, an organisation pledged to evangelise the Chinese
Empire, dependencies and the provinces.
But what is the Chinese Empire? It is not only the
eighteen provinces of the Chinese proper, but includes
within its borders the remnants of many nations, and
tribes, and tongues. Most of you know Manchuria, Mon-
golia, Eastern Turkestan, and Tibet by name; but there
are scores of principalities and states, self-governing and
non-Chinese, about which you have never heard; and yet
they are legitimate spheres for the inland missionary’s
operations. No apology, therefore, is necessary for mak-
ing the public statement that they have absorbed my
interest, and made heavy demands on my time for years.
Apart from Tatsienlu, the China Inland Mission has
only one other station —Hsi-Ning—with Tibetan work
as part of its programme. A line between them south to
north would be about 700 miles, and that line could be
extended westward for 1000 miles without touching


regions affected by the programmes of Mission Boards.
“But,” some might say, “the region consists of deserts
and unpeopled wastes. The population is negligible, why
trouble about it?” But who has a right to make such a
statement? Some of us, who have come out from similar
“blank spaces,” can tell of thriving settlements and
opulent monasteries, and we judge, by immense caravans
and streams of pilgrims, that the regions even beyond
them have populations far too important to be ignored
by men and women who believe that “the earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as
the waters cover the sea.” At times the question is
asked: “Have no gleams of Gospel light ever penetrated
this deep darkness? Perhaps, yes. Years ago a Moslem
priest called on me with three Tibetans whose homes
were in regions near the springs of the Yellow River.
They had been out in China worshipping at one of the
holy mountains. When there, they had heard of a Great
Being who had made the heavens and the earth, and all
living things. The Chinese could give them no satisfac-
tory information. At Weiehow, however, they had met
the head of the local Moslem mosque, who had given
them the benefit of his knowledge, but when they asked
for literature on the subject in Tibetan, he had none to
give them. So he brought them to the Gospel Hall and
told me his difficulty. “They are the representatives of
influential families, and they not only desire to study the
question themselves, but they are anxious for literature
which will also enlighten their friends. I shall esteem
it a favour,” he continued, “if you treat them liberally.”
And, some time later, when the pilgrims set out for their
distant homes, they were well supplied with the soul-
saving literature.
But there are ethnic survivals between China proper
and Tibet whose tribal boundaries and racial names are
unknown even to the missionaries who have specialised
in such matters. I once saw a caravan at Tsakulao, the
personnel of which consisted of women between 5 feet
8 inches to 5 feet 9 inches. They had light olive com-
plexions, and clear cut classic features, but they were as


timid as hares, and shunned me like poison, until, in a
few hours’ time, like ships that pass in the night, unsig-
nalled, they disappeared into unknown Asia. Who were
they? On this frontier, rumours are not wanting of “a
kingdom of women” who once lived in these parts, and
even now of fair-skinned races beyond the mountains.
But the visits of travellers have failed to confirm the one
or the other. Had I met them at last? I cannot say.
but, after thinking the matter over for years, it might
be reasonable to look for our Amazons in Ngapa, a robber
kingdom in the wild interior. Years ago a deputation
from a terra incognita came to Kwan Hsien for pith
helmets, guns, and Bibles. The interest in the Gospel,
like the order, seemed mixed, so the man was sent away
empty-handed. But he, forced thereto by an angry mas-
ter, made another attempt. Robbers, however, this time
frustrated him, and it seemed as if Ngapa’s bid for
Christian instruction was to prove a failure. But in
Tsakulao, eleven years later, I met a prince of the ruling
family, who eagerly bought up my store of Christian
literature. “No,” he said to a misunderstanding China-
man, “they are not for sale. My people are interested in
this religion.” But where is Ngapa? One or two mis-
sionaries alone could answer your question.
Four hundred miles to the south-west of Ngapa we
come to a maze of mountains with gridiron-like valleys,
which is unclaimed by China and ignored by England.
In there is a pgymy race, representatives of which were
first seen by Major Bailey and myself in 1911. The men
were between 4. ft. Gin. and 4 ft. Bin., and the women six
inches less. Who are they? Ido not know, and, although
a missionary, I could do nothing for them. Are they
cannibals ? Some Chinese histories might suggest as much,
but again, confirmation is lacking. But we do know
Christ died for them as much as He did for you and me.
But of all the people that live in the buffer States
between China and Tibet, the Kia-Rung are the most
numerous and important. We know nothing of their
origin, apart from a statement in a Chinese history that


they are remnants of the Tn Fan, which for centuries
dominated Tibet. Their tribal haunts are now confined
largely to the Upper Tong River and its tributaries, and
the Lifan affluent of the Min. They may number between
250,000 to half a million souls, and are controlled by
native princes, or by certain colonial functionaries of
China. They differ from the Chinese, and the conven-
tional Tibetan racially, but have accepted the religion
and civilisation of the latter. They live in stone castles,
often perched on mountain crags, or hill tops, which are
protected by high towers, like the chimneys in manu-
facturing areas. They have many important lamaseries,
and their priests, when orthodox, study in Lhasa, and
pilgrims resort to the same centre in thousands. The
Tibetan language is in some regions understood, and lite-
rature in that script is the only one in favour. But they
have a language of their own which the Chinese liken to
the confused chattering of many birds. To me, however,
it is more like hissing “cordials” and fire crackers
demonstrating. It can be readily expressed in the Tibetan
script.
During the last 25 years I have made many journeys
in the Kiarung regions, and, apart from preaching in
their markets and monasteries, about 100,000 Gospel por-
tions, books, and tracts have been put in circulation—in
Chinese and Tibetan. But they are at times very anti-
foreign. I have been hounded out of Badi-Bawang and
threatened with death if again seen in the regions. But
I have many friends there now. My most startling
experience, however, was in December, 1903. I arrived
in Choskia one afternoon without passports in Tibetan,
and the prince was mightily incensed. He peremptorily
dismissed my Chinese escort, but later housed me in a
high unfinished tower. At the same time a homicidal
maniac, who had been tied up for three years, was let
loose and put in with me, after which the ladder was
removed. The man tried hard to work himself into an
attacking position. Fortunately for me, my eye was blue
and sinister, but darkness was coming on, and hundreds


were expectantly waiting for developments on the flat
roofs down below. The angels of the Lord, however, were
with me, and the madman, breaking through a barred
door into another section of the tower, began operations
in an unexpected quarter, which called for prompt action
on the part of the authorities. Thoroughly scared, I made
my escape early next morning, and have kept away from
Ohoskia ever since.
There is much talk in some quarters to-day about
evangelising the world in this generation, but, humanly
speaking, that cannot be. Here we have races unclassi-
fied and tongues unsuspected. Who is there to preach
to them the Gospel of God’s grace? Who is there to
translate the Scriptures into their languages ? And where
are the men to disseminate them if translated? And the
answer is, “No one, 0 Lord.”
My years of service are drawing to a close, but Unless
the young men are willing to take up the burden, I must
return and toil on till Jesus comes for me. Very often I
am sad. I see a wonderful vision of redeemed men and
women standing before the throne and the Lamb. Among
them are representatives of the earth’s kindreds and
nations and tongues—the warlike Kiarung, the beautiful
Amazons, and the ugly dwarfs of the Salwin are all there.
But I awake and realise that the Kiarung, the Amazons,
and the pygmies are still in gross darkness, and unknown
to the Mission Boards of Europe, America and Australia.
And yet, they must all be represented among the redeemed
before the Throne. TTow long then must the grand num-
ber remain incomplete? That to some extent will depend
on your prayers and your actions from now on.


Curious Religious Customs
THE religion of Tibet is based on false ideas of man,
God, and natural operations, hence it is a fountain
of superstition and magic. The fanatical belief in
malignant influences and evil spirits lias blighted the
national life of the Tibetans as an unseasonable frost
withers their flowering wheat. Such a state of mind
credits men with occult powers, and assumes that harm-
ful forces may be directed against individuals at will.
Consequently, as a rule, untoward happenings or unex-
pected calamities may be interpreted as the result of
someone’s evil eye, and the authorship assigned to any-
one caprice or ill-will may suggest. The same ignorance
of God and nature allows the Tibetans to fill the land
with demons, who marshal their forces on passes, ambush
at fords, or with malice prepense lurk around human
habitations. The shrines and the idols show that they
have been domesticated, and in most cases are capable
of being controlled. For this purpose a vast amount of
protective machinery has been evolved. But the chief
medium between the Tibetan and the unkindly spirit
world, directly and indirectly, is the lama or priest. These
men, representing a tithe of the people’s manhood, are
the magicians, and their training is supposed to qualify
them to stand between ordinary mortals and the machina-
tions of the unseen world. They know the plans and
haunts of the spirits, and may outwit them, scare them
away, or w'heedle them into friendship. And so it is the
magician and magical machinery are as dear to the
Tibetan, and as necessary, as the food he eats, or the
clothing he wears. But we know such ignorance and
superstition degrades and enslaves to an incredible
degree, and the waste in temples, shrines, idols, instru


ments of worship, magical paraphernalia, pilgrimages,
and an expensive priesthood, if computed, would appal
even a tyro in economics. The peculiar forms of super-
stition just mentioned will be for or against the mission-
ary, according to the disposition of the priests at any
particular time. In my own experience many situations
of difficulty and danger could be traced to unfriendly
feelings in the lamasery. But an unaccountable change
may in a few months place us on a footing with fairy
princes, and credit our literature with Divine powers. 1
have seen the pages containing Matt. 1: 1-18 pasted on
rods and erected on the housetops, where they were sup-
posed to act as spiritual disinfectant. This is surely a
case where the Scripture has been made into a fetich.
A belief in the power of holy phrases is an important
phase of Tibetan magic, For instance, 80 per cent, of
the .Tibetans consider the formula, “Om mani pad me
hum,” essential alike for the salvation of soul and body.
It is intended to be repeated by everyone everywhere, and
A Lamasery, the Roof of which is Plated with Gold.


is set in motion by all the forces at the nomad’s disposal
from early morn till late at night. Small cylinders
turned assiduously by hand are much in favour. But in
the temples are often to found great drums, seven or
eight feet high, and three to four feet in diameter. These,
on examination, are found to be stuffed to their utmost
capacity with prayer-inscribed paper.
Such machines arc so heavy that the supplicant finds
it convenient to hire an animal, which will be driven
round for hours, and during its performance offer up
millions of prayers. By the sides of rivers, fed by the
eternal snows, are sheds where waterwheels are busily
engaged in the work of revolving prayer-stuffed cylin-
ders; and even windmills do the same duty on the roofs
of the Tibetan houses.
Indeed, the Tibetan seems to have solved to his own
satisfaction the problem of praying without ceasing.
Usually the prayer is “Om mani pad me hum,” but
a minority of heretics reject it, and, for some un-
known reason, substitute “Om ma dre mu ye sale dug.”
Now, both these phrases are without meaning in Tibetan,
and are addressed to no known man, demon, beast, or
god. But on one occasion the majority ordered the
minority to conform. “Om mani pad me hum” must be
the only Tibetan prayer. “But no,” said the others, “Om
ma dre mu ye sale dug” has been our fathers’ prayer,
and we shall die rather than renounce it. Then a perse-
cution arose in the land, and in due time, not only did
men suffer death, but war devastated the regions
because of two phrases, equally without meaning.
But the Tibetan not only sets his prayers in motion by
his vocal organs and complicated machinery, but they are
also carved on fragments of stone which face the sides of
earthen pyramids. Such mounds are especially valuable
in ridding the land of malignant influences. Therefore,
devoid men pass them reverently, and in an orthodox
way. To do otherwise is to show contempt for the reli-
gion of Tibet. Indeed, so regularly is this ceremony per-
formed, and with such meticulous correctness, that the


horses and the dogs conform to the orthodox require-
ments. This illustrates how even religion may become an
unmeaning habit.
One of the most pregnant superstitions of the Tibetans
is a belief in deified men. Of these, the most exalted is
the Dalai Lama, the Pope and Paraclete of Tibetan
Buddhism. The Lamaists recognise five historical Bud-
dhas, and their doctors claim that each has a celestial
counterpart; and the Dalai is supposed to be the abode
of a light emanation from the Heavenly Gautama, whose
choice it is to remain in the world of sense until all
Tibetans are safe in the Nirvana fold. Very many of
the heads of lamaseries and others are believed to have
the spirits of saints, teachers, and even emperors, con-
stantly abiding in them. These men are really the Tibetan
conceptions of love, power, and holiness, deified. But it
is my duty to point out to them at times how their scheme
only provides salvation for Tibetans. Christianity, how-
ever, makes no difference ; racial and geographical dis-
tinctions vanish when a man becomes a subject in God’s
Kingdom.
In Tibet the sin-bearer has a place in Lamaist theology.
Indeed, wherever we find a belief in spiritual beings, we
find men with a sense of guilt, because they have served
them imperfectly. Then follow schemes for squaring
accounts with the gods. A common expedient is to send
the sins of the people away to uninhabited realms by
proxy.
In parts of Tibet the morning sacrifice is common. On
the roofs of houses small stoves are built, and made holy
by magic. Every day, at sunrise, someone takes burning
kindling of cedar chips, and, putting it in the stove, feeds
the fire with fragrant cedar boughs. The result is a
dense aromatic smoke, which, like small white cumulus
clouds, rolls in volumes to the unfathomable azure. It
is a beautiful sight to watch scores of such fires, and
pleasant to smell the fragrance as it is wafted through
the crisp morning air. The idea is to send all unholi-
ness to the endless sea of Heaven on a chariot of scented


smoke. It is the first act of the day, and a very beautiful
one. In another region one is reminded of the Jews. A
huge yak, without blemish, offered by the community,
is led out, and, after the sins of the people are, by magical
rites loaded on the animal, it is forced out into a wilder-
ness of mountains and wild animals. Surely such a
custom speaks to us of Jesus who bore men’s sins to
Calvary, and unloaded them in the accursed place.
But men often are their own sin bearers, and
strive to shame the gods that send them woe. Take the
case of prostrating lamas. These men, because of sin or
false ideas of virtue, set themselves the task of measur-
ing the awful country between the Chinese frontier and
Lhasa with their bodies. They stand bolt upright with
their hands above their heads, then drop on their knees,
and finally throw themselves forward on the ground. A
mark is made at the most distant point touched with
their fingers, and the movement is quickly reversed until
they are again in the upright position. The devotee then
steps over the region covered by his prostration, and
begins the new act. I met a man once who had been at
this heartbreaking penance for seven years. He had
crossed China from Mukden to Chengtu, and would
require seven years more to take him to Lhasa. The
devotees carry with them huge leather gloves, with steel
palms, and worn out samples testify to the severity and
prolonged nature of the pilgrimage.
All that has been related is the pathetic result of
ignorance. But there is no need for it all. Jesus has
borne away the sins of the world, and is waiting for men
to cast their burdens on Him. In Tibet, truth and false-
hood must grapple, but who ever saw truth worsted in
a fair and open fight? The missionary is the herald of
truth, commissioned by truth, and entrusted with the
Gospel of Truth, and Jesus is the Way to Truth and
Life.


Perilous Experiences in Bible Circulation
SOWING is an uncertain process. That which a man
has is placed in the cold, damp earth, and left to
Nature’s uncertain forces. It may return a hundred-
fold, or it may be entirely lost. But sowing is charac-
teristic of an advanced culture. Men of the old Stone
Age do not sow. They either cannot bridge the gulf
between the sowing and the reaping, or are incapable of
appreciating the chances in their favour when sowing.
But is this only true in the natural world? What about
the man of faith who sows the,good seed into the oppor-
tunities God has given him, or he himself makes? Does
such a sow r er not honour the Harvest Giver more than
the one who withholds his hand?
The Bible must be the good seed. So, because of this,
it is essentially different from all human books. Jesus
was God’s Revelation of Himself to man, and the New
Testament is God’s record of that unique expression.
And this is not only the view of the missionary, but one
that is widely held by men of varied gifts and social
standing. If you examine the publications of the Bible
Societies, you will find on its councils and among its
members and agents, names that the most powerful
financial, commercial, and scientific institutions would be
glad to honour and obey. Then think of the expense of
translating, printing, binding, exporting, and disseminat-
ing the Scriptures. Who shoulders the responsibility of
it all? Not fools by any means, but men of influence,
integrity and ability. But the Bible has not only the
financial and commercial brains of the Anglo-Saxons
behind it. The translating of the Scriptures into the lan-
guages and vernaculars demands both perseverance and
scholarship of a high order. Indeed, if a man is capable


of appreciating true values, he must admit that much of
the brain power of Christian nations is freely employed
in preparing this hook for circulation in the uttermost
parts.
But the end is not yet; when translated, printed, and
forwarded to foreign depots, it still awaits the services
of the strong and bold to carry it into the camps of the
enemy. This work is so romantic and spiced with hard-
ship, that it should appeal to men whose unexpressed
motto is “Live dangerously.” The first Protestant mar-
tyr in China was an agent of the British and Foreign
Bible Society. In 1868, Mr. Johnston set out on a boat
loaded with Scriptures, and never returned. Is its fate
still unknown ? Partly ; but this much has come to light—
the brave man was stoned to death, and went down with
his boat in the Hwai River, in North-west Anhwei. My
own experiences with the Bible in China and Tibetan
country are not without sensational details. One day I
found myself in a camp of 500 brigands. The forty
thieves of the legend were mild in comparison, and they
were more picturesque than their colleagues in Turkey,
Macedonia, or Bulgaria, but, like them, they bristled with
knives, rifles, and small arms, and they were as irrespon-
sible as Bashi Bazouks. Moreover, they were hardly what
one would call conciliatory, and, to make matters worse,
I was as uneasy as a rabbit in a conference of foxes. What
did I do? Kept calm, sold them Scriptures, demanded
payment, and then, working my way to the end of tin
market, slipped out past the pickets and reached my
destination in safety. The security, however, was only
relative. I left the town at 10.30, and at eleven the same
strong band entered the gates and robbed it of thousands
of dollars. But my escape was “from the frying pan into
the fire.” In the next market cholera was raging, and
carrying off victims by the score. How I escaped infec-
tion is a mystery, as I whs entirely dependent on local
supplies, as well as table appointments. On another occa-
sion I was savagely bitten by a dog in a region where
rabies was affecting great numbers of the animals. The


mission station, 40 miles distant, was 1800 miles from
Pasteur injections. But, to my amazement, I found that
one treatment had just arrived for the first time, and,
taking the cure, I was saved much unpleasant specula-
tion about hydrophobia and its effects.
“A risky occupation,” I hear someone say. And so it
is—too risky to be undertaken for fun or adventure. No,
I do it because the Bible is the power of God unto sal-
vation, and for the rich and the poor, the fool and the
wise man, the black and the yellow, the pink and the
brown, as well as for the white and the red. Millions of
us believe this. If proof is needed, see the 600 languages
and dialects which tell out its message. How different it
is with other holy books! The Moslems have the Koran.
But who cares whether it is translated into English and
distributed? Not a living soul! The Tibetans, too, have
a Bible, but what relation has it to the unwashed nomad
on the planet’s roof? None whatever. Why, 30 yaks
would be required to take it to a pulpit, and 1000 would
not easily move the type. But, because the Bible is for
all, and applies to all men of the highest social position,
widest influence, greatest wealth, and deepest erudition,
prepare it for circulation, and an army of the brave and
the faithful are at work putting these torches of light in
the hands of men who are floundering in Egyptian dark-
ness—facts that should set the sceptics thinking.
And to-day we believe the same Light of the World is
beginning to eclipse the dim, smoking slush lamps of
Asia.
But is the Gospel Light dispelling the darkness of the
heathen lands? Read the reports of Bible Societies in
five continents and a thousand isles. They surely are
conclusive. But what about China and Tibet? Listen, I
have heard of Tibetans in prison transcribing Gospels in
their possession, and forwarding the copies to friends in
the far interior. One night, also, I gave a man a copy of
Romans in the gloaming, and months later he sought me
out and told me how it had rivetted his attention, and
taught him the way of God. Then, finally, it is common


knowledge that the strongest church in Anhwei is in
Yingchow, where Johnston died. Indeed, one of its
earliest Christians gained his first knowledge of the truth
from books in the martyr’s boat.
In conclusion, I would point out that no harvest will
ripen in the dark. Not only light, but a definite amount
of light, is required. The murky gleams of Oriental sys-
tems are useless, but are we sending out the sunshine of
God in sufficient quantities to do the great work of ripen
ing the harvests of Asia?
A Portion of a Tract in Jah-rung Written by Mr. Edgar.


Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd.
134 a Little Collins-st., Melbourne
