

The Annals of
KING'S COLLEGE
Affiliated with
The University of Queensland
SILVER JUBILEE
1913-1938 Brisbane Q.


FOREWORDS.
From Rev. Professor A. E. ALBISTON, M.A., 8.D., President-General of the
Methodist Church of Australasia.
Methodists of Australasia have every reason to rejoice in the first 25 years of King's
College. Though the youngest of Church Colleges affiliated with a University in the
Commonwealth, it has already a splendid record in the scholastic world, and its con-
tribution to an educated Ministry is worthy of all praise. When we remember that the
chief function of a University is to send forth graduates with high ideals, whose mental
equipment and ethical standards will enable them to accept responsibility and leadership
in various departments of social service, we can appreciate the value of such a College
as King's, in furthering these ends. Under its successive Masters, King's has deservedly
enjoyed the fullest confidence of our people, ministerial and lay, evidence of which is
furnished by the steady increase in the number of students and the success with which
it has been financed. Queensland Methodism is loyal to the best traditions of our
Church, and in this College is demonstrating the essential unity of Culture and
Evangelism. The whole Church praises God fot this Institution and confidently antici-
pates for it an even more glorious future.
From Rev. Dr. FINDLAY, M.A., D.D., Didsbury College, Manchester, Eng.
As a representative of the oldest Methodist Theological College in the world—
Didsbury College, Manchester —I am glad to be able to wish Godspeed to King's College,
Brisbane. Notwithstanding our different conditions, our purpose is the same. Your
College which combines Theological training with University courses, is an integral
part of the University of Queensland; ours is a Theological Institution, dedicated entirely
to the training of the Methodist Ministry in Great Britain and overseas; but we are
drawn together by one devotion to a common Master, and our desire to promote the
union of knowledge and vital piety in His service. We hope that you will soon find a
continuing city in your new quarters, and will, in the future as always, worthily repre-
sent our Church and render wide and full Christian service in the State of Queensland
and the Commonwealth of Australasia.
The Hon. Sir James W. Blair, Kt., C.J., Deputy Governor of Queensland, and
Chancellor of the University, in a commendatory letter, writes: "I cannot let the occa-
sion go by without expressing my appreciation of the work done by this College.
Founded in 1912 by the Methodist Church of Australasia, established to afford residence,
religious instruction and tutorial assistance to undergraduates. King's College has
fulfilled during its 25 years of existence the hopes of its founders, and has played an
important part in the life of the University and the State.''


The Annals
of
King's College
Affiliated with
The University of Queensland.
SILUER JUBILEE
1913 1938
Compiled by the Publications Committee.
Brisbane, Queensland
1938.
Price—Three Shillings.


PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE.
The General Editor (Dr. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B.).
Assistant Editors (Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., 8.D., and
Mr. M. M. Purser, 8.A.).
Rev. W. H. Harrison, Rev. T. Bibby, Mr. C. Ellis, 8.E., Mr. W. R. C.
Jay, 8.A., 8.C0m., Mr. V. EL Schmidt, and Mr. R. Howe.
The narrative, lists, and other facts have been drawn from Associa-
tion Records, Books of Committees, Minutes of Conference,,
private notes and memoranda ; and also from Files, Official
Data and Publications of the University of Queensland ; and
from contemporary Press reports.
Thanks are tendered to various valued contributors (as indicated in
the text), and also to those who have made available sources of
original and official information.
The work of the Editors and all contributors has been entirely
honorary. The Committee appreciate the help given by Mr.
J. A. J. Ferguson in display of advertising, and in cover design.
Early application is necessary to secure copies of this Book which
are obtainable, while the supply lasts, from the Queensland Book
Depot, Albert Street, Brisbane ; or from King’s College, River
Terrace, Kangaroo Point, Brisbane ; or through any leading
Bookseller.


INDEX.
Page
FOREWORDS 2
TITLE PAGE 3
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE 4
INDEX 5
Chapter I. THE ESTABLISHMENT 7—23
(a) Foundation and Functions.
(b) Relationship to University.
(c) Relationship to Church.
(d) Government; Council; Constitution.
(e) Growth in Membership.
(f) Development in Buildings and Grounds.
(g) Statutory Affiliation.
Chapter 11. PRE-WAR PERIOD (1912-1914);
and WAR PERIOD (1914-1918). (Contributed by R.A.P.) . . . . . . 23—26
Chapter HI. POST-WAR PERIOD (1919-1923). (Contributed by A.H.T.) 27—31
Chapter IV. RECENT YEARS 31—39
(a) 1924-1927 (Contributed by C.E.).
(b) 1928-1929 (Contributed by H. L.).
(c) 1929-1938 (Contributed by W.R.C.J.).
Chapter V. THEOLOGICAL REVIEW (Contributed by W.C.K., J.M., L.N.K., and A.L.R.) 39—45
Chapter VI. RECORDS 45—59
(a) Scholastic.
(b) Theological.
(c) Administrative and Academic Staffs.
(d) Great War Records (Contributed by Col. R.).
(e) Sporting—Tennis, Cricket, Football, Swimming, General Athletics.
(f) Presidents K.C.S.C.
Chapter VII. MEN’S CAREERS (Contributed by M.M.P.) 59—35
Chapter VIII. THE OLD COLLEGIANS ASSOCIATION (Contributed by A.G.G.) .. . . 67—68
Chapter IX. WOMEN WORKERS 69—71
(a) Committee.
(b) Matrons and Staff.
Chapter X. BURSARIES AND GIFTS 71—77
(a) Scholarships, Prizes, etc.
(b) College Library.
(c) A Note on Finance.
Chapter XL MISCELLANEOUS 77—81
Coat of Arms; Enrolment Ceremony; Reception and Dinner; Old Boys’
Reunion and Valedictory ; Collegians’ Cup ; Twenty-first Birthday :
Collegians’ Sons in Residence; College Name. (Contributed by M.M.P.)
Appendices: (a) Students’ Roll (1913-1938) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83—88
(1) University.
(2) Theological.
(b) “The Opening Path.”
(c) Sister Colleges.
(d) St. Lucia.
(e) The Press.
5
THE ANNALS OF KING’S COLLEGE


KING’S COLLEGE JUBILEE YEAR (1938) STUDENT GROUP— Front Row: E. H. Hughes, B.E., H. G. Lavers, B.A., M. M. Purser, B.A. (Tutor), F. W. Miller ,B:E:,
D J. W. Smith B.Sc. (Tutor). V. W. Wilson, B.A; (Committee, Senior Resident Tutor), T. J. N. Foley, B.A. (Vice-Master), V. E. Schmidt (Pres, K.C.S.C.), R. Howe
(See. K C.S.C.) R. Courtice (Treas. K.C:S:C:), W: N: Wensley (Committee), G. A. Preston, V. R. Pascoe, D. H. L. Rhodes, Second Row: H. M. Whyte, R. A. Perry,
L. J. L Rhodes R. M. Jones. A. S. J. Stewart, D: K; Williamson, R. W. Fulcher, H. G. Bradbury, W. R. Jay, B.A., B.Com. (Tutor), F. H. Cowlishaw, W. J. Whit-
church, W. J. Simmonds, D. S. Adcock, G. W. Russell, A. A. Anger, R. D. Hunter, Third Row: R. S. Brodribb, G. L. L. Handel, N. D. Quelch, W. Hamen, A. W.
Preston, G. D. Smith, I. W. Alcorn, I. D. Fowler, A. D. S. Foggon, K. W. Lavers, A, E. Risson, K. B. Fowler, B. H. Courtiee, J. J. Wilshere, G. Corones; Back
Row: D. A. Curtis, R. L. Church, T. R. Sargeant, A. J. Popham, J. L Macfarlane, V. J. Wagner, B. J. Phillips, G. E. Ponting, A. G. Bennett, H. P. Palethorpe, C. G.
Elworthy, H. G. Wilson; Absent; Rev. G. James, M.A., L.Th. (Tutor), R. M, Benham, E. Mulleer, K. Macalpine, Rev. A. G. Finch, L.Th., D. J. Stevens.
6
THE ANNALS OF KING’S COLLEGE


Chapter I. — THE ESTABLISHMENT.
THE year 1938 rejoices to see King’s College celebrating its 25th Birthday. Founded
in 1913, its progress has been constant, substantial, and gratifying. It has worthily
served its two-fold purpose of providing a residential college affiliated with the
University of Queensland, where students of promise may graduate under the most
inspiring and enriching conditions ; and also where candidates for the Ministry may
receive an adequate Theological and University training, without the cost and dislocation
of travelling to other States.
(a) Foundation and Functions.
It was the day of small things when the
first steps were taken to found King’s Col-
lege. The training of local candidates for
the Ministry was then a problem not easy
to solve. Until the year 1900 most of those
who were trained outside the State received
their education in the Sydney (Stanmore)
Theological Institution. The Conference of
1900 resolved that students be thereafter
sent to Queen’s College, Melbourne.
Some earnest but ineffectual public
efforts had been made to establish a Uni-
versity in Queensland, and Conference at
one time appointed a Committee to co-
operate with the Committees of other
denominations with the object of assisting
proposals to provide for efficient training,
either in the case of candidates for the
Ministry, or for students desiring Univer-
sity courses.
But the day had not yet dawned for a
University, or for University Colleges.
There was but little public knowledge or
appreciation of the incalculable advantages
such institutions can bestow on a State.
The University Congress of 1906 had
appointed four Committees to continue its
difficult task. Only one Committee perse-
vered. This enthusiastic, but small band
of earnest workers included :—Mr. J. B.
Henderson, F.I.C. (Chairman), Mr. H. H.
Henchman, M.A., LL.M. (later Mr. Justice
Henchman), Mr. L. G, Corrie (Mayor of
Brisbane), Mr. J. J. Walsh, B.A. (a pioneer
University advocate), and Mr. J. T. Isles,
with Mr. E. W. H. Fowles. M.A.. LL.B., as
Organising Secretary, (Vide current Press
reports and “The Telegraph” of July Ist,
1935.) After four years of moulding public
opinion, and collecting donations, the in-
tense labours of this dauntless Committee
were happily consummated by the passing
of “The University of Queensland Act of
1909” (assented to December 10th) and the
gazetting of twenty members to comprise
the first University Senate, Hon. E. W. H.
Fowles being the only Senator representing
the Methodist Church.
By the establishment of a University
new highways of culture opened, and fresh
hopes were lit. Providence placed the be-
ginnings of King’s College in the hands of
three men :—Rev, Dr. Robert Stewart (Sec-
retary of the Conference in 1913 and
President in 1914), Rev. W. H. Harrison
(Secretary of the Conference in 1901, 1902,
1903, 1904, and 1910, and also President in
1905), and Hon. E. W. H. Fowles. The last
named sought and obtained permission to
address the Methodist Conference of March,
1911, on the advantages of establishing a
denominational College in affiliation with
the new University. Among objections
raised were the cost, and the prestige of
ministerial training in Southern Colleges.
No official action was then taken. But the
seed was sown and did not die. After secur-
ing promises of initial help (including the
sum of £SOO from the estate of Hon. John
Archibald, £IOO from Hon. F. T. Brentnall,
£IOO from Hon. James Cowlishaw, and over
£4OO in smaller sums) Dr. Fowles ap-
proached Rev, R. Stewart, who became
fired with the proposals, and enlisted the
zealous co-operation of the 1910 Secretary
(Rev. W. H. Harrison). A movement was
on foot, at the same time, to establish
Anglican and Presbyterian Colleges. Revs.


Rev. Dr. R. STEWART, D.D.
Rev M. SCOTT FLETCHER, M.A., B.Litt.
SIR WILLIAM MACGREGOR,
P.C., G.C.M.G.
Rev. H. H. TRIGGE, M.A., B.D.
Rev. L. E. BENNETT, M.A., B.D.


W. H. Harrison and Robert Stewart sent a
joint telegram to the President (Rev.
Frank Duesbury), who was absent from
Brisbane. Plans were speedily laid, and
the President called the Senior Ministers
of Brisbane and Ipswich together to con-
sider the question. A meeting was held
September 18th, 1911. There were present:
Revs. F. Duesbury, R. Stewart, W. Powell,
W. Dinning, A. Hutchinson, G. E. Rowe, T.
Brassington, Joseph Bowes, Charles Martin
and W. H. Harrison. These considered the
proposal favourably and resolved to widen
the circle by the addition of these laymen—
Messrs. E. W. H. Fowles, G. I. Bourne,
J. J. King, R. J. Archibald, and Hon.
Angus Gibson, M.L.C. The hopes of this
representative Committee, meeting on
October 6th, and again on November 23rd,
were crystallised into specific resolutions
submitted to the Conference of 1912. Their
report was received with enthusiastic
favour, and Conference resolved :
(i) That the Conference receives the Report
of the Special Committee on College pro-
posals and gives its general approval of
the scheme submitted.
(ii) That, having heard the reports of the
committee, this Conference decides to
establish the proposed College.
(iii) That a fund of £5,000 be established for
the promotion of the said College, and
commends this movement to the gener-
ous support of our people throughout
the State.
(iv) That a College Committee be appointed
for the year, with full power to act on
behalf of the Conference.
(v) That the Conference decides to establish
the College when the sum of £3,500 is
promised.
(vi) That the ex-President, the Rev. F. Dues-
bury, and the Rev. R. Stewart be Asso-
ciate Secretaries, and the Rev. R.
Stewart and the Hon. A. Gibson be
Associate Treasurers.
(vii) That the name of the Institution be
“ King’s College.”
It was agreed that the prime essential
for the success of the College was to
secure as the first Master, a minister of
intellectual attainments, the instincts of a
teacher, and a spiritual, purpose to attain
the ideals entertained by the Conference
for both sections of students. Accordingly
the Rev. M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., a minister
of the New South Wales Conference, who
had just spent two years in England for
educational purposes at Oxford, was ap-
proached. He accepted the position, and
laid the foundations of the new project
with rare judgment and conspicuous ability.
The following are the names, of the first
Committee appointed by the Conference :—The
President (Rev. T. Brassington), the ex-Presi-
dent (Rev. P. Duesbury), the Revs. H. Youngman,
D.D., G. E. Rowe, J. Bowes, W. H. Harrison,
C. Martin, R. Stewart, M. Scott Fletcher, M.A.,
B.Litt., A. Hutchinson, W. Dinning, W. Powell,
Hon. A. Gibson, M.L.C., Hon. E. W. H. Fowles,
M.A., LL.B., Messrs. J. J. King, S. D. Fletcher,
J. H. Barkell, C. W. L. Heiner, R. J. Archibald,
D. H. Rhoades, Sir A. Rutledge, G. I. Bourne.
In the earliest stages the question was
considered with the utmost care. Based
on the information secured from Dr.
Sugden, of Queen’s College, and Dr. Pres-
cott, of Newington College, it was thought
that King’s College would be self-support-
ing with an enrolment of twenty students,
so that it seemed probable that from Con-
nexional sources substantial, grants, in di-
minishing annual sums, would be required
for several years. It is an inspiring recol-
lection that twenty students were in resi-
dence at the end of the very first year,
thus necessitating the renting of a house
nearby for additional, accommodation.
Upon the founding of the Queensland
University, the College had a name and
prospects; it needed a habitation. The
Rev. R. Stewart submitted certain pro-
perty, which he himself had purchased in
faith, at Kangaroo Point, which contained
one acre and a quarter, with large substan-
tial house and frontages to three streets.
The property was ultimately purchased for
£2,200. The report notes that Dr. Fowles
gave valuable information and help in the
University aspect of the College ; Rev. R.
Stewart and Mr. J. J. King prepared esti-
mates of costs and revenue ; Rev. W. H.
Harrison, Secretary of the first Com-
mittee, secured valuable information from
the Sydney and Melbourne Colleges;
the President, Revs. R. Stewart and C.
Martin, and Dr. Fowles prepared the
scheme, and Rev. F. Duesbury and R.
Stewart were indefatigable in collect-
ing funds. From all angles the Con-
ference of 1912 discussed fully the
proposals, enthusiastic and unanimous sup-
port was accorded, and on the motion of
Rev. Dr. Youngman, Conference launched
the enterprise, its members there and then
contributing £I,OOO towards initial costs.
Necessity immediately arose for accom-
modating a further number of students and


Rev. W. H. HARRISON
Hon. J. ARCHIBALD
Dr. E. W. H. FOWLES
Hon. JAS. COWLISHAW
Hon. F. T. BRENTNALL


the Committee was authorised to call for
plans for the new wing to the College,
costing £1,470 and providing seventeen
additional, rooms, and for renovating the
property already acquired. (Later other
very substantial additions were made.)
The joint Secretaries (Revs. F. Duesbury
and R. Stewart) reported that over £5,000
in cash and promises had been received,
and the Rev. M. Scott Fletcher reported
that the College had been affiliated with
the University.
The Conference of 1912 decided to send
six accepted candidates for training—R. E.
Bacon, W. C. Kleindienst, W. Kidd, A. C.
Tempest, P. F. Witton and E. A. Axelsen.
In addition, ten University students were
enrolled. The College had been most taste-
fully furnished. The report submitted to
the Conference of 1914 indicated marked
advances. A second enlargement of the
College was rendered necessary by the
increase of students, and the joint Trea-
surers (Rev. R. Stewart and Hon. J. Gibson)
were authorised to make an appeal for
£I,OOO to meet the cost. (This was raised,
and a later appeal for £SOO was also success-
ful.) The Master’s report of the first
year’s work showed an enrolment of seven-
teen resident students, in the first term.
By the beginning of the second term the
numbers had risen to twenty. (In 1938
the enrolment is 64. During the War the
College enrolment went down to nine
students, of whom four were Theological
students sent by the Conference for train-
ing.) Its first year saw the accommodation
of the College taxed to the utmost.
The Divinity students then numbered
six, all doing satisfactory work. The other
fourteen engaged in University work
acquitted themselves well in. the annual
examinations. One student, H. W. Dinning,
qualified for the B.A. degree in December,
and another. C. A. Foggon. sat for the
Honours of B.A. in March. The others in
their respective years and faculties gained
twelve “merits” between them, P. H.
Brown doing brilliant work by winning
five of these, while others who gained
these distinctions were J. L. Mursell (in
Arts), D. E. Baldwin and A. B. Grimes (in
Engineering), R. A. Percy and S. B.
Watkins (in Science). During that year
the College lost no time in establishing its
reputation in sport. Students placed the
College in premier position among the
affiliated Colleges by winning three out of
five matches, viz., football, athletics and
shooting.
Truly the first year of the College was
marked by outstanding achievements.
Gratitude is due to Mrs. Scott Fletcher for
her fine work and influence in conducting
the domestic side of the College in its early
days. The devotion of the members of the
House Committee, Revs. R. Dunstan, G. E.
Rowe and Mr. G. I. Bourne, together with
the Master and the Bursar (Mr. J. E. Green-
ham) well deserves being recorded.
The following list, nominated and accepted
by the Conference, comprised the first College
Council : —The Master of King’s, the President
of the Conference (Rev. R. Dunstan), the
Superintendent of the Wesley Circuit, the fol-
lowing Trustees, namely, Revs. Henry Young
man, D.D., Robert Stewart, Frank Duesbury,
Charles Martin, George Edward Rowe, Alexander
C. Hutchinson, William H. Harrison ; and T.
Brassington; other members as follow, namely,
Sir Arthur Rutledge, K.C.8., Messrs. George
Watkins, James Jordan King, Robert John Archi-
bald, George Iredale Bourne ; also Rev. William
Powell. Joseph Bowes, Hon. Frederick T. Brent-
nail, M.L.C.; Messrs. Thomas Fielding, C. W. L.
Heiner, S. D. Fletcher, D. H. Rhoades, William
Henry Barclay, Dr, A. J. Gibson, C. H. Hooper,
together with the Bursar (who shall be elected
by the Council), and the following Fellows :
Hon. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B.. J. J. Kings-
bury, M.A., and Dr. G. H. C. Douglas, M.8.,Ch.8.
Conveners: The Joint Secretaries, Revs. R.
Stewart, and F. Duesbury.
The first Theological Institution was consti-
tuted as follows :—Revs. R. Dunstan (Presi-
dent of the Conference), Robert Stewart (Sec-
retary of the Conference), T. Brassington (ex-
President), M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt.,
Master of King’s, H. Youngman, D.D . William
Powell, William S. Smith, Frank Duesbury,
Joseph Bowes, A. Hutchinson, George E. Rowe,
William Brown. Thos. Robert Thurlow, John
James Gee, W. H. Harrison, Sir Arthur Rutledge,
K.C., Hons. Angus Gibson, M.L.C.. F. T, Brent-
nail, M.L.C., F. W. H. Fowles, M.L.C.; Messrs,
G. I. Bourne, J. J. King. F. J. Beet, J. J, Jones,
Thos. Fielding, George Watkins, D. H. Rhoades,
C. Hooper, C. W. L. Heiner, G. A. Bayard, J. B.
Lugg.
The College was officially launched in
November, 1912, but the following year
was the first academic year of King’s.
The report of the College Council
stated that during the year the College was
formally opened on Saturday, June 14th.
1913, by a distinguished public and social
function under the auspices of the General
Conference. His Excellency, Sir William


W. H. GREEN, Esq.
E. PROCTOR, Esq.
Hon. A. GIBSON
Miss CHARLOTTE E. BRENTNALL
J. J. KING, Esq.
W. TAYLOR, Esq.


MacGregor presided. Many hundreds as-
sembled and the address of the Master of
King’s, the President of the General Con-
ference, dignitaries from Universities and
heads of Churches, made the day conspicu-
ous in our history, and thus early stamped
the College with the approval and admira-
tion of our Methodist people and the public
generally.
The Foundation Tablet on the College
main door reads thus :
KING’S COLLEGE.
The Foundation Ceremony of this College
was Performed by His Excellency
SIK WILLIAM MACGREGOR,
G.C.M.G., ( ML. M.D.,
Governor of Queensland,
Chancellor of the University,
-30th November, 1912.
The Master first installed was the Rev.
(now Professor) M. Scott-Fletcher, M.A.
(1913-1915). Then followed Rev. L. E.
Bennett, M.A., B.D. (1916-1923) , and from
1924 the present Master Rev. H. H.
Trigge, M.A., B.D.
These Annals in subsequent pages show
that, year by year, numbers of students
finish their College course and take their
place with increasing success in life’s
work. In all departments—scholastic,
theological, finance, sport and numbers —
the College has achieved success. Valuable
scholarships and bursaries have been
established ; its funds and domestic
management have been greatly assisted by
an excellent Ladies’ Committee ; and a
strong and influential Old Collegians’ Asso-
ciation is doing excellent work. Praise
fills our hearts that the College, after
twenty-five years of gratifying expansion
and useful and very notable service, enjoys
the confidence and approval not only of
Queensland Methodists, but of the whole
community.
(b) Relationship to the University.
In the University of the Old World as
well as in the educational centres of the
New, “college life” is found to be an integ-
ral and incalculably useful part of Univer-
sity training. In the lecture-room, the
personality of the professor, the quality of
the notes taken, and the contents of the
text-books, all count for very much, but
there are other obvious sources from which
one may consciously derive culture.
College life offers some advantages
peculiarly its own, quite apart from the in-
valuable tutorial assistance. The close
camaraderie, the daily interchange of
opinions, the subtle interplay of character,
the free discussion of careers, the forming
and cementing of friendships, the stimulus
of kindred group studies, the imbibing of
traditions —all these are obtained from col-
lege life, and they are influences that
potently shape both the student and the
man.
Hearty rivalry between colleges not
only heightens the standards of study and
recreation, but also enables students to
reach a high level of life. King’s College is
far more than merely a guest-house
equipped with special, facilities for study.
Its work is complementary and supplemen-
tary to that of the University, and during
twenty-five years of busy life it has, in
every direction, worthily improved all op-
portunities for dove-tailing into the life
and work of the University itself. Every
year the College takes its due place as an
institution shaped not only to further the
true educational interests of its own stu-
dents, but also to add to the lustre and use-
fulness of the whole University.
Elsewhere in these Annals, abundant
evidence is afforded of the prominent part
played by King’s men in the corporate life
of the University—in the lecture-rooms and
laboratories, in Committee-rooms and com-
munity service, in the various sporting
arenas, and in all those activities —social,
economic and communal. —that soon spring
into action wherever hundreds of students
foregather. In the past twenty-five years
happy co-operation and a lively sense of the
value of each other’s task and sphere, have
characterized the relationship between the
University and the Colleges. The latter
acknowledge that they have a responsible,
if indirect, share in moulding and maintain-
ing the reputation of the University and
even in contributing somewhat to its
government; while the University itself
recognises the aid that the colleges render
by intensifying studies, expanding spheres
of action, and extending University pres-
tige through a spirit of many-sided inter-
collegiate competition. All King’s College
men are alive to the bonds existing between
them and the Alma Mater; the ties that


QUEENSLAND BOOK DEPOT
“FAMED THROUGHOUT THE STATE”
for
Books - Stationery - Fountain Pens
TRAVEL—BIOGRAPHY —THEOLOGY — PSYCHOLOGY-
ART - CLASSICS DRAMA-FICTION —BIBLES—TEXT
BOOKS SCHOOL BOOKS and GENERAL READING
You will find the finest range of Fountain Pens in the
State on display in our Fountain Pen Department—
SWAN CONWAY STEWART CONKLIN WATER-
MAN’S ONOTO PARKER and EVERSHARP
FOUNTAIN PEN REPAIRS A SPECIALITY
QUEENSLAND BOOK DEPOT
228-232 Albert Street, Brisbane
Reg. H. Utting, Manager Box 342 E, G.P.O.
Rev. Wm. BROWN
Rev. D. S. BRUMWELL, O.B.E.
Rev. R. P. POPE


join them to King’s, while being no less
real or permanent, are even more intimate
and take their place among the most pre-
cious assets of a student’s life.
(c) Relationship to Church.
The Silver Jubilee year of King’s College
happens to coincide with the bi-centenary
year of Methodism, and it is timely to re-
flect that this Church took its rise in the
lives of Christian scholars. John Wesley
and his brother, together with several
other students at Oxford, were dubbed
“Methodists” by their fellow students be-
cause they attended weekly Communion
and observed the “method of study” pre-
scribed by the statutes of the University.
In John Wesley, the Oxford don, there com-
bined the attainment of wide and ordered
knowledge with the potent gift of preach-
ing. At the opening of Kingswood School,
which he established, he affirmed that
Christian education should teach how to
think, judge, and act according to the prin-
ciples of Christianity. The Constitution of
King’s College shews that this is one of the
main objects of the College. Accordingly,
the Church devotes both time and money
in the discharge of an important ministry
in this direction.
The general spirit and order of the Col-
lege are maintained to serve this ideal,
regular definite expression of which is
afforded through Chapel services and
prayers. From the first the Chapel has
been a central and distinctive entity in
the buildings. It is now located where
formerly the Common-room existed, and it
accommodates twice as many as its previous
position made possible. Addresses in
Chapel have been delivered bv such visitors
as Rev. W. R. Maltby. D.D. (Cato Lecturer).
Dr. T. Z. Koo (Vice-President of the World
Student Christian Movement), Rev. N. G.
Dunning. M.A., LL.B.. Rev. C. H. Haddon
(Maori Chief and Methodist Minister of
N.Z.), Rev. C. F. Andrews (missionary and
writer on international relations), and also
various Presidents-General of the Metho-
dist Church of Australasia, have visited
King’s, the latter being Rev. George
Brown, D.D., Rev. E. H. Sudden. M.A.,
D.Litt... and Rev. Professor A. EL Albiston,
M.A., B.D. Students who heard at the
close of a usual official dinner the words of
■greeting and counsel from Sir Edgeworth
David, noted scientist and explorer, will
not forget how, after making helpful sug-
gestions based on his own scientific experi-
ence, he went on to recall an overpowering
impression of insignificance that once came
upon him when in the vast Antarctic; but
one which was soon relieved by the firm
conviction that he was a child of the
Creator of all, which conviction again in-
spired him to proceed with his work in
those regions. Whatever else students
would acquire in life he urged them to re-
tain a living faith in God.
King’s men have gone out with advanced
mental equipment; and they have gone
out devoted to a Cause. They have taken
their place in the community ready to
achieve and to serve. The Church, too, has
welcomed them to her organised work as
officials, teachers and preachers. Thus in
the task of rightly co-ordinating intellect
with will the Church through the College
co-operates with the University.
In the realm of knowledge, too, the
Church renders a distinct service. The
University with its many-sided activities to
satisfy the human quest here has as yet no
full faculty for divinity studies. Hitherto
King’s and other colleges have been meet-
ing this need, in training the student called
to specialise in these studies, at the same
time incorporating through such activity
an element of the general, atmosphere in
which the science or literary student lives
whereby he possesses the advantages of a
balanced influence. About forty theologi-
cal students have obtained the diploma in
theology. Several have further succeeded
in studies for the degree of Bachelor of
Divinity, one having completed and others
nearly completing the course. From its
inception, every year has seen its quota of
Theological students in training.
Some of the Theological students on
entering College have commenced a Univer-
sity course, and others have done so to-
wards the end of their College course.
Eight have obtained the degree in Arts,
and as many more should complete this
work within a year or so. We warmly wel-
come the beginning made this year by the
University of Queensland in givinn instruc-
tion in Divinitv studies. One such subiect
is now included as a unit for Arts, and it is
proposed to proceed with a second subject


T mnrrow ’s moving methods are
To-morrow & Rrvl . p moves
year’s To-day when Bryce m
y your Furniture
Move the Modern Way-
i t > s Safer and Cheaper
KING’S COLLEGE COUNCILLORS, 1938. (For full list see page 17)


next year. It is hoped that within a few
years a degree in Divinity will be con-
ferred. The Queensland University has the
credit of being the first University in Aus-
tralia to make provision for such lectures
to be given from its own teaching staff.
Our Church sends every accepted candi-
date for the Ministry to King’s College for
a period of three years, and many are the
advantages there available. As students
they have direct and constant contact with
lecturers and tutors in both Theological and
University subjects. The curriculum re-
quires the taking of annual examinations
conducted by an. independent authority,
such as the Melbourne College of Divinity
or the University of Queensland. Living in
College, Divinity students have daily inter-
course with other young men preparing for
the various professions. It is an immense
gain for them to understand the different
outlooks, and early to begin relating Chris-
tian truth to these situations. In the
training all care is taken to develop the
gift of preaching, including vocal expres-
sion. The students are encouraged to con-
duct evangelistic missions during the short
vacations, much good being the result, both
to circuits and to the men themselves. Each
student pays towards the cost of training
as he is able, and the Church sees to it that
adequate financial provision is forthcoming,
as may be necessary, from Church funds.
So much is the work esteemed by our
people as to result already, in the brief
history of the College, of seven endowment
funds which annually make available to
students scholarships, bursaries, or prizes.
The Stead Scholarship provides an outstand-
ing student with an additional year at the
College and the University, which the
ordinary funds do not render possible.
Certain of the Theological subjects have
received lecture treatment in united
classes arranged with the Presbyterian,
Congregational and Baptist Churches.
Since the establishment of King’s College
the studies of our Theological students
have been directed in turn by the various
Masters—Rev. M. Scott-Fletcher, M.A.,
B.Litt., Rev. L. E. Bennett, M.A., 8.D., and
Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D. In the dual
capacity as Master of King’s and Principal
of the Theological College it has been their
duty and joy to serve among their students,
“That mind and soul, according well,
May make one music as before,
But vaster.”
(d) Government; Council; Constitution.
King’s College is under the jurisdiction
of the Methodist Conference of Queensland.
Annual Reports and Balance Sheets are
furnished to the Conference by the Secre-
tary of the College Council, the Master of
the College, the Lay Treasurer, and the
Bursar.
The College Council consists of the
Master and twenty-six Councillors, in whom
the government of the College is vested.
The Council, as appointed for this Jubilee
Year, 1938, is constituted as follows :
The President of the Conference (Rev. G. W.
Pittendrigh), the Secretary of the Conference
(Rev. F. A. Malcolm), Revs. H. H. Trigge,
M.A., 8.D.. W. H. Harrison, A. Taylor, W. S. Bath,
8.A.. H. M. Wheller, A. A. Mills, M.C., A. E.
Lapthorne, I. Bennett, J. A. Pratt, T. Bibby;
Messrs. W. H. Green, Dr. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A.,
LL.B., J. J. King, W. A. Jolly, C.M.G., M.H.R.,
E, Proctor, Dr. G. A. C. Douglas, Dr. A. J. Gib-
son, Dr. E. H. Derrick, 8.5., S. Castlehow, M.A.,
E. T. Campbell, W. Taylor, A. Bennett, 8.A.,
T. P. Fry, M.A.,B’.C.L.Sc.Jur.D,, Col. Robinson,
D. 5.0., 8.A., A. G. Grant, Ph.C., and C. Ellis, 8.E.;
Rev. T. Bibby, Secretary. Officers in 1938:—The
Master is Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., 8.D., Vice-
Master Mr. T. J. N. Foley, B.A. The Fellows
are :—Dr. E. H. Derrick, M.D., 8.5., Dr. A. J.
Gibson, Ph.D., Dr. G. A. C. Douglas, M. 8., Ch.B.,
M.S., and Mr. S. Castlehow, M.A. The Bursar is
Dr. E. W. H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B., Litt.D. The
House Committee are : —The Master, the Secre-
tary, the Bursar, and W. H. Green. Esq. (Lay
Treasurer), and Rev. W. H. Harrison (Clerical
Treasurer). The Secretary is the Rev. T. Bibby.
The revised Constitution of King’s Col-
lege Council, as adopted by the Conference
of 1934, and further amended by the Con-
ference of 1935, provides for the following
members 'The President of the Confer-
ence, the Secretary of the Conference, the
Master of the College, the Clerical Trea-
surer, the Lay Treasurer, Six Trustees, Five
Fellows, Eight nominated by the President,
Three nominated by the Graduates, and the
Bursar.
Rev. Dr. Stewart was Recording Secre-
tary and Secretary of the Council from the
establishment of the College to his death
in 1921. He was succeeded by Rev. W.
Brown (1921-1930). Rev. R. P. Pope fol-
lowed till his removal to Toowoomba in
1937, when he was succeeded by the present
Secretary, Rev. T. Bibby.
The Graduate nominees are selected by
the King’s Old Collegians’ Association. The
Trustees nominate six of their own num-


ber. The whole Council is appointed by
the Annual Conference.
The King’s College Council in 1917 was
comprised as follows :
The Master, L. E. Bennett, M.A., 8.D.; and
Revs. Robert Stewart, D.D., Hon. Secretary and
Clerical Treasurer ; Hon. A. Gibson, M.L.C., Lay
Treasurer ; Six Trustees (Revs. H. Youngman,
D.D., G. E. Rowe, D.D., and Charles Martin ;
Messrs. R. J. Archibald, J. J. King, and G. I.
Bourne); Four Fellows (Hon. E. W. H. Fowles,
M.A., LL.B., M.L.C., Dr. A, Gibson, Dr. A. C.
Douglas, M:B;, J. J. Kingsbury, M.A.); Seven
nominated by the President (Revs. William
Brown —President of the Conference —A. Hutchi-
son, W. H. Harrison, W. Powell, J. Bowes, Hon.
F. T. Brentnall, M.L.C., Mr. Thomas Fielding);
Three nominated by the Graduates (Revs. A. C.
Plane, W. Dinning, J. J. Gee ; and the Bursar,
Mr. J. E. Greenham.
The first College Trustees were ap-
pointed in February, 1928 :
Rev. W. H. Harrison, Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A.,
Rev. A. Taylor, Messrs. G. I. Bourne, J. J. King,
and G. W. Muntz, with Rev. William Brown as
Chairman..
(e) Growth in Membership.
The development of King’s College has
been both vigorous and sustained. Com-
mencing in 1913 with twenty-two resident
students, of whom six were Theological
students, the enrolment in 1925 was thirty
in residence, including eight in training
for the Ministry. (This was 30% above the
accommodation available.) The roll for this
Jubilee year shews that sixty-four are resi-
dent, including ten Theological students.
By 1932, a total of 230 students had been
enrolled, of whom 160 were University, and
70 Theological. Silver Jubilee year sees
the figures, respectively, 260 and 90 —a
total of 350.
The first academic year saw 5 tutors en-
gaged in preparing University students for
their studies. Fifteen years later 10 tutors
were employed, while to-day 12 graduates
conduct these classes. Whenever possible,
resident tutors are appointed, and this year
5 are living in College. In 1931 the size
of the College called for the appointment
of a Vice-Master, while last year the posi-
tion of Senior Resident Tutor was also
established.
At first the Master had the assistance of
two other Ministers in giving Theological
instruction. Later, when united classes
with other Churches were formed, and a
United Faculty was established in 1933, our
VIEW OF EDUCATIONAL BUILDING AND MASTER'S RESIDENCE.


COLLEGE ANNEXES.
students had the further benefit of lectures
from the Principals of the Presbyterian,
Congregational and Baptist Colleges. The
first term of 1931 saw the first entry of
Baptist students. Our divinity men to-day
are receiving instruction from five lec-
turers, as well as from five tutors in Uni-
versity subjects.
It is of interest to see how the students
in 1938 are engaged in the various courses :
Engineering 16, Medicine 13, Theology 10,
Arts 8, Science 7, Commerce 5, Pharmacy 4,
Dentistry 2, Applied Science 2, Law 2,
Teaching 2, Agriculture 1. These students
have come from the following educational
centres :—lpswich Grammar School 15 ;
Toowoomba Grammar School 15; Thorn-
burgh College, Charters Towers, 7 ; Towns-
ville Grammar School 5; Gympie High
School 3 ; Rockhampton High School 3 ;
Bundaberg High School 2; Church of Eng-
land Grammar, East Brisbane, 2; Mary-
borough Grammar School 2; Nudgee Col-
lege 1; Brisbane Boys’ College 1; War-
wick High School 1: Weslev College, Mel-
bourne, 1; Trinity Grammar, Melbourne, 1.
From the opening year, Fellows have
held office, being associated with the
Master for the purposes of counsel, in
academic matters. At present there are
five appointed, and proposals are being:
considered to increase this number and to
form a permanent Board. (See Chap.Vl(c).)
(f) Development in Buildings and Grounds.
The College opened with a residential
block of seventeen rooms for students, in
addition to the Master’s residence. The
large room which is now the Master’s study
served as the College Dining Hall. Early
in the first year a cottage across the Ter-
race was rented to provide necessary accom-
modation for all the students, and, shortly
after, an extension was added joining the
main building to the residence. This addi-
tion gave a Dining Hall and eight more
study bedrooms.
In 1918, under the stress of the Great
War, a joint Committee prepared a basis
for the amalgamation of King’s College and
Emmanuel College (Presbyterian). This
was considered by the two Churches. The
combined governing body was to purchase
the former College for scholastic and resi-


Phone F 8143
W. W. GIFFIN
Painter, Signwriter and Decorator
Specialist in Colour Washing
- - and Paper Hanging - -
Coronation Street, Bardon, W. 4
THE COLLEGE CHAPEL.


dential purposes. Next year, however, with
the close of the War, the negotiations ter-
minated.
A further development took place in
1925 when nine students’ rooms were built
on to the main block. The Common room
was also enlarged, and the sewerage sys-
tem installed. Increasing enrolment in
1928 demanded a further extension, and an
annexe of six rooms resulted. Two years
later an upper storey was erected on the
annexe, which then made forty rooms
available for students. This was followed
in 1933 with the building at the end of the
main block of a wing comprising six rooms
together with a lecture room. The year
1935 saw the purchase of a neighbouring
property in Walmsley Street, which was
moved back to the rear of the main build-
ing and re-conditioned for a large Common
room and four study bedrooms. At the
same time the old Common room was trans-
formed to serve as a more spacious Chapel,
while the former Chapel gave place to the
library. This development furthermore
permitted considerable alterations in the
grounds, the tennis court in front of the
College being removed and lawns with cir-
cular drives taking its place. A new tennis
court was put down at the rear of the Col-
lege, as well as a concrete practice wicket
for cricket. Relief workers employed on
these jobs also made additional lawns and
concrete paths with borders in the front
and the rear of the grounds.
The next extension occurred in 1934,
when four rooms were added to the wing,
bringing this building up level with the
front of the main block. To cope with
still increasing application for entrance last
year a cottage adjoining the grounds in
Walmsley Street was rented, which makes
available accommodation for seven students.
At the same time the Dining Hall was sub-
stantially extended,. Thus the College has
reached the stage of being able to admit
into residence sixty-three students with a
room for each man. Electric light, refri-
gerator and hot water showers are among
the many conveniences for all.
The lawn at the Robert Street side of
the Master’s residence was re-modelled to
receive a garage of ample dimensions and
pleasing appearance.
All through the years, the College has
had the advantage of a live, expert, and
tireless Property Committee. Both Mr. E.
Proctor and Mr. W. Taylor have not only
watched the buildings growing, but have
at all, times placed their experienced advice
at the free disposal of the Council. It is of
interest that, many years ago, on the very
house that is now the Master’s residence,
Mr. W. Taylor worked as a carpenter’s ap-
prentice, while his brother, Rev. A. Taylor
(then in the building trade) personally as-
sisted in erecting the structure.
(g) Statutory Affiliation.
In the University of Queensland Act
(assented to 10th December, 1909) provi-
sion was made for affiliated institutions.
Section 5 reads—“ The School of Mines at
Charters Towers, established under ‘The
Schools of Mines Act of 1894,’ the Agricul-
tural College at Gatton, Central Technical
College, and the Bacteriological Institute at
College Road, Brisbane, and any other edu-
cational establishment in Queensland may
be affiliated with the University upon such
terms and conditions as the Governor-in-
Council, by Order-in-Council, shall, declare
and the Senate shall approve.”
Early steps were taken by the College
Committee, appointed by Conference, to
become so affiliated, and King’s College, in
common with the Colleges of the Anglican
and Presbyterian communions, became duly
entitled to be designated “Within the Uni-
versity of Queensland.” This status of
practical affiliation was continued pending
the gazettal of terms and conditions as pre-
scribed by the Act.
Report of the matter was made to the
Methodist Conference of February, 1913,
and the College Regulations for the Theo-
logical Department, and the full text of
the Constitution of King’s College were
presented and unanimously adopted. There-
after the Colleges appeared in the Univer-
sity Calendar as Residential Colleges
approved by the University.
The Constitution and Regulations of
King’s College appeared in the Minutes of
Conference, 1917.
In November, 1933, the question of full
statutory affiliation arose, and applications
were made by all the Colleges to come
under Section sof the Act of 1909. King’s,
at that time, had been vigorous and pros-


Ride in Comfort —Ring
B 1771
for a “Blue & White” Cab
5 Reasons why you should ride in a “Blue and White”
1. The exclusive operation of the latest luxurious saloon cars, always clean, comfortable and
mechanically perfect.
2. The employment of drivers who are trustworthy, of good appearance and character, and
thoroughly competent chaffeurs.
3. Helpful and courteous service from every driver.
4. A standard of charges that make luxurious City travel no more costly than ordinary tram
fares.
5 The utilization of the most direct route possible to your destination, travelled in the
shortest time consistent with your safety and comfort.
Remember — 81771 Blue & white cabs Ltd.
BEWARE OF IMITATIONS LOOK FOR THE NAME ON THE DOOR
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1933— Back Row: R. A. Percy, C. H. Jones, F. T. Small, W. Kidd, F. P. Witton, A. B.
Grimes: Middle Row: J. H. Heaton. D. E. Baldwin. C. A. Foggon, E. A. Axelsen, A. C. Tempest, E. C. Cribb; Sitting:
L. H. Foote, A. H. Jones (Com.). J. A. Robinson (Pres. K.C.S.C.), The Master, P. H. Brown (Sec.), R. E. Bacon (Treas.),
H. W. Dinning (Com.); Absent; J. L. Mursell, F. J. McCarthy, W. C. Kicindienst, W. S. Bath, F. Hof, S. B. Watkins.


perous for 21 years ; had a total roll of 230
students, and had 46 occupied student
rooms with need for additional accommoda-
tion.
The Senate gave attention to the appli-
cations, and in September, 1937, approved
of certain terms and conditions which were
accepted by the College Council. On April
Bth, 1938, the Senate of the University ap-
proved of full statutory affiliation being
granted.
Chapter II.—PRE-WAR PERIOD (1912-1914) and WAR PERIOD (1914-1918.
(Contributed by R.A.P.)
W W* HE previous chapter has shown us the
planting of the trees. They all rapidly
grew and thrived. Students not only
imported age-long traditions from older
Colleges, but adapted them to modern con-
ditions, and added a few local ceremonies
which, as time wore on, became eminently
respectable. Some even died —regretted or
not! Freshers threw themselves —or were
thrown —heartily into the full routine of
their new life, and the whole College par-
ticipated valiantly and loyally in the cor-
porate life of the University. It is merely
historical accuracy to say that King’s men,
whether on Committee work, or in sporting
or at lectures, or in varied social and com-
munity service, contributed a generous
share of ability and enthusiasm to the
rapidly evolving University. Their slogan
was “University, first; King’s, second;
self, last”; and King’s men lived up to it!
One glance at any year’s records will show
that not only King’s, but every College
pulled its weight in developing the latest-
born Australasian University.
Twenty-five years ago—how time flies!
And both wind and memory become
shorter!
From the very beginning the Master and
Mrs. Scott Fletcher were keenly ambitious
that right traditions should be established,
and through their leadership and energy
King’s speedily was raised to a high status
in University circles. In addition to the
freshers, there was a stiffening of older
men who had made a break in their ordi-
nary work to accept the advantages offered
by the recently opened University. F. T.
Small had been engineering in North
Western Queensland; J. A. Robinson, H. W.
Dinning and C. A. Foggan had been en-
gaged in teaching. Several of the others
were in their second University year.
About this time, too, occurred King's
first public victory in sport. This was in
inter-college football, when King’s defeated
St. John’s by a margin of about 15 points.
King’s score would have been 3 more had
not a recruit to football for the match, R.
E. Bacon, being off-side, but mindful of
stern instructions to be “sure to finish
your tackle,” splendidly downed E. C. Cribb
after he had successfully got past the St.
John’s full-back ! R. E. Bacon used to train
by running to his meetings at Merton St.
Church. On one occasion, with characteris-
tic grit, he went up and down at full speed
with us for the whole football practice.
Next morning he was so stiff that we
carried breakfast to him !
In its first year, King’s won the inter-
college sporting premiership. In the second
year King’s retained the position. For the
few years that followed, the War inter-
vened.
King’s was well represented in Univer-
sity sport in those two early years. In
football—F. T. Small, J. A. Robinson, L. H.
Foote, E. Francis, S. Francis, T. Francis,
C. A. Foggan, R. A. Percy, E. C. Cribb,
A. B. Grimes played in the University first
team; L. H. Foote, E. Francis, S. Francis
played interstate, while E. Francis repre-
sented Australia.
In the University Ist Eleven were J. A.
Robinson (captain), S. Francis, E. Francis,
L. H. Foote, R. A. Percy. In University
Athletics were C. A. Foggan and T. Francis.
T. Francis was the amateur champion for
Queensland in the 440 yards. In Univer-
sity Rowing were P. H. Brown, A. H. Jones,
D. E. Baldwin. P. H. Brown stroked the
University eight.
In addition to sport King’s took its full
share in the various departments of under-
graduate life. H. W. Dinning was Editor
of the University Magazine, and was con-
ductor of the Musical Society. A. H. Jones
was Treasurer of the University Union. P.
H. Brown was President of the Christian
Union, while E. C. Cribb was the Secretary.


ALEX. JORGENSEN
Electrical Engineer and Contractor
Lighting Installations and Maintenance
Work. Alterations, etc. skillfully executed
All work guaranteed. Estimates given
Address - 35 King Street, East Brisbane
Phone J 4560
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—I9I4—Back Row: H. G. Ford, J. T. Roberts, D. E. Baldwin; Third Row: C. J. Clarkson.
E. C. Cribb, F. T. Small, T. Francis, F. P. Witton; Second Row: E. W. Holdaway, J. Mursell, C. A. Foggon, 8.A., W.
Kidd, J. G. Hunter, E. Francis; Sitting: R. A. Percy (Com.), H. W. Dinning, B.A. (Com.), P. H. Brown (Pres. K.C.S.C.),
The Master, L. H. Foote (Sec.), A. H. Jones (Treas.), J. A. Robinson (Ex-Pres.): In Front; A. B. Grimes, H. H. Heiner;
Inset: S. Francis, O. O’Brien.


J. A. Robinson was President of the Uni-
versity Sports Union, while D. E. Baldwin
was the Treasurer and R. A. Percy was the
Secretary. Others were members of the
various committees, and at that time it
was possible easily to obtain in King’s it-
self a quorum for most of the societies.
Rivalry sometimes found an outlet in
strange escapades, but no bitterness re-
mained within the College itself. Unity
was the dominant note. The desirability of
this was emphasised by the older men, and
when there might have been a split be-
tween Theologs. and the rest, R. E. Bacon’s
happy chuckle bridged the gap. Within the
first few months a Students’ Club was
formed, with J. A. Robinson as President,
and all, were equal members. P.'H. Brown
was the Secretary and became the next
President. Those who received the worst
treatment were the external students ; as
a rule they good-naturedly suffered in
silence.
The relations with “the House” were of
the happiest character. We felt that the
Master and Mrs. Scott Fletcher took an
interest in us individually, and we have
grateful, memories of many kindnesses
from Mrs. Scott Fletcher, whose public
spirit we admired.
When old King’s men meet they talk of
these matters, and then there comes a
series of anecdotes begun by “Do you re-
member.” Vividly the past floats before
our eyes, and in our sober years we marvel
at many a by-gone adventure. If anyone
imagined that no serious study was done,
he should be told of the card which could
be pinned to the door of the room, to indi-
cate that the occupant of the room was
busy and must not be disturbed. These
cards were respected. Again one recalls
the “owls” who worked late at night, and
the “fowls” who got up in the early morn-
ing to work, and how each section respected
the hours of the other. And in the Minutes
of Conference, does not the Master’s report
record for the first year that two students
graduated in Arts and that the others se-
cured 12 merits between them; and for the
second year that one had graduated, and
that two were to sit for final, honours in
March, and that J. L. Mursell had gained
the Archibald Scholarship ? The Master’s
Third Report records that the College was
left with only eight men in residence, the
others having enlisted for active service.
The war record is dealt with separately. It
is enough to say here that the College
passed through anxious times during those
tumultuous and fateful years.
When the Rev. L. E. Bennett came he
found five students and one tutor in resi-
dence. During his second year the num-
bers increased to eleven, the majority
being below military age. The year 1918
found the numbers reduced to nine owing
to more enlistment.
A paragraph from the Master’s Report
presented to the 1919 Conference sum-
marises the outlook of King’s during these
years. “We have been quite content to
pass through heavy days, during the War;
we are glad to have been able to supply so
many for the ranks of the gallant A.1.F.;
and we now welcome peace and brighter
prospects with gratitude and hope.”
When, once an all-round contact with
University life had been well established,
King’s men, spurred by earlier examples,
never slackened in the succeeding years. If
any outstanding merit has been shown it
is in dramatic and journalistic channels.
King’s men (P. H. Brown, L. H. Foote,
Cecil Ellis and H. A. Lowe) have held the
office of President of the University Union.
H. W. Dinning, T. Thatcher and M. M.
Purser have been successful editors of the
University Magazine, and Dr. Whitehouse
and R. J. H. Risson are typical instances of
how College men can render invaluable per-
sonal help in quite a number of University
activities. Succeeding chapters will, indi-
cate in further detail the prominent part
played by King’s in University life.
Among the many workers for King’s Col-
were the three Methodist Doctors of
Divinity in this State : Rev. Henry Young-
man, D.D. (whose honorary degree, from
Toronto, was a fitting recognition of his
powerful contribution to the success of
Methodist Union in this State); Rev. G. E.
Rowe, D.D. (for so many years a leader of
Methodism, Head of Missions both in Perth
and later in Brisbane, and a noted Coun-
sellor in Methodist Policy); and the Rev.
Robert Stewart, D.D., whose name and
work in connection with Methodism, and
especially with King’s College, will ever be
remembered. Both Dr. Rowe and Dr.
Stewart received their well deserved
honour through the petition and memorial,
presented by Dr. Fowles to the Syracuse
University.


KING’E COLLEGE STUDENTS—1917—Back Row: E. G. Wagner, H. A. Larkin, A. McCulloch (Com.); Middle Row: F. H.
Brown, T. G. Moores, S. G. Brown. E. C. C. Gee, A. G. Dunn, I. F. Jones; Sitting: H. McCulloch (Com.), F. J. Bray
(Pres. K.C.S.C.), The Master, F. Fielding (Sec.), E. G. Gee (Treas.).
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1920—Back Row: F. W. Whitehouse, J. H. Simmonds, H. W. Johnson, R. J. H. Risson,
H. S. Roberts, W. T. Phillips, F. A. Gaydon, R. L. Mills; Middle Row: A. H. Thomas, C. S. Hooper, L. A. Jacobs, F. A.
Irvine, J. H. Woolryeh, V. E. Greet, J. E. Morwood, B. Powell, Sitting: I. F. Jones (Sec.), C. W. Morsley (Com.), S. G.
Brown, B.A., The Master, A. McCulloch (Pres. K.C.S.C.), E: G. Wagner (Treas.), E. G. Gee; In Front: F. W. Dunstan
(Com.), H. McCulloch, T. J. Wilson, L. R. B. Powell, W. D. Pryor, W. R. Winks; Absent: S. B. Watkins, M.Sc.


Chapter III.—POST-WAR PERIOD—1919 1923.
(Contributed by A.H.T.)
was a Golden Age for King’s. Every
past collegian naturally thinks of his
own period as the “Golden Age.” Time
has dimmed the memories of many events,
but they are usually reburnished when any
two Kingsmen of this period meet.
By 1919 the College contained many men
who had seen service in war and had re-
turned to resume or commence their Uni-
versity courses. That influx of men, as
distinct from freshers direct from second-
ary schools, gave a solidity and balance to
the College personnel. It gave, too, the
type of leadership that can only come from
men whose characters were already formed
and who had seen life in much sterner
spheres of activity.
This reservoir of character and leader-
ship carried the College forward and gave
the “freshers” of the following year a new
conception of the job ahead of them. They
set an example which was handed on for
many years to come.
Actually, in that following year, the Col-
lege was blessed by an influx of freshers
who were ripe for this example—a fine set
of men, which included many who wrote
their names large on the history of King’s
both scholastically and on the social and
sporting registers. Thus by 1921 the Col-
lege was blessed with a mixture of men . . .
a blend of ripe experience and promising
youth, which lifted the Institution to a
very high pinnacle of achievement in every
department.
In 1917-18 the soldiers had commenced
the invasion—E. G. Wagner, Herb. McCul-
loch, Alf. McCulloch, Idrisyn F. Jones, S. G.
Brown in 1917 ; Frank Dunstan in 1918,
and Cyril Morsley who, after having been
in College in 1915, re-entered it in March,
1919.
The building of the College to strength
continued through 1918, but it was in 1919
and 1920 that there was an influx of men
from the secondary schools who were des-
tined to play a vital and significant part in
the College’s future life and development.
For the sake of record the newcomers, on
the University side, as apart from the
Theological, who entered in 1918 were
Horace Johnson and G. M. Jenks ; in 1919
Frank W. Dunstan, Victor Greet, Fergus
A. Irvine, J. E. Morwood, D. W. Pryor, R.
J. H. Risson and F. W. Whitehouse.
In 1920 there were initiated into the
“rites of King’s” some dozen “freshers” of
outstanding quality. Probably in no year
since have such a batch of young men,
with potentialities in so many different
directions, entered the College. Their in-
fluence on the esprit de corps of the Col-
lege helped to carry King’s right into the
forefront in every activity.
The names inscribed in the College Roll
for that year, 1920, are W. G. Henderson,
J. W. Woolrych, W. R. Winks, C. S. Hooper,
R. L. Mills, H. S. Roberts, A. H. Thomas,
L. A. Jacobs, Lytton R. B. Powell, Harold
McCulloch and F. A. Gaydon.
Frequently these names appear in the
list of sporting “blues” of the College for
the ensuing three years. Many of these
men, notably Henderson, Mills, Hooper,
Harold McCulloch and Powell, played their
parts in practically every sport and
finished their University courses bril-
liantly. An outline of the sporting achieve-
ments of the College in the years that fol-
lowed will show the influence these men
had on the Institution’s well-being.
This influx of a dozen men in 1920
brought the need for more accommodation
—a kind of growing pain that appears to
have troubled the College more or less ever
since. Many of us either shared rooms or
slept on verandahs. Such a make-shift had
its disadvantages. I remember how often
one returned to College to discover one’s
bed, mattress, sheets and blankets missing
—reposing in a disordered heap on the
lawn below, or carried to some tree-top
where they remained until found by the
weary owner.
Disjointed memories of these years
come thronging back ... of the furniture
of Spencer Roberts arranged in all its
glory on the tennis court . . . affrays with
boxing gloves in the common room after
supper . . . mock marriage ceremonies on
the Terrace . . . midnight “Parliaments” at
the foot of the main staircase when, clad
in pyjamas and dressing gowns, we sat and
27
THE ANNALS OF KING’S COLLEGE


% t
i Under the Joint Auspices of the Presbyterian and Methodist Churches. <s>
I BRISBANE SCHOOLS. I
I “SOMERVILLE HOUSE” I
I THE BRISBANE HIGH SCHOOL FOR GIRLS, SOUTH BRISBANE |
(Adjoining Old Town Hall) I
Principal; Miss M. K. JARRETT, B.A.
Vice-Principal: Miss E. F. CRAIG, B.A. f
KINDERGARTEN TO UNIVERSITY. Phone: J 3771. |
THE BRISBANE BOYS’ COLLEGE
TOOWONG.
Principal: Mr. P. M,. HAMILTON, M.A., B.Litt.
Vice-Principal ; Mr. A. W. RUDD, M.A., LL.B.
PRIMARY TO UNIVERSITY. Reduced Fees for Scholarship Holders.
Pine Open-air School Rooms. Special Care and Accommodation for Boarders.
Limited Number of Vacancies.
THE CLAYFIELD COLLEGE
AT CLAYFIELD TRAM TERMINUS, BRISBANE.
SECONDARY DAY SCHOOL FOR GIRLS KINDERGARTEN AND
PRIMARY SCHOOL FOR GIRLS AND FOR JUNIOR BOYS TO
10 YEARS.
Head Mistress : Miss NANCY ASHBURN, B.A.
Consulting Principal; Miss M. K. JARRETT, B.A.
Phone: Wl 2332.
CHARTERS TOWERS SCHOOLS.
THORNBURGH COLLEGE for Boys
Principal : Mr. C. A. FOGGON, B.A. Phone: Charters Towers 164
BLACKHEATH COLLEGE for Girls
Principal : Miss J. E. BULLOW, B.A. Phone: Charters Towers 11,0
Excellent Boarding Accommodation Sports Grounds Swimming Pools
Tennis Courts, etc. Bursaries Available. Approved to receive holders of
State Scholarships.
PROSPECTUS AND FULL INFORMATION FROM PRINCIPALS OR FROM :
El T.' CAMPBELL, Secretary,
Presbyterian and Methodist Schools’ Association, 309 Queen Street, Brisbane.
Phone: B 2546. f
<s>
$


discussed every topic under the sun until
the small hours.
A book could easily be filled with ac-
counts of such doughty happenings. The
question of the propriety of all these esca-
pades of exuberant and competitive youth
may be questioned. Obvious objections
can be raised against them, and it must not
of course be thought that our days were
filled with such tom-foolery. Far from it.
The sporting and scholastic record of the
College in these years disproves that. The
lessons of the period 1919-1923 surely are
that “this freedom,” for what it was worth,
certainly built up a college spirit, an esprit-
de-corps that was of lasting benefit to the
College as a unit within the University. It
cemented the men together as one Univer-
sity activity, and played its part towards
those successes, both in the exam, room and
on the sporting field, for which the men
of that period may be justly proud.
In 1919 a King’s College Guild was
started by the Master. It was a social
gathering held every few weeks during the
term, to which friends from time to time
were invited. Although not permanent it
fore-shadowed the social side of to-day, in-
cluding the Annual Reception and Dinner,
and the invaluable Women’s Committee.
In 1919 there was no inter-college sport.
The War had interrupted the series, and
the difficulty of fixing on any scheme
agreeable to all Colleges prevented a re-
sumption then. There was, I belive, one
tennis match in 1917. But in 1920 these
contests were resumed in toto. King’s
(26A points) were second to John’s (31
points). King’s were first in cricket,
second in football and second in athletics,
and first in tennis —with one of the
strongest fours ever to represent the Col-
lege—Alf. McCulloch, Jack Woolrych, C. S.
Hooper, and W. G. Henderson.
In 1921 King’s won the College Cham-
pionship with 37 points, John’s trailing us
with 21 and Leo’s with 5.
In 1922 John’s again won with 29 points
against our 21 and Leo’s 13. That year we
had 29 men in residence.
In 1923, with only 22 men in, 11 of the
last year’s men having graduated, amongst
them some of those fine sportsmen of the
1920 vintage. we managed to hold St. John’s
to a tie for first place with 21 points each.
Leo’s being quite handy with 18—one of
the closest sporting years on record.
The influence of the 1920 batch of
“freshers” on the sporting strength of the
College is to be found in the sporting
blues awarded for the subsequent years.
Here they are :
1920.
CRICKET : Alf. and Harold McCulloch, W.
G. Henderson, C. S. Hooper, R. L. Mills, and
J. E. Morwood.
FOOTBALL: Alf. and Harold McCulloch,
W. G. Henderson, J. B. Morwood, R. J. H. Risson,
R. L, Mills, L. B. Powell, C. S. Hooper, H. S.
Roberts, and H. Johnson.
TENNIS : Alf. McCulloch, J. Woolrych, C.
S. Hooper, and W. G. Henderson.
ATHLETICS ; V. Greet, E. Gee, E. Risson,
W. G. Henderson, R. L. Mills, J. E. Morwood.
ROWING ; V. Greet, E. G. Wagner.
1921.
FOOTBALL: Alf. and Harold McCulloch,
W. G. Henderson, R. L. Mills, C. S. Hooper, L.
Powell and R. Risson, and F. Irvine.
C. S. Hooper incidentally represented Bris-
bane v. Ipswich, Toowoomba v. Maryborough,
and Metropolis v. Country.
CRICKET; Alf. and Harold McCulloch, W.
G. Henderson, R. L. Mills, C. S. Hooper.
A. McCulloch represented Brisbane v. Ips-
wich.
TENNIS : R. L. Mills, H. G. Henderson, A.
McCulloch, C. S. Hooper and F. A, Irvine.
ATHLETICS : W. G. Henderson, J. E. Mor-
wood, R. J. Risson, V. Greet and A. McCulloch.
The University was represented by Morwood,
Greet and McCulloch and Risson. A. McCulloch
represented the Queensland Varsity versus Syd-
ney and Melbourne. He was awarded a full
blue; Greet and Morwood half blues.
ROWING: Mills, Greet, Morwood, Risson.
This was a year of great things for King’s
rowing. They broke through a long series of
successes by John’s in the inter-college boat-
race, and won other events outside University
activity. Mills and Greet rowed in the Varsity
eight and were awarded full blues.
1922.
FOOTBALL: Powell, H. McCulloch. R. J.
Risson, R. L. Mills, F. A. Irvine, and Ivor J.
Pauli.
CRICKET : W. G. Henderson, H. McCulloch,
R. L. Mills, V. Greet, F. A. Irvine and L. Powell.
TENNIS : C. S. Hooper, W. G. Henderson,
F. A. Irvine and R. L. Mills.
ATHLETICS : V. Greet and Morwood.
’VARSITY BLUES: ROWING—Greet and
Mills ; Irvine, half.


KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS— 1923-Back Row: S. V. Potter. A. H. Thomas (Com.), A. G. Berg, W. G. Rankin, J. Tain-
ton, A. T. Walker, P. J. Lanham; Middle Row: H. T. Pegs, N. E. Raymond, T. Milfull. E. H. Butters, I. J. Pauli (Com.)
A. F. Clappison, J. Mulholland, R. B. Morwood; Sitting: L. A. Jacobs, B.Sc., R. J. H. Risson, B.E., G. W. Harding (See.).
S. G. Brown, M.A., The Master, H. McCulloch (Pres. K.C.S.C.), J. Murray (Treas.), C. S. Hooper, B.A., B. L. Mills, B.Sc.
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS— IS2C Back Row: V. A. Webber. G. W. brown, J. A. Hunt, N. H. Grimmett, W. A.
McDougall, W. S. Parkinson, H. N. C, Bandidt, M. White (Treas.), L. Morrison; Middle Row; W. H. Hawton, A. H. Thomas,
J. Tulip, A. G. Grant, F. Few, G. W. Noble, S. J. R. Murr, T. H. Blackburn, H. R. Heaton; Sitting; A. Bradford (Com.),
I. J. Pauli, B.Sc., A. G. Berg, B.E., C. Ellis (Sec.), F. S. Thomas (Pres.), The Master, R. J. H. Risson, B.E., Dr. F. W.
Whitehoum, B.Sc., Ph.D., R. B. Morwood, B.Sc., J C: Rundlo (Com.); Absent: J. Mulholland, B.E.


1923.
CRICKET : W. Rankin, R. L. Mills, H.
McCulloch, L. Pauli, R. J. Risson, N. E. Raymond.
FOOTBALL : R. L. Mills, R. J. Risson, W.
Rankin, L. Pauli, H. McCulloch and G. W. Hard-
ing.
ROWING : R. L. Mills, R. J. Risson, E. But-
ters, H. Harding, F. G. Holdaway (cox).
TENNIS : C. S. Hooper, R. L. Mills, W. G.
Rankin, A. H. Thomas.
During the year King’s was the only College
to have a representative in every ’Varsity sport.
Mills and Harding were awarded full blues in
rowing.
The influence of the Hooper-Henderson-Mills-
Powell-McC'ulloch group on the sporting achieve-
ments of the College can readily be seen.
The years 1922 and 1923 resulted too in
some further brilliant scholastic achieve-
ments for the College.
In 1922 F. W. Whitehouse took first-class
honours in Geology, won a gold medal and a
travelling scholarship entitling him to two years’
study abroad, which he took out at Cambridge.
Fergus Irvine took firsts in Chemistry; Alf.
McCulloch honours in Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering; E. G. Wagner, seconds in Civil En-
gineering; Hooper and Greet graduated well in
Arts; Norman Craigie took his B.Sc.
In 1923 eleven men graduated, some of them
brilliantly. Henderson. Mills, Jacobs, Powell and
Holdaway in Science; Fergus Irvine and Norman
Craigie in Applied Science; Risson in Civil En-
gineering; Eric Morwood took first class honours
in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering; Frank
Dunstan seconds in Civil Engineering; Henderson
seconds in Chemistry; Jacobs seconds in Physics;
Powell firsts in Chemistry.
Irvine was awarded a travelling scholarship
for two years to study Industrial Chemistry
abroad. He has never returned to Queensland
from those travels, he being now chief research
officer of the Celotex Company in the United
States.
The year 1923 was also notable for the birth
of King’s Old Collegians’ Association, a body
which has continued to justify its existence,
and proves to be of increasing value to the Col-
lege as the years pass.
This year, 1923, also closes a notable
chapter in the history of the College in the
resignation of the Master (Rev. L. E. Ben-
nett), who left to take a similar post in
Wesley College, Sydney University.
No words of mine could do justice to the
fine feeling that existed between him and
the men in College,. His broad generosity of
spirit, his tolerance of outlook, and above
all his ability to see every situation from
the students’ point of view as well as from
his own, made discipline in the College
easy. The extent of his practical generosity
to students will never be fully known.
When we lost him, we all knew we had
lost a personal friend. A tribute should
also be paid to the gracious influence,
practical sympathy and tireless interest of
Mrs. Bennett in all College, household and
social matters. Her tact and zeal ensured
smooth, efficient administration, and the
men realised that the College was a home.
Chapter IV.—RECENT YEARS.
(a) 1924-1929.
(Contributed by C.E.)
(In the compilation of these notes the
writer has drawn largely from the records of
King’s College Students’ Club, and the King’s
Old Collegians’ Association, and from the Annual
Reports of the Master of the College.)
1924. The new Master, Rev. Hubert H.
Trigge, M.A., 8.D., of the Victorian and
Tasmanian Conference, soon showed, by his
tact, and firmness and kindliness, that he
was a worthy successor to Rev. L. E. Ben-
nett, who had accepted the headship of
Wesley College, Sydney. The best tradi-
tions of the College were carried on, and
King’s not only retained its high position
among the Colleges, but made increasingly
valuable contributions to the life and work
■of the University. Twenty-six students
(including seven Theological) were en-
rolled. Accommodation was insufficient,
and students had to share studies and com-
mon verandahs for sleeping quarters. Pos-
sibly it was the heavy repair bills for bed
and bedding that hastened the building of
an additional nine rooms ! The year saw
the closing of the City Council Domain
Ferry. Only those who have actually en-
joyed this ferry can appreciate what a boon
it was to John’s and King’s. No such need
as now for reasonably punctual breakfast
for the 8.55. The “south side” gave ample
time for the 9 o’clock lecture. But if the
unhappy student just missed the ferry (and
that happened, alas! too often), then the
King’s English rose to the lowest depths !
In spite of protests from two Colleges, the
ferry remained closed, and students from
King’s and John’s have since enjoyed a 12


Why Pay Cash ? Pay as You Play.
For all Sporting Requirements
call on
P. W. EDSER
607 STANLEY STREET, SOUTH BRISBANE
Next Newtown Hotel. Phone J 1916
Agent for STATE SPORTS STORE
also “AJAX” Cydles, Guaranteed 10 years
From 10/- deposit and 3/3 weekly
All Cycle Repairs executed, Cycle accessories, Tyres, Tubes, etc., stocked. Racket Repairs and Restrings,
i et me quote you on our PAY AS YOU PLAY SYSTEM
ObiiMiiivtnot
Publicity Engraving Pty-
-19 Charlotte St., Brisbane
For
Quality PRINTING BLOCKS
at
REASONABLE PRICES
Phone 82381
AND BE SURE OF SERVICE.
After hours F 8576


minutes’ walk to the Edward Street ferry
—and doubtless benefit greatly in health
and digestion. The Inter-college sports in
this year provided very keen competition,
King’s being ultimately placed third to
John’s, with Emmanuel second. King’s
achieved a remarkable performance in
Tennis by winning all matches without the
loss of a set. In the final match King's
won all sets to love, excepting one, which
went to 7 —5.
The College team included Hooper,
McDougall, Thomas, Conken and Ellis. We
shattered another record this year by de-
feating John’s in football for the first time
since the War. We also won against Em-
manuel, but were defeated by Leo’s. In
athletics King’s rose second to John’s. It
is a matter of some regret that the sport-
ing record for 1924 is incomplete. No men-
tion of blue awards can be found, and the
results of the several matches do not ap-
pear to have been completely preserved.
King’s were again, the only College who had
representatives in every Inter-University
contest. The outstanding achievement,
scholastically, was that H. McCulloch se-
cured first-class honours in engineering.
Office-bearers of the K.C.S.C. were : Presi-
dent, Harding; Secretary, Pauli; Treasurer,
Clappison.
1925. The enrolment was 30, of whom
8 were “ Theologs.” The nine additional
rooms were opened at a very successful
Garden Party (the first) by the Mayor of
Brisbane. Billiards was added to the in-
door pastimes of boxing and ping-pong, and
very skilful cuists were Bundle (who later
did splendid work among the heathen in
Papua), Hooper, Bisson, McDougall and
White (with a certified break of 62!).
During the year Mrs. Berg relinquished
her position as Matron, and her resignation
was received by the students with very
keen regret. In the short while she had
been at King’s Mrs. Berg had endeared her-
self to all of us by her kindly hospitality
and the very enjoyable afternoon tea par-
ties. Grateful King’s men, at a farewell,
presented her with a handsome coffee-
service. ' In the Inter-Collegiate contests
King’s gained second place to John’s, com-
ing first in cricket and tennis. In the
cricket match against Leo’s, King’s secured
365 for 10 wickets in just under two hours,
a truly memorable event. McDougall’s 119
and Bandidt’s 104 in the innings must also
constitute a record for College cricket.
Blues were awarded to Bandidt, Bradford,'
Ellis, Gaydon, McDougall. Tennis was won
completely with the loss of two sets only,
blues being awarded to Bandidt, Berg, Ellis
and McDougall. McDougall also secured
blues in football along with Ellis, Gaydon,
Wilson and White, Mulholland was the only
rowing blue, with Jorss, Morwood and Pegg
second in athletics.
In 1925 Morwood (J.L.) was awarded
the Walter and Elizabeth Scholarship,
while Mulholland secured a Mcllwraith
Scholarship. K.C.S.C. office-bearers were ;
President, Clappison; Secretary, Berg
(A.G.); Treasurer, Mulholland.
1926. Twenty-nine Collegians in resi-
dence, eight of them Theological. At the be-
ginning of the year Mrs. Trigge was in-
stalled as Matron, and soon proved an ad-
mirable household head. In October, a new
student arrived at the College, Buth Kings-
leigh Trigge, the first to be christened in
the College Chapel, the Ministrant being
Bev. Albert Taylor, with the Senior Theo-
logian (John C. Bundle) assisting. A
silver mug (engraved with the College
arms) was presented by the students to'
the happy “fresher.” The usual Boat Pic-
nic to Seventeen Mile Bocks was held in
September. King’s men were active in the
social life of the University, and an out-
standing display of fancy dress characters
was made at the Annual University Ball.
This year our men acquitted themselves
well in. the official Inter-Collegiate con-
tests, and King’s became the first holders
of the Old Collegians’ Cup, donated by the
old Collegians of the four Colleges. Wc
were undefeated in cricket, football and
tennis, and took first place in athletics; but
Bowing reminded us how difficult it really
is to secure first place all round.
“Johnnie” Stewart secured blues in
cricket and athletics, and proved a fine
Collegian. Other awards this year were: —
Cricket: Bandidt, Ellis, McDougall, Thomas
and White; Football: Bradford, Ellis, Pauli,
McDougall and White; Tennis: Bandidt,
Ellis, Thomas, McDougall; Athletics: Grant,
Morwood and White; Bowing: Mulholland.
In Cricket, John’s batted first, and at 4 p.m.
declared with 151 for eight wickets. With
only one hundred minutes to play left,
King’s men had a merry knock, and at
stumps had scored 150 runs for six wickets
—Hunt with 49 being top. Two runs —or


Your Health is Your Wealth !
Invaluable medicinal preparations for household use are
Dr. Lucas Famous Papaw Remedies
Perfected after 53 years of botanical and medical research. Embodying
the matured unique essences of the Papaw tree and fruit the most
wonderful tree in the world. Compounded with the finest known
pharmaceutical curative herbs and balsams.
The Dr. Lucas Papaw Ointment cleanses, heals and cures. Keep a tin handy in the home.
Other celebrated remedies include :
MISTOIDS for INDIGESTION
PAPAYATE for ADENOIDS and CYSTS
PILLS for IMPAIRED LIVER and KIDNEYS
CAPSULES for WORMS. LOZENGES for INFLUENZA
WRITE FOR VALUABLE FREE BOOKLET
The wholesale selling agents are
Messrs. A. M. Bickford & Sons, Tank st. Brisbane
Phone 82177 (3 lines)
Ask your Chemist for supplies Metropolitan Pnces-1/6 and 2/9
The Right Medicine often Saves Life
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1929—Back Row: V. Mead, H. Nieholls, R. W. Strutton, B. Schatzel, H. M.
Kingston, C. A. Jorss; Third Row: L. G. Doblue, K. H. Shelton, G. James, G. S. Pro-Copis, D. N. Gredden, C.
Courtice, T. H. Cherry, J. L. C. Rowley, J. M. Fielding; Second Row: J. B. Reid, F. J. Leckenby, R. T. Hague,
D. S. Maxwell, C. N. Sinnamon, L. N. Kentish, C. G. Browne, A. C. Hawley, C. S. Christian, W. L. Haenke;
Sitting: G. Nash (Com.), A. Bradford, B.A. (Com.), J. S. Hardy (Sec.), H. A. Lowe (Pres.), The Master, R. J.
H. Risson, B.E., M. White, M.Sc., H. N. C. Bandidt, B.A., T. G. Lithgow (Com.); Absent; E. F. Gutkunst.


two minutes —would have given us the
match instead of a draw! That year each
victory (or defeat) was celebrated by an
informal banquet, from which sprang
“Kio Kio Ki-i,” for many years the recog-
nised war-cry of King’s.
Rundle (who came to King’s in 1924)
was our best cuist. (By the way, is it
generally known that John enlisted on
August 4th, 1914, served the full term, and
and was “demobbed” in March, 1919?) The
Old boat race resulted in a draw, and had
to be re-rowed, with the same result! Mul-
holland achieved outstanding academic dis-
tinctions by first class honours in En-
gineering. Office-bearers were; President,
F. S. Thomas; Secretary, C. Ellis; Treasurer,
M. White.
1927. A new record of 31 students was
enrolled, and men were again required to
share rooms. The “freshers” sometimes
did not heed telephone calls or Chapel, but
in other respects they made a fine contri-
bution to the life of the College. Tea and
Tennis afternoons on Wednesdays and
Saturdays were in vogue. Billiards re-
mained popular, and boxing and ping-pong
enjoyed a revival. A valiant attempt was
made to get the Ferry back again. Some
lively King’s men purchased a trim yacht,
“The Christobel,” and for the best part of
the year the gallant craft served as a ferry,
till a week-end flood washed her down to
Pinkenba, and the shareholders in this
only Shipping Co. at King’s abandoned the
derelict on the advice of the water police.
Sic transit “Christobel”! Up to 1927 Col-
lege teams had used Pineapple and the Ter-
race for training areas, but a collision with
the authorities ended in restricting eager
trainers to the Pineapple Oval.
That year we shared cricket honours
with John’s. In rowing, our men were be-
lieved to have put up in practice an offi-
cial record of 5 secs, below the Queensland
“Mile record.” But later, when the course
was measured by Q.R.A., it was found to
be only f-mile !
McDougall, who was a tower of strength
to the College in practically all branches of
sport, got his ’Varsity blues for cricket and
football, and was Captain and Vice-Captain
respectively, for the ’Varsity teams for this
year. Other blues awarded were :—Tennis;
Bandidt, Ellis, Lanham, McDougall; Ath-
letics: McDougall, Risson; Football; Ellis,
Few, Hunt, Jorss, McDougall, Risson;
Cricket; Christian, Ellis, Hunt, McDougall,
Morwood, F. S. Thomas.
“Johnnie” Hunt is remembered for his
sportsmanship and sterling qualities in all
phases of College life. The officers were ;
President, C. Ellis; Secretary, A. Bradford,
Treasurer, J. Tulip.
1928 (contributed by C.E.). —An enrol-
ment of 33, of whom 10 were “Theologs.”
The 9 freshers, a likely working lot were
welcomed “in the manner hallowed by time
whereof the memory of man runneth not
to the contrary. With the old accommoda-
tion for only 28 students the first annexe,
a single story (and later a second), had to
be built. (The mango tree was saved !)
The annual Garden Party of the Ladies'
Committee in the grounds of Mr, and Mrs.
R. J. Archibald, Paddington (now well es-
tablished as one of the brightest and most
successful functions connected with the
College) was first held in 1928, and has
been held in the same grounds many times
since.
The Students’ Club had a very eventful
year. We find records of many and tedious
sion of the K.C.S.C. and I.C.C. constitu-
meetings held to discuss the complete revi-
tions, the subject of dancing, the College
cap and blazers, the Boat Picnic, the up-
keep of the Billiard Table—and last but
not least —the rather large deficiency in
the telephone account!
The College was becoming well, popu-
lated with enthusiastic debaters—Bandidt,
Bradford, Risson, Whitehouse, Grant,
Hardy, Thomas and others. Lively meet-
ings sometimes lasted past midnight. The
design of a new blazer (with modern
wyvern) called forth long and ferved elo-
quence. In sports King’s performed very
creditably, but were headed by John’s
(first) and Emmanuel. Our chief successes
were in Tennis and Athletics. Cricket saw
a 9th wicket partnership (White and
Davey) of 81 against Emmanuel, which
gave us the match.
The outstanding academic success of the
year was the election of Mulholland for the
Walter and Eliza Hall Scholarship. (See
Chapter VI.)
K.C.S.C. officers were:—President, Brad-
ford; Serretary, Lowe; and Treasurer,
Nash.


A. L. EVANS
Fruit Merchant and Farm Produce Agent
Section 25, Municipal Markets
Roma Street BRISBANE
City and Country Orders Supplied
Prompt and Personal Service
Phones B 7672 Telegrams:
Toowong 1739 Box 890 L, G.P.O. “Satisfaction Brisbane
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1932—Back Row: J. G. Percy, G. E. Ross, A. C. Oertel, C. H. Allen, A. L.
Robinson A G. Michael, V. K. Collins. S. T. Vickery, G. E. Young, ,H. H. Denny; Third Row: P. H. Thomas, R.
Jay E A Wells C G. Robinson, W. A. Rogers, A. F. Bandidt, J. White, C. T.. Hansen, S.C. Foote, B. J. Dale;
Second'Row: A. C. Meadmore, C. White, C. A. Jones, R. U. Hogg, H. T. Unwin, D. F. Boorman, W J Tomlin-
son F W Miller W L. Haenke, L. B. Swan, A. G. Finch; Front Row: G. James L.Th. (Committee), A. G.
Grant Ph C H A. Lowe, B.E., C. Ellis, B.E. (V. Master), The Master, Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D., T. R.
Edwards (Pres.), S. L. Russell (Secretary), L. T. Vickery (Treasurer), F. G. Few, B.Sc., A.App.Sc. (Tutor).


1929 (contributed by H.A.L.). —A full
house; at that time 34, consisting of 4
graduates, 14 undergraduates, 11 Theolo-
gians, and 5 pharmacists. Thirteen
“freshers” were given the usual warm wel-
come.
K.C.S.C. officers were elected thus :
President, H. A. Lowe; Secretary, J, S.
Hardy; Treasurer, G. F. Nash.
The annual Boat Picnic was held as usual
at Seventeen Mile Rocks. College astro-
nomers failed that year in foretelling the
moonlight!
In sport we tied with John’s for first
place in cricket. The most outstanding
performance was put up by Bandidt who,
in the match against Emmanuel, took five
wickets for fourteen runs off seven overs !
Christian and Jorss were_ our representa-
tives in the University eight, which took
part in the ’Varsity race held that year in
Brisbane, “Blues” were well won. (For
list see Chapter VI.)
In this year, fot the first time in his-
tory, the Old Collegians’ Cup left Kangaroo
Point to grace the halls of Emmanuel.
Structural alterations to the long corri-
dor of the main building ended for ever
the adventurous pastime of “ water-slides.’
Built-in wardrobes were provided in each
room by the Ladies’ Committee.
Scholastically the year was very success-
ful, though some of us were obliged to wait
on the examiners in March as well as No-
vember. Outstanding results were : —A. K.
Thomson, first-class honours in English,
Language and Literature; F, G. Few,
third-class honours in Applied Science ;
whilst G. Nash and C. Jorss completed their
courses, and A. Bradford completed his
finals.
At its Annual Meeting, held in October,
the K.O.C.A. voted from its funds the sum
of £lO to be handed to the Master to con-
stitute a College Bursary for 1930. The
Association also decided to institute the
“Old Collegians’ Bursary Fund,” to which
reference is made in these Annals.
(b) 1930-1938.
(Contributed by W.R.C.J.)
During this period, the College has
progressed enormously. This is all the
more remarkable because in the first
half of the period the expansion of the
College was brought to a sudden, stop
by the depression, to be resumed in the last
four years at a much accelerated tempo.
This expansion, due partly to recovery
from the depression, partly to the inaugura-
tion of new faculties at the University, has
brought in its wake many administrative
difficulties and has markedly altered the
character of the student body. This has
increased in numbers from 40 to 65, and
now includes many Medical and Law stu-
dents, and evening students “doing” Com-
merce, These men have provided a
leavening of older and more mature men,
a tendency which is accentuated by the
fact that it is now customary to have some
ten or twelve graduates to grace the dais.
Furthermore, the proportion of Theological
students has very much declined, and with
many of them following University Degree
courses, the College has become almost a
University College.
To meet .this increase in numbers, a large
programme of building extensions has been
rendered necessary. The College is in the
very difficult position of having to provide
for a steadily increasing student body
while knowing that a move to St. Lucia
appears to be certain. Even now, it is not
definitely known at what date the College
will be called upon to transfer its activities
to the new University site. Since 1930
fifteen new rooms have been added to the
College; a new Common room, Library and
Tutorial, room have been provided ; while
the Chapel has been transferred to more
spacious surroundings and the Dining Hall
has been enlarged to make a very dignified
venue for dinner and the official functions.
Building extensions are not the only
form of expansion necessitated by increas-
ing numbers. Tutorial assistance is now
on a much larger scale than in 1930, and a
beginning has been made in the provision
of an up-to-date text book library. A Vice-
Master and Senior Resident Tutor are now
appointed to assist the Master in his rela-
tions with the student body. As in the
matter of housing the increased numbers,
so in the matter of nroviding the necessary
organisation the College is now faced with
a difficult transition stage. The large in-
crease in responsibility for the organization
of the domestic and ordinary financial ad-
ministration of the College, together with


R. LENEHAN
M.P.S.
Chemist
and
Druggist
Fiveways, Woolloongabba
H. R. Lenehan, Manager, J 2503
and
Clarence Cornel, Stanley Street
W. A. Lenehan, Manager, J 3614
STANDS for QUALITY
Always Ask For
DARLING DOWNS PRODUCTS
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1935 —Back Row: C. A. Jones, G. E. Young, H. G. Lavers, V. E. Schmidt, C. D.
Alcorn B. Gegg, A. M. Thomson, V. C. Rahmann, E. H. Hughes, T. J. N. Foley, R. S. Brodribb, C. R. Lulham;
Third Row: D. S. Stevens, M. W. Blank, J. N. Bagnall, A. L. Robinson, J. H. M. Frewen, V. R. Pascoe, J. W.
Radford, A. A. Anger, K. B. Fowler, M. M. Purser; Second Row: A. W. Preston, H. G .Wilson, D. E. Williams,
A. L. Wilkinson, R. A. Perry, A. C. Nielsen, G. R. Atherton, W. N. Wensley, H. W. Freeman, G. H. Bourne, G.
M. Foote, B. H. Trembath, G. A. Preston, P. S. Williams, W. J. Simmonds; Front Row: A. W. Trembath, R. Jay,
B. A. C. Oertel, M.Sc. J. Hardy, B.A., H. A. Lowe, B.E. (Vice-Master), The Master, Rev. H. H. Trigge,
M.A., B.D., H. K. Thomsett (Pres., K.C.S.C.), T. C. Toft (Hon. Sec., K.C.S.C.), A. B. Risson (Hon. Treas.,
K.C.S.C.), F. W. Miller (Committee), L. B. Swan.


the arrangement of tutorial assistance for
University students and tuition for Theo-
logical students, and the preservation of
harmony in a College housing sixty-five
men still falls upon the Master. The pre-
sent honorary assistance (as in the case of
Mrs. Trigge) and part-time assistance (as
in the case of the Vice-Master, Tutors, etc.)
must soon be augmented by full-time assis-
So here, too, the rapid growth and
changing circumstances of recent years
have brought new problems.
In the social field, King’s has also
achieved notable progress during the last
few years. In 1933 the Enrolment Cere-
money and the Reception and Dinner were
both inaugurated. At the Enrolment Cere-
mony freshmen are welcomed to their new
careers by speakers representing Univer-
sity, Church and Old Collegians, after
undertaking the obligations of membership
of the College and signing the Register. At
the Annual Reception and Dinner, the staff
of the University and the Senior represen-
tatives of the Methodist Church are invited
to be the guests of the College and to meet
the students, past and present, their
friends, and well-wishers of the College. It
is the crowning event of the social year for
the College.
Academic successes are dealt with
separately. It is in place here, however, to
record the two major achievements of
King’s men during this period—the win-
ning of the Rhodes Scholarship for 1933 by
Colin Courtice and the 1851 Exhibition by
Montgomery White. This latter is a trien-
nial award for the best post-graduate work
in Science in the Australian Universities,.
A pleasing feature of the period has
been the revival of the King’s Old Colle-
gians’ Association. Under the influence of
that dynamic personality, Flying Officer
A. G. Grant, and his successor. Colonel
J. A. Robinson, Principal of the Teachers’
The Period 1912-1919.
(Contributed by Wm. C.K.)
THE Theological students of the founda-
tion year agreed that the Conference
chose wisely when appointing the
Rev. M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt., as the
first Master of King’s. His culture, disci-
pline and personal interest were of great
value to us.
Training - College, the Association has be-
come a lively body, which arranges social
functions for its members, keeps in touch
with country members by medium of a
newsletter, awards an annual bursary to a
present student, and nominates three dele-
gates to the governing body of the College.
An Association of this kind can be a great
assistance to the College, and many Old
Collegians look forward to the time when
it will be possible to draw all delegates to
the Council, in whatever capacity, from the
ranks of Old Collegians.
The King’s College Students’ Club is the
organisation through which present stu-
dents express their communal, existence.
The Club controls sporting activities in
competition with other Colleges, provides
for social functions and amenities, and pro-
vides a channel for relationships between
the student body and the College authori-
ties. The sporting activities of the Club
have resulted in the winning of the Inter-
College Cup three times during the period
under review, and produced such outstand-
ing athletes as Vey Wilson, international
footballer; Harry Thomsett, interstate
cricketer ; and Charlie Hansen, winner of
the State 880 yards championship, as well
as many inter-city and inter-Varsity repre-
sentative players. In the social field, the
Club provides for occasional debates, musi-
cal items at the Dinner and other functions
of a kindred nature, as well as furnishing
newspapers, a fiction library, and a tele-
phone, and maintaining the billiard table,
ping-pong table and piano. One of the most
outstanding efforts of student organization
was the raising of half the money required
to furnish a heavy four and tub for the row-
ing enthusiasts, thus providing the
nucleus of a good fleet. Periodical meetings
are held, and at these both officers of the
Club and members generally receive an ex-
cellent training in the conduct of meetings
and in debate.
The late Rev. H. Youngman, D.D., lec-
tured in “Methodist Law" and “The Person
of Christ.” One student stated privately,
that had he “not accepted Christ, prior to
entering the College, he would have been
led to do so during one of these Lectures."
The Rev. David Hill, 8.A., took the subject
of “Church History,” and the Rev. W. N.
Chapter V.—THEOLOGICAL REVIEW.


Time Marches On
25 Years of Opportunities
Our actions and results print
themselves clearly, boldly, and
indelibly in the book of time.
Moral obligations transcend all
material gain, and are the only
worth while objective, making
one proud of the opportuni-
ties to prove one’s calibre,
thereby showing in our daily
efforts that each and all are
striving to be worthy of their
creation.
Railings & Railings
Printers & Bookbinders
Stanley St. (Clarence Cor.) Sth. Brisbane
Phone J 2366
L J. RIDGEWELL
SPECIALIST
Impediments in Speech
Including Stuttering, Paralytic
and Spasmodic Stammering,
Mental Hesitation and Psellysm
For two years student and
patient of Neredah Phillips and
now the only one practising in
the "Phillips Method" apart
from the originator.
HIBERNIAN BUILDING
92 ADELAIDE ST., BRISBANE, Q.
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS —1936 —Back Row: A. Anger, R. Courtice, J. H. M. Frewen, A. L. Robinson, C.
Ellworthy, C. D. Alcorn, H. G. Wilson, F. Fraser, R. Howe, I. Alcorn, H. M. Risson, W. J. Sinclair, J.
Clements; Third Row: B. H. Trembath, P. S. Williams, H. G. Palethorpe, M. W. Blank, A. W. Trembath, H.
Muller, G. H. Preston, V. E. Schmidt, G. E. Fewster, B. L. Poole, P. C. Christesen, W. J. Whitchurch, K.
Macalpine, T. Abell; Second Row: A. M. Thomson, R. A. Perry, G. E. Foote, A. C. Nielsen, H. G. Lavers, V.
R. Pascoe, G. E. Ponting, G. R. Atherton, K. B. Fowler, A. W. Preston, R. S. Brodribb, M. M. Purser, D. J.
Stevens, W. J. Simmonds, A. C. Seamer; Front Row: J. N. Bagnall, B.A. Gegg, Ph.C., A. G. Finch, L.Th., F. W.
Miller, B.E., R. Jay, B.A. (V. Master), The Master, Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D., T. J, N. Foley, B.A. (Pres.,
K.C.S.C.), A. E. Risson (Hon. Sec., K.C.S.C.), W. N. Wensley (Hon. Treas., K.C.S.C.), E. H. Hughes (Com.),
J. W. Radford (Com.); Sitting; R. C. Simpson, B. S. Richmond, D. N. Drew, D. A. Curtis.


Gunson, 8.A., a Congregational Minister,
lectured in English Literature.
The students were men of varied types,
each with his own traits, gifts and failings.
But we were a happy group, and formed
firm friendships. Here are the foundation
men —as students : —Robert E. Bacon was
senior student, a great plodder. Scrupu-
lous about his studies. Determined to un-
ravel mysteries, even if it meant an all
night sitting. Brotherly to a degree.
Walter Kidd, strong, and with firm convic-
tions. A good student; alert, keen, and a
true friend. Edward Axelsen, a really
good fellow, very open-heartened ; loved by
everybody. Arfhur C. Tempest, in evidence
with his boisterous nature. Emphatic in
his opinions, and always expressed them.
Thoroughly respected by all. Frank P.
Witton was quiet and unobtrusive. Always
thinking about something. Very approach-
able and friendly. William C. Kleindienst,
“who paid a weekly visit to his country
seat.”
We were all proud to be foundation stu-
dents. Every candidate for the Ministry
should have a term at King’s. The relation-
ships between the Theological and Univer-
sity students in residence were most
friendly.
The Chapel services—early in the morn-
ing—were always beneficial. In the winter
months, some felt that they needed “some
grace” to face the cold atmosphere of the
Old chapel, room, but the warmth of the
spirit more than compensated. It was the
custom for each Theolog. to take his turn
in the conduct of the Chapel Service, and
thus we were coached in the art of oral
prayer and in the reading of the Scriptures.
The Preaching service—after which the
usual remarks by the students in the ser-
mon and the summing up by the Master —
were always helpful, even though the prea-
cher may have been told some “home
truths.” Frequently, several of us gathered
in a fellow student’s room for prayer and
the discussion of our work and difficulties.
The early Theologs had their share of the
recreation and fun of College life.
The Period 1920-1927.
(Contributed by J.M.)
An intelligent study of the history of
King’s over the whole of the twenty-five
years of our existence will convince even
the confirmed pessimist that progress has
been continuous, and that our highest
hopes are being fulfilled. It is therefore
with much pleasure that we of earlier
years make our contribution to these cele-
brations, acknowledging a sense of pride
that we have had some part in the develop-
ment of College tradition.
In writing of the period between 1918
and 1923 I would express for all the Theo-
logical students of that time an acknow-
ledgement of real affection for and in-
debtedness to the Rev. L. E. Bennett,
M.A., B.D. Taking over the direction of
the College during the War, when every
educational institution suffered severely,
Mr. Bennett faced a difficult task, and the
gradual development which continued from
the close of the War until the end of his
term was doubtless due almost entirely to
the Master’s personal gifts of tact and
sympathetic understanding.
The inauguration of Sunday Morning
Chapel was an innovation, appreciated by
many of the- undergraduates as well as
“theologs.” Some of the addresses de-
livered by the Master are remembered
and discussed by King’s men even now.
Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A., was tutor in
Homiletics. No student will forget his
preaching classes. Under the guidance and
criticism of W. S. Bath men have overcome
disabilities which, if not removed, would
seriously have lessened their efficiency.
In this period was established the
“United Faculty,” a united course of train-
ing for the students of the Presbyterian,
Congregational and Methodist Churches.
There were obvious advantages in such an
arrangement for students and teaching
staffs. For the latter it afforded relief
from the difficulties of lecturing on a
great diversity of subjects and enabled con-
centration on a smaller field. To the stu-
dents there were brought opportunities for
fellowship with men of other communions
and a consequent enlargement of mutual
understanding. It was hoped that this
venture of bringing the future ministers of
several churches together would greatly
help forward union of the churches. Look-
ing back on this adventure we remember
with gratitude our associations with men
whose breadth of vision was contagious.
The name of the Rev. Fred. North comes
immediately to mind. Of a quiet disposi-
tion, he was unsparing as lecturer in
Church History, Greek and Apologetics,


.
A-*.
m
■W-y
€
wmmm
% *-
Young, men of vision . . . .
Personality, imagination, ability, and character are
four essential factors of a successful career . . . plus
GOOD CLOTHES.
It is well to remember, also, that good clothes need
not be necessarily expensive. Pike Brothers, in an
endeavour to demonstrate that point to young men,
are making a special feature of
TAILORED-TO-MEASURE SUITS FOR £6/6/-
These suits carry the usual “hall mark” of immacu-
late tailoring so characteristic of the craftsmen of the
House of Pike Brothers. Acquaint yourself with these
facts by calling or writing for a range of patterns.
PIKE BROTHERS
of QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE
and many Methodist theologs were deeply
indebted to his work in making possible
any success achieved for the diploma. The
Rev. Richard Glaister, M.A., D.D., a typical
Scots theologian, came as a new and in-
vigorating experience. His lectures on
Theology and Old Testament subjects scin-
tillated with bright parentheses and side-
lights giving an unusual interest from
which even his Scots accent could not de-
tract ! To link with his name that of Dr.
Merrington is to be reminded of the
varieties and contrasts to be found in the
ministry of every church, and especially
among those who teach. One has an abid-
ing impression of this truly “big’' man
ploughing the heavy soil of theological and
metaphysical abstractions, discoursing on
the relations between Subjective and Objec-
tive reality, what time he paced the lec-
ture room floor with measured tread and
slow. But he could also rise to mountain
heights!
For all such men and the privilege of
association with them we are grateful, and
we believe that, through them, King’s Col-
lege has received lasting benefit.
The Period 1928-1931.
(Contributed by L.N.K.)
It is a joy to be a member of a progres-
sive institution. The year 1927 had a
record of ten Theological students, which
was increased soon after. Moreover, the
L.Th. diploma had just been added to the
dignity and honour of the institution, mak-
ing one eager for achievement.
During 1928, 1929 and 1930 a character-
istic was enthusiasm for work. A new
programme was being attempted. The
object was to matriculate by the end of
the allotted three years of the course. To
do this it was necessary during the first
two years to complete nearly all the work
for L.Th., for the Master insisted that this
must come first. Ordinarily the first year
was for preparation, with exams, in the
second year. In 1930 success was seen
when L. N. Kentish matriculated.
The same year a still more ambitious
plan evolved through the keenness of L. T.
Vickery, who was able to make use of adult
matriculation conditions. He decided to
attempt two matriculation subjects during
his first year and two during the second.
Thus two years which hitherto had at the


KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS —1937 —Back Row: D. J. Stevens, N. J. Sherwin, H. G. Wilson, G. A. Preston, A.
G. Bennett, K. W. Lavers, FI. S. Brodribb, W. J. Simmonds, K. B. Fowler, J. G. Hunt; Second Row: F. H
Cowlishaw, A. A. Anger, M. W. Blank, H. Palethorpe, B. H. Courtice, I. W. Alcorn, R. T. Sargeant, E.
Ponting, P. Fraser, B. L. Dennis, A. L. Robinson; Third Row: A. Jayasuria, G. E. Young, D. Curtis, R. A. Perry,
E. H. Hughes, H. G. Lavers, A. Seamer, A. W. Preston, W. J. Whitchurch, A. S. Stewart, B. L. Poole, k.
Macalpine; Fourth Row: R. L. Church, P. J. Christesen, R. Courtice, W. Simon, E. Muller, C. G. Elworthy, V.
R. Pascoe, G R. Atherton, V. Wagner, C. D. Alcorn, N. J. Bagnall, J. Wight; Fifth Row; D. J. W. Smith B. Sc.,
V. W. Wilson, B.A., G. James, B.A., T. J. N. Foley, B.A., R. Jay, B.A., Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D. (Master),
A. E. Risson (President), V. E. Schmidt (Secretary), R. Howe (Treasurer), W. N. Wensley (Committee) J. H.
M. Frewen (Committee). Front Row: G. L. Handel, B. S. Richmond, L. J. Rhodes, R. Hunter, G. Corones.
most brought the L.Th. would now yield
also adult matriculation, leaving the third
year free for first year in Arts. But this
required a man to be able to claim adult
matriculation privileges. Accordingly, the
Master sought to obtain alteration of regu-
lations of the University to meet any one
doing L.Th.
In the meantime Mr. G. James was fol-
lowing with excellent success the older
scheme. Thus 1931 brought two more ma-
triculations, those of James and Vickery.
It must have been gratifying to the Master
who had long championed the new line of
studies. At the same time working hours
seemed to grow longer and the application
of the students closer. The course outlined
above served also to stimulate work
generally. In fact, it seemed as though the
theologs. were possessed of a mania for
work. Even those who had little hope of
matriculating would see how much they
could do.
From 1928 to 1931 the relations between
the Theological and University elements
were increasingly good. Unity under the
one name “King’s” was emphasised.
Theologs. occupied offices in the Students’
Club —George Nash treasurer, and later L.
Vickery; while L. Kentish was President.
Taking their place in sports the theo-
logs. figured in the awards of blues. It
helped in maintaining unity to have at
least one theolog. attending the Univer-
sity. Mr. G. Nash was our representative
from 1927 to 1929, with P. Lanham
accompanying him in 1927, when the latter
completed Arts with honours. In 1930 the
institution became still, more closely re-
lated to the University through the new
Curriculum. Probably now, there will, al-
ways be some theolog. attending the Uni-
versity.
In 1931 great benefit came to the stu-
dents and the College through “The Rev.
Charles Stead Scholarship” and the “Dr.
G. E. Rowe Memorial Bursary.” An out-
standing advantage came with the policy
of giving a man a fourth year as the Stead’s;
Scholar—L. N. Kentish being the first.


LARGEST THEOLOGICAL GROUP—1931—Back Row: E. A. Wells, W. J. Tomlinson, D. F. Boorman, B. J.
Dale, Middle Row: L. T. Vickery, C. G. Robinson, S. T. Vickery, H. T. Unwin, R. L. Hogg, O. J. Brandon;
Sitting: T. H. Cherry, G. James, The Master (Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D.), L. N. Kentish, C. G. Browne.
In 1929 a new departure was made
which since has become quite an estab-
lished custom. T. H. Cherry, V. Read and
L. N. Kentish conducted evangelistic ser-
vices at Kalbar. It resulted in great bless-
ing for both preachers and people. Next
year four similar bands went out. Such
work not only rounds off training, but pro-
vides inspiration for that work of the King-
dom which is the end of all College studies.
A weekly fellowship meeting was held
in the Master’s residence. Some of those
simple meetings will live long in the
memories of those who have gone out as
witnesses to Christ.
The Period 1932-1938.
(Contributed by A.L.R.)
Elisha came from the plough, Amos
from the herd, Jeremiah and Ezekiel from
the priesthood, Matthew from the tax-
office, the sons of Zebedee from the fish-
ing boats, and Zephaniah from the palace.
The truth, that God’s servants are variously
chosen, still holds. Students for the
Ministry within the last six years have ap-
proached the door to higher learning along
diverse paths, but in answer to a common
call. Naturally, the process of adjustment
is sometimes painful. The individual who
innocently clings to his black tie and “spit-
thru” collar is not applauded by older mem-
bers. Certain conventionalities are coldly
received, and in time are given quiet and
unceremonial burial. The youthful enthu-
siast, ruled by a single passion, may at
first regard his more calculating comrades
with suspicion. But later, understanding
grows, and each man striving to develop
the gift that is in him is united with his
fellows in the pursuit of one common end.
Community life of College means exact-
ing standards. The undergraduate does
not withhold criticism, and neither the per-
son nor the opinion of the Theological stu-
dent is sacrosanct. The latter must show
reason for his faith and conduct, and can-
not long entertain any pious illusions. He
learns that the “best apologetic for Chris-
tianity is the life of a Christian man.”
Any virtue he possesses on leaving College
certainly is not “a fugitive and cloistered
virtue, unexercised and unbreathed.”
Santayana said, “To court the truth is
a very distinguished passion.” Students
of recent years have been diligent here.
Despite the warnings against the higher
criticism students have, for the most part,
entered upon their Theological studies
with open minds. Some have been severely
handicapped, and many courageous battles
have been fought within study walls. Did
not Thomas Hill Green say, “the long years
of patient waiting and silent labour


these are the tests of that pertinacity of
man, which is but a step below heroism”?
There has been a marked devotion to
duty, and all have laboured to possess a
well-informed and an understanding mind.
An increased proportion have undertaken
the University course. Apart from results,
not the least of the gains have been the
formation of studious and disciplined
habits of life and the development of a
trained mind. Wordsworth’s description—
“ Sheltered, but not to social, duties lost,
Secluded, but not buried,”
is a fitting description of the Theological
student while in his training. If anyone
still persists in speaking of Theological
“cemeteries,” a visit to such an institution
would instantly dispel any such notions.
The apostolic brethren are there very
much alive. Perhaps the most vivid
memories of College days will always be of
humorous incidents and high-spirited
moments —sporting events, and the many
and varied activities. No student will ever
forget that the “Preaching Class” is the
■only surviving institution in which a hu-
man victim is sacrificed upon the altar!
Even his critic must heed the warning—
“ Launch not beyond your depth, but be dis-
creet.” Sermons may often be purchased
at very low cost after Preaching Class !
The Theological Branch of the S.C.M.
has provided opportunity for valuable con-
tact and discussion with ministerial stu-
dents of other churches. Meetings in the
open air and Evangelistic Missions during
vacations are prominent in this last period.
Means for the development of Christian
character have not been neglected. The
influence of the Oxford Group Movement
has been considerable.
For eight years Rev. W. Bell, M.A., has
lectured with marked success on Hebrew
and New Testament literature. Combining
accurate scholarship with attractive exposi-
tion and a gracious personality, he has
proved an invaluable asset to the tutorial
staff.
The company of labourers sent forth in-
creases each year. Since 1932 the Inland
Mission has claimed two, two have entered
the Overseas Mission —one at Fiji, the
other with the aborigines of an island off
Darwin—while others are scattered
throughout the- State. Whatever their
gifts—gifts of mind and health, of sym-
pathy and kindliness, of personal attach-
ment, of utterance to attract, of logic to
convince and eloquence to sway—they are
all consecrated to the work for which they
have been divinely commissioned and em-
powered.
Chapter VI.—RECORDS.
represent more than mere
names or figures. They represent
work of brain and hand, determina-
tion, skill, keen competition, arduous and
patient study, patriotism, and a steady pur-
suit of cherished ideals apd ambitions in
the face, frequently, of forbidding circum-
stances. In 25 years there must have been
both happy successes, and, it may be, a few
disappointments ; but King’s achievements
pay a tribute to the vigorous fibre and
dauntless character of its men. Records
.are arranged thus :
(a) University Degrees and Awards.
(b) Theological Summary.
(c) Administrative and Academic
Staffs.
(d) Sporting (including Cricket, Foot-
ball, Rowing, General Athletics,
Swimming, Tennis, Cup Wins.
(e) Miscellaneous.
*(f) Presidents K.C.S.C.
Allen, C. H.
Bandidt, H. N. C.
Bath, W. S.
Bradford, A.
Brown, S. G.
Dinning, H. W.
Douglas, W. M.
Foggon, C. A.
Foley, T. J. N.
Foote, S. C.
Francis, E.
Gee, E. C. C.
Gredden, D. N.
Greet, V. E.
Gutekunst, E. F.
Hardy, J. S.
Heaton, J. H.
Heiner, H. H.
Holdaway, E. W.
Hooper, C. S.
Hunt, J. A.
Hyde, W. A. L.
Jacobs, L. A.
James. G.
Jay, W. R. C.
Jenks, G. H.
Jones, A. H,
(a) University Degrees and Awards.
Bachelor of Arts:
Jones, C. H.
Jones, I. F.
Kentish, L. N.
Lanham, P. J.
Lavers, H. G.
Maxwell, D. S.
Milfull, T.
Morrison, L.
Mursell, J. L.
Nash, G.
O’Brien, 0. W.
Percy, R. A.
Purser. M. M.
Radford, J. W.
Rankin, W. G.
Richardson, J. F.
Robinson, J. A.
Russell, S. L.
Simpson, T.
Thatcher, T.
Thomas, F. S.
Thomsett, H. K.
Vickery, L. T.
Webber, V. A.
Wyeth, E. R.
Wilson, V. W.


A Good Suit
Gives Longer Service
Just
that little
extra
effort
and attention to
the finer details —
Mine is a PERSONAL tailoring service
. . large enough to carry its own modest
workroom staffed by skilled tradespeople,
yet small enough to enable me to per-
sonally measure, cut, ht and supervise
the making of every suit. These arc the
ideal conditions for QUALITY tailoring
and that is why a Borrows Suit is always
“a cut above the average". Seethe
new materials 1
BUSINESS SUITS
To Measure from
£5/ 15/-
Others at 6,7, 8 up to 13 gns.
If you cannot call, write or phone (or a
range of suiting patterns
Phone B 6053
E. BORROWS
For High-Class Tailoring
CANBERRA BUILDINGS, ANN STREET
BRISBANE
W 3
V I
T
H.W. KILGOUR, 1.0. q
(Optometrists: H. W. KILGOUR and D. J. WATT)
Optometrist and
Spectacle Maker
In modern suite
of rooms
Ist Floor
Old Town Hall Chambers
Queen St., Brisbane
Phone B 9646
Private M 4225
Baby HERMES PORTABLE
MODERN to the MINUTE Pnice £l2
12 months Guarantee and very Easy Terms.
Old Models Traded.
HERMES TYPEWRITERS. Made in Switzerland
Queensland Distributors:
E. S. SPENCER & CO.
371-373 QUEEN ST. Phones B 8767
BRISBANE B 9939


Allen, C. H.
Brown, S. G.
Douglas, W. M,
Gee, E. C. C.
Holdaway, E. W.
Berg, H. R.
Blank, M. W.
Blumberg, B.
Brown, S. G.
Clappison, R. J. S.
Courtice, F. C.
Craigie, N. R. M.
Few, F. G.
Gee, E. G.
Haenke, W. L.
Hansen, C. T.
Hargreaves, G. W.
Henderson, W. G.
Huelin, F. E.
Irvine, F. A.
Jacobs, L. A.
Johnson, H. W.
Lawrie, J. S.
Craigie, N. R. M.
Few, P. G.
Christian, C. S.
Craigie, N. R. M.
Hargreaves, G. W.
Holdaway, F. G.
Henderson, W. G.
Irvine, P. A.
Jacobs, L. A.
McDougall, W. A.
Courtice, P. C.
White, M.
Baldwin, D. E.
Berg, A. G.
Brown, P. H.
Clappison, A. F.
Bobbie, L. G.
Dunstan, F. W.
Ellis, C.
Frewen, J. H. M.
Gaydon, F. A.
Harding, G. W.
Hughes, E. H.
Jones, C. A.
Jorss, C. A.
Brown, P. H.
Dobbie, L. G.
McCulloch, A.
Jay, W. R. C.
Master of Arts:
Diploma in Education:
Master of Education:
Holdaway, E. W.
Bachelor of Science:
Bachelor of Applied Science:
Master of Science:
Doctor of Philosophy (Science):
Bachelor of Engineering:
Master of Engineering:
Bachelor of Commerce:
James, G.
Jones, I. F.
Lanham, P. J.
Thomson, A. K,
Wyeth, E. R,
Lulham, C. R.
McCulloch, H.
McDougall, W. A.
Mills, R. L.
Morwood, R. B.
Oertel, A. C.
Pauli, I. J.
Pegg, H. T.
Percy, R. A.
Powell, L. R. B.
Reid, J. B.
Simmonds, J. H.
Smith, D. J. W.
Watkins, S. B.
White, M.
White, C.
Winks, W. R.
Haenke, W. L.
Morwood, R. B,
Mulholland, J.
Oertel, A. C.
Pauli, I. J.
Simmonds, J. H.
Watkins, S. B.
White, M.
Whitehouse, F. W.
Whitehouse, F. W.
Lowe, H. A.
McCulloch, A.
McCulloch, H.
Miller, F. W.
Morwood, J. E.
Mulholland, J.
Noble, G. W.
Risson, R. J. H.
Thomas, P. H.
Wagner, E. G.
Young, G. E.
Wilmoth, G. R.
McCulloch, H.
Morwood, J. E.
McCorquodale, D.
(B.Sc.)
Foote, G. M.
Outridge, M. E.
t Carseldine, M. W.
♦ Foote, L. H.
t Hooper, K. H.
* Johnson, H. W.
Pro-copis, G. S.
Allen, C. H. (2nd)
Berg, A. G. (2nd)
Blumberg, B. (2nd)
Brown, S. G. (2nd)
Christian, C. S. (2nd)
Courtice, F. C. (Ist)
Craigie, N. R. M. (Ist)
Dobbie, L. G. (Ist)
Douglas, W. M. (2nd)
Dunstan, F. W. (2nd)
Few, F. G. (3rd)
Poggon, C. A. (2nd)
Foley, T. J. N. (2nd)
Gee, E. C. C. (2nd)
Hardy, J. S. (3rd)
Hargreaves, G. W.
(2nd)
Henderson, W. G.
(2nd)
Holdaway, F. G. (2nd)
Hyde, W. A. L. (2nd)
Irvine, F. A. (Ist)
Jacobs, L. A. (2nd)
James, G. (Ist)
Jay, W. R. C. (2nd)
Kentish, L. N. (2nd)
Jones, I. F. (2nd)
Bray, F. J.
Clements, J. E.
Cox, S. E.
Gaydon, N. S.
Gegg, B. A.
Gielis, D.
Berg, A. G. (Passage
to Europe)
Christesen, C. B.
(Morrow)
Hargreaves, G. W.
(Gold Medal)
Irvine, F. A. (Gold
Medal)
Jones, I. F.
(Ford Medal)
Bachelor of Agricultural Science:
Christian, C. S.
Bachelor of Dental Science:
Percy, J. G.
Bachelor of Laws:
Morrison, L.
Bachelor of Medicine:
* Lewis, D. H.
* Roberts, H. S.
t Williams, M. A.
t Walters, L. D.
* Master of Surgery
(Ch.M.)
t Bachelor of Surgery
Honours:
Lanham, P. J. (2nd)
McCulloch, A. (Ist)
McCulloch, H. (Ist)
Morrison, L. (3rd)
Morwood, J. E. (Ist)
Morwood, R. B. (2nd)
Mursell, J. L. (Ist)
Mulholland, J. (Ist)
Oertel, A. C. (Ist)
Pauli, I. J. (2nd)
Powell, L. R. B. (3rd)
Purser, M. M. (3rd)
Roberts, H. E. (2nd)
Richardson, J. F. (Ist)
Russell, S. L. (2nd)
Thatcher, T. (Ist)
Thomson, A. K. (Ist)
Wagner, E. G. (2nd)
Watkins, S. B. (Ist)
White, C. (Ist)
White, M. (2nd)
Whitehouse, F. W.
(Ist)
Simmonds, J. H. (Ist)
Vickery, L. T. (3rd)
Walters, L. D. (Ist)
Diploma in Pharmacy:
Grant, A. G.
Hawton, W. H.
Hague, R. T.
Herries, C. A.
Hunter, J. S.
Kingston, H. M.
Prizes:
Morwood, J. E.
(Gold Medal)
Mursell, J. L.
(Archibald)
Thatcher, T.
(Gold Medal)
Thatcher, T.
(Archibald)
Thomson, A. K.
(McDermott)


Dr. F. C. COURTICE
Scholarships:
Baldwin, D. E.
(Mcllwraith)
Berg, A. G.
(Engineering)
Brodribb, R. S.
(Mcllwraith)
Courtice, F. C.
(Rhodes)
Courtice, F. C. (Raff)
Courtice, R. (Raff)
Dobbie, L. G.
(Mcllwraith)
Dunstan. F. W.
(Mcllwraith)
Frewen, J. H. M.
(Mcllwraith)
Hansen, C. T.
(Freemasons)
Irvine, F. A.
(Original Research)
Hansen, C. T.
(McNaughton)
McCulloch, A.
(Mcllwraith)
McCulloch, H.
(Mcllwraith)
AWARDS:
The Hon. Angus Gibson Bursary and the
Mrs. Rebecca Balser Bursary have been operat-
ing since the founding of the College, and from
year to year they have been awarded to Univer-
sity students at King’s College needing financial
assistance, and on the recommendation of the
Master.
In 1933 the Dr. Robert Stewart Bursary and
in 1935 the Dr. T. P. Lucas Bursary were made
available, and since these years they also have
likewise been placed with University students.
Morwood, J. E.
(Walter and Eliza
Hall)
Morwood, J. E.
(Mcllwraith)
Mulholland, J.
(Mcllwraith)
Mulholland, J.
(Walter and Eliza
Hall)
Mursell, J. L.
(Travelling)
Noble G. W.
(Mcllwraith)
Preston, G. A.
(Mcllwraith)
Richardson, J. F.
(McNaughton)
Watkins, S. B.
(Original Research)
Wagner, E. G.
(Mcllwraith)
White, M.
(Original Research)
White, M. (1851
Exhibition)
Whitehouse, F. W.
(Travelling)
Dr. M. WHITE
The King’s Old Collegians’ Bursary was first
awarded in 1935. This is given not only out of
regard to financial need but also to all-round
service to the College. The awards to date are:
1935 H. K. Thomsett (University)
1936 J. N. Bagnall (Theological)
1937 R. Courtice (University)
(h) Theological.
Ninety theological students have passed
through King’s College, and the vast ma-
jority are to-day, as ordained ministers,
serving the Church in the various circuits
throughout the State, as well, as in more
distant fields.
Several Old Collegians already have-
obtained the highest official honour the
Church confers, the following having been:
President of the Conference of the Method-
ist Church in Queensland :
Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A., 1927.
Rev. J. H. Heaton, 8.A., 1928.
Those who have served overseas are:—
Rev. T. N. Deller (Fiji).
Rev. W. T. Phillips (Papua).
Rev. J. C. Rundle, L.Th. (Papua).
Rev. L. N. Kentish, 8.A., B.D. (Northern
Territory).
Rev. D. F. Boorman. L.Th. (Fiji).
Rev. T. C. Toft, L.Th. (Northern Terri-
tory) .
These have served in the Inland:—■
Rev. T. G. Lithgow, L.Th.
Rev. S. T. Vickery, L.Th.
Rev. E. A. Wells.
Appointed Tutor; —
Rev. G. James, M.A., L.Th.
Dr. F. W. WHITEHOUSE


Many have secured academic degrees and
diplomas:—
Licentiate of Theology:
Revs. S. Y. Potter, J. Murray, R. Huth, J.
Tainton, A. T. Walker, E. E. Potter, G.
W. Brown, J. C. Rundle, J. Tulip, N. H.
Grimmett, T. H. Blackburn, H. R. Heaton,
S. J. R. Murr, T. G. Lithgow, A. C. Haw-
ley, R. H. Shelton, F. J. Leckenby, V.
Mead, L. N. Kentish, T. H. Cherry, C. G.
Browne, J. L. C. Rowley, G. James, 0. J.
Brandon, S. T. Vickery, H. T. Unwin, R.
L. Hogg, L. T. Vickery, J. White, D. F.
Boorman, W. J. Tomlinson, A. C. Mead-
more, A. G. Michael, H. White, R. E
Bramley, T. C. Toft, J. N. Bagnall, D. E.
Williams, A. W. Preston.
Bachelor of Divinity:
L. N. Kentish.
Passed subjects for 8.D.:
P. J. Lanham, G. James.
Bachelor of Arts:
W. S. Bath, J. H. Heaton, F. S. Thomas,
P. J. Lanham, G. Nash, L. N. Kentish, G.
James, L. T. Vickery.
Passed subjects for 8.A.:
J. Tainton, J. Tulip, D. F. Boorman, A. C.
Meadmore, A. L. Robinson, C. D. Alcorn.
Passed honours in 8.A.:
P. J. Lanham, L. N. Kentish, G. James
(firsts).
Master of Arts:
P. J. Lanham, G. James.
The following have gained awards:—
Stead Scholarship;
L. N. Kentish, G. James, R. L. Hogg
(minor), D. F. Boorman, T. C. Toft, J. N
Bagnall, A. L. Robinson, A. W. Preston.
Dr. G. E. Rowe Bursary :
V T A ™ery, S. T. Vickery, H. T. Unwin,
A. G. Michael, A. C. Meadmore, R. E.
Bramley, D. E. Williams, J. N. Bagnall,
A. C. Seamer.
Stanley and W. H. Green (Junior) Bursary:
A. W. Preston, R. Howe.
Hon. P. T. Brentnall Bursary:
I. W. Alcorn.
Rev. W. H. Harrison Prize:
J. N. Bagnall, D. E. Williams, A. L.
Robinson, ,C. D. Alcorn, I. W. Alcorn A.
J. S. Stewart. ’
S. and L. Cooper Prize:
C. D. Alcorn, R. T. Sargeant.
Dr. Hy. Youngman Prize:
C. D. Alcorn.
<c) Administrative and Academic Staffs.
i. MASTERS—
-1912-1916: Rev. M. Scott Fletcher, M.A.
B.Litt. ’
1916-1924; Rev. L. E. Bennett, M.A., B.D.
1924 : Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A., B.D.
ii. FELLOWS-
-1913 : Hon. E.W.H. Fowles, M.A., LL.B.,
D.Litt.*
Dr. G. A. C. Douglas, M.8.,Ch.8.,
Mr. J. J. Kingsbury, M.A. M.S.*
1914 ; Dr. A. J. Gibson, PhD*
1927 : Mr. S. Castlehow, M.A.*
1936 : Dr. E, H. Derrick, M.D., B.S.*
Fellows)
Dr. T. P. Fry contributes the following
Note on Fellows :
The King’s College Council has recently ap-
proved regulations designed to set up a Board
of Fellows, to be presided over by Master as
Chairman, and to advise him concerning acade-
mical activities of the College, and in particular
concerning (I) the establishment and awarding
of scholarships and prizes; (II) tutorials, lec-
tures and the appointment of tutors; (HI) the
College library; and (IV) the duties and rights
of Fellows. In the past a very limited number
of Fellows have been appointed, but these ap-
pointments have been regarded principally as a
means of doing honour to distinguished scholars
who have for some reason deserved well of
King’s College. It has not been customary for
them to meet regularly, nor have they been re-
quired to perform any particular functions.
In future, the Council will appoint Fellows
(not more than twelve in all) for a period of
five years, and the persons so appointed will be
eligible for re-appointment for further periods
of five years each. In making its appointments
of new Fellows, the Council; is to have regard to
the suitability of the various nominees on the
grounds of (I) outstanding academical distinc-
tion; (II) previous association with the College;
and (III) membership of or adherence to the
Methodist Church, This development is an aus-
picious event in the Jubilee Year of King’s
College.
iii. SECRETARY—
-1913-1915: Rev. R. Stewart, D.D., and Rev.
F. Duesbury (jointly).
1915-1921: Rev. R. Stewart, D.D.
1921-1930: Rev. W. Brown.
1930-1934: Rev. W. H. Harrison.
1935-1937: Rev. R. P. Pope.
1938 : Rev. T. Bibby.
iv. BURSAR—
-1913-1917: Mr. J. E. Greenham.
1918-1934: Mr. W. Webb.
1935 : Dr. E. W. H. Fowles.
v. TREASURERS—
-1913-1921: Hon. Angus Gibson and Dr. R.
Stewart.
1922 : Dr. R. Stewart and Hon. F. T.
Brentnall.
1923-1924: Hon. F. T. Brentnall and Rev.
W. Brown.
1925-1930: Rev. W. Brown and Mr. W. H.
Green.
1930 ; Mr. W. H. Green and Rev. W. H.
Harrison.
vi. AUDITORS—
-1913, 1914, 1915, 1917 :
Mr. J. E. Greenham.
1916 : Mr. W. E. Sommer, A.F.I.A.
1918-1922: Mr. H. Hiley, A.F.I.A.
1922 : Mr. J. A. Packer,
vii. CHAIRMAN OF HOUSE COMMITTEE—
-1913-1924: Hon. F. T. Brentnall.
1925 : Mr. W. H. Green.


Telephone B 7115
Residence F 8196
GEO. K. FRASER
Manufacturers’ Agent
and Direct Tea Importer
2nd Floor, Courier Building, Queen St.
Brisbane
STILL THE LEADING HOUSE.
Surgical Supplies Limited
428 Queen St., opp. Customs House Brisbane
Specialising in
Surgical Instruments, Hospital
Supplies, Trusses, Elastic Hosiery.
We would appreciate a call.
EVERYTHING GOOD IN SPORTING GOODS—
No matter which sport you follow you are offered the widest selection of the
best material at the most reasonable prices at the Brisbane Sports Depot.
LARGE STOCKS OF MATERIAL for
Cricket Tennis Golf Bowls Croquet Vigoro
Football Hockey Badminton Table Tennis Basket Ball Etc.
Also Fishing Tackle, Travelling Goods, Torches, Billiard Accessories, and Gymnasium Goods.
Repairs to all Sporting Goods promptly and efficiently attended to at reasonable prices.
Special Discounts offered to Schools and Clubs. Price Lists of all Sporting Goods Free on application
BRISBANE SPORTS DEPOT
340-342 Queen St, Brisbane
J. E. MORWOOD
J. MULHOLLAND
A. G. BERG


viii. VICE-MASTER—
-1931-1932: Mr. C. Ellis, B.E.
1933-1935: Mr. H. A. Lowe, B.E.
1936 : Mr. J. S. Hardy, B.A.
1936-1938: Mr. W. R. C. Jay, 8.A., B.Com.
1938 : Mr. T. J. N. Foley, B.A.
ix. COUNCIL—
See article on “Foundations and
Functions” in Chapter I.
x. SECRETARY THEOLOGICAL COMMITTEE—
-1913-1920: Rev. G. E. Rowe, D.D.
1921-1923: Rev. W. S. Bath, B.A.
1924-1925: Rev. B. Frederick.
1926-1935: Rev. D. S. Brumwell, 0.8. E.
1936 : Rev. J. A. Pratt,
xi. TUTORS IN UNIVERSITY STUDIES—
Mr. H. W. Dinning, 8.A., Mr. L. H. Wat-
kins, 8.A., Mr. C. Schindler, M.A., Mr. J. A.
Robinson, 8.A., Mr. R. A. Percy, B.Sc., Mr.
E. C. Holdaway, 8.A., Dr. G. Wilson, Mr.
C. A. Foggon, 8.A., Mr. P. H. Brown, M.E.,
Mr. G. Hargreaves, M.Sc., Mr. C. Thompson,
8.A., Mr. P. Arundell, M.A., Mr. F. Ben-
nett, B.Sc., Mr. H. McCulloch, B.Sc., Mr.
H. V. Byth, 8.A., Mr. S. B. Watkins,M.Sc.,
Mr. E. W. Jones, 8.A., Mr. S. G. Brown,
M.A.,8.5c., Miss Freda Bage,M.Sc. (Women’s
College), Mr. P. Irvine, B.Sc., Mr. V. Greet,
8.A., Mr. R, L. Mills, B.Sc., Mr. W. M.
Douglas, M.A., Mr. R. B. Morwood, M.Sc.,
Mr. E. C. Q. Gee, M.A., Rev. P. J. Lanham,
M.A., Mr. J. Mulholland, M.E., Mr. A. G.
Berg, 8.E., Dr. M. White, Mr. A. K. Thom-
son, M.A., Mr. H. Cannon, M.A., Mr. P. G.
Few, B.Sc., B.App.Sc., Mr. W. G. Smith,
8.A., Mr. L. G. Bobbie, M.E., Mr. J. G. B.
Gibson, B.Sc., Mr. D. N. Gredden, 8.A., Mr.
E. H. Flint, 8.A., Mr. H. R. Berg, B.Sc.,
Mr. S. L. Russell, 8.A., Mr. A. C. Oertel,
M.Sc., Mr. J. C. Mahoney, 8.A., Mr. C. H.
Allen, M.A., Mr. R. J. S. Clappison, B.Sc.,
Mr. C. T. Hansen, B.Sc., Mr. W. R. C. Jay,
8.A., 8.C0m., Mr. J. S. Hardy, 8.A., Mr; T;
J. N. Foley, 8.A., Mr. J. G. Percy, B.D.Sc.,
Mr. A. E. Mee, Mr. M. M. Purser, 8.A., Dr.
G. Croll, Mr. J. A. Thomson, B.Sc., Mr. B.
R. Butler, 8.A., Mr. V. W. Wilson, 8.A.,
Rev. G. James, M.A., Mr. D. J. W. Smith,
B.Sc., Mr. R. Courtice, Mr. W. J. Simmonds,
Mr. P. B. McGovern, M.A., B.Sc.
xii. LECTURERS IN THEOLOGICAL
SUBJECTS—
Rev. Dr. Hy. Youngman, Rev. D. Hill, 8.A.,
Rev. W. N. Gunson, 8.A., Rev. A. W. Wheat-
ley, 8.A., W. G. Goddard, M.A., Rev. H. M,
Wheller, Rev. W. S. Bath, 8.A., Rev. I.
Bennett, Rev. G. James, M.A., Rev. J. J.
Gee.
In United Classes :
Rev. F. North, M.A. (Congregational)
Rev. M. Henderson, M.A. (Presbyterian)
Rev.A.MacKillop,B.A.,B.D. (Presbyterian)
Rev. R. Glaister, D.D. (Presbyterian)
Rev.E.N.Merrington,D.D. (Presbyterian)
Rev. P. Watson, M.A. (Congregational)
Rev. W. Bell, M.A. (Baptist)
Rev. T. C. Warriner, M.A.,8.D. (Baptist)
xiii. TUTOR IN ELOCUTION—
Mr. H. Borradale.
KING’S COLLEGE THEOLOGICAL GROUP—JUBILEE YEAR, 1938—Standing: A, S. J. Stewart, R. W. Fulcher, G. D.
Smith, D. H. Williamson; Sitting: I. W. Alcorn, A. W. Pres ton. The Master, R. Howe, R. T. Sargeant.


BETWEEN FATHER and SON
ESTIMATE DIALOGUES >«-1
Well, Son, I’m proud of your school
pass. You haven’t let me down. What
is next —still bent on a professional
career ?
Yes, Dad', you knozv I’ve ahvays
wanted to be a doctor.
You realise that means the University?
/ might manage a scholarship. That
zvould lighten the load; zvouldn’t it?
I don’t want to be a burden, Dad.
It’s no burden, Son, scholarship or
no scholarship. You see, when you
were a little chap, I was thinking ahead
to this very time, and I prepncd
Hozv ?
I took out a Prudential Policy, and
now I can see you through without
difficulty. That’s one of the many
* eh S
benefits obtainable from Prudential
Policies,
ssA IN'twlehlial Miminv Possible
Taken inti mt the father's life in Itll'lplyoiiy of his earning capacity,
a Prudential policy will place hfe children out of the reach of
personal tragedy or rnlsadr entore. By putting a few shillings
a week aside, you may lake out a policy which will provide
ro« at the right time with funds to complete your children’s
higher education and thus increase their earning capacity.
Or it may* provide money to start your son in business, or
comfortably endow' your daughter. Your plans are absolutely
secure, whatever may befall you, because they are guaranteed
by the huge assets of the Prudential, totalling over £330,000,000
Tie PRUDENTIAL
COUPON
ASSURANCE CO. LTD.
(INCORPORATED IN ENGLAND)
Queensland Branch:
240 QUEEN ST. (Corner Edward St.) BRISBANE, 8.6.
Manager for Queensland: R. C. CHAPPLE, F.A.1.1.
Metropolitan Representative; F. S. THOMAS, B.A.
To .
THE PRUDENTIAL ASSURANCE
CO. LTD.
Please send particulars of your
Endowment Assurance Policy to
mature in years.
My age next birthday is
NAME
ADDRESS
GET A PRUDENTIAL GRIP ON THE FUTURE
LIFE FIRE ACCIDENT MARINE INSURANCE TRANSACTED


(d) Great War Records-
(Contributed by Col. J.A.R.)
Perhaps the most impressive day in
the history of King’s College was August
4th, 1914, the day that plunged our
Empire into what is now termed “ The
Great War.” Viewing the events of
this day, after a lapse of twenty-four
years, one finds it rather difficult to
understand the nature of the reaction of
Kingsmen to the declaration of war. Ac-
tually, the announcement of war had the
peculiar effect of urging every student to
discontinue the activity in which he hap-
pened to be engaged at the moment, and
to return to the College by the most direct
route. Thus, within an incredibly short
space of time, the whole of the students
had assembled at the College, and had
formed themselves into groups of varying
size, discussing the situation as it affected
Australia in general and the University
students in particular. Students wandered
from group to group, but always the same
questions were to the fore—How long
would the war last ? Would Australia send
an expeditionary force ? Would all Aus-
tralians be required for Home Defence ?
Should students enlist prior to gaining
their degrees? Should a career be sacri-
ficed if the necessary numbers were offer-
ing from other quarters? Would the Rifle
Clubs, including the University Rifle Club,
be compulsorily called up for service? And
dinner that evening—ordinarily regarded
as the ceremonial parade of the College
day—was disrobed of its usual dignity and
formality, and assumed the irregular
character of “Service when and how re-
quired.”
But when the first shock wore off (and,
indeed, it did very rapidly) the inevitable
College wag seized every opportunity of
baiting the more timid of his colleagues.
A bogus telephone call instructing mem-
bers of the Rifle Club to parade at the Bar-
racks the following morning and to be pre-
pared to embark for overseas within
twenty-four hours caused one student to
book his seat by rail to Sydney. “Can you
picture So-and-So being chased by a crowd
of bayonets?” sent shudders down Mr. So-
and So’s spine.
After the lapse of a day or two, how-
ever, the men, with several exceptions,
adopted the attitude of “Wait and See.”
Three students enlisted in 1914, but the
majority “waited” until April, 1915, and
“saw” the results of the landing at Galli-
poli, with the result that the great exodus
of students took place after that event.
Fifteen in all enlisted in May, 1915, or
thereabouts, and the few remaining were
mostly under age or rejects because of
physical disability.
It is worthy of note that the then Mas-
ter, the Rev. M. Scott Fletcher, sad though
he was to see the College to which he was
so devotedly attached, dwindling from a
flourishing institution to an almost empty
building, maintained an attitude and out-
look worthy of the big citizen and the fine
patriot that he was. On no occasion was
there a suggestion of selfishness in any
word, thought or deed of his, but always
some friendly advice and a “bravo” for the
man about to join the colours. Mrs.
Fletcher, whose nature it was to take a per-
sonal interest in every student, showed
how genuine that interest was in many
ways. Suffice .it to mention that more
than one casual student found on his re-
turn that Mrs. Fletcher had preserved in
perfect order the content of his wardrobe,
which he had long since forgotten, but
which was nevertheless most acceptable.
We feel that we are not over-stepping
the bounds of humility when we claim that
King’s College and its supporters might
feel justifiably proud of the part Kingsmen
played in the Great War.
Although full details of the service of
the whole of the College students are not
available, the following particulars should
be of interest to readers.
TRIGGE, Rev. H. H.—The present Master of
King’s College, served *as Chaplain to
H.M.A S. “Sydney” in the North Sea during
1917, and was present at the surrender of
the German High Seas Fleet.
DINNING, H. W.—Enlisted in the Army Service
Corps in September, 1914, sailed with the
original convoy and saw service in. Gallipoli,
Egypt and France. He gained his commis-
sion as Lieutenant in 1916, was promoted
Temp-Captain in June, 1918, and returned to
Australia in May, 1920.
HUNTER, J. G.—A Theological student, was a
reservist from Scotland. He joined the 9th
Battalion as a private in. 1914, took part in
the landing at Gallipoli in April, 1915, was
promoted to Corporal, and was killed on
Gallipoli in June, 1915.
SMALL. F.—Enlisted in the 3rd Field Company
of Engineers in September, 1914, saw service
in Egypt and Gallipoli, and was commissioned
as a Lieutenant in October, 1915. He was


UNIVERSITY HONOR BOARD
WAR HONOR BOARD
invalided to Australia in March, 1916, and
discharged. Later he returned to England,
where he was engaged on important work
in the manufacture of aeroplanes.
FOOTE, L. F.—Enlisted in the 3rd Field Ambu-
lance of the Army Medical Corps early in
1915, and served in that unit in Gallipoli
and France. He was selected to attend an
Officers’ School at Cambridge, England, and
obtained his commission as Lieutenant in the
9th Battalion Infantry in August, 1917. He
was severely wounded in the chest in
October, 1917, and returned to Australia in
March, 1918.
FRANCIS, TREVOR.—Enlisted in the Light
Horse in August, 1915, but was transferred
to the 9th Battalion, and later, in Egypt,
to the 53rd Battalion. He gained his com-
mission in August, 1915, won the Military
Cross in March, 1916, was wounded in July,
1916, was promoted to Captain, November,
1916, and was killed in action at Bapaume
in March, 1917.
BALDWIN, ERlC.—Enlisted in the 4th Light
Horse Field Ambulance in April, 1915, was
severely burnt when on Gallipoli, was trans-
ferred to the 12th Field Co. of Engineers in
1916, and received his commission in May of
that year. Served until the Armistice, re-
turning in March, 1919.
CRIBB, ERIC. —Enlisted in the 4th Light Horse
Field Ambulance in April, 1915, was trans-
ferred to the 12th Field Co. of Engineers in
1916, was commissioned in March, 1916, and
promoted to Captain in November, 1918.
was wounded in October, 1916, and “men-
tioned in despatches” the following month.
Won the Military Cross in 1917. Returned
in April, 1919.
ROBINSON, J. A.—Enlisted in May, 1915, in 26th
Battalion, gained a commission as Lieuten-
ant, May, 1915. Served in Gallipoli, Egypt
and France. Promoted to Captain, Febru-
ary, 1916, Major February, 1917, Temp.-
Lieutenant-Colonel in command of the 26th
Battalion July, 1918. Awarded D.S.O. in
April, 1917. Three times “mentioned in
despatches” November, 1916, November,
1917, March, 1919. Severely wounded Octo-
ber, 1918. Returned May, 1919.
JONES, A. H.—Enlisted in April, 1915, in 26th
Battalion, promoted to Sergeant in May,
1915. Served in, Egypt and Gallipoli, and
invalided in March, 1916.
JONES, C. H.—Enlisted in May, 1915, in 26th
Battalion, transferred to the 7th Machine
Gun Co. in 1915. Served in Gallipoli, Egypt
and France. Re-transferred to 26th Bat-
talion in 1916, was promoted to C.Q.M.S., in
September, 1916, thence to Lieutenant in
December of the same year. Served until
the Armistice, returning in May, 1919.
DOUGLAS, W. M.—Enlisted in the 2nd Light
Horse Field Ambulance in May, 1915, and
saw service in Egypt and Palestine. He
gained the rank of Sergeant in November,
1918, and returned in March, 1919.
FRANCIS, ERlC.—Enlisted: in the Infantry in
July, 1915, and was commissioned in the 15th
Battalion in January, 1916. Was wounded in
August, 1916. Was transferred to No. 8
Squadron of the A.F.C. in June, 1917, where
he obtained his Pilot’s Certificate and acted
as an Instructor. Returned in May, 1919.
WHEATLEY, A. —A Theological student, enlisted
in the 3rd Field Ambulance in 1915. He was
selected to attend an Officers’ School at


This Tablet is erected
In Memory of
King’s College Men
Who gave their lives
in the Great War,
1914-1919.
JAMES GRAHAM HUNTER,
28th June, 1915,
Gallipoli.
TREVOR FRANCIS, M.C.,
14th March, 1917,
Bapaume, France.
ARTHUR WILFRED WHEATLEY,
25th April, 1918,
Meteren, France*
Memoria bene redditae
Vitae sempiterna.
Cambridge, England, in 1917, and obtained
his commission as a Lieutenant in the 9th
Battalion in August of that year. He was
killed in action at Meteren, France, in April,
1918.
MORSLEY, C. —A Theological student, enlisted in
the 3rd Field Ambulance in 1915. Saw ser-
vice in Gallipoli, Egypt and France, perform-
ing the duties of Staff Sergeant. He was
invalided to England in December, 1917, and
return in August, 1918.
GRIMES, A. B. —Enlisted in the 7th Field Ambu-
lance in September, 1915, and was trans-
ferred to the Ist Field Ambulance the fol-
lowing year. Acted as a stretcher-bearer
and later as a Motor Transport Driver until
the Armistice. Returned April, 1919.
PERCY, R. A.—Enlisted in the 7th Field Ambu-
lance in September, 1915, and, was trans-
ferred to the Ist Field Ambulance the fol-
lowing year. Acted as a stretcher-bearer
and later as a Motor Transport Driver until
the Armistice. Returned April, 1919.
BROWN, P. H. —Enlisted in the 3rd Pioneer Bat-
talion in September, 1915. He gained his
commission in. January, 1916, and was pro-
motel to Captain in October, 1918. He was
“mentioned in despatches” in April, 1918,
and won the Military Cross the same year.
He returned in August, 1919.
CRIBB, H. C.—Enlisted in the Field Artillery
early in 1916. Saw continuous service in
France until the Armistice. Returned
April, 1919.
FIELDING, F.—Enlisted in the 26th Battalion
in May, 1915, andi was promoted to the rank
of Sergeant in March, 1916. Was prominent
in patrol work on Gallipoli. Was badly
wounded at Armentiers in April, 1916, and
returned in October of that year.
AXELSEN, E. —A Theological student, enlisted
in the Army Medical Corps in 1916, and saw
service in Egypt and Palestine. He rose to
the rank of Sergeant before returning in
May, 1919.
CHANDLER, H. A. —A Theological student, en-
listed in the 41st Battalion early in 1916. He
served with that unit until the Armistice,
and returned in May, 19191.
BATH, W. S.—Was appointed Chaplain with the
rank of Captain in December, 1915. He was
attached to the sth Infantry Training Bat-
talion in England. He returned in March,
1918.
O’BRIEN, 0. W.—Made several attempts at early
enlistment before accepted in October, 1916.
He saw service in France as a Sapper in the
Australian Corps Signal Coy. He returned
in October, 1918.
-GEE, E. C. C.—Enlisted in December, 1917, and
became an Air Mechanic in the A.F.C. Re-
turned to Australia in November, 1919.
McCULLOCH, a.—Enlisted in February, 1918,
and became an Air Mechanic in the A.F.C.
Returned May, 1919.
WAGNER, E. G.—Enlisted in April, 1918, in the
Bth General Reinforcements. The Troopship
in which he sailed was recalled on the sign-
ing of the Armistice.
JONES, I. F. —Enlisted in May, 1918, and was
allotted to the 9th Battalion Reinforce-
ments. He returned in April, 1919.
BEAN, J.—A Theological student, enlisted early
in 1918, and served with the A.M.C. in
France until the Armistice. He returned in
June, 1919.
The Memorial Tablet reads thus ;
(e) Cricket, Football, Rowing, General
Athletics, Swimming, Tennis, Cup Wins.
The College in its first year, 1913,
established an excellent lead in sport.
They achieved premier position among
the affiliated Colleges by winning three
o u t of five matches, namely—Football,
Athletics and Shooting. In the follow-
ing year they maintained their premier
position in the University by winning four
out of six matches, held with the other
affiliated Colleges, namely—Football, Ath-
letics, Rifle-shooting and Rowing. In 1914
J. A. Robinson, of King’s, was Captain of
the University Cricket, and P. H. Brown
Captain of the University Rowing. During
the years of the Great War no inter-college
Athletic contests were held. Most of the
students were “playing the game” under
much harder conditions in distant fields.
In 1919 inter-collegiate sports were re-
sumed. King’s, with new men, came second
in the boat race, and won tennis and
cricket. Lieut. Eric Francis represented all
Australia in A.I.F. football at Sydney.


KING’S COLLEGE FOOTBALL —1913 — Back Row: W. Kidd (forword), C. A. Foggon (forward): Third Row: S. B. Watkins
(forward), L. H. Foote (three-quarter), F. W. Witton (three-quarter); Second Row: J. A. Robinson (five-eighth), R. E.
Bacon (forward), D. E. Baldwin (full-back), P. H. Brown (three-quarter); Front Row: A. B. Grimes (forward), E. C.
Cribb (three-quarter), F. T. Small (capt., forward). Rev. M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt. (Master King’s College), C. H.
Jones (forward), R. A. Percy (forward), F. J. M’Carthy (half).
In 1921 King’s won the premiership in
Inter-Collegiate sport, winning the cricket,
tennis, rowing (by 4| lengths), and the
athletic sports. King’s came second in
football.
In 1923 King’s and St. John’s divided the
honours of the Inter-Collegiate Sport—the
first draw on record. King’s won, tennis
and cricket and came second in rowing. St.
John’s won rowing and athletics, and came
second in football.
In 1926 King’s emerged premiers, win-
ning athletics, tennis, cricket and football.
As a result of this victory, the College was
awarded a handsome Silver Cup provided
and presented by the Old Collegians of the
various Colleges. The cup is an annual
trophy for the winning College.
In 1929 two King’s men rowed in the
Inter-University boat team at Melbourne.
In 1930 King’s again secured the Inter-
Collegiate Cup, by winning athletics and
tennis, and coming second in cricket and
football.
In 1931 the students, led by Mr. A. G.
Grant, Ph.C., raised £25 towards a College
practice boat which, with a subsidy from
the Council, completed the purchase.
From 1931, a lean year or two followed.
In tennis were King’s chief successes.
Both in 1935 and 1936 general athletics
again revived, and the Cup returned to
King’s.
The following lists indicate the year, the
sport, the result and the names of those
who won the College “ blue.” (* denotes
a tie.)
1913 — Cricket (2nd): L. H. Foote, R. A. Percy,
J. A. Robinson; Football (1st); E. C. Cribb, C. A.
Foggan, L. H. Foote, A. B. Grimes; Athletics
(1st): C. A. Foggan; Shooting (1st): D. E.
Baldwin, P. H. Brown, E. C. Cribb, L. H. Foote,
A. B. Grimes, A. H. Jones, C. H. Jones; Tennis
(2nd): L. H. Foote, A. H. Jones, F. J. McCarthy,
J. A. Robinson; Inter-College Contest (Ist).
1914 — Cricket (2nd); Football (1st): P. H.
Brown, C. A. Foggon, L. H. Foote, E. Francis,
S. Francis, A. B. Grimes, J. G. Hunter, R. A.
Percy, J. A. Robinson, F. T. Small; Rowing (1st):
D. E. Baldwin, P. H. Brown, E. C. Cribb, A. B.
Grimes, A. H. Jones; Athletics (1st): E. C.
Cribb, T. Francis, F. Witton; Shooting (1st);
Tennis (2nd): L. H. Foote, H. G. Ford, A. H.
Jones, J. A. Robinson; College Championship
(Ist), 40 points.


1920 Cricket (1st): W. G. Henderson, C. S.
Hooper, A. McCulloch, R. L. Mills; Football
(2nd): W. G. Henderson, C. S. Hooper, H. John-
son, A. McCulloch, H. McCulloch, R. L. Mills, J. E.
Morwood, L. Powell, R. J, R isson, H. S. Roberts:
Rowing (2nd): V. Greet, E. G. Wagner; Ath-
letics (2nd): V. Green, E. Gee, W. G. Henderson,
R. L. Mills, J. E. Morwood, R. J. Risson; Tennis
(1st): W. G. Henderson, C. S. Hooper, A.
McCulloch, J. Woolrych; College Championship
(2nd), 26% points.
1921 Cricket (1st): W. G. Henderson, C. S.
Hooper, A. McCulloch, H. McCulloch, R. L. Mills;
Football (2nd): C. S. Hooper, F. Irvine, A.
McCulloch, H. McCulloch, R. L. Mills, L. Powell,
R. J. Risson; Rowing (1st): V. Greet, R. L.
Mills, J. E. Morwood, R. J. Risson; Athletics
(1st): V. Greet, W. G. Henderson, A. McCulloch,
J. E. Morwood, R. J. Risson; Tennis (1st): W. G.
Henderson, C. S. Hooper, A. McCulloch, R. U
Mills; College Championship (Ist), 37 points.
1922 Cricket (1st): V. Greet, W. G. Hender-
son, F. Irvine, A. McCulloch, R. L. Milk, L.
Powell; Football (lost); F. Irvine, A. McCulloch,
R. L. Mills, L. Powell, I. Pauli, R. J. Risson ;
Athletics (lost): V. Greet, J. E. Morwood; Ten-
nis (1st); W. G. Henderson, C. S. Hooper, F.
Irvine, R. L.Mills; College Championship (2nd),
21 points.
1923 — Cricket (1st); A. McCulloch, R. L.
Mills, I. Pauli, W. G. Rankin, N. E. Raymond,
R. J. Risson; Football (lost): G. W. Harding,
A. McCulloch, R. L, Milk,, I. Pauli, W. G. Rankin,
R. J. Risson; Rowing (2nd): E. Butters, G. W.
Harding, B. W. Holdaway, R. L. Milk, R. J. Ris-
son; Tennis (1st): C. S. Hooper, P. J. Lanham,
A. McCulloch, R. L. Mills, W. G. Rankin, A. H.
Thomas; College Championship (Ist*), 21 points.
1924 No “Blues” awarded.
1925 Cricket (1st): H. Bandidt, A. Brad-
ford, C. Ellis, S. N. Gaydon, W. McDougall, F.
Thomas, M. White; Football (2nd): C. Ellis, F.
Few, S. N. Gaydon, W. McDougall, M. White,
F. J. Wilson; Rowing (lost): J. Mulholland ;
Athletics (2nd): C. Jorss, R. Morwood, H. Pegg;
Tennis (1st): H. Bandidt, H. Berg, C. Ellis, W.
McDougall ; College Championship (2nd), 24
points.
1926 Cricket (1st): H. Bandidt, C. Ellis,
J. A. Hurst, W. McDougall, F. Thomas, M. White;
Football (1st): A. Bradford, C. Ellis, J. A. Hunt,
W. McDougall, I. Pauli, M. White; Rowing (lost):
J. Mulholland; Athletics (1st): A. G. Grant, J. A.
Hunt, R. Morwood. M. White; Tennis (1st): H.
Bandidt, C. Ellis, F. Thomas, W. McDougall; Old
Collegians’ Cup (Ist), 32 points.
1927 Cricket (*lst): C. Christian, C. Ellis,
J. A. Hunt, W. McDougall, D. Maxwell, F. Thomas;
Football (*lst): C. Ellis, F. Few, J. A. Hunt,
C. Jorss, W. McDougall, R. J. Risson; Athletics
(lost); W. McDougall. R. J. Risson; Tennis (2nd):
H. Bandidt, C. Ellis, P. J. Lanham, W. McDougall;
Old Collegians’ Cup (3rd), 15% points.
1928 Cricket (2nd): C. Ellis, C. Christian,
J. Robertson; Athletics (2nd); A. G. Grant; Tennis
(1st): H. Bandidt, C. Ellis, P. J. Lanham; Old
Collegians’ Gup (3rd), 14 points.
1929—Cricket (*2nd): H. Bandidt, F. C.
Courtice, R. T. Hague, D. Maxwell; Football
(lost): F. C. Courtice, D. Gredden, J. Hardy, G.
Pro-Copis, P. Schatzel; Rowing (lost): C. Chris-
tian, R. J. Risson; Athletics (2nd): L. Kentish;
Tennis (2nd): H. Bandidt, R. Shelton; Old Col-
legians’ Cu,p (3rd), 11 points.
193i0—Cricket (2nd): H. Bandidt, K. Hooper,
D. Maxwell, H. Patterson ,S. Vickery; Football
(*2nd): S. C. Foote, D. Gredden, J. Hardy, G.
Pro-Copis, W, Watt; Rowing: (lost): J. Fielding;
Athletics (1st): D. Gredden, L. Kentish, A.
Wood; Tennis (1st): H. Bandidt, S. Cox, K.
Hooper, H. Patterson; Old Collegians’ Cup
(Ist), 19% points.
1931 Cricket (lost): L. Kentish, D. Max-
well; Football (lost); C. Ellis, S. C. Foote, L.
Kentish, F. Milton, W. Watt; Rowing (lost): W.
Watt; Athletics (2nd): A. Bandidt, L. Kentish,
F. Miller, A. Wood; Tennis (*lst): C. Ellis, L.
Kentish, S. Vickery; Old Collegians’ Cup (3rd),
7% points.
1932 Football (2nd): T. R. Edwards, S. C.
Foote, F. Miller; Rowing (2nd): A. Bandidt,
K„ Collins, J. Percy; Tennis (2nd): C. Ellis, S.
Vickery; Old Collegians’ Cup (2nd), 13 points.
1933 Cricket (2nd): C. Miller, H. Thomsett;
Football (lost): C. Miller, F. MiPer; Athletics
(2nd): C. Hansen, C. Lulham; Tennis (*lst): A.
Risson, H. Thomsett; Old Collegians’ Cup (2nd),
11% points.
The coveted Cup was won as follows (* indi-
cates a tie):—l9l3, 40 points; 1914; 1919; 1921,
37 points; 1923*, 21 points; 1926, 32 points;
1930, 19% points; 1935, 32 points; 1936, 30
points.
Sport wins in the respective years include
the following’ :
1913 Football, Athletics, Shooting; 1914 —
Football, Athletics, Shooting, Rowing; 1915-1918
(no contests); 1920—Cricket,* Tennis; 1921 —
Rowing, Athletics, Tennis, Cricket; 1922—Cricket
and Tennis; 1923—Cricket and Tennis; 1924—■
Cricket; 1925 —Cricket and Tennis; 1926
Cricket, Football, Athletics and Tennis; 1927 —
Cricket* and Football*; 1928 —Tennis; 1930 —
Athletics and Tennis; 1931—Tennis*; 1933—Ten-
nis*; 1934 —Tennis*, Athletics and Swimming ;
1935—Cricket, Athletics and Swimming; 1936-
Football*, Swimming and Tennis; 1937 —Tennis
and Football*; 1938—Tennis (all sets), Swim-
ming (all races) (Progress scores).
SPORT—MISCELLANEOUS.
1914 Football Representation: Metropolitan
v. N.S.W.—L. H. Foote, E. Francis; Interstate —
E, Francis, S. Francis; Australia v. New Zea-
land —E. Francis.
Honour Cup, presented by F. T. Small,,
awarded to L. H. Foote;
1920 Football Representation: Brisbane v,
Ipswich—A. McCulloch.
1921 — Cricket Representation: Brisbane v.
Ipswich—A. McCulloch. Football: Brisbane v.
Toowoomba, Brisbane v. Maryborough, Brisbane
v. Ipswich—C. S. Hooper.


ROWING—1921 CHAMPIONS— Stroke: V. E. Greet; 3rd man: R. J. H. Risson; 2nd man: J. E. Morwood; Bow: R. L.
Mills; Cox: A. P. Douglas. (Won by 5 lengths in 5 minutes dead—a record.)
J. HUNT
K. MACALPINE
V. W. WILSON


1924—Football Representation; J. Hunt
(Australia).
1931 —Football Representation: Brisbane v.
Toowoomba—S. C. Foote.
1934—Athletics: C. T. Hansen—Australian
University Representative ; won Queensland
Championship (Mile).
1936 — Cricket: H. K. Thomsett—Queensland.
1937 Football ; V. Wilson—Australia v. S.
Africa (2 Tests), and Queensland State team.
1938 — Football: V. Wilson (Captain)—Aus-
tralia v. New Zealand “All Blacks.”
Recent “Blues” include ;
1936 Athletics : V. Schmidt; Tennis : D.
Stevens, N. Foley; Rowing: J, Radford.
1937 Football: V. Wilson, V. Schmidt, J.
Hunt, N. Sherwin; Tennis: B. Courtice; Cricket:
C. D. Alcorn.
The 1921 Winning Crew for Rowing were :
V. E. Greet (stroke), R. J. H. Risson (3), J. E.
Morwood (2), R. L. Mills (bow), and A. P.
Douglas (cox).
The Sporting Record, in Rugby Union Foot-
ball, of Mr. V. WILSON deserves special men-
tion
Represented King’s College (1937-38).
Represented University of Queensland (1929,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38).
Represented Brisbane (1934, 35, 36, 37, 38).
1913 J. A. Robinson
1914 P. H. Brown
1915 R. A. Percy
1916 G. W. Har-
greaves, M.Sc.
1917 F. J. Bray •
1918 H. McCulloch,
B.Sc.
1919 A. J. Matheson
1920 A. McCulloch
1921 A. McCulloch
1922 J. E. Morwcod
1923 H. McCulloch
1924 G. W. Harding
1925 A. F. Glappison
Represented Queensland: v. N.S.W. (1935
36, 37, 38); v. Maoris (1935); v. Victoria (1936)’
v. South Africa (1937).
Represented Australia (1938): v. South
Africa (First and Second Tests); v. South Africa
(Australian XV).
Represented Australian Universities: v City
of Sydney (1933); v. Victoria (1934); v. Brisbane
(1936); tour of Japan (1934).
Captain of King’s College (1937).
Captain of University of Queensland (1936
37, 38). ’
Captain of Brisbane (1936, 37, 38).
Vice-Captain of Queensland (1937).
Captain of Queensland (1938).
Captain of Australia (1938).
College Blue, University Blue, Australian
University Blue, “Telegraph” Blue (1938).
Presidents K.C.S.C. as follows;
1926 F. S. Thomas
1927 C. Ellis
1928 A. Bradford,
B.A.
1929 H. A. Lowe
1930 H. A. Lowe
1931 L. N. Kentish
1932 T. R. Edwards
1933 A. C. Oertel,
B.Sc.
1934 C. T. Hansen
1935 W. K. Thomsett
1936 T. J. N. Foley
1937 A. E. Risson
1938 V. E. Schmidt
Chapter VII.—MEN’S CAREERS.
(Contributed by M.M.P.)
D. E. BALDWIN. —Graduated in Engineering in
1921. Won a Mcllwraith Scholarship. On
Active Service in 1915 with the 4th and 12th
Field Company Engineers. Now Chief En-
gineer at Melbourne for the Colonial Oil Re-
fineries Company.
A. G. (GORDON) BERG.—B.E. (Seconds), 1926.
Travelling Scholarship in Engineering.
Chosen (1927) for General Electric test
course (U.S.A.). Several important positions
in U.S.A. and England. From 1933 Superin-
tendent of Aircraft, Civil Aviation Branch,
Defence Dept. (Australia). 1936, travelled
to England and back by air to discuss
urgent technical problems and represented
Australia at session of International Con-
vention of Aerial Navigation at Warsaw.
1938, President of Institute of Automotive
Engineers (Aust.). Also associated with
other technical bodies in U.S.A, and Aus-
tralia.
S. G. BROWN.—Graduated in Arts in 1920, with
honours in Mathematics. M.A. in 1922 and
B.Sc. in 1925. Principal of Wolaroi College.
Orange, N.S.W.
C. B. CHRISTESEN (“ CLEM.”). —Was in King’s
from 1933 to 1935, studying Journalism.
Successful career as writer. Now Publicity
Officer for the State Government Tourist
Bureau. At University won distinction, in
Athletics, also successful in Repertory acti-
vities.
C. S. CHRISTIAN.—Our only graduate in Agri-
cultural Science; took B.Sc.Agr. in 1930 with
seconds in Animal Husbandry. To Minnesota
on a Travelling Scholarship; and graduated
as M.S. in 1932. Now at Canberra as a Re-
search Officer for the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research.
COLIN COURTICE.—King’s Ist year Medicine in
1929. Four merits and won the Raff Me-
morial Scholarship; won College blues in
football and cricket. Completed a brilliant
course at Sydney University. In his fourth
year he did an honours course in Physics to
gain his degree in Science—and took firsts.
Rhodes Scholar for 1933. Entered New Col-
lege, Oxford. Research work and D.Phil. in
1935. Worked in the London Hospital for
two years, and has the M.R.C.S. and the
L.R.C.P. to show for it. He is now back at
Oxford doing research work.


KING’S COLLEGE CRICKET-1925—Standing: Howard Berg, N. White, Frank S. Thomas, C. A. Jorss, A. Bradford, E.
Potter, Harry T. Pegg; Sitting: H. N. C. Bandidt, H. H. Trigge, C. Ellis, F. Wilson, W. A. McDougall (capt.); Insets
S. N. Gaydon.
ERIC FRANCIS
C. HANSEN


N. R. M. CRAlGlE.—Graduated in Science in
1922. Won a research scholarship and gained
firsts in Chemistry. In 1923 he graduated
as a Bachelor of Applied Science, and in
1924, M.Sc,
HECTOR W. DINNING. —B.A. in 1914. In the
same year he joined the Army Service Corps,
and served until 1918, ultimately being sent
to Egypt to take charge of the A.I.F. records
in that country. During the War he pub-
lished “Byways of Service” and “Nile to
Aleppo,” and more recently “The Fruitful
Granite.” He is now a well known member
of the staff of “The Telegraph.”
C. ELLIS (“CEC.”). 8.E., 1928. Forestry
Scholarship and Research in U.S.A. All-
round athlete. Been President of K.C.S.C.,
University Union, and now K.O.C.A. Some-
time Vice-Master. Busy at Forestry Dept.
C. A. FOGGON. —B.A. with honours in 1914.
Very successful in University athletics and
in sport generally. Now Principal of Thorn-
burgh College, Charters Towers.
L. H. FOOTE.—M.B., Ch.M., 1922 (Sydney).
After completing 2nd year Science, 1915,
and becoming President of University Union
left on active service. Good athlete. Now
practising at South Brisbane. Often seen at
King’s in professional capacity.
A. G. GRANT.—Ph.C. The College enthusiast,
keen athlete. Relinquished Science to join
Royal Australian Air Force, where, when
well established, was seriously injured. Re-
tired. Now successfully pursuing Medicine.
Greatly responsible for K.0.C.A., Old Col-
legians’ Bursary, etc.
C. T. (“CHARLIE” or “BOXER”) HANSEN. —
Graduated in Science in 1934. On staff of
Melbourne branch of the Shell Company.
Later transferred temporarily to the Perth
Branch. Very prominent and useful as Presi-
dent of University Men’s Club and the King’s
College Students’ Club. Successful in Uni-
versity and State athletics. Won the
Queensland Mile Championship.
G. W. HARDING. —B.E. in 1925, President of
K.C.S.C. in 1924. Now with the Vacuum Oil
Company of Townsville.
E. W. C. HOLDAWAY.—B.A. in 1917. Later took
the Bachelor and Master degrees in Educa-
tion from Melbourne University. Formerly
a Lecturer at the Teachers’ Training College.
Now Principal of the State High School,
Roma.
F. G. HOLDAWAY.—Science degree in 1925 with
seconds in Biology. M.Sc. in 1925. Later,
Ph.D. at Minnesota. Later an Entomologist
for the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, and now at the University of
Hawaii, Honolulu.
C. S. HOOPER.—B.A., 1923, later Solicitors’
finals. Good at games, excelling in tennis.
Well established as authority in legal mat-
ters at Laidley.
J. A. HUNT (“JOHNNY”).—B.A., 1929. One of
many Ipswich Grammar’s gifts to King’s.
Brilliant footballer, five-eights for College,
University, Queensland, and Australia. On
staff at Church of England Grammar, East
Brisbane.
F. A. IRVINE. —Science degree in 1922 (first
class honours in Chemistry). Gold medallist.
Research and Travelling Scholarships. M.Sc.
in 1925. Now 7 in the Research Department
of the Celotex Company, New Orleans,
U.S.A. Dr. Irvine was very prominent in the
social and sporting activities of King’s and
the University in the years immediately fol-
lowing the War.
L. A. JACOBS.—B.Sc. in 1923 (honours in Phy-
sics). M.Sc. in 1925. B.A. in 1928. For
several years second Master on the Staff of
Thornburgh College. Now first Principal of
the newly-established State High School at
Mt. Isa.
GORDON JAMES. —Combined Theology and Arts
in College, and after taking his Licentiate in
Theology graduated in Arts with firsts in
Philosophy. Successful circuit Minister at
Innisfail and other centres. Now stationed
at Thomson’s Estate, Brisbane. Lecturer in
Theological studies at King’s. A notable
philosophical thesis won for him his M.A.
in 1938. Rev. Gordon James completing his
B.D. course.
W. R. C. JAY (“BOB”).—B.A. in 1933 with
seconds in History. Prominent in College
and University life. Passed from Teachers’
Training College to the staff of his old
school (the Ipswich Grammar School). Later
on staff of the Main Roads Board in Bris-
bane. Re-entered King’s and completed
B.Com. He made valuable contributions to
Economics publications. Recently appointed
for four years as a Scholar for Research in
Industry under Mr. J. L. Gifford, M.A.
Shortly after, Vice-Master of King’s till
April, 1938. Still Secretary (1937-1938) of
the Old Collegians’ Association.
H. W. JOHNSON.—Graduated in Science in 1921.
He subsequently took the degrees of M.B.
and Ch.M. at Sydney University, and pro-
ceeded to Edinburgh, where he qualified as
a M.R.C.P. Dr. Johnson is now in practice
on Wickham Terrace, Brisbane.
C. H. (“CHARLIE”) JONES.—B.A. in 1924. Dur-
ing the War he served in the 26th Battalion
of the A.I.F. Sometimes Lecturer at the
Teachers’ Training College. Later Principal
of the Warwick State High School. In 1938,
appointed a District Inspector of Schools.
L. N. KENTISH.—Arts and Theology. He was
President of the K.C.S.C., and was prominent
in all sports. He was the first Stead Scholar
in King’s. He obtained seconds in Philosophy
and capped a good course with the B.D. in
1936. Rev. L. N. Kentish has been appointed
to the adventurous and responsible post of
Superintendent Missioner at Darwin,
P. J. LANHAM.—B.A., 1928. Second honours.
M.A.. 1937. Tennis ability. During course
developed into a “ theolog.” Ordained
Minister of Methodist Church. Now direct-
ing spiritual affairs at Palmwoods.


KING’S COLLEGE TENNlS—1926—Standing: C. Ellis, A. H.
Thomas; Sitting: W. A. McDougall, H. N. C. Bandidt.
KING'S COLLEGE SWIMMING—1935—A. C. Nielsen, H. G.
Lavers, C. R. Lulham, D. S. Stevens; Inset: K. Maealpine.
KING’S COLLEGE ATHLETIC TEAM—1930—Standing: L. N.
Kentish, A. Wood; Sitting; J. B. Reid. D. N. Gredden,
George S. Pro-Copis.
KING’S COLLEGE ATHLETIC TEAM-1935—Standing: J. W.
Radford, A. M. Thomson, T. W. Miller; Sitting: C. D.
Alcorn, C. R. Lulham, A. W. Trembath; Inset: J. Percy.


H. A. LOWE.—B.E., 1931. Another contribution
from Ipswich. President K.C.S.C. President
University Union. Sometime Vice-Master
King’s.
ALFRED McCULLOCH. —B.E. in 1922. Firsts in
Mechanical and Electrical Engineering. Won
a Mcllwraith Scholarship. M.E. in 1927.
Service with the Australian Flying Corps.
Power-house Superintendent for the City
Electric Light Company in Brisbane. Later
appointed Engineer Manager of the Rock-
hampton Municipal Electric Works. After-
wards held a similar position at Townsville.
Recently returned to the City Electric Light
Company as Chief Engineer.
HAROLD McCULLOCH.—Followed his brother’s
example in winning a Mcllwraith Scholar-
ship and getting firsts in Mechanical and
Electrical Engineering (1924). M.E. in 1928.
Now Assistant Electrical Engineer for the
Hydro-Electric Department, Tasmania.
HERBERT McCULLOCH.—B.Sc. 1918. Several
years at Scott’s College, Warwick, as Senior
Science Master. Later, Senior Maths. Master
and Second Master at the Maryborough
Grammar School. When the State Govern-
ment took over the control of the Mary-
borough Grammar Schools in 1935 he retained
his place on the staff of the newly-organised
Maryborough Boys’ State High and Inter-
mediate School. Considerable success as a
cricketer and as a school cricket coach. The
splendid records of the three McCulloch
brothers give them a family place of signal
distinction in the annals of King’s.
W. A. McDOUGALL (“MAC”).—B.Sc., 1931.
M.Sc. 1935. Outstanding in all sports, not
excluding billiards. Now at Sugar Experi-
ment Station, Mackay.
R. L. MILLS.—B.Sc. 1923. Second Master at All
Souls’ School, Charters Towers, where he has
for a time been acting Head Master.
J. E. (“ERIC”) MORWOOD.—B.E. in 1923. Firsts
in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, a
Mcllwraith Scholarship, a gold medal, and
the Walter and Eliza Hall Fellowship. M.E.
in 1931. Engineer in the employ of the
Brisbane City Council. At present stationed
at the Council power-house. Prominent in
student and senior branch activities of the
Australian Student Christian Movement.
ROY MORWOOD (a brother of “Eric”). —B.Sc.
in 1925. Honours course in Botany. M.Sc.
in 1927. Now a Plant Pathologist in the De-
partment of Agriculture and Stock. Sta-
tioned on the Downs (Qld.).
JACK MULHOLLAND.—Finished a brilliant En-
gineering course in 1926. Firsts in Civil
Engineering. Mcllwraith Scholarship and
a Walter and Eliza Hall Fellowship. M.Sc.
degree at Harvard. M.E. in 1933. He has
some notable engineering works to his credit.
Now a practising engineer in Brisbane.
J. L. MURSELL. —B.A. in 1915. First class
honours in Philosophy. Won the Archibald
Scholarship and a Travelling Scholarship.
He gained abroad the degree of Ph.D., and
is now Professor of Philosophy at Lawrence
University, Wisconsin, U.S.A.
A. C. (“CHARLIE”) OERTEL.—B.Sc. 1933. Firsts
in Physics. President of the King’s College
Students’ Club (1933). M.Sc. 1935. Some-
time in the Department of Public Instruc-
tion. Now engaged in Optical Research
under the direction of the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research.
R. J. H. RISSON (“BOB”).—B.E., 1923. Holds
record for residence in College—l 2 years.
Conspicuous in sports, oratory and dra-
matics. Serving city as Maintenance Engi-
neer, Brisbane Tramways.
J. C. (“CHARLIE”) RUNDLE.—L.Th., 1927.
Nine years Missionary in Papua. Translated
parts of New Testament into native dialect.
Rev. J. C. Rundle sees to it that the dark
lads learn both Christianity and soccer !
J. A. (“REG.” or “ROBBIE”) ROBINSON.—B.A.
in 1915. In 26th Battalion of the A.1.F.;
Lieutenant-Colonel, and D.S.O. Mentioned
in despatches. Sometime a Lecturer at the
Teachers’ Training College, and Principal of
the Rockhampton State High School. In 1935
appointed Principal of the Teachers’ Train-
ing College. First President of the King’s
College Club, mixing business and pleasure
well. Captain and wicket-keeper for the Uni-
versity cricket team. In 1936 and 1937 suc-
cessful President of the Old Collegians’ Asso-
ciation. Recreations —cricket, golf, billiards.
T. (“TOMMY”) THATCHER.—B.A. 1917. Firsts
in Philosophy. Archibald prizeman and a
gold medallist. Since then he has had a
varied career, having been Secretary to
Governor Sir Hamilton Goold-Adams, a mem-
ber of the staff of the Toowoomba State
High School, an Acting Lecturer at the Uni-
versity in 1921, and in 1938 was appointed
the Director of External Studies at the
University.
A. H. THOMAS.—A King’s evening student in
Scifence (1920-1924), being at that time in
the State teaching service. In 1924 he
joined the staff of “ The Telegraph.” Well
known as a cricket writer and an able critic
in music and the drama.
A. K. (“ANDY”) THOMSON.—McDermott prize-
man and Firsts in English in 1929. M.A. in
1933. A noted and inspiring teacher of
English Literature. Tutor in English at
King’s and St. John’s. Now on the staff of
the State High School, Rockhampton.
S. B. WATKINS.—B.Sc. in 1916. Research
Scholarship; and Firsts in Chemistry. M.Sc.
in 1918. Chief Instructor in the Industrial
Chemistry Branch of the Central Technical
College, Brisbane.
A. MONTGOMERY (“MONTY”) WHITE.—B.Sc.
in 1927. Research Scholarship. Honours
course in Chemistry. M.Sc. in 1929. Awarded


KING’S COLLEGE CRICKET —193 6— Back Row: A. L. Robinson, C. D. Alcorn; Middle Row: W. N. Wensley, W. J. Sim-
monds, A. W. Preston, I. W. Alcorn, D. N. Drew, T. Abeel; Front Row: B. L. Poole, R. Courtice, D. J. Stevens, A. E.
Risson, V. Kleinschmidt.
KING’S COLLEGE FOOTBALL —1937 —Back Row: N. Sherwin, B. H. Courtice, A. E. Risson, G. E. Young; Middle Row:
G. Coroncs, A. G. Bennett, C. D. Alcorn, J. Whight, E. H. Hughes, A. W. Jayasuria; Front Row: H. G. Lavers, E. Mul-
ler. W. N. Wensley, V. W. Wilson, V. E. Schmidt, J. G. Hunt, R. Howe.


■# ### # # #
B.D.Sc.
DENTAL SURGEON
229 Given Terrace
Paddington
Phone F 9392
Zco
B A (Q land) B D.S (SYD UNIV )
DENTAL SURGEON
Bank of Australia Chambers
406 Queen Street
Brisbane
Phone B 6880
ass &§5 dss 6§s <2ss ass iljfc &§5 d|i &|fe &§5
an 1851 Exhibition. In 1933 secured Phil.D.
at the London University. Dr. White is now
a Bio-Chemist at the Brisbane Abattoirs,
and a Science Tutor at King’s.
F. W. (“FREDDY”) WHITEHOUSE.—B.Sc. in
1922. Firsts in Geology, and Gold Medallist.
M.Sc. in 1924. To Cambridge on a travelling
Scholarship, where he became Ph.D. Lec-
turer in Geology at the University, and
Palaeontologist to the Department of Mines.
A world authority on Geology. Has done
much valuable Geological research in Queens-
land. Prominent in dramatic and sporting-
activities. President of the University Dra-
matic Society. Coach of the Rowing Club.
Officer in the Boy Scout movement.
In addition to the valuable themes written
by a number of King’s graduates, especially in
connection with the Master’s or Doctor’s Degree,
several of the Old. Collegians have distinguished
themselves by issuing, on occasion, valuable pub-
lications and contributing research articles to
standard journals. The writers are:—Mr. H. W.
Dinning (War, Descriptive and Journalistic),
Dr. Whitehouse (Scientific), Dr. J. L. Mursell
(Pyschology), Mr. A. G. Berg (General), Mr. A.
H. Thomas (Journalistic), and others who, from
time to time, assisted in the production of the
University magazine.
OBITUARY
Among- the graduates of King’s wo honour
five whose very promising careers were cut short
by death :
PERCIVAL HENRY BROWN.— A foundation stu-
dent of King’s. Prominent in the social and
sporting life of the University and of the
College. First President of the University
Union ; first Secretary of the College Club,
and Vice-captain of the University Rowing
Club. At the time of his death, on Ist Sep-
tember, 1932, he was Superintendent of the
Sherwood Methodist Sunday School.
FRANK WHEATLEY DUNSTAN.—From 1915 to
1919 with the 25th Battalion of the A.I.F.
Entered King’s as an Engineering student,
and later won a Mcllwraith Scholarship.
B.E. (with honours in Civil Engineering).
Died, Easter, 1933.
The Great War took its toll of King’s.
These shall not grow old : —Corporal James Gra-
ham Hunter, Captain Trevor Francis, M.C., and
Lieut. Rev. Arthur Wilfred Wheatley, B.A. A
Memorial Tablet to them was placed in the
Chapel in 1921. (See illustrations, and reference
in Chap. VI (d).) ■


KING’S COLLEGE TENNIS—1937—Back Row: Harold
Palethorpe, B. H. Courtice; Front Row: T. J. N. Foley,
A. E. Risson, D. J. Stevens.
Mr. R. J. H. RISSON
KING’S COLLEGE SWIMMING—1936—Inset: W. N.
Wensley; Back Row: P. S. Williams, H. G. Lavers;
Front Row: E. Muller, K. Macalpine, B. H. Trerabath.
Mr. V. E. SCHMIDT
Mr. T. J. N. FOLEY


Chapter VIII. —THE OLD COLLEGIANS ' ASSOCIATION.
(Contributed by A.G.G.)
PKT ING’S College has one proud tradition
' that time can never tarnish. The
College was open for students in
March, 1913. In March, 1914, the second
entry of freshers came in, bringing the
total number up to 30. Five months later
the Great War broke out and men were
called to arms. The response from King's
men is now so famous that it seems un-
necessary to record it in print. However,
for the benefit of oncoming men let it be
written. King’s answered as one man, and
the College was almost emptied (as the
first Master put it, “to the honour of King’s
for all time”). Thus were our first Old
Collegians created. It is said that four of
them met on Gallipoli Peninsula, and first
formed an unofficial K.O.C.A.
The War finished, some of the men re-
turned to King’s and brought with them a
wonderful esprit de corps that served as
the best tonic possible to the young Col-
lege.
So the official K.O.C.A. came into being
in 1923 with exactly the same ideals that
the first unofficial body had—to keep ever-
green the King’s spirit of comradeship
amongst past men and to render the College
love and service in all ways within the
power of the Association.
The K.O.C.A. is the oldest of the Asso-
ciations connected with the University of
Queensland Colleges. The Master of King’s
is the Patron, and once a year the Associa-
tion is entertained by the Council at dinner
in College, after which it proceeds to its
Annual Meeting and election of officers.
Naturally much of the success of such an
Association depends on the energy of the
Secretary, and in this respect the K.O.C.A.
is indeed lucky.
Three Old Collegians are elected by the
General Meeting to take their places in the
Governing Council of King’s. The first
representatives, elected in 1932, were
R. J. H. Ris son, A. G. Grant and A. H.
Thomas. The present (1938) representa-
tives are Col. Robinson, D. 5.0., 8.A., A. C.
Grant, Ph.C., and C. E. Ellis, B.E.
Valuable Bursary help has already been
given by the K.O.C.A. In 1935 a bursary
was awarded to Mr. H. K. Thomsett. The
winner of the 1936 bursary was Mr. J. N.
Bagnall, and for 1937 Mr. R. Courtice.
At present the aim of the Old King s
men is to help King’s practically, by raising
the capital sum of £lOO or more towards a
Bursary Fund to help some fresher into
College. Thanks to the generous response
of the men half that sum is assured al-
ready. This is but an indication of the
earnest endeavour of the K.O.C.A. to stand
united in the interest of King’s.
In addition to the Annual Reception
and Dinner held in September (which is re-
garded as the official College function), a
Social Evening was organised by the
K.O.C.A. late in 1936. In 1937 a second
similar Social Evening was successfully
organised by a joint committee of the
K.O.C.A. and the K.C.S.C.—some 160 attend-
ing. The May social celebration in 1938
was again a success, the K.O.C.A. being in-
vited by the Present Students’ Clubs. This
social event affords a further opportunity
for King’s men to return the hospitality ex-
tended to them by other various University
functions.
Four Old Collegians have celebrated
their weddings in the College Chapel. The
Rev. Cyril Morsley was the first; he wed
Miss Annie Dunstan in the old Chapel, the
officiating clergyman being Dr. G. E. Rowe,
then Minister of the Albert Street Metho-
dist Church.
The next wedding in King’s had a happy
inter-collegiate touch. The Dining Hall was
turned into a Chapel for Dr. Monty White
and Miss Jess Smart, of the Women’s
College, and several of the bride’s fellow
collegians attended the ceremony. The
present Master was in charge of proceed-
ings, and the King’s students formed a
guard of honour. The reception was held
at the Women’s College, with the Principal
(Miss Freda Bage) presiding.
“Bill” Rogers and Miss Una Morris also
chose the College Chapel as the scene of
their wedding ceremony.
Frank Thomas was the first Old Colle-
gian to be married in the new Chanel. His
bride was Miss “Teddy” Jones, and again
the Master officiated.
C- B. Warmoll (“Charlie”). —Picked up
leaves and polished boots (never a second
pair!) for seventeen years. Given ouarters
at College on retirement. Died 1 934. Suc-
ceeded by J. F. Chadwick, whose duties now
do not include the shining of integu-
ments !


Col. J. A. ROBINSON
Flying Officer A. G. GRANT
Capt. C. ELLIS
LADIES’ COMMITTEE —Insets: Mrs. T. H. Hore (Hon. Secretary), Mrs. W. Webb (President); Back Row: Miss Ruby Har-
rison, Mrs. A. L. Bennett; Middle Row: Mrs. A. Little, Miss Cummins, Miss Alice Little, Mrs. T. W. Crawford, Miss G.
Crawford, Mrs. J. Packer; Front Row: Mrs. W. Taylor, Miss M. A. Powell, Mrs. E. J. Jones, Mrs. E. W. H: Fowles, Mrs:
J. Bowes, Mrs. G. T. Bennett, Mrs. J. Davey (Hon. Treasurer).


Chapter IX.—WOMEN WORKERS.
(a) Committee.
JJN 1925 nine additional rooms were added
to the College accommodation, and the
Common room was enlarged. These
improvements cost £605. The Mayor of
Brisbane officially opened the extensions
at a very successful Garden Party organised
by an enthusiastic Ladies’ Committee.
At the suggestion of Rev. William Brown,
the King’s College Council improved the op-
portunity by requesting the Ladies’ Com-
mittee to become permanent. Thus was
instituted one of the most beneficial Com-
mittees working in the interests of the
College.
The Hon. Secretary (Mrs. T. H. Hore)
supplies the following summary : —On July
31st, 1925, a meeting of ladies was held at
Epworth House, with the idea of forming
this permanent Committee. Mrs. W. Brown
occupied the chair. The election of officers
resulted in Mrs. W. H. Green (now de-
ceased) being made the first President.
Mrs.. E- W. C. Holdaway was elected Secre-
tary, and Mrs. W. Webb, Treasurer. The
Vice-Presidents elected were Mesdames W.
Brown, B, Frederick, J. Bowes, and A.
Douglas. These ladies constituted the
Executive Committee, while the General
Committee comprised—Mesdames G. E.
Rowe, A. Taylor, E. J. Jones, E. W. H.
Fowles, W. Taylor, W. M. Douglas, G. A. C.
Douglas, Millar, A. H. Berg, and Miss
Powell ; and the following members —now
deceased—Mesdames W. Little, E. Proctor,
G. I. Bourne, and J. G. Hobbs. The Com-
mittee became known as King’s College
Ladies’ Committee. Meetings were held in
the Board-room, at Epworth House, till
1927, since when the meetings have been
held in the Albert Street Church Choir
vestry. The Executive Committee, in con-
ference with the Secretary of King’s Col-
lege Council (Rev. W. Brown), decided in
which ways service could be rendered to
the College. To provide crockery and
cutlery, an appeal was made to all the Cir-
cuits throughout Queensland for donations.
Three Churches responded, and an initial
sum of £44 was raised. A Garden Party,
given by Mrs. G. A. C. Douglas, yielded
further revenue, and 35 dozen crockery was
purchased from England, with the College
crest impressed, the cutlery having the
name of King's engraved on it. During the
first ten years, concerts, socials and garden
parties were held to help raise more funds
towards providing other necessary articles
for the College. Furnishings for the
Master’s residence were soon purchased,
and also quilts and blankets. Built-in
wardrobes for the students’ rooms, costing
£7l, were paid for by the Ladies’ Com-
mittee.
In 1927, the Garden Party became an
annual event, arranged for the last Satur-
day of Conference. Most of these functions
have been held at the picturesque home of
Mr. and Mrs. R. J. Archibald, who have
also generously helped to make our Garden
Parties such a success. To them we tender
our sincere thanks. Mrs. W. H. Green and
Mrs. T. G. Lahey have also lent us house
and grounds, on more than one occasion,
and the Committee are very grateful for
their kindness and help.
Extensive alterations were made to the
College in May, 1928, when, through the
efforts of the Ladies’ Committee, they were
able to hand over to the Men’s Council
£23/10/- towards the debt reduction, and
later gave £26 towards furnishing the
rooms. On account of the transfer of her
husband from Brisbane, Mrs. Holdaway, in
1928, had to resign as Secretary. In recog-
nition of her admirable work she received
a handsome presentation. Miss Eileen
Dinning was elected in her stead. In 1929
Mrs. W. H. Green, on account of ill health,
relinquished her duties as President, and
Mrs. W. Webb was elected in her place.
Mrs. Green acted as Treasurer till, her re-
grettable death in 1931. Miss Dinning
acted in a dual capacity as Secretary and
Treasurer till the Annual Meeting in July,
when Mrs. T. H. Hore was elected Secretary,
and Miss Dinning Treasurer. As Albert
Street Mission was in need of funds, the
Ladies’ Committee, from a Social After-
noon. successfully organised by them, as a
welcome to Rev. Irving Benson, handed
over to Rev. H. M. Wheller £2O for the
work of the Mission. Much regret was
felt at the resignation of Miss Eileen Din-
ning as Treasurer in 1933, and the Com-
mittee recorded their deep appreciation of
the services rendered by her. Mrs. G. T.
Bennett was then appointed Treasurer,


Mrs. M. SCOTT FLETCHER
Mrs. H. H. TRIGGE
Mrs. L. E. BENNETT
Mrs. A. H. BERG


and proves a most careful guardian of the
finances. The Committee presented the
College with an Academic Honour Board,
as a 21st Birthday gift; and also supplied
new floor-coverings for the Common room
and stairs carpet for the Chapel, newspaper
desks, office baskets, geyser, forty-nine
wardrobes, and other essential equipments.
In September, 1931, the Master (Rev. H. H.
Trigge) spoke to the Committee of the
urgent need of building up the Dr. Stewart
Bursary Fund. The Committee responded
with raising £SO at their next Garden
Party for that object. In 1933 they gave
another £26 to close the Bursary Fund.
Mr. Trigge then started a £I,OOO Bursary,
and again the Committee organised a Gar-
den Party, and, up to the present, have
given another £55 to the new Bursary.
Just in passing it may be said that the
object of the Garden Parties is not only to
raise funds, but to place before the public
the work done by the Ladies’ Committee,
year by year, and to indicate to what pur-
pose the money is used. During the
thirteen years this Committee has been in
existence, several ladies (including Mrs.
Wm. Brown and Mrs. G. E. Rowe) became
members, but for various reasons were not
able to continue in the work, though their
keen sympathies are still with us. We
fully appreciate all kind friends who have
given of their services at different times,
to make our functions so successful, and we
would like to mention Mr. R. J. Archibald
and Mr. Archie Day for the musical pro-
grammes provided. Thanks are also due to
the Committee for splendid work year by
year, especially at the annual Garden
Parties, in helping make them so success-
ful. This Committee, although holding but
one annual function, have raised nearly
£I,OOO since they started their work in 1925.
The present Committee consists of Mesdames
W. Webb (President), T. H. Hore (Hon. Secre-
tary), G. T. Bennett (Hon. Treasurer), W. Taylor
(Vice-President), E. W. H. Fowles (Vice-Presi-
dent), J. Davey, E. J. Jones, J. J. King, T. W.
Crawford, G. E. Rowe, J. Bowes, A. Little, J. F.
Maguire, A. L. Bennett, W. H. Green, J. Packer,
and Misses M. Powell, R. Harrison, A. Little, G.
Crawford, A. J. Cummins, E. Bourne, and C.
Jones.
(b) Matrons and Staff.
The Report presented to Conference,
February, 1914, states “all the domestic
arrangements for the year 1913 have been
superintended by Mrs. Scott Fletcher, and
we have been fortunate in securing an ade-
quate staff of servants.”
The first staff was a cook, two maids,
and a house-man. The present staff in-
cludes ten efficient employees.
From 1913 to the present year the Col-
lege has been very fortunate in having
expert, sympathetic and careful manage-
ment of all household affairs.
Successive Matrons have personally
supervised these very important matters,
and have given unremitting attention to
the health, comfort and general well-being
of the students. The staff throughout
have been capable and loyal, and have ren-
dered excellent service.
Year by year the Council have referred
in eulogistic terms to the smooth working
of this department, and to the adequate
provision made for all board and lodging
requirements.
Following are the Matrons who have so
successfully carried out the duties of their
indispensable household ministry :—Mrs.
Scott Fletcher (1913-1915), Mrs. L. E.
Bennett (1915-1924), Mrs. A. H. Berg
(1924-1925), Mrs. H. H. Trigge (appointed
1927 and still in office).
Chapter X. — GIFTS AND FINANCE.
(a) Bu rsaries, Scholarships, Prizes.
numerous benefactions, large and
small, in kind and in cash, that have
been received by the College during
twenty-five years, would form a long and
interesting catalogue. They bear witness
to the generosity of countless friends and
the practical sympathy of those who see
in education, such as the College can im-
part, one of the indispensable levers for
sound community progress. One gift from
overseas came from Sir William Hartley ;
a legacy of £lOO was received in 1917 from
Mr- W. R. Keenan ; Rev. Osborne Lilley
donated his library, and an anonymous do-
nation of £2O is among the large number
of early offerings from warm-hearted
friends and Committees. Mention of these
appears elsewhere in these pages.


Phone M 6301.
Nundah Planing
& Moulding Mills
Union Street, Nundah
Good stock of Hardwood
Flooring always on hand.
Terms Cash
E. PROCTOR & SON
TIMBER MERCHANTS
Phone B 4211
JACK MULHOLLAND
M.Sc., M.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.)
Assoc. M. Am. Soc. C.E.
CONSULTING ENGINEER
Union Bank Chambers
Queen St., Brisbane.
R. O. MEYER
Surgeon Dentist
Fiveways - Woolloongabba
above B.C C. Stores
Sets of Teeth from
Plates Remodelled
Plates Repaired
Gold Fillings
Amal. or Porcelain
Evenings by appointment
£2 2 0
1 5 0
5 0
1 1 0
7 6
Phone J 1084
DINING FALL


Special benefactions have been donated
for the purpose of producing annual
amounts which may be granted to meri-
torious students, and thus materially
assist them through their College and Uni-
versity course.
The earliest gifts include donations from
Mrs. Rebecca Balser (£200) and Hon. Angus
Gibson (£250) for the establishment of
Bursaries. Hon. Angus Gibson was for
many years, from its inception, Councillor
and Lay Treasurer of the College, and at
his demise, in 1920, the family donated the
sum of £525 towards the College funds as a
memory of their father. The Master, Dr.
Stewart, and Dr. Fowles were appointed a
Selection Committee to allocate bursaries.
In 1915 Hon. F. T. Brentnall, as part of a
generous Settlement, made available an
annual sum of from £2O to £25 for ten
years for College purposes. Since 1930
interest on the handsome capital sum of
£1,750 received from the benefactions of
Rev. Charles T. Stead (who died in May,
1916), provides valued annual help to
Theological students. The Dr. Robert
Stewart Memorial Fund of £5OO (completed
in 1933), and the Dr. G. E. Rowe benefac-
tion of £l,OOO in 1930, provide welcome
Scholarships. (Dr. Rowe always evinced
keen interest in the College, and for years
was active on the House Committee.) In
1933 a bequest of £l5O was received to form
a Dr. T. P- Lucas Bursary. Provision is
made by W. H. Green, Esq., for an annual
Scholarship of £4O in honoured memory of
“Bill and Stanley Green.” In November,
1937, Miss C. A. Brentnall donated the sum
of £l,OOO in memory of her distinguished
and generous father, Hon. F. T. Brentnall,
M.L.C. This sum annually provides both a
University and a Theological Scholarship.
Benefactions have also been generously
given by Rev. Dr. H. Youngman 1£250),
Rev. W. H. Harrison, in 1933 (£100), and
Messrs. S. and L. Copper (£100), in each
case enabling provision to be made for
annual prizes. In 1928 the King’s College
Old Collegians’ Association made available
a Bursary of £l2 and continued the same
generosity in 1929, when the Association
opened a fund for the purpose of raising
sufficient funds to permit an Old Colle-
gians’ Bursary to be available annually.
The King’s Old Collegians, to date, have
contributed over £l2O as a special fund.
The Foundation Bursary Fund, begun in
connection with 21st birthday celebration,
has, to date, climbed to £550, with an early
objective of £l,OOO, the interest on which
is to be devoted to two Scholarships.
Reference must be made to the tireless
efforts of the Master (Rev. H. H. Trigge),
who has for several years given up his
shorter vacations in the interests of Col-
lege bursary funds. His lecturing tours in
various parts of the State have been very
largely responsible for the establishment
of the Dr. Robert Stewart Memorial Bur-
sary, and for the present healthy state of
the Foundation Bursary Fund. These
tours have also been of incalculable value
in bringing the College before the notice of
the public and of prospective students.
During 1933 £5l was received, includ-
ing £ll from the Master’s fees for services
—a generous gesture, which has been con-
tinued by Mr. Trigge. This gift of fees
now has reached the sum of £560.
Following is the list and annual value
of Scholarships, Bursaries and Prizes at
present available :
For University Students :
Hon. F. T. Brentnall .. .. £2O
Dr. Robert Stewart . . . . £2O
Hon. Angus Gibson . . . . £lO
Mrs. Rebecca Balsar .. .. £lO
Dr. T. P. Lucas .. .. £6
King’s Old Collegians . . . . £5
For Theological Students :
Rev. C. T. Stead .. .. £7O
Dr. G. E. Rowe .. ~ £4O
Bill and Stanley Green .. £4O
Hon. F. T. Brentnall . . . . £2O
Rev. W. H. Harrison . . £4
Dr. Hy. Youngman . . . . £lO
S. and L. Cooper . . . . £6
Many additional handsome and varied
gifts have been received by the College.
The Rev. Norman Dunning, M.A., LL.B., on
his memorable visit to Brisbane, presented
a Lectern. Mrs. G. E. Rowe gave furnish-
ings for the Chapel Pulpit. Mrs. H. T.
Hore presented a Tennis Table. Mr. D. H.
Rhoades gave the first Billiard Table.
Later Mr. W. L. Haenke gave a full-sized
Billiard Table, and the first Table was sold,
the proceeds being devoted to the Library.
Dr. Fowles donated the Clock and Cricket
Nets ; and when the New Methodist Hymn
Book appeared Mrs. Fowles donated an ade-
auate supply of books for the Chapel. The
Master’s Chair for the Dining Hall was
presented by Miss H. Heaflip.


McDougalls for Best Bread
Edward Street, Dutton Park.
100 % Wholemeal Bread
PROCERA, four varieties also Child Study and Glyx Bread
Note Address : McDOUGALLS, DUTTON PARK, Phone J 1842
and ROSALIE. Phone F 9507
The Grant Materia Medica Collection,
containing some 300 carefully conserved
specimens, was given by Mr. Gordon Grant,
and is a most valuable aid not only to
Pharmacy students, but also to men study-
ing the earlier courses in Medicine.
In 1925 the photograph of the Rev. F.
Duesbury, who did admirable service in the
establishment of the College, was given by
his widow, and was hung in the College
Dining Hall-
(b) College Library
As early as 1914 the nucleus of a
Library had been formed and 300 volumes
were already on the shelves. Dona-
tions were received from Rev. Dr. George
Brown, Rev. Osborne Lilley, Revs. T. Bras-
sington, A. Hutchison, and Charles Martin,
Mrs. Blamires, Hon. F. T. Brentnall, and
Messrs. G. Watkins, Colledge and J. Wherry.
A number of scientific books were pur-
chased from year to year; papers, maga-
zines and miscellaneous works were added;
an anonymous gift of £2O was received for
the purchase of educational works. Many
kind friends have forwarded excellent
volumes for the Library, and the shelves
are gradually filling. A useful, gift of
books was received from Hon. F. T. Brent-
nall in 1925. Mrs. Coote, of Rockhampton,
gave a valuable library classical and theo-
logical of her son, the late Rev. Col. A. W.
Wheatley, 8.A., one-time Tutor at King’s.
The Library was helped by a parcel of
General Literature from Mr. C. Brabin, of
Holland Park, and by the gift of useful His-
tory books from Mr. Gower, of Chermside.
In 1927 the Council commenced an an-
nual grant of £lO to the Library Fund,
the students themselves and the K.O.C.A.
gave welcome contributions, and Mrs. E. W.
H. Fowles continued supplying weekly
magazines.
In 1932 the Queensland Book Depot gave
a complete set of the latest edition of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica.
The year 1938 sees the useful volumes
steadily increasing, reading facilities have
been improved, a small annual grant is
regularly received from the Council, and
the reference Library is beginning to
grow. Gifts of books permanently useful
the cordially welcomed. It is hoped that
the Library will steadily grow, especially
in inspirational volumes and in books of
reference.


INCOME.
£
s
d
To Cash Received
2,021
5
3
„ Balance Owing Bank
1,439
16
1
£3,461
1
4
EXPENDITURE.
£
S
d
By Property
2,200
0
0
„ Part Payment on A/c New Wing
1,000
0
0
„ Rates, Charges, Insurances
34
11
10
„ Caretaker and Help
17
0
0
„ Rev. D. Hill, B.A
53
6
8
„ Printing, Stamps and Telegrams
25
7
6
„ Tools
6
9
11
„ Deposit Gas Co. ..
2
0
0
,, Expenses Foundation Ceremony
30
13
6
,, Interest on Overdraft . .
S3
18
0
„ Bank Charges, etc.
2
13
11
,, Joint Secretaries’ and Trea-
surers’ Expenses
55
0
0
£3,461
1
4
(c) A Note on Finance.
Time had run out for taking advan-
tage of the bequest of £l,OOO made to
Conference by the late Hon. John Archi-
bald, towards the establishment of a
Ministerial Training College, provided such
was established five years after his decease
in May, 1907. The beneficiaries, however,
were unwilling to see the bequest lapse,
and as the University was already in exis-
tence, a sum of £5OO was devoted to the
founding of an Annual Archibald Prize, and
a like sum of £5OO was made available
when the Methodist College was projected
—the first gift to King’s.
When Conference, in 1912, resolved to
found King’s College, the target of £5,000
was set, with a promise that when £3,500
was raised the work should proceed.
As elsewhere stated, even before the
project was launched, gifts had already
been foreshadowed, and the persistent ef-
forts of Revs. R. Stewart and the President
(Rev. F. Duesbury) resulted in the £5,000
being raised in less than two years. But
extensions were needed and fresh expense
was incurred. In March, 1916, the defi-
ciency on the House Account was £674 and
the Bank Overdraft was £2,436.
Early efforts were made to free the pro-
perty from debt, but success brought fur-
ther need for accommodation; and, later
on, the very lean years of the War only in-
creased the College liabilities far above the
£5,000 with which the College finances had
practically begun. In 1917 a legacy of £lOO
came to the College by the will of Mr. W. R.
Keenan. The deficit reached £2,000, and
Rev. Dr. Stewart was commissioned by the
Conference to make a further appeal, to
Queensland Methodism. This appeal
realised £1,525, and the Laymen’s Drive in
1922 resulted in a first gift of £7OO being-
received by King’s College. Influenza, a
shipping strike, and drought militated
against the 1919 appeal, but the work went
steadily on, and in 1922, for the first time
in the history of the College, the ordinary
revenue met the ordinary expenses, and
left a small credit balance.
In 1921 the Bank required and obtained
an annual reduction of £250 on the over-
draft. The Conference had already
separated the Property Account from the
ordinary Working Account. Further steps
were taken in order to ensure both accounts
being on a satisfactory basis.
In 1922 a touching legacy of £2O came
from Dr. Stewart. The necessary outlay,
including the building of new premises,
arrangements for the establishment and
furnishing of the Chapel, the founding of
the library, electric light instalment
(1921), sewerage connection (1925), paint-
ing and the necessary upkeep, recreational
facilities (such as tennis courts, billiard
table, new piano in 1921) and other equip-
ment all involved, from time to time, not
merely capital expenditure, but substantial
maintenance. In 1922, £250 was paid off
the mortgage, £252 spent in renovation, and
£229 carried forward to credit.
It is of interest to note the items in the
very simple first College Balance-Sheet :
By 1924 the finances had improved,
£5OO was paid off the mortgage, which was
reduced to £1,375. Brisbane District gave
£892 in response to an appeal. The. over-
draft in 1926 was reduced to £997. In 1927
a further £250 was paid off the debt, leav-
ing still, a credit of £3Ol on Working Ac-
count. In 1929 there was a credit of £547
on Working Account, and the Overdraft
stood at £576.
In 1933 the Brisbane Boys’ College boat-
shed was purchased and transformed into
students’ rooms and a lecture room, at a
total cost of £364.
During the year 1931 the King’s College
Committee contributed £5O towards a new


J. McNEE
CREAM
Address :
AND MILK RETAILER
Delivers Twice Daily
South Brisbane District
Frederick Street, Annerley
Phone J 1920 for SERVICE
A RECENT ENROLMENT CEREMONY


College rowing boat, and also £5O towards
the Stanthorpe College—precursor of an-
nual assistance.
The training of our ministerial candi-
dates costs approximately 35% less than
what it costs the New South Wales Con-
ference,. This is accomplished because, our
Theological Institution is established at
our University College, whereas New South
Wales has two separate Colleges.
The Bursars of the College have been :
Mr. J. E. Greenham (from its establishment
to 1917), Mr. Walter Webb (1917-1936), and
Dr. E. W. H. Fowles (1936 onwards).
The Hon. Angus Gibson, M.L.C., was Lay
Treasurer from the establishment of King’s
to 1920. He was succeeded by the Hon. F.
T. Brentnall (1920-1924). In 1925 the pre-
sent Lay Treasurer, W. H. Green, Esq., was
appointed.
Mr. H. Hiley, F.C.1.A., A.F.1.A,, was
Honorary Auditor of the College from its
establishment to 1921. He was specially
thanked for his valuable service. Mr. J. A.
Packer, A.F.1.A., was appointed in his stead
and still, holds office.
In the 1937 Profit and Loss Account
(presented to Conference in February,
1938), general progress is abundantly
shown. The House Account totals £1,821 ;
general wages £552; tutorials £135; paint-
ing and repairs £107; rates £74; and £lOB
was spent on furniture and equipment.
Revenue from students’ fees reached £2954.
In the Balance Sheet, the assets appear at
£11,491, including property £7,274, on
which an ample sum for depreciation is an-
nually allowed. The excess of assets over
liabilities is £7,975. May the next 25 years
manifest equally wise and successful
management of King’s monies !
Chapter XI .—MISCELLANEOUS PARS.
(Contributed by M.M.P.)
TT N the full and varied life of a University
' College many unrecorded events happen
in 25 years. They pass into legends, or
become memories that fade. Others are
germane to College life, and during the
years they emerge naturally, and in many
eases remain as an essential feature of ex-
panding usefulness. Some of these may be
mentioned.
THE COLLEGE COAT OF ARMS.
The King’s College Coat of Arms is an
adaptation of the original coat of arms which
was devised by the first Master, the Rev. (now
Professor) M. Scott Fletcher, in consultation
with Dr. Fowles. This consisted of a smaller
shield with a King’s crown, superimposed on a
shield bearing the St. Andrew’s Cross. The
Cross commemorates the laying of the College
foundations on ,St. Andrew’s Day, the 30th Nov-
ember, 1912, and the official opening of the Col-
lege by Sir William McGregor, Chancellor of the
University, in May, 1913. The Wyvern crest was
used by John Wesley and his family, and now
appears in the coat of arms of most Methodist
collegiate institutions. The motto, “ Veritas
Vos T iberabit,” was chosen by Professor Scott
Fletcher from the vulgate, and derives its sig-
nificance from the fact that the College was in-
tended to have a liberalising influence.
THE ENROLMENT CEREMONY.
This impressive ceremony, now established
as one of the most important annual functions
of the College, was instituted in 1933. It is held
early in the first term. The service in the
Chapel is followed by a dinner in the Hall.
Freshmen and other students are addressed by
speakers representing the University, the
Methodist Church and the Old Collegians’ Asso-
ciation. A short toast list includes that of “The
Freshers,” proposed by the President of the
K.C.S.C.
Freshmen are presented in turn by the Vice-
Master, who announces their names, their home
towns, the schools at which they have been
educated and the course for which they have
enrolled. As each is presented he is asked to
subscribe to the following declaration:—
“I solemnly promise that, so long as I am
a student of King’s College, I will loyally obey
the Master and all other persons to whom he
may delegate his authority, and will faithfully
keep all the rules that are or may be made, for
the government of the College.”
Having duly declared his loyalty, the fresher
signs the College register, and receives the
congratulations of the Master. This apt and im-
pressive ceremony, though formal, is pleasingly
domestic. In simple yet dignified fashion,
freshers receive their first official welcome to
King’s. They are made to feel that they really
do “belong;” and wholesome advice, springing
from personal experience, is often given by the
chosen speakers. Someone has described the
function as a happy blend of the marriage ser-
vice and the University Matriculation Ceremony!
It csrtainlv has the special advantage of giving
the youthful fresher an early opportunity of ad-
justing himself to his new surroundings.
THE RECEPTION AND DINNER.
An important social link between each Col-
lege and the rest of the University is the annual
“At Home,” at which the students entertain their


WATSON & SON Pty. Ltd
Butchers and . . .
Ice Manufacturers
J 6926 - Head Shop and Ice Works, Stones Corner
J 3012 - Branches at Wellington Rd., E.B.
J 6213 - Logan Rd., Holland Park, Coorparoo Junction
RECEPTION AND DINNER


friends. The policy of the Methodist Church
does not admit of the King’s College official
function taking the form which is usually adopted
by the other colleges. For many years the
students arranged an annual boat picnic, but it
was felt that this was inadequate as a means
of returning the hospitality of other colleges,
and in 1933 there was inaugurated the Recep-
tion and Dinner, which the experience of each
year has improved until it has become a highly
successful and distinctive event in the life of the
College. The dinner is held at the “Canberra”
in September, and is attended by University and
Church representatives, and by past and present
students and their friends. Guests of honour
have included such distinguished men as His
Excellency the Governor (Sir Leslie Orme Wil-
son), the Premier (the Hon. W. Forgan Smith),
and the Deputy Premier (the Hon. F. A. Cooper).
The Chancellor (Sir James Blair), the Vice-
Chancellor (the late Dr. W. N. Robertson), the
former President of the Board of Faculties (Pro-
fessor H. Alcock). Professors and Lecturers
have represented the University, and the Presi-
dent of the Conference and many ministers and
laymen have represented the Church.
The dinner is preceded by a Reception, where
250 guests are welcomed by the Master, the
President of the Old Collegians’ Association, and
the President of the Students’ Club. The Master
presides, and the Vice-Master acts as Master of
Ceremonies. An appropriate Toast List, musical
and elocutionary items rendered by 1 collegiate and
visiting artists; and a King’s College Glee Club
(first organised by Mr. J. N. Bagnall), are among
the notable features in a social function, that
grows in eclat with the growing years.
TWENTY-FIRST BIRTHDAY
CELEBRATIONS.
The twenty-first birthday of the College was
celebrated in September, 1934. A garden party
was held in the College grounds, and was attend-
ed by the Chancellor (Sir James Blair) and other
representatives of the University, the President
and other representatives of the Methodist Con-
ference, and many past and present students and
friends of the College. The annual Reception
and Dinner, which had a special birthday signi-
ficance, was attended by the Governor (Sir
Leslie Orme Wilson), as well as University,
Church and College representatives, and about
200 guests. A photograph of this function ap-
pears in these Annals.
Commemorative services, attended by gradu-
ates and students in academic dress, included a
morning service at Albert Street Methodist
Church, at which the speaker was the Rev.
L. E. Bennett, M.A., 8.D., formerly Master of
King’s, and at present Master of Wesley College,
Sydney; and an afternoon service, also held at
Albert Street, at which the speakers were the
Masters past and present of the College—Pro-
fessor M. Scott Fletcher, M.A., B.Litt., the Rev.
L. E. Bennett, M.A., 8.D.. and the Rev. H. H.
Trigge, M.A., B.D. For this service a choral
programme was arranged by Dr. E. W. H.
Powles. _ In connection with the 21st birthday
celebrations, a Foundation Bursary Fund was
launched. From the garden party and other
sources £l7O was collected in 1934.
SOCIAL EVENING.
In the past three years the students of
King’s have organised an annual social evening,
which gives them a further opportunity to enter-
tain their friends. It is an enjoyable but quite
unofficial function, and is held with due regard
to Church regulations.
REUNION AND VALEDICTORY.
For several years it has been customary for
past and present students to meet in the College
dining hall for a reunion and valedictory dinner.
This function takes place early in November, and
since the institution of evening chapel a few
years ago, a preliminary chapel service has been
included. The dinner is a happy occasion for
old Collegians to fraternise with each other and
with present students. It also gives students
themselves an opportunity to bid farewell to
those who are about to leave College. The
menace of approaching examinations makes the
dinner necessarily short, but time is found to
toast the Old Collegians’ Association, the men
leaving College, and the Master and Mrs.
Trigge, whose hospitality is greatly appreciated.
Of late years, at this function, the President of
the Old Collegians.’ Association presents the Old
Collegians’ Bursary to the winner for the year.
After the dinner the Annual General Meeting
of the King’s Old Collegians’ Association is held.
THE OLD COLLEGIANS’ CUP.
The Old Collegians’ Cup is a much coveted
nrize among the men’s colleges within the
University. It is known affectionately by many
as “the old mug.” Each year it calls forth
enthusiastic inter-collegiate contests in football,
cricket, tennis, rowing, swimming and athletics.
The Inter-College Council, which takes its
president and secretary from each College in
rotation, controls these contests. When the fate
of the mug is finally decided for each year, the
winning college is pacifically visited at about 2
a.m. in true sportsman style by men of the
other Colleges. The cup is officially presented
at the University Men’s Club Dinner, held at the
end of the examination period in November.
We are indebted to “Galmahra” of April,
1927. for a note on the origin and description
of the cup. Although the Inter-College com-
petition in athletic snorts was instituted as long
ago as 1913, and had been maintained with
keenest interest, until 1926 there was no
tangible token for presentation to the winning
College. In 1925 past students of the four
men’s Colleges decided that a cup should be
donated by College graduates and past members
for annual competition between the Colleges.
The chairman of the “Cun” Committee was Mr.
R. J. H. Risson, 8.E.. of King’s. Donations were
received from past students of the Colleges, and
the trophy was named the Past Collegians’ Cup.
At the men’s Club Dinner in November. 1926,
Mr. W. J. Chamberlain, on behalf of the donors,
w T as able to present an “Old Collegians’ Cun” to
the President of the Inter-College Council, by
79
THE ANNALS OF KING’S COLLEGE


Change Your c Diet
Ring
CERVETTO & CO. PTY. LTD.
for
Quality Fish, Oysters and all other Ocean
Produce also all classes of Prime Poultry
and Thereby Save Dissatisfaction
Pure Italian Olive Oil and Dugong Oil
Boarding Schools, Hotels and Cafes catered for.
The Leading Shipping Food Purveyors of Queensland
625 Stanley Street - - - South Brisbane
Phone:—J 2806, J 2822
A Ring will suffice Immediate Delivery
VIEW FROM COLLEGE, SHOWING UNIVERSITY GARDENS, OVAL, AND ROWING REACHES.


GAS
THE MODERN FUEL FOR
THE MODERN HOME 1
<&
<s>
<s>
<*>
<S>
<«>
&
&
Bring the Efficiency and Economy of GAS to bear on all household tasks. Use neat
that is clean, controllable, ready and reliable. It will save work and save money.
There is a modern gas appliance for every domestic heating purpose.
Gas for COOKING
GAS provides the exact heat for every cooking need. It means easier, cleaner, better
cooking because GAS is all pure heat, easily controlled and absolutely reliable.
Modern Gas Cookers are available in various coloured finishes to tone with any
decorative scheme. Easy Hire Purchase Terms may be arranged.
Gas for REFRIGERATION
The ElectroEux Gas Refrigerator creates that crisp, dry cold that keeps food pure and
palatable. It operates in permanent silence and has no moving parts to wear out.
It does not interfere with the wireless in any way and running costs are negligible.
A model for every family. Easy Hire Purchase Terms available if desired.
Gas for WATER HEATING
Whether you instal simply ; a bath or sink heater or a more elaborate multipoint hot
wateri system such as the Junkers Heater, you can depend upon an ever ready hot
water supply at any time of the day or night with gas.
&
<»
<J>
<»
<§>
/N.
The Brisbane Gas Coy*, 5
SHOWROOMS : 541 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE. v
<s>«■ s><j> <*>«>
whom it was handed to the representatives of
King’s College, the 1926 winners. The cup,
which is some twenty inches high, is of silver,
surmounted by a winged victory, and is in the
form of a Grecian Kantharos. On the ebony
plinth are a number of small shields bearing the
name of the victors each year in the Inter-Col-
lege contests.
AN OLD COLLEGIAN’S SON IN KING’S.
There is this year an interesting link be-
tween foundation and present students, in that
Mr. W. Foggon, who entered College in March
to take a Science course, is a son of Mr. C. A.
Foggon, 8.A., Principal of Thornburgh College,
Charters Towers, who was one of the first
students enrolled in King’s. This is the first
time that an old Collegian has sent his son to
the College, and our Jubilee year was a fitting
time to begin. A man must be highly satisfied
with his alma mater if he is willing to commit
his own son to it; it is always taken for granted,
however, that every son of h Kingsman is him-
self a potential Kingsman, and it is reasonable
to assume that our Golden Jubilee celebrations
may feature “fathers versus sons” contests in
various College pursuits—including, perhaps,
billiards, aquatic sports, and interior decorating!
DEBATES.
A flourishing Debating Society was set
afoot in 1921. It has continued through the
years, being conducted by the K.C.S.C. Each
year a debate is arranged with the Old Colleg-
ians’ Association, and other Colleges. Several
of King’s men have distinguished themselves in
Inter-University debates, and the contests have
proved of practical and permanent value to the
students in their later professional careers. In
1929, Mr. G. Nash was one of the University
Debating team which journeyed to Hobart. In
more recent years Mr. T. J. N. Foley has also
represented the University.
COLLEGE NAME.
The name “King’s College” was only chosen
after long deliberation. A dozen names, sug-
gested by Dr. Fowles, were before the com-
mittee. “Wesley” was soon eliminated on ac-
count of the duplication with the College in
Sydney University. The proposals were finally
lessened to three:—University, Union, and
King’s. On a vote, the last proved first,
“University” being too general, “Union” having
other meanings than “Church Union”; and also
for two other reasons, viz.:—(1) that King
George Y. (crowned in Westminster Abbey, June
22. 1911, and acclaimed on his return from a re-
splendent tour in India) seemed destined, just
then, to have quite as long and prosperous and
neaceful a reign as his father, King Edward, the
Peacemaker; and (2) that “King’s” seemed to
recall “Queen’s” College in Melbourne where
some of our most distinguished Australasian
Methodists have studied and graduated. So
“King’s” it became for the centuries to come —a
royal home of culture!


A
Consider the Advantages
Furnishing at RHOADES
Do not fail to call in
and see RHOADES’
wonderful DISPLAY.
inexpensive Dining
This Suite only One
Example.
This suite is an attractive
Suite in selected Silky Oak, comprising Sideboard.
Refectory Table, 5 Dining and 1 Carver Chair.
Available on very Easy Terms. m r*%
A real Rhoades’ bargain at tli/I//I1
Elastic Credit System.
Rhoades’ Easy Terms are ar-
ranged to suit the purchaser. In
fact , the buyers practically ar-
range their own terms. Discounts
are allowed for Cash, and Gener-
ous Freight Concessions for out-
of-the-city customers are available.
Keen Factory Prices.
The factory to home policy
adopted by Rhoades means that
direct factory prices are available.
Save your Money Buy from
Rhoades.
Furnishing; Schemes.
Rhoades’ complete home furnish-
ing schemes have assisted many
young couples, so why not come
along and discuss the furnishing
of your home with them.
Send for Catalogue and Furnish
Throughout List.
Modern Designs.
Rhoades’ modern factory’ ensures
you the very latest up-to-the-
minute styles and designs. For
a modernly furnished home call
and see Rhoades.
RHOADES
Ifft, Complete
Home
im
Furnishers
| IT6-124 Wickham St., Valley, BRISBANE
mit
<S>
<s>
<s>
<»
•$>
<S>
<S>
<*>
<S>
■S>
<S>
<S>
<s>
<s>
<S>
<S>
<S>
<S>
<S>
<S>
<S><S>3>
W. R. C. JAY
Rev. T. BIBBY
(Hon. Sec. College Council)
H. A. LOWE


APPENDICES.
(a) Students' Roll (1913-1938)
(i) UNIVERSITY STUDENTS.
1913 *W. Stanley Bath, H. W. Dinning, C. A.
Foggon, J. L. Mursell, F. Small, A. H. Jones,
R. A. Percy, I* H. Foote, D. E. Baldwin, E. C.
Cribb, *S. B. Watkins, Chas. H. Jones, P. H.
Brown, James Alexander Robinson, Alister Bailey
Grimes, Thomas Thatcher, Frederick James
McCarthy, Owen Walter O’Brien.
1914 — Harry Hooper Heiner, Ernest William
Cue Holdaway, Eric Francis, Stanley Francis,
Trevor Francis,
1915 *Walter Mather Douglas, James Hoare.
1916 F. J. Bray, A. J. Matheson, G. W. Har-
greaves.
1917 Idrisyn Frederick Jones, Eric Gordon
Wagner, Alfred McCulloch, Stanley George
Brown, Eric Gibson Gee, Herbert McCulloch,
Frank Fielding, Alexander Gordon Dunn, *E. C.
C. Gee.
1918 — Tom Simpson, Horace William Johnson,
George Henry Jenks.
1919 Frank Wheatley Dunstan, Victor Edgar
Greet, Fergus Albert Irvine, James Eric Mor-
wood, William David Pryor, Robert Joseph Henry
Risson, Frederick William Whitebouse, *H. E.
Roberts.
1920 William George Henderson, John Hum-
phrey Woolrych, William Robert Winks, Charles
Sinclair Hooper, Robert Leslie Mills, Herbert
Spencer Roberts, Arthur Horace Thomas, Leslie
Allerton Jacobs, Lytton Redvers Baden Powell,
Harold McCulloch, Francis A. Gaydon, *J. H. Sim-
monds.
1921 Frederick George Holdaway, George
Woods Harding.
1922 David Herbert Lewis, James Saunders
Lawrie, Alfred Gordon Berg, Thomas Milfull,
Alexander Foster Clappison, Neville Ernest
Moore Raymond, Jack Mulholland, Roy Bilbrough
Morwood, Morris Albert Williams, Norman Rey-
land Maxwell Craigie, Ivor John Pauli, Charles
Henry Frederic Johnston.
1923 Harry Thomas Pegg, xPercival John
Lanham, William Gordon Rankin.
1924 Malcolm Wesley Carseldine, Cecil Ellis,
Montgomery White, Malcolm E. Outridge, Wil-
liam Alexander McDougall, Noel S. Gaydon.
1925 Howard Richards Berg, Henry Norman
Charles Bandidt. Frederick George Few, Arthur
Bradford, Alan Gordon Grant, F. J. Wilson, C. A.
Jorss.
1926 Gerard William Noble, Lionel Morri-
son, William Sinclair Parkinson, J. A. Hunt,
Vernon Asquith Webber, W. H. Hawton.
1927 — Leonard Graham Dbbbie, Henry Alfred
Lowe, Douglas Samuel Maxwell, Clifford Stuart
Christian, Ernst Fritz Gutekunst, Cecil N. Sin-
namon, Charles A. Herries.
1928 James Gardiner Robertson, Desmond
Noel: Gredden, John Salkeld Hardy, George Sand-
ford Pro-copis, Alexander Kilpatrick Thomson,
P. E. Huelin, *E. Blumberg.
1929 James Baxter Reid, Willis Lynn
Haenke, John Mervyn Fielding, Frederick Colin
Courtice, Harold William Adolphus Nicholls,
Phillip Earl Gordon Schatzel, Herbert Montrose
Kingston, Robert Thomas Hague, *E. R. Wyeth,
Robert William Strutton.
1930 — Arthur Wood, Maxwell Arthur Walker,
Alfred Charles Oertel, Robert Jay, Trevor Rece
Edwards, Reginald John Snarr Clappison, Hamil-
ton Stuart Patterson, Kenneth Hugh Hooper,
Stewart Clarence Foote, John Hayden Middleton,
Stanley Edwin Cox, *J. D. Richards, Samuel
Leonard Russell, William Albert James Watt,
D. McCorquodale, *W. A. L. Hyde.
1931 — Alan Francis Bandidt, Charles Arthur
Jones, Lynn David Walters, Percy Harold
Thomas, Clive Hartley Allen, Frederick William
Miller.
1932 Victor Keith Collins, Herbert Howard
Denny, xAlfred George Finch, John Gustavus
Percy, George Elvis Ross, Colin White, George
England Young, Gharries Thomas Hansen, Fran-
cis Joseph Seary, Leslie Benjamin Swan, William
Alexander Rogers, xArthur Lex Robinson,
'"Charles Stanley Green.
1933 Graham Rupert Atherton, Kenneth
Seymour Hale Foote, Howard Wilfred Freeman,
Clifford Edwin Grigg, Clifford Robert Lulham,
Charles Ernest Miller, James Clifford Nuttall,
John Wesley Radford, Arnold Enfield Risson,
Percy Francis Skewes, Harold King Thomsett,
James Stewart Hunter, Frank Joseph Lewis, Eric
David Evans, Clement Byrne Christesen.
1934 — Graham Henry Bourne, Oscar Henry
Bell, Geoffrey Merrett Foote, Jerome Hugh
Mariano Frewen, Kenneth James Grice, Ernest
Harold Hughes, Donald Gielis, Kenneth Macal-
pine, Edmund Muller, Muir Mervyn Purser,
Ronald Alfred Perry, Geoffrey Reginald Wilmoth,
*J. F. Richardson.
1935 — Robert Kelvin Allen. Allan Arthur
Anger, Howard Gordon Lavers, Maurice William
Blank, Vyvyan Roessler Pascoe, George Albert
Preston, Wilfred John Simmonds, Victor Cyril
Rahmann, Donald James Stevens, Bernard Hec-
tor Trembath, Albert Wilbur Trembath, William
Neilson Wensley, Alexander Miln Thomson, Harry
Gilmore Wilson, Paul Stanley Williams, Kenneth
B, Fowler, Robert Stevens Brodribb, Thomas
John. Noel Foley, Bruce Alexander Gegg, Vincent
Ernest Schmidt, Stephen James Lothian Gomm,
*J. R. Allen.
1936 — Paul Justus Christesen, James Ernest
Clements, Robert Courtice, Douglas Alexander
Curtis, Dudley Nelson Drew, Colin Gregory El-
worthy, Frank Fraser, Vernon Kleinschmidt,
Harold Powell Palethorpe, George Edward Pont-
ing, Bruce Stanley Richmond, Horace Mervyn
Risson, Richard Cunningham Simpson, William
Vincent Sinclair, William John Whitchurch,
Geoffrey E. Fewster, T. Abel, Bruce Lionel
Poole, :!: H. A. Becconsall.
1937 David John Wilbur Smith, Vayro Wil-
liam Wilson, Jack Cecil Whight, Alan Geoffrey
Bennett, Reginald Louis Church, George Corones,
Brian Hooper Courtice, Frank Haig Cowlishaw,
Bernard Lawrence Dennis, George Charles Lovell


*X3
n
571^1
Jbri\
&
—-V fC7
| THE GIRLS READ THE RIOT ACT ! |
S“Hear ye. Hear ye," chorused the girls. “Be <a>
it known that any male whose honour it may $>
the to dance upon our toes or enjoy the bright-
ness of our company shall henceforth appear in
<$ tails." . . . Lots of fellows are still trying to <|>
<& get away with the dinner suit . . . others are <s>
<& dashing about in prehistoric tails, but the wiser <s>
men are coming to Rothwells* for up-to-date &
$ tail suits—and they’re getting golly good value, <s>
<$ too. Ready-tailored styles from £5/15/- (22 <s>
<s> sizes); Made-to-measure tails from £9/9/-. See <s>
<|> Rothwells* Edward Street windows. <s>
And Now Refrigeration by Gas
The Scientific Wonder of the Age Refrigeration by Heat —The
Modern Electrolux Gas Refrigerator is a truly amazing appliance
Completely Silent
No Moving Parts
No Wireless Interference
Perfect Operation in Tropics
Ten Point Cold Control
Guaranteed Two Years
Completely Dependable
Before you decide on a Refrigerator investigate this extraordinary appliance
A FULL RANGE IS ON DISPLAY IN OUR SHOWROOMS
The South Brisbane Gas & Light Co. Ltd.
Office and Showrooms 305 Stanley Street, South Brisbane
Handel, James Griev Hunt, Robert Dunbar
Hunter, Alfred W. Jayasuria, Kenneth W. Lavers,
Walter Morgan Simon, Donald Arthur Lindsay
Smith, Vernon John Wagner, Norman John
Claude Sherwin, Leopold Joseph Laurie-Rhodes,
*L. V. P. Kennedy.
1938 —Douglas Stewart Adcock, Robert
Murray Benham, Alexander David Stewart Fog-
gon, lan Daveney Fowler, William Hansen,
Ronald Morrison Jones, James lan Macfarlane,
Bertram James Phillips, Alfred John Popham,
Gilbert William Russell, Henry Malcolm Whyte,
John Joseph Wilshere, Noel Delwyn Quelch, D. H.
Laurie-Rhodes, H. G. Bradbury.
* Non-resident,
x Later studied Theology.
(ii) THEOLOGICAL STUDENTS
1913 — William Christian Kleindienst, Robert
Edward Bacon, Edmund Axelsen, Walter Kidd,
Arthur Charles Tempest, Frank Percy Witton,
Hof, *James Henry Heaton.
1914 Charles Percival John Clarkson, Harold
Gordon Ford, James Graham Hunter, John
Thomas Roberts.
1915 Hector Chandler, Cyril William Mors-
ley, Frederick Jonathan Harris, Thomas Norman
Deller, Frederick H. Metcalfe, Benjamin Powell,
Robert Grayson.
1916 — James Bean, John William Thomas
Theaker.


1917 Thomas George Moores, Frederick
Hugh Brown, William Harold Acton Larkin,
z Frank Fielding.
1918— George Edwin Holland, Charles Henry
Foulkes, Harry Leslie Delves.
1919 — Thomas John Wilson.
1920 William T. Phillips.
1921 — Stanley York Potter, Rudolph Huth,
John Murray.
1922
1923 z Joseph Tainton, Edmund Henry But-
ters, Arthur Trafford Walker.
1924 Eric Edgar Potter, z Frank S. Thomas,
George Wesley Brown, John Charles Rundle.
1925 John Tulip, Norman Haddon Grimmett,
Tom Hardy Blackburn.
1926 Howard Ralph Heaton, Stanley John
Russell Murr, *Edwin T. Walker.
1927 — Thomas Gilbert Lithgow, z George
Nash, Ambrose Cheetem Hawey, Raymond Henry
Shelton, *Cyril A. Read, *Roland F. Bristow, Per-
cival John Lanham.
1928 William P. J. Davey, Francis Joseph
Leckenby, Victor Mead, z Leonard Noel Kentish.
1929 — Thomas Herbert Cherry, Clifford Gold
Browne, John Leslie Clisset Rowley, z Gordon
James.
1930 — z Cecil Graham Robinson, Oliver James
Brandon, Stanley Tiplin Vickery, Herbert Thomas
Unwin, Ralph Leslie Hogg, z Leslie Tiplin
Vickery.
1931 — Basil Joseph Dale, z Donald Fraser
Boorman, Edgar Almond Wells, Wilfred John
Tomlinson, z x Chester Eric Martin, z x John
White.
1932 — z Arthur Charles Meadmore, z Alexan-
der Gordon Michael.
1933 —Arthm Leonard Wilkinson, Ralph
Ellis Bramley, Thomas Clyde Toft, x Horace
White, x Clement Victor Barnard.
1934 — Arild Christian Nielsen, z James New-
ton Bagnall, David Edward Williams.
1935 — z Arthur William Preston, z Cyril D.
Alcorn, Arthur Lex Robinson.
1936 — Ivan Wells Alcorn, Ronald Howe, Alan
C. Seamer.
1937 — Richard Thomas Sargeant, Albert
Samuel James Stewart.
1938 z Robert William Fulcher, George Dick
Smith, Dudley Kenneth Williamson.
* Non-resident,
x Baptist.
z Also Studied at University,
(h) The Opening Path.
(Ode on the Founding of the University of Queensland)
A continent to human ken unborn —
Its circling waters lonely vigil keep ;
Where Phoebus’ chariot flames the coming morn.
And coral bars arrest the swelling deep.
There wide domains and fairest lie asleep.
Dumb vales and hills watched by the spangled skies:
A kingdom Nature sows but no hands reap.
With myriad treasure stored, hid from all eyes.
In idle slumber through uncounted centuries.
When hark! a circumnavigator’s cry;
A daring soul surveying rivers full;
Explorers pressing where swift deaths are nigh;
Rough paths and wandering tents, an outpost school.
Stocked run, and sudden gold, and wealth of wool,
Havens and iron roads, and all the array
Of justice, progress, peace and ordered rule;
And so from chaos Queensland sped its way,—
A wondrous dawning, herald of resplendent day.
Now crown her Jubilee and Nationhood!
With highest knowledge radiate the land!
Let this day’s dedication be of Good
A sovereign warranty for aye to stand!
Let North and South clasp eager hand in hand.
Rejoicing in this Temple, strong and free.
Built for the People by august command.
That generations long may turn the key
Of lore and swing the gates of Opportunity.
Proud Colleges in wisdom’s line shall rise
Rich in to-day, and for to-morrow bold;
Students shall climb the steeps unto the skies,
Outstripping every porch and fane of old.
Compact in comradeship that ne’er grows cold.
Finding God’s purpose out of mysteries.
Joyously shaping life while years unfold,
And linked with eager-souled fraternities
Across all time and wide associating seas.
Here let majestic Science find a home.
And spell new secrets of the sky and earth;
Speed freighted argosies across the foam,
Snan gulfs, assay the hills, and transform dearth
To plenty; realms of wisdom bring to birth,
Materialise the visioned age of seers.
Make the dull round of days shine with strange worth.
Enjoy the garnered gains of pioneers.
And point to dazzling wizardry of coming years!
Here flourish Art and all that makes men thrill
In kinship with the Highest; all that tends
To useful days, to discipline of will.
To proud emprise, to reverence that bends
And worships One whose agelong goodness sends
Dream and fulfilment, spite of Time’s long stealth.
So may His workers shape to noblest ends
This State, its soul illumed, its mind in health, —
Youngest and queenliest daughter in the Commonwealth!
E.W.H.F.
10th December, 1909.


f
$> <»
Choose Your Photographer with Care !
The Artistic Productions of TRAINED Master Craftsmen will Cost
you no more than the Inferior Quality of Untrained Amateurs.
Now is your Opportunity to Surprise the Home folk with the
ONLt Gift that ONLY YOU can give :
YOUR PHOTOGRAPH
Made by REGENT STUDIOS
(Member Professional Photographers’ Association)
Will Delight both Giver and Receiver.
Don’t Risk a Disappointment. Reserve an Appointment.
REGENT STUDIOS
Note New Address
MANAHAN’S CHAMBERS, 43 QUEEN STREET (next Bank of New South Wales)
Photographers to Queenslanders Since 1864.
PHONE : B 5728.
KING’S COLLEGE STUDENTS—1933—Back Row: A. G. Michael, K. S. H. Foote, J. S. Hunter, E. D. Evans,
C. E. Miller, H. W. Freeman, H. White. C. R. Lulham, F. W. Miller, A. L. Robinson: Third Row: C. B.
Christesen, J. G. Percy, C. A. Jones, B. J. Dale, R. E. Bramley, A. L. Wilkinson, C. E. Grigg, F. J. Lewis,
J. W. Radford, J. C. Nuttall, A. E. Risson; Second Row: G. E. Young', H. K. Thomsett, W. J. Tomlinson,
P. F. Skewes, T. C. Toft, G. R. Atherton. D. F. Boor man (Com.). G. E. Ross, H. H. Denny, W. L. Haenke,
A. G. Finch, L. B. Swan; Front Row: A. C. Meadmore (Treas.), S. L. Russell, B.A., W. A. Rogers, H. A.
Lowe, B.E. (Vice-Master). The Master (Rev. H. H. Trigge. M.A., B.D.), A. C. Oertel, B.Sc. (Pres.), C. T.
Hansen (See.), P. H. Thomas (Com.), C. H. Allen.


(c) Sister Colleges.
The following are the Residential Colleges
affiliated or to be affiliated, with the University
of Queensland, the first three being founded
very shortly after the establishment of the Uni-
versity : —King’s College (open for students at
the beginning of 1913), situated on River Ter-
race, Kangaroo Point. Present Master: Rev.
H. H. Trigge, M.A,, B.D. St. John’s College
(opened in 1912), situated on River Terrace,
Kangaroo Point. Warden; The Yen. W. H. W.
Stevenson, M.A., 1919-1926 and 1936-1938 (now
Bishop of Grafton, N.S.W.). Emmanuel Col-
lege (opened in 1912), situated on Wickham
Terrace, Brisbane. Present Principal : Rev.
Mervyn Henderson, M.A. The Women’s College
(founded in 1914), situated in Shafston Avenue,
Kangaroo Point. Present Principal: Freda Bage,
M.Sc., F.L.S. St. Leo’s College (founded in
1917), situated on Wickham Terrace. Present
Rector: Rev. P. Meenagh, C.M., M.A. Duchesne
College (opened in 1937), situated at “Stuart-
holme,” Toowong. Present Principal: Madame
J. Percy-Dove, rscJ., M.A., Dip. Ed.
(d) St. Lucia Site.
From its foundation in 1910 there had been
a quest for the ideal site for the University. It
was housed at first in the Governor’s residence
(Botanical Gardens), because that seemed the
safest way to secure the University beginning
at all. Once planted it rapidly grew, but all the
while it was obviously misplaced. Negotiations
for a site in Victoria Park, where a medical
school would be near the Hospitals, were long
continued, and the site for the University was
reported as definitely fixed in 1922. In 1925
six areas of three acres each were set apart in
the new official Victoria Park University Site
for affiliated Colleges. King’s College Council
thought that five acres was the minimum. In
1926 the munificent offer from Dr. and, Miss
Mayne of land at St. Lucia, for the site of the
new University buildings, altered the whole situa-
tion, although the Victoria Park site, which was
strongly suggested in 1910, had been formerly
adopted by the Government.
No one can yet say what financial commit-
ments the proposed transfer to St. Lucia will
involve, either in capital outlay or in annual
maintenance. Certain it is that faith, generous
and wide-spread gifts, and economic management
have combined to place the College finances upon
; a present satisfactory basis, and it may fairlry
be hoped that, when King’s changes its locale,
means will be devised by which its new difficul-
ties may be met and surmounted.
(e) The Press-
The “Newsletter,” a breezy, informative
publication, was established in 1923 by the
K.O.C.A. It skips a span now and then, but
re-emerges bright and hearty. No. 4 appeared
in May, 1938. It is a welcome link with country
and overseas members. Published vigorously and
irregularly, its pages sparkle with pungent pars.
No. 5 appeared in September.
“ The University of Queensland Magazine ”
(1911-1919) has interesting records of King’s.
The Notes of 1911 foreshadowed the establish-
ment. Residents of King’s made their first
contributions, to the “Magazine” in May, 1913.
They record that 5 “Arts” and 6 “Greasers”
came in March, 1913, followed by 6 “Theologs”
in April. Reference is made to the formal open-
ing of the College on June 14th, 1913. The
Methodist General Conference was then being
held in Brisbane. Speakers included Sir Wm.
Macgregor, Professor Steele, Dr. Brown, and Rev.
F. J. Nance, M.A. In August the King’s Col-
lege Club was formed —President, J. A. Robin-
son; Secretary, P. H. Brown; Treasurer, R. E.
Bacon; Committee, H. W. Dinning and A. H.
Jones. War broke out in the midst of King’s
jubilations over winning the “Athletics.” On
the morning after War was declared, Dinning
enlisted, and King’s “First Expeditionary Force”
were Corporal H. V. Dinning, 8.A., Sapper F. T.
Small, and Rev. Private J. G. Hunter! The Notes
for 1915 witness that every available man had
gone to the front. Notes for May, 1918, say —
“We have four old men back with us and six
new ones; and H. McCulloch risen from the
ranks is first resident tutor.” In 1919 the Col-
lege Guild had its first lecture—from Prof.
Richards, on “Coal and Oil.” One Shakespeare
Evening was. a dramatic success. A Bible Club
also prospered. King’s, in its first ten years,
laid surprisingly well its foundations of work,
sport, and College spirit. “All honour,” the
Notes say, “is due to those who pioneered in the
life of the College.”
The present University Magazine, “Gal-
mahra,” has occasional references to King’s and
contributions from our scribes.
And much valuable material for these An-
nals has naturally come from the “Courier,” the
“Daily Mail,” “The Telegraph,” and the denomi-
national magazine, “ The Methodist Times.”
ff t n t s.


The dream that fires man’s -heart to make,
To build, to do, to sing or say
A beauty Death can never take,
An Adam from the crumbled clay.
—John Masefield.
KING’S COLLEGE JUBILEE
CELEBRATIONS.
Special Features -
of the
TWENTY-FIFTH BIRTHDAY PROGRAMME,
September, 1938.
1. Saturday (September 19th) —
Jubilee Garden Party at King’s College.
In the presence of the Lieutenant-
Governor and Chancellor of the Univer-
sity (Sir James Blair, Kt.). Chairman :
W. H. Green, Esq.
2. Sunday (September llth)-^
11 a.m. —College Service at Albert
Street Church. Preacher: Professor A.
. E. Albiston, M.A., 8.D., President-
General.
3. Wednesday (September 141 h) —
Jubilee Reception and Dinner. In the
presence of the State Premier (Hon. W.
Forgan Smith, M.L.A., LL.D.). Hosts :
The Master (Rev. H. H. Trigge, M.A.,
8.D.) and Mrs. Trigge.
4. Jubilee Annals of King’s College. A per-
manent History, beautifully illustrated.
5. The £l,OOO Foundation Bursary Fund.
(Collections to date, £580.)
No blast of air or fire of sun
Puts out the light whereby we run
With girdled loins our lamplit race,
And each from each takes heart of grace
And spirit till his turn be done.
, —Swinburne.
