

EXTRACT FROM
THE
AUSTRALIAN ZOOLOGIST
Issued by
The Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales
Edited by
ALLAN R. McCULLOCH,
Zoologist, Australian Museum
Vol. 1.—Part 5
Sydney, MAY 20, 1918
All communications to be addressed to the Hon. Secretary,
Box 2399, General Post Office, Sydney.
SYDNEY:
W. E. SMITH LTD., PRINTERS


Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales
ESTABLISHED 1879
REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT, 1899 (1917)
COUNCIL, 1918.
President:
A. F. Basset Hull, R.A.O.U.
Vice-Presidents:
H. E. Finckh.
W. W. Froggatt, F.L.S.. F.E.S.
A. E. Jaques.
S. T. D. Symons. M.R.C.V.S.
Members ;
J. H. Campbell.
Professor H. G. Chapman, M.D., B.S.
Sydney Dodd, V.D.Sc., F.R.C.V.S.
E. A. D’Ombrain, M. 8., B.S.
C. Hedley, F.L.S.
Professor S. J. Johnston, D.Sc., B.A.
Allan R. McCulloch.
W. J. Rainbow, F.E.S.
W. C. Shipway.
D. W. C. Shiress.
Col. Alfred Spain, V.D., F.I.A.
R. H. Todd, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer ;
G. A. Waterhouse, B.Sc., 8.E., F.E.S.
Subscription : Ordinal)- Member, £1 is. per annum.
Associate Member, 7s. 6d. ~ ~
Privileges :
Ordinary Members —Free admission to Taronga Zoological Park; Additional Tickets
admitting 20 Adults or 40 Children ; Free Copy of “ Australian
Zoologist.”
Associate Members —Free Copy of "Australian Zoologist.”


THE BIRDS OF THE COBBORA DISTRICT.
By THOMAS P. AUSTIN.
Most of my observations of bird life have been within the boundaries of the Cobborah Estate, which
is a grazing property of about eight thousand acres, through the middle of which runs the Talbragar
River. Upon this Estate, on each side of the river, there are some very rich flats ; after leaving
these flats the nature of the country suddenly changes, it rather abruptly rises to a height averaging
about fifty feet, then it is mostlv sandy country, or ironstone ridges and hills, running back for many
miles. Just at the western boundary of the Estate there is another change in the country. Here,
on the north side of the river, rough, wiki sandstone hills rise up very suddenly to a height of about
three hundred feet ; then on for forty miles the country is very poor, and has never been occupied.
It consists of rocky ridges, either of sandstone or ironstone, one after the other, with poor sandy
flats between. Practically the whole of this country is very heavily timbered, mostly with fine large
ironbarks, from which hundreds of sleepers have been cut during the last two years. Beneath these
trees the ground is mostly covered with thick scrub and undergrowth of various kinds ; in some parts
it is almost smothered with young pines ; in others wattles, bullions, blackheath, stringybark saplings,
and other kind of eucalyptus seedlings and suckers, which have sprung up after bush fires. Through
the greater part of this vast forest one could travel for miles without seeing a drop of water, and very
few birds ; but just outside the western boundary of the Estate in this great forest there are a few
small patches of country, which in a good spring are simply alive with birds. Further than these
I seldom go, so my collecting area consists of about nine thousand acres, within the boundaries of which
I have taken the eggs of one hundred and twenty-two species, and there are another ten I have known
to breed here, although I have not actually taken their eggs.* I have identified another sixty species,
but know nothing about any of them ever having bred in the district, most of them being just casual
visitors. The timber on the Estate has been mostly killed, just sufficient being left growing to
provide plenty of shelter for the stock. Along the river there are many fine large red gums and river
oaks, most of the flats being lightly timbered with white and yellow box and native apple trees.
Away from the flats the timber is similar, with the addition of a few pines and ironbarks in places,
and most of the killed trees have been left standing. The following are the species of which I have
taken the eggs, and a few remarks about them :
f Dramatis novae-hollandiae (Emu). —1 am glad to be able to say that a fair number of these stately
birds are still to be seen here. They do no damage, and are given every encouragement to remain
upon the Estate, but the scrubby ridges appear to be their stronghold, their visits to the Estate being
mostly during times of drought. During the winter of 1915. when the country was suffering from
want of rain, two broods were reared on the Estate, and in 1916 several nests containing eggs were
found outside.
Upon ocellaia (Mallee Fowl).- —I regret to say that this fine bird has now entirely disappeared
from the district. About ten years ago I found one of their nesting mounds in course of construction.
When the birds appeared to have finished laying I completely enclosed it with wire netting, hoping
to secure the young birds, but owing to the parents not being able to get at the mound the top set
hard with the rain, and although the eggs incubated the young birds could not work their way out,
and died in the shell, as I found when 1 opened the nesting mound just too late.
*Cotuniix pecloralis (Stubble Quail). — At the time I started to write this paper I had never
seen a nest of this species, but on November 19th, 1917, while driving up to a sheepyard in a motor
car on the Estate a bird flushed from almost beneath the car. Upon making a search I found a nest
containing six eggs, the wheel of the car having passed over the edge of the nest and within two inches
of the eggs. I left the eggs, but upon passing the nest some days later found the clutch had not been
* These species arc marked with an asterisk.
t The nomenclature is that of Gregory Mathews’s Hand-list of 1908,


increased, and the eggs were quite cold. When I came to this district first, 17 years ago, I often saw
young birds while cutting the crops, but from 1905 till 1915 I did not see two dozen birds. During
that period we did not once have a good spring, but this year and last year have been the two best
I have known here, and there are a fair number of Stubble Quail about, and I have seen several
broods of their young.
*Synoecus australis (Brown Quail). —A rather rare species here ; only a few coveys of them
are found on the Estate, mostly along the banks of the river, where I have seen young birds.
Turnix varia (Painted Quail). —The first time I actually identified this species as being found
in this district was on June 32nd, 1917, when I shot a pair. Since then they have been very numerous
in suitable country, both on the Estate and out on the scrubby ridges. My dogs have found a great
number of young birds, more especially when only a few days out of the shell, but strange to say I
have only seen one nest containing eggs. They evidently have a long breeding season, and start
very early. I caught young birds almost able to fly in August, 1917, and they were still breeding
in November, because I saw very young birds on the 13th of that month.
Turnix velox (Little Quail).— Being a nomadic species, it only puts in an appearance here in
good seasons, arriving sometimes in great numbers early in the spring, but they are all gone again
by the cnd .of March. They are late breeders. I have seen neither eggs nor young birds before
November, One habit they sometimes have here when nesting, which I have not seen recorded
before, is building a very substantial dome-shaped nest, and placed under the side of a small fallen
dead tree trunk, somewhat resembling a roughly made nest of the Little Field Wren. The eggs are
scarcely visible viewed directly from above.
Geopelia placida (Peaceful Dove). —A permanent resident, but some years much more numerous
than others, more especially so in the spring. I have never seen them in such great numbers as
during the spring of 1917. I have found them breeding from early in September till the middle of
January, and their nests have been placed from six to sixty feet from the ground.
Geopelia cuneata (Little Turtle Dove). —I first saw this species here on Ist October. 1917 ; since
then they have been rather plentiful, but only in the thickly-timbered country. I have only found
one nest, which was placed in a stringybark sapling, about five feet from the ground, and although
the eggs were in a very advanced state of incubation the sitting bird was very shy, and I had to hide
in a bush near the nesting tree awaiting the return of the bird to enable me to get close enough to
identify the species. This seemed rather strange, because when not nesting they are very tame.
Phaps thalcoplera (Bronzewing Pigeon).—A permanent resident, but like many other species
found here it is much more numerous some years than others. During the summer they come to
the river and waterholes to drink every evening about sunset, or even much later. They arc very
erratic in their breeding habits. 1 have found their nests from within a few feet from the ground
to over sixty feet up, and have taken their eggs from the first week in September to the first week
in March. As an edible bird in this district they are scarcely worth shooting. They mostly feed
upon the wattle seeds, which appear to make them very tough and give them rather a disagreeable
flavour.
Hypatanidia philippensis (Pectoral Rail). —A very rare bird in this district. I have only
known them to breed here upon two occasions ; one nest with five eggs was found while cutting a
crop ; another pair bred at a dam only about a hundred yards from my house, where they reared
their young. When first hatched they were clothed in black down, and .had the habit of bobbing
their tails, like some of the Water Hens.
*Poranza palustris (Little Crake). —A very rare species here, but a few of them turned up during
the winter of 1913, and bred at a lagoon just in front of my woolshed. but I did not know they were
there until they had finished breeding. I then found several of their nests from which the young
had lately gone, pieces of eggshells being in the nests.


Microlribonyx vevlralis (Black-tailed Native Hen). —A very rare species in these parts, but about
a dozen birds put in an appearance during the winter of 1909, taking up their abode at a dam near
my house, and started nesting almost immediately. I took ten clutches of their eggs, and they laid
from two to eight eggs for a sitting. They place their nests in a great variety of situations ; some
were in tussocks growing in water, others in the water roots of willow trees, some a few feet from
the ground in the first fork of pepper trees, but one was placed in a most extrordinary ]K)sition ten
feet above the water in a white box tree. With the exception of two of these birds, they all departed
before the end of the year. Although the two remained for several years they did not breed again ;
then one disappeared. The other is here still, having remained at the house dam for eight years,
and 1 can hear it calling at the time of writing.
Podicipes novac-hollttndiae (Black throated Grebe). After heavy rains which till the lagoons
these birds put in an appearance almost immediately. I'pon one occasion there was a very heavy
thunderstorm about live o’clock in the evening; it filled a swamp which had been dry for many
months, and as it was the break-up of a protracted drought there had not been sufficient suitable water
anywhere in the district lor these birds, but when passing the swamp early next morning I was
surprised to see about a dozen Black-throated Grebe upon the water. In suitable seasons they breed
here freely, and I have seen their nests containing eggs from the first week in September to the end
of January. Some years the Ravens find them out and destroy all their eggs, in spite of the birds
covering them with water weeds before leaving the nests.
I.obivamllus lohatus (Spur-w inged Plover). -A permanent resident, but in some years seen in
rather large flocks, while in others only a .few scattered pairs are to be met with. Their coming in
great numbers is not owing to good seasons, because I have seen them here in large flocks during
droughts. Their favourite haunts are near shallow swamps and open paddocks with short grass.
They are extremely wary birds, being very difficult to approach. When darting down over water
they rank amongst the fastest flying of Australian birds. They breed hero very freely, and when
disturbed from the nest they will not return while the intruder is in sight. Their eggs are very difficult
to find without hiding and watching the sitting bird until if returns to the nest, which is usually much
more substantially constructed here than those I have seen in other districts. I have never seen
more than four eggs for a sitting, and they show considerable variation in shape, colour and markings.
They mostly commence to lay about the middle of July and finish about the end of September, and
unless their eggs or young arc lost they only rear one brood in a season. On November 25th, 1909,
I found a nest with the eggs just hatching, this being the latest which has come under my notice.
Zonijer tricolor (Black-breasted Plover). —Some years they arrive in large flocks in January,
mostly immature birds, and during the heat of the day are to be met with beneath shady trees, usually
at no great distance from water. In cool weather they scatter about the more open paddocks and
plains. A few of them always remain to breed here. They arc very solicitous for their eggs and
young. If disturbed from their nest they will soon return, in spite of an intruder being only a short
distance away and clearly in sight. They generally lay four eggs for a sitting, most of which show-
very little variation. I have found their nests containing eggs from the last week in .May up till
November 12th. If the material is available their nest is invariably placed amongst horse-dung.
There is always a nest built, though in some cases it is very scanty, but I have never seen the eggs on
bare ground.
JEgialitis melaunps (Black-fronted Dotterel). -Always found here in great numbers, no matter
what the season may be. After the breeding is finished they sometimes gather together in great
numbers, usually about a dam in which the water has receded considerably, leaving broad, bare, muddy
margins ; but they are mostly met with in pairs or single birds, and usually in the vicinity of water.
They place their nests, if such they can be called, in a great variety of situations, but usually it is
a mere depression in gravel or sand. Like many other species, when disturbed from their nest, they
adopt the habit of pretending to be crippled. On 16th November, 1917, I saw- the best instance of
this which has ever come under my notice. I suddenly came upon a sitting bird ; it jumped up from
the eggs as if trying to fly, but fell over backwards, exactly like a bird with a joint off one wing. I


watched it do it about a dozen times, and it was each time done so cleverly that I really thought the
bird weis a cripple, but upon making a nearer approach it flew away. I find they just as often lay
three eggs as two, but 1 have never found more than three for a sitting, and I have taken their eggs
from the ist October up till January 13th.
Burhinus gtallarius (Stone Plover). —About eight or ten years ago they were very numerous
throughout the district ; since then I notice that they are getting less and less each year, and it is
seldom I ever hear one now. I can only put the decrease down to the increase of the fox. The
young of this bird becomes such an easy prey for this pest. Their eggs in this district show very
little variation, and I have found them from September 12th till December 10th.
Notophoyx novae-hollandiae (White-fronted Heron). —Never to be seen in great numbers here,
but there are always a few about. They are usually to be met with in pairs or single birds feeding
in the vicinity of water. For nesting purposes they generally resort to redgum trees overhanging
water, often returning to the same nest year after year. The clutch is mostly from three to five, and
I have found nests containing eggs from September nth till November 21st.
*Notophoyx pacific a (Pacific Heron). —A very rare species here ; only small flocks of about
half a dozen and single birds suddenly put in an appearance after big falls of rain, which fill the swamps
and lagoons. I have only known of one nest here, which had young birds standing upon it when I
found it.
Chenonetla jubata (Wood Duck). —At times they are here in Isirge numbers, but usually in small
flocks of from four to a dozen birds, mostly met with feeding upon short green grass near water, such
as the margin of a river, dams, lagoons, etc., and when disturbed they will often only fly a short
distance, and settle upon a dead tree. They breed here more freely than any other species of Duck,
usually going some little distance away from water to select a nesting tree with a suitable hollow.
Although I see several broods of their young each year, I seldom find their nests, but I have taken
their eggs from July 27th till September 1 ith, the largest clutch being ten eggs ; but I have a set of
fifteen in my collection, taken in the Kiverina.
Anas superciliosa (Black Duck). —It is very rarely impossible to find a few of these fine birds
on the Estate, but at no time are they in very great numbers. They are mostly met with in pairs
or small flocks along the river. Nearly every year a few of them breed here, generally hatching their
eggs in hollows in river redgums ; only once in this district have I seen their nest upon the ground.
Their breeding is governed by the season. I have seen young birds just hatched from the middle of
June till the end of the year, but I have only seen eggs during August and September, the largest
clutch being twelve.
Nettium castaneum (Chestnut-breasted Teal). —A very rare bird here. During my seventeen
years’ residence in this district I have only seen two pairs ; the first put in an appearance during May,
1913, and I took their eggs, a clutch of nine, on July 26th. Another pair were on the Estate on 17th
November, 1917, the female having a green head. Although 1 have seen a fair number of these birds
in Victoria and Tasmania, this is the only time I have noticed a female in this stage of plumage.
Nettium gibberi/rons (Grey Teal). —A rather common species here in suitable seasons, sometimes
Eirriving in large flocks. Unlike the Black Duck, they are seldom seen upon the river ; they appear
to prefer dams, swamps and lagoons. They seldom breed here, but I have seen several nests containing
eggs, all of which have been in hollows in redgum trees overhanging water, twelve eggs being the largest
clutch. I have also seen a few broods of young birds.
Astur fasciatus (Goshawk). —Not by any means a common species. Occasionally a bird puts in
an appearance, but they very seldom breed here. During 1906 I found a nest with young ; the birds
returned and bred in the nest again the following year. They laid and hatched while I was away in
North Queensland, | have Only taken two sets of their eggs in this district.


Nest and eggs of the Sparrow Hawk (Accipites [?]) in branch of a
Native Apple Tree.
All illustrations are from photographs taken by the Author on the [?] Estale
Accipiter cirrhocephalus (Sparrow Hawk). —A rare species here, just an occasional pair 01 a
single bird turning up at any time. I have only found four nests ; one had young when I climbed
to it. I took eggs from the others, one nest two years in succession upon the latter occasion the
bird laid five eggs, which is the only clutch of more than four I have ever heard of. Most of the eggs
taken here have been practically white, just an odd specimen being spotted, and then most of the
markings as if beneath the surface of the shell.
$
Uroaetus audax (Wedge-tailed Eagle).—This fine eagle is never very plentiful here, but there
are always a few pairs about, and in this district they seldom, if ever, do any damage to the stock.
In this district alone I have taken six sets of their eggs, and have climbed to at least an equal number
of their nests containing young birds, and numerous others from which the young have gone. Although
they breed in the lambing season, I have never yet seen the remains of a lamb in the nest, but always
rabbits, and plenty of them. They are early breeders, sometimes laying in May, but mostly in July.
Eutolmcetus morphnoides (Little Eagle).—A very rare bird here. I have only seen four pairs,
and they were all breeding, the first being in 1910, and as I was not sure of the species I shot both
birds at the nest. The following year another pair came and built a nest in a tree only about 150
yards away from where the first nest was. It contained a nearly fully-fledged young bird when I
found it. I saw no more of this species until 1917, when another pair had a nest only about 150 yards
from No. 2, and another pair built a nest a few miles down the river. Of the three sets of eggs only
one has been a pair, the ethers being single eggs, and they were taken during the months of September,
October and November,


Nest and eggs of the Little Eagle [?] (originally the nest of a Haven
[?] in branch of a river Red Gum.
Haliastur sphenurus (Whistling Eagle).—Before I eradicated the rabbits on the Estate these
birds were present in great numbers, and I used to take about thirty clutches of their eggs every year.
As soon as I got rid of the rabbits these Eagles mostly disappeared, and now I only see on an average
about one nest a year. They are very erratic in their breeding habits; I have taken their eggs
during every month of the year with the exception of January and February. Two eggs are usually
the full clutch ; but of one hundred and eight nests I have examined containing eggs, thirteen
contained sets of three. I have never seen a larger clutch, and only once have I seen three young
birds in a nest.
Falco lunulatus (Little Falcon). —A very rare species here, just occasionally a pair or a single
bird putting in an appearance at any time of the year. I have only known them to breed here once ;
the nest was placed near the top of a very lofty river redgum tree, from which I scooped three fresh
eggs on October 9th, 1912.
Hieracidea orienlalis (Brown Hawk). —During the years 1908, 1909. 1910 and 1912 these birds
were very common here, and I took seventeen sets of their eggs. Since then I have not known them
to breed here till 1917. when I found two nests; in fact, the birds are seldom seen here now. They
generally use an old Raven’s nest; only once have I known them to build a nest for themselves.
The clutch is generally three; I have never taken "more. I have examined nests containing eggs
from the middle of August till November nth. They do no harm. I have not even known them
to kill a bird of another species.
Cerchneis cenchroides (Kestrel). —Frequently met with at any time of the year. They are
quite harmless ; in fact, I consider they do a lot of good by destroying such pests as grasshoppers
and mice. They are rather late breeders; of twenty-five clutches of eggs I have taken all were


found during the last three months of the year, and they usually lay from three to five eggs, which
show considerable variations in the markings. I have never found them nesting in any place other
than in the hollow of a tree.
Ninox boobook (Boobook Owl). —Considering the class of country it is strange that this species
is not more numerous here ; but owing to their nocturnal habits they might be more plentiful than
they appear to be. I have only taken three clutches of their eggs, all of which were found during
the month of October.
Ninox connivens (Winking Owl). —There are always a few pairs to be found on the Estate.
Once they take up their abode in any particular local-ty they remain about there for years, sometimes
nesting in the same hollow season after season. They are early breeders, often having young by the
middle of August, but I have taken their eggs as late as November 16th ; this, however, might have
been a second laying. They usually lay three eggs for a sitting, often only two. I have taken ten
sets of their eggs, and found a number of their resting hollows containing young birds. Their usual
call note cannot be distinguished from that of Ninox boobook, but when disturbed at their nest and
perched in a neighliouring tree they have quite a different note, somewhat resembling a loud screeching
growl.
Strix dclicatula (Delicate Owl). —From the number of dead birds I have found upon this estate
this species at one time must have been rather plentiful; but for the last seven years I have not seen
one, dead or alive, and I th)nk they are now quite extinct as far as this district is concerned. I have
only once found a nesting place, which contained three eggs.
Glossopsittacus concinnus (Musk Lorikeet). —Some years, usually in the early summer, when the
eucalyptus trees are in bloom, these birds arrive in thousands, most of them departing again before
the winter. Usually a fair number of them remain throughout the year, and some seasons breed
here freely, commencing towards the end of July, but I have taken eggs as late as the middle of
October. I have examined about forty nesting hollows containing eggs or young, but have never
seen more than a clutch of two. When sitting the bird becomes very tame. 1 have repeatedly
seen them come and perch within a few feet of me while I have been chopping out their nesting hollow.
Glossopsittacus pusillus (Little Lorikeet). —Rather a common species on the Estate, some years
arriving and feeding with G. concinnus, though never in such great numbers, but they are more often
met with in pairs. They are very tame, showing little fear of man. When feeding they will often
allow of a very close approach, giving an intruder the impression that he had not been observed.
They nest here freely, but owing to being very close sitters their nests’ are most difficult to find, and
few would ever be discovered containing eggs only for two peculiar habits of the birds. One is, the
non-sitting bird usually remains near the nesting tree, and if watched for a few minutes invariably
flies to the entrance of the nesting hollow. The other is, the sitting bird will often leave the nest and
take a rapid flight, often with the mate, high up in the air, uttering a peculiar- screeching note,
suddenly darting back to the nest. I have often chopped open their nesting hollows and had to pull
the sitting bird off the eggs. The clutch is usually four or five ; I have never seen more. They are
early breeders, commencing towards the end of July, but I have taken fresh eggs as late as the middle
of October, which was probably a second laying.
*Calyptorhynchus viridis (Leach Cockatoo). —There are always a fair number of them in the
ranges, usually keeping to the dense ironbark forests. I have known of their nests to be found in
the district, and I have seen young birds, but I have never been able to find a nest myself. They
are exceptionally tame, showing little fear of man. I have often ridden beneath a tree containing
a flock of them, and there sat and watched them. I once saw six on top of a large dead ironbark
tree, amongst them a beautifully yellow-mottled bird. This one I shot with a revolver ; the other
five did not appear to take the slightest notice of the shot, not even flying from the tree.
Cacatua galerita (White Cockatoo). —Rather a rare species here, being more numerous about
twenty miles down the river. But if I have a ripening maize crop these birds are sure to find it out,


and a flock of atxmt fifty will do great damage to it in a few days. I have only taken three sets
of their eggs, and climbed to three other nests containing young birds. They lay from two to three
eggs during the months of September and October, but in my collection 1 have a clutch of four taken
in Queensland.
Calopsittacus novae-hnllandiae (Cockatoo Parrakeet). —The arrival and departure of this species is
very erratic; sometimes large flocks of them will suddenly put in an appearance, only to disappear
again within a few days, while other seasons they will remain throughout the year and breed here.
Their nests containing eggs are rather difficult to find. I have only taken their eggs twice, both of
which were clutches of four, but I have known of larger broods of young birds.
*Plistes erylhroplerus (Crimson-winged Lory). —Extremely rare in this district; I have only seen
three birds, but I know of one nest having been found.
Platycercus eximius (Rosella). —A very common species on the Estate and a great nuisance in
the orchard while the fruit is ripe, destroying great numbers of quinces, peaches and pears. They
breed here freely, mostly laying during October, and the clutch is generally from six to eight for a
sitting. I have never taken more than the latter number.
Barnardius barnardi (Malice Parrakeet). —A rare species here, only met with in pairs or small
flocks of from four to half a dozen birds. I have only found one nest which contained five eggs.
*Psephotus haematorrhous (Crimson-bellied Parrakeet). —A very rare species here, but not many
miles away they are very common. I have only known of one nest in this district from which young
birds were taken and reared. Their nests are very difficult to find ; it is almost impossible to flush a
sitting female from the hollow, but she always comes out towards evening to be fed by the male,
and to watch for her appearance is the only way to find a nest containing eggs.
Psepholus haematonotus (Red-backed Parrakeet). —One of the most common birds of the district.
They are to be met with in pairs or small flocks anywhere in the more open country, but sometimes
during the winter they congregate in large flocks. Later on during the early part of the breeding
season it is no uncommon thing to see a number of males together, forming a sort of bachelors’ club.
When nesting they become very quarrelsome, fighting with any others that happen to enter the tree
containing the nesting hollow. The female solely performs the task of incubation, but is fed by the
male, for which purpose she leaves the nest, and keeps up a peculiar chattering noise while being
fed, similar to young birds. They breed here very freely, usually commencing during September, and
most of the nests contain young birds by the end of October. I have examined a great many of
their nests, some of which have been in low, hollow stumps, the eggs resting upon the ground, while
others have been in hollows in trees as much as sixty feet from the ground. They usually lay from
four to six eggs for a sitting, but I have taken clutches of seven and eight.
Melopsittacus undulatus (Warbling Grass Parrakeet). —Some years they appear here in the spring
when the grass seeds are ripening, in flocks of thousands. They soon commence to pair off and breed,
often using a tiny hollow, so small within that it is impossible for them to rear their whole brood,
consequently many of the young birds are smothered in the nests as they increase in size. Some
years they breed very late, practically all of them laying in December, but I have never found eggs
here before the middle of November. They lay from five to seven eggs, but appear to differ from
most birds in the time they take to lay the whole clutch. In sets of seven the first egg laid is almost
hatched by the time the clutch is complete ; therefore the eggs are in all stages of incubation, showing
that there must be an interval of some days between the laying of each egg.
Podargus strigoides (Tawny Frogmouth).—A very rare species here. During my seventeen
years’ residence in this district I have only seen four pairs of them, all of which were breeding. On
the morning of May 3rd, 1915, I found a freshly-killed bird in my garden ; from the appearance of the
ground and the numbers of feathers scattered about I think it had lost its life in a fight; it had not
been destroyed by any animal, because the skin was not in any way damaged.


*Aegotheles novae-hnllandiae (Owlet Nightjar).—Owing to its habit of living during the day in
hollows these birds are little seen, but I often hear them calling both during the night and day. I
have found several of their nests containing young, and once flushed a sitting bird from a partly
fallen-in old nest of a Ked-backed Kingfisher, near the top of a high bank of the Talbragar River, the
nest containing three eggs, which I left to hatch. They are very tame little birds ; I have several
times known them to come into my house. On one occasion I was writing rather late on a hot night
in my collection room, when one of these birds came in at the window and perched on the table in
front of me. I just put out my hand and caught it, and even while in my hand the bird did not
show the slightest sign of fear, so I put it out of the window again. I had a similar experience with
another which I caught in my bathroom early one morning.
Eurystomus pacifcus (Dollar Bird). —A few pairs arrive here every year in October, and mostly
take up their abode about the same locality year after year, which is mostly in the large redgums
growing on the banks of the river. I have never known them to breed a second time within the
same hollow ; they choose a fresh one each season, and it is generally high up. Four eggs form a
complete clutch for a sitting, but often only three are laid. The eggs are not always pure white; I
have found them pronouncedly spotted, but the markings appearing as if beneath the surface of the
shell. Most of the birds lay in November, and as soon as the young birds are strong enough
they all take their departure.
Dacelo gigas (Brown Kingfisher).—A very common bird throughout the whole district, mostly
met with in pairs or small communities. They breed here in great numbers, choosing hollows in trees
at various heights from the ground, sometimes quite low down, while others are as much as seventy
feet from the ground. The clutch is usually three, but I once climbed to a nest containing four young
birds. They are rather late breeders, most of them laying in October, but I once took a set of
slightly incubated eggs on the 16th December.
Halcyon pyrrhopygius (Red-backed Kingfisher). —A few pairs arrive here every year during
the months of October and November, and usually take up their abode in ring-barked country,
resorting to the banks of dry creeks for nesting purposes. No matter how hard the clay may be
they appear to have no difficulty in drilling a tunnel into it. They are very close sitters; I have
often caught them in their nests. They breed here very late ; I have taken eggs from the last week
in October up till January 10th, and they mostly lay four or five eggs. I have never taken more
than the latter number.
Halcyon sanctus (Sacred Kingfisher).—They arrive here every spring, but never in very great
numbers, and excepting when with young 1 have never seen more than two birds together, but
pairs are dispersed throughout the whole district, mostly within the vicinity of water. The nest
is usually within the hollow branch of a tree, but I have found them drilled intp the soft sandy
soil near the top of a bank. They often betray the whereabouts of their nest by uttering loud,
screeching cries. They are late breeders, all the eggs being taken during November, and the
clutches were all four or five.
Merops ornatus (Bee Eater). —Arriving here in large numbers during October, they have all
departed again by the end of March. Although I have found many of their nesting burrows, I
have never seen one drilled into a bank ; here they have all been in flat sandy country, but some-
times on the side of a deserted rabbit burrow. They breed late, most of them having eggs during
November and December, and a full clutch is nearly always five. I have never seen a larger one.
Euroslopus albigularis (White-throated Nightjar).—A species which is very seldom seen during
the day. but while fishing in the river just after sundown 1 see a fair number of them. They drink
while on the wing in the same manner as Swallows. I have only found their nesting place twice—
once with a young bird, the other containing an egg ; that was on October 28th, 1910, both nests
being simply the bare ground amongst stones and eucalyptus leaves.


Nesting place and egg of the Spotted Nightjar (Eurostopus argus).
Eurostopus argus (Spotted Nightjar).—Until October 28th, 1915, I had not identified this species
as being found in this district. I had just returned from Tasmania, and one of my employees, who
had been ringbarking during my absence, told me of a nest he had found containing a single " blue ”
egg amongst stones. From his description I could not think what species it could be, so thought it
best to go out with him and see for myself ; but I firstly asked him if he thought the egg would be
now hatched. He informed me that he knew it had not, because he saw it the previous day, and
also, a week ago, he put the egg in a pint of cold water from his water-bag first thing in the morning,
leaving it there all day, returning it to the nest just before he came home in the evening, and
that the bird had gone back to it and was still sitting. When I arrived at the place there was the
Spotted Nightjar on the egg. which was just on the point of hatching ; the shell was chipped, and the
young bird was chirping. So the incubation of the egg had not been interrupted by being placed
in cold water for a day. This shows that the cold has little effect upon these eggs—probably one
of Nature’s protections to enable the bird to leave its egg at night to feed. There was no nest
built, the egg being just simply laid amongst stones, and it was a typical one, not " blue.”
Cuculus inornatus (Pallid Cuckoo). —They generally begin to arrive about the end of August,
sometimes earlier, but I have never known them to remain here through the winter : they have
all departed before the end of March. There are not a great many of them, or. in fact, any species
of Cuckoo, breeding in this district; but I have found their eggs in nests of the following species :
Brown-headed Honey-eater (A/ elithreptus brevirostris) , White-plumed-Honey-eater ( Ptilotis penicillaia) ,
White-eared Honey-eater (Ptilotis leucotis) , Regent Honey-eater ( Meliphaga phrygia), and Yellow-faced
Honey-eater (Ptilotis chrysalis), and I have seen young birds being fed by Noisy Miners (Myzantha
garrula) and Rufous-breasted Thickheads (Pachycephala ruftventris). I have taken their eggs from the
23rd August up till 17th November.


Nest and eggs of the Warty-faced Honey-eater ( Meliphaga phrygia) with an egg of the
Pallid Cuckoo [?].
Cacomantis rufulus (Fantail Cuckoo). —Some years this species does not put in an appearance
here at all, while in others it is fairly numerous, generally met with in the more thickly timbered
country. Only once have I found it breeding here ; an egg was placed in a nest of the Little
Field Wren ( Chlhonicola sagiltata).
Mesocalius palliolatus (Black-eared Cuckoo). —A bird which, owing to its habits, and also to
its similarity in appearance to a female Lalage tricolor, it easily escapes notice. The first proof that
I had of it being in the district was its egg being brought to me by a boy, taken with two eggs of
the Little Field Wren (Chlhonicola sagiltata). Since then I have often seen the birds, and shot a few
for identification, and I have twice taken an egg, each time in a nest of the Little Field Wren.
Chalcococcyx basalis (Narrow-billed Bronze Cuckoo). —Every year a fair number are to be seen
in the spring. I have taken their eggs from nests of the following species ;—Red-capped Robin
(Petroeca goodenovii ), Buff-rumped Tit (A cant hi za reguloides), White-browed Babbler (Pomatorhinus
superciliosus), and Silvery Blue Wren (Malurus cyanocclamys). With regard to the latter, I took the
first set with Mr. A. F. Basset Hull on the Ist October, 1917, the Cuckoo’s egg being covered by the
lining of the nest. Eleven days later she had built another nest and laid two eggs, and it also contained
one of the Cuckoo. On November 2nd, 1917, she had another nest built and two eggs, and again
one of the Cuckoo was deposited in the nest. In the two latter cases the Cuckoo’s egg was not covered.
All the nests were built within a few yards of each other.
Chalcococcyx plagosus (Bronze Cuckoo). —This species arrives in the early spring, and I have
only taken their eggs with the following species ;—Yellow-rumped Tit (Acanthiza chrysorrhoa), Buff-
rumped Tit (A. reguloides), and Red-rumped Tit (A. pyrrhopygia).


Hirundo neoxena (House Swallow). —A few pairs sometimes remain about my house the whole
year, and return to the same nests season after season, often rearing three broods one after the
other. Most of their nests are placed on rafters in outbuildings, such as stables. A few years
ago one pair started to build in a passage in my house, and although the nest was knocked down
day after day they would not give up building, so I kept the doors shut for about a week, but as soon
as they were left open again the Swallows returned. I then hung a stuffed Goshawk just beneath
the nest; this was too much for the Swallows, so they went under a back verandah, built a nest,
and reared their young.
Cheramoeca leucosternum (Black and White Swallow). —A few years ago this species was
frequently seen at any time of the year, but I have not seen any since 1911. They used to nest
here in holes drilled into the banks of the river and dry creeks, laying from three to six eggs.
Petrochelidon nigricans (Tree Martin). —A very common species, remaining throughout the year.
Often several pairs of birds will be found nesting in the same tree, sometimes in the same branch,
and I have found more than one nest within the same hollow. They are very close sitters ; I
have frequently chopped open the nesting branch and lifted the sitting bird from the nest. They
usually lay during September and October, but generally rear a second brood. Four or five eggs
are mostly laid for a sitting.
Petrochelidon atiel (Fairy Martin). —Arriving in large numbers towards the end of August and
early in September, they commence nest building almost immediately, often resorting to the same
place year after year. They do not all appear to arrive at the same time. 1 have frequently
found almost fully-fledged young birds, while other nests in the same colony are not half completed.
Fresh eggs may be found as late as December, but no doubt this is often owing to birds laying a
second time. They lay from three to five eggs for a sitting, a big percentage of which are pure
white without any markings, while others are heavily freckled, especially about the larger end.
Microeca fascinans (Brown Fly-catcher).—This cheerful little bird remains here in great numbers
throughout the year, and is met with almost anywhere, mostly in pairs. Their small nests would
generally escape notice if it were not for the solicitous actions of the owners. They mostly lay during
September and October, but nests containing eggs are at times found much later, probably second
layings. Two eggs are mostly laid for a sitting, but I have twice found clutches of three.


Petroeca gondenovii (Red-capped Robin). —Always to be found in great numbers in the drier tracts
of the flistrict. Commencing in August, they breed here freely, rearing two broods in a season. The
clutch is just as often two as three ; I have never seen more than the latter number. They often
Ijecome the foster parents of the Narrow-billed Bronze Cuckoo.
Petroeca bicolor (Hooded Robin). —Generally dispersed in pairs throughout the more open
country ; mostly found near the ground perched on dead branches. I have never met with this
bird in the heavily timbered country. The female alone builds the nest, and takes upon herself
the whole task of incubation. They are very close sitters, often allowing an intruder to approach
within a few yards before leaving the nest. Breeding here freely, usually placing their nests low
down, I have examined a great many of them containing both eggs and young birds, but have never
seen more than two to a clutch. Eggs may be found during the months of September, October and
November.
[?] Robin [?] on nest in a White Box sapling.
Smicrornis brevirostris (Short-billed Tree Tit). —Numerous in the country where the eucalyptus
saplings are growing ; seldom seen high up in large trees. They breed here freely, placing their nests
in the leaves of drooping willow-like branches of eucalyptus trees, generally near the ground, and
most of those 1 have found have been discovered by the sitting bird flushing as I rode past. They
usually lay three eggs. I have taken them at all times between August 25th and December xoth,
and although I have examined a great many of their nests I have never known a Cuckoo to place its
egg in any one of them.
Gerygone alhigularis (White-throated Fly-eater). —Some years during the spring and summer
months they are very common, while in other years not a bird is to be seen. Their notes and
habits are very similar to those of Pseudogerygone culicivora, and their nests can only be distinguished
by the colour, the present species using the inner reddish bark of the stringybark trees for an outer


covering, while the nest of P. rulicivora is always constructed of greyish material. They usually lay
three eggs for a sitting, anil about a dozen nests I have examined containing eggs were all found
between October 22nd and November 27th.
Pseudogerygone culicivora (Western Fly-eater).—Always met with in pairs. Some years during
the spring and summer months they are rather plentiful, but they do not remain here during the
winter. Breeding here freely, their nests are usually placed low down, often within a few feet of
the ground, and as I have mentioned in my notes of the preceding species, their nests can always be
distinguished from each other by the colour. They are generally decorated with bits of newspaper
if available, or whitish egg-bags of spiders, and some nests have exceptionally long tails. Although
I have examined a great number of their nests, I have never found one containing an egg of a Cuckoo.
They mostly lay three eggs for a sitting, which show considerable variation in the markings. I
have taken their eggs from September 23rd till as late as December 3rd.
Nest of the Western Fly-eater (Pseudogerygone [?]).
Rhipidura albiscapa (White-shafted Fan tail). —Rather a common species in suitable country,
more especially during the spring and summer ; generally met with in pairs, often returning to
the same locality year after year. They breed here, but owing to the birds being exceptionally
close sitters, and also the nest being usually placed in a whitegum sapling, the branches of which are
so much the same colour as the nest, it is very difficult to find. I have put my hand within a few
inches of a sitting bird before it would leave the nest. They generally lay three eggs for a sitting
in the month of October.
Rhipidura tricolor (Black and White Fan tail). —Very common throughout the district, but
being a lover of water it is more frequently met with in the vicinity of same, and it appears to have
a friendship for the Magpie Lark, often building its nest in the same tree, but much lower down.
They also very often take up their abode about dwellings; one pair have been about my house for
many years, breeding in the grape vines growing on the verandah, where I have known them to rear


three broods in a season, building up the old nest time after time. They place their nests in a great
variety of situations, but the most extraordinary which has come under my notice was one built on
top of an old Swallow's nest on a rafter in a stable.
Myiagra rubecula (Ixadcn Flycatcher). —A rather rare species here, just an occasional pair
turning up some years in the spring. I have seen several pairs building nests, all rather high up in
large ironbark trees, but with one exception they all disappeared before the eggs were laid. The only
eggs I have taken here were a clutch of three on November rath, 1915.
Nest and eggs of the [?] on a dead branch of an Ironbark Tree.
Sisura inquieta (Restless Flycatcher).—A rather common species here at any time of the year,
but they appear to be more numerous during the spring and summer months. Although sparingly
dispersed throughout the district, they are more often met with near water. They are rather late
breeders ; most of the nests I have seen containing eggs have been during the months of October
and November, and the clutch is generally four.
Pteropodocys phasianella (Ground Cuckoo Shrike).—There are always a few of these fine birds
to be met with on the Estate, generally found feeding upon the ground in flocks of five, comprising a
pair of old birds and their last brood of young, which often remain with their parents until another
brood are upon the wing to take their place. I have four times found two pairs of these birds
breeding together, twice actually laying in the same nest, each nest upon these occasions contained
six eggs. In another case there were two nests built within a few feet of one another on the same
branch, and young birds in each. The other which came under my notice was only about a hundred
yards, outside my garden. The cld birds built in exactly the same fork in which they had reared
their young the previous year, and the young birds built in an old Magpie Lark’s nest in a neighbouring
tree only a few yards away. They usually lay three eggs for a sitting, but I have found a clutch
of four, and, as I have mentioned above, twice six, which was undoubtedly the result of two females


laying in the same nest. I have taken eggs from September Ist up till December 15th, which was
a second laying, as I had already taken their eggs the same season. If not much disturbed they will
often remain about the same locality for years, even breeding in the same tree season after season.
Nest and eggs of the Black-faced Cuckoo Shrike [?]
in branch of a Native Apple Tree.
Coracina robusta (Black-faced Cuckoo Shrike). —A very common species throughout the whole
district, just as often met with in the open ringbarked country, where only a few shade trees have
been left growing, as in the thick ironbark forests. After the breeding season they sometimes
become a great nuisance in orchards, but more especially in vineyards, devouring large quantities of
grapes. After flight, when perched, they have a peculiar habit of slightly lifting their wings, one
after the other, several times, giving an observer the impression that the wings did not fit down
comfortably on the body. They breed here very freely, usually laying three eggs for a sitting ; I
have never seen a larger clutch, and their eggs have a wonderful range of variation, it being difficult
to find two sets alike. Of a great number of nests I have examined containing eggs, more than half
of them have been during the month of October, but I have taken eggs as early as September 29th and
as late as December 15th.
Lai age tricolor (White-shouldered Caterpillar-eater).—Never have I known this species to remain
here during the winter. They arrive in large numbers some years during the spring, mostly in October,
but odd birds may sometimes be seen towards the end of September. Some of the males are inclined
to be pugnacious during the resting season, but this is not the general rule, because I have frequently
found several pairs nesting in the same tree in perfect harmony. In fact, this nesting together seems
to be a peculiarity with them; where one nest is found there are generally many of them, not always
in the same tree, but near by in the same clump of trees. Both birds assist not only in building the
nest, but also in the task of incubation. They are late breeders. I have never taken eggs before
October 20th, but I have taken fresh eggs as late as December 20th,


Nest and eggs of the White-shouldered Caterpillar-eater (Lalage tricolor)
in a branch of a Yellow Box Tree.
Cinclosoma punctatum (Spotted Ground Bird). —Although this species might be more numerous
than it appears to be, I am under the impression that it is far from common in any part of this district,
but at the same time I have met with it sparingly dispersed in all parts where there is any under-
growth. I have only found one nest containing eggs, but have often come across young birds
unable to fly.
*Hylacola pyrrhopygia (Chestnut-rumped Ground Wren). —I had lived in this district over sixteen
years without identifying this species, but on October 7th, 1916, I shot a fine old male and a pair of
immature birds which had not been many days out of the nest. Since then I have seen three
more pairs, but so far have not found a nest.
Pomatorhinus frivolus (Babbler). —A very common bird on the Estate, and they breed here
freely, but owing to their habit of building nests at any time during the year, many of which
they never lay in, it is no uncommon thing to see several nests in the same tree and many others
in close proximity, and as birds are often flushed from these dummy nests it is difficult to know
when they are actually breeding. The peculiar song of this species is not all uttered by one bird,
as many people suppose. I have often had the opportunity of watching them closely, and I find
that the different notes come fcom two or more birds. In this district they rarely lay more than
three eggs for a sitting ; although I have several times taken clutches of five they usually appear to
be the result of two females laying in the same nest. They breed early, mostly laying in August,
but I have found eggs as late as November nth.
Pomatorhinus superciliosus (White-browed Babbler). —For the first ten years I lived in this
district I saw nothing of this species, but of late years a few have taken up their abode just outside
the west boundary of the estate, and have built a great number of their nests there in dead wattles.


During the last two seasons I have taken half-a-dozen clutches of their eggs, all of which have
been sets of three.
Cindorhamphus cruralis (Brown Song Lark). —During the spring of 1916 and 1917. two of the
best seasons for many years, these birds have been very numerous in the more open parts of the
estate. Their nests are very difficult to find. The female takes upon herself the task of incu-
bation, and is a very close sitter, so finding the nest is simply a matter of chance —one has almost to
tread upon it before the sitting bird will flush. As a rule they breed late, often having fresh eggs
in January, but on November 14th 1917. I found two nests, each containing three eggs in a very
advanced state of incubation. I have never found more than three eggs for a sitting.
Cindorhamphus rufescens (Rufous Song Lark).- In a favourable spring this species is very
numerous on the estate, and although often found together with the Brown Song Lark, the present
species has a preference for timbered country, more especially dead timber, where there are plenty
of dead fallen branches upon the ground, beneath which they delight in builiding their nests, and
they just as often lay three eggs as four for a sitting, mostly during November.
Ephthianura albifrons (White-fronted Chat). —A rather rare species here; small flocks may turn
up at any time, but most of them seldom stay long, and very few of them breed here. I have only
found half a dozen of their nests, each of which contained three eggs.
Ephthianura tricolor (Tricclourcd Chat). —A few of these birds put in an appearance on an
average about once every five years ; they remain to breed, then disappear. They mostly lay three
eggs for a siting during November, but I once found a nest on October 19th containing two slightly
incubated eggs.
Acrocephalus australis (Reed Warbler).— Some years this species docs not put in an appearance
at all; in other years they arrive during the spring in fair numbers, taking up their abode in any
suitable situation. At the present time (1917) a single bird (as far as I can judge) has taken a fancy
to my garden. This seems strange, because there is a large dam full of water with plenty of cover
around it not a hundred yards away. They breed here rather late, fhe earliest date on which 1
have seen eggs being November 14th and the latest January 22nd.
Megalurus gramineus (Grass Bird). —I have only seen one pair in this district; they arrived at
my house dam about September Ist, 1912, and built a nest in a clump of bulrushes, from which I
took three eggs. They almost immediately commenced another nest, and eventually laid another
clutch of three.
Chthonicola sagiltata (Little Field Wren). -Not by any means a conimon species anywhere in
this district, but a few scattered pairs are to be met with in the more thickly timbered country. I
have only found five of their nests, and only one of them was without an egg or young of a Cuckoo.
Acanthiza nana (Little Tit.) —Being so small, and usually keeping rather high up in thickly
foliaged pine trees, these birds mostly escape notice, but I am sure they are not here in any great
numbers. They are rather shy, and strongly object to any interference with their nest; when it is
being constructed they will desert it for the least cause. I have found several nests by seeing
the birds building, most of which have been torn to pieces upon my next visit to them. I have
taken four sets of their eggs, all during the month of October.
Acanthiza pyrrhopygia (Ked-rumped Tit). —A rather rare species, their range of habitation being
very limited. I have found five of their nests containing eggs, in three of which the full clutch was
a single egg ; the other two contained each two incubated eggs, and I have also found two nests
containing a single young bird. Their nests can always be distinguished from that of any other species
I know of owing to a number of long streamers of thin blades of soft grass always hanging from
just below the entrance,


Nest of the Red-rumped Tit [?] in topmost branch of a small [?]
sapling.
Acanthiza chrysorrhoa (Yellow-rumped Tit) .—This well-known little bird is rather rare in this
district, but there are always a few of them about my garden, where they breed every year, laying
from three to four eggs for a sitting. Their nest is a favourite one for the Bronze Cuckoo to place
its egg in. They never enter into the thickly timbered country in these parts, keeping to the open
forests where there is little undergrowth.
Acanthiza reguloides (Buff-rumped Tit). —A very common species in just the very class of
country which the Yellow-rumped Tit avoids. They are usually met with in small flocks feeding
upon the ground between the scrubby bushes. They place their nests in a great variety of situations,
and lay either three or four eggs for a sitting. All I have taken were found during the month of
October.
Malums cyanochlamys (Silvery Blue Wren). —This is the only Malurus found in this district,
and during the first ten years of my residence here I did not see a single bird, the first which came
under my notice being on January 13th, 1910. They had a nest containing three eggs in a black
thistle growing on the edge of a lagoon, only a lew yards outside my woolshed. Since then they have
been increasing, and now there are a fair number of them on the estate, but I have never found them
them far away from water. One family have been breeding in my garden for the last five years, and
at the present lime have a nest in a clump of sweet peas only a few steps off my verandah, and I can
see the nest while writing these notes. The female is sitting upon three eggs.
Artamus leucogaster (White-rumped Wood Swallow).—They do not put in appearance every
year, but occasionally a few pairs arrive in the spring, always taking up their abode in the large red
gums growing on the banks of the river, where they breed. Their nests are placed sometimes in a
partly rotten hollow branch, or where a branch has been broken off, and very often in an old Grallina’s


nest, lining it with fine dry grass or river oak needles. They usually lay lour eggs for a sitting, mostly
during the months of October and November.
Nest and eggs of the White-rumped Wood Swallow [?]
in dead branch of a river Red Gum Tree.
Artamus superciliosus (White-browed Wood Swallow).—Some years arriving in thousands in the
early part of the spring, while other years not a bird will be seen. They commence breeding almost
immediately they arrive, mostly laying two eggs for a sitting, but olteu three. This year (1917) they
arrived in great numbers during the second week in October, and were breeding everywhere, when
suddenly something must have gone wrong because nearly the whole lot rolled their eggs and young
out of their nests, and practically all the birds disappeared. This all happened within thice days,
between November Bth and nth.
Artamus personatus (Masked Wood Swallow). —Arriving with Artamus superciliosus, but never
in anything like such great numbers. This year (1917) there were more of them breeding here than
I have ever known before, but they treated their eggs and young in the same manner as the White-
browed, described above.
Artamus tenebrosus (Wood Swallow). —A permanent resident, but never in great numbers;
generally met with in pairs in the ringbarked country, where they breed. They place their nests in a
great variety of situations, and usually lay three eggs. I have never found a larger number for a
sitting, and I have taken their eggs from September 29th up till December 15th.
Collyriocichla harmonica (Grey Shrike Thrush).- This bird is met with in all classes ot timbered
country, but is more numerous in the ironbark ranges. In this district it is extremely shy ; in habit
it much resembles the Spotted Bower Bird. It is far more often heard than seen. When building,
it is only necessary to ride close past their nest ami they will leave it for ever. I have never yet
found a nest in course of construction which was not immediately deserted. The situations chosen,for
nidification are very various : sometimes in a sapling, others in crevices in a bank of a dry creek.


but more often on the top of a slightly hollow burnt stump; and I have seen them from three to
twenty-five feet from the ground. I have often seen young birds on the wing during September,
but have only found nests containing eggs from September 12th up till November 13th, and the clutch
is usually three.
Grallina picata (Magpie Lark). —A very common species throughout the district, anywhere in
the vicinity of water. As a rule they breed here in great numbers, but for some unaccountable reason
during the present year (1917) very few of them bred at all. I did not see half-a-dozen nests occupied.
Most of the nests contain eggs during the latter part of September and October, but I have found
fresh eggs as late as December Ist. Four eggs constitute the usual number for a sitting, but they
often lay five, and they place their nests at various heights, some are to be seen quite low down, near
the surface of the water, while others are as much as seventy feet above.
Gymnorhina tibicen (Black-backed Magpie).—Although this species is far from common any-
where in the district, scattered pairs and small flocks are to be met with in the more open forests, and
ring-barked country. Once they take up their abode in any particular locality, they usually remain
thereabouts for years, sometimes building a new nest in the same tree season after season, but they
only rear one brood each year, and the young birds remain with their parents till the approach of
the following breeding season. I have examined a great number of their nests, but have never seen
one containing eggs earlier than August 22nd, and none later than October 24th. They mostly lay
four eggs for a sitting. I have never found a larger clutch, and it is seldom that two clutches from
different birds are found exactly alike in colour and markings.
Gymnorhina leuconola (White-backed Magpie).—A very rare species in this district, but one
bird has been here to my knowledge for the last four years ; it is mated with one of the black-backed
birds, and they breed about the same place each season. I had one of their young, but when about
a year old it was killed by a Goshawk. To all appearance it was purely a black-backed.
Cracticus nigrigularis (Black-throated Butcher-bird). —When I came here first, about 17 years
ago, theie were always a few pairs about the estate, and they used to breed in the white box trees
near my house, but I have not seen or heard a single bird since 1907.


Cracticus destructor (Butcher Bird). —There are always a few pairs to be met with scattered about
the district, but mostly in the thicker forests, and once a pair take up their abode about any favoured
clump of trees, if not disturbed they will breed there season after season, usually laying four eggs for
a sitting. I have never found a larger clutch, but it is often only three, and all the nests I have
examined containing eggs were found between September 12th and October sth.
*Falcunculus frontatus (Yellow-bellied Shrike Tit). —I have only seen one pairof these birds here,
but a young friend found a pair building a nest this season, in which the birds eventually laid two
eggs, and he sent me the nest.
Pachycephala rufiventris (Rufous-breasted Thickhead). —This species arrives during the early
part of the spring, some years in great numbers, while in others scarcely a bird is to be found. They
are mostly met with in the ironbark ranges, generally where there is plenty of undergrowth or saplings,
and some years they breed here freely, usually laying three eggs for a sitting. I have never found
a nest containing a larger clutch, and have only found eggs between October 9th and November 16th.
Eopsaltria australis (Yellow-breasted Shrike Robin). —A very common species on top of the
rocky ironbark ranges, but I have never met with it in any other class of country in this district; it
appears to avoid any country where there is water or even moisture. Their habits and notes are very
different to the coastal form, and they have the power of ventriloquism. They breed here is great
numbers, placing their nests at various heights from the ground. I have seen them from six to pearly
sixty feet up, and they have a very long breeding season, probably rearing several broods in succession.
They mostly lay two eggs for a sitting, but it is not uncommon to find clutches of three, and I have
examined nests containing eggs from August 26th up till November 23rd. Even their eggs show a
marked difference to those found near the coast ; here they are mostly much brighter in colour.
Aphelocephala leucopsis (White-faced Titmouse). —Although seldom met with in scrubby country,
it is undoubtedly the most common bird of the district. It is met with in very great numbers in all
the open forests, mostly where the trees have been killed, and left standing ; it also frequents gardens
and orchards. Usually found in small communities feeding upon the ground, when disturbed they
often only fly a short distance away and settle upon the ground again to continue their searching for
food, and show very little fear of man. They breed here in great numbers, mostly placing their nests
in hollow branches in dead trees, but often in hedges, and under the roofs of out-buildings. They
are extremely close sitters ; I have often chopped open their nesting hollows, and lifted a sitting bird
from its eggs. They rear two or three broods during a season, usually laying three eggs for a sitting,
but often four ; I have never found a larger clutch. They have a long breeding season ; I have taken
fresh eggs from August 17th up till November Ist, and have noticed them building much later.
Climacteris picumna (Brown Tree-creeper). —Very seldom have I seen this species in the iron-
bark ranges, but in the more open forests and ring-barked country it is one of the most common birds
of the district, breeding here in great numbers, mostly placing their nests in perpendicular hollow
branches in dead trees, at various heights from the ground. I have several times found them in hollow
posts in stockyards. They are rather early breeders, many of them laying during August, but I have
never found a nest containing eggs later than October 3rd, and the clutch is nearly always three.
Climacteris scandens (White-throated Tree-creeper).—Plentiful in the thick ironbark forests on
the ranges. It appears to prefer the class of country which the Brown Tree-creeper avoids. Their
nests are placed at various heights from the ground ; I have found them from eight to over fifty feet
up, and have taken their eggs from August 31st up till October 17th, the clutch being either two or
three eggs for a sitting.
Dicaeum hirundinaceum (Mistletoe Bird). —Although sparingly met with tlirough all the forests
of the district, it is very plentiful in the ironbark and sapling country, which appears to be its true
home ; when found in the open forests it is only on a visit. I have known them to come into my
garden and feed upon the berries of the tiox-thom hedges. They breed here freely, usually laying
three eggs, and 1 have found their nests from four to thirty feet from the ground, and have examined
them containing eggs from September 15th up till November 29th.


Pardalotus ornatus (Striated Pardalote). —A very common species, more especially where most
of the timber has been killed. They are friendly little birds, showing little fear of man. Breeding
here in great numbers, either placing their nests in hollows in trees or a hole drilled into a bank of a
river or creek. They usually lay four eggs for a sitting during October.
Pardalotus punctatus (Spotted Pardalote). —It appears to be rather rare, but owing to its habits,
it could easily escape notice, but I have only met with it in the iron bark ranges. When nesting, it
drills a mouse-like hole into the flat ground almost anywhere amongst fallen eucalyptus leaves, and is
only found by either flushing the bird or seeing it building.
Melilhreptus brevirostris (Brown-headed Honey-eater).—Some years they arrive in rather largo
flocks early in the spring, and will be noticed travelling from tree to tree as if they were in a great
hurry, but anything strange will at once attract their attention, and they come to very close quarters
to make an inspection. When nest building they have a peculiar habit of plucking fur and hair from
live animals ; while sitting on horseback watching them, I have often had them come and perch upon
the horse I was riding and try to pull hair out. Unless noticed in course of building their nests are
very difficult to find, the birds being exceptionally close sitters. I have only found three of their
nests, from two of which 1 took a Pallid Cuckoo’s egg.
Plectorhamphus lanceolatus (Striped Honey-eater).—Rather a rare species in this district, only
met with in scattered pairs, mostly ip the more thickly-timbered country. They are exceptionally
close sitters. I once found a nest with a bird sitting, over thirty feet from the ground, at the extreme
end of a long thin branch, in a large ironbark tree. As I was many miles from home, and had nothing
with me to enable me to get the eggs, excepting a tomahawk, I climbed the tree and cut the branch off,
thinking I could hold it and allow it to swing down, but it proved to be too heavy, so I had to let it fall.
While I was descending the tree, I noticed one of my spaniels go up to the nest, and, much to my
surprise, she flushed the sitting bird. The nest contained four fresh eggs, only one of which was broken
in the fall. W'hen eggs are taken, the birds will often build another nest in the same tree, or a neigh-
bouring one. The clutch is usually four.
Myiomela nigra (Black Honey-eater).—Until the present spring (1917) I had only seen about
half-a-dozen of these birds here, and they put in an appearance during a very severe drought. This
year they arrived in fair numbers during October, and started to breed almost immediately. Between
October 36th and November nth, I found twelve of their nests, each containing two eggs, and no
doubt had I taken the trouble to look for them, could have found many more. No nest was mere than
two feet from the ground, and some of them only fifteen inches. I noticed that the female alone dees
all the nest building, and takes upon herself the entire task of incubation, and I found her to be a very
close sitter ; often she wuold allow me to approach within six feet before she would leave the nest.
The male is rather shy, but never goes far away from the situation of the nest. Their call note is very
similar to that of the Grass Bird, but is much more feeble.
Enlomophila picla (Painted Honey-eater).—l had not seen this species in the district till the
spring of 1914, when I found a pair builidng a nest in a pine tree, from which I took a pair of eggs
on September 27th. I saw no more of these birds until the spring of the present year (1917),
when about a dozen pairs put in an appearance in the ironbark ranges, and I found them to be
amongst the most extraordinary little birds which have ever come under my notice. In some
respects they somewhat resemble the Mistletoe Birds, otherwise they differ from any other species
I know of. After spending all my spare time watching them for about six weeks, I had found
eight of their nests, from three of which I took a pair of eggs, from one a clutch of three, anothei
contained young when I found it, the other three were deserted, apparently before eggs were laid.
The nests are about the most frail structures imaginable, often quite invisible from the ground. In
some cases (when the birds are off the nest) the eggs only could be seen without field glasses. One
of the strange things about them is, they take from three to four weeks to complete a nest. The
lowest I found was placed exactly thirty feet from the ground, and the highest sixty-five feet. All
the nests were built at the extreme end and in the leaves of a very long, thin horizontal branch


in an ironbark tree, in each case in flower. I know of no species building in a tree, the eggs of which
are more difficult to secure. 1 have had to resort to means such as I have never used before. It
is remarkable that the eggs or even the young birds remain in the nest during windy weather; it
can only be by the birds sitting upon them.
Nest and eggs of the Painted Honey-eater [?] in branch of an Ironbark Tree.
Aleliphaga phrygia (Warty-faced Honey-eater).—Being a nomadic species, it arrives some years
towards the end of the winter ; as a rule most of them depart before the end of November. Some
years, or even several years in succession, not a bird will be seen. Only once have I known them to
remain here all through the winter. They breed here in great numbers, laying mostly two eggs
for a sitting, but occasionally three, and they often become the foster parents of the Pallid Cuckoo.
The nests are sometimes placed within a few feet of the ground, but it is no unusual thing to see them
forty or fifty feet up. The earliest date on which I have taken their eggs is September 2nd. and
the latest November 26th. The eggs vary considerably ; I have them from a very pale salmon
pink all over, with practically no markings, to a very rich reddish-buff, very darkly spotted on the
apex, being darker in colour than any other Honey-eaters’ eggs I have seen.
Ptilotis chrysops (Yellow-faced Honey-eater).—A very rare species in the whole district, and
what few there are about are more often heard than seen. They live in the thick undergrowth on
the ranges. I have only found two of their nests, one on November 16th, which contained an egg
of the rightful owner, also an egg of the Pallid Cuckoo; the other, on September 17th, contained
two heavily incubated eggs.
Ptilotis leucotis (White-eared Honey-eater).—Rather a common species on the ranges where
there is thick undergrowth. Although a very shy bird, their curiosity often overcomes their fear.
If an intruder keeps quite still they will gradually approach to within a few feet and peer at one in
a most curious manner, but with the slightest movement they dart away into the scrub. Their


nests are very difficult to find, mostly being placed near the ground in a dense bush. They generally
lay two eggs for a sitting, but occasionally three, and I have only taken them during the months
of September and October.
Nest and eggs of the White-eared Honey-eater [?] in a Blueberry Grass bush.
Ptolitis penicillata (White-plumed Honey-eater).—Wherever there are trees growing in the
vicinity of water this species is sure to be found. In the redgums growing along the Talbragar River
they are very numerous, nesting freely in their drooping branches, also in the river oaks, and several
pairs breed in my garden every year. They nearly always lay three eggs for a sitting, and I have
examined nests contain'ng eggs from the first week in September till early in January.
Myzantha garrula (Noisy Miner). —A very common species in the open forests on the estate,
but not found in the thick ironbark forests on the ranges. When the grapes are ripe they come
into my garden to feast upon them, and become very tame, even coming into the house and hopping
about without showing the least sign of fear. They breed here in fair numbers, usually placing their
nests low down in a small tree or bush, but occasionally they will be seen high up in a very large
tree. Generally they lay three eggs for a sitting, but sometimes four. I have never taken a larger
clutch, and 1 have examined nests containing eggs from August 25th till as late as October 31st.
Anthochaera carunculata (Red Wattle Bird). —Some years, towards the end of the winter, more
especially if the native apple trees are in bloom, this species arrives in thousands, and the effect of
their curious notes uttered by so many birds is most extraordinary. Not many of them remain here
to breed, but those that do so mostly commence very early. I have seen young birds out of the
nest early in September, and have taken their eggs from August 22nd up till October 19th. The
clutch is usually two, only twice have I found three.
Entomyza cyanotis (Blue-faced Honey-eater). —A common species on the estate at all times,
usually met with in pairs or small flocks of about half a dozen or more, but I have never seen them


in the thick ironbark forests. They breed here, but I have never known them to entirely build a
nest for themselves. Of about twenty I have examined, all have been inside old Babbler’s nests.
F.nlarging the entrance they roughly reline it with bits of bark and dry grass. I have never found
a clutch of more than two eggs, and I have taken them from August 22nd till as late as October 25th.
Tropidorhynchus corniculatus (Friar Bird). —A common species everywhere, more especially in
the spring, sometimes arriving in great numbers, but they do not all remain here to breed. In
certain localities on some of the sandy flats between the ranges, a fair number of them breed every
year, placing their nests near the end of a long thin horizontal branch, mostly in ironbark and stringy-
bark trees. Very few of them can be climber! out to ; to secure their eggs it is usually necessary
to scoop them. I have examined about thirty-five of their nests, but have only been able to put
my hand in two of them in its natural position. Three eggs is generally the full clutch, but I once
took a set of four. They are rather late breeders, the earliest record I have of taking eggs being
September 28th, and the latest December 16th.
Philemon citreigularis (Yellow-throated Friar-bird). —A very common species here during the
spring and summer months, but they are seldom found far away from water. They breed here freely,
mostly building their nests in the redgiuns, river oaks and native apple trees growing on the banks
of the river. I know of no bird the nests of which differ so greatly ; some are rather frail structures,
loosely constructed, composed of dry grasses, while others are great bulky structures, neatly made
within, but almost entirely composed of wool from sheep. Three eggs is the usual clutch for a sitting;
I have only once found a set of four. They are late breeders, mostly laying during Novemlicr, but 1
have taken eggs as early as September 30th and as late as January 12th.
Anthus australis (Ground Lark). —A very common species on all the open country on the estate.
They breed here in great numbers, sometimes placing their nests in an old rusty jam tin. They
evidently rear several broods during a season, because I have seen nests containing eggs from August
25th till as late as November 12th. The usual clutch is three, but often four.
*Mira/ra horsfieldt (Bush Lark). —A rather rare species here, only odd pairs and single birds
turning up in good springs. I once caught a young bird which had only just left the nest.
Staganopleura guttata (Spotted-sided Finch). —A common species throughout the district, in all
classes of country, often seen in gardens, and frequently found building their bulky nests in creepers
growing on the sides of verandahs. Wherever a Brown Hawk’s nest is found there are sure to be
several nests of this Finch in close proximity, mostly in the same tree, and usually two or three
attached to the underneath part of the larger nest. I once counted twenty-two nests in a single
tree. They lay from three to six eggs for a sitting, and are not very particular at what time of
the year they breed. I have examined nests containing eggs from June 23rd up till January 15th.
They use the old nest for roosting purposes long after the young birds can fly.
Taeniopygia castanoiis (Chestnut-eared Finch). —Some years enormous flocks of this species put
in an appearance, but most of them disappear before they breed—in fact, very few of them breed
here at all ; those that do, build a nest within a hollow branch of a (lead tree. One evening I saw
a bird enter a hole in a dead tree, about six feet from the ground ; upon giving it a knock with a
tomahawk out flew about a dozen of these birds.
Aidemosyne modesta (Plum-headed Finch). —A very rare species in this district. I have not
seen more than a dozen birds, just an odd pair turning up any year in the spring. At present a
pair have taken up their abode about my house. I often see them in my garden ; they come
on to a lawn only a few steps off my verandah, and pick up feathers blown there from a white
cockatoo which is kept in a cage on the verandah, so they are evidently building somewhere close
about. I have only found three of their nests containing eggs, and the clutches were four, five
and six,- all found during the month of November. Two of the nests were placed in black thistles,
the other in a tussock on the bank of the river.


Oriolus Sagittarius (Oriole). —Not by any means a common species, but there are usually a few
of them scattered about the district during the spring, often coming into my garden when the grapes
are ripe. Excepting when breeding, they go about singly. I have only found three of their nests,
each of which contained three eggs.
Corone australis (Raven). —This well-known species is numerous at all times throughout the
district, but is more frequently met with in the open country, although they often resort to the iron-
bark ranges to breed, usually choosing a very large tree in which to place their nest, and, if their eggs
are destroyed, they will often lay another clutch in the same nest within a few days. The earliest
date I have taken their eggs is July 7th, and the latest October 14th—the latter probably l>eing a
second laying. Most of them lay during July and August, and the clutch is generally four or five,
but it is no unusual thing to find six. During droughts, when sheep are in very low condition, also
in the lambing season, these birds do a great amount of damage ; stockowners, as a rule, do all they
can to destroy them, which is no easy matter. When poor sheep get down, they are almost immedi-
ately attacked by these birds, firstly pecking out an eye, or both, from w'hich treatment I have never
known a sheep to recover ; whether this is owing to the fact that the raven, being a carrion feeder,
causes blood poisoning, remains to be proved. Few people have a good word to say for them, and
nobody ever fails to try and shoot a raven if the opportunity arises. But, excepting during droughts
and the lambing season, they do little damage, the worst probably being the taking of chickens, young
turkeys, and eggs, at which they are experts, and their depredations in the fowl-yard arc only too well
known to most people living in the country districts where ravens abound. The bird is therefore
condemned by most people as a curse to the country, and probably not without reason ; but, on the
other hand, it has much in its favour, so I will now mention some of its good traits. The bird being a
scavenger cleans up a vast amount of offal and carcases of dead animals, destroying thousands of
noxious insects, maggots, and even blow-flies themselves. Dead stock and rabbits, etc., are so de-
stroyed that nothing but skin and bene remains, and the maggots are destroyed that would otherwise
have entered the ground and escaped to eventually do their damage in -am later on. I consider that
the raven is our best natural enemy of the blow-fly, and is also a most effective enemy of grasshoppers
in certain stages. While there is no question as to the damage done in some districts to ewes and
lambs in bad seasons, at other times of the year it is a friend in disguise ; so, if it would only leave
the sheep alone, it would be one of our most useful birds.
Strepera graculina (Pied Crow Shrike). —Some years during the winter small flocks of this
species will arrive, though most of them never stay long, but there are'always a few pairs of birds in
the district. They breed here, but very sparingly ; I have only found four nests containing eggs,
and six with young birds. They usually place their nest near the extreme end of a long, thin
horizontal branch, high up in a large tree. The eggs I have taken here show very little variation.
Struthidea cinerea (Apostle Bird). —A very common bird on the estate, but I have never found
them entering far into the ranges. They prefer the more open forests where there are clumps of pine
trees, in which many of them construct their nests, usually laying four eggs for a sitting, but I have
found as many as seven. 1 have taken their eggs from September sth up till November sth.
I have never yet seen a single bird with white eyes, and I have searched flock after flock with field
glasses.
Corcorax melanorhamphus (Chough).—A very common species throughout the district, but more
especially in the more open forests. They breed here in great numbers.- During 1908 I made a
special study of their eggs. I examined no less than twenty-seven clutches, and they ranged from
three to eight, but I found in every case where there were more than five eggs in a nest they were
of two distinct types, but where there were five or less I am quite satisfied they were laid by
the same female. They start breeding early, most of them laying during August, but I have taken
eggs as late as December sth.


Nest and eggs of the White-winged Chough (Corcorax metanorhamphus)
on branch of a dead Yellow Box Tree.
SPECIES IDENTIFIED, BUT NOT KNOWN TO BREED IN THIS DISTRICT, MOST OF
THEM BEING VISITORS.
Ocyp/iaps lophotes (Crested Pigeon).
Gallmula lenebrnsa (Black Moor Hen).
Porphyrin melanotus (Bald Coot).
Fulica australis (Coot).
Hydrochelidon hyhrida (Marsh Tern).
Larus nnvae-hollandiae (Silver Gull).
Frythrogonys cinctus (Ked-kneed Dotterel).
Himantopus leucocephalus (White-headed Stilt).
Pisobia ruftcollis (Little Stint).
Gallinago australis (Snipe).
Postratula australis (Painted Snipe).
liupodotis australis (Bustard).
Antigone australasiana (Native Companion).
Ibis molucca (White Ibis).
Carphibis spinicollis (Straw-necked Ibis).
Plegadis falcinellus (Glossy Ibis).
Platihis flavipes (Yellow-billed Spoonbill).
Herodias timoriensis (White Egret).
Chenopsis atrata (Black Swan).
Dendrocygna eytoni (Plumed Whistling Duck).


Spatula rhynchotis (Blue-winged Duck).
Malacorhynchus memhranaceus (Pink-eared Duck).
Stictonetta naevosa (Freckled Duck).
Aylhia australis (Hard-head Duck).
Biziura lobata (Musk Duck).
Phalacrocorax carbo (Black Cormorant).
Phalacrocorax sulcirostris (Little Black Cormorant).
Phalacrocorax melanoleucus (Little Cormorant).
Plotus novae-kollandiae (Darter).
Pclecanus conspicillatus (Pelican).
Circus assimilis (Spotted Harrier).
Circus gouldi (Swamp Hawk).
Milvus affinis (Kite).
planus axillaris (Black-shouldered Kite).
Falco melanogenys (Black-cheeked Falcon).
Falco subniger (Black Falcon).
Falco hypoleucus (Grey Falcon).
Cacatua roseicapilla (Rose-breasted Cockatoo).
Platycercus elegans (Pennant Parrakeet).
Platycercus splendidus (Yellow-mantled Parrakeet).
Alcyone azurea (Azure Kingfisher).
Chaetura caudacuta (Spine-tailed Swift).
Cypselus pad ficus (White-rumped Swift).
Scythrops novae-hollandiae (Channel-bill).
Peiroeca leggei (Scarlet-breasted Robin).
Coracina mentalis (Little Cuckoo Shrike).
Acanthiza line at a (Striated Tit).
Pachvcephala pectoralis (White throated Thickhead).
Zosterops caerulescens (Silver-eye).
Melithreptus atricapillus (Lunulated Honey-eater).
Melithreptus affinis (Black-headed Honey-eater).
Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris (Spine-billed Honey-eater).
Ptilotis melanops (Yellow-tufted Honey-eater).
Ptilotis ornata (Yellow-plumed Honey-eater).
Myzantha flavigula (Yellow-throated Miner).
Anelhbia chrysoptera (Brush Wattle-bird).
Acanthogenys rufigularis (Spiny-cheeked Honey-eater).
Corvus bennetti (Bennett’s Crow).


CONTENTS OF PART 1.
Pago
Report of the Council for 1913 1
The Mallophaga as a possible clue to Bird Phylogeny, by Launcelot Harrison, B.Sc 7
Bird Sanctuaries, by A. F. Basset Hull 13
A Monograph of the genus Tisiphone, Hubner, by G. A. Waterhouse. B.Sc., 8.E., F.E.S 15
A new Victorian Araneiad, by W. J. Rainbow, F.E.S '... 21
Notes on the Breeding-habits of the Purple-striped Gudgeon, Krefftius adspersus, Castelnau, by
Albert Gale 23
A new Australian Caprellid, by the Rev. Thomas R. R. Stebbing, M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.Z.5... 27
Notes on some Australian Syngnathidae, by A. R. McCulloch 29
Bird Notes from the North-west of New South Wales, by Walter W. Froggatt, F.L.S 33
An Interesting Exhibit, by A. S. Le Souef. Director, Zoological Gardens 35
CONTENTS OF PART 2.
Report of the Council lor 1914..... i 37
List of Members, 1914 41
Bird Notes, by Walter W. Froggatt, F.L.S 44
Two Beetles apparently new to Australia, by W. J. Rainbow, F.E.S 46
The Migration of the Jolly-tail or EeTGudgeon. Galaxias atienuatus, from the sea to fresh-water,
by A. R. McCulloch : .' 47
Further notes on the genus Tisiphone, Hubner, by G. A. Waterhouse, B.Sc., 8.E., F.E.S 50
CONTENTS OF PART 3.
Report of the Council for 1915 53
Some new Araneidae from the County of Cumberland, by W. J. Rainbow, F.E.S 58
Notes on Colour-variation of Opossums of the genus Trichosurus, by A.- S. Le Souef, Director
Zoological Gardens 62
CONTENTS OF PART 4.
Report of the Council for 1916 Front Pages
The Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales. Its present position and future aims, by A. F.
Basset Hull, President ' 65
The Economics of Trochus niloticus, by Charles Hedley 69
The Destruction of Bird Life in Australia, by Walter W. Froggatt, F.L.S 75
The Lyre Bird : Some Nesting Notes, by John Ramsay and Albert E. Keene 81
Kangaroos in Captivity, by H. L. White... 83
Illustrations of Australian Coleoptera, by A. Musgrave and E. H. Zeck 85
The deposition of the eggs of Monotremes, by Harry Burrell 87
Ichthyological notes, by Allan R. McCulloch..., 89
The Great Black Palm Cockatoo, Microglossus aterrimus, in captivity, by Dr. E. A. D’Ombrain,
M.RA.O.U 95


CONTENTS OF PART 5.
Taronga Zoological Park .... 99
Royal Zoological Society of New South Wales • • 100
The Distribution of Anaspides and Ooperipatus in Tasmania, by Professor T. Thomson Flynn.. 102
Birds in my Garden, by Henry L. White....
The Birds of the Cobbora District, by Thomas P. Austin 10 9
