



.jotMA-naKosoi
a-L2,r««~, t> ".-— — • — 5






/ \
THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
4
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
I.-CHARLES FRASER (Continued). ||
By J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
SBSmeg:
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street.
1902.
k. J


THE SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
Biographical Notes Concerning the Officers in Charge.
NO. 1.-CHARLES FRASER.
Bv J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
Although the Sydney Botanic Gardens
have been in existence as a garden little
more than a century, have been formal
constituted as a Botanic Garden for less
than ninety years, and are situated in the
heart of the city, it is a matter of surprise
that its early records are so scanty. The
garden and its superintendents and direc-
tors were, for the first fifty years at
least of its existence, intimately associat-
ed with the material development of Aus-
tralia and of the adjacent islands. The
Botanic Gardens department is one of the
oldest in this State, and 1 feel sure that
the work of its officers who have passed
away will be of real interest to the present
generation of public servants.
In the very early days plants from Aus-
tralia were the fashion in Europe by rea-
son of their beauty or botanical interest.
Horticultural establishments were not com-
plete without a “New Holland” house. In
the infant colony collectors in the pay of
Sir Joseph Banks, or of the Royal Gar-
dens at Kew (then a private garden of
King George the Third), or officers of the
settlement, used to collect and despatch
seeds to Europe. While European horti-
culturists were more interested in our
plants for botanical or horticultural pur-
poses, our gardening was mainly confined
to such plants as furnished food for man
and beast, or produced distinctly utilita-
rian articles. And then, in the vicinity of
“Farm Cove,” the land adjoining, which
was cleared for agricultural purposes the
very first year of settlement, there was im-
perceptibly developed a garden which com-
bined aesthetic with utilitarian aims. Syd-
ney was the focus of the Australasian in-
terests for many years, and for a long
period, as I have shown on another occa-
sion, the continent and its adjacent islands
were supplied with useful and ornamental
seeds and plants, while in exchange their
plants were brought to the Botanic Gar-
dens at Sydney lor test or establishment
before undertaking their long and uncertain
journey to Europe.
And so the garden, like Topsy in “Uncle
Tom’s Cabin, ' was not born but “grow-
ed.” And the first explorer-botanist officer-
in-charge glided imperceptibly into a formal
appointment. Of course he was a Scotch-
man. As I proceed with these biographi-
cal notices it will be seen that nearly all of
ray pr&dtsfrssoxs were ocuteiune ~ or lnu
sons of Scotch fathers.
I have arranged such data as I have been
able to get together concerning Fraser in
chronological order.
Allan Cunningham’s unpublished journal
of Oxley’s expedition has the following en-
tries between Bathurst and Wellington
27th April, 1817.—“ I visited the left
bank in company with C. Fraser, a private
of the 46th Regiment, who had been sent
as one of our party, in order to form a
separate collection of seeds and specimens
for Earl Bathurst. We were both well arm-
ed in case of attack by the natives. Fraser
had been before on these hills in his pursuit
of flora (to which he is very much attach-
ed) during the period of time during which
he has been at this depot, viz,, about one
month.”
28th April —“This morning, about nine
o’clock, the following persons, who compos-
ed this grand western expedition, left the
last human habitation westward, in order
to survey the river down, and trace it with
its supposed junction with the Macquarie,
and the disemboguence of their union on the
south-west coast : John Oxley, Esq.,
Charles Fraser, private of the 46th Regi-
ment, as collector for Lord Bathurst ”
(who was Secretary of State for the colo-
nies at the time).
Oxley, in his “Journal of the Two Ex-
peuitions,” &c. (1820), the official account
of the exploration referred to in Cunning-
ham’s “Journal,” speaks of “Frazer, our
botanical soldier,” p. 76 ; “Mr. Charles
Frazier, the Government collector,” p.
212 ; “Charles Fraser, Colonial Botanist,”
p. 362. He alludes to him three times, and
his name is spelt differently each time.
Hooker, in his “Introduction to the Flora
of Tasmania,” speaks of Fraser as a “sol
dicr in the 73rd Regiment, then commanded
by Lieut.-Col. McQuarie.” He may, of
course, have been transferred to Macqua-
rie’s Pcgi*nent, but I do not know when.
Tradition states that Fraser, who was
known to have a good knowledge of horti-
culture, and a scientific acquaintance with
botany, acquired his knowledge in some of
the best establishments in Scotland, In
the Edinburgh Botanic Gardens he had an
opportunity of seeing the greater number
of thfe Australian plants then in cultiva-
tion, and with which he became familiar
both as regards their names and culture.
Being an intelligent man, he was exactly
suited to the post to which he was ap-
pointed. Our knowledge of this hard-work-
ing public servant is, however, very scanty,
and I should be glad to supplement it. His
hand writing does not appear to be that
of a well-educated man. We know that he
was in communication with Sir William
Hooker for a number of years, but I have
seen but few details of their transactions,
though there are numerous letters from
him to Sir William, between 1824 and
1831, in the Hookerian correspondence at
Kew. Many years ago, in a second-hand
bookseller’s shop in Sydney, I. picked up a
copy of “De Regni Vegetabilis Systema
Naturale,” with the words on the fly-leaf
“To Mr. Fraser, from W.J.H., 1824, Glas-
gow,” (From Sir W. J. Hooker, of
course).
“lt is but justice to the memory of Mr.
Charles Fraser, a former colonial botanist
at Sydney, to notice the visit of a day,
paid by that indefatigable and generous
traveller to the Bay of Islands (New Zea-
land) in 1825, in one of His Majesty’s
sloops of war, then stationed at Port
Jackson. In the passing stay of only a
few hours, that laborious botanist collect-
ed specimens of an interesting selection of
the plants of its shores, taking up many
living examples of tiie vegetable products
to establish in the Botanic Gardens at
Sydney’.” (Hooker in “Companion to
Bot. Mag.,” vol. ii., 23(1).
In 1826-7 he visited the “Swan River”
(as the settlement of- Western Australia
was then called). He wrote an account of
this trip.
He visited Tasmania about this time. I
have seen some of his Tasmanian collec-
tions in the herbarium of the University of
Oxford.
4he first official letter to Fraser I have
seen is as follows
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
19th May, 1828.
Sir,—l am directed by His Excellency the
Governor to request that you will send by the
Isabella some seeds and plants, especially cot-
ton-seed, lor the use of the settlement m Nor-
folk Island.
I am, sir,
A LEX 11, McLEAY.
Mr. Ghas. Fraser, Colonial Botanist.
Fraser wav,on I-B'F "HVuhlto -fiucist
auuresseu JraperintWialK, rrotaflrcai Gar-
den,” in a letter by the Colonial Secre-
tary ; thereafter he was addressed Colonial
Botanist, or Superintendent, Botanic Gar-
den indifferently, and sometimes “Superin-
tendent, Government Garden. His salary
was fixed by the Secretary of State in
1828 in the following words :—“Superin-
tendent to receive £l5O per annum, which
includes an allowance for sending home
seeds, &c., with apartments.”
In Allan Cunningham’s report to Gov-
ernor Darling, dated 16th December, 1828,
on the South Queensland Expedition, on
which he was accompanied by Fraser, he
signs himself “H.M. Bot. Co'llector,” and
alludes in the body of the report to Fraser
as the “Colonial Botanist” (of New South
Wales, of course). Fraser also wrote an
account of this expedition.
The following is interesting as showing
details that engaged the personal attention
of the Governor in the early days
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
Sydney, 15th May, 1829.
Sir, —In reply to your letter o,f this day’s
date, requesting permission to bo absent for
six days in order to proceed to the vicinity of
the Blue Mountains for the purpose of collect-
ing plants, &c,, I am to convey to you His
Excellency the Governor’s authority for doing
so.—l am, &c.,
(Sd.) ALEX, McLEAY.
Mr. C. Fraser. Colonial Botanist, Sydney.
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
12th December, 1829.
Sir, —His Excellency the Governor having con-
sulted the Executive Council on the subject of
your remuneration for your services as Colon-
ial Botanist, I am directed to inform you that
the Auditor-General has been instructed to pre-
pare a warrant authorising the issue of one
hundred and fifty pounds (£150) to you as
a compensation for expenses incurred hy you
on several expeditions on which you have been
employed in the interior ; and, further, that
your salary is to be increased from the com-
mencement of the present quarter to two hun-
dred pounds (£200) per annum.
I am, however, directed to apprise you that
the above is ordered subject to the approval
of the Secretary of State.—l am, &c.. &c..
(Sd.) F. C, HARRINGTON.
Mr. Charles Fraser, Colonial Botanist.
10th May, 1831.
Deal' Sir,—l send for your acceptance a sup-
plement of Mr. Brown’s “I’roteaceae,” which I
received yesterday. You will see your own
name often quoted. I want very much to Jiave
several parcels of seeds to forward to England
by the Lady Harewood, and 1 beg of you to
assist me.—Yours faithfully,
(Sd.) ALEX. McLEAY.
Mr; Fraser.
In the old days officials were usually ad-
dressed by name in official correspondence.
On the 23rd December, 1831, “The Co-
lonial Botanist” is first addressed in that
way, notifying that a “Board has been ap-
pointed to take a survey of the stores in
ybur charge.” Fraser, however, died eight
days afterwards. Of this event all I know
is contained in the following :
“In the ‘Companion to the Botanical
Magazine,’ vol. ii, page 213, Richard Cun-
ningham speaks of his arrival in Sydney
and of poor Fraser’s death, in the follow-
ing extract of a letter, dated Sydney, Feb.
9th, 1833 : ‘Amongst my first enquiries
here were those respecting poor Fraser’s
affairs, when fears that I had expressed in
my last letter were too well founded; though
such is the kindly feeling towards him, that
many of his creditors assure me that were
he now alive they would not press him for
payment. The circumstances attending his
decease were these : He had gone with the
carts to Bathurst for living plants. At
Emu Plains, a distance of twenty* miles
from Parramatta, on his return, he was
taken ill ; he reached the latter place in a
very debilitated state from the hot winds,
and died there in two days. Several of his
friends went from Sydney to Parramatta
to attend his funeral, of which, I believe,
th . e 7, grayed the expenses. A few books
which he left have been purchased by Mr
McLean, my assistant, for £ls.’ ”
Hooker filius, in his “Introduction to the
h lora of Tasmania,” says
“Fraser enriched the gardens of England
with numberless plants. His collections of
dried plants are, I believe, in the British
Museum, and many are in the Hookerian
Herbarium, ... He established the Bo-
tanic Garden at Svdnev.” There are come
neiuanum at iiXlorfl, as
I have stated, but there are none in Aus-
trana, so thoroughly was the policy of
sending everything to Europe and keeping
no duplicates here carried out.
The following comprise the whole of Fra-
ser’s published writings, so far as I am
aware :
“ Remarks on the Botany, &c., of the
banks of the Swan River, Isle of Buache
Baic Geographe and Cape Naturaliste,”
Hooker s “Botan. Miscell.,” 1 1830 nn
221-236. pp '
~ J_o u mal of a two months’ residence on
the banks of the Rivers Brisbane and Lo-
gan, on the east coast of New Holland ”
237-269 S Botan ' Miscell ->” I. 1830, pp.
These writings abundantly testify to
Fraser’s capabilities as a ‘botanical ex-
plorer, and to his enthusiasm for the pub-
lic service.
I may mention that the Secretary of
State authorised in 1828 the “Assistant
Superintendent to receive £BO per annum
with apartments.” This officer was named
Graham, and I do not even know his
Christian name, or when he first entered
the public service. The circumstances con-
nected with his leaving are given in the
ollowing letter. I have a memorandum
that he resigned on the 30th March 1829
but I forget my authority for this date
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
Sydney, 23rd Feb.. 1829
Sir,—Mr. Graham, Assistant Supt. of the Bo-
tanical Gardens, having applied for permission
to resign his situation in consequence of his
desire to give his attention to a garden which
he intends to form on the North Shore of Port
Jackson, tor supplying vegetables to the town
of Sydney, I am directed by the Governor to
request that you will apprise Mr. Graham that
ills Excellency has been pleased to accede with
his wish, and to inform you that it will be
necessary for you to look out for solne person
to replace Hr. Graham, who, however, has 4 ex-
pressed himself Willing to act if required until
the end of June.—l am ,v,
fSdJ ALEX. McLEAY.
Mr. C. Eraser, Colonial Botanist.
(To he continued.)


THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
I.“CHARLES FRASER (continued).
J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
SeDiicb:
S. T. Lf.igh Sc Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street,
1903.




1.-CHARLES FRASER (co»t,»u.i».-
IN the “Supplementum primum Prodromi
Florae Novae Hollandire exhibens Pro-
leaceas Novas, legerunt DD. Baxter, Caley,
Cunningham, Fraser and Sieber, of Robert
Brown,” published in 1830, F'raser is given
as the collector ol a number of plants, and a
Persooma, a Dryandra, and a Hakea were
called F'raser!, after him. This work is
referred to in Mr. Macleay’s letter to Fraser
of the 10th May, 1831.
In 1827 the French discovery ship “L’As-
trolabe,” commanded by Captain D’Urville,
visited Port Jackson ; she was accompanied
by M. Lesson as Naturalist. Some botanical
collections were made, but more important
ones were received from Mr. F'raser; of
these a few were published by Lesson and
A. Richard in 1832, in an octavo volume of
letterpress and a volume of plates.
Mr. Richard, in his Sertum Astrolabianum
(forming second part of the above work)
thus refers to the fine collections given to
the expedition by Mr. Fraser :
“ Parmi les plantes rapportees par
M. Lesson, s’est trouve un paquet conten-
tant un assez grand nombre d’especes
interessantes qui lui avaient ete donnees a
Sydney (Nouvelle-Galles du Sud) par
M. Fraser, direcleur du Jardin botanique
de cette colonie. Ces plantes proviennnent
des montagnes Bleues, de la baie Moreton,
du Port Macquarie, de File Melville, et de
quelques autres parties de la Nouvelle-
Hollande : la plupart etaient nouvelles et
offraient un grand interet; quelques-unes
meme viennent deranger la symmetric geo-
graphique de certains genres. Ainsi, parmi
elles, se trouve une espece du genre
Thoninia , dont toutes les autres especes
appartenaient au nouveau continent; plus-
ieurs Sapindacees du genre Cupania , etc.”
Following are some unpublished letters from
Fraser’s correspondence, and they are of un-
doubted interest. They refer to
(a) Western Australia.
(b) Norfolk Island.
(c) Glasgow Botanic Garden (Sir William
Hooker).
(d) Mauritius Botanic Garden (Charles Tel-
fair) .
(e) Bombay.
King George’s, Sound,
sth October, 1829
My Dear Fraser, —I have just time to tell
you that I came here this day from Swan
Port , and commenced doing business immedi-
ately after landing. Mr. Nind goes up in the
Amity. 1 have given him a flying
guana (? frilled lizard. —J.H.M.) for you.
I had a pair alive, and expected they
were safe, but fate says to the contrary. I
hope you are very well. I am in good health,
and find the cool air of this place has a brac-
ing effect on my whole system. I am sorry to
tell you that your botanical account of Swan
Port is not at all relished by the new comers.
Some of them, I think, would have no mercy
upon you. They all expected to find the country
fertile to a degree, and in every sense of the
word a paradise, but they are now satisfied
that sand and sand, and sand is everywhere
to be found. Some alluvial deposit is to be
met with on the banks, but that is confined to
parts adjacent to the river. In consequence of
the heavy weather and constant rain, which it
seems has continued the greater part of the
time since Capt. Sterling arrived in the Larne,
little has been done.
Lieut. Preston and the surgeon of the Sul-
phur penetrated into the interior and returned
while I remained in Gage’s Roads. Their ac-
count is not at all encouraging ; they pene-
trated about 35 miles, and the same features
were visible as far as they travelled. Forty
settlers have again taken ship and sailed for
the Derwent. A large ship, the Marquis of An-
glesea, is on shore near the bar, and so much
damaged as to be condemned. She drove from
her anchors. Gage’s Roads are, in my opin-
ion,'a very unsafe anchorage. I fully expected
that the brig Thompson, in which I came from
Raffles Bay, would have followed the Marquis.
I learned from Capt. Sterling that a large
number of emigrants are now on their way to
Swan Port for England.
I am in hopes that as soon as His Excel-
lency the Lieut. Governor shall obtain his
charter from home, I shall be relieved, as this
place is likely to be under the command of
Swan Port.
I am now tired 'pf the bush, and would feel
happy to be once again in my comfortable quar-
ters at the hospital.
The Mermaid was lost in Torres Straits, and
all our supplies gone with her. Capt. Laws
gave all he could spare for our use, and Capt.
** Probably W. Australia (Swan River) and
not Swan Port, E. Tasmania.
For the first article in this series, containing an account of Fraser’s life, see the Journal of the Public
Service Association (N.S. W.), for September, 1902.—p. 10.


Baker called at Swan to pick up what he
could for us. We are not as yet placed on
short commons.—Yours truly, and in haste,
(Sd.) ROBT. M. DAVIS.
King George’s Sound,
15th December, 1829.
My Dear Fraser,—l never thought so much
about you as I have done since I came to this
place, and at this particular moment I do not
know what I would give to have you with
me. Dr. Wilson, who came down with Capt.
Barker, started in a direction to Swan Fort
with a party of men, and in eleven days went
over at least 200 miles of ground. He says,
without fear of future contradiction, there is
a far greater proportion of good land in this
direction than any other part of Australia he
has been in, and also wood of large growth,
with innumerable rivers. He ascended a very
high mountain in the interior, which he has
called Mourit Lindesay, in honour of the 39th
Regiment.
At this moment a knowledge of this part of
the country is much required, and Dr. W.,
having been over so much ground in so short
a time, induces me to think it is a very open
country. If you can, come to us, if not say
what I am to do. Barker wishes much for
you.—Believe me to continue, yours sincerely,
ROBT. M. DAVIS.
C. Fraser, Esq.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 14th April, 1837.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the
Governor herewith to transmit for your informa-
tion an extract from the Commandant, King
George’s Sound, reporting that he had for-
warded to Sydney some plants and seeds col-
lected by him at Swan River and Raffles Bay,
and that the trees and plants left at the
latter settlement on its abandonment were
then in a thriving state. —I am, sir, your
obedient servant, for the Colonial Secretary,
(Sd.) F. C. HARRINGTON.
Mr. C. Fraser. Colonial Botanist.
Extract of a letter from Capt. Parker, Com-
mandant, King George’s Sound, addressed to
the Honourable the Colonial Secretary, Syd-
ney, dated King George’s 3rd Sound, 10th De-
cember, 1829 :
Part s.—The Crown prisoners not being al-
lowed to land at Swan River prevented my
employing the gardener to procure native
plants there, but I made myself as large a
collection as I could, and from the care taken
in keeping earth about the roots, I hope some
of them will live, notwithstanding it is the
wrong season. My total ignorance of New
South Wales’ plants and want of books must
excuse me if I send what is common at
Sydney.
I forward a few native seeds collected at Raf-
(les Bay, in charge of Dr. Wilson, the red
apple, grape, yellow fruit and “Idyurka” (na-
tive) ; many are eatable.
Those in paper No, 23 appear to be a species
of nutmeg. I found them in and near the Nest
of the Gomi animal, but could never discover
the tree that produced them. I send a list of
the principal cultivated trees and plants left
behind, which were generally thriving well, and
some of them beginning to fruit. I pointed
out to the natives at different times those
which would be useful, and have no doubt
they will keep them from being destroyed
They much relished the bananas.
Government House, Norfolk Island,
sth March, 1830.
Dear Sir, —Colonel Morrissett, I am sorry to
say, being very unwell, has commissioned me
to try once more to persuade you to send us
a few plants for our garden. We are much
obliged to you for the seeds you sent us by
the Amity, but they are not of the description
we most needed, as we have abundance of seed
from the commonest kinds of vegetables pre-
served from those of last year. We should be
most grateful for any fruit trees you could
spare, such as apple, pear, peach, nectarine,
the cuttings of vine, and, in fact, everything
but lemon and figs, which are the only fruit
trees we have. Also if you could spare us a
few old crowns of asparagus and sea kale, or.
if not, some of the seed, garden rhubarb,
China rose, lavender, or anything in the way of
flowers would be most acceptable ; in fact, we
should be truly thankful for any donation you
may make us, particularly at this season of
the year, which will be so favourable for
transplanting by the time of the arrival of the
next vessel here. We have selected a beautiful
spot for our gard'en, about miles from
Government House, which we call the Orange
Vale. There nature has done much for us,
though, as yet, we have done but little for
ourselves, and, indeed, cannot do much now
without your kind assistance in sending us
some trees and plants. I would not be so
great a beggar were it not for the extent of
my wants, and my wishes to make our garden
as beautiful and as productive as it is cap-
able of being. We are sorry to hear of your
late ill health, and trust you will derive
every benefit from the change of season.
We have been in our new quarters since
Christmas, where we are very comfortable, and
when we can give you a comfortable lodging
should you still retain your intention, and
which we hope you have not given up, of pay-
ing a visit to our island.
All the plants you have been kind enough to
send are most flourishing. I am particularly
anxious for some cuttings of the China rose,
as there is not one of the kind on the island.


The Colonel begs 1 will send you his best re-
membrances. 1 am sorry to say he has been
unwell for some time, and is still far from
strong.—Believe me to remain, yours truly,
(Sd.) EMILY MORRISSETT.
C. Fraser, Esq., Botanic Garden, Sydney.
Botanic Garden,
Sydney, 13th May, 1831.
Dear Sir, —Per the Princess Charlotte, I have
forwarded to your address two paper parcels
of seeds. The one containing 16 papers of culi-
nary seeds, the other seeds of the Deccan,
which forms an impenetrably hedge for any
animal from a mouse to an elephant, but re-
quires to be assisted by a rough two-rail fence
to recline upon.
1 have likewise furnished Miss Raymond with
fifty papers of flower se<?ds for Mrs. Morriset,
and a case of plants.
By next vessel you may expect two cases of
fruit trees. The season is so late that I am
afraid to take them up, as they are not out of
leaf.
I shall feel obliged by your sending some
pines, or any other produce of your interesting
island, more particularly that large-leafed
plant on which Mr. Cunningham placed so
much store. I hope Mrs. Morriset and all the
children are well. I will feel obliged by your
presenting my best wishes towards them, and
allow me to subscribe myself—Yours very
truly,
(Sd.) C. FRASER,
C. Botanist.
To Colonel Morriset, Norfolk Island.
Glasgow Botanic Garden,
June 30th, 1829.
My Dear Sir,—From your letter to Dr.
Hooker, received yesterday, I perceive you were
still without my letter of last August, sent in
haste by a Mr. Geo. Mitchell, who intended as
a settler in New South Wales or Van Dieman’s
Land, and introduced to me in passing from
Aberdeenshire on his way for Liverpool. Since
then, that is during the bygone months of
February, March, and April, I have been near-
ly dead with rheumatic fever, which, however,
I thank God, I am now quite recovered from,
and have the pleasure of sending you a few
seeds, as also some Glasgow “Heralds,” which
may, perhaps, amuse you in a spare hour. I
am glad to say our collection) goes on in-
creasing, adorned with many beautiful new
things, both from South and North America,
and from your inexhaustible colonies. The
seeds which accompanied your last kind fa-
vour are offering very well, but I am sorry to
say “Banksia grandis” has not succeeded with
me this time ; however, I am not ill off at all,
as from a cone you sent me three years ago,
I have eight very fine healthy young plants.
What a beautiful plant “Trachelium coerU-
leum” is ! I shall be glad to hear from you at
your earliest convenience, and will, ere long,
have the pleasure of sending you a fresh supply
of stationary, which want of time alone pre-
vents my doing at present. I am very imppy
to hear that your health is so much improved,
as from Sir Thos. Brisbane’s intelligence some
two months ago, we were very much afraid
you were dangerously ill. Sir Thomas is a
warm friend of yours. We have just returned
from Benlawers, where Dr. Hooker and his
class have made a botanical trip. 'lbis season
we met with many good things, although noth-
ing exactly new. My brother-in-law (Dr. C.)
is now staying at Florence, where he seems to
enjoy himself among the Italian scenery. A
new horticultural and botanical garden is go-
ing forward at Manchester, as also at Belfast,
and the thing is talked of at Aberdeen, so you
see we are doing something in this northern
region. Mr. David Douglas, who has been so
very successful as a collector for the London
Horticultural Society in North America, goes
out again for three years in the end of July
to the North California, where I hope he will
make a rich harvest.
Many of the seeds collected by Dr, Richard-
son and Mr. Drummond in the Arctic circles
came up very well, and are highly interesting—
mostly all new. With best wishes, and hoping
to hear from you from time to time.—l ever
am, my dear sir, most truly yours,
(Sd.) STEWART MURRAY.
C. Fraser, Esq., &c., &c.
Glasgow, July Ist, 1829.
My Dear Sir, —I am but just returned from a
long tour in the Highlands, with my botanical
students, and have the very great pleasure to
find your kind letter and precious parcel, for
both of which you have my most cordial
thanks. In every parcel I get from you, there
is always much that is new, and much to
study. I am much gratified with the account
of your Moreton Bay expedition. I am now
actually printing that to the Swan River for
No. 2 of Botanical Miscellany, and that on
Moreton Bay will come into No. 3. They are
both exactly suited to this work, and will, I
am sure, be well received by the public. I shall
publish there, too, some of your fine plants,
which are in an excellent state for being
figured.
Dr. Nesbitt has given me a favourable ac-
count of your health, which I was much pleas-
ed to hear, for you were not so well when Dr.
Logan came away.
Dr. Nesbitt has arrived from the Mauritius,
and brings good account of our friend, Mr.
Telfair, from whom, too, I have letters and a
parcel. My friend John Bannerman (sic), Esq.,
No. 9 Queen-st., Soho, London, will take charge
of any parcel addressed to me in London. But


all your things, in whatever way they came,
have reached me safely, and the cost is but
trifling when compared with the value I set
upon such good plants.
You gratify me by mentioning your desire to
possess the continuation of the “Botanical
Magazine.’’ I send it you with much satisfac-
tion, and shall continue to do so, but say not
a word of the cost. You must accept it as a
mark of the obligation I owe to you for so
many fine plants. 1 seem to live upon plants,
and you cannot conceive the pleasure I have
when I receive any from you. Still bear me in
mind when you gather any duplicates., I do
not know whether Sir Edw. Parry will be in a
good country for botany, but he is a very old
and good friend of mine, and will do any-
thing he can for me.
I send you No. 1 of “Uot. Miscellany.” There
was great delay with it, but now the
bookseller has given me all the management of
it in Glasgow, and the second number will go
with next opportunity, for it is just ready.
Send me any curious botanical information,
and I will insert it. Have you my “Musci
Exotici” and my monograph of “British Jun-
germanniae ?” If not, I shall send you co-
loured copies at once.
Dr. Nesbitt takes charge of the “Bot. Mag.
and Miscellany.” At the end of the year I
shall send vol. 3 of “New Series of B. Mag,”
bound as those vol. are bound.—Yours, my
dear sir, most truly and gratefully,
' (Sd.) W. J. HOOKER.
Glasgow, April 12th, 1830.
My Dear Sir, —I have had very great pleas-
ure in preparing for the press your account of
residence on the Brisbane and Logan Rivers.
It is by far the most interesting of all the
journals with which you have favoured me ;
partly, indeed, on account of the novelty of
the country, and also because you have been
more full and particular. I have given figures
®f two or three of your most important
plants collected in that visit and some notes
I have added ; all of which I hope will meet
your approbation. Be so good as offer one of
the two copies of the No. of my Miscellany
which contains the account of your tour to
your zealous and able fellow traveller, Mr.
Allan Cunningham, and with it oiler him my
best respects. I send you with those Nos.
also the vol. from 1829 of “Botanical Maga-
zine”; you received, I hope, the previous vo-
lumes of the new series which I sent you last
year. I almost wish I had kept one of those
volumes as a pattern for the binding ; as it is
I am obliged to send you those numbers un-
bound, which, I assure you, I would gladly
have put into good covers if I could have
matched the binding with the former volumes.
I hope 1 shall soon again have the pleasure of
hearing from you, and of your pursuits and oc-
cupations ; have you made any further jour-
neys, and what has been the result of Baxter
being employed by you ? You expected, and
had reason to expect, much from him, and 1
do trust for the sake of science that you have
not been disappointed. He is so excellent a
collector that he will not surely return from
King George’s Sound without adding many
new species to those hitherto known, and with-
out a great store of what others may have
gathered, but which are yet only in possession
of a chosen few. You will not forget me I am
sure either in what regards phoenogamous
plants nor cryptogarnic. Perhaps ho will find
some new ferns —even fungi will be acceptable.
So large is my herbarium now become that 1
have engaged a German from Berlin (well re-
commended to me) to have the charge of keep-
ing it in order. He is particularly well ac-
quainted with fungi, and If any come in your
way, pack them in the box and they will turn
to good account. Especially, I should like to
receive some sea-weeds. Greville has had some
which I know he thinks highly of. I am
equally interested in them as in other plants.
I regard not any reasonable expense, and I am
determined, as far as lies in my power, to
make my herbarium the richest of any private
one in Europe.
Nor is it for the sake of hoarding I do this,
but because I feel that such a collection is in-
estimable to me in my publications, and to my
friends, who have always the most liberal ac-
cess to it.
1 would send you the last numbers of Lou-
don’s “Gardeners’ Magazine" if I did not think
that you must already possess it through the
means of your many other friends. It contains
many pages relative to the Horticultural So-
ciety, and all the recent events that have taken
place there. What will be the consequence it
is not easy to foresee. There may have been
mismanagement, and such might have been pre-
vented ; but it is certain that the society, with
all its faults, has done an infinity of good,
and has diffused a taste for the cultivation of
plants, such as was before unknown in Bri-
tain. You have, I trust, ere this again and
again heard from Murray ; he assures me he
has not neglected to write to you, though it
may happen that the channels by which he has
sent to you have not been the safest. I have
been working very hard the whole winter at
“Botanical Magazine,” “Botanical Miscellany,”
“leones Filicum,” Captain Franklin’s plants
for the Flora Americanus, at Captain
Beechey’s collections, and, lastly, at a new
British flora,* of which I am now happily
printing the index and introduction. It must
be all ready before Dr. Graham’s and my
class begins the first of next month. I flatter
myself the arrangement and description are a
better and more simple plan than any work of
the kind that has yet appeared ; but of this
you shall judge, for I shall have the pleasure
of sending you a copy. The first volume is
confined to the phenoggmous plants. Another
will be devoted to the cryptogamia of the Bri-
tish Isles. Do you meet with any more of the


Dawsonia polytrichiddes ? 1 wish 1 could get
a stock of it, for I am continually asked for
it, not only on account oi Its rarity, but be-
cause it was named after my father-in-law, Mr.
Dawson, junior. Brown found it about Port
Jackson. You, 1 think, sent me two or three
specimens from V. D. Land. It is pro-
bably not very uncommon.
Habits of a Polytrichum. Its leaves and
calyptra similar, but the capsule is like Bux-
baumia, and the peristome is like a tuft or
parcel of white silk. Pray send me any
Cryptogamia that you or your collectors may
chance to gather in fruit, and, above all, let me
have the pleasure of hearing from you when
you have the leisure to write. You pot, I
hope, the account of your Swan River excur-
sion. Always let me know if you do not re-
ceive the numbers of “Miscellany” and “Maga-
zine” regularly, that I may correct any etror,
for I do not keep a careful account of v-hat I
send, but trust to an often treacherous me-
mory.—Yours ever very truly and faithfully,
(Sd.) W. J. HOOKER.
C. Fraser, Esq.
Bois Chery Moka,
Mauritius, 13 March, 1829.
My Dear Sir,—l am much obliged by your
letter of the 20th Decemner last by Captain
Richards, of the Tyger, who took great care
of the seeds, and delivered them to me. I put
them at the disposal of uur friend Professor
Bojer, as you desired, and he begs to say that
he considers them as a real treasure, and is
most grateful for this instance of your kind
attention. I w 7 as glad to make an acquaint-
ance wdth Captain Richards, who deserves the
interest you express for him. He is a very in-
telligent, observing man, and in his rambles
over the world has collected much curious in-
formation. I was very glad to pay to him at-
tention. not only on your account, but for his
own good qualities. He regretted much having
left at Sydney several mineral specimens which
he had collected in South America, and with
which he otherwise would have enriched his
cabinet. Dr. Drummond told me that you had
some large quartz crystals from the new coun-
tries. Anything of that nature that you can
spare will be very acceptable.
The Cunninghamia which you sent me are in
the most flourishing state, and already at
Reduit and Pampelmousses, and other gar-
dens, as well as at Bois Chery. Captain
Demy, of the Caroline, told me that he had
lost a letter which had been entrusted to him
for me. He seems a very quiet, agreeable man,
and I was glad to receive him at this garden,
where he was much delighted. He Sails to-day
for England. Captain Richards has sold his
vessel for the Madagascar bullock trade, to
which he (sic) seems well adapted. He seems
inclined to reside here for some time, and has
been visiting my sugar estates.
Mrs. Telfair is sending by this opportunity
to Mrs. Darling a plant cabin with some of
our fruit trees, which I trust may arrive safe.
Our excellent friend, Professor Hooker, con-
tinues his valuable labours. He writes to me
that Dr. Wallich has brougnt to London 7,000
nondescript plants from Ava and the Burman
Empire, and has requested the professor to de-
scribe and publish them to the scientific
world, but that he fears his multifarious la
hours will prevent him from undertaking such
a gigantic task.
We fear that the letters and parcels sent to
Sydney by Captain Freeman’s ship in July
last have not been received, as we have not
had any of them acknowledged. I wrote se-
veral long letters which have not been noticed,
and Mrs. Telfair says she never heard if you
received a box of shells she sent you. I wrote
and sent something to Mr. Marsden at that
time, and to Mr. Savage, and I think to your-
self. Captain Foreman and his wife were so
very kind, attentive, and obliging that we fear
some accident has occurred to them, or we
should have had an answer from our friends.
Yet we have heard that the Denmark Hill has
arrived at New Holland, and sailed again.
Pray make my kindest regards and remem-
brances, and that of my family, to our valued
friend Cunningham. I wrote to him very
lately, and forwarded to Professor Hooker his
most interesting list of the plants from the new
discovered, countries you travelled together. I
regret much that the precipitate departure of
Mr. Aspinall deprived me of the sight of those
treasures, which, however, I hope will arrive
safe. Through the professor I was glad to
hear by the Leda your health was quite re-
established. Long may it continue, for the ad-
vancement of science and the happiness of
your friends, among whom there is none more
sitfeere than—Your obliged and faithful,
(Sd.) CHARLES TELFAIR.
Royal Botanic Garden,
Mauritius, June 21st, 1829.
Dear Sir, —By Captain Foreman, of the Den-
mark Hill, I send you a few seeds and nut-
megs, hoping they will reach you safe. As you
already know them it would be useless to in-
troduce them to you. As you have been to the
new projected settlements you will know that
I can send from hence to any part of yours
when opportunities offer. If any of the settle-
ments are in the same latitude as Mauritius, I
should feel proud to send a quantity of nut-
meg, clove, cinnamon trees, &c., you may
please to wish.
My poor museum increases very slowly. Would
there was anything we could send to New Hol-
land, as that might have a few visits, &c., in
return. Excuse this short scroll, I have just left
our mutual friend, Mr. Telfair, who will, if
possible, write you by this.—Yours very truly,
(Sd.) JOHN NEWMAN.
To Mr. Fraser.
Bois Chery Moka,
Mauritius, 21st June, 1829.
My Dear Sir,-—I had the pleasure of writing
to you in March last, and although I have
little of interest to communicate, I avail my-
self of the departure of Captain Foreman, of


the Denmark Hill, to say that we are still
busy in our botanical researches and amuse-
ments. Mrs. Telfair has sent to Mrs. Darling
by this vessel a case of plants from our gar-
den, selected by Professor Bojer. I hope they
may arrive safe. I send you some seeds of our
most beautiful dahlias, which will, I hope,
prosper with you, as I know them to be fer-
tile, and they will keep for a considerable
time in a dry state. They are seeds of some
that 1 raised from seed sent to me from Eng-
land by an excellent friend, Mr. Barclay, of
Bury Hill. I send you a good quantity that
you may give them an extensive trial by dis-
tributing them among your flowering friends.
The New Holland chesnut* seeds you sent me,
are now beautiful plants four feet high. I
should like to get some more of the seed ; they
thrive so well here. The gigantic lily** our
excellent friend Cunningham sent me seven or
eight years ago are in high health, and one of
them has flowered, to the great admiration
and astonishment of us all.
The flowering stalk is at least 23 feet long.
It has been in full bloom these three months
past, giving most magnificent scarlet flowers
coming out in a succession of flowerets. I hope
most earnestly it may give seed, for it has
never yet given any offsets from the root, and
I fear we may lose it unless it seeds. Pray try
to send me some more. My garden of Bois
Chery is the only place it flourishes in. Those
1 distributed to other habitations have not
done well ; the heat was probably too great.
I have had the plant and its flower drawn by
a professional flower painter. It is beautifully
done. I shall send it home to our friend Pro-
fessor Hooker to publish in his “Miscellanea
Botanica,” mentioning that I received it from
our friend Cunningham, But the thing that
will make most noise amongst the botanists
in England is the drawing and dissection
which Mr. Bojer has made of the plants of
Calumba root in this garden. They have long
been earnestly desired, and hitherto in vain ;
they have at last flowered at Bois Chery and
perfected their seed, and the whole process has
been anxiously and studiously watched by
Bojer, who has recorded everything, and very
curious his observations are. I sent you some
roots in 1825 ; have they yet shown any
shoots ? Several of these I transplanted are
still full of vegetable life, and not the slight-
est symptoms of decay, yet they have not yet
shown a single fibre out of the earth. We,
however, have more and more coming into
flower, and, fortunately, one that produces the
female flower which Bojer fecundated and seeded.
You never told me if the seeds of the Tel-
fairia have succeeded with you, I send you two
more. 1 hope they will produce the female as
well as the male plant. They require much
care here in applying the pollen of the one to
the stigma of the other for fecundation. There
is in the packet for you some seeds of a speci-
*Castanospermum australc.
**Doryanthes excelsa.
men of Hibiscus, entirely new, and exquisitely
beautiful, from Mombasa, on the east coast of
Africa, and some seeds of the Adenanthera
pavonina also.
Pray say to Mr. Cunningham everything on
my part that regards and attachment dictate,
and believe me ever, my dear sir, your affec-
tionate friend,
(Sd.) CHARLES TELFAIR.
Bombay, August 15th, 1829.
My Dear Sir, —Captain Steele, of the Cumber-
land, a few days ago communicated to me
your desire to obtain a few seeds from this
place, and I have endeavoured to meet your
wishes in the best way I could upon so short
a notice. Unfortunately, this is the very worst
season of the year, the middle erf the rains,
when seeds of the commonest shrubs and trees,
many of which would be jmobably interesting,
are not to be found free from damps and in-
sects. Had Captain Steele given me more
time I could probably have made a collection
better worth your acceptance, which would
have afforded me much pleasure. Fortunately,
however, my friend Col, Hough has favoured
me with the packet. No. 1, of seeds from his
garden, to which I have added a few wild
seeds, obtained from the neighbouring country,
No. 2, and a packet of common garden seeds,
from the native cultivations, some of which I
thought might prove acceptable.
Many of the beautiful bulbs and shrubs of
Australia I should think would thrive here,
and would be very desirable, and I regret very
much that I have not time to make references
to the botanical periodicals to suggest some
in particular. But if you will have T.he good-
ness to send a few roots and seeds which you
consider suitable to our'climate will be
very acceptable.
A botanical horticultural garden (quite in its
infancy) has lately been established under this
Presidency at Poona, about a hundred miles
from Bombay, under the superintendence of Dr.
Chas. Lush, who, I should imagine, would be
most happy to be in communication with you.
For my own part, 1 know very little more of
botany than the mere names, classes, and or-
ders of a few plants, but am very partial to
the cultivation of flowers. But Col. Hough is
the best practical florist we have, and has in-
troduced from other countries many fine
flowers, amongst others the Crinum amabile,
which grows in great perfection here, as do the
Cactus triangulus and the Yucca gloriosa. We
have also the Amaryllis revoluta, zeylanica,
and equestris, but no other. We have tried
some of the Cape bulbs, but have never suc-
ceeded in bringing them to flower. The mean
temperature is about 82£ deg. Fahr.—l beg,
&c., &c.,
(Sd.) P. MILTON (?).
To C. Fraser, Esq., Sydney.






THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
+
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
II—JOHN McLEAN.
III.—RICHARD CUNNINGHAM.
IV.—JAMES ANDERSON.
\
By J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
SgCmeg;
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street
1903.
■ ‘ J




THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
ll JOHN McLEAN.
III—RICHARD CUNNINGHAM.
IV.—JAMES ANDERSON.
J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
SpCmep;
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street
1903.




lI.—JOHN McLEAN.'"
Mr. McLean, who had been Assistant
Superintendent under Fraser from Ist
April, 1829, became, on the latter’s death,
Acting Superintendent, from Ist January,
1832, and filled that office until the arrival
of Richard Cunningham, in January, 1833.
Thereupon he was again relegated to the
position of Assistant Superintendent.
The following letter refers to him as
Assistant Superintendent, and explains the
reference in my first paper (September) to
the date of resignation of Mr. Graham :
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
6th July, 1829.
No. 29/289.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the
Governor to inform you that Mr. McLean has
been appointed! Assistant-Superintendent of the
Botanical Garden in the room of Mr. Graham,
to take effect from Ist of April.—l am, &c.,
&c„,
(Sd.) ALEX. McLEAY.
Mr. Charles Fraser, Supt. of the Botanical
Garden.
A letter from the Colonial Secretary,
dated 24th July, 1829, is addressed “ Mr.
McLean, Assistant Supt. Govt. Garden.”
On the second of January, 1832, a letter
was addressed to “ Mr. McLean, Acting
Supt. Botanic Garden,” asking him if he
can furnish “ from the papers of the late
Mr. Fraser” a ‘‘Report of the Supt. of the
Botanic Garden, Sydney, for 1831.”
On the 17th March, 1832, he was ad-
dressed “Assistant Supt. Govt. Garden.”
On the 4th June, 1832—“Supt. Govt.
Garden.”
On the sth June, 1832—“ Acting Supt.
Govt. Garden.”
On the 26th July, 1832—“Supt. Bot.
Garden.”
On the 22nd September, 1832, he was
called “Assist. Supt. 8.G.” for the last
time.
2nd January, 1833, was the date of the
last letter to “Mr. John McLean, Supt
Bot. Garden.”
Richard Cunningham, under date of 9th
February, 1833, speaks of “ Mr. McLean,
my assistant” (Comp. Bot. Mag. ii. 213).
On the death of Richard Cunningham,
in April, 1835, he again became Act-
ing. Superintendent. Hooker (Introd. to
FI. Tasmania) says that this acting ap-
pointment continued until tie arrival of
Allan Cunningham in 1836, but I cannot
trace the authority for this statement, nor,
indeed, I am in possession of any addition-
al information concerning Mr. McLean.
lII.—RICHARD CUNNINGHAM.
Richard Cunningham (2) was the son of
Allan Cunningham, a gardener of Renfrew-
shire, Scotland, who became head gardener
at Wimbledon House, Surrey. He was born
at Wimbledon on the 12th February, 1793.
Whilst he was yet an infant, his mother
died, and at the early age of six his father
removed him from the preparatory school
in his native village to an Academy at
Putney, conducted by the Rev. John
Adams, A.M., where he remained upwards
of seven years.
When he was 15 years of age both he and
his elder brother Allan were taken into the
service of Mr. William T. Aiton, Director
of the Royal Gardens at Kew, who was
engaged in preparing a second edition of the
“Hortus Kewensis,” and their duty was to
assist in carrying the work through the
press. They thus came under the notice of
(1.) These sketches are extracted from The Public Service Journal , Sydney, of December, 1902, and January, February and
March, 1903.
(2.) See “A Brief Biographical Sketch of the la f e Richard Cunningham, Colonial Botanist in-New South Wales.” (With a
Portrait.) Hooker’s “Companion to the Botanical Magazine,” ii., 210, to which I aro indebted for much of the infor-
mation I lay before my readers.


Sir Joseph Banks, Mr. Robert Brown, and
other botanists of the day. Richard con-
tinued with Mr. Aiton at Kensington as a
clerk for about six years, and then remov-
ed to the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew,
and where, as a clerk attached to that es-
tablishment, he became known, at least, by
name, to many British and Continental bo-
tanists, and here passed eighteen years of
his life.
Sir J. D. Hooker, the late Director of
the Botanic Gardens at Kew, wrote
“I have evidence to show that Richard
Cunningham, one of the staff attached to
Kew, was for many years engaged in the
arrangement of the collections and the de-
terminations of the plants in Kew gar-
dens. He corresponded during a long per-
iod with Sir W. J. Hooker, then Regius
Professor of Botany at Glasgow. Writing
under date January 22nd, 1824 (the project
for using Hunter House having fallen
through at that time, owing to Sir Jo-
seph Banks’ death), Richard Cunningham
says : “I have at length persuaded Mr.
Aiton to have a room built in the gardens
to contain the herbaria altogether, which
is now going on with, and as soon as I get
things straight in it, I will commence up-
on a series of S. African plants.”
He refers again to this during the fol-
lowing year (November 3rd, .1825) in speak-
ing of “the little convenience we have had
till lately in the garden room to arrange
and compare dried plants with the books.”
His bi other Allan, after his long botani-
cal travels, returned to London in 1831.
In May, 1832, the death of Mr. Charles
Fraser, Colonial Botanist and Superinten-
dent of the Botanic Gardens at Sydney,
was officially announced by the Governor
of the Colony to the Secretary of State,
and the appointment thus vacated was
given to Richard Cunningham, upon the
strong recommendation of Mr. Robert
Brown. In August of that year he em-
barked, the Secretary of State having been
pleased to make an increase in the salary
that Mr. Cunningham’s predecessor had re-
ceived. Together with other ornamental
and useful plants he had permission to car-
ry out with him in cases on the ship’s
deck, were some open boxes of vines of ap-
proved kinds, both for wine and raisins.
These had been selected for the purpose by
Mr. James Busby, during a tour which
that gentleman had made through some of
the best wine districts of France and
Spain.
Mr. Busby’s “Journal of a Recent Visit
to the Vineyards of Spain and France, &c.,
Culture of the Vine in New South Wales,”
was published in 1834, and he states : “By
the invitation of Mr. Richard Cunning-
ham, then of the Royal Gardens of Kew,
and since, fortunately for the Colony, ap-
pointed Colonial Botanist of New South
Wales, I transferred the cases to Kew,
where Mr. Cunningham himself superin-
tended the packing, and I feel persuaded
that to his care I am, in a great measure,
indebted for the excellent condition in
which they arrived at Sydney.”
The following extracts from a letter
written to Sir William Hooker, while on
the eve of quitting his native country, are
very interesting to botanists and others at
the present day
Ship Mary, oil Sheerness.
August 25, 1832.
“Previous to sailing, I am anxious to ad-
dress a few words to you, and to tell you,
that among the commissions with which I am
honoured, are several from Mr. R. Brown. I
have particular instructions from him to look
after “Dawsonia” in all its states ; a leafless
quadrangular-stemmed plant of Rubiaceae (?),
near Sydney ; a submersed grassy aquatic
plant in the Sydney Cove, and sea-weeds of all
kinds; also sections of remarkable woods, the
same of Monocotyledonous Plants generally,
the trunk of the Australian ‘Todea’ (which he
is disposed to consider specifically distinct from
the African); stems of ‘ Xanthorrhoeas,’ especi-
ally the dichotomous parts, west-coast grasses
(for I hope to work occasionally on the west
and south-west colonies, a ‘Banksia,’ supposed
to diller from ‘B. Cunninghamii,' on Wilson’s
Promontory, and another at Port Phillip, his
(Mr. B.’s) variety 3 of ‘B. integrifola,’ but be-
lieved to be also a species ; also trunks of the
great nettle tree, &c., &c.”
*****
“I will keep in mind your commission with
respect to dried plants for your herbarium, and
should I meet with such collections as you
mention will make the best bargain I can for
you, either by purchase or exchange, looking
out particularly for voyagers, whether English
or foreign. By the earliest opportunity after
I arrive in Sydney, I will report to you every
particular that I have been enabled to obtain
respecting poor Fraser, which may prove inter-
esting to his sister or you, as you have kindly
undertaken to point out a safe 1 channel by
which such articles of his property as I may
collect will reach her. I fear, however, there
must bo very little, as our surgeon, Mr. Watt,
with whom I consider myself fortunate in being
placed in juxtaposition, and who left the co


To 1. Mr. Spark ...
... £0
14s.
,, 2. Mrs. Hall ...
... £17
Os.
,, 3. Mrs. Still ...
... £5
Os.
4. Mr. Webb ...
... £8
Os.
£30
14s.
lony with General Darling, tells me the im-
pression in Sydney was that, owing to his
careless habits, Fraser died insolvent.”
In January, 1833, Richard Cunningham
entered on the superintendence of the Bo-
tanic Gardens with an earnestness and zeal
which furnished good evidence of his hav-
ing the improvement of the establishment,
in its several departments of botany and
horticulture, strongly at heart. An ex-
perimental ground was formed, in which
the cultivation and propagation of vines
and fruit trees generally were attended to,
and from which the colonists received
ample supplies of cuttings. In the botani-
cal division, some improvements were
made, and many of the rarer indigenous
plants were brought in from remote locali-
ties, that had not previously found a place
in the garden ; while numerous exotics,
adapted to the soil and climate of the co-
lony, were introduced.
The first official letter (of which I have
a record) was from the Colonial Secretary
on the 14th March, 1833, to
Mr. R. Cunningham,
Colonial Botanist ;
on the 16th inst. he was promoted to
R. Cunningham, Esq.,
Colonial Botanist.,
which afterwards remained his official de-
signation. In the early days there was a
great gulf fixed between the Esquires and
the Misters.
Following is the first N.S.W. letter of
Cunningham I have seen
To Alex. McLeay, Esq.
Sir, —The repairs and alterations approved
by His Excellency to be clone ro the Garden
House of this department being now so far
completed as to afford me accommodation
therein, I have the honour to inform you that
I have taken up my residence in the Garden,
and beg that you now will be pleased to ob-
tain His Excellency’s approbation to my charg-
ing in my contingent account the amounts
stated in the margin,
which T have paid for the rent of apartments
in the town from the date of my arrival here
up to the 16th inst., the vouchers of which I
will transmit to the Auditor-General on ob-
taining the necessary authority for making
these charges upon the Treasury.—l have, &c.,
&c.,
(Intd.) R.C.
13th Aug., 1833.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
12th October, 1833.
No. 33/249.
Sir, —Having submitted to the Governor your
letter of the 7th inst., requesting permission to
make an excursion to Emu Plains for pur-
poses connected with your public duty, and
that rations for two men and one boy who
are to accompany you may be furnished, I am
directed by His Excellency to acquaint you
that he approves of your absence from Sydney
accordingly, and that the necessary instruc-
tions respecting the rations proposed by you
have been given to the Deputy Commissary
General.—l have, &c., &c.,
(Sd.) F. C. HARRINGTON.
I have no particulars in regard to this
trip, which was probably performed before
the New Zealand one, in spite of the date.
It is alluded to in 1833, the Home Govern-
ment, having determined to despatch a
store ship to Sydney with instructions to
proceed afterwards to New Zealand, to cut
spars of kauri pine (Dammara australis,
Lamb.) for the Royal Navy. His Majesty’s
ship Buffalo, having been put on commis-
sion, sailed from Portsmouth on the ser-
vice. The master commanding this vessel
received instructions from the Admiralty
. to take Mr. Cunningham on board at Syd-
ney, in order that he might accompany the
expedition to New Zealand, with a view of
affording his botanical aid in the selection
of the particular spars adapted for main-
top-masts first rates, which were then re-
quired for the public service. Of the parti-
cular tree, as it stood majestic in its na-
tive forests, not a soul on board had the
least knowledge. The Buffalo reached Sydney
at the latter end of the year, and was soon
again ready for sea. At length the Colon-
ial Botanist embarked, and was received
with joy by the commander and officers,
who were glad to have a scientific man
with them on the speculative voyage on
which they were to proceed.
From the following letter it appears that
Richard Cunningham’s trip was optional on
his part :
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 9th Sept., 1833.
No. 33/222.
Sir .—I have the honour, by direction of His
Excellency the Governor, to inform you in com-
pliance with instructions from the Under-Se-


cretary of State that if you consider that
there will be any advantage in your proceed-
ing to New Zealand for the purpose of making
yourself acquainted with the various vegetable
productions of that island, an opportunity will
oiler of your procuring a passage in the Buf-
falo store ship expected shortly to arrive,
free from any expense to you, but of your trip
and that a return passage by either the same
ship, or by means of the British Resident, will
be also furnished to you.—l have, &c,, &c.,
(Sd.) ALEX. McLEAY.
R. Cunningham, Esq., Colonial Botanist.
As the commander of His Majesty’s ship
had to confer with the missionaries as the
best mode of proceeding so as to obtain the
prescribed kind of spars, those gentlemen,
irom their intimate acquaintance with the
natives and their knowledge of various re-
mote inlets on the eastern coast, being
supposed to possess the best information
on the subject, the Bay of Islands, on the
shores of which are situated the mission
stations, was the first 'port visited. The
information obtained, however, proving by
no means equal to what he had at Port
Jackson been led to expect, the commander
made but a short stay at the Bay of Is-
lands (the rendezvous of all whalers),
where no trees of the kauri pine were now
to be had. Weighing anchor, the Buffalo
proceeded to Wangaroa, a port on the
coast to the northward, where His Majes-
ty’s ship Dromedary had, some years pre-
viously, cut a cargo of spars of the dimen-
sions now required. Mr. Cunningham, who
had landed with the officers at the Bay of
Islands, it may be observed, had his first
look at the indigenous vegetation on its
southern shore, and among the plants re-
cognised several that he had already seen
in the herbarium formed by his brother
Allan in 1826.
Some apparent difficulties presenting
themselves to the commanding officer of the
store ship, in his outset to procure the
trees from the ravines at Wangaroa, he re-
called the felling gangs, and preparing for
sea, stood out of the port, with the design
of visiting the more remote parts of the
coast to the south, hoping there to effect
the ulterior objects of his voyage. Here,
then, terminated Mr. Cunningham’s connec-
tion with His Majesty’s ship Buffalo. Thus
left alone, without a single European as a
friend or servant, on the shores of a har-
bour densely inhabited by savages, who
bad, but a few years before, massacred the
crew of the ship Boyd, and more recently
had seized upon the houses and property of
the Wesleyan missionaries, Mr. Cunningham
was immediately assured by the natives
that his life was perfectly safe with them,
as they knew he was the brother of the
man (Allan) who had some seven years
previously lived and travelled with them
in their native woods, and who, on taking
his farewell, had distributed among them
many tokens of his regard for them. Rich-
ard discovered that his name, which the
New Zealanders called Canni-nama, was a
passport, a perfect safeguard to him
wherever he rambled.
He made a fine collection of New Zealand
plants, which was forwarded to Sir W. J.
Hooker. We have some details of his finds,
hut this is not a botanical paper. He dis-
covered an orchid, “Dendrobium Cunning-
hamii,” Lindley, and also a new “Fuch
sia.” On the 24th January, 1834, at the
mouth of the Hokianga River, he discover-
ed a new species of “Veronica,” which he
called “V. speciosa,” and which is figured
in the “Botanical Magazine,” fig. 34tii.
Early in March he returned to the Mis-
sion Stations at the Bay of Islands. He
now set himself to make some final excur-
sions, in which he materially enriched his
collections. With a view of establishing
them in the Botanic Gardens at Sydney,
he also applied himself to collecting certain
living plants of the forest, either remark-
able for the richness of their foliage, or the
beauty of their flowers. Robust seedlings
oi these were chosen, and carefully planted
in boxes.
But the period arrived for Mr. Cunning-
ham’s departure for Port Jackson, and His
Majesty’s ship Alligator, having put into
the Bay on a temporary visit, an opportu-
nity was afforded him to return to the co-
lony, i with the various collections he had
formed. He, therefore, embarked with Cap-
tain Lambert, about the close of April,
and after a passing call at Norfolk Island
he landed at Sydney on the 13th May.
15th May, 1834.
Sir,—l do myself the honour to request that
the authority to charge in my contingent ac-
count the sum stated in the margin,
To Messrs. Mair and Powditch, for tobac-
co, &c., a payment to the natives for the
hire of canoes, &c., for various services
performed by them, £3 3s.
To .7. Poynor, for a passage from Wan-
garoa to the Bay of Islands, £3.
which I have found it necessary to incur in
New Zealand on account of the service on


which 1 was employed there, and as regards
the expense of my passage from New Zealand—
as the officers of H.M.S. Alligator, whoso
mess 1 joined during my passage from New
Zealand, have declined to receive any pecuni-
ary payment from me as my share of the ex-
pense of the same during that period, I do
myself the honour to suggest the propriety of
being allowed to forward on board that ves-
sel a few stores such as may bo considered ac-
ceptable to them in their equipment for sea,
and as an equivalent for their kind accommo-
dation of me on board. I have the honour
further to state that two boxes containing a
selection of fruit trees, &c,, have been placed
on board the Columbine proceeding to New
Zealand addressed to the British Resident
there, whom I have requested to direct the re-
turn of the boxes with such New Zealand
plants that can be procured of the species the
storminess of our passage had destroyed. The
charge for freight of these two boxes to New
Zealand is fifteen shillings (155.).
(The rest of this letter is missing owing to
the leaves of the letter book being torn out.)
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
9th January, 1835.
No. 35/ G.
Sir, —In reply to your letter of the 2nd No-
vember last, requesting to be allowed a pas-
sage to Hobart Town for the purpose of col-
lecting plants peculiar to Van Diemen’s Is-
land, I am directed by the Governor to inform
you that His Excellency thinks it would be
bqtter for you to communicate with Mr. Scott,
the botanical collector in that Colony, to as-
certain what has been done there, and what
can be obtained from him before you set out
The journey may, perhaps, be saved, and no
loss can accrue from delay.—l have, &c., &c
(Sd.) ALEX. McLKAV
To the Colonial Botanist.
Sir J. D. Hooker, in his “Introduction
to the Flora of Tasmania,” speaks of a
“Dr. Thomas Scott, who collected in Tas-
mania and transmitted specimens to Sir
W. J. Hooker about 1835.” Perhaps this
is the Mr. Scott referred to in the above
letter.
Botanic Garden, Sydney,
January 25, 1835.
“1 take advantage of the departure of the
first wool-ship this season to send you a
package, containing a selection of our collec-
tions in the vicinity of the Nepean River, on
the Blue Mountains, at Tornah, &c, I do not
expect there will be found many species among
them new to your herbarium, which, must I
think, be inferior only to two in the United
Kingdom. Some of the specimens I send may,
however, be in different states of inflorescence
from what you already possess. You have, I
believe, an original set of Sieber’s plants from
this colony ; if on a comparison with them, it
is found that I have mistaken any of his (I
allude particularly to the JLeguminosae), I shall
be thankful to be set right.
“My late excursion to Tornah proved a very
agreeable one, and altogether tolerably success-
ful. Tornah is the mountain where Fieldia
(‘Fielda australis,’ see Hook. ‘Ex, Flora,’ t.
232) was first met with by my brother, as
you may remember. I sent seeds of it to Mr,
Murray, and hope he may get them to vege-
tate ; they cannot well be more fresh. You
will find among the plants in the bundle Pi-
melea hypericina (‘Bot. Mag.,’ t. 3330), re-
specting which my brother wrote to me in
July last. There is hardly, I think, a doubt
tkat my Tornah plant is identical with that of
King George’s Sound, though the morsel my
brother sent me was so destroyed by damp as
to leave me somewhat to hesitate between it
and another species that has fallen in my way.
I was pleased also to meet at Tomah with a
plant (1) which you probably have in your
herbarium, under the name ‘Loranthus’; but it
is terrestrial, and although I unfortunately ne-
glected to put specimens of its flower and fruits
into spirits, as 1 should have done, still I
trust those I send will suffice to determine the
question, whether or not it should form, with
‘L. floribundus’ of Labillardiere, the genus
‘Nuytsia’ of Mr. Brown. We brought home a
living specimen with us, which appears likely
to succeed in the Botanic Garden.
“Dr. Bindley has written to Dr. Bowman,
who is the Principal of the Medical Department
here, for a full-length specimen of ‘Xanthor-
rhoea hastilis’ (2), which reminds me to ob-
serve that I have hitherto refrained from send-
ing you any bulky specimens, as ‘Xanthor-
rhoeas,’ sections of the stem of Proteaceae,
Epacrideae, &c., fearing to incur an expense on
such articles, as I have often known to prove
enormous. Last year, however, I met with the
commander of a vessel, who was willing, for
the consideration of a few seeds, to take home,
free of charge, a ‘Xanthorrhoea,’ which I had
obtained for Mr. R. Brown, and I understand
this very ‘Xanthorrhoea’ is now put up, in a
glass case, at the British Museum. Should
such another opportunity occur, I will avail
myself of it to transmit such articles as I
should think would be acceptable.
(1.) (?) Atkinsonia.
(2.) Grass-tree.


“According to present arrangements. I am to
start on the 2nd March, with Major Mitchell,
Surveyor-General of this Great South Land, on
the grand journey of which so much has been
talked ever since my arrival in the colony. I
cannot, however, state particularly what our
route will be, but Major Mitchell is most an-
xious to make a push for the Swan River set-
tlement. This, if it can be effected, with the
spur which the expected arrival of our new
southern neighbours (1), will give to geo-
graphical discovery, bids fair to throw open a
considerable portion of the unknown interior
of this vast territory during the current year.
Should motives of economy, however, actuate
the Governor to postpone the Major’s journey,
or prevent my being a party with him. I will,
in such case, follow up my intention with re-
gard to the sister colony of Van Diemen’s
Land. I have written to Hobart Town by de-
sire of His Excellency, to enquire what bo-
tanical purchases can be made there, but I
think, wdthout vanity, I may be able to prove
that far better collections would be obtained
by travelling in the train of an exploring ex-
pedition, than by sending a commission to ob-
tain them by purchase. You will be glad to
hear that a ‘Castanospermum australe’ (2)
(All. Cunningham in ‘Bot. Misc.,’ v.; p. 241
to 51 and 52), and ‘Grevillea robusta’ (3)
(‘Bot. Mag.,’ t. 3184) have flowered in the
Botanic Garden here for the first time.”
Richard Cunningham’s last entry in the
letter book is
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
23rd February, 1835.
I am directed by the Governor to inform you
that it being understood that the Surveyor-
General wishes you to accompany him on his
intended expedition, His Excellency requests
that you will make the necessary preparations
for that purpose, and arrange with that offi-
cer about your departure.”
Major Mitchell’s expedition (a full ac-
count of which is familar to my readers
from his “Three Expeditions into the In-
terior of Eastern Australia”) was equip-
ped on a grand scale, to ascertain the
course of the Darling River of Captain
Sturt, and to prosecute extensive geo-
graphical and scientific researches in the in-
terior.
(1) The settlement of what is now Victoria
by the Tasmanians.
(2) Moreton Bay Chestnut.
(3) Silky Oak.
All went well until the vicinity of the
Bogan was reached, when Cunningham, who
was botanising, strayed away from the rest
of the party, and was lost. The leader of
the expedition made every effort to find
him, and only on the third day did he find
traces of the missing botanist, who had
been murdered by the blacks.
The melancholy circumstances of Rich-
ard Cunningham’s death are related in de-
tail by Mitchell in his work to which I
have already alluded.
The following letter from Allan Cun-
ningham, dated June 17th, 1836, to Lou-
don’s “Gardener’s Magazine” (1836) is
published in the “Mag. of Zool. and 80t.,”
i. 210 (1837), and will be new to most of
my readers. We know nothing of the two
brothers Richard and Allan but what is
noble and true, and Allan’s letter breathes
true fraternal affection
“The last arrival of the mails from Sydney
has put the Government in possession of the
report of the Officer of Police (Lieut. Zouch,
4th Regiment), who had been in command of
a party of mounted police to the spot where
my poor brother was last heard of, with the
view of ascertaining his fate. It appears that
after leaving Boree, on the present western
verge of the colony, beyond Bathurst, Lieut.
Zouch, and a party of troopers, accompanied
by one of Major Mitchell’s men, and a friendly
native black, named Sandy, proceeded N.W. to-
wards the Bogan. On the third day of their
advance (viz., 2nd November last) they fortu-
nately met with two blacks, who knew all the
particulars of a white man having been mur-
dered on the Bogan, and also the names and
persons of the perpetrators of the deed ; and, as
they offered to accompany the party to the
country where the murderers were encamped
with their tribe, Lieut. Zouch gladly accepted
their services as guides, and, on the evening
of the 6th, the party, by their directions,
came upon a tribe consisting of upwards of
forty men, women, and children, who were bi-
vouacing on the banks of a lake fed by the
Macquarie, and called the Budda. As no re-
sistance was offered by these savages, they
were immediately invested and taken prison-
ers. A few questions produced an acknow-
ledgment from them that a white man had
been killed by four of the tribe on the Bogan,
three of whom they delivered up, and the fourth
they stated was absent on the Big River—that
is, the Darling. On searching the bags of the
tribe, they found a knife, a glove, &c., which
the three blacks acknowledged they had taken
from the white man, and which the man who
had been with Major Mitchell on his expedi-
tion, and now accompanied the police, said he


was sure had belonged to my brother. The de-
tails of the closing scenes of my poor rela-
tive’s life are dreadful in the extreme, and, to
those of his friends who had known his great
benevolence of mind, his last moments can be
more readily conceived than described.
“The officer goes on to report that the three
murderers, on being taken prisoners, admitted
that, about six moons ago, they met a white
man on the Bogan, who came up and macl'e
signs to them that he was hungry ; that they
gave him food ; and that he encamped with
them that night. The white man, repeatedly
getting up during the night, excited their sus-
picions ; and, under apprehension that he would
betray them into the hands of some enemies
in the neighbourhood, they consulted together,
and soon came to the determination to destroy
him, which they effected the following morn-
ing, by one of the savages approaching him un-
perceived, and striking him on the back part
of the head, and the others rushing upon him
with their spears.
“The officer adds :—T then determined to
proceed to the spot where the murder was com-
mitted, which, I was informed by the blacks,
was distant three days’ journey. Lieut. Zouch
and his party were now conducted to a place
named Currindine, where the blacks showed
them some of his bones, which, he said, were
those of the white man they killed, and point-
ed out a small portion of a coat, and also
part of a Manilla hat. Being thus convinced
that they had reached the spot where the very
melancholy event had occurred, the officer and
his little party, with true Christian-like feel-
ing, collected all the remains they could dis-
cover ; and having, in sad silence, deposited
them in the ground, they raised a small mound
over them, and barked some of the nearest
trees, as the only means in their power of
marking a spot whereon a man wholly devot-
ed to science had, in- the earnestness and zeal
with which he was prosecuting botanical in-
vestigation, been deprived of his life by the
hands of mistaken savages.
“Thus fell in the very prime of life (having
just completed his forty-second year), Richard
Cunningham, an able botanist, and in other re-
spects a very talented man ; whose very ami-
able and obliging disposition had in his life-
time secured as, much to him general esteem,
as his premature, ever to be lamented death
had produced! a universal sentiment of un-
feigned grief, in the minds of all his friends in
England, and of every colonist in New South
Wales.
“I have now given you the substance of the
last official communication from New South
Wales, and which is a final one, regarding my
poor brother ; who, you will observe, was but
one night living with the natives. We cannot
tell what might have been the state of his
mind on that night, which had urged him to
repeatedly rise, walk about, and listen to catch
the bark of dogs, or any little stir (amidst
the dead silence of midnight) from the con-
siderable encampment of natives, his anxious
sleepless companions, not far removed from him
at the time. How dreadful must have been his
feelings may be readily imagined. But, could
he have composed himself, and not have risen
and thus excited the suspicions of the savages
among whom he was reposing, he would, pro-
bably, have been recovered in a day or two by
his companions, who came to the native en-
campment but a day too late. He had a mind
well disciplined by the religious education he
had received ; and, in perfect possession of his
mental faculties, could soon have reconciled
himself to a short life in a remote desert, with
savages, until rescued by his party, for he
could say with real feeling, and in firm belief
in the existence of a merciful protecting Provi-
dence, in the desert and everywhere,
“There is mercy in every place,
And mercy, encouraging thought,
Gives pven affliction a grace,
And reconciles man to his lot.’’
His remains were buried at Lower Tabra-
tong, near Dandaloo ; a tombstone was
placed on the grave and a palisading was
placed around it. I have been promised a
photograph of the grave, and a copy of the
inscription on the stone.
In St. Andrew’s Scots Church is a mural
tablet, with an inscription as follows ;
“Richard Cunningham, Government Bo-
tanist to the colony, attached to an ex-
plorative expedition into the interior, un-
der the command of Major Mitchell, Sur-
veyor-General, wandered in his enthusiasm
for botanical investigation, from his com-
panions, and losing himself in the desert
country on the Bogan River, fell into the
hands of one of the native tribes, by whom
he was unfortunately killed about the 25th
of April, 1835, in the forty-second year of
his age.”
“This tablet is erected as a lasting and
affectionate tribute to his memory by
Allan, his only brother.”
This tablet was brought from England by
Allan.


VBf
IV.—JAMES ANDERSON.
It is not easy to trace Mr. Anderson’s
record of service, but it appears to be as
follows ; Acting-Superintendent from April,
1835 (death of Richard Cunningham) to
12th February, 1837. He was Superinten-
dent from February, 1838, to June, 1839
(Allan Cunningham having retired from the
direction of the Botanic Gardens, while re-
taining the title of Colonial Botanist
From June, 1839, to April, 1842, Anderson
was in sole charge.
Anderson had been the botanical collector
of Captain King’s voyage to South Ameri-
ca, and the survey of the Straits of Magel-
lan, &c. It was on Captain King’s home-
ward voyage that Anderson was left at
Sydney, where, until he obtained an official
nosition at the Botanic Gardens, he was, it
is understood, a botanical collector on his
own account.
“Allan Cunningham died (1839), his hand
clasping that of his faithful friend, James
Anderson.” (Heward.) *
“Many, however, will associate the name
of ‘Andersonia,’ a genus of Epacrideae, wilh
that of James Anderson, who was for many
years the Director of the Botanic Gardens
in Sydney, and the first to reclaim from
the cove that which is now known as the
finest part of the lower garden. (This is
hardly correct.) He was a great collector
of plants, the friend of A. and R. Cunning-
ham, and died a bachelor, in 1838'”
(Woolls’ “Lectures on the Vegetable King-
dom, 58.) (The date should he 1842 )
He was buried in the Presbyterian por-
tion of the Devonshire-street Cemetery, and
the following inscription was placed on his
important-looking monument :
“Erected to the Memory of the late
JAMES ANDERSON,
Superintendent of the Botanic Gardens,
Sydney,
Who died on the 22nd April, 1842.
He was born at Boguham, near Stirling,
Scotland, in 1797, and travelled over a
great part of Europe, Africa, America, and
along the coast of New Holland (properly
speaking, New South Wales), collecting
rare botanic specimens.
He was of the most kindly disposition,
and highly esteemed by all who knew him.
This monument was subscribed for by a
number of his friends in this Colony, to
show their respect for his memory.”
Mr. J. M. Pringle, who took much inte-
rest in the removal of Anderson’s re-
mains during the demolition of the ceme-
tery in 1901, informs me that the monu-
ment and remains are now in the Presby-
terian portion of the new cemetery, La
Perouse. The number is 17, trench No. 4,
north.
It will thus be seen how limited is my
knowledge of Mr. Anderson, and I should be
glad of any further particulars available.


0 0
0 0“
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street, Sydney.








THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS
♦
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
V.—ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.
By J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
O
SEfcneE =
s. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street
1903




THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS
♦
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
V—ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.
J, H. MAIDEN, Director.
SECmeg :
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Streki
1903




V.—ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.
(I think his official record, since the date
of his connection with the Botanic Garden,
is Superintendent Botanic Garden, 12th
February, 1837, to February, 1838 ; Colo-
nial Botanist—with James Anderson as his
Superintendent of the Botanic Garden—
from February, 1838, to June, 1839. While
he returned from his botanical expedition
to New Zealand in October, 1838, it is not
entirely clear what official botanical posi-
tion he held after April, 1838.)
An admirable life of Allan Cunningham
was written under the following title ;
“ Biographical Sketch of the late Allan
Cunningham, Esci., F.L.S., M.R.G.S., &c.,”
by Robert Heward, F.L.S. This was pub-
lished in part in Hooker’s “London Journal
of Botany,” vol. iv., pp. 107-128, 263-290
(1842). A number of reprints (with addi-
tions) were struck off for private distribu-
tion by Mr. Heward, and form a volume of
140 pages, with a frontispiece portrait
(likewise in Hooker’s “Journal”) of Cun-
ningham. Heward was the particular
friend of Cunningham, and his sole legatee;
his information was mainly obtained from
the latter's letters. This memoir con-
tains some interesting observations by
Cunningham on the Botanic Garden, and
also an account of Cunningham’s difference
with the Governor of the day, in regard to
glowing vegetables for the officers, and
which led to his resignation of the office of
Superintendent of the Sydney Botanic
Garden, a post he continued to hold for a
few months at the particular request of
Governor Sir George Gipps, who, to do
him justice, made a special effort to retain
his services. I have alluded to this matter
further on.
In the following account of Cunningham I
have obtained mv facts from various authen-
tic sources, including Cunningham’s manu-
script journals and contemporary papers
and publications. I make no pretence in
this (or in the other biographical sketches)
to literary merit ; I have simply arranged
the principal facts of Cunningham’s life in
chronological order. In fact, this series of
articles is but the setting in order of ma-
terials, with the view to ask for additional
information and references, and, may be,
corrections, so that the historian of the fu-
ture may, if so disposed, be able to write
a connected history of these worthies.
Allan Cunningham is my ideal amongst
Australian botanists. His was a noble
character, and he literally worked himself
to death for the advancement of his favour-
ite science. As a geographical explorer the
present generation know but little of the
debt Australia owes to him. He is better
appreciated in Queensland at the present
day, and an admirable account of his ex-
plorations in what is now Queensland is
contained in a paper by the Hon. Arthur
Morgan, M.L.A., read before the Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia
(Queensland branch), at its Warwick meet-
ing, 7th May, 1902, and published in its
“Proceedings.” Sir J. D. Hooker, the late
Director of Kew, says “Cunningham’s
botanical travels are by far the most con-
tinuous and extensive that have ever been
performed in Australia, or, perhaps, in any
other country. His vast collections were,
for the most part, transmitted to Kew,
whence they were transferred to the Bri-
tish Museum. A very complete set was,
however, given to Sir W. J. Hooker, and
his own private herbarium was left to his
early and attached friend, R. Heward,
Esq., F.L.S.”
As an Australian botanist he may not
have been as brilliant as Robert Brown,
Bentham, or Mueller, but who could tell
what he could have published had he been
given the opportunity. As he himself said,
with his dving breath, he was always on
his legs—a wanderer. Expedition succeeded
expedition, and he rarely had any time to
deliberately sit down and write descriptive-
ly of the treasures which were first brought
together by his endeavours. Here and there
one gets glimpses of the hardships he un-
derwent, both as regards poor and inade-
quate food and miserable transport and ac-
commodation, but he was one of the most
uncomplaining of men. He is far and away
the most eminent man who has held the
honourable post of Director for other title)
of the Botanic Gardens of Sydney, and as
there are statues in Sydney in honour of
men whose services to Australia are not to
be compared to Allan’s, I trust that some
dav th°re wiD he erected in his honour, in
these beautiful wardens, one of the choicest
works of art the most accomplished statu-
ary sculptor in Australia can produce. But
his reputation is eternal, and not depen-
dent on any material monument raised by
the hand of man.
He was one of the most modest of men.
He received no mark of favour from his So-
vereign, and no very special recognition,
other than the “smooth words that butter
no parsnips,” from, the colonial authorities.
Following is a list of his scientific honours
—I do not know whether it is complete :
Elected Fellow of the Linnean Society,
January 17th, 1832. A resolution of the
Linnean Society, passed on the 21st Feb-
ruary, 1832, reads : “Refunds £36 to Allan
Cunningham, being his entrance fee, and
life composition, in honour of the value of
his numerous discoveries, &c,”


“Membre Correspondant Societe d' his-
toire Naturelle de V lie Maurice.” February
9th, 1831.
Honorary Member, Royal Irish Acade-
my, February 25th, 1833.
Elected a member of the Geographical
Society, December 24th, 1832, admitted
January 141 b, 1833.
Before any leisure had been accorded him
to publish his researches, and before he had
attained the age of 48 years, this intellec-
tually great man, and pattern of all that
is noble and true, passed away, working to
the last with that sanguine enthusiasm
which is one of the characteristics of the
cruel disease that laid him low.
Ah, why shouldst thou be dead, when common
men
Are busy with their trivial affairs ;
Having and holding ? Why, when thou hadst
read
Nature’s mysterious manuscript, and then
Wast ready to reveal the truth it bears
Why art thou silent ?
(Longfellow, “Three Friends of Mine.”)
Allan Cunningham was born at Wimble-
don, near London, in 1791. He received a
good education, his father intending him
for the law ; but he preferred gardening,
and obtained employment at Kew, under
Mr. Aiton, who was then engaged on his
“Hortus Kewensis.”
In the “Report of the Committee on Bo-
tanical Work” (1901), p. 84, W. T. Alton
wrote to Banks, asking that collectors
might be despatched to collect for Kew,
such work having been interrupted for a
number of years on account of the war.
Banks replied under date June 7th, 1814 :
“ Should you be allowed to send to the
Cape of Good Hope and to New South
Wales, I have no douht of being able to give
such instructions to the Governors of those
countries as will enable His Majesty’s col-
lectors to visit, at a very reasonable ex-
pense, countries hitherto unexplored, and
they will add to the Royal collection
riches beyond the most sanguine expecta
tions of those who have had less experi-
ence in the produce of those countries than
has fallen to my lot.”
By Treasury letter of the 13th Septem-
ber, 1814, Banks was informed that the
persons he had nominated to this service
would be appointed, and thereupon Allan
Cunningham was sent to the Brazils.
He went to Brazil in 1814, where he
made large collections. Here he remained
two years, collecting in the vicinity of Rio,
the Organ Mountains, San Paulo, and other
parts of Brazil, making large colie tions of
dried specimens, living plants, and seeds.
Sir Joseph Banks wrote that his collec-
tions, especially of orchids, bromeliads, and
bulbs, “did credit to the expedition and ho-
nour to the Koyal Gardens,”
When this service came to an end, he was
nominated for service in New South Wales.
Cunningham’s “ Manuscript Journal ” is
marked 1811 on the outside, and was doubt-
less obtained for Brazil. The Sydney en-
tries begin at p. 139, and he refers to
“Rio, September 20th, 1810,” and records
that he landed at Port Jackson 21st De-
cember, 1810. At p. 148 he collects at
Woolloomooloo. The instructions of the
Secretary of State (Earl Rat hurst ). dated
April 18th, 1810. as regards vegetable pro-
ducts, are as follows, and these instruc-
tions Cunningham attended to in his
“Journal”
“The vegetables, and particularly those
that are applicable to any useful purpose,
whether in medicine, dyeing, etc., any
scented woods, or such as may be adapted
for cabinet work, or furniture, and more
particularly such woods as may appear to
be useful in shipbuilding ; of all which it
would be desirable to procure small speci-
mens, labelled and numbered, so that an
easy reference may be made to them in the
1 Journal,’ to ascertain the quantities in
which they are found, and the situations in
which they grow.” (Oxley’s “Journals ”
etc., p. 360.)
“Exclusive of yourself and Mr. Evans. I
have deemed it advisable to permit Mr
Allan Cunningham, one of the King’s bota-
nists (lately sent out to this country for
the purpose of collecting plants and seeds
for His Majesty’s Gardens at Kew), to ac-
company the expedition.” (Governor Mac-
quarie’s instructions to Oxley, dated 24th
March, 1817 ; Ox T ey’s “Journals,” etc., p.
356.)
T nder the same date, op. cit., p. 362,
Go\ ernor Macquarie gives the designa-
tions : —“Mr. Allan Cunningham, King’s bo-
tanist ; Charles Fraser, Colonial botanist ”
Oxley’s expedition left Svdney on 6th
April, 1817, and arrived at Bathurst on the
14th. The chart which accompanies Oxley’s
Journals,” etc., is dated. The expedition
painfully explored the Macnnarie and Lach-
lan Rivers, returning to Bathurst on Au-
gust 29th. In this expedition Cunningham
collected about 450 species of nlants, many
of which are still extant. * Mt. Cunning-
ham was called after him (Oxley, “Jour-
nals,’ etc., up. 29-34), and at page 164 is
a record of the journey over the Blue Moun-
tains , on April 9th they came upon the
heap of stones supposed to mark the fur-
Ihermost limit of Caley’s progress over the
Blue Mountains, and which Governor Mac-
quarie, in his iournev over the mountains in
1815, named “Caley’s Repulse.”
Cndci date 30th May, 1817, Cunningham
records
( oming through this thicket, which we
have named Euryalean Scrub, after one of
the Gorgons, etc.;” and a number of the
plants procured in this arid area are re-
elsewhere.* 11 tbe “ Flora Australiensis,” and


At p. 58 : “Yesterday, being the King’s
birthday (June 4th), Cunningham planted
under Mount Brogden acorns, peach and
apricot stones and quince seeds, with the
hope rather than the expectation that they
would grow, and serve to commemorate the
day and situation, should these desolate
plains be ever again visited by civilised
man, of which, however, I mink there is
very little probability.” This planting of
useful seeds in out-of-the-way districts was
a pleasing practice that Cunningham fre-
quently carried out.
I now give particulars of the live
voyages—four, if the comparatively un-
important one to Van Diemen’s Land
(Tasmania) be excluded. Cunningham’s
movements from 22nd December, 1817,
to 25th April, 1822, are thus ac-
counted for. I have taken the particulars
from the “ Narrative of a Survey of the
Inter-tropical and Western Coasts of Aus-
tralia, performed between the years 1818
and 1822, by Captain Phillip P. King,
R.N.” The first four voyages were taken
in H.M. cutter “Mermaid,” a little tub of
84 tons, or about the size of a small ferry-
boat. Allan Cunningham was me botanical
collector, and it is marvellous in our eyes
to find what good surveying work Lieute-
nant (afterwards Captain) <\ing performed
in this little boat, and what excellent bo-
tanical results were achieved by Cunning-
ham, under circumstances which would
have damped the ardour of most men. He
went prolonged voyages in this little boat;
the food must have been very poor, and the
inconveniences for botanical work exaspe-
rating. He had little space to dry his
plants, his papers got wet, and rats and
cockroaches ate the specimens. Yet the
fruits of his industry are in the herbaria cf
Europe to-day. 1 have often had what I
call rough experiences when botanising,
but when I recall the circumstances under
which Cunningham worked I am dumb.
I have given precise localities of the spots
touched by Allan Cunningham, as they are
absolutely necessary in order that we may
understand his herbarium labels ; I have
given the dates because from personal ex-
perience, without a connected narrative I
have found it difficult, if not impossible, to
follow many fragmentary accounts of Cun-
ningham’s wanderings that have been pub-
lished.
FIRST VOYAGE.
H.M. cutler “Mermaid,” of 84 tons,
Lieut. P. P. King, R.N. Botanical Collec-
tor, Allan Cunningham. Went on board on
the 21st, and leit Port Jackson on 22nd
December, 1817. Visited Twofold Bay,
passed through Bass’ Straits, along the
south coast to King George’s Sound.
Thence to North-west Cape, and a survey
of the coast between this cape and Depuch
Island was made, including examinations of
Exmouth Gulf, Curlew River, and Dam-
pier’s Archipelago. On March 6th, 1818,
Depuch Island was left ; Rowley’s Shoals
were examined, and a passage made to the
north coast. The Goulburn islands, Mount-
norris and Rallies Bays were surveyed, and
Port Essington was explored. Popham
Bay was visited, and examination made of
Van Diemen’s Gulf, including Sir George
Hope’s Islands and Alligator River ; the
northern shore of Melville Island and Aps-
ley Strait were surveyed, Luxmoor Head,
Port Hurd, and Clarence Strait were vi-
sited ; Australia was then left behind, and
they arrived at Timor on sth June, 1818.
On the 13th Lieut. King left Timor for the
north-west coast of Australia again, visit-
ing the Montebello Islands and Barrow
Island. Little happened till the small craft
passed through Bass’ Straits, and returned
to Port Jackson on 24th July, 1818.
At King George’s Sound traces of Capt.
Vancouver’s garden were sought for in
vain, and Cunningham formed another gar-
den. This voyage seems to have yielded
very few novelties, for, in a letter to Mr.
Heward, he says that the aggregate of his
collections made on the coasts of Australia
did not exceed 300 species.
SECOND VOYAGE.
24th December, 1818, left Port Jackson,
and the vessel arrived at Hobart on 2nd
January, 1819 ; examined the entrance of
Macquarie Harbour, and visited other
I)laces. Returned to Hobart on 30th Janu-
ary, and returned to Port Jackson 14th
February, 1819. Valuable botanical notes
of this trip will be found in King’s narra-
tive.
THIRD VOYAGE.
Left Port Jackson Bth May, 1819, and
commenced a running survey of the east
coast. Port Macquarie and the Hastings
River were made in company with the
“Lady Nelson,” colonial brig, and assisted
by Lieut. Oxley, R.N., the Surveyor-Gene-
ral of the colony. The “ Lady Nelson”
then returned with Oxley to Port Jack-
son, while King, in the “Mermaid,” with
Cunningham aboard, went north. The Bar-
rier Reef was entered at Breaksea Spit ;
Rodd’s Bay was discovered, the Percy
Islands visited, Whitsunday Passage was
passed through, and the “Mermaid” an-
chored in Cleveland Bay. The coast was
examined towards the Endeavour River,
anchoring at Rockingham Bay, Fitzroy Is-
land, Snapper Island, and Weary Bay. Ar-
rived oft the Endeavour River on 27th
June, 1819. On the llth of the following
month the river was left (where, by the
way, Cunningham obtained many plants, a
number of which 1 have seen in Europe),
and exploration of the coast continued.
The cutter anchored among Howick’s
Group and under Flinders’ Group ;


Princess Charlotte’s Bay was explored,
and the islands and reefs as far as Cape
York, anchoring at various parts of the
coast. Then the Gulf of Carpentaria was
crossed, and the survey of me north coast
resumed at Wessel’s Islands ; Castlereagh
Bay and Crocodile Islands were visited,
and Liverpool River discovered and exam-
ined. Gou'burn Island was visited, Cape
Van Diemen passed, and the survey of the
coast resumed at Vernon’s Islands, in Cla-
rence Strait. Paterson Bay, Peron Island,
Anson Bay, and Port Keats were visited
and Cambridge Gulf discovered. Thence
the coast was traced to Cape Londonderry.
On October Ist was begun the examination
of the coast between Cape Londonderry and
Cape Voltaire, including the surveys of Sir
Graham Moore’s Islands, Eclipse Islands,
Vansittart Bay, Admiralty Gulf, and Port
Warrender. At Cassini Island the coast
was left for Coepang, in Timor. Leaving
Coepang, they arrived at Port Jackson, via
Bass’ Straits, on 12th January, 1820.
FOURTH VOYAGE.
14th June, 1820, left Port Jackson, vi-
sited Port Bowen (Queensland), passed
through the Northumberland, and round
the Cumberland Islands, and anchored at
the Endeavour River. Cunningham visited
Mount Cook, where he made a great haul
of seeds and plants. After leaving Endea-
vour River, Lizard Island was visited, al-
so Cape Flinders and Pelican Island, also
Haggerston’s Island, Sunday Island, and
Cairncross Island. Cape York was passed
and Endeavour Strait, and the “Mermaid”
anchored under Booby Island.
The Gulf of Carpentaria was crossed, and
the ship anchored at Goulburn’s South Is-
land. The survey of the coast was resum-
ed at Cassini Island. A survey was made
of Montague Sound, York Sound, and
Prince Frederic’s Harbour, also Hunter’s
and Roe’s Rivers, Port Nelson, and Coro-
nation Islands. At Careening Bay they
stopped for repairs, and Cunningham again
made a haul. Brunswick Bay and Prince
Regent’s River were visited, and home via
the west and south coasts. Bass’ Straits
were passed in safety, but the “Mermaid”
was nearly wrecked near Botany Bay ;
however, on the 6th December, 1820, she
safely anchored in Port Jackson, having
circumnavigated the continent.
FIFTH VOYAGE.
The “Mermaid” was then condemned as
unseaworthy, and H.M. Storeship “Drome-
dary,” rechristened the “Bathurst,” and
placed under the command of Lieut. P. P.
King, with Allan Cunningham, Botanical
Collector, as before. She left Port .Jack-
son on 26th May, 1821, followed the east
coast, and passed round Breaksea Spit,
visited Percy Island, anchored under Cape
Grafton, Hope Islands, and Lizard Island.
Passed Cape Flinders, anchored in Mar-
garet Bay and under Cairncross Island ;
passed through Torres Strait, and visited
Goulburn Island. Passage was then made
from Capo Van Diemen to Careening Bay,
and Prince Regent’s River was visited.
Anchored in Half-way Bay, and Munster
Water and Hanover Bay were explored in
a boat. Then Port George the Fourth, Red
Island, Camden Bay, Buccaneer’s Archipe-
lago, Cygnet Bay, Cape Leveque, Cape La-
touche Treville were successively visited.
The brig being found in a dangerous condi-
tion, the Australian coast was then left,
and a course steered for Port Louis,
Mauritius to refit, where she arrived on
27th September, 1821. Mauritius was left
on 15th November, and King George’s
Sound, Western Australia, reached on De-
cember 24th. A stay here enabled Cun-
ningham (who found no trace of the garden
he had been at great pains to form in
1818) to make fine collections. The brig
then commenced a survey of the west coast
at Rottnest Island. The coast was then
examined to the northward and Cape Les-
chenault, Lancelin Island, Jurien Bay,
Houtman’s Abrolholos, and Red Point were
in turn visited, and the brig anchored in
Dirk Hartog’s Roads at the entrance to
Shark’s Bay. Then the coast was examin-
ed to the North-West Cape, Barrow Is-
land, Montebello Isles. Rowley’s Shoals,
and Cape Leveque were passed, and the
brig had a dangerous experience among the
islands of Buccaneer’s Archipelago. After
an examination of Cygnet Bay, a course
was shaped for Port Jackson, which was
reached on the 25th April, 1822. Here
ended the voyages of Cunningham with
Captain P. P. King. The excellent maps
that accompany Captain King’s volume
enable us in most cases readily to ascer-
tain the precise places where Cunningham
made his collections. Cunningham was
very happy in his commander, who was an
accomplished man in many respects.
Doubtless owing to his association with
Cunningham, he turned his attention to
botany, and King’s copy of “De Candolle’s
Prodromus,” containing interesting margi-
nal notes in his handwriting, fell into my
hands a few years ago, and form a pleas-
ing memorial of this scientific circumnavi-
gator.
Allan Cunningham published a sketch of
the botany of the coast surveys under the
following title
“A Few General Remarks on the Vege-
tation of Certain Coasts of Terra Austra-
lis, and More Especially of its North-
Western Shores,” by Mr. Allan Cunning-
ham, Collector to the Royal Gardens at
Kew. It is to be found in Captain P. P.
King’s “Narrative of a Survey,” &c.,
vol. ii., p.p. 497-533, and a few copies were
separately printed for private circulation.


Captain King’s work was published in
1827, and a resume of Cunningham’s work
was published in German, under the
following title :
“ Einige allgemeine Bemertkungen über
de vegetation, vorziiglich der Nordwestkiiste
von Australien. Oken, Isis, xxi., 1828, col.
172-175.
Cunningham kept a journal of voyages,
which he inscribed “Journal More Particu-
larly Referring to Botanical Subjects,
Formed During Voyage ci Discovery on the
N. and N.W. Coasts of Australia, on board
H.M.’s cutter ‘ Mermaid,’ P. P. King,
Esq., Lieutenant and Commander.”
A rough draft of a portion of this jour-
nal is in the Public Library, Sydney, hav-
ing been presented by the director of the
Royal Gardens, Kew, but the complete,
annotated journal, replete with botanical
data, is in the library at Kew, and if it
had been published fiftyyears agoitwould have
been of great value to Australian botanical
science, and would have increased Cun-
ningham's reputation. But although the
ground he traversed is no longer “terra in-
cognita,” I should feel very gratified if a
rich man would arise and publish the Kew
volumes, with explanatory notes, after the
fashion of the Hakluyt Society.
Many interesting extracts from Cunning-
ham’s journal are given by Reward.
In March, 1820, in an interval between
these voyages, Cunningham accompanied
the naturalist, M. Stein, and the painter,
M. Karneyeck, of a Russian expedition.
They crossed the Blue Mountains, and were
absent ten days.
In August, 1822, Cunningham again visit-
ed Hlawarra to collect living plants. To-
wards the end of September he started on
an expedition over the Blue Mountains, ar-
riving at Bathurst on the 14th October.
He botanised on the Macquarie, Cadge-
gong, and other districts, and returned to
Parramatta, 4th January, 182,3. He suffer-
ed privations, principally owing to poor
food, even on this journey, which formed
the basis of the following paper
“A Specimen of the Indigenous Botany
of the Mountainous Country Between the
Colony Round Port Jackson and the Set-
tlement of Bathurst ; being a Portion of
the Result of Observations made in the
Months of October, November, and Decem-
ber, 1822.
“Disposed according to the Natural Or-
ders by Mr. Allan Cunningham, Botanical
Collector for His Majesty’s Gardens at
Kew.” See Barron Field’s “New South
Wales,” p.p. 325-365.
This is a purely botanical paper, and con-
tains descriptions of a number of new spe-
cies, with references to the occurrence of
some described previously. Then comes a
“Journal of a Route from Bathurst to
Liverpool Plains in New South Wales, Ex-
plored by Mr. Allan Cunningham, His Ma-
jesty’s Collector for Kew Gardens” (with
a map) (Barron Field’s “Geographical Me-
moirs of New South Wales,” p.p. 131-
192), which is a modest record of the fol-
lowing important expedition.
He left Sydney 31st March, 1823, and re-
turned to Bathurst. On the 21st July he
returned to Parramatta.
In this memorable journey he discovered
Pandora’s Pass, through the formidable
Liverpool Range into the Liverpool Plains.
This Pass, though marked in the map ac-
companying the journal, is not referred to
by name in the journal itself, but at page
174 of Barron Field’s work it is alluded to.
At p. 49 of He ward’s “Memoir,” which is
copied at p. 403 of Favenc’s “History of
Australian Exploration,” it is stated that
Cunningham wrote a memorandum on
parchment, and buried it under a marked
tree in the Pandora Pass. The document
was dated June 9th, 1823, and is given in
full by Reward.
In November, 1823, he again left Sydney
on another expedition. On the 26th he left
Mr. Bell’s farm, saw a beautiful prospect,
which he called “Bell’sView” (doubtless
the Kurrajong Heights), and shortly after-
wards reached a mountain named by the
aborigines “Tomah.” Here he discovered
“Fieldia australis (Field’s “New South
Wales,” p. 363). He returned to Parra-
matta on 10th December. His journey was,
doubtless, the forerunner of a portion of
Bell’s line of road from Richmond to Ba-
thurst.
In January, 1824, he went to Bathurst,
and on his return he met the officers of the
French discovery ship “La Coquille,” Cap-
tain Duperry, and furthered the botanical
work of M. Dumont D’Urville, the botan-
ist of the expedition, and also assisted M.
Lesson, the zoologist.
In March, 1824, Cunningham went south
through the counties of Camden and Ar-
gyle, visited Lakes George and Bathurst,
the head waters of the Murrumbidgee, the
Monaro, and Shoalhaven gullies. He re-
turned to Parramatta the first week in
May. In July and August he was again at
the Hlawarra.
On Ist September he left Sydney with
Lieut. Oxley for Moreton Bay, where they
arrived on the 11th. The object of the ex-
pedition was to see if the vicinity was
suitable for the establishment of a branch
of the colony. He returned to Sydney on
i lie 14th October, and before the end of the
year was again at Bathurst.
He then set out on another expedition.
Leaving Parramatta at the end of March,
he crossed the Hawkesbury at Richmond,
proceeded to the Wollombi, thence to Mt.
Dangar, and made for Pandora’s Pass, al-
ready discovered by him. Thence he de


scended to the Liverpool Plains. On the
18th May he commenced his homeward
journey, arrived at Bathurst on the 7th
June, and Parramatta on the 17th.
The three last months of 1825 were spent
in the vicinity of Wellington Valley, and
he botanised about a hundred and fifty
miles on each side of the Macquarie River.
From the end of February,lB26, he occu-
pied six months in collecting in his fa-
vourite localities of Cox’s River and the
Illawarra.
On the 28th August, 1826, be left for
New Zealand, arriving on the 9th Septem-
ber at Paihai, the Church Missionary So-
ciety’s Station in the Bay of Islands.
Heward gives a long account of this trip,
which was terminated on the 29th Decem-
ber, and he landed in Sydney on the 20th
January, 1827.
Following are accounts from his pen of
the important botanical results achieved
by Cunningham in New Zealand on this and
other visits he paid to that colony
“Florae insularum Novae Zelandiae pre-
cursor ; or, A Specimen of the Botany of
the Islands of New Zealand,” Hooker’s
“Companion to the Botanical Magazine,”
ii., 1836, pp. 222-233, 327-336, 358-378 ;
“Annals of Natural History,” L, 1838, pp.
210-216, 376-381, 455-462 ; ii., 1839, pp
44-52, 125-132, 205-214, 356-360 ; iii., pp
29-34, 111-115, 244-250, 314-319 ; iv., pp.
22-26, 106-111, 256-262.
He then undertook the command of ano-
ther most arduous expedition, in which he
skirted the Liverpool Plains, crossed the
Peel and Dumaresq Rivers, made the
famous discovery of Darling Downs, and
Peel’s Plains, and after making various
detours, returned to the Hunter River,
and thence by a new route to Parramatta
and Sydney. He departed on this expedi-
tion from Segenhoe, on the Upper Hunter
(a few miles from the present town of
Scone), on the 30th April, 1827, returning
to Segenhoe on the 28th July. He receiv-
ed high compliments from the Governor on
the 17th November, and it is to be re-
gretted that this most accomplished ex-
plorer, the greatness of whose geographi-
cal discoveries dwarfs those of his botani-
cal discoveries, great as the latter were,
rarely received anything else but compli-
ments. Considering the beggarly equip-
ment with which he was always provided,
and the mere handful of men who always
formed his parties, the results that he ob-
tained were remarkable, and redounded to
the development and prosperity of Austra-
lia. It is difficult to apportion merit
among the grand army of Australian ex-
plorers, but I know of none superior to
Cunningham, and therefore hail Allan Cun-
ningham as the prince of Australian ex-
plorers.
For details of this memorable journey
see “ The Australian Quarterly Journal”
for January and April, 1828 (see also Lang's
“Cooksland,” p 60); the “Journal of the
Royal Geographical Society ” London, vol.
ii., p 99 (1832) (see also Lang’s “ Cooksland ”
pp. 69 and 76); and “ Proc: Geological
Society of London,” vol. ii., p. 109 (1834 5).
The titles of the papers are: —
“Brief View of the Progress of Interior
Discovery in New South Wales. By Allan
Cunningham, Esq.”
Read 271h February and 12th March,
1882, before the Geographical Society, and
published in its “Journal” for that year,
pp. 99-132 (with a map).
In the “ Proceedings of the Geological
Society of London, Vol. 11., 1834-1835, No.
38,” is the following entry
“December 17th : The reading of a paper
on the physical and geological structure of
the country to the west of the Dividing
Range, between Hunter’s River (lat. 32deg.
S.) and Moreton Bay lat. 27deg. S.) ; with
observations on the geology of Moreton
Bay and Brisbane River, New South Wales,
by Allan Cunningham, Esq., and communi-
cated by W. H. Fitton, M.D., F.G.S.”
The title of the published paper is
“On the Physical and Geological Structure
of the Country to the West of the Divid-
ing Range, between Hunter's River (lat.
32deg. S.) and Moreton Bay (lat. 27deg.
S.), with Observations on the Geology of
Moreton Bay and Brisbane River, New
South Wales” (1834). “ Geol. Soc. Pron
lE, 1838, pp. 109-111.”
The remaining portion of the year, and
January and February, 1828, were occupied
in journeys to Bathurst, the pine ridges on
the Macquarie, and to the Illawarra.
In a “Journal of a Two Months’ Resi-
dence on the Banks of the Rivers Brisbane
and Logan, on the East Coast of New
Holland,” by C. Fraser, Colonial Botanist
(Hooker’s “Botanical Miscellany,” vol. i.,
pp. 237-269, 1830), we find some notes of
a further journey by Cunningham—this time
accompanied by Fraser. They had, of
course, been fellow-explorers in Oxley’s
first expedition. They left Sydney 7th
June, 1828. Under date July Ist, Fraser
says : “At seven o’clock in the morning
proceeded across Moreton Bay, in company
with Mr. Allan Cunningham, the Govern-
ment Botanist ; entered the Brisbane River
at 10 o’clock, and reached Brisbane Town
at 3 o’clock, 6th July. At 10 o’clock I
proceed with Captain Logan and Mr. Cun-
ningham to the southern extremity of Glen-
moriston’s Range.”
July 18 ; “Proceeded, in company with
Captain Logan and Mr. Cunningham, to
Stradbroke Island, and reached Dunwich at
one o’clock in the afternoon.”


On the 22nd July the same party pro-
ceeded to Mt. Warning. The adventures of
the party were interesting, although ardu-
ous. They included an expedition to Mt.
Lindsay. Under date August 11th, Fraser
writes ; —A strong desire to return by the
first vessel to Port Jackson, carrying thi-
ther the largest possible collection of liv-
ing plants from the banks of the Brisbane
River, induced me to quit the party this
morning, and to accompany Captain Logan
back to Brisbane Town. Mr. Cunningham,
with three men and two oxen, proceeded to
the westward, in order to connect his for-
mer survey with the present one. From
the period of my return till I embarked for
Port Jackson I was busily employed in se-
curing mv collection of dried plants, com-
pleting that of living ones, and laying out
the rest of the New Garden” (at Bris-
bane) .
Fraser adds a final note, dated Sydney,
sth February. 1829 :—“Since the above was
written Mr, Cunningham has returned, hav-
ing accomplished his obiect of connecting
his route and observations of last year
with those made during the present. This
he did without anv difficulty, thus estab-
lishing beyond doubt the practicability of
forming a road from the shores of Moreton
Bay to the immense open country west of
the Dividing Range.”
Cunningham left Brisbane on 29th Octo-
ber, and arrived in Sydney on the 4th No-
vember, 1828.
See his paper on this journey in the
“Journal of the Royal Geographical Socie-
ty,” vol. ii., p. 99, already referred to.
In January. 1829, he again set out for
Bathurst, and this journey, undertaken in
an especially dry season, yielded but few
seeds and plants. In May of this year he
undertook a third voyage to Moreton Bay ;
visited the headwaters of the Bremer and
Campbell’s Range, and returned to Sydney,
laden with plants, towards the end of Sep-
tember, (1829).
On the 10th May, 1830,* Cunningham
proceeded to Norfolk Island, and a most
interesting account of his expedition is
given by He ward. He returned to Sydney
on the 28th September. Howard’s record
gives an account (inter alia) of Cunning-
ham’s adventure on Phillip Island in his
own words. I also give an account of it
from a manuscript by an unknown hand
which is in my possession.
“On the 10th May, 1830, Mr. Cunning-
ham, the botanist, arrived in the “ Lucy
Anne,” and on the 21st proceeded in a
* Reward omits the year, hut I believe it to
be 1 830 as stated.
whaleboat to Phillip Island on a botanical
excursion, taking; with him an overseer and
two men. The party landed, and the boat
returned to the settlement. On the same
night, at a late hour, 11 convicts escaped
from the camn. broke open the Commissa-
riat Store, taking away a quantity of pro-
visions and wine, forced open the door of
the boatshed, and made their escape in a
whaleboat. They were challenged by two
sentinels as they were launching the boat.
One of the convicts stood forward, and said
that they were going to Phillip Island for
Mr. Cunningham, and at the same time
hastened hack to the boat, which was im-
mediately launched. The sentry fired, but
the boat crossed the bar and was soon lost
sight of. They proceeded to Phillip Island,
robhed Mr. Cunningham of his chronometer,
a brace of pistols, provisions, water, and
tent, which they converted into a sail, and
pulled out to sea. At the expiration of
six weeks they were picked up in a most ex-
hausted state bv the “John Bull,’’ whaler
In a few davs thpjr strength returned, and
with it their spirit of enterprise ; they took
nossession of the vessel and scuttled her.
The whole of them landed on Pleasant Is-
land, which, with one exception, they all
left by whalers. The crew of the “John
Bull’’ is supposed to have perished. Some
of the convicts have since hcen heard of in
England, others in America. The one who
remained on Pleasant Island became a
great favourite with the natives for bis
daring courage, and was eventually elected
their chief The murders and outrages
committed bv him on white men were mon-
strous. He was consequently expelled from
the Island, and when last beard of was
working in irons at Manilla.’’
The Governor of the dav refused to re-
place any of Cunningham’s instruments.
&c., which were stolen, on the ground that
he was an Imperial officer, and he had to
make them good out of his pittance.
On bis return to Sydney, he botanised
about Parramatta (where he usually re-
sided), and in December, 1880, he visited
Illawarra and Broken Bav, the latter ex-
pedition for a supply of the beautiful
“Grevillea Caleyi,” whose seeds, he re-
marks, appeared to be a favourite food of
the black cockatoo.
On the 6th January, 1831, he made ano-
ther journey to Cox’s River, and then be-
gan to make active preparations to depart
from New South Wales, leave to visit his
native land having reached him during the
previous November. He left Sydney in the
“Forth” on the 25th February, and reach-
ed London about the middle of July, with
his health much impaired as the result of
the arduous life' he had been leading.


It would appear from the following letter
that the recall of Cunningham was partly,
at least, owing to a desire to curtail ex-
penses ;
“Of late years the means of maintaining
Ibis garden (Kew) appear to have been
considerably reduced, one of two collectors
sent abroad in 1814 for collecting seeds and
plants, and communicating with similar es-
tablishments in other countries, having
been recalled in 1823 and the other in
1830.” (Letter from office of Woods, &c.,
24th April, 1830, to Treasury, quoted at
p. 90 of “Report of Committee on Botani
cal Work, 1901”).
On the death of Fraser (31st December
1831) the office of Colonial Botanist was
offered to Allan Cunningham, which he de-
clined in favour of his brother Richard,
who, bearing a strong recommendation
from the eminent Robert Brown, received
the appointment from the Colonial Office as
already related (p. 12, January issue of
this Journal). A few months after his
brother Richard’s lamentable death in
April, 1835, Allan w r as again offered the
appointment, and accepted it.
The intervening years were spent at Kew
Green naming and arranging his plants,
doubtless, with some remuneration from
Aiton (director of Kew).
Following are two papers he wrote dur-
ing this period
“Synopsis des especes du genre Alvxia,
de la famille des Apocynces,” Ann. Sci.
Nat., iv. (Bot.), 1835, pp. 302-307.
“Synopsis du genre Calythrix de la fa-
mille des Myrtacees” (1834), Ann. Sci.
Nat., iv. (Bot.), 1835, pp. 305-307.
He sailed for Sydney in, October. 1830,
to take up his new post. The following
interesting souvenir of his departure was
presented by Messrs. Angus and Robert-
son, of this city, to the Botanic Gardens, in
October, 1901 ;
“An introduction to the study of bo-
tany, by John Bindley, Ph D.. F.R.S., &c.
2nd edition, Longman, 1835,” bearing on
the fiv-leaf, “Allan Cunningham, Esq., on
his departure for Australia, October 1836,
in memorial of the many scientific obliga-
tions of his sincere friend the author.” and
bearing “Allan Cunningham, 1836” in Al-
lan Cunningham’s own handwriting on the
title page.
He arrived on 12th February, and his
appointment was announced in the New
South Wales Government “Gazette” of
March Ist, 1837, as “Colonial Botanist and
Superintendent of the Botanic Garden,”
Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, 27th June, 1837.
Sir, —The period having nearly arrived for
distributing cuttings of vines and other plants
from this Garden, for supplies of which several
applications have already been made to me.
and finding upon a reference to the Garden
books that these distributions have been sanc-
tioned during the last and preceding seasons
by a committee of management appointed by
His Excellency the Governor, I do myself the
honour to request to learn whether I am to
obtain the authority of the members of that
committee, for making such distributions of
plants to applicants as can be conveniently
supplied during the ensuing season.
I beg further to Se informed whether I am
to communicate with the committee of man-
agement for such _ general instructions as may
be considered necessary for my guidance, as
Superintendent of this Garden.—l have, etc ,
etc ,
A LEAN CUNNINGHAM.
To the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Col. Sec. Office,
Sydney, 10th July, 1837.
Sir, —In reply to your letter of the 27th ul-
timo, inquiring whether you are to obtain the
authority of the members of the committee for
the (Distribution of vine cuttings from the Bo-
tanic Gardens during the present season, I do
myself the honour to inform you that it is un-
derstood . the committee will give their usual
attendance for the purpose mentioned. —I have,
etc.,
(Sd.) J. IDEAS. THOMSON.
The Colonial Botanist.
He, however, soon made up his mind to
resign his appointment in consequence of
duties having been imposed upon him
which he considered incompatible with his
position. He particularly resented having
to cultivate vegetables for certain civil and
military notables, and the “Sydney
Herald’’ of tile time supported him in the
stand he took.
“The result of all these annoyances was
Cunningham’s determination to resign the
appointment of (the miscalled) Colonial
Botanist, and in the early part of Decem-
ber he sent in his resignation to the Go-
vernor, Sir R. Bourke, which was accepted
by His Excellency a short time before he
took his departure from the colony t Pre-
vious to the arrival of Sir George Gipps,
the new Governor, application was made
to Cunningham by the Lieut.-Governor,
Colonel Snodgrass, that he would prepare
and furnish a. report of the state of the
garden to lay before the expected Governor
on his arrival. His request Cunningham
complied with, and with it closed his con-
nection with the Botanic Gardens at Syd-
ney” (Heward).


I have a copy of the “Report of the Go-
vernment Botanical Garden, Sydney, from
the 13th February to 31st December,
1837,” signed by “Allan Cunningham (late
Superintendent);’’ It was his last, report,
and is, doubtless, the report asked for by
Colonel Snodgrass. I would like to be
able to find money to print it some day,
if only as a memorial of Allan Cunning-
ham, for I' wish nothing, even an adminis-
trative report, that he wrote to perish.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 2nd February, 1838
Sir, —In reply to your letter of the 25th ul-
timo, 1 am directed to inform you that the
Acting-Governor approves of your charging the
sum of £l6 13s. 4d., being the amount of your
pay for one month, in the abstract for Janu-
ary, in order that you may resume the duties
of your late office of Superintendent of the Bo-
tanic Gardens, and furnish a half-yearly return
of the Garden up to the close of last year.—
I have the honour to be, sir, your most obe-
dient servant, for the Colonial Secretary,
T. C. HARRINGTON *
Allan Cunningham, Esq., Elizabeth-street.
Relieved of the cares of the Botanic
Garden, Cunningham then, with the dis-
ease that carried him away evidently firm-
ly fixed upon him, made preparations for a
further scientific expedition to New Zea-
land. Writing to friends in .England under
date 15th January, 1838, he said : “Tell
all that I have discharged the Government
cabbage-garden in disgust, and am now to
enter with all my might, mental and cor-
poreal, on a more legitimate occupation
for a few months.”
lie delayed his departure until the arri-
val of Governor Sir George Gipps on the
23rd February. His Excellency was in-
clined to take a great interest in the Bo-
tanic Garden, and made a genuine effort to
retain Cunningham’s services as “Govern-
ment Botanist,” a purely scientific ap-
pointment, including travel in the colony,
leaving the gardening portion of the du-
ties, hitherto attached to the position, to
Mr. James Anderson, as Superintendent.
Cunningham demanded the salary of £450
clear, and His Excellency, pointing out the
high price “of house-rent and every article
of life,” said the salary was not to be ob-
jected to ; but still the matter was not
pressed in the Legislative Council, and
learning this, Cunningham finally “ washed
his hands” of the Garden in April, 1838.
He left Port Jackson in the French cor-
vette, “L’Heroine,” Captain Cecille, on the
15th April for New Zealand, on a further
botanical expedition, returning to Sydney
on October 13th, 1838, “in a deplorable
state of health.” The warmer air of Syd-
ney added no new strength to his debili-
tated frame, and in 1839 he was reluctant-
ly compelled to decline accompanying Cap-
tain Wickham in his survey to the north-
west coast.
The end was not far off, and Heward
gives the following account of Cunning-
ham’s last moments :
On the 24th of June, 1839, he was re-
moved from his lodgings in Sydney to the
cottage in the Botanic Garden, for change
of scene and air. . . . On Thursday, the
27th . . . his last breath was sighed
away in the arms of his faithful friend,
James Anderson” (his successor in the su-
perintendence of the Garden). He died of
consumption, a martyr to geographical ex-
ploration and botanical science, in the 48th
year of his age.
It is often staled that Allan Cunning-
ham was buried in “St. Andrew’s Church-
yard, Sydney,” and this is how the state-
ment has come about
St. Andrew’s Scots’ Church is one ot the
oldest Presbyterian Churches of Sydney,
and is situated between the back of St.
Andrew’s Church of England Cathedral and
Kent-street. This is a poor neighbourhood,
and the pretty Gothic church has fallen on
bad times. It contains a mural tablet, in
memory of Allan Cunningham,, with the in-
scription as stated below. St. Andrew’s
never had a churchyard, but was at the
corner of the old general churchyard, on
which the Town Hall is now built. It was
indeed approached through the old burying
ground. Hence one not familiar with the
topography of the place might readily con-
fuse the mural tablet in St. Andrew’s
Scots’ Church with a grave in the church-
yard alongside. As a matter of fact, he
was buried in the Church of England por-
tion of the Devonshire-street Cemetery,
whence his remains were removed by me to
the obelisk in the Gardens.
The presence of these two mural tablets
in the Scots’ Church seems to me to be
evidence that the Cunninghams were really
Presbyterians, in spite of the fact that
Allan was buried in a Church of England
cemetery.
Following is the inscription of Allan’s
mural tablet, copied by me. I have already
given the wording of Richard’s
“ Allan Cunningham, F. L. S. and
M.R.G.S., associated in the pursuit of bo-
tanical discovery with Oxley, in exploring
the interior of New Holland ; with King,
in four times circumnavigating its coasts ;
and, by subsequent personal research, hav-
ing more fully developed the geography and
flora of the northern districts of this colo-
ny, and of Norfolk Island and New Zea-
land, has left enduring monuments of devo-
tion to the cause of science, and eminence


in those branches which he most assiduous-
ly cultivated. Frank, unaffected, firm in
principle, with warm feelings tempered by
a most kind and benevolent heart, deserved-
ly beloved by his friends—some of them
in the foremost rank of science, in Eng-
land, France, and Germany ; he died in un-
repining submission to the will of God, and
in a calm dependence on the merits of his
adorable Redeemer, on the 27th June,
1839, aged 48.”
A contemporary picture of Allan Cun-
ningham’s obelisk in the Botanic Gardens
will be found as a frontispiece to Hooker’s
“Journal of Botany,” vol. v. See also p.
661.
Cunningham’s obelisk in the Gardens,
which formerly alone bore the brief inscrip-
tion.
ERECTED TO THE MEMORY OF
ALLAN CUNNINGHAM,
BOTANIST.
MDCCCXLIV.,
bears now the added inscription
“The remains of Allan Cunningham were
interred in the Devonshire-street Cemetery
in July, 1889, from which they were reve-
rently removed on the 25th May, 1901, and
placed within this obelisk.” The actual
placing of the remains (in a small leaden
casket) took place in my presence, in that
of Mr. George Harwood, Superintendent,
and a few friends, on the 26th June, 1901
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street, Sydney.






THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
+
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
VI.—WILLIAM ROBERTSON.
VII.—JAMES KIDD.
VIII.—JOHN CARNE BIDWILL
By J. H, MAIDEN, Director.
S\?£mC£ :
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers', 135 Clarence Street
1903




THE
SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS.
- ♦ -
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES CONCERNING THE
OFFICERS IN CHARGE.
VI—WIL LIAM ROBERTSON.
VII.—JAMES KIDD
%
VIII.—JOHN CARNE BIDWILL
J. H. MAIDEN, Director.
SECmeg =
S. T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street
1 9°3




VI.—WILLIAM ROBERTSON.
After the death of Allan Cunningham,
the administration of the Botanic Gardens
was allowed to drift for a few years.
James Anderson, who was “locum tenens”
for both Richard and Allan Cunningham,
continued to hold office after Allan re-
signed the superintendence of the Gardens.
I assume that William Robertson succeeded
James Anderson in charge of the Gardens
when the latter died in April, 1842. He
held office (apparently) until his death in
July, 1844. When he entered the Service,
as Overseer, or otherwise, I do not know.
In fact, the only information I have in re-
gard to him is contained in the following
letter by Mr. James Kidd
Botanic Garden,
Sydney, January 22, 1845.
Sir,—l do myself the honour to acknow-
ledge the receipt of a letter and case of
plants addressed to the late superintendent,
Mr. Robertson, who died last July. The
case of plants arrived safe and gives credit
to Captain Mallard for his care, although
the plants received we already had.
However, I am preparing a case to send
in return, and some of the things you wished
for I have wrote for to King George’s Sound
and Swan River, which will cause delay.
1 calculate on their being fit to depart from
here by March; you may rely on my prompt
attention to your wish as far as is consist-
ent.—l have, etc.,
JAMES KIDD.
Sir William J. Hooker, Royal Botanic Gar-
dens, Kew, London, England.
VII—JAMES KIDD.
The following letter shows that Mr,
Kidd was first employed under Richard
Cunningham
No. 33/177.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
July 20, 1833.
Sir, —Having laid before the Governor
your letter of the 19th instant, recommend-
ing that Charles Job in your department be
dismissed for harbouring an absentee and
reporting him absent on duty, and that
James Kidd be appointed in his room, I am
directed by His Excellency to inform you
that he approves of the discharge of Charles
Job and the employment of Kidd from the
date of his returning upon duty.—l have,
etc
(Sd.) F. C. HARRINGTON.
The Colonial Botanist.
According to a letter of Richard Cun-
ningham, dated the 25th July, 1833, Kidd
commenced duty on the 22nd .July, 1833.
Letters of Allan Cunningham, dated 14th
Au'gust and 26th September, 1837, recom-
mending Kidd for an increase of salary,
were not successful.
Kidd writes from the Botanic Garden
on 15th July, 1844, re plants for South
Australia (his first letter recorded).
On the 6th August, 1844, he writes, un-
der the style “Superintendent, Botanic
Garden,” to
The Revd. W. B. Clarke,
Parramatta,
“Secretary to the Superintending Com-
mittee of the Botanic Gardens” (the body
whose existence was one of the causes
which led to the resignation of Allan Cun-
ningham), stating that “the last minute of
the late Mr. Anderson (Superintendent)
was made on 22nd January, 1842.”
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 6th August, 1844.
No. 44/239.
Sir, —His Excellency the Governor, on the
recommendation of the Committee of Man-
agement of the Botanic Gardens, having been
pleased to appoint you to be superintendent
of the Gardens to succeed the late Mr. Ro-
bertson, I am directed to inform you that
you will be allowed the same salary as was
paid to Mr, Robertson; but His Excellency
desires that you expressly understand that
your appointment is only a temporary or e.
I am further directed to inform you that
under the recommendation of the committee,
Edward Woodheart has been appointed to
succeed you as Overseer of the Garden. —I
am, etc.,
(Sd.) W. EL YARD, JR.
Mr. James Kidd, Superintendent.


This letter bears the marginal note : “Ap-
pointments bearing date Ist instant inclus-
ive. ”
Parramatta, 19th December, 1844.
Sir,—ln reply to your letter of the 6th
August, 1844, requesting me to inform you
how you are to act with regard to the cor-
respondence of the late superintendent. I beg
to state that I have no instructions to offer
upon the subject, but it appears to me that
if the correspondence' be worth the trouble
of recording the best mode of so doing
would be to enter it in your minute book.
—I remain, etc.,
(Sd.) W. B. CLARKE.
Mr. James Kidd, Superintendent, Botanic
Gardens.
Kidd wrote to “The Honourable the
Speaker'’ on 28th August, 1845, asking
permission to go to the Hunter, also to
send plants to England, hence the author-
ity of the Superintending Committee must
have been of a very limited character.
The following refers to two overseers
who served under Kidd. Woodheart enter-
ed on his duties on Ist August, 1844 ; I
do not know when those of Waterman ter-
minated ,
Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, 12th May, 1846.
The Honorable,
The Colonial Secretary,
Etc., Etc., Etc.
Sir,—l do myself the honour to inform
you that Mr. Edward Woodheart, Overseer,
has given notice that he will resign the situ-
ation of being Overseer here on the 30th
day of June next, when it will be requisite
to select a man to succeed him as Overseer
to this Department. —I have, etc., etc.,
(Sd.) JAS. KIDD.
Superintendent.
To the Committee.
No. 46/242.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 15th June, 1846.
Sir, —I am directed to inform you that
His Excellency the Governor approves of the
appointment of Mr. William Waterman to
be Overseer of the Botanic Gardens in the
room of Mr. W’oodheart resigned. Mr.
Waterman will receive the same pay as his
predecessor from the date of commencing
duty. —I am, etc., etc.,
(Sd.) WM. EL YARD, JUNE.
The Superintendent of the Botanic Gar-
dens.
Marginal note ; “Commenced duty Ist
July, 1846.”
On the appointment of Mr. Bidwill as
Director, Mr. Kidd was relegated to the
position of Overseer, a post he continued
to hold under Mr. Charles Moore until the
year 1866. I do not know the date of his
death. He seems to have been an indus-
trious and useful public servant ; he, how-
ever, does not appear to have left his mark
on the horticulture or botany of the colony.
No. 47/300.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 21st August, 1847.
Sir, —Mr. J. C. Bidwell* having been ap-
pointed from the Ist of next month, Director
of the Botanic Gardens, I am directed by
His Excellency the Governor to inform you
that from that date you will return to your
former situation.—l am, etc., etc.,
(Sd.) WM. ELYARD, JUNE.
Mr. Kidd, Superintendent of the Botanic
Gardens.
*The name was often, though incorrectly,
spelt in this way.


VIII.—JOHN CARNE BIDWILL
He was born at Exeter, England, in the
year 1815, and his father was a merchant.
I know nothing of his early history.
The Home Government was communicat-
ed with in 1847 for the purpose of appoint-
ing a Director for the Botanic Gardens,
and Mr. Charles Moore was appointed by
the then Colonial Secretary, Earl Grey,
on the recommendation of Professor Bind-
ley, but before the news reached the co-
lony, Mr. Bidwill, then residing in Sydney,
was, on the recommendation of the Supei-
intending Committee, appointed by the
Governor to the office, changing the name of
“Government Botanist and Superinten-
dent,” to that of “Government Botanist
and Director.” This gentleman, of course,
vacated his position on the arrival of Mr.
Moore, but he was afterwards appointed
Commissioner of Crown Bands in the Wide
Bay district, now a portion of Queensland.
Mr. Bidwill entered on his duties on Ist
September, 1847, and superintended the
Gardens until 14th January, 1848. He
was, therefore, the first officer to hold the
designation “Government Botanist and Di-
rector of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.”
Sir J. D. Hooker, the late Director of
Kew, thus speaks of him in his “Introduc-
tion to the Flora of Tasmania”:—
“Mr. J. T. Bidwill, a gentleman long
resident both in Sydney and New Zealand,
and possessed of a remarkable love of bo-
tany and knowledge of Australian plants,
visited Moreton Bay and Wide Bay, and
formed an excellent herbarium, which in-
cluded many novelties, and was transmit-
ted to Sir W. Hooker. Mr. Bidwill ac-
companied me in my excursions round Port
Jackson, and impressed me deeply, both
then and afterwards in England, with the
extent of his knowledge and his fertile ta-
lents. He was the discoverer of the Arau-
caria which bears his name, and of many
other rare and interesting Australian and
New Zealand plants.”
He published “ Rambles in New Zea-
land,” 1841, a work which I have not seen,
also a paper “On a New Species of Aran
caria from New South Wales” ; and on
Nuytsia fioribunda, ( Annals of Natural
History, viii., 1842, pp. 438-439 ; Tasman-
ian Journal of Natural Science, 1., 1842,
pp. 404-5).
Following is the original botanical ac-
count of the Bunya Bunya of Queens-
land
“As already observed, the Australian
species of Araucaria differ remarkably in
their foliage from those of the new world,
it was, therefore, with no small degree of
pleasure that the Linnaean Society receiv-
ed a communication from J. T. Bidwill,
Esq., then resident at Sydney, giving an
account of a new Araucaria of the coun-
try interior from Moreton Bay, of which
the foliage could scarcely be distinguished
from the Chili Pine. A specimen of a
branch with foliage accompanied the com-
munication, and a statement that the seeds
of this pine were extensively collected by
the natives above Moreton Bay and used
as food. In a voyage which Mr. Bidwill
subsequently made to Moreton Bay, he re-
solved to visit the locality of this remark-
able tree himself, and in the summer of the
present year (1848) he has brought to Eng-
land not only branches and cones, and male
flowers, but also a healthy young living
plant. This noble tree I propose to dedi-
cate to its discoverer, who is not only a
successful cultivator of plants in his garden
at Sydney, but who has been the means of
making known to us many novel plants of
Australia, and more especially of New Zea-
land. “H00k.,, Bond. Journ. Bot. Vol.
ii., p. 502.”
Then follows Hooker's description and
figure of Araucaria Bidwilli , a pine
which excited much interest in Europe.
We know it as the Bunya Bunya, but Bid-
will originally gave the native name as
Bunza-tunza or Banya-tunya. The original
locality is stated in these words ; “Mount
Brisbane range of hills, 70 miles N.W. of
Moreton Bay, Australia.” Then follows
an account of the use of the seeds as food
by the aborigines.
Under the title : “Another coniferous tree
detected in Australia by J. C. Bidwill,
Esq,” Sir William Hooker gives the note


I reproduce below, and also a very inter-
esting letter by Bidwill on some of his
botanical finds, from which it will be seen
that he was no mean field botanist. The
Dammara or Queensland Kauri Pine he
discovered is known to science as Dam-
mara robusta , C. Moore; the material
sent home by Bidwill not being suificient
for Hooker to describe it; later on Moore
obtained adequate material. Bidwill gave
its naive name as Tendara or Tendar-
andara.
“Our readers are aware that Mr. Bidwill
had the good fortune to detect a new pine
(Araucaria Bidwilli, Hook, in i on . Joui-
nal, Bot., vol. 2, p. 48, Tab. 18, 19), on
the hills above Moreton Bay. Capt. Phil-
lip King, R.N., has favoured us with an
extract of a letter, written by the same
gentleman while travelling in N. W. Aus-
tralia, ar the River Mary, somewhere
about S. Lat. 25 Q 25' and Long. E. 152° 80,
dated January 2nd, 1849, in which he de-
scribes the discovery of another Pine, the
cones of which have fortunately reached us
at the moment when this is going to press;
and these, as far as can be judged without
foliage, are the cones of the Dammara
oriental is (a species hitherto noticed in
the “mountains of the Molucca islands,
and of .Java and Borneo’’), or of some
very nearly allied kind.”—Hook. Journ.
Bot. Vol. 1, p. 284 (1849).
What we otherwise know of Bidwill is
chiefly in regard to his death, and it will
be seen how appreciative are the refer-
ences to him. The first newspaper notice
at the time reads “Deaths.—On March
16th, at Tinana, Wide Bay, J. C. Bidwill,
Esq., Commissioner of Crown Lands, aged
38.”
Following is Lindley’s graceful notice of
this good man :
“THE LATE MR. BIDWILL.
“We announce with great concern, in an-
other column, the death, in New Holland,
of Mr. Bidwill, the talented son of Mr. J.
G. Bidwill, of Exeter, and a valued cor-
respondent of our own. We learn that
two years since, in marking out a new
road from his district of Wide Bay to the
adjoining one of Moreton Bay, he was
accidentally separated from his party,
and lost himself, without his com-
pass, in the Bush, in which he remained
eight days without food; in cutting his
way with a pocket -hook through the para-
sitical web of the scrub, he brought on
internal inflammation, of which he even-
tually died, after protracted and most
acutely painful suffering. As an ardent
botanist, his death demands a record in
these pages. He was a young man of sin-
gularly acute perception, as well as of in-
domitable energy. His visit to New Zea-
land, of which a journal was afterwards
published, proved that no danger could
deter him from the prosecution of science.
Our own columns contain many an inter-
esting statement from him upon horticul-
tural subjects, especially hybridising, in
which he was an adept. To him it is
that we owe the discovery of the famous
Bunya-Bunya tree, afterwards named after
him Araucaria JJidwilli , and of the
Aymphcea gigantea , that Australian rival
of Victoria (regia). By bis friends, of
whom he had more than most men, his
loss will be found to be irreparable, and
the colony in which he died could ill af-
ford to lose him.'—J.L.— The (Hardeners
Chronicle , 1853, page 488.
Then follows Hooker in a similar
strain :
“JOHN CARNE BIDWILL, ESQ.
“We have with great regret to record
the death of this amiable gentleman, son
of Jas. G. Bidwill, Esq., merchant, of
Exeter; a distinguished and successful
scientific cultivator, botanist and travel-
ler. For many years he has communicat-
ed to our gardens and our herbaria nu-
merous rare plants of New Zealand and
Australia. Latterly he was appointed
commissioner of Crown Lands at the Wide
Bay district, Australia, where his duties
were not a little onerous, but where he
nevertheless found time to gratify his
taste for botany and zoology. From
North-east Australia he introduced to our
Gardens living plants of the Bunnya-Bun-
nya f Araucaria liidwilli. Hook.), and
roots of the magnificent Nymphcva gigan-
lea, Hook. Between two and three years
since, while laying out a new road between
the district of Wide Bay and that of
Moreton Bay, he was separated, without a
compass, from his party, and was eight
days in the hush without food, cutting
bis way with a small pocket-hook through
the parasitical entanglements of the scrub.
The exertion superinduced inflammation of


the kidney, of which he eventually died
(March Ist, at Tinana, in his thirty-eighth
year), after protracted and most, acutely
painful suffering. He was Chairman of
the Bench of Magistrates of the Wide Bay
district, and in every relation of life was
much endeared to a large circle of friends
in Europe and in Australia.”—Hook,
Journ. Bot., vol. 5, p. 252 (1853).
The ( hardeners’ Chronicle. of 12th
January, 1850, page 20, has an article
abridged, from the Western Times of
December 24th, 1855, entitled “Dangers of
the Bush,—the late J. C. Bidwill, Esq.,”
from which I extract the following
“DANGERS OF THE BUSH.
“THE LATE J. C. BIDWILL, ESQ.
(Abridged from the Western Times.
December 24).
“The public journals and especially those
devoted to the science of botany, recorded
a short time since the death of Mr. John
Came Bidwill, of St. Thomas’s. He died
at Wide Bay, New South Wales, where, by
the force of his character, and the super-
iority of his intellect, he had attained to
offices of trust and the highest degree of
influence and public usefulness.
“As his career was so creditable to his
native country, we devote a brief space to
his memory. His father intended him
for commercial life, and educated him ac-
cordingly. But his strong natural taste
for scientific pursuits, and especially bo-
tany, showed that the current of his life
was setting into another channel. In the
solitude of Australia, and the endless va-
riety of its plants, his mind found inex-
haustible treasures. He was first to pene-
trate alone into the interior of New Zea-
land—of which arduous but interesting
journey he published a brief and unpretending
account. His reputation and talent were
speedily appreciated in a young colony
where integrity and energy of character are
the only patents for nobility. The Coun-
cil offered him the Curatorship of the
Royal Botanical Gardens at Sydney. Sub-
sequently he was appointed Commissioner
of Crown Lands and Chairman of the
Bench of Magistrates for the District of
Wide Bay, New South Wales, an office on-
erous, and in the highest degree important.
The journey which we record below was
undertaken with the view of discovering a
practicable route from Wide Bay to the
adjoining district of Moreton Bay ; but
his friends really believe that botanical
investigation was the master-motive that
sent him forth. The fatigues and suffer-
ings of this journey were followed by his
last fatal illness, during which he was
tended with the most affectionate solici-
tude by his brother magistrates, who in
turns watched by his bedside and in whose
presence he died. Every mark of public re-
spect was paid to his memory, by the
whole population of the Wide Bay district;
and his death was spoken of by the press
as ‘entailing a great loss to the Colony
of New South Wales, as a botanist and
naturalist.’ ”
Then follows a touching letter, written
when he was dying, to his father, dated
sth March, 1853, and a very long letter,
also to his father, dated 10th June, 1851,
giving a graphic account of his pioneer
geographical and botanical work between
Wide Bay and Brisbane, with a modest ac-
count of the hardships he underwent in the
public service, and which undermined his
constitution, causing his premature death.
Bidwill was therefore another of the
martyrs to science whom the hardships of
early colonial explorations brought to an
untimely end, and at least the fourth offi-
cer-in-charge of the Botanic Gardens who
succumbed to zeal for the public service.
Lindley and Hooker spoke in high terms of
his merits as a botanical explorer, as has
already been shown, and mention the
large number of interesting plants that
were sent to Europe by him. Strange to
say, there is not in the herbarium of the
Sydney Botanic Gardens a single plant
collected by him, and I have not even
a portrait of him, nor a specimen of his
handwriting. Will any friend remedy this
defect, for I desire in the Botanical Mu-
seum, attached to the Gardens, to place
memorials of these worthies ? Of all
my predecessors who have passed away, I
have only portraits of Richard and Allan
Cunningham. If friends will lend me por-
traits with permission to have a photo-
graphic reproduction taken, or will assist
in anv way in filling the gaps of our
knowledge of these good men, I shall be
very grateful. I have specimens of the
handwriting of Fraser and Allan Cunning


ham and, I believe, of Richard’s. Will any
one lend me specimens of the handwriting
of any other of my predecessors, if only to
compare with some scraps of handwriting
1 have, but by whose hand I am uncer-
tain ?
Already as these articles have been ap-
pearing in the Journal I have obtained a
few supplementary notes. I will wait for
others and then will crave permission of
the editor to publish them.
I have now come to an end of these
desultory articles. Mr, Charles Moore was
ninth officer-in-charge, and his period of
service lasted from 14th January, 1848, to
sth May, 189(i, extending far longer than
that of all his predecessors put together. The
present writer is therefore the tenth of the
line. Mr. Charles Moore, notwithstanding
his great age, is in full possession of his in-
tellectual faculties, and I only wish that he
could have been persuaded to write the
histories of his predecessors. We should
then have had a far more interesting ac-
count of them than I have been able to
present. All lovers of the Sydney Bo-
tanic Gardens, that he has done so much to
Improve, will join with me in wishing the
old veteran many years of dignified repose
after his valuable public services. For my
part I am filled with humility as I think
of my predecessors,—the grand work they
did, and the difficulties and often hard-
ships under which they did it.
S T. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 CJ.arence Street, Sydney














