

,;f, " Vftw\ v' : ‘
r Ske\va.v©oS vW
Vi* Sm?
-, v 3A? %*>
;
■ tsfi3ST3 r-£
s ;i iroiiuo-" 1 ®
: '£
••:> "-j * v / ••;.;:•>
■
*
■
.
t
/
( if
.




CEITIC IN CHUKCI
MELBOUENE PEEACHEBS AND PEEACHING
I <
REPRINTED FROM THE “WEEKLY TIMES.”
MELBOURNE
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET
MDCCCLXXII.




PREFACE.
These notices of Melbourne preachers and of Melbourne
preaching are republished in hope that they will meet with
something of the like favour in their collected that they
received in their serial form. The author has to express his
obligations to the proprietors of the Weekly Times , in which
paper they first appeared, for the permission to reproduce
both them and the accompanying illustrations. With regard
to the Preachers themselves, the author trusts that nothing
personally hurtful will be found in his remarks. They were
intended neither to be harsh nor kind, but true, the writer
keeping in view, as his ideal, Clough’s verse:—
“ Oh ! for a friend, or more than friend, sincere,
To make me know myself and make me fear.
Oh ! for a touch too gentle to be kind,
To wake to life the mind within the mind.”




CONTENTS.
=#>
PACK
The Right Rev, Dr. Perry, Bishop of Melbourne - i
St, Peter’s, Eastern Hill (Mr. Handfield) - - 11
Scots’ Church, Collins Street (Mr. Menzies) - - 19
Wesley Church, Lonsdale Street (Mr. Bickford) - 27
St. Francis’s Church, Lonsdale Street (Father Barry) 34
The Baptist Chapel, Albert Street (Mr. Clark) - 42
St. Mary’s, Hotham (Mr. Potter) - - - 52
Chalmers’ Church (Mr. Cameron) • - - - 60
Collins Street Baptist Chapel (Mr. Martin) - - 71
St. Patrick’s Cathedral (The Rev. W. Kelly, SJ.) - 78
The Rev. J. Dare ------ 89
The Rev. A. F. Ornstien ..... 98
The Rev. J. E. Bromby, D.D. - - - - - 109




THE CRITIC IN CHURCH.
THE RIGHT REV. DR. PERRY, BISHOP OF
MELBOURNE.
The cares of the churches have weighed upon Bishop Perry
for a quarter of a century, and have left their marks in a
wasted frame, a furrowed forehead, and an ascetic counte-
nance. The Bishop’s charge has, indeed, been most onerous.
He has seen cities grow like ant-hills. Multitudes therein
have been dependent upon him for the bread of life. Even
now visitations and confirmations, the rites of his church,
require him to be a constant traveller, at all seasons, from
the Murray to the sea, from Gipps Land to Mount Gambier.
Upon him rests the selection of the ministers to feed the
Anglican flock—a flock which is fastidious in its choice,
which scorns a cheap, illiterate ministry, and has not learned
to pay the money price of a trained, educated priesthood.
Any stick, if stout and strong, served to drive the Wesleyan
flock into the fold. “ I have no more to do with your being
gentlemen, than I have with your being dancing-masters,”
was John Wesley’s saying to his pastors. “Lucky man,”


must ejaculate a bishop required by the world to think
of outward deportment, by the church to demand
theological culture, and by conscience to see that the
crook has no twist in it. To serve these three masters with
equal faithfulness is to be more than a man ; to fail is to be
less than an Anglican Bishop. It would be absurd to say
that in this trying situation Dr. Perry has not made bitter
enemies. Every strong man placed in a high position does.
u Abuse you,” said an outspoken friend of another Bishop—
Hampden of Hereford—during a famous persecution, “of
course they will abuse you if you are worth abusing,” adding,
with quiet humour, “ I wish they would abuse me.” The
fact that Dr. Perry has smote, and has been smitten, is
declared by that very ringing applause which greets him
when he meets his ministers and the lay representatives of
his church in their little annual assembly, and which the
newspapers always describe as “ enthusiastic.” And so it is.
But judges of men would recognise in a moment its mixed
character. Half of the loud and long-continued cheers
expresses confidence in the Bishop, but part is the cheer of
victory or defiance in presence of a common foe. Such
feelings can dwell in clerical bosoms.
Bishop Perry may be said, with literal truth, to be known
through the length and breadth of the land, for he has
preached in every pulpit in his diocese, and the pulpit, if it is
nothing else, is a great test of character. Many sittings are
not required to take his portrait. No one, after listening to
a solitary address, could mistake him, for his sermons, one
and all, speak the man. Each is clear as a diamond of
“ purest ray serene ” —a diamond, cut and polished by the
lapidary, as brilliant and as hard and as cold. His sermons
are designed to rivet the attention, not to pierce the
conscience, nor move the heart. They are religious
essays on the “ whole duty of man ” —more especially


a Low Churchman. As compositions they are models
of their school ; simple to severity in diction; classical
in construction; never burdened with the smallest
ornamentation, with a trace of illustration or imagery.
Jewels are they without settings. They are read with an
equal faultlessness of intonation, with a deliberate and
telling slowness, every sentence impressed on the auditor,
not only each word, but each syllable separately accented.
The clear metallic voice, which, low as it is, will make the
largest building echo, is freed from all trace of impurity, free
also from the thrill of anger, the pathos of pity, the quiver
of emotion. It might be that of a disembodied spirit. Free
from cant, free from rant, pallid, and passionless, are the
discourses of the Bishop. They are beautiful as statues are;
not as are creatures of flesh and blood. Lovely are they as
icebergs seen by moonlight, but nature demands her price
for that as for every other spectacle. She drives a ready-
money trade also, does that dame, and gives with one hand
and holds out the other. The price here is chilliness; with
warmth of current, icebergs cannot be.
The Bishop speaks to cultivated men and women, who
can understand argument —or, are supposed to be capable
of understanding it—and who have to pay the penalty of
foregoing edification—of hearing the living voice of the
-spirit. The merit of these discourses is their care and
clearness. No idle words fall from such lips as the Bishop’s.
Their demerit is their onesidedness, their intellectuality, their
forgetfulness that man is a creature of passion as well as of
principle, that he has a body to be subdued as well as a soul
to be saved. The hearer is constrained to admit that the
truth is preached ingenuously and purely, but it has been
coldly imparted, and it is coldly received. Too often' such
preaching is forgotten as soon as it is heard: it awakens no
energy of will; enkindles no ardent aspirations ; it gives


birth to no divine despair. The whole church must have
heard addresses from their spiritual head which have had
all the rigour and method of suits in equity. One illustra-
tion must suffice. In the sermon he preached to com-
memorate the twenty-fifth year of his episcopate, the Bishop
enumerated the most striking instances of the signal
“ loving-kindness of the Lord.” Only a mathematical and
logical mind would have placed prominent in the list, as
Dr. Perry did, the fact that “ the boundaries of the diocese
were coterminous with those of the colony.”
As an administrator the Anglican Church has had a
zealous business agent in Bishop Perry. Acute and indus-
trious, clever and energetic, hehas defended well its temporal
interests. His success is declared by the state of his diocese.
When the traveller sees that substantial churches have
sprung up with nearly equal pace with mushroom townships,
and finds the Word preached in each, it may well be said of
the Bishop—he is the last man to say it of himself —Si
monumentum quceris circumspice. Only zeal, joined to great
administrative powers, could have secured the church its
present material position—the zeal of a man who could
keep his eye fixed on the working of the whole machinery,
not only the revolutions of a single wheel —who could watch
while others slept, and labour while others loitered. His
unselfish conduct in pecuniary matters has set a high example
to his communion. By this, and by earnest endeavour, he has
done much to quicken the church in its novel position in
the colony as an unestablished sect. His merits as ‘an
administrator do not end here. To see him manage
the Church assembly, gently terminating a debate, or
piloting a measure through committee, always calmest
when temper begins to rise, smiling blandly among the
scowlers, is a lesson in the art of transacting public
business.


There were the makings of a most judicious “ Mr.
Speaker ”in the Bishop. But neither the temporal affairs
of the church, nor preparation for the pulpit absorbs the
most of Bishop Perry’s attention. His great labour has
been to maintain purity of doctrine; and success has
crowned his exertions. The claim may be made that in this
one diocese, this oasis in the desert, there is not a church
where ritualism shows its head, nor a pulpit from which
aught but orthodoxy is preached. Nothing indeed is farther
from the Bishop than any idea of toleration of the ideas of
which he conscientiously disapproves —surely, the only
toleration worthy of the name. He is too keen a logician
to be, in spiritual matters, a model, an all-embracing Bishop.
His mind is swift to detect differences, and to dwell on their
importance, rather than to discern all essential unities. His
is the centrifugal, or throwing-off force, rather than the
centripetal, or the uniting.
Mankind may always be divided into two classes—the
poetical or sympathizing, and the logical or differentiating—
the men who see Divine unity, and the men who
perceive eternal differences. To the one the chess-
board is all white; to the other it is all black. The
one gaze on Christ crucified, the others behold the
heretic accursed. It would not be difficult to decide
with which class to place the Bishop. It would be Calvin’s.
And thus, while he achieves the same measure of success as
Calvin did, and is respected and loved as Calvin was, there
attaches to him the same counterbalancing odium. When
Calvin is mentioned there ever rises to the student the pale
face of the martyred Servetus; and with Bishop Perry there
comes the recollection of the ministers of the Broad and
High Church divisions of the Anglican communion who
have been admitted to the fold in England, who have been
ordained and set apart for Gospel labours by orthodox


bishops there, but who have left this colony disappointed'
and sometimes broken men, to feed flocks elsewhere, because-
the price of pulpits was one they could not pay; because
they preferred to face loss and ruin rather than in disputed
dogma renounce the faith in which they were consecrated.
Uniformity is obtained by this process of expulsion and
repression, but the price of uniformity is a heavy one always y
it is life. In England the opposite policy has been pursued
—that of saying to conscientious, moral men, willing to-
subscribe to the Church’s articles and the Church’s creeds,
“Go thou also into the Lord’s vineyard.” Arnold and
Robertson were both licensed by bishops who disapproved
of their peculiar points. Both men were saved to the church,
and have become the proudest boasts of its modern oratory
and literature. Here they must have been as “ dumb dogs.”
Canon Liddon, at St. Paul’s Cathedral, and Dean Stanley,
at Westminster Abbey, are the centres of the pulpit power of
London, Neither the High nor the Broad Church orator
could find a pulpit here. Stopford Brookes, Her Majesty’s
personal chaplain, the biographer of Robertson, the suc-
cessor to his mantle of prophetic fire, could hope for no
licence in the diocese of Melbourne. The most noble, the
most intense, the most enlightened of the apostles—the
apostle of the third heaven—has written, “ Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; ” but the Bishop
has read the last word as “ orthodoxy.” In his spiritual
capacity he is the conscientious, the confident, the deter-
mined head of the dominant party; not so much the
Bishop of the diocese as the leader of the majoi'ity. Woe
to the vanquished !
Strange was the contrast presented in a Melbourne church
three years ago, when side by side stood, ministering at the
altar, George Selwyn, metropolitan Bishop of New Zealand,
Bishop designate of Lichfield —now named by men with an


earnest hope for the next vacant archiepiscopal see —and
Charles Perry, Bishop of Melbourne. Half a lifetime ago the
two men had equally sacrificed high prospects, had left England
in the flush of University honours to preach the gospel in
the “ uttermost isles of the sea.” The one the Paul of his
period, the Augustine of his age ; by perils oft, by journey-
ings oft, by endurance of hunger and privation, of dangers
more terrible than the serpent’s fang, had gained for Christi-
anity its latest and noblest triumph—the rescue from a
fanatical idolatry of a noble, and even heroic race. His
words were words of power. His fervid eloquence melted
the heart of stone. The heathen and the cannibal heard,
and, 10, many thousands were baptised the same day. It
was an era in life to hear him, on New Zealand hills, address
the armed host of British soldiery arrayed for battle, or to
pray with them after their return from slaughter ; to see the
stern man weep, and the strong man tremble. His eloquence
was no trick of words, it bore no traces of the rhetorician ;
it was the disclosure of truths and ideas, and of fervid
feelings too burning to be concealed. Enthusiasm imparted
an unknown, and sometimes a terrible strength to his words.
Divine ecstacy kindled his face like that of Moses on the
mount. He smote the sinner, but he enlarged mightily the
bounds of the church, for he called the wicked to repentance
—not to correct opinions.
The mission of Bishop Perry has been of a different
character. Luther, the regenerator of the nations, is the
type of the one; Calvin, the organiser, has been already
named as that of the other. The one the man of the people,
the other of the divines. The one enwrapt, bold, and fiery,
the other systematic, accurate, severe. Holy energy the
characteristic of the one, Christian calmness of the other. War
the element of the first, order of the second. Such their
differences. The faithfulness and earnestness of both servants


have been equal; it is not for man to mete out their
respective praise.
And passing from matters of policy and opinion in Bishop
Perry’s career, we can all gaze with grateful pleasure on its
personal facts. In days of extravagance and dissoluteness
he has set before the community the “ white flower of a
spotless life.” The moral virtues have been more than
insisted upon ; they have been practised. In a selfish gene-
ration he has been unselfish; in a wealth-seeking community
he has sacrificed his treasure. He may be blamed; he will
never be shamed. His shortcomings are those of his
physical and mental constitution. The sun of the Anglican
diocese, he has enlightened the communion : he could not
vivify it. He could impart light, but not warmth; he could
shine, but not kindle. Frost and Heat, they are both
“ ministers of Him to do Him pleasure,” and Bishop Perry
is a worker in frost.






ST. PETER’S, EASTERN HILL.
Melbourne might be called a City of Churches, for, from
every point of view, spires and towers meet the eye of the
gazer. Its people might be described as a community of
churchgoers by the stranger who beheld the thronged streets
of a Sunday morning. At 11 o’clock on the first day of
the week, at all events, there are no outward and visible
signs of that decay of pulpit power, and that decadence of
church influence, and that supremacy of licentiousness we
are all accustomed to bewail with some bitterness on week
days, after the fashion of our forefathers. Our purpose is
to join in the throng thus hastening to Divine service, to
describe the manner of men who occupy the high office of
preachers; to glance, as occasion may be, at those who
discharge the almost as high duties of hearers.
We wait at the portals of St, Peter’s for a time, for the
day is a church holiday, and the glorious rejoicing sun, “ nor
dim nor red ” has invited worshippers forth. And so the
entrances to the building are blocked by strangers, through
whom filter the regular attendants of the church, with velvet-
bound prayer-books in hand, seeking their cushioned seats.
The congregation is evidently fashionable, and the sensitive
stranger, by a not unnatural conclusion, may leap to the
assumption that it is also High Church. However, he may
discharge from his mind any fear of receiving a shock from
any outward and visible display of Ritualistic proclivities.
If a suspicion of perfume greets him, it proceeds from no
censer swung by acolyte, but merely from the cambric hand-
kerchief of the gentleman who precedes him, and who is
preparing to bury his face decently and elegantly in prepara-
tory prayer. The rustle and the glow of colours in the


■opposite aisle, and the turning of all heads, marks a proces
sion, not of priests, but of ladies. They have stepped out of
villa residences as regards the flesh, and out of the fashion
plates of Le Follet as regards costume. About the lilies of
the valley who toiled not over their toilettes one feels
assured. Let us also devoutly and reverently hope—seeing
what the fashions of the day are —that even Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed as one of these.
There are people who delight in contemplating virtue in
rags, but a glance round shows that they need not visit Saint
Peter’s. Virtue here is well fed and well-dressed—will be
turning over its bank-book to-morrow as it does the Litany
to-day—is prepared to make the best of both worlds, and a
fair and goodly spectacle does virtue present under these
gratifying circumstances —of the aged, whose spectacles are
gold-rimmed; of the young, rejoicing, as youth does and
must rejoice, in its braveries. “ A gladdening and a pros-
perous sun” has shone over these worshippers, and, as we
afterwards see when the heavily-laden collection-plates go
round, they are mindful of the circumstance.
No church, we are told, equals St. Peter’s in its charitable
•offerings. One can understand, therefore, the complacency
of those numerous attendants who otherwise would have a
right to cogitate with alarm upon the parable of the com-
parative ease of a camel entering the eye of a needle, and a
rich man reading his title clear to a mansion in the skies.
The stranger is privileged to glance round the congregation,
besides which, when he goes to St. Peter’s, he may do as
St. Peter’s does. In this seat he sees a Cabinet Minister,
in that a millionaire. All the doctors of the East-end (and
their name is legion) are here in the persons of their wives
-and families. A pew in St. Peter’s follows, as inevitably as
a logical conclusion, the possession of a three-storied house
and a shining brass plate in Collins-street. Not a few of


the busiest of the practitioners themselves manage to steal
away from their practice, giving their dashing pairs of
chesnuts and bays a Sunday morning’s rest, and, let it be
hoped, their patients a morning's respite from draughts and
medicines. Here at least doctors might, with singular
advantage, be included in the set prayers for magistrates—a
prayer for patience, inquiry, and discretion. More of them
still will attend the shorter evening service, and no accidents
ever occur to call any one of their number out. Their
position is a little too assured to need any device, stale or
rare. St. Peter’s is a little above the arrangement. One
feels instinctively that the intrusion of a doctor’s messenger
would be regarded by every seat-holder as an insult to his
personal intelligence; for let it not be supposed that the
congregation is sleepy or dull in any sense. It is perfectly
evident that every lady will be prepared, when she comes
out, to express her opinion on everybody else’s behaviour
and dress ; and in all human probability, every gentleman,
after a short summary verdict on the sermon, will criticise with
musical zeal all the points of the service, besides confiding
to the wife of his bosom, in the afternoon, his private con-
viction that with the salary Brown, Smith, or Robinson draws
from the bank, or the department, or the office, Mrs. Smith,
or Mrs. Brown, or Mrs. Robinson is going altogether too far.
Visitors are present in great numbers at St. Peter’s, for its
minister and its services have both a name in the land, and
strangers in the city naturally drift to it. Strangers are
always to be seen there, a downright poorly dressed person
never is. All of the congregation cannot be rich, but as they
are never shabby, one is driven to the conclusion that a good
hat and a passable bonnet are regarded as qualifications for
attendance; and that when the young people have nothing to
wear they exchange public for private devotions. The service
itself is a musical one, to the horror of Bishop Perry, who


fulminates at intervals in the official Messenger , but without
terrifying the officiating minister. It is rendered this special
morning with admirable effect by the white-robed choristers
who fill the side seats at the lower end of the church.
The assistant minister, the Rev. A. Bromby, son, as the
family likeness tells us, of the well-known principal of the
Church of England Grammar School, intones his part of the
service to-day, and the creeds are rung forth, as Arnold
insisted they ought to be, and had them at his Rugby chapel,
as the “ war songs of the Church militant.” Mr, Summers,
the organist, has done his duty well, and, whatever may be
urged against musical services, St, Peter’s is one of the con-
gregations where we see its benefits displayed, and not its
vices—the power of sacred music to chase away the evil
spirits of the world from the mind of the man of business or
of pleasure, as it dispelled the glamour of Saul; its influence
to raise the soul, if only for a moment, to the gates of
Heaven. There are congregations who, worshipping with
the intellect, feel that they can exclude the senses, the fancy,
and the imagination from their devotions. St. Peter’s does
not. Its most zealous supporters are the strongest advocates
of the musical service. With the Litany, prayers, canticles,
and anthems of their Church derived from all and every
source, the spoil of the ages, “ all the light of ancient story”
streaming upon them, joined to music hallowed in itself by
association, they realize the possession of that “ communion
of the saints” it is the boast of the High Anglicans to
anticipate upon earth.
To address a congregation of this nature is an unusual
responsibility. The lamented Frederick Robertson has left
on record his sinking of the heart when he became pastor
•of a fashionable and fluctuating congregation, and the
minister of this church has certainly to face his share of
change of faces, and of male and feminine frivolity. It is


a great privilege also, this possession of St. Peter’s pulpit,
for there are men in the congregation whose influence in the
land is powerful for good or evil, who are there liable to be
influenced themselves. The preacher is before us in the
comparatively young man, fair, and of pleasant face, who
has mounted the pulpit, and who, on the conclusion of the
hymn, will commence his address. It proves to he on the
Holy Communion, and the central idea is acknowledged
from “ Ecce Homo.”
Professor Seeley’s great work has evidently few more
ardent admirers than Mr. Handfield. Lord Shaftesbury may
believe that the volume was “vomited from the jaws of
hell;” the incumbent of St. Peter’s would repeat the dictum
■of Mr. Gladstone, that the book was more of a gift from
Heaven. The address is not long. Mr. Handfield never
exceeds the half hour, and even then his congregation are
the last of the worshippers who stream forth from the
tabernacles of the Eastern Hill, for the service has encroached
on the preacher’s time. It has been a practical address,
and has commanded the complete attention of knots of
young men who are earnest admirers of their preacher, and
who will exchange opinions, not on the flags outside, which
is vulgar—not St. Peter’s-like, resembling too much waiting
for the ladies, and to be left to the snobs—but when they meet
at the office or on the block, next day, or at Tuesday’s ball.
'Pheology intrudes into all these places now; and no one’s
theology and no one’s sermons are more talked over there
than Mr. Handfield’s.
The preacher would not be pronounced a great orator by
critics—not, at any rate, by virtue of any grace of action,
nor of volume or modulation of tone. He is listened to
with pleasure, however, for his voice is clear and penetrating,
and his diction always elegant. Moreover he preaches, if
not on the news of the day, on the questions of this


generation. Its longings for a more close and more living
knowledge of its Divinity find in him a continual echo. And
he deals constantly with great social issues which oppress the
age—its duty to the poor, Biblical revision, the evil of
dress, the sin of great cities—with a straightforwardness
which shows that he is in communion with the spirit of
advance in the church. If he joins in the appointed sup-
plication for rain in a season of drought, it is to tell his
hearers that prayer is well, but unless it takes also the form
of work with the hands, and assumes the shape of the con-
struction of reservoirs, as science may dictate, it is not well.
Broad and practical as he is on these matters it is sufficient,
however, to hear the rev. gentleman on any test subject,
such as the position of the priesthood, to be able to fix his
position at once in the Anglican communion—that of a
member of the High Church party.
In all probability only an earnest man of the character
here indicated would keep together the congregation of
St. Peter’s. A Boanerges, or son of thunder, would disgust
them rather than terrify. A mere evangelical shedder of
tears would be secretly ridiculed by the educated audience.
Tradition asserts that one gentleman who did move himself
to weeping had to reprove his hearers for laughing instead
of wailing. Neither brimstone nor treacle would be accept-
able at St. Peter’s. They have now the theology of the
day put forward by an apostle of sweetness and culture —
a man familiar with the literature of the day, and particu-
larly with its higher poetry ; who speaks from the fulness of
his heart; who is felt to be an earnest Christian ; who is also
felt —without ever dreaming of the idea himself—to be a
Christian gentleman. Other denominations have drawn
their apostles from other ranks, but it is from men of Mr.
Handfield’s stamp and tone that the Anglican Church has,
in all ages, derived its leaders.


■


M


SCOTS’ CHURCH, COLLINS STREET.
For what purpose the congregation in Scots’ Church
assemble—the Presbyterian church whose graceful spire
crowns the crest of the Eastern Hill in Collins-street —
admits of no manner of doubt. It is to hear the sermon.
The heads of the people displayed in the pews here are of
a shrewd, inquiring, intellectual type. If there is the
smallest truth in phrenology, these persons are the last
whom we should expect to appreciate the piety of routine or
the sensuous beauty of choral song. Something for the
mind to grapple with must be their want —their preacher
must be able to take his place in the cavern of the brain as
well as the recesses of the heart. Here is a brick to judge
the temple by: three out of the four members of Parlia-
ment present in the church the evening of this visit are
keen logical debaters, one of them the most keen and
most logical arguer in the Assembly —an orator whose
trained tongue, like a Damascus blade, will find its way
through any crevice, any flaw in his opponent’s address,
who goes into a debate like a bridegroom entering his
chamber, and rejoices in a dreary financial struggle like a
strong man to run a race. Watch his set, keen face at the
close of the discourse, and you will see that he is ready to
murmur an appreciative “ hear, hear ; ” and that is an
assurance that, whether you have liked the preacher or
disliked him, whether he has vibrated the cords of your bosom,
or has swept the harp in vain, you have listened to no
inconsequential twaddle, but to a logical and intellectual
sermon, a discourse distinguished by force of brain ability.
The eyes of this congregation converge steadily to one
point, and that is, the pulpit, with a fixed look, nay, some-
thing of a stony glare, it seems impossible to divert. No


admiration-joying young damsel could be advised by a
judicious chaperon to faint in the Scots’ Church ; for unless
she struggled, which would disarrange her attire, she would
be unnoticed, and if she made the sacrifice, she would be
taken out and forgotten. We are late, and with friends
(peccavimus, peccavinms), and the pew destined to receive us.
is well up the aisle, but the unwarranted intrusion is ignored.
There is no turning of heads, and the men from north of the
Tweed who frequent the church are like the Greeks in that
their sharp cut, forward-projecting features preclude them
from squinting. If they want to gaze they must turn the
neck. They do not. They have come for the discourse
they are waiting for it, and they have not long to wait. The
service is but a setting for this jewel, and the lustre of the
latter is undimmed by any superfluous ornamentation.
Long extempore prayers do not seem to have many
admirers now-a-days, even amongst those who object to a
formal liturgy. They are abandoned, as a rule, to lazy
pastors, who prefer vain repetitions to girding up their loins
for solid preaching, and at the Scots’ Church the minister is
energetic, and has little spare time apart from the message
he is burning to deliver. That when we have to sing, he
only gives us two verses of the psalms “ arranged for
singing in public places,” is ascribable perhaps to his good
literary taste, which must shudder at the too successful effort
made by the Presbyterian paraphrasers to unpoetise that
grandest of all poetry, the poetry of the Hebrew bards,
and reduce to commonplace that most majestic of all
diction —the language of the inspired prophets of Israel.
How the sins of the father are visited upon the ninth and
tenth generation is only fully realised when we behold the
children of culture in the nineteenth century turning over
the mutilated metrical version of the rude iconoclasts of the
seventeenth. Noticeable traces of a rebellion in spirit are


visible. Music might do something to soften the incon-
gruous language in which the Psalms of David are bade to
appear, and lo! there is a harmonium in the building—a
mechanical aid to devotion. The fact would stamp the
church at once as a church of progress. A harmonium, in
the natural order of development, may be expected to lead
to a great deal. The cold, dreary walls of the building drive
one’s thoughts inwards at this juncture, and organ-building
in the air is the result —visions of a future full-voiced choir,
and “ service high and anthems clear.” Such tricks can
strong imagination play us ! But it may be mentioned as
a palliative to the offended, that at present the musical
transgressor is of the most juvenile proportion, has an
infantile voice with a squeak in it, and is altogether so
diminutive that, unless one visits the gallery, there seems to
be no glimpse obtainable of the interesting little stranger.
Two small portions of Scripture read, half an hour con-
sumed in all since church began, and the preliminaries have
been disposed of. No more surreptitious peerings round by
the critic. The preacher quotes his text. He has obtained
a silent and even a strained attention, and in the first minute
one sees that here we have no common man, no mere clerical
attorney exercising his wits on legal arguments for salvation,
no special pleader for some antique form of opinion, no mere
artist submitting polished brain work for our mental inspec-
tion, but an interpreter of living truths, a man transfusing
into our passive absorbing systems his deepest and most
vital thoughts.
That, in a sentence, is the characteristic of the preaching
of the Rev. Peter Menzies —its polished earnestness. Like
Paul, the physical man is “ mean in presence.” Perhaps
the allusion is irreverent. It is difficult to resist it; for a
dark, sickbed, sallow countenance, and a sad face, lit up
strangely, now and then, by enthusiasm, recalls naturally


our fancied portrait of the energetic apostle of the Gentiles,
who suffered from a thorn in the flesh, and who holds his
readers to this day by rush of argument mingled with bursts
of declamation —by his fulness of heart as well as his vigour
of intellect. The characteristics of any one of the, epistles
are those of Mr. Menzies’ sermons. They are, as it has been
said, polished compositions. Epigrammatic sentences every
now and then, cutting as a knife, tell the critic of long
study. The illustrations, generally taken from Nature, smell
to him of the lamp, for they are apposite, worked out, and
without redundancy of detail. Such choice and picturesque
language as the preacher employs can only be the result of a
naturally vigorous growth subject to a ruthless pruning.
And all this labour is expended upon ideas which are not
only noble, but sympathetic—the ideas of a man who has.
sounded some of the depths of the human heart. He
speaks also in unaffected tones and in natural cadences. He
knows something of the outside world ; he has read his
newspaper. The vivifying element of earnestness is never
wanting ; the soul within gives weight to his words and fire
to his sentences.
Here then are most of the elements of a great pulpit
orator; but this high position—surely the noblest to which
man can aspire—Mr. Menzies has yet to attain. He may
grasp it, for he is yet young; his foot is high on the hill side,
and his gaze is on the pinnacle. His friends would say with
confidence that he would, but that, in looking at him, one is
sadly reminded how, after all, the first condition of human
success is that in which the brute creation may surpass their
lords—bodily health and physical vigour, The preacher’s
Doric tones may jar on an Anglican ear, but that is a
secondary point. The impression is soon forgotten, for his
voice is far more susceptible of modulation, especially of
pathos, than that of most Scotch clergymen, and it is only


the monotonous voice that is incapable of being rendered
attractive. His pulpit action is Mr, Menzies’ one great
drawback at present, or rather his lack of action. What he
wants is to rid himself of his present servitude to his notes,
and to acquire the faculty of speaking, in some degree at
least, to his auditors. The preacher leaves himself no
opportunity of speaking directly to his hearers. We are
hearing a sermon read at vacancy the greater part of the time,
and that is something very different from having a sermon
preached to living men. There is great force in the saying
of old George Herbert, how the preacher best of all pro-
cures attention “by a diligent and busy cast of his eye upon
his auditors, with letting them know that he observes who
marks and who does not, and with particularising of his
speech now to the younger sort, and then to the elder —now
to the poor, and now to the rich. This is for you, and this
is for you.” Sometimes Mr. Menzies does get away from
his writing—it is only for a few too brief sentences —but then,
while he is leaning over his pulpit boards, speaking in
trembling tones to his listeners, face to face, man to man,
each pregnant period given in as if on oath, we feel how
great a preacher he might and may become.
The sermon this May evening shows that, like the men
who are taking the lead in the Scotch Church at home- —Dr.
M‘Leod, Principal Tulloch, Dr. Caird, and others—Mr.
Menzies belongs to the Broad Church, and shrinks visibly
before the naked eye of the mental man from the legal
machinery of Calvinism. This particular discourse has been,
in substance, nothing more nor less than a vehement pro-
test against the extreme doctrine of predestination, which
was once as a buttress of the church. The gulf between the
preacher and predestination pure and simple is indeed very
deep. In one emphatic burst, in which Mr. Menzies aban-
doned that fatal note-book, the secret of his failure wherever


he does fail, he besought his hearers, whatever clouds of
infidelity swept over them, to hold fast to moral good, to
adhere to the belief that man is free to mould his own
destiny. “If I could not believe that,” he said, “ I would
never enter a pulpit.” The sermon was on the influence of
the Holy Spirit. “ Were it proved,” said the preacher, “ that
the influence worked capriciously, and without preparation,
in violation of the great law of Nature, which is evolution,
that would be to me a formidable objection.” The allusion
was to the arguments of unbelievers, for this pastor is a true
shepherd. He drives away the wolves from the fold, as well
as feeds the sheep. Altogether, as Presbyterians are given
to linger on the way home to discuss their preacher’s points,
and to argue over their doctrines on succeeding evenings,
one imagines that Mr. Menzies must supply a constant suc-
cession of themes for animated controversies. There can
be little of stagnation in the Scots’ Church pool, with his
own spring of fresh new thought bubbling from the bottom.
No thinking men of any denomination can enjoy “blessed
sleep from heaven” under this preacher. And the reference
is not to physical slumber. Men will go to sleep on the
rack, and they may find oblivion, therefore, in the angular
excoriating pews of this edifice, which were built either for a
stiff-backed generation or in defiance of the flesh, and deserve
to be treated in a separate essay by themselves. But the
mentally drowsy must go elsewhere. Thorough complacent
ease, personal immunity, and absence of prickings of the
soul are good things only to be obtained under the valiant
beaters who devote themselves to thrashing out the dry
husks of a dead theology, the Preachers of the Past. What
Mr. Menzies preaches is the Christianity of the Present.
Or, if not that, it is the Christianity of the Future ; and then
he has but to stand still for the revolving world to reach him.
In a dozen years he will be orthodox.






WESLEY CHURCH, LONSDALE STREET.
Fools are said by society to build houses. Every con-
scientious observer must have said in his heart that fools do
not stop there, but erect churches also. No other explanation
accounts for the hideous structures to be seen, in all lands,
dedicated to Divine service; nor for the perverse placing
of majestic buildings on insignificant sites. For instance,,
the whole effect of the massive architecture of the Lonsdale-
street Wesleyan Church is lost to the city by its erection in
a hollow, hemmed in with buildings, for the most part mean
and indifferent in character, too bad to be endured, and yet
too valuable to be pulled down. Until you enter the
grounds you are actually unaware of the features and the
extent of the splendid pile, and are altogether unprepared
for the long aisles, the spandrils, the pillars, the vaulted
roof, which place this church, as a building, first amongst the
Protestant edifices of the city. It is a noble church. With
its galleries, and arches, and recesses, it is in marked con-
trast to the circular and amphitheatre tabernacles spreading
on all sides now, and adopted, it appears, by modern society
as its architectural ideal. It would be an interesting inquiry,
did time and place, and above all, space permit, whence
did these latter edifices derive their being, and what do they
represent ? The Chinese pagoda is declared to be the
household Tartar tent beatified; has sweet recollections of
home about it. In Persian architecture the traveller sees
the lotus and the palm reproduced in slender shaft and
flowering capital. The Gothic cathedal also, Emerson has
said, with the force of inherent truth, had its origin with a
people who, in majestic woodlands, looked up through
Nature unto Nature’s God. We see its birthplace in the


frozen forests of the North, where each avenue is an aisle,
a temple not made with hands ; lit with the coloured lights
of the rising sun, or the pallid pulsings of the Aurora,
filled by moaning winds, with the rushing wondrous strain,
u When wandering on the echoing strand,
The enthusiast hears at even.”
In the chapel of this day every seat is equal one to
another ; no worshipper can be seen less than another ; no
other arrangement could possibly show more of all; not one
of devotion’s phases need be wasted; the builders have
remembered that if Providence can read the secrets of all
corners, man cannot: not an attitude is thrown away; not
a glove nor a bonnet can escape notice. The sinner who
smites upon his breast would be puzzled to find a place to
stand afar otf and lift up his voice. The scene recalls
nothing save the grand stand or the theatre. If it fulfils the
devotional aspirations of modern society, it must be because
society’s devotional aspirations are lamentably small.
Martin, in his majestic architectural illustrations of Paradise
Lost—architecturally majestic, and little more—has drawn
one such arena, but the site is not heaven ; the gathering is
not of saints, and the central figure is not a minister of light.
Different indeed are one’s recollections of the venerable
piles, the lowly, consecrated buildings, where Christians
were wont to worship in other lands ; where the scene itself
exercised a sobering, softening influence, and the “ religious
light ” imparted a solemn expression to every face, young or
old, pale or ruddy, smooth or wrinkled.
In this Wesleyan Church, a chastening, hallowing effect,
consecrating the building, lifting the thoughts upward, or
diverting them to the great hereafter, is produced by the
sight of an occasional tablet on the walls in memorial of
some members of the fold who have gone before. Imagine


memorials of death in the modern chapel, all luxury, light,
and studied elegance ! More incongruous would they be
than a skeleton at a feast. Their antithesis, rouge spots on
the cheeks of a corpse, would not be more shocking. One
enthusiastic ecclesiologist has declared that Gothic is the
only Christian architecture. Without adopting that sweeping
dictum, it is open to venerating beings to be grateful to the
Wesleyans for clinging to it.
A large congregation worships here, and, let it be added,
a healthy looking congregation. The lank-haired youth, the
virgins wise and foolish, old and staid, or young and giggling,
the dyspeptic, cadaverous, middle-aged beings, whose God
dwells in a disordered stomach, and who make up the sum
of some chapel audiences, are invisible —or if not invisible,
are few and far between. Another good sign about the
congregation is, that the men and women open their mouths,
instead of singing on the sly. Apparently they like harmony.
The music introduced into the Church of England litany,,
which is used here, would call down the especial condemna-
tion of the Anglican bishop. The effect when the entire
congregation unite in some of the Wesleys’ own fervent
hymns is impressive. In none of the histories of Wesley, or
of the church he founded, is justice done to the sacred
poetry of the regenerator, and yet his hymnology will possibly
survive his sermons. It would be hard to say how much he
and that earlier reformer, whom in so many points he resem-
bled, advanced their cause by their pressing sacred harmony
into congregational service. They were men of this world
as well as the other. They knew that the organ might be
the servant, but would never be the tyrant of the real, the
earnest, the fervent preacher. Luther’s times were sung by
the Catholics of his own day.
Wesley’s hymns are become part of the life of the Protestant
church. Hear a congregation pour out their souls in the


spiritual longings they express, and you understand a great
part of the strength of Wesleyanism. Listen to the long, long
list of prayer-meetings, and of social gatherings, designed
to bring members of the churches individually together,* and
you grasp a second source of peculiar power. Pay heed to
the specialities of their sermons, the plain, familiar speaking
to plain men, the throwing away of all veils and screens, and
you realise the whole.
The Wesley Church, like the other churches, of the
denomination, enjoys a change of preachers. Its principal
minister, its responsible pastor, the gentleman we have come
to hear, is the Rev. James Bickford. There are disagree-
ables to be conquered in listening to Mr. Bickford. A
strong, harsh voice, incapable of modulation, is one; the
mannerism of his sect is another, and an unmistakeable
mannerism it is, conspicuous as the name branded across the
brow of the Beast. It is always legible. Occasionally a lay
preacher who has sat at the feet of various Gamaliels, finds
his way into Parliament, and he stands detected at once by
his measured diction, his unctuous delivery, his long
balanced sentences, the club of Hercules uplifted ever, the
rumble always,
“ Heaven’s awful thunder or a distant cart.
Mr. Bickford is altogether possessed by this turgid spirit.
He is clothed in it like a garment. It harmonises with his
person, which is also heavy, solid, giving comfortable
assurance that saints have not always the thorn in the flesh,
that there is corn other than in Egypt, that the garners of
Israel are full, that fattening pastures lie within the fold.
Were it the minister’s lot to climb up the Delectable
Mountains, the task would be undertaken with soberness
and toil. Not his the light heart, and elastic step, and
joyous shout, of the religious enthusiast, but the safe and


cautious advance of the orthodox divine. His mode of
sermonising would commend itself to the heart of old
Herbert, for, as the godly rector of Bemerton says, “ The
parson’s method of handling a text consists of declaring its
true meaning, and then some just observations drawn out of
the whole passage as it lies whole and unbroken in Scripture.”
This the writer considers “natural, sweet, and grave,”
whereas the other mode of crumbling a passage into words,
hath in it neither sweetness nor gravity nor authority, and
the Dictionary, says Herbert, would suit the preachers who
adopt it as well as the Bible.
Mr. Bickford is one of Herbert’s preachers of “ large dis-
course, looking before and after.” And like most Wesleyans
he has a fund of genial anecdote, which tells often when
genius itself would fail. All those we have heard from him
have been apt and pointed, sermons in themselves, like the
scriptural parables, familiar not vulgar, dwelling in the
memory when exordium, and application, when “ firstly,” and
“secondly,” and “thirdly” have gone the way of most
sermons. Mr. Bickford’s admirers will hardly claim for him
any exalted oratorical merit. He is far more cold and
formal than one might expect from a Wesleyan divine, with
less of action indeed than the average Anglican curate, if
that be possible. The Church-goer is told that there are
moments when the preacher soars, on heavy wing it is true,
but still soars, leaving platitudes and formalities behind, and
arising into pure feeling, and a strain of earnest eloquence.
Unhappy, or censorious critic ! For his part, he felt more
inclined to yawn like the wretched Eutychus, than to tremble
like the stricken Felix. The terror was more than once
upon him that—to quote Sydney Smith—the preacher ima-
gined souls were saved like Eve was made—by first casting
the man into a deep sleep. Perhaps the Church-goer was
unfortunate in his visits. He will undertake therefore neither


to affirm nor deny the statement made to him that some-
times Mr. Bickford’s congregation have an echo, as it were,
faint and afar off, but true in tone, of the powerful personal
preaching of the Fathers of the sect. Would that it were
more than echo. In an age of luxury and indifference, we
need those appeals, those interrogations, that sifting of the
heart by which Whitfield and Wesley did their mighty work.
Only a “ peal of thunder ” roused Alexander from the lap
of Thais.
One can imagine two men leaving Mr. Bickford’s church
with very contrary tales. The one would dwell upon the
absence of speculative intellect, betrayed by his addresses —
would wish for a quicker and more enlightened sympathy
with the spirit of the age—would say that Mr. Bickford is
not only, and of course, devoid of sympathy with the fierce,
eager “No” of the day, on the one hand, and with its
eclectic sympathies, its readiness to reconcile the irrecon-
cilable, to unite those whom the written Word hath put
asunder on the other ; but fails also to realise the existence
of these strivings—sees not the clouds which some see ready
to burst over the heads of the churches in storm and deluge
—does not breathe the intellectual atmosphere of the day—
is a preacher of the old school of thought, of expression,
and of style, and not a leader in the new—is himself in
intellectual swaddling clothes —may make a Mary weep, but
will never draw from a smitten Didymus the cry “My Lord
and God.” The other would be struck by the preacher’s
abnegation of personal display in the pulpit—his conscien-
tious striving to put the Gospel and not himself before his
audience, and would think no more of the ruggedness of
style than a woodsman of the gnarled excrescence of the oak,
the signs of its soundness at the core —would see the weak
of the fold comforted by an honest shepherd, the vicious
rebuked, and the strong assured.


From the different view-points the preacher will be
differently judged. But the Church-goer’s opinion ? Well,
he would rather be “ taxed for silence than checked for
speech.” He does not write for those dull elves who fail to
see the reason why. If such there be, let them remember
the fact that a tree shall be judged by its fruit, and that if it
bears fruit after its kind it shall be honoured, and not cut
down. He prefers to let the figure of Mr. Bickford dwell in
his memory out of the pulpit—where the preacher finishes
and the pastor begins—to see him presiding over the social
anniversary, or beaming and throwing off life at a tea-
meeting, or setting out to raise the fallen, to comfort the
comfortless, and to remember the forgotten—a
“ Good honest man, close buttoned to the chin ;
Broad-cloth without and a warm heart within, ”
If the stranger goes to Mr. Bickford’s preachings expecting
to be dazzled or mystified or convinced, he will assuredly be
disappointed. The spiritual pauper who attends church to
loaf upon a minister for ideas will be sent back empty away.
He who goes “with pure mind and feeling”—not only
charitable but sympathetic—may hope to leave edified and
contented.


ST. FRANCIS’S CHURCH, LONSDALE STREET.
Rome has her spell; attend her cathedral services and the
charm is upon you ; visit St. Francis’s and you will sym-
pathise with Arnold when on a foreign tour he worshipped
in Chartres cathedral. The bitterest foe of the system,
Arnold never was more eloquent than in denouncing on that
occasion what he termed “the provoking confusion” con-
tinually made between the magnificence and beauty of the
Romish church, and the doctrines and practices which divide
her from Dissent. When visiting strange shrines, or wit-
nessing alien ceremonies, a liberal allowance must always
be made for the effect of novelty. Still, after you have made
the deduction at St. Francis’s, you will understand how pos-
sible it is for congregations to be absorbed in ceremony and
praise, in pageantry and prayer, without the assistance of the
expounder of the gospels, and how the solemn glories of the
service, the mysteries of the Mass, tend to stifle the craving
for pulpit oratory. A lecture on colours to the enrapt gazer
upon the painter’s glowing canvas, would be as much out of
place, would jar as harshly, as would lengthy argument after
the burst of harmony, the continuous supplications, the
symbolism of the Romish ceremonial. The sermon we
have come to hear is huddled away into a corner. It is but
an excrescence.
The step across the threshold of St. Francis’s does indeed
take the Church-goer, fresh from the intellectual pastures of
Protestantism, into a different world. The crowded state of
the large building, the symbolism, the pictures on the walls,
the crosses trophied with the events of the Passion, the
display of devotional emotion there, are all striking to the
starnger. Upon him their devotional effect is not palled by






usage. Nave, transept, and aisles swarm with people, taking
an active part in the service. To obtain a seat is a diffi-
culty, and then your elbows are converted into instruments
of torture by the press ; you are involuntary Pascals with
iron spikes at your ribs. Beads you see counted, prayers
are audibly murmured by worshippers on their knees; you
do not see young people studying the marriage-service on
the sly ; when the silver bell sounds in the Mass you do see
every knee bent, and every breath for a moment suspended
in silent adoration. And the congregation is thoroughly
mixed. Side by side worship master and servant. The
seats are free to all. On the same bench is a silk fresh from
the mercer’s, showing the latest phase of the milliner’s art,
gay and meretricious enough for a Watteau costume at a
fancy ball; next it is a bonnet —a thing which was a bonnet
once —which one would hesitate to rescue with tongs from
the gutter now. A bride wears the one, a wretched,
mumbling, toothless hag the other. Broad-cloth there,
and next it corduroys ; the merchant kneels on the same
board as the labourer. Occasionally an Anglican or Presby-
terian pastor remembers that “the poor ye shall have always
with ye,” is one of the promises made to the church
militant. His eye wanders over seats filled with women, bold
in attire and wandering in looks, and men, curled and
anointed like barbers’ dummies. Blinking like an owl at
noon-day, he recognises that the poor are not with him.
Then echo the churches with wailings, and then teems the
press with articles ; and again all is silence. The question,
where are the poor, remains unanswered. With a bitter
and biting shame it must be confessed by the Protestant
Church-goer that the poor, or some of them at least, are
here. The outcasts, the failures of this world, the rejected
of men, the pitiful, and the fallen, have not been improved
out of this church ; not driven into “ free seats,” into corners


branded with poverty, as though they were tainted wethers;
not choked with the barren husks of theology. The “weary
and heavy laden,” those who have not where to lie the head,
can still turn to this church, “ hoar with the frost of ages,” if
to nO other, as unto a mother. There are creatures in the
seat with the Critic who would scare an Anglican congrega-
tion ; there are cowering, pitiful, shame-stricken wretches
behind him, from whom the virtuous of the chapels would
shrink. Why have Protestant ministers lost this “glorious
presence”? Wealthy congregations, and intellectual dis-
courses, and glittering edifices, they are all snares if the
result is that the church becomes a den of fashion, if the
price paid be the exclusion of poverty, the systematic isola-
tion of misery. The Churches of the Successful! Their
foundations are on sand. The rock of ages is the heart of
the poor.
An undefinable murmur runs through the crowded
gregation whenj the sacristy door opens, and in the rear of
the procession of surpliced boys is seen the portly form of
Father Barry. In him it is evident that the people have-
one of their favourite ministers. The possessor of a
splendid baritone voice, clear as a bell in its upper notes,
deep and powerful in its lower, he renders the service with
marked musical fervour. The priest’s “ Gloria in Excelsis”
rings through the silent air like a bird note from the earth,,
the choral response comes pealing like thunder from the
clouds. But justice to Father Barry’s musical talent must
be done by other pens. He stands before us as an orator.
Nor is it easy to judge him in that respect, for the preaching
of his Church is distinct from that of the Protestant com-
munion. Before a Presbyterian or a Wesleyan divine has
commenced his argument, Father Barry has finished his
short, close, compact address. What the sonnet is to the
poem—what the trumpet note to charge is to the measured


marching tune —are his discourses to the ordinary sermon.
Like the snow-flake on the river are they in time, like the
smiting hailstorm in effect. Without preface or introduc-
tion, the preacher holds the audience at full tension for ten
minutes or a quarter of an hour by a brilliant burst of close
and rapid declamation, glittering and polished, full of vivid
imagery, of appeals to the emotions, and delivered with an
equal emphasis of gesture and of style. The preacher’s aim
is to stir the emotions ; there is no attempt to convince the
head. All that controversy could prove is assumed. The
addresses impel to action, not thought: they declare the
truth without attempting to establish it, much less bottom-
ing it. We have an impassioned declaimer before us, not
a subtle arguer. Whether Father Barry could be the latter
or not it is purposeless to inquire. At St. Francis’s he
is the fervid orator, the rhetorician is not required;
argument is needless; all that logic and reasoning involve
is taken as conceded. The declamation is no doubt florid
in style; loud, like a cornet obligato ; moves stately, rather
than gracefully ; lacks change of construction a little ; has
a copper-plate neatness; but, then, how effective it is!
The last address we heard him deliver was on the value of
time. The past, urged the preacher, is irrevocable ; the
future existing only in expectancy ; the present with us is
transient as a lightning flash ; and yet that fleeting second is
purchased with the blood of the Redeemer. A succeeding
picture of the blessed contemplating their past with rejoic-
ings, and the wretched meditating in .agony on theirs, was
couched in language and uttered with a fire which told
audibly in a thrill through the church, and showed visibly
in clasped hands and pallid cheeks. It agitated all; thrilled
in every corner. Possibly some people in other congrega-
tions might have felt their taste shocked with the vehemence
of the highly-wrought passage; but the multitude was


entranced. Ear-splitting ranting it was not; there is always
a restraint upon the preacher. He finishes at the end of one
of his discourses like a war horse reined in from the charge.
These sonnet sermons fall upon the ear with the ease and
fluency of unpremeditated effusions ; and yet they are not
unpremeditated. They are far too clear and striking for
that. “Toil and trouble” is written across them in language
readily recognised by the practised eye. The hearer’s
pleasure is the preacher’s preliminary pain. As well might
a rhymester attempt to dash off one of Wordsworth’s edes,
an improvisatore to declaim the “Giaour,” or a player of
voluntaries to produce a “ Dead March,” as an unprepared
speaker to present an audience with one of Father Barry’s
packed and fiery exhortations. One fact should be borne
in mind by other sects : Father Barry has only to preach
occasionally. Whether he could give us these bursts of
impassioned oratory, fragments as they are, twice every
Sunday, is at least doubtful; and that is the task Protestant
pastors have to perform.
Father Barry’s sermons certainly would not please
audiences whose religious feelings are linked to the intel-
lectual process. They would be ineffective to congregations
which desire the utterances of a reasoned theology; who
distrust the emotions, remembering that they are the
servants of the man, and not his masters; that they may be
pressed into the cause of the false as well as the service of
the true. Any preacher of any sect could use those of
Father Barry’s sermons the “ Church-goer ” has heard, and
the quality is at once their weakness and their merit. They
are preached, however, not to meet the views of a critic
contemplating a model sermon, but to supply the actual
want of a living church. The time is short, and a multitude
has to be stirred. And before an audience of thousands,
and a most mixed audience, where the Minister has to


preach to the mountain and to preach to the plain, only
nerve and animation like his, only a simple language and
forcible illustrations will strike home. The sweet or classic
features which charm the drawing-room are lost upon the
public stage. Force is wanted there, and energy, and
Father Barry has that. His living vis is the secret of half
his effect. The very first impression he communicates—
and it endures to the last —is that Goethe made on
Napoleon ; “ You are a man,” said the world’s Sword, on
meeting the world's Pen. The man shines through all
Father Barry’s oratory. It is refreshing in an age of
mysticism to listen to his clear and massive English, his
pronounced views, his practical exhortations. He stands in
the front rank of our preachers.
' V '


THE BAPTIST CHAPEL, ALBERT STREET.
The reading-desk or rostrum of the Albert-street Chapel is.
a light breastwork compared with the massive forts of the
old-fashioned pulpits. Its elegant shape and velvet-pile
chair give it a drawing-room appearance ; and the graceful
young man who enters it, with elastic step and cheerful smile,,
attired in the faultless black and spotless linen of lay life,
and with more than a suspicion of jewellery about his person,
would only have to exchange his narrow black tie for a
narrower strip of white or lavender to be an ornament to any
drawing-room. If he produced a crimson-bound Tennyson
from his pocket, instead of opening a dowdy black hymn-
book, the picture would be complete. Sure, thinks the
visitor—if, miserable sinner, he permits a carnal thought to
intrude—no more elegant vision ever greeted the eyes of a
nonconforming congregation. Sure ten thousand tongues
would be unloosed should venturous critic hint disparage-
ment. The people of such a pastor may well look upon
him with admiration; and the tailor,’and the laundress, and
the jeweller of such a form may gaze with unaffected delight.
Such incongruous ideas have to be dismissed. The minister
himself is taking stock of the congregation, and the visitor
proceeds in turn to notice him once more. Young is he,
but certain deep lines show that the possession of the smooth
face of Jacob gives him a more youthful appearance than his
census-paper would warrant the sub-enumerator in expecting.
Altogether, the tall figure, and graceful carriage, and chiselled
features are not to be mistaken. They are familiar to every
one who has visited the photographic studios of Melbourne
as those of the most popular preacher of the city, the Rev.
Charles Clark.






Mr. Clark is eloquent. So many preachers are praised for
qualities not their own, that it is of importance to be
explicit on the fact. To know what is meant by “ word-
painting ” one must listen to him. The vivid, thrilling force
of language itself, the manner in which an idea or an
incident may be placed before an audience with startling
distinctness, with attractive loveliness, with stereoscopic
reality; how, after all, a new phrase remains to throw a side
light over the scene —the power, the poetry of the English
tongue ; —all this remains to be appreciated by Melbourne
church-goers until they have sat under Mr. Clark. There is
something very fascinating, particularly to the trained ear,
in the mingled grace and steadiness of his flights. He breaks
out into images and illustrations as naturally and as pro-
fusely as a peach tree blossoms or a lark swells into song.
And his vivid metaphors, often gay, always appropriate, and
gathered from every source—nature, history, poetry, and the
sciences—are given in transparent language. Every one can
understand them. Like as shells in the clear depths of the
sea, they acquire a fresh beauty from the crystal medium
through which they are viewed. The voice is in harmony
with the language—clear as a clarion, and with a metallic
ring. And the preacher’s control over word and tongue are
as great the one as the other. The voice becomes a very
potent instrument with him; reading acquires a new value.
A good many Melbourne ministers ought to be put to
school to Mr. Clark to learn how to quote, and particularly,
how to give out hymns. If encores were allowed at the end
of a verse, some of his hearers would be terribly tempted to
forego the prayers and the singing and the sermon, and cry,
‘‘ Go on reading sacred poetry for ever, Mr. Clarkfor at
these times his trembling inflexions will thrill the audience,
or his voice will die away like the dissolving notes of distant
music. Yes and certainly ! There are all the outward and


visible signs of a great orator about the Albert-street preacher.
It would be difficult, without being interested in the subject,
to help being gratified by the charm of his delivery. If one
pulpit orator in early days was called the “ golden-lipped,”
Mr. Clark might be well termed the silver-tongued.
Much of the minister’s preaching is in a conversational
strain, Mr. Clark buttonholing his audience, as it were,
questioning them, and taking them into his confidence. Very
delightful conversation it is—no rush, no gabble—the matter
always lively, and often including a well-told anecdote of
real life. As for the poets of the day, the speaker is so
imbued with them that their verses ooze from his tongue.
Some actors sleep on their parts, to catch their spirit as they
say, and one would imagine that Mr. Clarke pillowed his
head on the neat green and gilt editions which issue from
Moxon’s press. Interrogated and catechised as you are by
the minister, you never wish to interrupt the flow. The
Church-goer looks round the building and sees attention
everywhere. Only two pairs of eyes did he ever behold
closed. The one were owned by an energetic deacon,
whose complacent stroking of his beard showed that he had
but shut the bodily eyes to enjoy more keenly the preacher’s
imagery with the mental vision. The gifted Bourdaloue
was accustomed to preach with his eyelids dropped, to avoid
distraction, and his portraits were always taken with them
thus compressed, and there can be no objection to a deacon
following so illustrious an example. Still, as a concession
to the weaker and easily-scandalised brethren, the rule of
stroking the beard, as a sign of wakefulness, ought to be
insisted upon. The second pair were in the choir, and
the choir is a privileged body everywhere, and what it does
is the business of nobody. It is to be noted that his col-
loquial form of address often betrays the preacher into
almost slangy expressions. They jar sadly. Mr. Clark is


not natural—is quite out of his element in using them.
We seem to see the swan ashore, and want to get it back to
the water again. He is at his ease most in fine phrases.
Mr. Clark is, however, essentially a dramatic preacher.
On that character his reputation is founded. Often every
word has its action. His attitudes, never the same for a
minute, are often picturesque, always graceful. He bends
the bow and fits the arrows and draws the sword; he gives
the counterfeit presentment of the grumbler whose tone he
is mimicking. Were he to describe the cockcrow and St.
Peter’s fall, he would hide his face to stifle his cries. “ I’d
give all the money of a benefit night to handle my handker
chief as that fellow does,” exclaimed Garrick, when sitting
under Whitfield; and the actors of our day might study
nature and grace from Mr. Clark. His reading-desk, by
placing a large space at his disposal, gives him an advantage
over the cribbed, cabined, and confined occupants of the
wretched pulpit-boxes of our forefathers, and he turns it to
good account. He fills the space, now in the middle, now
on this side, now on that, like a “star” actor occupies the
entire stage, no matter who else may be upon it. The
audience can never ignore him. In manner and address—
in style—he rises above his compeers of the cloth, not like
one bough does over another, but as the mountain tops the
forest.
The turn from the form of the addresses to their substance
is abrupt and severe, but it has to be made. And the
verdict must be recorded, however reluctantly, that, as
literary compositions, Mr. Clark’s sermons are far too often
vague, loose, and flabby. The charm of the gift is all in
its manner. The little nothing is wrapt up in tinsel paper,
and presented with such a grace and impressment, that
the hearer feels the obligation of one who has received a
treasure. But Mr. Clark should never publish one of his


ordinary discourses. The press would be a fatal talisman.
Spoken by him, his addresses reflect all the light and shade
of his eloquence, as the jellyfish, floating on the surface of
the sea, does the colours of the rainbow. When we come
to coldly dissect both, we find a common fault; they want
a backbone. There is a lack in the sermon of tangible facts,
solid thoughts, weighty ideas. Glitter does not compensate
for their absence. All of his addresses are ethical, many are
ethical alone. The text is from the Bible; the middle
might be taken from a magazine. By what mysterious
process the preacher links the one to the other, and both to
the benediction, is not given to ordinary logicians to com-
prehend, and must remain a mystery until all secrets are
revealed, and the sea of the popular preacher’s heart gives
up its dead syllogisms. Necessarily such sermons fail to
generate strong sentiment. Free from offensive dogmatism,
they are free also from the decision, the firm principle, and
the strong conception, always so refreshing to the weak, and
they are free from the just and clear and earnest declaration,
“ Thus saith the Lord,” of the Christian preacher. At the
conclusion we feel that there has been more of ability than
piety. We have been tickled rather than thrilled, the
preacher has been “ too clever by half.” With the delivery
of the sermons it is the same as their matter. In hours of
reminiscence the gifted improvisatore is recalled; the
impassioned orator, the self-forgetting, self-forgot utterer of
divine truths, the deliverer of a divine message, never. The
tones, the looks, the sighs which linger in the heart for
years —these are spirits over whom the elocutionist has no
control. No doubt this preacher holds some of the golden
keys. He can unlock laughter, and often has to put a
restraint upon himself to check the impulse and the smile.
That he can
“ Ope the sacred source of sympathetic tears,”


very few will believe. To make others weep, says the Latin
proverb, you must weep yourself. With all his powers of
rhetoric, and imagery, and action, was ever a sob of contri-
tion heard in his chapel ? Had he drifted to the stage, the
highest walk there, tragedy, heaven-crowned, “weeping tears
and blood,” could hardly have been his forte. It would be
strange now to hear him speak “as a dying man to dying
men.”
From him who has received much, much is expected.
With all popular preachers there is this issue—to what end
are their talents applied ? Has the man a mission to fulfil,
a charge to deliver ? or, does he misuse the high place, and
the sacred position to glorify himself; to intercept the
homage due to the Maker, even as the sons of Eli defiled
the Holy of Holies ;
“ Will he seek to dazzle me with tropes
As with the diamond on his lily hand,
And play his brilliant parts before my eyes
When I am hungering for the bread of life ? ”
On this question hang all the law and all the prophets.
It must be put after hearing Mr. Clark, for it cannot be
denied, it would be affectation for any one to conceal, that
he arouses the suspicion. The doubt is founded on a mis-
apprehension of the preacher’s talents. A great preacher he
is, but not of the greatest. A man of brilliant, showy parts,
but not of creative and sympathetic powers. The distinction
is often overlooked, but it is of vital importance. It is the
secret of a disproportion between Mr. Clark’s show and Mr.
Clark’s results. Even in the midst of his vivid word-
colouring and his elegant action, in the height of his bursts
and bravuras one starts. The features of eloquence are
there, the soul is wanting. The inward fire which would
inform every gesture with a new meaning, and render lumi-
nous every sentence, has not been lit. By nature he lacks


that which gives talent all its edge, all its weight, all its
momentum —the wrapt enthusiasm of the devotee. He is
what he is ; the popular preacher, the favourite of the hour,
the pet of piety’s dress circle. Lo, religion in the Albert-
street Chapel, “ thou art unto men as a very lovely song of
one that hath a pleasant voice.”
How finally describe Mr. Clark save by his own imagery?
The eagle, beating with steady pinions against the storm ;
the nightingale, delighting men by its plaintive melody ; the
dove, soaring on the “ seraph wings of ecstacy,” must be
dismissed. Rather is he one of our own native lyre-birds,
repeating every note it hears, and displaying with conscious
pride every feather of its brilliant plumage. With regret we
find the silver voice has ceased; but the appeal it has made
has been to our admiration, not to our hearts. The audience
have had held up a pleasing picture for their contemplation,
rather than a truth-telling glass to make them “tremble
while they gaze,” causing them to loathe the guilty form they
know to be their own. They are apt to leave, not with
tremulous thought of themselves, nor yet with chastened
hopes of the future, but pleased with a preacher who is so
admirable; pleased with themselves for having the intelli-
gence and taste to appreciate his merits. Admiration Mr.
Clark will have wherever he goes. It is his right, and will be
acknowledged. Energetic, able, and conscious of his ability,
he is sure of crowded chapels in whatever place his lot may
be cast, and pitted against whatever rivals. But it is a safe
prophecy to predict that the fruit will be in poor proportion
to the leaf. Admirers will be many, and converts few. His
is the lustre, but the reflected, heatless lustre of the moon;
the lightning, but the forkless, lambent flame from earth;
the crystal, but not the “ sea of glass with the fire in itthe
winged words, but not “to the dividing of body and spirit
asunder.” To Martha much was given, but there was one


thing needful. Mr. Clark’s want is the same. It is the heart
of flame. And only that can tip the tongue with fire.
Gentle reader, a postscript. A faithful notice of Mr.
Clark includes a glance at his defects. Think thou of all
that warns against a harsh judgment, and of all that calls for
palliation and praise. His shortcomings, they are those of
nine preachers out of ten, yea, ninety-nine in the hundred.
They would pass unnoticed but for his heaven-sent gifts.
The strong light deepens the shadows. In the youth of the
world men were more generous than in these latter ages.
They did not expect perfection. They made a god of the
man who possessed any one talent in an heroic degree.
Hercules was not blamed for his want of wit, nor Apollo
for his lack of strength. Imitate thou them, rather than the
present many, the vulgar, the envious herd, who remember
only the weak points of a great man, and fancy that those
frailties reduce him to their own low level.


ST. MARY’S, HOTHAM.
People who believe that the Anglican church can draw
congregations only from the extremes of society the
classes who are too fashionable to care much, and the
people too ignorant to know much—may learn a lesson by
visiting the growing pile known as St. Mary’s, Hotham.
Here, lavender and lace, the modern substitutes for purple
and fine linen, are unknown, nor do chariot wheels tarry,
nor buggies linger outside the portals. The assemblage is
one of decent men and women, struggling, evidently, for
their daily livelihoods, puzzled, a good many of them, how
to make both ends meet, able to appreciate in their inmost
hearts the lines that declare “ the trivial round, the common
task ” furnish all the trials the most fervid need require—
give more space than the “ cloistered cell ” for the sacrifice
which is Christian, and the self-denial which is divine.
They sing the verse often, for their pastor sits at the feet of
Keble, and next to the inspired poetry of the Psalms, one
can imagine him placing the consecrated melodies of the
“ Christian Year.” A congregation it is of foot soldiers in
the battle of life. Its minister can be no spectator on the
hill side. He is a standard-bearer in the midst of the fray,
and vice, apathy, heartlessness, and misery are his foes,
instead of theologic heresy. Worldly honour is not to be
obtained in the strife, but victory is. The church building
itself is large and cold and cadaverous, devoid of ornamen-
tation, and a trial in its barrenness to a minister who is
possessed of aesthetic tastes and a weakness for symbolism,
nor does there seem any prospect of a mitigation of its
severity. Bazaars are going on, but the energies of the
maidens who toil and smile there are still devoted to






obtaining means for bare accommodation. This growth of
building, and increase of numbers in a neighbourhood which
seems at first glance the rightful property of dissent, has
taken place under the pastorship of one man—the Rev.
Robert Potter, the subject of our sketch.
In dealing with his preaching only, a critic takes but a
minor part of Mr. Potter. It is judging a man by a limb, a
temple by a stone. To do justice would be to exceed our
functions, and paint not merely the Sunday preacher, but the
Parish Priest. In the pulpit Mr. Potter is greatly hampered.
In the first place, the circumstances of his charge prevent
any attractive intellectual flights. To delight the head can-
not be his mission ;he must aim steadily at the heart. The
second is a personal difficulty. He has to struggle against a
peculiar voice, the voice of one crying in the wilderness—
pitched in a high key, to which one has to become accus-
tomed, as to the eating of olives. Turning to his subject
matter, a critic cannot fail to note that, like every other
Anglican clergyman, and Presbyterian clergyman likewise,
he falls into an error the Wesleyans and the Roman Catho-
lics are sedulous to avoid. He preaches at his congregation
rather than front them. In fact, Mr. Potter does not preach
at all, but reads; the inevitable manuscript creates once
more an obstacle between the preacher’s and the hearer’s
heart, and wherever it is there effective oratory is not. For
this shortcoming his communion is answerable. His church
has abandoned the grand art of Paul, of Chrysostom, of
Whitfield, and of Hall. It has discarded the graces of
delivery and manner; has lost the art of extempore speak-
ing ; has stripped the rose of its veil of moss, taken from the
arrow its barb, robbed oratory of half its power, and all its
edge. Eloquence has been replaced in its pulpits by rheto-
ric ; and zeal, where it exists, is arbitrarily toned down to
classical correctness.


Preachers of Mr, Potter’s class cannot absolutely and
imperatively command attention, as do the Csesars of speech,
the men whose matured conception and definite ideas are
fused in the passionate inspiration of the moment. But —
and here Mr. Potter is a representative man—they can well
repay the hearer who gives his mind. There is substance
in his sermons; and substance which can take and which
receives a polish. Few men put so much matter in their
discourses, so much brain-work, and fewer still point so much
their language and simplify so much their illustrations, so as
to be “ understanded of the people.” It was this polish of
composition, the Church-goer remembers, which surprised
most his London reviewers; for Mr. Potter has published,
and ought to publish still more. No one has more to gain
by coming before the public in type —cold, cruel, but
truthful type, where the charms of delivery are not, where,
as in marble statuary, colour and gesture vanish, but bone
and muscle, the strength and elegance of substance, tell.
His English critics expected, apparently, a loose, rapid flow
of fervid imagery from an Australian minister, and they
found the terseness, the compressed energy, and the sim-
plicity of long studied compositions. The very simplicity
of the discourses spoke to these judges of the minister’s
conscientious toil, for the initiated know that clearness has
but one price, and that is labour. All literature repeats the
tale. Of Macaulay’s essays there is none like that on Byron
for flowing ease, for playful touches, for perpetual lucidity.
It is the one which most taxed its writer; where he put
forth all his powers. In nature the result is the same. The
most rapid motion, and the revolving wheel seems to stir
not ; the perfection of flight, and the albatross floats where
the pigeon whirrs; the greatest heat, it is invisible. At
this white heat are many of Mr. Potter’s sermons beaten
out.


With the pastor of St. Mary’s may be mentioned the
name of the preacher of the Scots’ Church. The two men
are diverse and yet alike, different in opinion, one in fervour.
Mr, Potter clings to those High Church dogmas which have
for ever become incredible to the thought that leads the
world and shapes its destinies. Mr. Menzies is a leader in
that theology of the future, the Broad Church of the day, to
which mankind turns a willing ear. There is not the differ-
ence between the two schools in practice there is in theory.
Both belong to the mystics; that is, both abjure a frigid
theology framed on the assumption that Christianity is a code
of civil laws. Robertson of Brighton, from whom the Broad
Church preachers borrow their passionate softness, their
hatred of distinctions, their love of the mist which spiritual-
ises the landscape, was ordained and licensed by Bishop
Wilberforce, the High Church leader, and was at least once
invited to join the High Church ranks. Mr. Potter and Mr.
Menzies belong each to the nobler sections of their parties.
One bond unites them—it is their enthusiasm in a common
cause. They are preachers of the earnest, the natural, the
apostolic type; men wrapped up in their message ; seeking
only to do justice to that; striving only how to place that
before the hearer in the most striking form. They are
transparent mediums, so far that is, as mediums can be
transparent. If we linger on their tones, their looks, their
phrases, it is by an effort of our own will. Herbert describes
them in his “ Elixir ”
“ A man that looks on glass,
On it may stay his eye,
Or if he pleaseth through it pass,
And there the Heaven espy.”
Mr, Menzies is without comparison, and for many reasons,
the greater orator. He adds to the same love of truth, the
same abandonment to a task, a keen delight for an


impassioned argumentation. He scents the controversy
afar off. From the “ lofty watch-tower of his pulpit ”he
discerns the approach and spread of infidelity, and his note
is the clamorous sound of the alarm bell. His is the eager
spirit of a Paul,
“ The fiery soul, which working out its way,
Fretteth the pigmy body to decay,
And o’er informs its tenement of clay.”
Mr, Potter’s is the patience of a John. The one is the torrent
bearing everything before it, the other the stream fertilising
a thousand plains. The one sends our thoughts inward, the
other raises the eyes to the skies. The one is arrayed for
battle against the giant, with the stones in his sling; the
mission of the other is to feed the flock. Both are “ whole
burnt offerings.” With both the heart muses, the fire burns,
and the tongue speaks. They stand before the people as the
seraph Abdiel addressed the host, “ wrapped in a flame of holy
zeal severe.” They are free from egotism; a thrice-blessed
deliverance. Never, you feel sure, will the pulpit be turned
by them into an advertising van, nor the sermon transformed
into a placard of personal qualifications. Both would shrink
with loathing from aught that would call attention from the
truth to its propounder; from deliberate word-painting;
from the flaunting of knowledge; from dimming the light;
from obscuring the glory of the divine, from kindling with
fires from hell the sacrifice they dedicate to heaven. They
make, though in different degree, what Johnson declared
the hardest sacrifice of all, namely, a voluntary descent
from the dignity of the scholar. Such men reap scant
honour in their own day. Not theirs the “ vain wonder of
applauding fools.” Their hope and purpose can be but to
live in the minds their exhortations have trained ; the hearts
their appeals have softened.


Pulpit oratory of this class fails to dazzle the multitude
it deceives the cultivated too often by its very conditions.
They do not recognise under the simplicity of the language
the value and importance of the thought; the weightiness
of the ideas. And yet if preaching is to be judged by its
results —and surely it has no other standard —this preaching
is the highest of all. It tickles not the ear, but it sinks
into men’s hearts. You may hear florid declamation, and
loose disquisition, and strings of paradoxes comparatively
often. The preacher who stands nearly alone in his moral
grandeur is he who earnestly strives to make his audience
feel what he feels, who devotes himself to that alone. The
gift that is rare is that of throwing the sympathies of an
ardent nature into the spoken words, and making them
instinct with life. Here lies the secret of the success Mr.
Potter has achieved in his parish. Men when they leave
his church do not crowd the doors to express admiration of
the preacher’s imagery, to praise his tones, or extol his
gestures. No, there is a higher tribute than that. When
they commune together they say like those of old, “ did
not our hearts burn within us as he opened to us the
Scriptures?”


CHALMERS’ CHURCH.
The Pilgrim Fathers who erected Chalmers’ Church were
very far from being devotees of display. Rigid simplicity,
the plainest of plain bluestone, satisfied these contented
beings. They erected a building which is like Melrose
Abbey, in that it should be viewed by moonlight, or better
still, when there is no moon at all. In truth, the “ decent
spire ” —poetry for an architectural fright, would be in place
fronting a village green, but is hardly in keeping with the
beautiful metropolitan reserves surrounding the edifice.
There is much to be said against spending money in beauti-
fying the temple while men and women, “ the buildings not
made with hands,” go destitute of spiritual and material food;
but for all that, poverty in a building when the congregation
is not poverty-stricken, jars. People who object to the one
expenditure don’t incur the other, just as the disciple who,
the evangelist records, with a fine sarcasm, “ kept the money
bags” was the one to protest against the waste of ointment
on the feet of the Saviour. Chalmers’ Church was erected,
of course, before prosperity had set in upon the colony ;
before the congregation could maintain two eminent minis-
ters ; and to caution, therefore, and not to meanness, must be
ascribed the disproportion between the edifice and its site.
These remarks will apply when the day for rebuilding comes.
May it be near at hand, for the splendid site is worthy of a
splendid pile.
Apart from the beauties of the landscape there is a
pleasant spectacle visible from the entrance steps of
Chalmers’ Church,
“ When the sweet chimes proclaim the hallowed day,”






the spectacle Coleridge declared to be the fairest on earth ;
that of the hastening to the kirk of “ old men and young,
and loving friends.” These family groups are visible from
here, flocking in from every suburb, dotting the park lands
and gardens, now lost amid the shrubberies, and now stand-
ing forth, wending their way through winding paths to the
many Melbourne houses of praise and prayer ; the air laden
meanwhile with the pleasant noise of bells. The stranger
would be deceived, however, if he imagined that the silver
melody which fills the ear comes from Chalmers’ Church.
He is merely indebted to that for the curious note he starts
to hear, a solitary clang like that of a bag-pipe tocsin, audi-
ble with a painful distinctness in the midst of all other
sounds. The charge of that particular bell has been
confided to a muscular Christian who does his duty by his
employers irrespective of a suffering society. His zeal is to
be respected, the regret being that a more melodious instru-
ment cannot be found to display his powers. Once inside,
and the visitor finds that Chalmers’ Church boasts a large-
sized hall and a large congregation. The numbers hasten-
ing to the edifice, the occasional carriages rolling in,
proclaim the church at once the central Presbyterian church
of the city. Neither is there any mistaking the character of
the worshippers. It is a wealthy, an influential, a shrewd,
satisfied, and sedate congregation. Leaders in society are
here, and leaders in politics. Rising professional men, and
sure bank managers. The seed sown will produce its fruit
in high and practical places ; the lights kindled will be
shown on beacon spots in society. Wealth without ostenta-
tion, fashion without display, youth without levity are to be
witnessed. Not one over-dressed person, not one shabby.
The poorest man in the building is as decently apparelled as
the richest; the struggling mother has her bairns as well
kempt as the carriage children. But why paint the


congregation in phrases ? It may be described in a word, and
that will be a word of praise. It is “Scotch.”
The church, it has been stated, enjoys the services of two
ministers. The senior pastor, the Rev. Dr. Cairns, is now
partly resting from his labours. Who in Melbourne does,
not know his upright figure, towering and erect like an
Alpine pine, his rugged countenance furrowed like a moun-
tain top, and like it crowned with snow, the clear blue eye
and the genial smile, all waiting to give the world assurance
of a man. Nearly as familiar is he in the pulpit. One of
the Cyclops was he there ; the giant race possessed of only
one eye, while two are required for perfect mental as for
perfect bodily vision, but that one a burning orb, and
placed in the middle of the forehead. A hard hitter, but
never wincing nor whining under the return blow. Free
from the reproach of the church of Laodicea and of the
church of this day—the sin of being neither hot nor cold;
by no means free from what Jeremy Taylor calls the plain
and manifest work of the devil —the being so in love with
one’s own opinions as to call- them Heaven’s. A man who
preached best and prayed best when anger was aroused, the
divine anger of one who could say, “Do not I hate them,
O Lord, which hate Thee.” His wrath was forgotten by
the controversialist with the occasion; the guilty sinner
cowered and trembled before it. A man to be loved also
by little children. It is a spiritual lesson in itself to see
him entering the church with the step and bearing of the
antlered monarch of the forest, looking round with the
noble confidence, the gracious dignity of the minister of
the Word. A dozen texts rise spontaneous to the mind of
the glory of the hoary head, and of the loving mercy shown
to the righteous and their seed for ever. It will be a pleas-
ing pain some other day to describe the “old man eloquent”
still occupying the pulpit of his manhood. The sight of


the sun setting to renew its rays is always sublime and
affecting, and a sunset like this is more noble than Tasso
has sung or Claude painted.
This time we have to deal with Dr. Cairns’s coadjutor
and successor, the Rev. Andrew Cameron. Picturesque as
the senior minister’s appearance is in the pulpit, his fellow-
labourer’s is something more. The ladies call it romantic,
and the men singular. If he would but introduce a little
more fire into his features, the preacher might sit as a model
for one of the enthusiast divines who stood by the covenant;
defied the rack and the sword; and with the dragoons of
Dalziel of Claverhouse in sight, broke the bread of life or
raised the psalm of victory on the hill side. Such visions as
these are recalled to mind by the outward man of Mr.
Cameron. The inward man, however, has absolutely nothing
of the fanatic. There is tenfold as much of the veritable
“ soldier” of the church about his fellow-labourer. Instead
of a natural impulse to vehement controversy or to doctrinal
disputes, Mr. Cameron when in the pulpit is more to “gentle
melancholy tuned.” Some preachers and some writers have
all their geniality in their sermons or their writings. They
exhaust their stock of good nature there. With Mr. Cameron
it is the very opposite. He is known as the most genial of
visiting clergymen ; his private qualities endear him to his
flock; and yet a curious plaintiveness pervades the whole of
his discourse. He seldom shakes himself altogether free
from its influence, and he readily falls into the ever-present
temptation of adopting a lachrymose style in his prayers.
It is recorded of one preacher that he could make his con-
gregation either laugh or weep by the manner in which he
pronounced the word Mesopotamia, and Mr. Cameron has
nearly arrived at the tear-producing stage. One is reminded,
by the “ dying fall” in his tone, of Robert Hall, who was
taught to read off the gravestones in a cemetery.


As a preacher, Mr. Cameron belongs to a class which,
whether for good or evil, has been smitten by the inexorable
law of decay. They studied life in the Bible. Their
successors are bringing the Bible into life. Their mission
was hardly what John Angell James was accustomed to
describe as his —“the direct conversion of souls,” but
rather to instruct and edify the souls who were already
converted. Their information was encyclopsediac. Egypt
and Galilee, prophet, bard, and apostle, time, circum-
stance, and place, stood revealed in their discourses —often
picturesque when genius preached, and often tedious when
less ability occupied the pulpit. They were the Walter
Scotts of the church; the men who re-clothed the past ;
while the strength and the weakness of the new men is their
eagerness to penetrate the mysterious future. In form and
substance Mr. Cameron belongs to the former section ;
possessed of their merits, and not avoiding their errors.
His best sermons, the critic would say, are his historical,
where he describes the familiar life of Bible characters;
paints the manners of the patriarchs, or of the Nazarenes,
or tells the terrors of the plague—“the darkness that
could be felt,” “ the fire that ran along the ground; ”
linking the centuries that are gone with to-day by an
“ application ” at the close, always solemn, and often
effective. Of necessity, his subject-matter descends at
times to the trivialities of Bible lore. The Church-goer has
heard him preach for well-nigh an hour on a point concern-
ing which different commentators had expressed different
opinions. As all of them were orthodox men, the question
may, with every appearance of safety, be set down as one of
trivial importance. It was actually John the Baptist’s
motive in sending a message to the Saviour. Mr. Cameron
has, with wonderful assiduity and apparently deep study
arrived at another view, equally orthodox and alike creditable


to his head and his heart. His argument was admirable—
stated with singular clearness and perfect method. There
were three lawyers in front of the Church-goer who were
absorbed in it, and checking it off mentally. If the preacher
failed to draw an angel from heaven, like the “ sweet
enthusiast” Cecilia, like Timotheus he raised these mortals
to the skies. Only one thing would have been needful to
complete their satisfaction—that was to take counsel’s
opinion on the point. By most other preachers the infor-
mation would have been afforded at the Sunday School or
the Bible Class, or probably not at all. It irresistibly
reminded the stranger of the speculations of the schoolmen
—the problem, for instance, of Thomas Aquinas, how many
angels could stand on the point of a needle.
Mr. Cameron can of course preach very different sermons
to this; can utter earnest calls to repentance, or solemnly
unveil the world to come ; but his set is towards the eluci-
dation and the interpretation of the letter of the Scriptures.
Preachers of this class linger on the actual deeds the men of
the Bible performed, rather than the deeds the Spirit would
in this day urge such men to attempt ; on the swine into
which the devils entered, rather than the passions they now
subvert; on the money-changers who were driven out of the
temple, rather than the vices awaiting ejection. They fail to
see with the clearness of the more modem men what Cole-
ridge describes, in allusion to the life of Luther, as the essen-
tial difference between a practical mind and an unpractical
mind, —namely, that the latter considers what Luther did, or
said, or sanctioned ; the former what he would do now.
The want —to a stranger —in most of the discourses of the
Chalmers’ Church preacher, indeed, in all sermons of his
school, is a more intimate relation with the stern realities,
the cruel facts of human life, of the actual battles men are
fighting, their living sorrows, their trembling hopes, and


secret fears. Such preaching does not want to be less divine,
but more human. The pulpit should speak, not only
men’s hearts and consciences, but to their “ business and
bosoms” too.
Mr. Cameron possesses a fluent pen. His composition
is never at fault. He has the grace also of an easy delivery.
In his ethical discourses too much praise cannot be awarded
to his plain and perspicuous elucidation of each article to be
believed, each precept to be taught. A critic intent on
noting literary defects and merits, would observe that his
language lacks nerve and energy, that there are no words to
“divide and rend,” no sentences dipped in zeal, like the
arrows of the Indians are in poison. But the preacher is
right. His good taste prevents him from dragging metaphors
and illustrations into discourse, and the inward passion
whose natural language is imagery, is not his. And thus his
success lies in his just measure of his own powers. There
is nothing really so chilling to a congregation, so pernicious
to a preacher, as an affected enthusiasm. Its best emblem is
the blast of winter, which freezes while it roars. Mr.
Cameron preaches honestly from his own heart; his
congregation have the clear, strong intellect, if not the play
of fancy; the weight of the wave, if not the flash of the
foam. He often interests, and never offends. He is a
thoroughly trained Scotch minister.
-a tSiS.XiSiS.tSa






COLLINS-STREET BAPTIST CHAPEL.
Of the congregations which stream out of church and
chapel into Collins-street, one of the largest is that of the
elegant Baptist chapel where the Rev. James Martin
ministers. And no louder “joyful noise ”isto be heard on
this Eastern Hill of Zion than greets the loiterer while
passing the edifice. Mr. Martin has certainly gathered the
best, the heartiest of singing congregations in town about
him. To hear them raise the “ Rock of Ages ” or the
“ Crowned Lord of all,” the organ doing its best, the choir
rivalling the instrument, the congregation resolutely declining
to be outdone, their zeal tainted, moreover, by no nasal
twang, is a treat to those who exult in musical fervour. It is
as if the hills clapped their hands together, or as the roll of
the nearer waters. The sound speaks volumes. When the
lungs are vigorous and healthy, there is a reasonable inference
that the heart is in its right place also. Good Minister
Poundtext despaired at once of the Covenanters when he
heard their miserable quaver at Bothwell Bridge, and con-
trasted it with the glowing psalmody which had preceded
the victory at Drumclog. Here he would have no cause for
fear, unless it was for the roof of the building. One bad
habit the congregation has not avoided, and one which
attaches to most assemblages accustomed to listen to extem-
pore prayer. The supplications of the minister find not a
worshipper in the attitude of devotion. The text that at the
name of names “ every knee shall bow,” has no realisation
here, and indeed in few other places. ’Tis a stiff-kneed, if
not a stiff-necked generation. In this chapel a good propor-
tion of the heads are thrown back when devotion is offered,
while the eyes are neither directed inwards nor raised to the


heavens. They are fixed eagerly, and even critically, on
the minister. A subject for discussion is involved in the
question, is this prayer ?
Mr. Martin’s own appearance is prepossessing. His
sharply-cut features, deep-set eyes, and development of the
particular feature which phrenologists associate with genius,
arrest attention. His officiating dress is the apparel of
ordinary life, its neatness and decent hue speaking the
minister of the Word; the absence of robes or bands or
copes of earthly insignia, declaring that he receives his
investiture direct from the Master whose cause he preaches
—that he would deem the interposition of human hands,
or mortal agency, a sullying of the trust he has received
from heaven.
There is a curious modesty about Mr. Martin’s deport-
ment, amounting almost to a shyness. Despite his pulpit
practice, he often seems not thoroughly at home before his
audience. Until he has warmed with his sermon, a pecu-
liarity like that of the amateur clings to him. In the early
part of the service he is disappointing; you can discover no
reason for his great reputation; there is a stiffness and
constraint in his manner, unusual even in the pulpit, and
both when he prays and when he reads he has far too much
of the conventional measured drawl of certain words
associated with inanimate piety; with the idea, that to be
spiritual you must be stupid; that the God of nature is
served by being unnatural; that what is wanted in the
pulpit is a yard-stick. In the same manner, he has a weak-
ness for adopting the artificial divisions of the sermons into
parts, and gives us his firstly, secondly, and thirdly;
approaches his subject sideways, as well as directly; throws
cross lights upon it; retains the formula of the past genera-
tion. In the morning discourse the defect is more particu-
larly observable, because then the preacher confines himself


to a strict and studied arrangement of thought. In the
evening he addresses a more mixed audience; his connexion
becomes more loose; he gives more room to declamation,
illustration, and imagery; addresses at once the under-
standing and the heart; endeavours, not only to convince
the hearer, but to make him feel. And these are the moments
when Mr. Martin does himself justice. They change the
man. Instead of a formalist, we have a fervid speaker
before us. It is not given him to move the passions, but he
can put obscure truths in a novel light; he cannot agitate,
but he can enchain.
It is really pleasurable to see Mr. Martin warm, like he
always does as he advances with his address. He casts off
the frigidity which at first has chilled his hearers. His action
becomes free, and even forcible. His voice rings at these
times. His words are winged, his sentences terse and
homely, keen as lances, and with a barb. The love breaks
out for antitheses and epigram, common to men who feel
warmly, and see quick and see true. You cannot mistake your
man. “Be honest if you would be eloquent,” said Faust
before his fall, and you feel the honesty, the intentness, the
concentrated energy of the preacher. There is a peculiar
freshness, and charm, and energy in perfect sincerity, and it
is his. There is life in the frank expression of a man’s own
mind; Mr. Martin has this vitality. It breaks through the
bondage of drawl, and raises him from the slavery of drivel.
It goes further to win the confidence of some men than the
most vehement outpouring of imagination and passion ; for
the heat which softens iron hardens clay. The question
wells up impulsively—why is not Mr. Martin always natural?
The conventionalisms he sometimes affects are antique, are
dead, and it is the law of nature that the dead should be
buried. Why cumber these tones, these affectations the
ground, now that they have long ceased to be sweet and


wholesome? When he has finally burst the chains, and
rent the garments of a pedantic and frigid school—got quit
of its mannerism Mr. Martin will pray like a man, and
preach like a man, and something more. Should ever
the event happen, the preacher will be surprised at his own
increase of pulpit power. At present he is like the new
wine poured into old bottles. He has not much to learn,
he has only to be true to himself; but he has something
to forget.
A word in this particular article on the subj ect of delivery
will be a word to the wise. Most surprising indeed is it
that unnaturalness in tone and diction, driven away else-
where, should still linger in the pulpit. They do mischief
there. It is the “ little rift within the lute” that soon does
silence all. This mechanical tameness of delivery, this
drawl, this conventional language—the “shop-talk” of piety
—first annoy men and then disgust. Church-goers want the
same living vigour in the pulpit as elsewhere, and, more than
that, the same charms of address. It is not sufficient that
ministers should be able to read the Word in the Greek ; they
must also be able to preach it in the vulgar tongue, so that
their congregations shall in truth hear them gladly. Unfor-
tunately for themselves and their cause, the very ministers
who labour most to obtain knowledge are too often those
who on the mode of imparting it with clearness and force
bestow no pains at all. It is as if years should be spent
in hewing the marble for the building, and no attempt
made to arrange the blocks for beauty and strength. They
abandon the charm of delivery to the empty mimic, or to
the mere improvisatore, and yet it was the weapon of a
Chrysostom and an Augustine among the Fathers; a
Bossuet and a Lacordaire in the French Church; a Hall
and a Whitfield in our own. There is a lesson to be
derived from the service in the Sanctuary. The vessels


used therein were of gold, yea, burnished gold; weight
without lustre is lead.
Of the preacher’s subject-matter it is mere justice to speak
in the highest terms. Few men—nay none—put more
thought, more earnestness into their sermons. They are
free altogether from the “ waterishness ” which is the radical
defect qf the sermons of the day. Behind all his verbiage
there is the strong and the cultured intellect —one of those
intellects which have taken a polish in proportion to their
solidity. Mr. Martin’s published works declare him a
scholar familiar with the German theological literature of the
day. He is enabled thereby, when occasion requires, to
meet the rationalist on his own ground; to confute him as
David slew Goliath —with his own sword. He seldom strays,
however, into controversial paths. His labours are directed
to making his hearers devout men rather than expert con-
troversialists. His strong hold in the affection of his people
is that no one “preaches Christ” more, no one sets before
a congregation more clearly and more persuasively, the
duties, the morals, the motive of the Gospels. He goes back
to the fountain head, and is more a disciple of Jesus of
Nazareth, than Saul of Tarsus, “ Paul,” he declared in a
recent sermon, “was a Christian before he knew the
doctrines of the faith.” “ The mistake of Roman Catholics,”
he said in the .same discourse, “is placing the crucifix in
lieu of the cross; the error of the Protestant is substituting
a creed for Christ.” On this basis does the preacher build.
The religion he preaches is that of “living soberly,
righteously, and godly in the world.” “To do the Father’s
will,” that is the preacher’s saving doctrine ; that is the
message, he holds, was sent from heaven, and sealed on
Calvary with blood. One of those men is he who object
“to dwell alone.” With a simple fervour which goes home,
he invites “ members of other churches ” to remain and


join at the communion table. That branch of the Church
Catholic whose ideal is Christian unity, which remembers
how vital are the points on which Christians agree, how
fleeting and trivial the subjects on which they differ, claims
him as a member.
Few voices are raised more loudly than this critical
scholar’s against the bigotry which condemns its brethren
from the false exegesis of misappreciated texts. No one
would shrink more from guarding a creed with terrors more
consuming than the fires that burned on awful Sinai. Purity
in doctrine, but charity in the interpretation of doctrine,
the motto of Lacordaire, might be taken for his. He is a
preacher, also, who grows upon you. Respect for the man,
and admiration of his abilities, increase as you become
more familiar with his services. Above all, he conveys the
impression of a minister who will last. Two massive
sermons a week are a severe tax to any one, no matter how
marvellous may be his affluence of thought, Paley saying
emphatically on this point, “If your situation requires a
sermon every Sunday, make one and steal fivej” but Mr.
Martin steals nothing, and yet he appears equal to the strain
imposed upon him. His seems no fitful flickering, feverish
enthusiasm, but the tenacity and intentness of a man
content to labour calmly on, with steady eye fixed upon
the End.
Such preaching as Mr. Martin’s ought to be fruitful in
results. There must be latent heat, of course, before a fire
can be kindled. Gunpowder itself will produce no
explosion if flung upon ice. But the fault is with the
auditor ; let him distrust his own heart, if he leaves the
Collins-street Baptist Chapel without carrying away some
healing sting, some noble humiliation, some divine impulse
treading down despair. Nor does the labourer appear to be
toiling in vain. It has been said that Mr. Martin has one


of the largest congregations on the Eastern hill. To this
statement must be added that he has an unusually large pro-
portion of communicants. Strange, indeed, will it be, and
a sad day for religion, when a preacher of a strong intellect
and a sanctified spirit ceases to meet with this substantial,
this real, this abiding success. For, in the words of
Timothy, this man has received “ not the spirit of fear, but
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.”


ST. PATRICK’S CATHEDRAL.
Not in a church to-day, but a cathedral—the pile which
looms above Melbourne, the first object starting into sight
as we approach the city from any quarter; a structure mas-
sive, isolated, and grand, like the communion it represents.
Such is St. Patrick’s Cathedral. It is in its infancy just now,
but the infancy is that of a giant. Already it is the wonder
of the Eastern Hill, whose summit it crowns, and some time
it must be its architectural pride. We may anticipate the
day when the stranger, drawing rein on the Nunawading
heights, or the Keilor hill; or, as off Gellibrand’s Point the
liner’s royals and to’gallants are reefed aloft, and the bellying
■canvas let fly below, will obtain his first glimpse of the
double spires, and of the Lantern tower, near 350 feet in
height, and will feel something of the glow of Chaucer’s
pilgrims when they caught sight of the “Angel Tower,”
rising far away at the end of Canterbury’s forest vista.
At present the interior of St. Patrick’s, like the exterior,
is unfinished. The nave and the two aisles are near com-
pletion, but the transepts and central tower are wanting.
We have a noble spectacle before us in the building as it
is; not the sober splendour, the “ dim, religious light,” the
sombre grandeur of the earlier English cathedrals, but the
■airiness, the lightness, and the grace which are the charms
of the perpendicular Gothic. There is one splendid tinted
window, one of Hardman’s best, but only one. Imagination
must depict the scene as it will be when there is the glow of
colour, the aid of the carved bosses and brackets, when
every wall space has its painted scene from Scripture and
legend, when storied panes and jewelled pyx and crucifix,
and saintly effigies, and glittering shrine, shall unite in their






effort to enthrall the senses. These have to be, but one
part of a cathedral there is, and the most impressive—the
living congregation. The immense area, holding its
thousands, is crowded at the mid-day mass; even the
passages—when Father Kelly preaches at all events —will
be thronged with kneeling worshippers. And what pigmies
do men and women look by the sides of the massive pillars,
and with the roof a hundred feet above them !
“ They dreamed not of a perishable home,
Who thus could build.”
In every way does the cathedral shed a glory on its
founders —and probably they will not live to claim more
than that title. They will begin, but others must finish. It
shows how they can rise above the prevalent meanness and
littleness of the present day, the selfishness which cares not
about the future, which forgets that our buildings are the
tombstones of the generation, and that by them our children
will stand and judge us. England received cathedrals from her
struggling forefathers; Melbourne is likely, but for the builders
of St. Patrick’s, to send down nothing in ecclesiastical archi-
tecture but specimens of hard bargain-driving, and cheap
contracting —the greatest number housed at the least possible
cost; the most souls accommodated at the least expense.
We build for our present wants, and forget the past and
ignore the future, like the degenerate savages Goldsmith
pictured, occupying turf huts, in sight of palaces, and like
them wonder that “man should need the larger pile.” The
Roman Catholics, true to nobler instincts, are not content to
chant, “ Day by day we magnify Thee, and we worship Thy
name ever, world without end,” in a barn. The painfulness
of the incongruity strikes them. And they, free from schism
and strife, can unite for a common purpose in the cause of
the Cross as other men only appear able to do in the cause


of the Dollar—a thing declared by some to be the devil, it
being as easy for the author of evil to take the form of a
coin as to assume the disguise of a reptile. Were this land
blighted at its present stage, as Greece has been, or Spain,
there would remain many magnificent temples erected in the
service of Mammon. Thanks to the Roman Catholics, and
them alone, there would be one temple dedicated to God.
Father Kelly occupied the pulpit of St. Patrick’s on the
Church-goer's visit; and the fact gave the visit its special
interest. Rome selects her tool, and uses the right instru-
ment for the right purpose; the edged tool to cut, and the
heavy to drive. This priest toils in the parish, that dazzles
in the pulpit. Father Kelly is the orator chosen in Mel-
bourne when the Church has to show that her right hand
still possesses its cunning; that her preaching has lost
neither its passion, its picturesqueness, nor its power. He
is the controversialist called upon to confute error in the
lecture-hall, and win ringing applause from fiery partisans ;
or the comforter, when solemn occasion offers, whose
whispered words on consecrated ground will shake the soul
to tears. Small in figure, not robust in physique, Father
Kelly yet bears the burden bravely. No weary Titan is he,
staggering under the “ too vast orb of his fate.” The
“ strong man eager to run his race,” does not describe him.
We must imagine the enthusiast with the idea of victory
itself lost in the cause ; a man all zeal and fire ; a born
advocate; an orator of the fluent fervid type. Like most
effective speakers, he has natural disadvantages to overcome.
Flis voice is mean, deficient in volume, inclined indeed, to
be harsh and stringy; his person lacks massiveness and
dignity, but the man himself overbears every obstacle, like
the mountain torrent sweeps all before its flood by its
avalanche impetuosity. It is a rush from source to sea with
the stream, and from text to blessing with the preacher. Ihe


•whole man speaks. Eyes, and face, and hands, and body are
alike agitated; and the style, like the man, knows no rest,
no repose. “He hath a devil,” was said of John the
Baptist, and the same might be the saying of Father Kelly.
The contortions of the sybil—to borrow an illustration from
Burke—are his, but his also the sybil’s inspiration. His the
energy, the threatenings “ trembling on the verge of all we
hate ; ” the personal, passionate appeals, the “ still small
voice,” the thunder, the rapid changes of a man charged with
the responsibility of saving souls, and of saving them by
love or by fear, no matter which, so that the brand be
snatched from the burning. His sermon was preached from
the gospel of the day—an excellent plan when contrasted
with the system of expounding isolated texts, and one much
in vogue in the Catholic churches, the priests remembering
apparently with the sagacious Donne, that texts in Scripture
.are “ like hairs in horses’ tails, growing on one root of
beauty and strength, but if pulled out one by one serving as
-springs and snares.” The subject of the gospel lesson and of
the sermon was the parable of the lepers, and the bulk of
the oration was a contrast between the ardour shown by
men to purify or adorn the body, the “ sensual slave of sin,”
.and their indifference to the more possible, more noble,
more self-important task—
“To clothe the soul with light,
And make the glorious spirit bright
With heavenly grace.”
The most telling portion of the discourse was its close ; a
•declamatory peroration evidently carefully studied, too anti-
thetical in its structure, too felicitous and condensed in
language, for an extempore effort. Much of the preacher’s
subject matter appeared to be brilliant improvisation, but
the conclusion was art itself; oratory in excels is; the union


of closet labour and pulpit impulse. It gave the blade its
edge. Robert Hall’s perorations drew his listeners to their
feet. One man after another would rise until half the church
would be standing. Father Kelly’s was delivered with the
congregation on their knees. For several minutes he en-
chained their attention. The hush of awe, the stillness of
expectancy, a trembling silence, at once powerful and pain-
ful, prevailed through the vast building, with its assembled
thousands, while the preacher passionately exhorted the
congregation to cleanse their daily lives, pictured them on
their knees before another seat —the judgment throne —and
prayed that on that dread day they might not, like the lepers,
have “to stand afar off.” The passage was an admirable
specimen of robust but polished declamation. It was the
glitter of steel, the flash of the sabre at the end of a head-
long charge.
Critics are nothing if not critical. The Church-goer is-
bound to declare that the discourse as a whole was marred
by its extremely rapid delivery. Riding on the blast, as
Father Kelly requires us, has its disadvantages, one of which
is that we are whirled past ideas before we have grasped
them. The images are blurred by their thick coming. An
orator who moves thus rapidly over his ground is in constant
danger of his auditors missing his points or his argument,
4wough inability to follow him, or in moments of inattention.
The remedy is either copiousness or repetition, and Father
Kelly adopts the former. There is no repetition in his
language, nor any tautology in his sentence, but he dwells
upon his leading ideas, and reiterates them as a whole or in
parts under manifold forms. Qualities which would be
charms in a composition, such as point, epigram, and
compression, have to be sacrificed by a preacher like
Father Kelly for clearness and impressiveness in the
pulpit. Or if they exist, they are no more to be


recognised in the onward press than the beauties of
faces in railway carriages can be noticed in the rush of the
train. Such a preacher must paint broadly. Wire-drawn
arguments, unadorned sense, dry reasoning, would be
wasted. Father Kelly knows this—he would not know human
nature if he did not —and he acts upon his knowledge.
Hence his success. All the logic of the schools was put
aside by him, as a lover ignores his syllogisms when he
addresses his mistress. His subject matter was purely
emotional. He spoke to his people as a man would to a
suicide with the bowl at his lips ; not to reason with him on
the sin, but to dash the poison to the ground ; to stay and to
save. The effectiveness of the address was no matter of
doubt. It might not convince the understanding; possibly,
it might offend the taste; but glistening eyes, and drawn
breath, and stifled sobs, showed that the arrows had reached
their mark ■ that the winged words had stricken the heart;
that, unlike Sisyphus, the preacher had accomplished his
task —had pushed the stone to the top of the hill.
With his rush and his power, Father Kelly is a lineal
descendant in the spirit, of the friars whom Rome poured
forth to win back with their impassioned harangues the souls
which had listened to heresy. Or he might trace a more
ancient descent from the friars minores, and after all, though
we have Whitfield and Wesley to boast of, history has
recorded no more successful preaching than theirs. What
we lack in him to make the complete preacher, the perfect
orator —
“ Who would not joy if such a man could be? ”
is modulation, the charm of variety. Passages of calm and
philosophical grandeur might be wished for. There is no
reason why he should have the same eagerness, the same
impetus, at the commencement as at the end of his discourse.


Cyclones have a calm in their centre ; this preacher has
none anywhere. He is all motion. He is a living contra-
diction to that dictum of Goethe’s that everything can be
accurately described ; that there is nothing that cannot be
painted. The couchant lion may be limned ; but how fix
the quivering visage, the hurried motions, the perpetual,
restlessness of the panther? The hills may be sketched,
those that in silent adoration lift their peaceful peaks to
heaven; but how paint those that “ clap their hands ” in
thunder; how photograph the fire and the darkness, the
gloom and the glare of the volcano ? And thus, after all
has been said of Father Kelly, something is left unsaid. He
is a man, as Coleridge says —for when we have to describe
the indescribable it is to the mystic of Grasmere that we
refer—“ gifted with strange powers of speech.”






THE REV. J. DARE.
Macaulay has painted a clerical coxcomb, who takes his
seat
“ With mincing step and languid smile,
And scatters from his kerchief sweet
Sabean odours round the aisle,
And spreads his little jewelled hand,
And smiles round all the parish beauties,
And pats his curls and smooths his band,
Fit prelude to his saintly duties.”
Imagine the very reverse of that gentleman, and you have
the Rev. Joseph Dare; a man with energy in him, who treads
the rostrum as though it were his “ best found and latest as
well as earliest choice,” and charms and warms and enwraps
a congregation by a manly presence, a frank and genial
manner, and a melodious voice. He has a noble instrument
in his voice undoubtedly; an instrument deep, free, and
mellow in lone, pealing like the lengthened roar of the
breaker in its higher swell, pleasant as the murmur of bees
or the rustle of the corn in the lower; as superior to silvery
notes for massive effect as the organ is to the clarion. His
physical appearance corresponds. It is literally brimming
over with health. He is one of those men from whom the
ancients derived their ideas of the Centaur —heroic creatures,
uniting the intellect of the god to the constitution of the
horse. He radiates health. He must do good. We are
all too much tempted to look on the dark, the sickly side of
nature. A sentimental yearning for death is too often mis-
taken for spirituality, though it is the sin of the suicide, the


crime without the courage ; in a myriad households morbid-
ness does duty for religion.
“ ’Tis life of which our nerves are scant,
Life, and more life, is what we want.”
Mr. Dare is a perpetual corrective for these vapours. No
matter what his creed, a man like him could not wear the
livery of sadness. He could not assume the sepulchral tone
of conventional piety. Gloomy and repulsive practices, the
habit of damping the social affections, of frowning on the
innocent recreations of life, of shutting up the body in a
crabbed round, if not in a cloister, vanish in his presence
like fogs before the sun. He carries “glad tidings of
great joy ” to mankind. Such a minister will always be
popular. Thousands will always arise to call that preacher
blessed.
It would be folly to represent Mr. Dare as one of “ those
faultless monsters whom the world ne’er saw.” Even in his
own class he is not in the front rank. He is a “ son of
thunder,” or he is nothing; but where are the piercing eye,
the inevitable forefinger “ trembling with the terror of the
Lord; ” when does he reach the height, where does he
sound the depths ? Simply he has his own particular line.
He would have had it at the bar as well as in the church.
His admirable self-possession, the swing of his delivery, the
ease with which he runs off a series of word pictures, all
assure that he would have made his mark at the criminal or
even the nisiprius pleadings. At equity, where the lawyer
must be the “most subtle of the beasts of the field,” he
would have been a failure, for there is nothing subtle,
nothing of the special pleader about him. In the same
manner, for much the same reasons, he would have been of
poor account in the Anglican communion, while he is a
leader among the Wesleyans, the popular preacher of the


sect, whose track, as he is changed about from district to'
district, is marked by heart-broken congregations.
Just as Australian landscapes are vitiated by one want —
that of water—so to many ears Mr. Dare’s addresses would
lack one quality—that which the younger Arnold expatiates
on as culture. In the midst of all his luxurious growth
there is nothing to suggest the deep tillage of the scholar •
the possession of that learning whose obtrusion is the one
thing most hateful, whose presence is, to some people, the
one thing most pleasing; the ingredient which should linger
in the bowl,
“And, scarce suspected, animate the whole.”
One cannot imagine this preacher discussing with his con-
gregation the last views of the German theologians. Not
that he is called upon to adopt that course. Of certain
Scotch assemblies Wesley complained that “they knew
everything and felt nothingthe congregations of his sect
were never open to the sneer in the evangelist’s day, and
they curiously continue their olden character to this. You
realise at a glance round the chapels where Mr. Dare
ministers—we found him alternating between St. Kilda and-
Prahran—that his hearers are practical men and women
immersed in daily commerce, occupied with daily labour,
with little inclination for metaphysics or dogma; few of them,
if any, perplexed with theological questions, of scriptural
authority; or biblical criticism ; few deeply read in sceptical
works ; few more than modest in their scientific inquiries.
The noble morality, the generous sentiment, the abounding
love of Christianity, are the truths lo which the preacher has
to bear testimony. His hearers have not to be argued into
accepting these gifts ; they take them as the thirsty earth
drinks up the rain. The minister is a reflex of the congre-
gation. Inclination, taste, ability, and opportunity have


been alike denied him to become familiar with the works of
the modern rebels against revealed religion—the Tubinger
schoolmen and the disciples of Comte —to enter into their
spirit, to appreciate their force —and their intellectual force
and fascination may be admitted. From Renan to John
Stuart Mill—
“ Their forms have not yet lost
All their original brightness, nor appear
Less than archangel ruined, and the excess
Of glory obscured.”
This preacher is a workman in the Christian citadel
itself, which is not assailed, which is far from the noisy
warfare of modern infidelity. He has no call to join
the men who are labouring in the outworks against
sharp shooting and sap. And thus he is relieved from
one temptation some Melbourne clergymen do not resist.
Because they are armed to meet infidelity in its higher,
modern, and intellectual aspect, they are continually
brandishing their weapons. They state objections of
which their hearers never dreamed; they kindle warning
beacons which betray the position and guide the foe ; they
will even hold parley, and visit the camp of the enemy.
They forget that law of physics, that the surest way to
produce a disease is to concentrate attention upon it. Too
much learning hath not made Mr. Dare mad.
As a preacher, Mr. Dare’s forte is to give vent to a rush
of imagery, not necessarily new, for he paints from
nature, and sun, moon, and stars have done their duty
right well before him. He is mostly at home in an animated
expression of personal feeling—lively and sincere, if not
deep. In style declamatory, not analytical; in sentiment
healthy, not vigorous nor graceful; in language a word-
painter, not a word-picker. Such would be the report of a
literary dissector. Mr. Dare is to be classed with the


orators who communicate lively feeling to their auditors—
Peter the Hermit, Whitfield, and Father Mathew are types
—rather than the teachers who drop thoughts deep into other
men’s brains —of which class Erasmus and Coleridge come
readily to mind as familiar instances. He is powerful in the
pulpit mainly because of the ease with which he wields one
potent weapon. Half his success may be ascribed to his
power of extempore speaking.
On this subject of unwritten sermons there is a word or
two to be said. The “ Church-goer” has touched upon it
before, but it is worthy of more than an incidental reference.
It is closely connected with an evil a thousand writers have
bewailed, and a thousand thousand have endeavoured to
solve —the secret of the decline of pulpit eloquence and
of pulpit power. Written sermons are not the source of the
flood of indifference to pulpit teachings—that must be
traced still farther up—but they are landmarks on the way
to the head waters. They knew a great deal in Judea. Men
have not changed much in heart or head since the days
when Damascus and Lake Tiberius acquired their fame.
They still want to be preached to as Paul pleaded, as Peter
spoke, and John wept—without a manuscript between their
hearts and the hearers. Most of our Protestant sects
imagine themselves wiser ; they have turned from the
example of Paul to imitate Voltaire; and instead of their
ministers “ withstanding to the face,” they read cold essays
like the Encyclopediasts. And yet in all times and places,
the one thing which hardens men is artificiality. They are
to be touched always by spontaneous emotion, by the quick
display of impassioned conviction and ardent feeling.
“ When I am angry,” said Luther, “ I can preach well and
pray well.” He knew the value of strong emotion. It was
not on the pinions of written sermons that he and his
fellow-workers soared. Calvin, one of the leaders of that


band, had of all other men the least of an orator about him.
Physically, he was little qualified ; and, intellectually, he
was a university professor labouring to instruct, slowly,
surely, and with care, rather than a missionary seeking to
convert suddenly. He flouted rhetoric, and despised the
oratory that comes upon men like a flood, and so passes
away. He was deliberate, say his biographers, and slow,
often pausing for a word or to ponder on a sentence ; but
his vigorous thought and profound conceptions came fresh
and uninterrupted from his heart; and, as we know, his
fame as an impressive speaker followed him until old age ;
until, broken with disease, there was not a body left to be
consigned to earth, but only a spirit to be translated to
heaven. In no other practical walk of life would the habit
be tolerated. Imagine the lover paying his vows, or the
barrister pleading his cause, or the general addressing his
forlorn hope, from sheets of foolscap pulled out of his coat-
pocket. Put the practice to the death-bed test, and its
hollowness would be seen. There it would be regarded as
an impiety ; and yet it is not only on the death-bed that
souls have to be saved.
Extempore speaking has somehow fallen into contempt
among the intellectual and educated laity of certain of the
sects. The circumstance is easily explicable. The art has
been left to men with a natural flow of words, and a plentiful
lack of ideas —for, by an inevitable law of nature, ease is
associated for ever with emptiness. But such speakers are
not orators. They stand in relation to the orator as the
ape does to the man. Their very resemblance is a cause
of loathing ; we can think but of the difference of spirit.
4 ‘ Get rid,” said Berreyer to Lacordaire* when he was com-
mencing the career which astonished Europe—“ Get rid of
your fluency.” The gifted pleader knew—no one better —
the great temptation in the way of the man possessed


of the dexterity of saying nothing with an air, of
making words do duty for ideas, of beating out gold to
cover a surface, or, worse than that, of electro-plating plati-
tudes. Such men take to “ thinking on their legs,” as the
phrase runs. They give us loosely-worded addresses,
beginning apparently without knowing what they have to
say, and ending apparently without remembering what
they have uttered.
* And where the subject-theme may gang,
Let time and chance determine ;
Perhaps it may turn out a sang,
Perhaps turn out a sermon.”
It is not preaching of that class the congregations wanted
when they asked for extempore sermons. Better, a thousand
times, the written discourse which shall inform us by its
sense, than the rambling gabble which can impress only by
its noise. More than all others does extempore preaching
require definite thought and definite ideas. It demands
increased study, not less, —study to realise the conceptions
so vividly that there shall never be any difficulty in expres-
sing them. Without such study, the manuscript, no matter
how closely followed, is to be preferred; for, if mangled
sentences, and halting language, and incoherent sentiment
are hateful anywhere, it must be in the pulpit. Extempore
preaching is a powerful weapon, and, therefore, dangerous.
It is a two-edged sword; which, in nerveless hands, may
wound to the death the wielder. Our great orators have
always been the men who have fagged with the pen like
galley slaves at the oar. Amongst a hundred others, Thor-
luck among the Germans ; Robert Hall, the English —two
giants among giants—have left on record the method of their
success. It was in proportion to the intensity of their toil.
Both men adopted the system of arranging the order of their
thoughts—of preaching from notes either mental or manu-


script. The preparation in Hall's case was extended to the
most minute subdivision of the plan, the most careful
selection qf words, the utmost polish of illustrations. No-
thing was left to accident or chance. When the hour for
delivery came, the audience listened to the points the
speakers had matured in solitude—that solitude which is the
cradle of genius—communicated with all the vivacity of a
mind seeking to clothe its sentiments in a striking dress.
There might be duller passages than any which would have
been forged in the closet. They were compensated by higher
flights than the man himself could have attained without the
quickening electric excitement of the moment. The sym-
pathy of the audience communicated itself to the preacher.
The organ played on the organist. Again, in modern days
there have been few more persuasive preachers than John
Angell James. Of his services, above all others, it may be
said that
“ Fools who went to scoff remained to pray.”
To the time of his death it was customary to dissuade from
attending his chapel those who did not wish to “ make an
outward profession of religion,” and the writer of these
papers is personally aware that on stated days for the greater
part of the week John Angell James would be shut up, and
devoted to no other labour than the preparation of his dis-
courses, which were always spoken with a singular impres-
siveness. He was privileged to hear one charity discourse
delivered on a week day, that was sold at the doors in its
printed form on leaving the building. Effective extempore
speaking means work ; it is another word for labour; its
synonym is toil. Bishop Latimer told his clergy to take
example from the devil, who left no stone unturned. In this
instance they may turn to the politicians, for if preachers
shirk preparation, the world’s speakers do not. Palmerston
was pronounced by the world a careless rattler, and his point


and epigram put down to conversational ease. His latest
biographer says that one person always knew when he was
about to speak well, and that was his groom. He practised
his passages on horseback, and the clatter of the horse failed
to drown his voice, and the longer the ride, the more furious
the gallop, the greater the oration. But there is no need to
turn to England for an example. The most polished orator
in Victoria conquers every impediment by the same effectual
means. The speeches of our Chief Secretary are cutting as
a Damascus blade, because they are forged like one ; because
they have been hammered and beaten, and ground to an
edge. The many admire his genius; the few his industry.
Without the preliminary labour, Mr. Duffy can speak as
badly, as tritely, as the slipshod parish priest; from the
study come the flowers of his style, the force of his logic—
those illuminated expressions that catch the country and are
the delight of the Press. Politicians have to incur this toil
to gain office, and preachers must do it to win souls.
Behold ! instead of a criticism on Mr. Dare, an essay on
extempore speaking ! As the printers say, stet. Is not Mr.
Dare a signal instance of the advantages of the practice—a
living testimony to the fact that manner has its value as well
as matter ? “ Oh,” exclaimed the Chaldean sage, “ that one
might plead for a man with God as a man does with his
neighbour?” Mr. Dare does.


THE REV. A. F. ORNSTIEN.
This day is not “cool, and calm, and bright” with the
calmness and brightness of the hallowed day of the Chris-
tians. It is its forefather, the Jewish sabbath, the busiest
day of the week for the Christians, but still observed as a
day of praise and prayer by the descendants of those who
heard the thunder and saw the tablets of Sinai. The world
runs on while the Jews worship. Dealers in scrip have
settled down to their avocation; traders in purple and fine
linen are welcoming the chariots which bring them customers
from the east and from the west —say Kew and Brighton ;
markets are crowded, the shrill whistle of the steamers on
the river and the locomotive on land is in the ear, the rest-
less hum of a large city in full life and vigour fills the air as
its attendants turn into the synagogue. They leave a morn-
ing of noise and bustle, and they return to a noon of action
and strife. And this step from active life to worship and
back—the plunge of the diver for his pearl—comes with a
shock.
Singular as are the ceremonies of the synagogue to a
Gentile and a stranger within its walls, nothing is more
strange than the first feeling of incongruity between the
within and the without. Religion and life meet face to face
without warning, without preparation, and they start like
creatures between whom there is a secret of guilt and wrong,
of sorrow and remorse ; like a husband and wife whom God
hath joined, and vice hath put asunder. The abyss that
separates Worship from Traffic is perceived, the whole truth
is realised —how the creak of the opening shutters of the
shop is as the cock-crow to religion, telling it to retire to
silence and gloom, to depart from life, to leave man alone






with Mammon. It would be impossible for us to repeat a
prayer or make obeisance at the Meuzzin’s call or the tinkle
of the Ave Maria. We cannot imagine the Verandah on its
knees, nor Bourke-street Bars at their devotion. We have
not added to vice the last sin of hypocrisy.
Different as a synagogue is from a church or chapel, it is
like. You do not know whether to dwell upon the diversi-
ties or the resemblances, but it would be easy for the most
obtuse of observers to perceive whence the liturgies and
services of the Catholic and Anglican churches were derived.
The Bourke Street Synagogue is an ordinary meeting-hall in
shape, with much of the masonic-hall in decoration. At the
further—the Jerusalem —end is the ark, a curtained alcove,
like in position, to the communion recess, or the altar, wherein
is lodged the written roll of the law. The alcove is rich in
colours, and is sometimes unveiled to the congregation;
sometimes closed. Synagogues, whispers your cicerone, are
modelled with the Temple of Solomon in mind, and the ark
corresponds with the inner sanctuary, with the Holy of
Holies.
In the middle of the hall, and its greatest peculiarity, is
the Almemnor, a raised platform, with massive sides; a
structure in itself; standing where the burnt offerings of the
Temple were bestowed, and used now for the sacrifice of
thanksgiving and prayer. Here the chief minister brings
the roll from the ark, from here he intones the service, and
from here the choir, consisting of boys, give forth the
psalms, returning to their seats when they have concluded.
Around it on side seats are placed the males, the women
occupying the galleries above. The apparel of the women
is the fashion of the day. Not exactly so that of the men,
for over the garments of the period each one wears a scarf
long and broad, and with coloured ends and fringes—the
•ordered “ Talith ”of the Book of Numbers. “ Speak unto


the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them
fringes on the borders of their garments throughout their
generations, and that they put upon the fringe of their
borders a riband of blue. And it shall be unto you for a
fringe that ye may look upon it, and remember all the
commandments of the Lord, and do them.” The scarf is
religiously worn, with all its fringes, and singular it is how
it will alter the appearance. You recognise the eye, the
smile, the features, the very Piccadilly whiskers of your
friend, and yet you look twice to identify him. There is
incongruity in this mixture of the costume of Collins Street
and the desert, but there is poetry also. The former, not
the latter, is added to by the wearing in the synagogue of
the hat —without exception the cylindrical beaver, the
chimney-pot of commerce. Each boy present wears his
beaver, and mightily pleased and jaunty are the young
gentlemen at the greatness thrust upon them. At the
present day the interior of the Synagogue is disappointing.
Decorated as the walls and pillars of the building are with
gilt and gold, and displaying also the deeper hues of the-
rainbow, the interior might and should be rich and
impressive. To make it so the congregation must renovate.
They must do more than that also, for they must build up
one' half their windows. The edifice has not walls so much
as a succession of openings for glass, and the “ garish light
of day ” puts to perpetual shame any work man can do in
colours.
The Jewish service is long, lasting many hours, and is all
liturgical. There are appointed prayers, appointed readings
from the Scriptural and Rabbinical writings, appointed
psalms of penitence and praise, and all are read or sung in
Hebrew. The congregation takes little part in the service y
less than Anglicans; as much, perhaps, as the Roman
Catholics. The physical labour involved in it nearly all falls


upon the chief minister; he intones everything, and must
have really an arduous task to perform. The choir consists
of lads whose unaccompanied singing is, to strange ears,
more peculiar than pleasant, consisting mainly of high nasal
and monotonous notes. According to opponents of Wagner,
the music of the future is devoid of harmony and has little
tune, and the music of the past, if one may be permitted to
judge from the strains of the synagogue, anticipated the
German professor. The prayers and psalms—the service
itself—are, of course,_ noble and grand, for they are
taken from the Old Testament; and there grandeur and
poetry have their home. To copy from that is to
be sublime; but though the words are living, the lan-
guage is dead ; the service is for the Jew, not for the
stranger, for though you may scare a bird by shouting
in Latin, you cannot impress the ignorant by reading
in Hebrew or Greek. Some picturesque points, however,
must strike the Gentile visitor; such are the carrying of the
roll of the written law from the ark to the table ; the calling
up of certain of the elders to the Almemnor to hear the
words correctly read ; the elevation of the scroll before the
people while the minister declares aloud, to quote from the
translated prayer-book, “ with the eye fixed on the exposed
writings,” “ Lo ! this is the law which Moses set before the
children of Israel by the command of the Lord through the
hand of Moses. It is a tree of life to those that hold on it,
and all its supporters are happy; its ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all its paths are peace.” An allusion here,
a ceremony there, continually remind the Christian indeed
where he is; that he stands at the source of his own faith,
where his own Lord was instructed; where, in His manhood
the Saviour performed some of the most wondrous of His
miracles ; where He spake many of His most gracious words.
If the Jewish liturgy cannot elevate the thought of the


Christian, through his ignorance of language, the service
and the situation can turn them inwards to meditate and to
ponder.
The service of the synagogue is complete without a dis-
course ; but a pulpit in the one corner of the building tells
its own tale. However much they may grumble at what
they receive, a sermon is the one thing congregations of all
sects and religions find they cannot do without. They all
want fresh thought—the thought of the age ; the old metal
perhaps, the coinage of our fathers, but newly stamped,
from the mint of the day. The minister of the synagogue
must be a preacher. It is not enough that we have heard
Mr. Ornstien’s fine, rich, manly voice for an hour and a half
intoning the service in Hebrew ; it must next be raised for
well-nigh half an hour in English. Mr. Omstien is per-
fectly at home in the one place as the other. In dress, but
for his tall hat, he might be mistaken for a Christian divine,
for he wears the decent black gown and white tie sanc-
tioned by orthodoxy; in matter his sermons might pass
current in any chapel, but for the reference being made to
the Rabbis and not to the apostles. Instead of texts from
Peter and Paul, we have quotations from Ben Natai and
Gamilel, and the appeals are to Ben Simeon and Tarphon,
instead of to John and to James.
Mr. Ornstien’s delivery is equally in accord with that of
many of his brethren of the churches —simple, impressive,
and deliberative, marked, as it was said of the judicious
Hooker, by “a grave zeal and an earnest voice, his eyes
never wandering to distract one’s imagination, inasmuch as
he seemed to weigh the words as he spake.” Should Mr-
Ornstien by any means be included in the proposed scheme
for a systematic interchange of pulpits, he will have nothing
to alter, nothing to learn or to unlearn before entering any
Anglican or Presbyterian church ; his new hearers will find


that if the one Testament and the Christian fathers have
been closed to him, he can the more vividly illustrate the
other from other sources ; they will be astonished also at the
identity of tone between the two his sermons establish. It
would be instructive to hear the rev. gentleman discourse on
the Jewish Sabbath, and show, as he could and would —no man
better, for there is a genial freshness in his face that gives
assurance of the sound disposition as well as the strong
mind—the libel involved in the shibboleth that the “Christian
Sunday is not the Jewish Sabbath.” He would show that it
is ; that the slandered Sabbath itself was not a day of gloom,
but was instinct with joy and cheerfulness ; that the contrast
between the two days is a mere controversial flourish, that
the “ Jewish Sabbath ” is really the day for which Christians
should strive, that, to the religious mind, its yoke is easy,
and its burden light.
The “ Church-goer ” did hear Mr. Ornstien deliver a
sound discourse to prove the unity of men. He took the
dicta of three Rabbis on the spirit, the dominant principle
of the Old Testament. Referring to the verse, “ This is the
book of the generations of man,” Ben Uzzi had said, “This
is the great principle of the law.” Ben Soma had said,
There is a verse which teaches a higher principle, and that
is, ‘ Hear, O Israel! 5 ” Ben Menas had declared there is a
verse which teaches a yet higher principle, and that is,
“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” And these
judgments, the preacher urged, were one and the same.
The Rabbis equally and alike set forth that the mission of
Judaism and its glory was to unite mankind in love.
Personal human feeling, tones of tenderness and pity, there
were not in his address; not as we find them in the appeals
of the preachers of a bleeding and suffering Saviour; but the
high sentiment, the exalted conceptions which Monotheism
engenders in its sincere believers, in all ages and all coun-


tries, in its Davids in Israel, and its Channings in America,,
these were there —eternal, awful, if to us sterile peaks, the
landmarks of God in the ages. But what struck his hearer
most was the familiarity of the minister’s quotations from the
Rabbis ; their identity with the precepts of the Scripture of
the Christians. He believed, for the first time, the statement
of Grotius —quoted by Emerson —that every sentence of the
Lord’s Prayer is to be found in the writings of the Rabbis,
that our daily prayer is the grains of gold sifted from the
sands; he understood more vividly how its utterer came to
clear away as well as to found, and to restore as well as to-
build, to fulfil the law, and not to destroy it.
The “ Church-goer” has been able to do little more than
note the surface impressions made upon a Christian by a
visit to the Synagogue. Mr. Ornstien is consequently a
sufferer, for he has had a meagre tribute paid to himself
personally. To do him justice, he should be described by one
of his own creed, who can enter into his position, sympathise-
with his sympathies, appreciate the boldness, perceive the
novelties of his teaching, who can condemn or admire, praise
or blame. That task is beyond the present writer. He
can only present a cold record, whose spirit is duty, and not
the zeal and sympathy without which complete criticism is
impossible. Mr. Ornstien must take the will for the deed,
remembering that Christians, not Jews, are the constituents
and critics of the Church-Goer.






THE REV. J. E. BROMBY, D.D.
Although he is without a parish, Dr. Bromby comes fairly
under the head of Melbourne preachers. It continually
happens that Anglican congregations witness the white head,
the genial ruddy face, and the twinkling eyes of the head-
master of the Church of England Grammar School rising
above the pulpit board to deliver the discourse of the day.
It may be that the attendants have come to church impelled
by a stern sense of duty, and prepared for the worst —nerved
to listen to the frigid eloquence, the schoolboy tone, the
inanimate diction, which linger still in the pulpit in this
intellectual age, as darkness dallies in some valleys after
sunrise, as stagnant pools will mark a deluge long after dry
land has appeared around. They bless the chance that has
sent them succour. Nor is it necessary that Dr. Bromby
should be set-off by a background of mediocrity. Whoso-
ever’s place he takes he is welcome on his own merits, and
welcome not by a class or a section, but both by grave and
gay, by young and old. You can see the smile creeping
gradually over the stern, business-wrinkled face of the father
at the one end of the pew, and dimpling the cheek of the
well-preserved dame at the other. “ The dear Doctor!” will
be the exclamation of the blushing young lady in the middle.
“ Dr. Bromby, by Jove!” you can see is what her moustached
male escort has whispered into her conscious ear. There is
a congratulatory tone in the inevitable cough with which
congregations are afflicted ; from one end of the building to
the other there is a satisfied rustle of religious silks. The
people hear Dr. Bromby gladly for two reasons, which explain
the whole character of his ministrations. Firstly, he is one
of those preachers who refrain from making sad the hearts


'God has not made sad; secondly, he is a teacher whom men
can sit under without wearing the badge of intellectual servi-
tude or committing intellectual suicide.
One preliminary word with the weaker brethren. Dr.
Bromby is not considered orthodox on some points. Pro-
bably he would not obtain a license to occupy a living in the
Low Church diocese of Melbourne, for he wears conspicu-
ously the suspected uniform of the Broad Church party.
The band led by Bishop Temple, by Dean Stanley, and by
Maurice, in England, regard him as Captain of the Host
here. He must be an object of dread to the authorities, but,
for all that, like his fellow-labourers, he does a great work
for his church. He often secures for her, in dark and
troublous days, the moral sympathy of the young, and rest-
less, and aspiring spirits, who insist upon “ proving all
things,” who to their fathers’ doctrine and the clergy’s dogma
add their own freshness of conjecture and felicity of expla-
nation. But—what the “Church-goer” wished to say earlier
—his listeners may be certain of one thing, and that is that
no distasteful opinions will be intruded upon them.
Dr. Bromby’s sermons never deal with doctrinal theology
at all; they are applications of the essential spirit of the
Gospel to moral culture. Modern congregations have,
indeed, little craving for the former sort of food, and one
thing is certain, that if Dr. Bromby is to feed them, it must
be with other loaves and other fishes. Moreover, delicacy,
if not inclination, would keep him silent on controversial
points, for he is the occupant of other men’s pulpits ; and we
may be right well sure that he would hardly be so often invited
there if he abused his position. The cuckoo has every
bird’s bill against it —is hooted out of the grove, not because
of its peculiar voice, but because of its propensity to lay eggs
in strange nests. Dr. Bromby, on the contrary, is made
welcome in every parish. The incumbent who solicits


him knows that the strain of warfare is banished from the
edifice when this guest ministers. Dr. Bromby has delivered
lectures and addresses which have sent a sword through the
land, but he never preaches a sermon to which “ the whole
estate of Christ’s Church militant could not say, ‘ Amen.’ ”
He may unloose the ominous raven of controversy from
the platform; in the pulpit his nestling companion is the
-dove of peace.
The preacher’s charm of manner is great, yet, in some
respects, it is an acquired taste, and particularly with regard
to his voice. It is a peculiarity, a contradiction, a decided
accent, but a soft cadence; a regulated rush upon some
words, a long dwelling upon others; a rhythm of rise and
swell in the inflection, like a running stream with successive
cascades. His utterance is delightfully distinct, his manner
uniformly calm, more fitted to please an affectionate circle
than to thrill a promiscuous auditory as with a trump. In
literary style he is singularly flowing, his sentences possessing
that verbal melody, that harmony of arrangement, which is
the most subtle and yet the first recognised charm of com-
position, and which, strange to say, is usually found associated
with men who have little ear for instrumental music. They
fall on the ear “ softer than the west wind’s sigh,” musical in
their cadence as
“ The unmeasured notes
Of that strange lyre whose strings
The genii of the breezes sweep.”
Divorce the mind from the matter, and the sentences would
have a positive lullaby influence. But that twain cannot be
put asunder.
It is one secret of his popularity that you can always
depend upon a good sermon from Dr. Bromby. He is the
most equable of preachers, the one man to whom a country
■cousin may be taken without your running the provoking


risk of apologising afterwards that you never heard your
minister so tame or jejune. The explanation is simple.
The doctor has the immeasurable advantage of not being a
parish drudge, a hack writer, forced to produce his tale of
sermons in health or sickness, business or leisure, in storm
or sunshine, when the mind is weary as when the mind is
fresh. His Pegasus does not have to run the race with
panting sides and trembling knees, and get distanced as a
consequence by a “ pampered jade of Asia,” of not one-half
its rival’s pace or its competitor’s breeding. He has time
to put work into his compositions, like any other literary
artist of merit must have. In his sermons we see industrious
leisure and its results. Not only that, but Dr. Bromby has
the same opportunity Whitfield turned to such good account,
of preaching the same discourse before different audiences ;
Franklin, it will be remembered, declaring of that fiery
apostle, the Paul of Wesleyanism, that it was easy to
tell which sermon had been just composed, and which
had become perfect by practice. One of Whitfield’s
most famous passages, the impetuous, terrible appeal to the
angel he supposed to be returning in sorrow from the
obdurate crowd, to tarry a little while longer; not to enter
the gates of heaven without the news of one sinner brought
to salvation, Franklin heard several times. It electrified
the last audience, says that cold, cautious critic, more than
the first. The audience at Philadelphia were more spell-
bound when it was delivered than the original hearers in the
Cornwall pits. And so with Dr. Bromby. The sermon
which has delighted St. Mary’s in the morning may gratify
St. Peter’s in the evening, and will be heard with greater
pleasure still by St. Mark’s when its time comes. Thrice
has the peripatetic “Church-goer” had the satisfaction of
listening to one discourse, and were he privileged to have a
“command” service in church, as Governors are to order


HUGH LENNON COY.
and farm iiv^lemJ
BUT WE WOULD, IF WE COULD. FOR TWO REASONS;
FIRST BECAUSE IT WOULD PAY YOU.
If vou are farming for fnn, well, it doesn’t matter much what tools you use. VOU V
LOTS OF FUN ANYHOW. But if you are farming fora living you must be up to-date,
/ ? ■ _ rEI want Implements that will increase your profits, you cannot do better than come to u
/' I SECOND BECAUSE IT WOULD PAY US.
J’S
a
JsS?
MTS
FILL GET
and if you
s for them.
We are not in business for our jhealtlp We are after the nimble sixpence, and don
t care who
knows it The onlv way w r e can see pf getting it is to make GOOD GOODS and sell them at
Fair Prices, and that is iust what we do.
OUR GOODS PAY A PROFIT AT BOTH ENDS— DON’T YOU WANT YOUR SHARE ? IF SO, WRITE FOR OUR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUES.
Head Office and Factory: — *->■• City Depot and Showrooms: —
«ri^ e ?fAT.oN. SPOTSWOOD, v 244 ELIZABETH ST„ MELBOURNE,


■
.
tonrfc of fhp
TR "SUN" Groin ond Ferlilimr \/ j \ \/r
t / /~' i
