

FIFTH THOUSAND.
ONLY AUTHORISED EDITION.
THE
NEW UTOPIA
PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY.
AN EXPOSURE OF THE EVILS PRODUCED BY
UNWISE LEGISLATION,
A SUGGESTION OF THE MEANS WHEREBY THEY
MAY BE REMEDIED.
ALEXANDER W. JOHNSTON, M.A. *
ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
1890.




THE NEW UTOPIA.








“ It is the duty of every one who regards a doctrine as true and
important, to do what he can towards diffusing it, leaving the result
to be what it may.”
“ Misery inevitably results from incongruity between constitution
and conditions.”
“ Good and bad results cannot be accidental.”
“ The essential requirement to general happiness —that each
shall enjoy all those means to happiness which his action, carried on
without aggression, have brought him.”
—Herbert Spencer.




THE NEW UTOPIA.
TO AUSTRALIA,
IN THE FERVENT HOPE
OF PROMOTING
HER NATIONAL WELFARE,
THIS LITTLE BOOK
IS SPECIALLY
DEDICATED.




THE
New Utopia;
PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY.
AN EXPOSURE
OF THE EVILS PRODUCED BY UNWISE LEGISLATION,.
A SUGGESTION
OF THE MEANS WHEREBY THEY MAY BE
REMEDIED.
ALEXANDER W. JOHNSTON, M.A.
Sgincg :
TURNER AND HENDERSON.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER. PAGE
I.—lntroduction ' ... 1
II. —Looking Around .... 5
111. —Looking Backward 17
IV.—The Burden of Taxation 29
V,—The Old System and the New ... 39
Vl. —Practical Politics 52
Vl.—Appendix to. —The Single Tax Fifty
Years Ago 61
VII. —Looking Forward 69
VIII. —The New System 85
IX. —Conclusion f 91
Free Railways; or, The Abolition of
Tolls and Taxes 1—24




PREFACE.
In the following pages I have endeavoured to state plain
truths in plain and simple language, avoiding abstract
propositions and abstruse digressions, which would tend
•only to confuse the thoughts and weary the minds of my
readers without adding anything essential to the opinions
presented for their consideration. As far as possible, words
are used in their most simple and ordinary application, and if
a meaning other than the most general may seem to be
attached to any particular term, the context must be accepted
in explanation. With regard to the term “producer,” for
example, it is clear, though not expressly stated, that it is
applied only to those to whom produce belongs. lam
aware that many authorities reckon among producers the
Labourers employed in productive work, but erroneously, as
I think, because the produce of their labour does not belong
to them ; they may never even see it, and they have no
responsibility of any kind in connection with it. If a farmer
employs one man to plough his land, another to harrow it,
and others to perform each successive operation until his
crop is finally disposed of; and next year he employs only
one man to do all the work, is that one man any more a
producer than those who had each done a part of the work
the previous year, but who manifestly produced nothing ?
If the crop should fail, the labourer loses nothing, nor does


he gain in the contrary case. Wherefore, as far as he
himself is concerned, he cannot possibly be a producer,
although his labour is productive labour, bearing to the
product the same relation as the capital and experience of
his employer, that is, he is a contributor to production.
Hence the meaning I attach to the term “ producer ” is
“ the owner of the product of labour,” whatever it may be,
who pays all the expenses of production and all the taxes on
the product.
The reader’s attention is specially directed to the evils
produced by bad legislation, and to the faults of our present
policy, as exhibited in the evils resulting from it, such as
poverty, disunion, strikes and so forth, and in its oppressive
and ever ruinous treatment of that class of our population
upon whose welfare that of the nation depends, with whose
prosperity all the people prosper, with whose decline the
people all must suffer ; and in the next place, to the nature
and effects of the remedy proposed ; lastly, to the urgent
need of reform, irresistibly impressed upon the mind by the
terrible disasters and dangers now impending out of the
threatening thunder cloud of “the Labour Troubles,” which
are shown to be created and sustained by the maleficent
■operation of a vicious and injurious system of legislation.
The evils produced by bad laws having been traced from
effect back to cause, and again from cause to effect, I have
next endeavoured to unfold a plan, which commends itself
to my judgment as most simple, efficacious and just,
whereby we may sweep away those bad laws and all their
■evil offspring, and replace them with a policy calculated to
promote the welfare and happiness of a prosperous and
■contented people.


THE NEW UTOPIA;
PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
IN “ Looking Backward ” Mr. Edward Bellamy has.
opened the eyes of the world to speculations
about the grand possibilities that lie before us in the
future. The picture he presents, however, though
fascinating in every respect, is too finely drawn and
too highly coloured to be received as a pourtrayal of
reforms that are, as yet, within our reach. We must
attain a much higher level of social, moral, and
political development before the plane on which he
elevates humanity will appear to lie within the bounds
of possibility. For this reason, whilst viewing it with
admiration and delight, we are compelled to acknow-
ledge with a sigh that his picture is too good for us,
as we are at present, to hope for its attainment.
Our minds cannot frame any possible intermediate
steps by which to climb so great a height, and though
we cherish a fond memory of the glimpse of heavenly
beauty we have seen in “ Looking Backward,” we sadly
wish the author had shown us “the how and the why,”


that we might set to work on even a forlorn hope of
realising for ourselves some at least of the beauties of
O
his dream.
In the following pages an attempt is made to show
Jhow we may attain, not all that Mr. Bellamy has
•described, but a much nearer approach to his ideal
than is practicable under any political system at
present existing in the world. If we content ourselves
with what is demonstrably within our reach we may
perhaps elevate ourselves, step by step, to a plane
from which the means of reaching even a better state
than he has imagined for us may at length become
apparent.
Mr. Henry George has indicated the lines of a
reform which may serve for the first step upwards, but
his great indignation against the wrongs, the poverty,
and the suffering resulting from the abuse of a
privilege our laws confer on all, has begotten in him a
feeling that savours of animosity against landowners,
who are innocent enough of any deliberate intent to
wrong others by acquiring possession of land. Their
doing so is in accordance with all our old ideas of
right, and we ourselves make them landowners, by
making the laws under which they not only may, but
wust, become landowners. It is therefore quite clear
that no man is blameworthy for being a landowmer,
any more than Queen Victoria is to blame for being
Queen of Great Britain and Empress of India, or
Mr. Harrison for being President of the United States.


The landowner is guilty of no wrong who uses his
land for its legitimate purpose, and expends his labour
or capital in making it productive. He injures the
rest of the community only when his land is not made
to produce that of which it is capable; which is
■equivalent to withholding that product from those who
stand in need of it. By not making this distinction,
and by advocating “ State resumption,” Mr. George
has needlessly aroused opposition to the “ Single
Tax,” a remedy by which all the evils of land
monopoly may be removed without interfering with
the land tenure, or “ repudiating State contracts,” or
attacking any landowner, whether he does or does not
use his land.
But Mr. George’s “ Single Tax ” is not a single tax
•in fact, even when all Custom House taxes are
abolished, for there still remains the heaviest of all
taxes, the most preventive of production, and therefore
the most injurious to the welfare of a civilised people,
the charge for the carriage of goods and passengers
by railway.
There are besides a great number of other taxes to
be got rid of before we reach the Single Tax, or move
on toward the realisation of the beatific vision of
Mr. Bellamy’s “Looking Backward.” By ridding our-
selves first of the most injurious and obstructive taxes,
namely, those on goods, and those on railway traffic,
and next imposing a tax upon the annual value of
land, we can most expeditiously attain a condition


which will render possible the abolition of all other
taxes and many reforms which are at present
impossible. When that condition has been attained
the tax on land values will become the Single lax in
reality as well as in name, and we will have achieved
the first great step towards a national purification
which may yet upraise mankind to heights unsealed by
Imagination’s boldest flights.
To those who will be satisfied with nothing less than
proof plain, absolute, and irrefutable, the Appendix to
Chapter VI. will possess an attraction of its own.
While the w r hole matter depended upon exactness of
logical perception and ability to form a just and true
estimate of consequences from given causes, there was
always room for doubt; but when process of pure
reasoning had brought out certain conclusions, it
removes all doubt, and is the grandest confirmation of
the truth of those conclusions to find them sustained
in their integrity by an example previously unknown,
and supported by testimony of a witness beyond
suspicion, whose own opinions are to some extent
opposed to those he involuntarily and unknowingly
confirmed.


CHAPTER 11.
LOOKING AROUND.
The object of the present treatise being to trace out
some of the causes which prejudicially affect our
condition as citizens of the freest and most highly
favoured among nations, and to offer for consideration
a means of removing them, it is needful first to examine
our present social state, in order that the evil effects
of bad laws may be clearly set in view, for the purpose
of fixing the impression upon the minds of all who see
them, of the fact that they are preventible evils,
since they are the effects of causes over which we
exercise the fullest control, and for which we are,
therefore, responsible.
Looking around us, then, upon the community as a
whole, we recognise the fact that the common good is
not the main object of any individual, but that we are
all striving for our own private advantage, not merely
without regard for the general welfare,,but even with
a jealous eye for the prosperity of our neighbours as
if it must be a necessary conclusion that their gain is
our loss.
Not of individuals only is this true. It is a universal
characteristic of our national as well as individual life,
visible in our minutest social divisions, and extending
between the narrowest and the widest limits. Thus


we see man envious of the prosperity of man, city of
city, district of district, and colony of colony, all
steadily ignoring the broad, self-evident truth that the
prosperity of all includes that of each individual, and
conversely the loss of an individual is equally the loss
of the entire community to which he belongs. We
nevertheless put our individual advantage in the first
place, and oppose at least a passive resistance to the
advantage of others. Consequently we retard progress
of the whole community in seeking what we selfishly
consider our private interests, failing to perceive that
the prosperity of each must increase or decline with
that of all, whether they be individuals or states, and:
that prosperity which includes the whole must possess
the greatest stability. But, with a selfishness that can
only be regarded as unnatural in face of a truth so
palpable, we begrudge success to any state but our
own, to any town but our own, to any individual but
ourselves.
This unnatural selfishness is produced and fostered
by bad laws, which teach us to ignore the unrighteous-
ness of seeking an advantage for ourselves at the
expense and to the injury of others.
It is therefore a preventible evil for which we are
responsible.
The next fact that strikes us is the tendency of the
people to congregate in towns, leaving vast areas of
rich and fertile lands unoccupied or unused. From
Tregarthen’s “New South Wales, 1860 to 1890,’’ page


7, we learn : “ Sydney now contains one-third of the
total number of inhabitants of New South Wales;”
(381,000 out of 1,122,000). Why should they thus
crowd together in squalor and discomfort, and in
unhealthy localities ? We can only discover the reason
by examining the surrounding conditions. These
crowds who form town populations are composed
mainly of manufacturers, professional men, middlemen,
clerks and labourers. Rural populations of those
in pastoral, agricultural and mining pursuits.
Of these, professional men, middlemen, clerks and
labourers are consumers only, not producers of wealth.
Manufacturers, graziers, farmers and miners are the
only producers of wealth. That is to say, the nation
is indebted to them for all the wealth it owns, whether
in money or in goods.
Hence it must follow that the congestion of popula-
tion in towns and cities involves :
1. The abandonment of rural occupations in favour
of those proper to city life.
2. Jhe diminution of the production of wealth.
3. Increased consumption of wealth.-
4. The necessary impoverishment of a greater and
greater number of persons in proportion to the
encouragement offered to that congestion.
When, therefore, we observe a rapid increase in our
urban population, and no corresponding increase in
that of the country districts, we may be perfectly
certain that the number of poor people, and the


intensity of their poverty, are increasing in the same
disproportion.*
This unnatural tendency, away from the healthy,
happy, and productive country life to the over-crowded
unhealthy, miserable and devouring city, is the result
of bad laws which impose a monstrous burden of
taxation upon the country districts.
We made those bad laws and are therefore
responsible for all their evil consequences.
Looking around at the people and their occupations,
we observe a reluctance to embark in new enterprises,
a distrust of even the most alluring prospects involving
the investment of capital, and indications of a feeling
of insecurity affecting even the most prosperous and
firmly-established industries. At the same time we
are struck with the avidity displayed by speculators,
as well as by steady, cautious investors, to secure the
possession of land. If this eager desire to possess
land were accompanied by a corresponding anxiety to
make the greatest use of it, there would be no occasion
to regard it with mistrust. But when we see every-
where land lying idle that might be turned to advantage
in some way or other, but which its owners will not
use, we have in that fact irrefutable evidence that the
* Dean Langley at a recent meeting in Sydney gave expression to
his opinion that already in Australia we have to deal with a “ large
and increasing pauper population —men and women living upon the
charity of our people (often misplaced), or upon the funds subscribed
for the relief of the sick, the infirm, or the aged.” —Australian
Economist, 21 st July , 1890.


owners have in the mere possession a more absolute
assurance of profit, with less risk of loss than any
industrial occupation can offer them.
Underlying all this reluctance to engage in repro-
ductive enterprises, and this eagerness to speculate in
land, there must be some condition which produces
actual insecurity in such occupations, and gives to
the speculator’s land an artificial value independent
of its true productive worth.
This condition is to be found in the crushing taxes
our bad laws impose on all kinds of industrial
occupation that would give imployment to a multi-
tudinous rural population, that would add to the
wealth and promote the prosperity of the whole
community, and at the same time afford reproductive
investments for capital in ways that would promote,
instead of impeding, the country’s progress, whilst
giving the capitalist a return for his money. These
taxes, which work all this injury to the country, leave
the investor no profit at all commensurate with the
risk and labour incurred in industrial occupations,
and, in the absence of any tax upon land, together
with the almost absolute certainty of a continued
unearned increment in its value, offer every induce-
ment for speculation in land, and drive capital away
from industrial occupations. Thus they are dis-
couraged, land is locked up from use through that
discouragement, and capital is locked up in land
for the sake of the unearned increment.


Under no circumstances could such a condition be
conducive to our national welfare. On the contrary,
it can only, and does injure us individually and
collectively by impeding our progress and inflicting
unnecessary and unmerited suffering. By it we are
robbed and wronged and ground down, whether we
regard -it in its application to the whole British
Empire, to Australia, to New South Wales, or to the
single units composing their populations. The
progress we have made in the face of this remorseless
enemy cannot excuse the centuries of suffering it has
caused, for that progress, achieved in spite of every
discouragement, is, after all, but a slight indication of
what might and could have been attained by a wise
development of our magnificent natural resources.
When we realise the diabolical wickedness of this-
system, and the responsibility we incur by permitting
its longer existence, we must also realise the necessity
for its immediate destruction, for we made the bad-
laws by which it is enforced and upon us lies the duty
of repealing them.
In another direction we find material for further
strengthening our already formidable indictment
against our laws, in the incessant acrimonious
disputes between the two classes of employers and
employed.
Enquiring into the origin of these quarrels, we find
that there is very great difficulty in adjusting wages
to work done. That matter is left to be arranged by


mutual agreement between the parties interested, and
there is consequently a continual bickering between
them, arising from the constant effort on the one side
to reduce wages, on the other to raise them. When-
ever matters reach a critical stage, a reduction is
enforced by a “lock-out,” or an increase by a “strike,’"
both of which methods intensify the irritation and
ill-feeling between wage-payers and wage-earners,
and attain their objects only at a ruinous expense and
through great sufferings. The true interest of both
parties lies in securing the greatest possible production
in return for the capital invested and the labour
employed; and any cause which interferes to lessen
the quantity or the value of the product, or to
increase its cost, must involve loss to them and to the
whole community.
The numerous labour-saving machines and other
inventions and discoveries of modern times have
materially lessened the cost of production, and should
have left a wider margin to provide for increases of
wages. To a certain extent labourers have gained in
this way, and the average of comfort in their lives is
now higher than ever it has been in times past. But
this advance is much less, in comparison with the
saving in cost of production, than might reasonably
be expected. For one reason, there is always an
outside fringe of workers, kept out of work by bad
laws which discourage enterprise, who are ready to
accept any wage that will give them bread. Driven


by hunger, they force themselves in at every opening,
glad even of the poorest wages, in exchange for which
they can give, as a matter of course, but poor work.
In this way there is a constant tendency to lower
wages and depreciate the quality while lessening the
quantity of the product. Trades unions set them-
selves to prevent the employment of such men, whom
they term “ blacklegs,” but if they succeed they do
not improve the general average in the least, because
they increase the misery of the “ blacklegs.” Any
advantage gained by the unions is a loss, not to
employers only, but to the entire people, and must in
the end still further restrict and discourage enterprise,
which is as much their life as that of the rest. When
employers cannot yield to the unions, or when
yielding means ruin, and the labourers still persist in
enforcing their demands, only anarchy can result, and
a certainty of worse conditions to follow it, for
producers cannot be made to suffer without double
suffering to all the rest of the community.
The mere existence of disputes between parties
whose interests are so intimately allied condemns the
system that produces them, that allows them to
continue, to become more frequent, more bitter, more
fraught with danger to the State* yet makes no
* Labour Difficulty in Christchurch. —Boycotting Goods
on the Railway.—Auckland, Monday.—The Maritime Council have
ordered the railway employes to boycott all goods consigned to and
from Messrs. Whitcombe and Tombs, Limited, printers, publishers,
■stationers, &c., of Christchurch, owing to a trade dispute. The


attempt to provide a remedy that will make them as
impossible as they are unnecessary. But these bad
results are the products of bad laws, and the makers
of those laws are responsible for their own misdeeds.
Another peculiar feature that cannot fail to attract
attention is that on a continent so vast, so wealthy,
so empty, and so utterly undeveloped as Australia,
there should be raised by the working classes so many
objections to the introduction of immigrants from
other countries.
With our most magnificent natural resources, as yet
comparatively untouched, and more than sufficient to
employ all the starving millions of the mother country,
when there cannot be, for centuries to come, any
danger of over-crowding, or any appreciable diminu-
tion of the quantity of work waiting for hands to do
it, such objections would be most extraordinary and
unaccountable had we not a guide to lead us to their
very source in the laws that oppose so many obstacles
to all kinds of industrial enterprise. These considered,
it is not at all surprising that the working classes should
object to new arrivals,t who would thrust them out of
Railway Commissioners and Union Steamship Company have both
intimated that the law compels the carriage of anyone’s goods.
The secretary of the Railway Servants’ Union to-day telegraphed to-
the Commissioners that the men were resolved to obey the injunction
of the Council, and if any were suspended the Council would call
out all hands and block the port of Lyttleton until they are
re-instated. —Daily Telegraph , Sydney, Aug. 5, iBgo.
f Sydney Depression.— A Warning to Immigrants. —London
Sunday.—Mr. Shipton, the secretary of the London Trades Council,.


employment in the few struggling enterprises we
carry on, in spite of the opposition of our bad laws.
It is not to be expected that, where our legislators
have failed, a less cultivated intelligence should detect
the difference between possible and permissible
work —between a lacking of opportunity and a locking
up of opportunity. But working men are prompt to
perceive that l< work is hard to get,’’ and that the
arrival of more hands would make it harder still,
though they cannot tell why it should be so with a
whole continent waiting for them to explore it. They
feel the pinch of the ill-made shoes our cobbling
legislators supply; but they try to hobble along, with
a patience born of many vain attempts to have them
mended, and only asking that they may not be made
more severe.
Out of the reluctance to engage in reproductive
industries there springs another evil, which it is
important to recognise and set down to its right
account. Profiting by his own experience of the
treatment we accord to those engaged in such
enterprises, no parent is willing that his sons should
be trained to occupations from which he knows they
can gain little and may lose much. He, therefore,
very prudently brings them up to be lawyers or bank
has published a communication which he has received from the
Sydney Trades and Labour Council, in which intending immigrants
are warned against New South Wales, owing to the great depression
there and the large numbers of workmen out of employment. —
Daily Telegraph, Sydney, 4th August, 1890.


clerks, the height of his ambition being reached when
they are all safe in snug “ Government billets.” In
other words, instead of educating producers, to add to
the sum of the world's wealth and happiness, he is
•compelled to make them all consumers—drones in the
busy hive, living on the honey accumulated by the
industry of others. Thus the same bad laws that rob
the working bees and drive them from their work,
multiply the number of drones, lessen the supply of
honey by preventing the cultivation of honey-bearing
flowers, and so reduce the allowance all round that
some must go without.
By way of encouragingthe over-burdened agricultural
and mining producers to think that after all they are
not such despised outcasts as their ill-usage would
argue, we have placed them under the wing of a
special Government “ Department of Agriculture,”
and a “ Department of Mines.” The function of these
bodies is to try to alleviate, by more bad laws, the
evils bad laws have already produced. Our legislators
seem to suppose, doubtless encouraged thereto by their
marvellous failures in the past, that nothing can thrive
unless they stand by to regulate everything as a sort
of overseers who, understanding nothing, must yet
meddle with everything, whilst their own experience
should tell them they are only “ making bad worse.”
We have now examined a number of evils that
oppress us, and traced them all to their source in our
own bad laws. We are, therefore, justified in assuming


that all our troubles arise from the same source. For
the sake of example, let any other glaring evil be
taken —larrikin ism, crime, poverty, drunkenness, the
social evil, or any other. We will find that, if not
the direct product of our bad laws, it is at least
enormously aggravated by them ; and, speaking
generally, if in any case it is found that any unnatural,
unnecessary, or unexpected evil result mars the
working of our institutions, we need not hesitate to
ascribe it to the operation of laws we ourselves have
made. Nor need we remain doubtful as to our
responsibility in such cases, or to the plain duty that
devolves upon us. Since the evil condition into
which we have fallen is the unforeseen and unintentional
result of measures intended to be beneficial, the guilt
of past wrongs may be forgiven us if now we set
ourselves to remove at once all the causes of public
or private injury we have established.


CHAPTER 111.
LOOKING BACKWARD.
There cannot possibly be any reasonable doubt that
the great multitude of evils that form so dark a blot
on our civilisation, and contrast so strangely with our
professed Christianity, originate in the laws we
ourselves have made. The mere assertion of that
truth, however, will not carry conviction to minds
inclined to oppose it. For their sake it is needful to
look back to their beginning, and follow up the causes
of these evils from their origin to their effects.
Looking backward, then, through the almost
forgotten pages of our history, we find that many
of our present laws are founded on the ancient
Roman system. Upon this ours has gradually been
built up, as the years rolled by, modifying or
amalgamating with the customs of the past and its
traditions, until now we have a mass of unintelligible,
obsolete, and contradictory statutes, some of which
are founded on the legislation of an alien and
barbarous race ; others have arisen out of the
amorphous methods of rough and ready justice
practised by our forefathers; while others acknowledge
ano more illustrious ancestry than the simple customs
and traditions of a bygone age. These may have


been suitable enough to the requirements of primitive
peoples ; but our circumstances have changed, and
ha\e become complicated into almost inextricable
confusion, because we have adopted the bad, and
rejected or forgotten the good provisions they
contained.
The lawmakers to whom we are indebted for our
present system, laid down a pernicious fundamental
principle to begin with, in adopting, as the base of
all their legislation, the maxim of some long-forgotten
heathen philosopher, that —“The highest aim of the
true statesman is to secure the greatest good to the
greatest number.’' This has come down through the
ages to our own legislators, who have accepted it as a
sound and solid truth, fit to sustain the shocks of time
and stand firm for ever. By it they test every
proposition, on it they have rested every measure
they have passed, and so have raised a pretentious
structure, of which they speak as “the Majesty of the
Law,” and assert, with equal self-complacency, “the
Law is the perfection of reason.” As if it were
possible that every man should at all times be able to
judge correctly what measures are best calculated to
promote “the greatest good of the greatest number,”
and also to know by intuition what measures their
wisdom has made into law, what they have changed
and repealed, and what actions are required or
forbidden by conflicting and contradictory statutes,
they assume that “ Every man should know the Law,”


holding none excused for mere ignorance, but
punishing all offenders with rigid severity.
Yet it is very well known that the judges, whose
duty it is to know and administer the Law, are often
unable to enlighten us on these points.
They have thus raised up in untrained minds what
they call “ a wholesome fear of the Law,” composed
partly of terror inspired by its relentless power, and
partly of dread of its blind stupidity ; but containing
no particle of reverence for its goodness, for which
there are good and sufficient reasons.
Lawmakers and lawyers alike pay themselves a
most undeserved compliment, and give themselves
credit for strict justice and impartiality when they
assert that “ the Law is no respecter of persons,” and
that “in the eye of the Law all men are equal.” Yet
the very fundamental maxim on which the Law stands
indicates, while it ignores the injury inflicted upon
some, and the unjust preference shown to others in
order that the good of “the greatest number” may be
secured. And if all men were equal before it, then
the right of one would be maintained as forcibly as
the right of a multitude, and the right of a poor man
as vigorously as that of a rich man, who is able to pay
the extortionate demands of the Law’s administrators.
The very root of all our legislation is thus proved
to be rotten, and the fruit it bears sustains its
character. For this our legislators rejected the grand
fundamental maxim given us by the Saviour himself,


“ Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” and also
the divine law based upon that maxim “Do unto
others as ye would that they should do unto you.”
Setting aside, as of no value to them, these Christian
precepts that would manifestly promote the good of
all and injure none , they have built on the heathen
sage’s maxim as the surer and safer foundation. We
continue to do the same, as if Law and Christianity
could have no aim in common, but must always oppose
and nullify each other.
With this idea understood, but not expressed, we
have rejected the wise and just foundation, and have
raised an injurious system on a pernicious fallacy,
impiously laying the evil results of our own folly to
the charge of the Creator of the universe.
The evil principle we have thus taken to our bosoms
taints not our legislation only, but our modes of
thought and action, and affects our inner lives to so
great an extent that we have become saturated with
its vicious selfishness, regarding with complacency
whatever brings profit to ourselves ; with indifference
the suffering it may cause to others.
Hence it follows that measures, intended to confer
a material benefit on a majority, while confessedly
injuring a minority of the people, must always work
a moral injury to the whole —to the benefited majority
by inculcating- a callous selfishness which esteems
their own gam as the reward of superior merit, and
the others’ loss as a well-deserved punishment —to the


injured minority by cultivating feelings of envy and
discontent arising out of their perception of the unjust
distribution of benefits, and the unmerited injuries
inflicted upon themselves. Not always able to trace
these to their true source, they soon begin to think
themselves the sport of an unfeeling Providence
punishing them for they know not what. So the evil
spreads in ever-widening circles, sapping the very
foundations of their faith in a beneficent Creator and
Ruler of the universe, and leaving them to fight the
battles of life without a true principle to guide them,
or a hope to brighten their lot.
Then begins to be felt the reaction of this moral
injury as it affects the material welfare of the whole
community, retarding their progress, and punishing
them for their rejection of the truth with an ever-
increasing amount of vice, crime and grinding
poverty, and the thousand other evils that disgrace
and degrade us.
Thus, looking backward to the foundation of our
system, and taking a broad view of the condition of
things resting on that foundation, we see enough to
uphold the contention that we are responsible for all
the evils that make the misery of our lives.
If we look more closely and examine the circum-
stances under which these ills affect us, we can
scarcely discover any that are not ultimately traceable
to our deliberate encouragement of the growth of evil
by basing our legislation on a false and vicious


heathen maxim, as full of curses in experience as of
blessing in promise, although we had the choice of
cultivating every good principle by acting upon the
precepts of the Saviour.
At the present time the evil most prominent in all
the most civilised nations of the world is the dispute
incessantly raging between employers and employed,
than which, perhaps,- no secondary cause is more
fruitful of harm to the moral and material welfare of
the nations involved.
Let us select this for examination, and ask ourselves,
“ What is the cause of this fearful national scourge ?’’
It is frequently spoken of as “ the dispute between
Capital and Labour/’ but, since Capital is merely a
product of Labour, and represents nothing but Labour,
there can no more be a dispute between them than
there can be a battle between a man and his shadow.
A large Capital represents the concentrated Labour of
many hands, and when gathered into the possession
of one individual, it gives to him the same power as
would the control of the hands which produced it.
If he make no attempt to exercise that power, it is
obvious that his Capital can never in any way come
into collision with Labour. Whence it is clear that
disputes can only arise when Capital is being used,
and they come, not out of any relation between Capital
and Labour, but out of that about which they are
employed.
That this is the point at which the conflict begins


will become apparent if we take, for example, a coal
mine at work.
If the mine belongs to the labourers who work it,
and the Capital to others, the whole product, after
providing for the repayment of the Capital, would
belong to Labour, and there could be no dispute.
If the ownership rests with the owner of the Capital,
it is that fact, and not the possession of Capital,
whether £1 or £1,000,000, which gives rise to disputes.
If the owner of the mine borrowed the Capital to
pay for and work it, no dispute is possible between
that Capital and the Labour employed, for the real
owner of the Capital stands altogether clear of it,
whilst the owner of the mine controls both the Capital
and the Labour. If, then, a dispute arise it can only be
between him, as owner of the mine, and the Labour he
employs.
Hence we may clearly infer that in all cases the
quarrel lies between Labour and the owner of the
opportunity for employing Labour, whether mine,
dock, factory, or any other thing about which Labour
may be employed. Capital, great or small, has no
part in the origin of the dispute, though it gives
more or less support to its owner when a dispute has
arisen ; it also confers the power of securing
possession of opportunities for the profitable employ-
ment of Labour. Until such an opportunity has been
secured, no dispute can possible arise.
From this it is perfectly clear that the origin of


disputes must lie in some fact or condition connected
with the possession of that about which Labour is
employed, and the discovery of that fact or condition
will at once expose the evil principle which causes all
the trouble. Let us first try to find an answer to the
question, “ Why do men strike?”
Generally the ostensible reason is that they want
higher wages, which employers either cannot or will
not concede. If labourers, dissatisfied with their
wages, could readily find other employment, or occupy
themselves on the land, they would not be compelled
to strike, for they would naturally prefer such a change
to the misery and loss incurred by a strike. But the
deadweight of taxation we impose on them crushes
the life out of so many enterprises, and prevents the
birth of so many more, that other employment is
seldom to be found ; and the land is not open except
under conditions that forbid its use to those who have
no capital. Thus restricted, the labourer must either
accept the offered wage or strike. If he accept, he is
very soon compelled to accept a lower wage, and still
a lower, until he faces the alternative of “ work and
semi-starvation, without hope of improvement,” or
“ strike and semi-starvation, sweetened by hope.”
By repeated reductions of wages he is compelled to
strike ; but he would prefer other work if he could
lind it, or content himself with making his own living
out of the land if he were not prevented from
doing so.


If now we ask, “Why are wages reduced ?” the
reason given is that profits are so small that expenses
must be cut down or work stopped. The owner of
the opportunity for the profitable employment of
Labour is, therefore, in much the same dilemma as the
labourer, and reduces wages not out of pure greed for
higher profits-, but because he sees profit rapidly
t) i
disappearing and loss coming nearer. Having the
power through his ownership to decide between
reducing wages and stopping work, he naturally
chooses the former as the lesser evil. So it goes on
until either a strike or a lock-out can no longer be
avoided.
If we inquire further, “ What swallows up all the
profits?” we learn that taxes take so much, freight so
much, interest so much, and expenses so much, leaving
but little, sometimes nothing, to provide for extra
wages.
The case may then be summed up in this way :
Along with the ownership of an opportunity for the
profitable employment of Labour is conferred the
power of reducing wages, which power the owner is
compelled to exercise repeatedly until either a strike
or a lock-out occurs, and his valuable opportunity is
rendered valueless to him, to his labourers and to the
State; and in addition there is an all round loss from
so many idle consumers being thrown, as they must
be, upon the already over-burdened shoulders of the
producers.


We next seek an answer to the question, “ How is
the owner compelled to reduce wages ?” and the
reply is that the owner obtains his title of possession
by virtue of the provisions of one or other of several
Acts of Parliament, whose operation is to invite
private persons to acquire possession of land from the
State. The land constitutes the base of every
industrial enterprise, but if the owner should make
any attempt to use his land for any such purpose the
State immediately comes down upon him with other
Acts of Parliament imposing taxes, duties, tolls, fees,
rates, and assessments of various kinds, which fall
wholly upon production, because without production
there would obviously be no means of paying them.
The operation of these tax-imposing Acts is to punish
those private persons who accept the invitation of the
State to buy land, if they attempt to make their land
productive. If they persist in the attempt taxes are
heaped upon them until all profit is swallowed up, and
the unfortunate owner is compelled either to reduce
the wages of his labourers or to abandon his enter-
prise. If he reduces wages his workmen strike, and
the same end is attained.
Ihe people have always been keenly alive to the
fact that these laws were harassing them in this
atrocious way, and have insisted upon the repeal of
this or the alteration of that law which seemed to them
to be the cause of injury. But though these laws have
been altered and amended over and over again, they


still continue to punish the people, and the people
demand more amendments still, although of the
original Acts but little now remains beyond the
fundamental maxim upon which they were constructed.
That fundamental maxim is the heathen sage’s legacy
we have preferred to our own Christian precepts.
Unearthed at last, “ the greatest good of the greatest
number ” is thus clearly exposed as the evil principle
underlying all our legislation, tainting and corrupting
every proposition based upon its delusive promises,
and drawing nothing but mischief from measures
honestly intended by their framers to do to some at
least a small amount of good.
By process of exhaustion we have thus reduced
these laws to their last persistent features, their evil
basis and their evil effects, and are, therefore, justified
in claiming that in this heathen maxim we have
discovered the Fans et origo malorum , the source of
all the ills that curse the lot of poor, blind, struggling
humanity. This is “ the condition attached to the
possession of land —that about which Labour is-
employed,” in which lies the origin of disputes
between employers and their workmen.
To this same evil principle all our other ills are as
clearly traceable as this of the “ Labour Question,”
but to follow it through all its intricacies and
contortions would be a gigantic task. When once
the true tendency of its malignant influence is under-


stood, the mind can readily grasp the links connec ting
it with any and all of its evil fruits.
Thus the indictment against the Law is proven ; it
is found guilty, and condemned by its own ill-doing.


CHAPTER IV.
THE BURDEN OF TAXATION.
OUR sytem of taxation, based upon the principle of
securing “the greatest good to the greatest number,’’
has been devised merely for the purpose of providing
revenue to cover the cost of administering the
government of the country. For this purpose, taxes
are levied on imported goods, on Railway, Postal, and
Telegraphic services, on commercial transactions,
on various businesses, on sheep, and even on the
administration of justice. From all sources, the
revenue of New South Wales for the year 1889, was
a little over £9,000,000 sterling; or roughly about £9
per head of the population. Taking an average in
this way would, however, prove very deceptive, and
would conceal all the mischievous workings of the
system. When the actual incidence of the taxes is
sought, and the question is asked “who pays?” no
direct reply is given; but an examination of the
figures provided by the Government Statistician
discloses some astounding facts, which place beyond
doubt the restrictive and punitive effects of taxation
upon productive enterprise. We find there that
those engaged in the pastoral industry alone are
made to pay about fifty times the average amount of
taxes. The figures given in “ Coghlan's Wealth and


Progress of New South Wales,” 1890, page 225, show
that there are engaged in the pastoral industry the
following persons:—
Holding Pastoral Leases, 1,613; who pay rent,
Occupation Licenses, 1,495; ~ ~ £252,121
Total, 3,108
In addition to this, they pay “ one-third of the
•earnings of the goods traffic of the railways of the
colony” (page 431). The total earnings of the
railways for 1888 were £1,748,834, one-third of which
amounts to £500,000 nearly. Adding this to the sum
paid for rent, we have £1,278,568 as the contribution
of 3,108 persons for one year, being an average of
over £4OO per annum for each person. Each of these
pays further taxes for passenger traffic, Custom House
and other items, an additional sum which cannot be
allotted with the same accuracy. Neglecting this, the
sum given above is sufficient to fill us with amazement,
when we consider that this plunder is extorted from
those who produce about 75 per cent, of the total
exports of the colony. The average of £9 per head
of the population looks very insignificant beside this
enormous impost; but it proves that “the greatest
number” must pay an average of very much less than
£9 per head, and it also proves that in the matter of
taxation, our Law secures their “ greatest good ” at
the expense of those who do most to promote the
progress of the colony.


GOODS.
COST
DUTY
FREIGHT.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
Timber for Buildings ...
75
0
0
11
5
0
15
0
0
Doors and Sashes
8
0
0
1
4
0
2
2
2
Galvanised Iron
40
0
0
4
0
0
4
16
10
Furniture
So
0
0
Nil.
6
6
6
Sundries
20
0
0
0
5
0
1
0
0
Paints, etc
5
10
0
0
12
6
0
10
0
Galvanised Tank
7
0
0
Nil.
3
0
10
Fencing Wire
20
0
0
2
0
0
4
16
10
Machinery and Tools ...
100
0
0
Nil.
7
10
0
Tea
3
0
0
0
12
6
0
3
0
Sugar
12
10
0
3
6
8
1
10
1
Flour
9
0
0
Nil.
0
13
3
As far as the pastoral industry is concerned, it is
thus made plain that our system levies on productive
enterprise a tax so heavy, that it cannot but exercise
a most discouraging effect.
With regard to agriculture, no figures are given by
which the incidence of taxation upon that industry
may be shown, but a tolerably accurate general
conclusion may be arrived at, and the amount a small
farmer is compelled to pay, may be gathered from the
following example. Let it be supposed that he has
secured a farm of 50 acres, valued at £5O per annum,
in the district of Singleton, 147 miles from Sydney,
where he buys the goods he requires to start with,
and sends them to Singleton by Railway. For doing
so much, he will have to pay a tax of £9O in addition
to the cost of the goods, as shown by the following
statement; —


GOODS. COST. DUTY. FREIGHT.
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Tobacco 7 10 o 7 io o 030
Whisky 1120 1120 030
Fruit Trees 20 o o Nil. o 12 o
Seed Wheat 2 10 o „ 030
~ Maize 0120 „ 039
~ Lucerne 700 ~ 030
„ Potatoes 800 , 166
Cart 10 o o „ 296
Horses (2) 40 o o „ 3 14 6
Bags (1,000) 25 o o ~ 147
£472 4 o £22 7 8 £57 12 4
Taxation.
Custom-house Duties ... ... 7 8
Railway Freight ... .. ... 57 12 4
Total £go o o
From this, it may be seen that the intending
farmer, for merely proposing to produce, must pay to
the public revenue a tax of £9O, before we will allow
him to produce anything at all. The Law says to
him, “You are fined £9O for wishing to increase the
wealth of the country. If you will abandon your
intention and remain idle, no further punishment will
be inflicted upon you. But if you persist, you wall be
fined more heavily still, the more wealth you produce.
You will have the satisfaction of knowing that the
fines you pay tend ‘ to secure the greatest good to
the greatest number ’ by saving them from the
necessity of contributing to the revenue.”


Crop.
Produce.
Value.
Freight.
Wheat
.. 200 bushels
/45
0
0
/3 12 10
Maize
.. 300 „
60
0
0
5 9 3
Lucerne
.. 30 tons
120
0
0
45 4 2
Potatoes
.. 50 „
150
0
0
33 2 6
Fruit
.. 500 cases
125
0
0
54 13 0
/500
0
0 /142 1 0
C
The deterrent effect of this tax must be clear
enough, but to remove any doubt upon the subject, let
us suppose that a governmental tax of £9O is levied
upon every young man who intends to become a
lawyer, and that it must be paid before he takes the
first step in that direction. Will any contend that
such a tax will not prevent many young men from
becoming lawyers ? May it not be considered the
natural result of imposing taxes on productive
enterprise that there should be such a rush of stalwart
manhood into the ranks of the “ Devil’s Brigade,”
upon which there is no tax?
But suppose again that our intending farmer is an
obstinate man, and is determined to be a producer in
spite of the Law. Having paid his £9O prohibition,
tax, and so made things comfortable for “the greatest
number,” he works industriously at his farm, until he
has ten acres each of wheat, maize, lucerne, potatoes,
and fruit trees in full production. He gathers in his
harvest, and sends it off by railway to Sydney for sale.
The result may be figured up as follows :


It is thus apparent that his contribution to the
revenue, out of his total production of £5OO, reaches
the respectable sum of £142 Is. 9d. for the benefit of
“ the greatest number.” It must not be forgotten
that this is the annual tax on this 50 acre farm,
increased or diminished by good or bad seasons ; but
equally oppressive and iniquitous in any case. In
addition to this “ crusher,” he must pay freight and
taxes on all he consumes—postage, telegrams, stamp
duty, railway fares, and so forth ; so that the full
amount of his annual tax cannot be less than £l5O.
In fact, his little 50 acre farm is made to pay taxes
for himself and fifteen or sixteen others, who pay
nothing because they belong to “ the greatest
number,” for whose benefit the Law restricts and
punishes agricultural enterprise.
With regard to the mining industry, exact facts and
figures are not available to show the average amount
of taxation falling upon each individual who under-
takes the responsibility of engaging therein. Taking
into consideration all the items of which it is com-
posed, to set it down at £IOO will not appear too high
a figure. This, of course, is only a guess; but it will
serve for the present, as at least an approximation to
the true amount. Thus it will now be clear to all that
the three great productive industries of New South
Wales are made to bear much more than their share
of taxation, and, together with the manufacturers, may
be said to pay for all the rest of the population. And


50 it must always be under our system, that producers
pay everything; consumers nothing Wherefore to
tax producers to death, would be to kill off consumers
as well To this fact, producers are indebted for
so much mercy as is shown them by our laws in
checking taxation just a little short of the point
at which production would become impossible.
Hitherto our policy with regard to them has
evidently been restrictive almost to prohibition, has
been as short-sighted as it is unjust, is calculated
to impede the progress of the whole community, and
therefore inflicts injury upon “ the greatest number,”
whose advantage it was supposed to secure. For if
one producer can maintain 100 consumers, two would
keep them in comfort, three would give them
abundance of everything, and four would provide
them with every luxury of life.
Hence to encourage production is a wiser policy than
ours, even if we still continue to seek only the good
of “ the greatest number.” To back up all the
obstructions we heap in the path of progress, our
system exercises punitive effects that are most
disastrous to our welfare. Its influence is irresistibly
destructive, because the crushing burdens we put on
them compel the abandonment of enterprises set on
foot in spite of all restrictive or prohibitive taxation ;
enterprises in which much capital is embarked, and
much labour employed, whose abandonment involves
a treble loss. 1. Loss of the Capital. 2. Loss of the


wealth that Capital and Labour would have produced.
3. Loss through adding to the numbers of those
already made idle by the action of the restrictive and
prohibitive influences a constant reinforcement from
the ranks of those whose employment is taken from
them by the destructive influence. This threefold
loss is so much the w r orse for the country, that it adds
to the number of consumers, who have to be
maintained by a smaller number of producers. For
if 500 producers employ 5,000 labourers and
maintain 5,000 consumers, and we reduce the number
of producers to 250, we thus add 2,750 to the number of
idle consumers, and each producer has to maintain 31
consumers instead of 10, or three times as many as
before, while each consumer will have only one-third
of his former share, because there are now 7,750 to be
maintained by only 250 producers. The effects of the
continual repetition of this process can only be an
increasing aggravation of the people’s suffering and
of their discontent and irritation. That the process
must be repeated and its evil effects increased
continually is plainly to be seen in the fact that the
taxation which causes it all is continually increasing.
Thus the average taxation per head of the population
for the years 1860, 1870, 1880, and 1889 was £3 175.,
£4 ss. 9d., £6 15s. 5d., and £8 4s. 2d. respectively *
It is plain then that we are rapidly tending toward
the consummation of that dire calamity, already
* Tregarthen, New South Wales, iB6O to 1889, p. 16.


looming large on the horizon of possible events, a
universal rebellion against the existing order of things
that will unite in one common destruction the system
that produces these evils and the grandeur that has
been attained in spite of it.
Because the volcano has not yet reached the point of
active eruption and the earthquake has not yet over-
thrown and destroyed us, there are many who urge that
there is no danger—that no change is needed —that
our present system is good enough to last a long time
yet —that the impeachment of it is based on a fallacy—
that the proposed New System is the dream of a
visionary enthusiast —and so on. But when we know
how great is the tension in other countries, and how
the explosion draws nearer and nearer day by day,
when we see how imminent is the danger even in
England—shall we go on quietly along the road that
we know must in the end bring us into the same
condition ? Delay means danger, with destruction
and death following close at its heels. Action may
avert it—inaction makes it a terrible certainty.
To the statesmen and politicians who rule Australia,
to whom is committed the trust of providing for her
present and future welfare, these considerations should
seem sufficiently powerful to induce them to devote a
little thought to their responsibility with regard to
them.
The people themselves, instead of following their
blind leaders, should grasp their destiny with a firm


hand, and, seeing how they have been beguiled into
by-paths of folly for the benefit of this party or that,
and to their own infinite loss and injury, should
demand an immediate return to the ways of wisdom,
in which alone can national safety be found.
The graziers, the farmers, the miners, and the
manufacturers should awake to the momentous value
of a reform that will no longer permit them to be
made the slaves and tax-payers for those schemers
who avoid the payment of their due share by saddling
it upon them ; that will also avert the threatening
calamity that else will surely overwhelm us.
The labourers—the “ working classes”—who have
formed themselves into the mightiest combination for
their common advantage that the world has ever
seen, should now see where their true advantage lies.
It is not in violence or destruction, or in putting an
end to that productive industry upon which their own
and their children’s lives depend. It lies in simply
returning to the path of wisdom and justice, by
insisting that our rulers shall abandon their present
heathen policy, together with the heathen maxim
upon which it rests, and adopt a new and better
system that will take for its aim “the good of all,” and
work in harmony with the precepts of the Son of God.


CHAPTER V.
THE OLD SYSTEM AND THE NEW
In framing a scheme of taxation the first question to be
considered should be, “ What things ought to be
taxed ?” and the next, “ What things ought not to be
taxed ?”
The founders of the Old System, seeking only the
readiest means of raising revenue, and caring little, so
long as it was successful, how their method might
affect the national welfare, gave but little thought to any
questions of this kind. Acting upon the principle of
“ the greatest good to the greatest number,” they
accordingly invented a system which produces nothing
but calamity Its tendency is now, as it has ever
been, to destroy good and encourage evil Without
any recognised effort on our part to cultivate it—even
in spite of all our efforts to eradicate it—evil seems to
spring up spontaneously on all sides. On the other
hand nothing good will thrive without the most
assiduous care and attention. Even the laws we
design to secure some good seem to possess an innate
diabolic power of frustrating our efforts to do good,
and turning them into unintentional and unexpected
evils, until it becomes a question whether it is more
difficult to produce good or prevent evil effects from
our laws. Their perversity, their apparent aversion to


good and inclination to evil, results from the neglect
of our law-makers to consider “What things ought,
or ought not, to be taxed, and the effects of taxes on
the things taxed,’’ whereby we have been led into the
grievous error of taxing what we ought not, and
allowing the things that ought to be taxed to go free.
Every tax is, in its nature, a burden, and cannot but
act accordingly and produce effects in agreement
with its nature. To heap burdens on the good things
we require is, therefore, a mistaken policy, whose
only result can be to lessen the quantity of those
good things, and to lessen also the consumption of
them. A decrease in production means less employ-
ment of Labour and Capital, less wages, more
poverty, strikes, and miseries that cannot be described.
And since good things are produced by the exercise
of good qualities, such as industry, energy, enterprise,
intelligence, and so forth, a tax upon their product is
a discouragement of those good qualities. To allow
all the bad qualities of man’s nature to escape taxation
is, therefore, to encourage those bad qualities. It
follows, then, that by discouraging good and
encouraging evil, and by basing our laws upon an
injurious principle which denies the right of every
individual to equal consideration from them, those
laws must work in opposition to any good we wish to
secure, and not only prevent us attaining that good,
but substitute for it some unforeseen, but none the less
absolute, evil.


Hence it is manifest that if we wish to overcome
this perverse tendency in our laws, we must go down
to their foundation, discard the evil principle we have
built upon, and adopt instead the principles and
precepts of Christianity.
If we refuse to do this, and continue to make Law
independent of and opposed to Religion, it must
follow that both Law and Religion will be more and
more despised—the first for its injustice, its cruelty,
its stupidity, and its immorality —the second, because,
it is disregarded by the law which rules our daily
lives, and with which w r e are brought, of necessity,
into the most intimate association, and which, more-
over, empowers men to act towards each other in
opposition to right and justice, and in defiance of all the
precepts of religion. While thus opposed to Religion,
Law cannot possibly achieve any good, but must con-
tinue to work evil to humanity so long as it is allowed
to maintain its hostility to the fountain of all good.
When asked “Which is the greatest command-
ment?” our Saviour replied, “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. This
is the first and great commandment, and the second
is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.” Both of these Divine laws we have cast out
of our system; and only by going back to them can
we hope to combat successfully against the evil
■consequences of our sin and folly.


But how is it to be done? Can we by any course
of legislative action reverse the destruction of good
and the production of evil, the necessary results of
our present system ?
We can. It has already been shown that laws
imposing taxes upon good things must necessarily dis-
courage good and encourage evil. Whence it follows
as a necessary corollary that laws imposing taxes
upon evil must discourage evil and encourage good.
But since it is impossible to build up a good system
on a bad foundation, we must first substitute the
Divine precept for the heathen maxim, and set up “ the
good of all” as the end we aim at, so making our law
acknowledge and enforce the Divine Law.
Guided by this new principle, we next proceed to
enact that no good thing, but evil only, shall be taxed.
And since we have cultivated selfishness as a national
characteristic, in direct opposition to the law which
bids us love our neighbour as ourselves, we must put
a tax on selfishness first of all; and since taxes upon
good things fall upon the good qualities that produce
them, we must, therefore, impose taxes upon the evil
qualities that produce evil and prevent the attainment
of any good. Along with selfishness, then, we will tax
sloth, stupidity, ignorance, cruelty, intemperance,,
and all the vicious qualities that now flourish so
abundantly.
“ But what method of taxation can be devised that
will fall only upon those evil qualities ?”


As already shown, under our present system, taxes
imposed directly upon goods fall indirectly and
ultimately upon the good qualities w r hich produce
them, we must tax our evil qualities indirectly also.
For if a tax were imposed directly upon them no man
would acknowledge the possession of them, and a loss
of revenue would result.
But we can impose a tax that will unerringly and
inevitably find them out and punish them wherever
they exist, that will at the same time stimulate
and encourage every good quality, and will, moreover,
prove a remunerative source of revenue in direct
proportion to the encouragement it gives to good and
the punishment it inflicts upon evil.
“ If taxes under our present system have in their
nature a tendency to destroy good and to foster evil,
what tax under the new system can have, in its nature,
the contrary tendency to punish evil and cherish
good ?"
“A tax upon the annual value of the land."
“ But why make the land pay everything? Surely
that is most unjust."
Under the present system the land pays for every-
thing. But only some of the land—the rest pays
nothing. Land that is used for carrying on any
productive enterprise, and so adds to the wealth of the
community, pays an enormous tax, and a tax that
increases in proportion to the benefit derived by the
community. The more wheat the farmer grows, the


more wool the grazier produces, the more coal the
miner raises from the bowels of the earth, the more
goods the manufacturer makes, the greater the tax he
must pay. In each case, the product being drawn
from the land, it is obvious that the tax must be drawn
from the land also; but land that is not used at all, or
used for the sole benefit of the owner, pays no tax at
all ; and the community derives no benefit whatever
from it. It is, in fact, capable of demonstration, if
proof of so palpable a truth should be demanded, that
producers pay taxes for non-producers ; or, in other
words, productive land pays taxes for non-productive
land; or, still more forcibly, land so used that the
whole community is benefited thereby is made to pay
taxes that should be paid by land that is used for the
sole benefit of the owner. For example, A, who lives
abroad, owns land in Sydney or in the country, worth
many thousands a year, but pays to the public revenue
not one farthing; while B, who owns and cultivates a
50 acre farm worth £SO a year far away in the bush,
must pay to the revenue £l5O a year.
As before explained, the necessary result of this
unjust distribution of taxation is to discourage
enterprise that is beneficial to the whole community,
and to encourage speculation that is advantageous to
individuals only. Yet directly it is proposed to tax
the land, the cry is raised, “ but that will put a stop
to speculation in land!” as if speculation in land
benefited anybody but the speculator. But it will not


prevent investment in land to be used for productive
purposes which will benefit the whole community as
•well as the investor. But our present system
discourages productive investment and holds out
every inducement for speculation, with a want of
discrimination and discernment that results from a
perverted, or rather inverted, apprehension of the
respective value of each to the community.
Since the land pays taxes for everybody under the
present system, there cannot possibly be any valid
reason why it should not pay under the New System.
In fact if a tax is levied at all, the land must pay it,
simply because the means of doing so cannot be
derived from any other source.
“ But if the land is still to pay taxes as before,
where is the difference between the Old System and
the New ?”
The land will still pay taxes but not as before.
It is a customary plan to hamper horses with a heavy
clog attached, by means of a rope, to a headstall. This
clog, dragging along the ground, prevents the animals
from moving either far or fast.
Imagine now a number of unarmed men riding
horses so hampered, hunted by a pack of fierce insati-
able wolves called Want, Poverty, Hunger, Starvation,
Misery, Ignorance, Vice, Crime, Cruelty, and so on.
That is the picture of the Old System.
Imagine now the same weights, in the shape of
saddles, transferred to the horses’ backs with the


additional burden of men armed with the sword of
Justice and the spear of Truth. How quickly the
tables are turned ! The hunted now become hunters
and no longer seek to escape, but turn and slay their
fierce enemies.
That is a picture of the New System.
It only remains to adjust the tax under Laws based
apon Truth, and built up in Justice, so that all land
shall contribute fairly and equitably to the public
revenue.
This difference in the adjustment of the tax will
.make as great a difference in our relation to the evils
of life as the transfer of weights in the pictures we
have imagined.
“ But how is the change to be effected ?”
Most easily and equitably, without violence,
revolution, or disturbance of any kind; by simply
abolishing the present system of taxation and levying
a rate of so much per cent, on the annual value of all
land, in the same way as municipal rates are now
levied, but on a different principle. That difference
of principle lies in this particular feature, that the
Law will take no cognisance of any improvements
whatever, but will estimate the amount of the tax
from the site value of the land alone ; and to simplify
matters and render evasion of the tax impossible, the
Law will know no man but the owner in connection
with any land, and will look to him only for payment
of the tax, for which the land itself will be security.


Lawyers who regard their own private advantage
more than the public good will, of course, oppose
this reform to the last, because disputes about the
ownership of land will thus become almost impossible.
In its incidence a tax on the annual value of land
(the “ Single Tax ” as it is called by the followers of
Henry George —a name which may as well be adopted
here for the sake of its convenience and expressive-
ness) becomes a factor of immense benefit to the
whole community. Though levied directly upon the
landowner, it does not fall upon him in the same
injurious manner as the present taxes do. It is
imposed in the most convenient manner so as to be
least burdensome and incommodious, and so that it
■does not harass and annoy him at every step. And
since the whole population must eat and be clothed,
and live in houses, and the land alone can provide
these things for their use, they must all assist the
landowner who supplies them, in proportion to their
use of them. That all others must help the landowner
to pay his tax is evident from the fact that he can
obtain the means of paying it only by supplying them
with the product of his land, or by allowing them to
use or occupy his land as tenants paying rent. It is
thus so widely distributed that the tax ceases to be
oppressive to all, except the selfish, idle, extravagant,
and vicious, upon whom it presses more and more
heavily the more they are vicious, slothful, and self-
indulgent, whilst it becomes easier to the industrious


in proportion to the good qualities they exercise.
Hence it is clear that its influence is altogether
beneficent, showing a tendency to promote and
reward the exercise of good qualities and to punish
evil. It gives the landowner every encouragement to
make his land productive to its utmost capacity, and
is an ever-present stimulus to keep him constantly
awake to the advantage of increasing and improving
his product.
And since he can produce nothing without Labour,
it follows there must be a continual opening up of
new avenues for the employment of Labour and
Capital in new productive enterprises, such as will
most materially increase the wealth of the whole
community, as well as of every individual member of
the community.
“ But if the land pays all taxes now, why do not
these beneficial results accompany the working of the
present system ?”
Because 1, The tax is not fairly adjusted; 2, the
producer is plundered of all his profits by the
enormously heavy charges for freight and passage by
railway, and by Custom House and other taxes; and o,
production is killed and labour debarred from finding
employment.
“ But if the people will all help to pay under the
New System, do they not help at present ?”
No. The great majority of producers live in the
country, and must pay freight on their produce before


it will be carried by rail to the towns, where their
market is, and wherein most consumers inhabit. The
freight paid by them is not added to the price of the
produce, and is therefore a dead loss to the producer.
Wherefore it is necessary, if we would effect a
really gigantic improvement, and give full scope for
the working of the Single Tax, that all those unjust
and destructive charges and taxes should be abolished,
and our seaports and railways forthwith declared free.
We thus get rid of those hideous quagmires which
swallow up the profits of our industries, and we afford
to all our people untaxed goods and free access to
market. These are the greatest of all possible
stimulants to individual and to national advance-
ment.
In order to convince any who may yet have a
lingering doubt as to the advantages to be gained, it
may be well to point out that —
Free railways will make goods equally valuable over
the whole country, and will open to every part of it
every market that can be reached by rail.
Free railways will multiply the value of land by
giving free access to it, and free and ready access to
all markets.
Free railways will cause a rapid increase of our
population, because no other country in the world can
offer such advantages.
Free railways will abolish the heaviest of all the
taxes upon productive industry, and, thus leaving a


wider margin of profit to employers, will remove the
necessity that compels them to reduce wages, and
will also enable them to pay higher wages.
Free railways will relieve the congestion o
population in cities and towns, spread the people over
the country wherever there is work to be done, or
land that can be used to advantage.
Free railways and the Single Tax will remove all
the circumstances that now make strikes compulsory
and inevitable, leaving no possible reason or excuse
for them —(We will therefore hear no more about
“ Labour Troubles,”) —will provide abundant employ-
ment for all the Labour and all the Capital in the
country, and as much more as we can get; will prevent
poverty and distress arising from lack of employment;
will prevent the waste of much valuable produce that
cannot now be carried to market on account of the
heavy charges for freight; will prevent much of the
loss of stock from drought, by enabling us to earn
fodder to starving stock. So long as the neighbouring
colonies maintain the old system, Free Railways will
enable us practically to annex immense contiguous
areas from them, and so reap the benefit of their
produce in addition to our own.
Free Railways will enable us all to become
acquainted with the whole of our country, so that we
will be able to see for ourselves the special advantages
of various localities, and so establish our industries in
places naturally most advantageous for them.


Free Railways will enable the sick poor to have the
benefit of change of air, so often vainly prescribed for
them.
The New System promises advantages so multitu-
dinous and so magnificent that it is utterly beyond
the power of any human intelligence to enumerate or
trace them. Suffice it to say, that the tendency of
the Old System to substitute evil for good will be
completely reversed, and we may fairly expect to reap
all the blessings that can result from a return to a
wise, just, beneficent and Christian system of
legislation.


CHAPTER VI.
PRACTICAL POLITICS.
BEFORE attempting a reform so wide and deep, it is
equally necessary and prudent to count the cost —to
sum up our resources and look that we do not under-
take more than we can perform.
Since we must abandon at once so much of our
revenue as is derived from the Custom House and the
Railways, and have only the Single Tax to make good
the deficiency, we must reckon up how much is likely
to be obtainable from that source.
This question brings the matter “ within the range
of practical politics,” and upon the answer depends
the fate of the New System.
In the absence of any exact statistical information
on many points, we are compelled to trust largely to
inference from the few and meagre facts at our
disposal. Nevertheless, there is nothing discouraging
to be found in those facts, or in any deductions that
can be drawn from them.
The total area of the land from which it is proposed
to draw our future revenue is about 196,000,000 acres
consisting of about 45,000,000 acres of private lands,
and 151,000,000 acres of public land.
The private lands comprise all that is most valuable,
and include municipal areas, towns and villages not


incorporated, water frontages, and the best Pastoral,
Agricultural and Mineral lands throughout the
country.
In the various municipal areas there are upwards of
5,000 miles of streets and roads, and in unincorporated
towns and villages perhaps about an equal length.
Land fronting these streets and roads is sold at so
much per foot, the price varying between wide limits,
ranging from £I,OOO per foot in parts of Sydney to £l
per foot, or less, in the least favoured parts. The
total area of incorporated lands is about 1,400,000
acres, valued with improvements at £131,500,000.
(“ Wealth and Progress, 1889,” p. 606.) Assuming
that of this sum improvements represent £31,500,000,
we then have £100,000,000 as the estimated value of
all incorporated lands. If we add £25,000,000 as the
value of Other town lands, we have £125,000,000 as
the assumed total value of all private town lands, an
estimate that is probably less than half the true value.
Of the remaining private lands, about 42,000,000 acres,
including the choicest land of the whole colony, the
value varies from £2OO to £2 per acre. Assuming
the average at only £5 per acre, the total value would be
£210,000,000, although including all improvements it
is valued by the Government Statistician at only
£181,200,000. For present purposes, and as a rough
approximation only, we may safely assume the total
value of private lands to be not less than £250,000,000.
But what is wanted is the annual value, upon which


alone the Single Tax is levied ; and we have no figures
or data to guide us to even an approximation. Let it
then be assumed that the total amount to be paid by
private lands is £2,500,000, or an average of less than
one shilling and three-half-pence per acre per annum.
And let us take the contribution from public lands at
£7,500,000, or one shilling per acre per annum.
These two sums give a total revenue of £10,000,000
per annum. The revenue for 1889 was £9,063,399
only, so that there need be no doubt as to our ability
to raise revenue from the land by means of the Single
Tax.
Thus, it has been demonstrated that, even under
present circumstances, with all the drawbacks of a
vicious and destructive policy to support, the land
can supply us with a greater revenue than our present
cumbrous and expensive system yields.
Under the New System, with a rational tax to
encourage the development of our immense natural
resources, with the way to national greatness and
prosperity cleared of all its obstacles, with land values
multiplying yearly, with a rapidly-increasing popula-
tion, and with numberless new enterprises flourishing
luxuriantly, and their produce largely increased in
value, it will be easier to raise £50,000,000 than now
to raise £5,000,000.
With regard to the method of imposing and collect-
ing the new tax, a few suggestions will not be out of
place, as showing the feasibility and simplicity of the


scheme, as compared with the present costly and
intricate system.
For these purposes the whole country should be
divided into Municipal Districts under Local Govern-
ment Boards with assessors to survey and value the
land. From the returns of these officers the Treasurer
will be able to calculate the rate per cent, on the
annual value of private lands that must be levied to
give the required revenue for the year Assesments
should be made annually, at least for some years, and
provision made for the hearing of appeals to the Local
Government Board. The tax should be paid tothe office
of the Local Government for transmission to the
Treasury. The Local Government Board of each
District should prepare schedules setting forth such
local improvements and the cost thereof as may be
required, and submit them to the General Government,
who will approve or reject what they think fit and
place the sum required to the credit of each District.
In dealing with these the General Government will
always remember that such local improvements as
Railways, Roads, Bridges, Wharves, etc., will all tend
to increase the value of land, and so enable it to pay
a larger revenue, if required; whilst the knowledge
that such works will render local lands subject to a
higher assessment will prove a wholesome check on
extravagant expenditure by the Local Government
Boards. Wherefore it may be deemed advisable that
such Boards should consist for the most part of


individuals belonging to the District over which they
preside.
The object in view here being merely to indicate
with what marvellous ease the change from the Old
System to the New can be effected, it is unnecessary
now to dip deeper into details of administration.
Statesmen accustomed to measure the value of a
suggestion at a glance will readily perceive the
superiority its magnificent simplicity confers upon the
Single Tax over the intricate, conflicting, and confused
system under which we now suffer.
With regard to Free Railways, since the abolition
of charges for freight and passage will not necessitate
any change of administration in other respects, there
is no need to explain anything. There will be, ol
course, an immense increase of traffic, which will be
provided for as new requirements develop themselves.
The New System having been thus conclusively
proved to be “within the range of practical politics,”
it remains to deal with certain objections, which do
not touch the “practical” side of the question, but
affect its value by attributing to it effects it cannot
produce and intentions it does not entertain. Some
of these objections are raised merely for the purpose
of confusing the issue and creating a prejudice
against the New System, using imaginary evils as
bugbears to fright the souls of the timid and ignorant
and deter them from supporting it. It is asserted, for
instance, that the New System will interfere with our


present methods of dealing with land ; that it will
affect the stability of the money market; that it will
make land valueless ; that it will raise the price of
everything ; that it will depreciate the value of our
securities ; that it will injure large landowners ; that
it will injure the small landowners and the free
selectors; and other objections of a like nature.
Objections of a different character are, that it will
make the rich richer, and the poor poorer ; and that
it is a cunningly-devised scheme to take from those
who have, and give to those who have not. All who
have closely followed the argument so far cannot
entertain any of these objections; but to reassure and
confirm the wavering, the statement already made is
here reiterated, that the New System has no desire or
intention to interfere in any way with the ownership
of land, or with the ownership of improvements thereon.
It is not proposed to prevent or hinder people from
buying, selling, leasing, or selecting land, or to change
in any way their right to do any or all of these things.
Its effect upon the money market cannot possibly be
prejudicial when it strews benefits broadcast in other
respects. It cannot render land valueless until all
the people take to living on the water or in the air.
While they live on land it must always have a value.
It will cheapen all kinds of goods and produce of
every description, because there will no longer be
any taxes on goods. It will increase the value of
securities by giving free access to the land. It will


make land more valuable, many times more valuable,
than it is now, so that it cannot possibly injure the
large or small landowner, or the selector, or anybody
else. It will make the rich richer, but it will not make
the poor poorer. On the contrary, the poor will
benefit equally with the rich, because all they earn is
theirs, and they will no longer be plundered by
taxation. If they own no land they will pay no tax.
If they own land, and use it, they will pay less than
they pay now. For instance, the farmer who (in the
fourth chapter)was shown to pay £9O as a “prohibition
tax,” and £l5O per annum as a “ destructive tax,”
will pay only a percentage on the annual value of his
farm, which was given at £SO per annum. Suppose
the tax imposed is £lO per cent., the amount he will
have to pay is only £5, and he will therefore make a
clear gain of £145 per annum by the change from
the Old System to the New.
“ But somebody else will have to pay it,” exclaims
the objector, as if he had struck a new and invincible
argument. But it has been answered already. Of
course somebody else will have to pay it, namely, the
landowners who now shirk payment by saddling those
who use their land with the shirkers’ share. The last
objection is a puzzle belonging to the bugbear class,
and is used to frighten silly folks with the idea that
there is some sinister design, some terrible bogey
somewhere or other hidden under the skirts of
the New System. Silly folks will be frightened


accordingly, and will actually swear they have seen
‘'bogey,” where sensible folks see only the plain
statement of a plain truth in the assertion that the
New System will injure none but rogues and
vagabonds, and those whose present business it is to
injure others.
There are also some who think Free Railways are
impossible, or that it will be long before we get them,
or that they will be abused if we do get them, or that
there will be no “ first-class,” or that there will be so
much traffic that we will not be able to cope with it,
and so on. The only one of these that deserves an
answer is the last, for there certainly will be an
enormous increase of traffic ; but it will not be
immeasurable, and the Railway Commissioners are
not without resources, and our railway system is
capable of extension, and the more it is extended,
and the more goods and passengers it carries, the
better it will be for the country. It may also be
mentioned that none of the lines, except the suburban,
are at present working up to one-half of their capacity.
It may be well, also, to repeat that neither the value
of the land, nor the amount of tax to be levied upon
it, as given above, is to be accepted as definitely fixed.
The amounts given are introduced only for the
purpose of showing that, on an assumed low valuation,
it is possible to raise from the land a revenue amply
sufficient for all present requirements. The estimated
average tax of one shilling per acre on public land is


merely a suggestion which may prove to be more or
less than is necessary, or more or less than is just.
But, taking into consideration the fact that the
estimate given provides a larger revenue than we can
now raise, which will enable us to dispense with all
other taxes, and rely upon the Single lax alone for
our revenue, the suggested tax does not appear to
exceed the limits of moderation or justice.
Exact figures for the purpose of ascertaining the
true value of the land can only be obtained b\
assessment of the whole colony a work entircl)
beyond the reach of individual effort, but which can
and ought to be immediately undertaken by tht
Government.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI.
THE SINGLE TAX FIFTY YEARS AGO.
While searching for the statistical information
required in this chapter, my attention was directed to
a pamphlet by Herbert Spencer, entitled “ The Man
versus The State,” which, it was confidently asserted,
finally disposed of the notion of Free Railways and
the Single Tax by exposing their utter impossibility.”
Having read the pamphlet, and found therein not one
word about either, but a great deal of very valuable,
instructive, and interesting matter entirely corrobora-
tive of my “ indictment against the Law,” but
embracing a much wider horizon than is contemplated
by my own feeble effort, and exhibiting the firmer
grasp of a master mind in the brilliant electric touch
which exposes a fallacy or illuminates a truth with
equal elegance and power, I can heartily recommend
the pamphlet to such of my readers as may desire to
gain a clearer and more comprehensive understanding
of a subject of so much importance.
Mr. Spencer gives many shrewd hints that should
be invaluable to the “collective wisdom ” of New
South Wales at present engaged in the task of making
laws for our governance—a task for which so many of
our legislators are so eminently disqualified. They
will keenly appreciate his reference to the “ practical ”


politician, of whom he says:—“The theory on which
he daily proceeds is that the change caused by his
measure will stop where he intends it to stop. He
contemplates intently the things his act will achieve,
but thinks little of the remoter issues of the movement
his act sets up, and still less of its collateral issues,
(p. 23.) The whole description exposes so many
of the failings of our own legislation that every
“ practical ” politician should study it. He cannot
read it without some advantage to himself, and it may
be that its perusal will have the effect of inducing him
to forego some of his contemplated attempts at law-
making.
In his chapter on “ The Sins of Legislators,”
Mr. Spencer gives a number of examples of “the
mischiefs wrought by uninstructed law-making,” and
reminds us that “uninstructed legislators have in
past times continually increased human suffering in
their endeavours to mitigate it; and ... if these
evils, shown to be legislatively intensified or produced,
be multiplied by ten or more, a conception will be
formed of the aggregate evils caused bv law-making,
unguided by social science.” Referring to the many
thousands of Acts of Parliament that have been
repealed, he says, “ unquestionably, in multitudinous
cases, repeals come because the Acts had proved
injurious. We talk glibly of such changes—we
think of cancelled legislation with indifference. We
forget that before laws are abolished they have


generally been inflicting evils, some for a few years,
some for tens of years, some for centuries . . . .
Seeing, then, that bad legislation means injury to
men’s lives, judge what must be the total amount of
mental distress, physical pain, and raised mortality,
which these thousands of repealed Acts of Parliament
represent!” (p. 50). He speaks of “the truth that
law-making, unguided by adequate knowledge, brings
immense evils” (51), and after exposing some of the
blundering Acts that have added greatly to the
sufferings of the London poor, he asks, “ Where
then lies the blame for the miseries of the East-end?
Against whom should be raised ‘ the bitter cry of
outcast London ?’ ” (55). Further on he tells of the
difficulties encountered by the Registrar-General in
dealing with the census returns for 1881, where he
had to take into account “ 39,000 administrative areas
of twenty-two different kinds which overlap one
another ” —a telling example of bad legislation made
actually visible by “ the vast multitude of different
areas” and “the bewildering complexity of their
boundaries.’"'
These quotations, though sufficient only to indicate
what a mine of instruction Mr. Spencer’s pamphlet
contains, will serve well enough to show how pointedly
he confirms my own contention that, since we make
the laws that make the evils we endure, we are
responsible for them, and have the power to remove
them.


But Mr. Spencer has given me other and much
more powerful support and confirmation, where I had
not looked for such help or thought it possible. His
support is all the more powerful, and all the more
valuable in that it is involuntary, because, writing in
1884, and for quite another purpose alluding to his
uncle’s success in improving the condition of his
parish, he could scarcely have been aware that he was
confirming our high anticipations of the value of the
Single Tax.
In his chapter on “The Coming Slavery,’’ Mr.
Spencer relates the following anecdote
A late uncle of mine, The Rev. Thomas Spencer, for
some twenty years incumbent of Hinton Charterhouse, near
Bath, no sooner entered on his parish duties, than he proved
himself anxious for the welfare of the poor by establishing
a school, a library, a clothing club, and land allotments,
besides building some model cottages. Moreover, up to
1833, he was a pauper’s friend—always for the pauper
against the overseer. There presently came, however, the
debates on the Poor Law, which impressed him with the
evils of the system then in force, Though an ardent
philanthropist, he was not a timid sentimentalist. The
result was that, immediately the new Poor Law was passed,
he proceeded to carry out its provisions in his parish.
Almost universal opposition was encountered by him; not
the poor only being his opponents, but even the farmers on
whom came the burden of heavy poor rates, lor, strange
to say, their interests had become apparently identified with
the maintenance of this system which taxed them so largely.


The explanation is that there had grown up the practice of
paying out of the rates, a part of the wages of each farm
servant —“ make wages,” as the sum was called. And
though the farmers contributed most of the fund from which
“make wages” were paid, yet, since all other ratepayers
contributed, the farmers seemed to gain by the arrangement.
My uncle, however, not easily deterred, faced all this
opposiiion, and enforced the Law, The result was that in
two years the rates were reduced from a year to
a year; while the condition of tie parish was greatly
improved. “Those who had hitherto loitered at the corners
of the streets, or at the doors of the beer shops, had some-
thing else to do, and one after another, they obtained
employment; ” so that out of a population of 800, only 15
had to be sent as incapable paupers to the Bath Union (when
that was formed), in place of the 100 who received out-door
relit f a short time before.
Mr. Spencer gives no particulars about the “ New
Poor Law ” he mentions, nor does he give the
slightest intimation that he was acquainted with its
purport ; though, knowing the evils of the previous
syshm, and the beneficial results which followed the
enforcement of this “New Poor Law ” —results which
could not possibly have been produced by a bad law,
an observer so keen can scarcely have failed to take
note of a matter of so great importance.
After reading the above anecdote, I had the
curiosity to look through the volumes of English
Statutes for 1833-6 in the Free Public Library in
Sydney, to find out what special provisions the “New


Poor Law” contained that would account for its
good results. Among the measures passed in the
years “ 6 and 7 William 1V.,” page 1139, Chapter
96, I found “an Act to regulate Parochial Assess-
ments in England and Wales,” by which it was
enacted that poor rates should be levied only upon
the net annual value of the property assessed.
Judge, then, of my surprise and my gratitude to
Mr. Spencer when I found that he had thus furnished
me with—what I had not imagined to be at all possible
—an example of “The Single Tax” in actual operation !
To have known the existence of the Act itself would
have been of great value ; but to have the working of
the Act described and its beneficial results dilated
upon, and by an authority perfectly disinterested and
unimpeachable, was a piece of good fortune as
inestimable as it was unexpected.
Mr. Spencer probably did not know, or did not
remember the exact conditions of this long-defunct
statute, and Mr. Henry George is probably not aware
that his theory has ever been even partially reduced
to practice. But here it is, and mark how grandly
superior its work! It failed not of what it was
designed to accomplish, and developed no unexpected
evils after the manner of other statutes, and it may be
cited as the one solitary Act of Parliament to which
such commendation can be given. It not only did the
work expected of it—to provide a fund for the relief of
the poor—but it had other and more beneficial effects.


It greatly improved the condition of the parish and
literally banished poverty, leaving only 15 incapable
paupers, where before there had been 100 “on the
parish ; ” and it reduced the amount levied on the
parish from £7OO to £2OO a year. In two years, what
a marvellous change ! By simply abolishing a bad
system and enforcing a good one, the entire aspect
of the parish is “ greatly improved,” and the burden
of taxation upon the ratepayers made lighter by no
less than five-sevenths ! and still more gratifying. 85
per cent, of the paupers, comprising all but the
incapables, were enabled to earn their own living.
How great, then, would be the national benefit, if,
instead of applying such a law in a single parish,
or to a single phase of national life, it could be made
to include the whole taxation assessment of the
country, as it is proposed to make the Single Tax
include it! Should it ever be enforced here and the
same percentage of improvement should follow, as in
the case of the parish of Hinton Charterhouse, our
taxation would fall from nine millions to two and a
half millions, all the unemployed and all the pot-house
loafers would be set to work, only the “ incapable
paupers ” would be idle, and the condition of the
whole country would be greatly improved.
Is not this exactly what has been prophesied of the
working of the Single Tax? Yet we are not now
compelled to rely solely on our anticipations, for we
have an authority to appeal to, an example to quote,


to strengthen our forecast with actual invincible facts
that can neither be denied nor explained away. So
many objections have been raised on the ground of
its supposed impracticability, that it is scarcely
possible to over-rate the value of this example of the
practical working and beneficial results of the Single
Tax. It silences at once the objection that it is a
mere theory, and proves that it has a sound and solid
basis, and that it is supported by something more
substantial and practical than “ the visionary notions
of a mere enthusiast.”


CHAPTER VII.
LOOKING FORWARD.
The foundations on which it is proposed to build being
thus set out, and indications given of the nature of
the structure intended to be raised thereon, a short
space may now be devoted to an attempt to realise, in
imagination, some of the benefits it will confer.
Let it first be granted that the New System has
been for some time in force as the “settled policy” of
New South Wales; then let us try to picture the
resulting improvement in the condition of the country
and the people.
Since the abolition of tariff taxation and the
departure of the first free train from Sydney, up to
the present day, the march of prosperity has been
rapid, uninterrupted and triumphant, brilliantly vindi-
cating the principles upon which those reforms were
introduced. At first there were not wanting numbers
of those wiseacres who are always at hand to worry,
annoy, and obstruct those who would sweep away
any musty, dusty, antique rubbish, or give the world
the benefit of any new and bright idea; who think
anything of the kind is condemned beyond redemption
when they have dubbed it “an innovation ;” who are
always full of forebodings of “dire disasters” and
“terrible calamities” when any reform is proposed.


But, so far, no catastrophe has occurred to lessen our
appreciation of the benefits we now enjoy, although
the traffic on our railways has increased so greatly
that ithas been found necessary again to quadruplicate
the suburban lines and duplicate most of the country
lines. No trains of empty trucks or passenger cars
are now' to be seen, for there is always a pressure on
the accommodation for both goods and passengers
that keeps the energies of the Railway Commissioners
ahvays aw'ake to the necessity of adding to their
rolling stock. Every little country station is a scene
of busy life and activity that affords abundant
evidence of new' fulness and vigour in productive
enterprises —evidence that the New System is not
only conducive to the advantage of the people, but
that it also stimulates their energies and their intelli-
gence to the best and most effective methods. In all
directions may be seen symptoms of the marvellous
improvement that has taken place, for the railways no
longer pass through untrodden forests or by neglected
or deserted farms. Along all the lines the farmers
are busy as bees in their luxuriant fields; vineyards,,
orchards, and orange groves show the extent to which
the wane and fruitgrowing industries have expanded,,
large quantities of fruit and wine being sent to India
and Europe. The shipments of wdieat to England
are now more than the whole produce of a few years
back, while the quantity of sugar produced more than
doubles the former import of that commodity.


In mining districts similar progress may be observed;
mines of coal, iron, tin, gold, copper, and other
minerals are being worked wherever they can be
found in payable quantities ; the iron industry
especially is rapidly growing in magnitude and
importance.
In pastoral affairs great progress has been made,
the number of horses, cattle, and sheep have largely
increased, wool has improved both in quality and
quantity, whilst the export meat trade has made
enormous strides.
Manufactures of all kinds are in a most flourishing
condition, those of iron and steel being now the most
important in the whole country on account of the
immense demand for machinery of all kinds, and the
magnitude of our requirements for Railways and
shipbuilding.
Many new industries have been established, a
marked feature in connection with which is the fact
that each is located in the best natural position, that
site being selected, as a matter of course, which
presents the best and greatest natural advantages for
carrying on any particular industry. By availing
themselves of such natural aids manufacturers are
enabled to produce a greater quantity at the least
possible cost. There is thus a tendency for manufac-
tures of similar kinds to gather in groups, which
greatly facilitates improvement and saves waste of
both time and material. The same tendency is


observable in regard to agriculture, wheat, oats, maize,
lucerne, sugar, oranges, apples, and other fruits, each
favouring particular districts where they flourish more
abundantly than elsewhere.
New Railways are being built as rapidly as the
supply of labour and material will permit, the demands
for accommodation and extension increasing more
rapidly than our ability to comply with them.
So far the condition of the country continues to
improve with undiminished vigour, the returns ol
every industry testifying to an unparalleled progress
and prosperity that more than fulfil the most sanguine
expectations of the founders of the New System.
Meanwhile the condition of the people has under-
gone a change for the better, as is shown by the figures
of the Government Statistician for the last census,
which prove beyond doubt that there has been a vast
decrease in crime, intemperance, illegitimacy, and
insanity, accompanied by an equally remarkable
increase in the marriage rate and the birth rate, which
proves an increase of wealth and comfort, and the
existence of a real uolden Age ”of happiness and
prosperity, that is no figment of a poetic imagination.
Perhaps the most striking feature disclosed by the
census is the vast addition to the population during
the last few years. The initiation of the New System
was the signal for the invasion of the country by a
swarm of immigrants from both the Old and the New
World, as well as from the other Australasian colonies.


This swarm continues to come with little diminution,
and it is calculated that, if it is maintained for another
ten years, it will add ten millions to our already
largely-augmented population. These immigrants are
not the outcasts or ne’er-do-wells’ of other countries,
but a busy, pushing, eager throng, whose very
appearance shows that they are not afraid of either
work or hardship ; but anxious to begin afresh the
demonstration of that grand truth, denied or despised
by so many in the days of the old regime that
.enterprise needs no coddling , no meddling, tinkering,
“ tin pot ” legislators to give it the life and vigour
which are its own inherent qualities, but only “a fair
field and no favour ” to enable it to display its power
to overcome and subdue the earth.
The arrival of the vanguard of this army of workers
was but the beginning of the invasion which has filled
the whole country with a most industrious and
thriving population, whose smiling farms and happy
homesteads form so notable a feature in the landscape
bordering upon the lines of railways which used to
pass through leagues of wilderness and unbroken
bush. Having free access to the land in all directions,
there is nothing to prevent them from becoming
landowners or tenants of farms, where they are able
to earn sufficient to maintain their families in com-
parative affluence. Just at first there was so great a
“ rush ” to obtain farms that labour was for a while
very scarce, and this scarcity was made greater by


the demand for hands for a number of new industries,
but the inflow of population soon restored the
balance, and the condition of affairs is now most
satisfactory. In the old days there was, as has been
shown, a never-ceasing, ever-increasing influence at
work driving and enticing people out of the country
districts into the cities, where, by the heavy tolls on
travelling, they were as effectually shut in as by a
wall, and so compelled to become consumers of that
of which they had been producers, diminishing the
share of all by lessening the amount produced, and
adding to the burdens of those who still obstinately
continued to produce. The double tendency of this
influence was to deplete the country districts and
over-crowd the cities, and to produce misery and
starvation in the country districts, and misery,
starvation, vice, and crime in the cities.
These evil symptoms have now entirely disappeared.
Instead of driving the people into the cities, the
New System encourages them to distribute them-
selves over the country wherever there is work to be
done, or land that can be used to advantage. Even
the rogues and vagabonds have discovered that it is
both easier and pleasanter to make an honest living
wdthout risking their liberty, than to live by plunder
and pass half their lives in gaol. As a natural conse-
quence, drunkenness and debauchery have become rare,
whilst the vices peculiar to the poor and miserable
have almost entirely disappeared, and the general


social and moral improvement of the people is even
greater than their temporal advancement. This need
not seem strange to enlightened and civilised
Christians when even Cicero, heathen as he was, knew
that “ to give men happiness is to bring them nearer
to God.” But it is, nevertheless, a complete vindi-
cation of the New System, and a confutation of those
who held that evil is an indigenous growth in every
human heart, while virtue is but an exotic culture ;
who maintained that it is impossible to decrease the
average residuum of poverty, sin, or sorrow in the
world, or to elevate and improve man’s moral nature.
The demonstration of this truth is the crowning
triumph of the New System.
The other Australian colonies regarded the
inauguration of the new policy in New South Wales
with calm confidence in their own superiority, not a
little mixed with wonder that the oldest and most
conservative of the group should thus be the first to
run counter to the traditions of ancient wisdom.
Their complacency was soon exchanged for admira-
tion of the renewed vigour and vitality displayed by
the mother colony; and their admiration speedily
gave place to alarm for their own safety when they
awoke to the fact that their people seemed with one
consent to have become eager to determine which
colony could be first abandoned to the crows and
kangaroos. They started for New South Wales at
first in tens, then in hundreds, and, before anything


could be decided upon, the hundreds had grown to
thousands, “ and still they came,” leaving behind only
those who could not get away.
Then it was seen that the same attraction which
drew them away must be relied upon to bring them
back, or at least to induce some to stay at home, and
the New System at once became law from Cape York
to the Leeuwin.
The Federal Government was shortly afterwards
established, and one of its first measures was a
provision for the extension of the system of free
carriage to our immense ocean traffic. All the Orient
and P. and O. steamers were bought, and a number
of still larger vessels ordered before the scheme was
divulged. Of course, a great outcry was immediately
raised by those who could not see what benefit was to
be derived from the step, although the advantages are
but little less than those conferred by free land-
carriage. The Federal Government, however, was
not to be deterred by the clamour of these, and
proceeded further to buy up all the coasting steamers,
and thus took the entire carrying trade of the country
into its own hands. It was very soon made clear that
the public regarded the change with approval, and its
value was put beyond doubt by the arrival of several
vessels in rapid succession, all crowded with immi-
grants ready to go to work, at a time when the
scarcity of labourers seemed likely to involve the
country in disaster. After that there was no more


grumbling, and all went “ merry as a marriage bell.”
Every vessel that arrived was full, both of cargo and
passengers, for the former cost nothing beyond the
expense of putting it on board, and the latter had to
pay only for food and attendance on the voyage.
Never in the history of the world has there been any
parallel to the life and activity now displayed by all
the colonies of the Australian Federation. As the
uninterrupted stream of immigration continued to
pour into them, adding new strength to the productive
power of the people, there has been a continuous
growth in all branches of industrial enterprise—a
growth so rapid and so great that, although the whole
energies of the Government are directed to prevent
waste, it is at times difficult to find adequate means
for transporting to seaport or to market the enormous
results of the people’s productive energy.
The question of the Federal Capital, which was
allowed to remain for some time in abeyance, having
at length been settled, and the capital fixed at
Centralia, a new direction has been given to much of
the land traffic. Trunk lines have been constructed
to connect the Federal City with the old capitals,
which are still the principal seaports of the country,
though many new ones have been established of late,
and others are in course of formation.
Our mercantile marine has kept pace with our
advance in other respects ; and we now have a fleet
of ocean steamers that will compare favourably with


any in the world. On account of the rapid growth of
the coastal traffic under the New System, it has been
found necessary to add large numbers of new vessels
to our coasting fleet. To supply these the new iron
shipbuilding industries were established, and have
been kept busy ever since; and have, indeed, been of
most signal national service.
The Federal Railway system is a very wonderful
feature in the new map of Australia, the lines stretch-
ing outward from Centralia to the coast being crossed
at Intervals by connecting lines, which impart to a
railway map the appearance of a huge geometrical
pattern. As the system extends, it will still more
decidedly assume that character, for it Is not intended
to allow the lines to grow at haphazard, but to build
them in accordance with a definite scheme prepared
by a skilful staff of engineers.
The abolition of all other governmental taxes of
every kind was a reform which speedily followed the
introduction of the New System. It was seen that
these taxes were entirely unnecessary, and that the
ever-increasing value of the land provided a revenue
so abundant and elastic that they were no longer
required; but they were abolished chiefly because of
their maleficent nature. In connection with our civil
and criminal courts, the charges had long been
condemned for their injustice, and because they
provided a means of extortion and oppression in the
hands of unscrupulous officials and litigants, and were


at all times a burden to the poor, who found it hard
enough to live, without having to buy justice. It was
accordingly declared unlawful to make any charge
whatever in connection with the administration of
justice, which was still further improved by the
abolition of • the “time-honoured system of trial
by juiy,” the place of both jury and counsel
being taken by two assistant judges, whose function
it is to see that justice is done in accordance not
only with the law of the land, but with the higher
law of right and truth. The practice of allowing
counsel to plead, to examine, and conduct cases,
has been swept away, and a much simpler form of
procedure adopted, which renders it unprofitable
to any man to waste time in the courts; and it is no
longer the interest of any that cases should be pro-
longed formonths that might easilybe settled inan hour.
After considerable discussion the Post and Telegraph
Offices were declared free, and letters and telegrams
were carried without charge, except for delivery by
-special messenger.
The next batch of burdens consisted of all that
remained of the Old System, Municipal rates, gas
rates, water rates, sewerage rates, the rabbit tax, and
all other charges, fees, rates, tolls, taxes or assess-
ments, levied in accordance with the provisions of any
Act of Parliament, were consigned together to
■oblivion. Then began the reign of the Single Tax as
the one supreme and only tax for the whole nation.


Against the abolition of the duties on wines and
spirits a desperate fight was made by the Local
Optionists and Sons of Temperance, who urged that
these should rather be increased than abolished.
Against them it was argued' —that publicans’ licenses
gave to certain houses, specially set apart for the
business, the monopoly of the retail traffic in intoxicat-
ing liquor ; that those houses thus became a rendezvous
for topers and tipplers, who were thereby encouraged,
and encouraged one another, to deeper indulgence than
if each should buy in a place where he would not be
allowed to stop and drink, even as people buy meat
and bread which they carry away and consume in
private ; that these licenses made it the interest as
well as the business of the publican to sell as much
liquor as possible, thus deliberately providing a class
to debase and ruin as many as possible of their
fellow-citizens; that the abolition of the license fee
would make the liquor trade a part of ordinary business
and would abolish pot-houses and ginshops, to the
great and manifest gain of the w'hole community ;
that provision could be made to prevent the gatherin g
of confirmed drunkards in any house for the purpose
of drinking, by treating drunkenness as an aberration
of intellect and secluding patients for special medical
treatment until they should be pronounced cured,
instead ot giving’them “twenty-four hours in the cells;”
and much more to a similar effect. Nothing, however,
would persuade the temperance people that the


removal of these taxes would not expose the entire
population to the imminent danger of becoming
confirmed drunkards, simply because liquor would be
so much cheaper. They were evidently of opinion
that only their efforts had hitherto prevented that
catastrophe, and that the license fee had assisted them ,
not perceiving that they must fight in vain against the
allurements of strong liquor while so many others were
rendering those allurements still more attractive and
still more potent by every means in their power. The
result has proved that their apprehensions were
groundless, for since the liquor trade has been
unrestricted , drunkenness has become rare, although,
of course, intemperance is still a vice all too prevalent.
In our struggle against its enticements we now have
the most powerful of all possible assistance in the
quickly rising standard of moral life and conduct more
generally adopted among the people, as they free
themselves from the evil influence of old associations,
and raise themselves by degrees above the level where
infamy and vice bring no shame to the misery-
encrusted soul.
The establishment of “ The State Bank of
Federated Australia” was another benefit, the
founding of which was, perhaps, only hastened by the
New System, for its necessity had been foreseen even
before the discussion about the New System had
arisen. It was formed for the purpose of managing
all the financial business of the Government, and


arranging the liquidation of the public debts of the
federated colonies. The revenue obtainable from the
Single Tax, being at all times easily and simply
adjustable to our requirements, it has been a matter
of no great difficulty to relieve the country of the
pressure of so great a burden of debt. Funds for the
construction of railways or other large and expensive
public works can easily be found by an almost
inappreciable addition to the ordinary rate of the
Single Tax, when the amount raised proves insufficient.
That has as yet occurred only once, when a large
instalment of the public debt and a heavy payment on
account of new railways became due at the same time.
The rate has been lowered three times since the first
levy, when it was found that the revenue was much
greater than the expenditure, owing to the unexpected
expansiveness of the value of the land.
The State Bank has proved itself a very useful
institution in many respects, but the one feature that
has most endeared it to the people is the system of
issuing State debentures in exchange for the title
deeds of land, which may be redeemed by the repay-
ment of the amount of the debentures, provided only
that the annual tax has not fallen into arrears beyond
the value of the owner’s improvements, in which case
the State may sell or lease the land, reserving the
right of redemption for five years only. In this way,
Capital locked up in land is set free to add its share to
the wealth of the country, and no individual is


hampered for want of funds to make his land more
productive, or by the difficulty of finding a purchaser
if he should wish to sell it. The method of issuing
debentures is very simple, the owner merely lodging
his deeds and his Single Tax Assessment to show the
value of the land, and receiving in exchange debentures
for the amount he may require up to the total value,
and a receipt for his deeds showing the amount for
which they are held. This receipt is a negotiable
security, and may be sold, mortgaged, transferred, or
bequeathed, the holder being the owner for the time
being of the equity of redemption, and of such value
over and above its debenture value, as the land may
possess or acquire. The debentures are negotiable
documents of the nature of bank notes, and may be
used in exactly the same way. Bearing no interest,
their face value shows their worth ; and, being of large
denomination only, they are of the greatest service in
all commercial transactions. The advantage to the
State, in lieu of interest, lies in the additional value
given to the land by the expenditure of the debenture
capital in increasing its productive power, or in the
establishment of reproductive enterprises, which add
to the wealth of the whole community—of the individual
producer, and to the State revenue.
The justice of this system has been called in
question, but without exposing any fault in it; for it
is clear that, since the State derives its revenue from
the land, and has already received its value for it,


and is, moreover, a direct gainer by this method of
dealing with it, there is every reason why the State
and the landowner should be mutually advantaged in
this way, and no reason at all why they should not,
except that it puts an end to the old usurious system
which returned large profits to shareholders in land
mortgage companies by killing off the productive
industries which are the breath of life to the
community.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE NEW SYSTEM.
The establishment of the new system in Australia was
watched with earnest attention by the whole civilised
world, but most intently by those of our own kindred
whose attention had already been drawn to the Single
Tax, but none had courage or confidence enough to
try it until they saw how splendidly it was working in
Australia. In England it was at first pronounced by
high authorities to be but “a visionary Utopian
scheme, flimsy and hollow as a soap-bubble, very
beautiful to contemplate in a favourable light, but
certain to burst immediately on coming in contact with
the hard realities of national life, and utterly impos-
sible as the settled policy of a great nation.” The
Irish and Scotch, and more emphatically the Welsh,
admired the system exceedingly, declaring it to be
identical with that which prevailed amongst them in
the days before either the Roman or the Sassenach
appeared in the land of the Briton. They are still its
enthusiastic admirers, and would have it at once if it
were possible, but the oracles had spoken and
condemned it, and so was lost the favourable oppor-
tunity that might have saved the Empire much loss
and many a bitter struggle. The troubles, domestic
and foreign, the strikes, mutinies, and revolts which


have of late destroyed his peace and happiness, have
hitherto prevented John Bull from even considering
the matter. Since, however, “the stern logic of Time ”
has completely reversed the judgment of the “high
authorities ” on which the new system was rejected in
the first instance, there is every hope that Great Britain
will shortly adopt it.
Other European nations having pronounced against
the New System, and rejected it with scorn when first
introduced to their notice, and now perhaps feeling
compelled to prove themselves right in spite of fate,
or bound too firmly in the chains of their military
organisations, maintain an obstinate hostility to it.
They have lost the small share of the world's carrying
trade they once enjoyed, and are compelled largely to
subsidise the few vessels they still maintain upon the
seas. They have also, to their own great injury,
imposed heavy taxes upon Australian ships visiting
their ports, and upon goods imported from Australia,
of which, although cheaper and better than their own,
they thus deprive their people.
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway have adopted the
Single Tax, but reject “ free carriage,” and must
consequently depend upon Australian vessels for their
foreign trade.
Our Canadian brethren had closely noted our
proceedings, and almost before its success became
assured in New South Wales, their Government
brought in a measure for the adoption of the New


System. Ibis was opposed with such vehemence
by the Tariff party that it was postponed for a
considerable time, but was, on “appeal to the country/’
finally carried by a large majority. It was thus forced
upon the notice of the United States Government,
who at once perceived that it would enable Canada
to cut them out of all their foreign trade, and that it
would be more prejudicial to them the longer they
stood out against it. They, therefore, immediately
declared in favour of the New System and set to work
with the greatest vigour and‘determination to carry
their resolution into effect. Their action was at once
endorsed with the warmest approval of the people,
which blazed up into almost delirious enthusiasm
when it was discovered that an attempt was being
made to defeat reform by the distribution of enormous
bribes. Then, indeed, the people arose in their
strength, and heaped scorn and contempt upon the
base traffickers in the nation’s liberties. Before their
righteous wrath, the opposition, after a few short-lived
but fierce and furious sputterings, disappeared like
thorns in the devouring flames of a mighty con-
flagration. Rings, pools, corners, and monopolies of
all kinds were swept away, the chains which fettered
industry, and made Labour the bond-slave of Monopoly,
were burst asunder, and Liberty once more walked
with free unshackled limbs through the land of Freedom,
The whole country went wild with joy, the immensity
of the people’s relief and gladness breaking forth in


songs of triumph and delight Processions, miles in
length, of labourers with their wives and children
paraded the streets with music, dags, banners and
devices with shouts of triumphant joy, showing how
deeply their hearts were stirred “ to welcome Freedom
home again ” as their voices re-echoed to the thrilling
strains of their musicians. On the next Sabbath, the
churches were decorated for “ services of thanksgiving
for the mighty deliverance of our country from the
bonds of industrial slavery,” which were held in almost
every town and city throughout the country.
The excitement culminated in, if possible, a still
wilder outburst of popular rejoicing when “a measure
for the resumption of the railways for the free service
of the people of this country ” was carried without a
single dissentient voice, although it pledged the
Government to a liability of nearly four thousand
millions of dollars, and an annual working expenditure
of about five hundred millions of dollars. Some were
a little staggered by the magnitude of these figures,
but the President soon allayed their fears by
reminding them that it “does not matter whether the
cost is four cents, or four hundred thousand million
dollars, so long as we get value for our money,” and
proceeded to demonstrate that the amount would be
more than covered ten times over, by the increased
value of land in the Western States alone. He was
well supported by an enterprising and speculative
Senator, who offered to take the whole liability on


liis own shoulders in exchange for the fee simple, free
of tax, of 100,000 square miles of land in a barren and
desert waste in the far west. When it was explained,
however, that free railways would raise the value of
that particular territory by about fifty thousand million
dollars, the advantages of the New System became
-clear to the most sceptical, and no further objection
was raised even to the purchase of all the steamers
owned in the United States, also “ for the free service
■of the people.”
The working of the system has more than justified
their most sanguine expectations, daily developing
unexpected features of a most beneficial nature. The
setting free of the enormons capital, which had been
locked up in railways, provided ample funds for the
establishment of newandflourishing industries, perhaps
the most expansive of which is the building of steel
steamers, the States being now the principal rivals of
Australia in that essential branch of national develop-
ment, almost strangled by the vicious exclusive policy
so long maintained by the dominant party in the
United States.
Nowhere has experience of the New System
.disclosed the slightest tendency toward the production
of any of those evils, of which the Old was so prolific.
On the contrary, it has given abundant proofs of its
power to work out the national and moral regeneration
of any people by whom its fundamental principles are
embraced. To them it becomes a fountain of blessing,


and a perennial source of refreshment and felicity,
and proving that man may raise himself above the
reach of evil, if he will but avail himself of the means
provided by Divine wisdom.


CHAPTER IX.
CONCLUSION.
If I have attained any measure of success, it must now
be manifest that our present policy stands condemned
in that it ever tends to degrade and debase mankind,
morally, socially, and physically ; and also because it
does not, and cannot, exercise any elevating effect in
any respect whatever.
It must also be clear that the New System, or a
new system, must shortly be attempted if we wish to
avoid the calamities that have overtaken older nations,
and are already menacing ourselves.
Having discharged my duty to my country in
making known what I hope and believe will prove of
great advantage to the world, it only remains to
express my gratitude to those whose works have
touched the same ground, Mr. Henry George, Mr.
Edward Bellamy, and Mr. Herbert Spencer ; and also
to my brother, Mr. T. A. Johnston, for much assistance
and many valuable suggestions.
FINIS.




FREE RAILWAYS.




FREE RAILWAYS
THE ABOLITION OF TOLLS AND TAXES.
A LECTURE
Delivered in the Mechanics' Institute, Singleton,
June 26th, 1890,
ALEXANDER W. JOHNSTON, M.A.




FREE RAILWAYS;
THE ABOLITION OF TOLLS AND TAXES.
The subject to which I wish to draw your attention
is the national benefit arising from the abolition of all
existing tolls and taxes, and the substitution for them
of a simple, easy, just and rational system of
taxation —a system which will encourage our national
progress instead of impeding it, and confer upon
every man the power to secure for himself the
full value of the product of his labour, instead of
plundering him of a round third of it as our present
system does.
.By removing obstructive tolls and injurious taxes
we can do much to promote the development of the
grand natural resources of our country, and clear
the way for a progression more rapid and more
magnificent than has every yet been enjoyed by
any nation in the world. By imposing a just and
judicious tax we can provide the spur that will set
every one moving in the grand march of that progress,
and keep them all going ever onward and upward


until we reach a pinnacle of happiness and prosperity
unsurpassed since the beginning of the world s
history.
To understand how this may be done, we must first
understand the operation of our present system,
how its workings obstruct our enterprises, ruin our
industries and degrade us socially, morally and
politically. We will the better comprehend the
influence of a wise and just system when we see
clearly the evil effects of a foolish and oppressive
one, and we may obtain this insight by observing the
transactions of our everyday life, and noting how
different classes of people are affected by them. We
see that there are two classes who are continually
« ngaged in the business of exchanging commodities —
the mercantile class and those engaged in productive
industries. It is the business of the former to bring
into the country supplies of all kinds of the goods we
use or consume but do not produce, and the function
of the latter is to exchange with the former the goods
we produce for those we consume. In this business
of exchange the whole of our population, with the
exception of a very small percentage, is incessantly
occupied, the profits remaining in the hands of the
merchant, and the producer representing the national
gain by their transactions for a given period. It is
obvious, then, that anything which tends to reduce
the amount of that profit, or to hinder or prevent
exchange from being effected, must [ exercise a


prejudicial effect upon our national welfare ; and it
must be equally obvious that if we deliberately lessen
those profits or deliberately obstruct exchange of
commodities, we inflict an injury upon the merchant,
upon the producer and upon the nation at large.
Hence it follows that if we not only deliberately do
these things, but also obstruct both the importation
and the production of goods, we inflict upon the
whole community a still greater injury—an injury
whose end is ruin, absolute and complete, which may
be postponed for a few short years in a community
possessed of great natural wealth and other advan-
tages, but which cannot be averted if that course is
sustained.
It may be urged that no civilised nation would be
so foolish as to cut its own throat in that manner, that
all would take particular care to avoid such actions as
must injure themselves, and would, above all, protect
and promote to the utmost of their ability all those
industries upon which their welfare depends. They
would certainly not throw obstacles in the way to
prevent people from entering upon any of those
industries, nor would they diminish the profits derived
from such undertakings, or harass those who carry
them on ; but would rather do all in their power to
remove obstacles and to give encouragement to such
enterprises. Judged by this standard, there are no
civilised nations, for all the most enlightened and
cultivated peoples of the world do act in this foolish


way, and even we, who flatter ourselves that we are
wiser than other nations, display as little wisdom as
any of them in our treatment of the most important
section of our population. Our producers are
constantly exchanging our wool, wine, wheat, fruit,
coal, or other produce, for clothing, furniture,
machinery, food, or other goods, and it is apparent
that they who can effect this exchange at the least
cost, or in the least time, or by traversing the shortest
distance, must have a great advantage over those
who must pay more, or spend more time, or
travel a greater distance to effect their exchanges.
To increase the disadvantages of these in any
respect would appear unjust and foolish, even in
the eyes of a savage. But we, in our wisdom, do so
increase their disadvantages by compelling those to
pay most who must travel the greatest distance, and
lose the most time in bringing their goods to market
by rail, or road, or steamer. This is practically the
same as if we declared one ton of hay in Sydney to be
equal to two tons at Singleton, three tons at Tam-
w'orth, or four tons at Narrabri, because the producer
at those places must send tw r o, three or four tons to
obtain in return the value of one ton from Sydney.
The greater their disadvantages in point of time and
distance, the greater we make their disadvantage in
point of cost, and the.more we increase the advantages
of those who are more favourably situated and already
enjoy the greater natural advantages. If we w r ere to


say in set terms to the pioneers who brave the dangers,
the difficulties, and the discomforts of life in the bush,
“ If you will persist in travelling by the railway so far
into the interior, we will make you pay more the
further you go, and if you should be so foolish as to
send any produce to market from the wilder-
ness of the west, we will not allow you to make any
profit on it, for we will levy a toll upon it that will
effectually prevent you from using the railways except
to the most limited extent,” we should only be stating
in plain terms what we do in effect. The simple
foolishness of our treatment of this most valuable
portion of the community will be more clearly apparent
if we remember that the railways are made and paid
for by the public, and for the public convenience and
benefit; the end aimed at being to afford ready access
to our most distant territory, in order that the immense
wealth of our western plains may be brought within
the reach of our people. That is the end we aim at,
but the end we attain is to prevent as many as possible
from using the means of travelling we have provided,
10 plunder all who do use it of as much as possible of
the wealth they may win, and to obstruct as much
as possible that development of our natural resources
we are so anxious to encourage. We build railways
to use, and punish those who use them: we push
them out into the plains to the north, to the south,
and to the west, and then we try to make it
unprofitable for anybody to use them ! We prevent


people from travelling and retard the progress
of the country by increasing the toll with the
difficulties to be encountered, and then we hold our-
selves up for the admiration of the world as the most
enlightened people that have been since the world
began! That is our way of encouraging the piomers
who force their way into our undeveloped wastes, our
miners, our farmers, graziers and manufacturers ; and
it is a fair example of the way the most necessary and
valuable section of the people is affected by our present
oppressive and injurious system.
But, lest it should happen that there should still
remain some small profit to those we profess to
encourage, we have another toll to levy upon them in
the shape of freight on the goods they consume. We
thus make them pay both ways, for we deduct the
freight from all they produce and add it to all they
consume. For example, if they send £lOO worth of
goods to Sydney by rail, we charge them say £lO for
freight, and only allow them £9O as the value of their
goods. Then, if they buy £lOO worth to consume,
we make them pay another £lO for freight, and so
their goods worth £lOO cost them £llO.
But there may even yet besometrifleof profitofwhich
wecan rob ourproducers, so wehaveaway of extracting
it by imposing Custom House taxes on the goods they
consume, by which we raise the price of those goods
so that they receive less in exchange. If they send
£IOO worth we deduct £lO for freight, and then deduct


£lO for freight of goods sent in exchange, and another
£lO for taxes; so that all they receive for their £IOO
is £7O worth! By means of tolls and taxes we
manage to plunder them of 30 per cent, of the value
of all they produce, we depreciate the value of
country lands, we restrict enterprise to the narrowest
limits, and obstruct the progress of our country.
And we do all these things by the very means we have
devised fcr the purpose of adding to the value of
country lands, encouraging enterprise, and promoting
the welfare of the country. We cry “ Advance
Australia ” and levy a line of 30 per cent, upon the
produce of those who do most to help Australia onward.
We build railways to give access to the land and then
punish with tolls all who use them. We offer cheap
land to induce people to settle in the interior of the
country, and then we fine them for going there
fine them for taking there the goods they must
use, fine them for sending their produce to market,
fine them whether they buy or sell, and fine them
again when despair drives them to try a change of
locality.
Under such a system, it is manifest that our rate of
progression must be the very slowest that is possible,
for we are much more successful in devising means to
retard than to accelerate it; and though we try to
get along quickly, we put so many unnecessary
obstructions in the way, that we are only able to go
very slowly ; and we waste so much in so many


ways, that even on that account alone, our system is
worthy of condemnation. Who has not seen long
trains of empty cars and trucks running to and fro on
our railways ? Who has not seed crops rotting in the
fields, or wasted and destroyed by vermin, while these
trucks run empty past them ? Who has not seen
stock dying of starvation, while the farmer’s hay lay
rotting on the ground ? Who has not seen valuable
mines abandoned, because it costs so much to carry
anything by railway? Yet these empty trucks run up
and down the lines doing good to none, wasting
themselves and causing the waste of more than would
cover the cost of our railways year by year ! The
reason of all this loss and waste is that we levy tolls
so enormous that we prohibit people from carrying
their goods on the railways we have built for the
express purpose of carrying them !
If we enquire “ Who pays the cost of running
empty trucks ?” we find that the farmer whose crops
are wasted, the miner, whose mine is abandoned, the
grazier, whose sheep and cattle are dying of starvation,
pay for everything, whether the trucks are full or
empty. But the wasting hay must not be carried to
the starving stock, nor the stock be carried to places
where grass is abundant, because the laws which rule
this country have decreed that it is unlawful to do so,
unless the fines, or tolls, in that case made and
provided are first paid. So the hay must rot; the
stock must die; the railways must be worn out


to no purpose, that this foolish law may be obeyed!
Why should this system be maintained ? It cannot
be that our rulers do not know its faults ; because
only a few years ago they abolished tolls on the
public roads of the colony, thereby clearly showing
that they understood their injurious action. The
public roads were made free because it was plainly
seen that tolls were a relic of barbarism, an obstacle
to national prosperity, and a gross injustice to
those who were compelled to pay for using the
public roads —roads made specially for the public
use and benefit, from which the country derived
the greater benefit the more they were used. Tolls
were therefore removed from the roads, only to be re-
established on the railways where they do a thousand
limes more mischief, because they fall almost
exclusively on those engaged in productive enterprise.
Farmers, miners, and graziers, send their produce to
Sydney by rail and pay freight. Then they buy
supplies and send them home by rail, and pay freight
again. Hence it is clear that the railways are paid
for and maintained by them almost exclusively, while
the rest of the community, who derive at least an equal
benefit from the railways, pay nothing at all!
Although the operation of these tolls may seem to
benefit these latter, it is nevertheless every way
injurious, and inflicts upon the country the worst and
greatest injury, because it falls oppressively upon
production and hurts those who are engaged in


developing the resources of our vast inland territory,
who produce the wealth by which the whole community
is sustained. The injury it works is twofold. It
prevents them from producing as much as they
otherwise would, and it prevents them from securing
the full value of what they do produce. In the first
case, the entire population suffer together, because
the wealth of the whole community must be less than
it should be when the production of wealth is less.
In the second, the merchant suffers with the producer,
because he sells less than he would if the producer
had more money to buy with. Therefore, the merchant
who pays no toll suffers because the producer pays it
all, and both are equally interested in securing the
abolition of this great impediment to national progress.
Of all who are injured by tolls, however, those who
suffer most are the working classes, who have nothing
to sell but their labour, and whose whole livelihood,
to say nothing of their comfort, depends on their
ability to find a market for their labour. It is not
only that they cannot afford to pay the toll for
travelling from place to place, but that the tendency
of the toll is to restrict their market by killing the
industries which otherwise would employ them. How
industry is strangled and production restricted has
already been made clear; but we still make some
gain —some advance in national prosperity in spite cf
all obstacles. As a whole, the community moves
onward ; but the labourer is often left by the failure


of enterprises to face the alternative of beggary or
starvation, and is thus the most injured and oppressed
of all.
Leaving, now, the dark side of the question, let us
consider some of the benefits that must follow the
abolition of tolls and taxes—those relics of barbarism
that cause us so much trouble. The producers of
national wealth, having now no tolls or taxes to pay,,
buy their goods in Sydney without contributing to the
Custom House, and carry them home without being
fined for using the railways; and thus effect a
considerable saving. The farmer harvests his crops,
and, finding that there is a good market to the North
for hay, to the South for corn, to the East for fruit, to
the West for potatoes, he sends off his produce
accordingly, it matters not how far, to the market,
where he receives full value because he has no toll to
pay. When he goes to Sydney he can buy more
goods, and next year he will cultivate a wider area
and produce more wealth, and so he will go on
prospering exceedingly because he buys and sells to
the best advantage, and his industry is not hampered
by unjust and unnecessary restrictions, and his profits
are not absorbed in paying tolls and taxes. The
grazier, too, has the advantage of buying and selling
in the best markets, and, in case of drought, can sa\e
his stock from perishing because he can carry hay to-
feed them without having to pay more than their
value in freight. The miner can work mines at a


profit that he was before compelled to abandon
because they would not pay, Ihe merchant, who has
all along supported the system of tolls and .taxes
under the mistaken impression that they were
necessary to his welfare, suddenly discovers that
business is growing brisker and more brisk, and
shows an expansiveness as surprising as it is un-
exampled. Where he used to sell one ton he now
sells ten; and where he once cleared £l, and thought
he did well, he now clears £lO, £l2, or £l5. His
old warehouses and depots are no longer equal to
the storage of goods in transit; and there is on all sides
a, most wonderful activity, promising better business
and greater profits yet in store for him. The labourer
also finds a great change for the better; for now
there are hundreds of thriving industries full of life
and vigour, all of them eager competitors for the
labour that was literally going a-begging but a short
time ago. He is no longer pinched with hunger,
or harassed with thoughts of the wife and little ones
to feed whom he used to tramp so many weary,
mournful miles. With thankful heart and cheerful
spirit he works industriously, and saves frugally, in
the confident hope of soon attaining an independent
position and a comfortable home of his own as the result
of his exertions. In all professions and trades, occupa-
tions and callings, classes and positions in life, are felt
the blessings and benefits conferred by the abolition of
these oppressive taxes and injurious, obstructive tolls.


“ But how is everything to be paid for when the
sources which now provide the revenue of the country
are thus closed up ? ” is the question by which we
are here confronted; for, however much they may
harass and vex us, however detrimental they may be
to the country, however barbarous and stupid they
may be in themselves, these tolls and taxes at least
furnish us with the means of carrying on the govern-
ment of the country. Our revenue for the year 1889
was £9,063,399 from all present sources of supply;
and if we sweep them away we must find some other
source that will provide at least an equal sum in order
that our.public credit may not suffer, nor the machinery
of government become disarranged.
There is but one source from which we can draw
such a revenue; and we can raise it without inflicting
upon a single individual any of that injury, oppression
and wrong our present system inflicts upon the whole
community. And more than that, and better than
that, we can raise it in such a way that we increase
and intensify the benefits and blessings already
described as accruing from the abolition of our old,
absurd, and injurious system of tolls and taxes.
By taxing the annual value of the land, we can raise
with ease a revenue of £9,000,000, and can even
double that amount, if it should be required, and yet
do no injury to those who own land.
This will be clearly apprehended from a careful
consideration of a few statistical facts. The area of


New South Wales is nearly 196,000,000 acres, of
which about 45,000,000 acres have been alienated
and passed into private ownership, leaving about
150,000,000 acres of land belonging to the Crown.
Remembering that the private land is the best and most
valuable in the colony, we may safely assume that its
average annual value Is not less than 6s. Bd. per acre,
giving a total income of £15,000,000 P er annum, a
tax of 10 per cent, upon which will yield £1,500,000
per annum. Assuming the annual value of Crown
lands to be, on the average, one shilling per acre,
from them we will draw a revenue of £7,500,000,
which, added to the amount derived from private
lands, £1,500,000, gives a total revenue of £9,000,000
per annum. We are thus provided against all
demands on the Public Treasury, and need have no
fear that we will not be able to meet all our
obligations.
Concerning the justice of such a tax, there are
some who argue that it is quite right and just to tax
food and clothing and other kinds of property, but
very wrong and unjust to tax land, which has been
bought and paid for, and become private property by
express contract with the State. The only difference
between other kinds of property and property in land
is that those other kinds have been bought and paid
for, and actually made by the labour of man’s hands,
whilst the land, though bought and paid for, is not so
made —a distinction, which can only be regarded as a


powerful argument in favour of taxing land, and against
taxing other kinds of property. Other objectors say
it is most unjust to tax landowners, and allow all other
classes to go free, and that it amounts to a repudiation
by the State of special State contracts, and a good many
things uncomplimentary to Mr. Henry George and
others who advocate the same doctrine, as if to tax land
were any more a repudiation of State contracts than
to tax property of any other kind. But they object to
the tax on land values only as children object to
medicine—because they do not perceive the good it
will do them ; and they oppose Free Railways for a
similar reason. I will try to explain it clearly, in
order to remove their objections, and convert their
opposition into strenuous support.
When enumerating the blessings that must accrue
to certain classes of the population from the abolition
of tolls and taxes I omitted landowners from the list,
because, though all benefit, they will benefit most.
If they will consider for a moment that the value of
land depends greatly on its accessibility, and on the
accessibility of markets for the produce of the land,
they must perceive that Free Railways will give free
access to the land, and free access to every market in
the colony that can be reached by rail, and will there-
fore add greatly to the value of their land.
It is impossible to calculate how great will be this
increase in value, but there is every reason to suppose
that it will speedily mount up to ten times the present


value, or even more. To be well within the mark, let us
suppose that the value will be only doubled, and that
private lands, now worth say £300,000,000 will then
be worth £600,000,000; then the owners of this land
must acknowledge that they gain considerably by the
transaction. To put it in another way —in return for
the tax of one million and a half yearly, which they
pay to the revenue, they receive fifteen millions added
to the annual value of their land. That is to say, for
every £1 they pay, they receive ten pounds. In
addition to this, they enjoy all the benefits accruing to
all other classes, because they have no other tolls or
taxes to pay, but only The Single Tax ” on the
annual value of their land. They also gain in addition
from the increased production of wealth from the land,
encouraged by the removal of obstructive tolls, and
stimulated by the action of the Single Tax.
It must therefore be perfectly clear that owners of
land will be the greatest gainers by this proposed
change, and if at any time it should happen that we
required 40 or 50 millions of extra revenue for the
public service, would they not gladly pledge them-
selves to pay it, more especially if, instead of being
only doubled, the value of their land should be
multiplied by ten, and raised from three hundred to
three thousand millions?
Although such a result may seem too astounding to
be really possible, there is yet no reason for supposing
it to be even improbable. On the contrary, the more


thought is given to the subject, and the more it is
examined and enquired into, the more clearly does it
become apparent that our gain will be simply
incalculable, our progress will be “by leaps and
bounds,” and that prosperity will sweep over the
country, not like a wave that leaves a period of
depression behind it, but like a flood that rises steadily
and knows no return, because it springs from a source
that is inexhaustible —a source that will pour forth an
ever-increasing stream of abundant blessing, if we
will but clear away the obstructions that now choke
up the spring and impede its flow.
It will continue to flow and to heighten its floods of
blessings, as long as we are willing to leave it free ;
but we can at any time cut it off and diminish its
beneficence, by blocking its channel with tolls and
taxes, such as we have at present. Should we find
that we are becoming too rich, too happy and too
comfortable, we can easily tax ourselves back into
poverty by restoring our existing system. But there
can be no reason why we should now keep the
channel of prosperity blocked up, unless it is taken
for granted that we are all rich enough as we are,
and would only be injured by the attainment of more
wealth. If we are not yet rich enough, let us clear
the channel that the flood may pour forth freely, for
that is all that is necessary to enable us to attain
wealth enough. If you think life without taxes
endurable, if you wish to possess more wealth, if


you think it worth your while to attempt to clear away
the obstructions that now prevent you from becoming
more rich and comfortable; there is in the
world to prevent you but your own inert submission,
your own blind adherence to this old, corrupt, and
injurious system of taxation which has kept us all
so long floundering in the mud, while close at hand,
within our reach, lies the good, smooth, hard road that
will accelerate our progress amazingly. There is
nothing to hinder you from reaching this road by
constitutional means, by making your desires known
in the same way as on any other question affecting your
material welfare, by simply giving your representative
in Parliament to understand that you want Free
Railways, and the abolition of all tolls and taxes at
present existing, their place to be supplied by a tax
on land values.
Remember that you have the power to decide what
the policy of this country shall be, and that the only
way to make your wishes felt, the only way to have
the policy you desire immediately enforced, is for
you to be of one mind about it.
Many of you have observed a party of ants
endeavouring to remove a straw from their nest.
How they tug and struggle and strain at it, every ant
working with might and main and doing his very
utmost to drag it in his own particular direction.
This way and that it moves, now a little forward, then
back a little way, obedient to the impulse of the


majority of ants, but making no material progress.
Sometimes, after working for hours in this way, they
will give up in despair and make no further effort to
accomplish what seems a hopeless task. They do not
perceive that if two or three of them would agree
which way the straw should go, and drag it that way,
they could move it as far as they wished in a few
minutes.
We are just like those ants. We are all anxious to
remove the poverty and misery, the terrible depression
in all branches of industry, but we all want to move it
our own way. We pull against one another and do
our best to prevent it from moving any way but the
way we want it to go, and so it does not move at all.
We have in fact no definite idea of how it should be
moved, and every man fears his neighbour’s plan
may be injurious to him because no one can
show a clear reason in favour of any of the plans
that have been proposed. The reasons in favour
of the plan I have set before you are clear and
decisive, and if you will only pull together and
determine to have the railways made free, you
will quickly remove the straws that have so long
troubled us. And if you then impose a tax on
land values you will at once set in motion the whole
productive force of the country, for that tax is the spur
of which I spoke just now. It is the stimulus that
starts the landowners to work to get the tax out of the
land, because they will not care to keep land lying


idle from which they get nothing, but for which they
pay the tax.
The spur will keep them going, and they will keep
everybody else on the move, because it will be to their
interest to do so, and land which now produces
nothing will be made to add its share to the wealth of
the community. This can be done only by applying
labour to it, either to cultivate it, to extract its minerals,
to feed stock upon it, or to build houses upon it. In
one of these ways it will be made to return a profit to
its owner, and so add to the. wealth of the community,
while providing employment for the idle thousands who
now can find nothing to do. Even then the spur will
continue to stir up the landowners to use their land to
the best advantage, and it will never cease to urge
them on as long as there is an acre of unproductive
land in the whole country.
Such js the beneficial tendency of this policy—
encouraging enterprise and rewarding with earth's
richest blessings all who will industriously seek them,
and rendering it unprofitable to keep land locked up
from use that might be used to advantage.
Not only does it add wealth to wealth and make the
rich richer, but it gives wealth and comfort for poverty
and misery. It not only removes obstacles from the
path of progress, but it also gives us a lift along the
road. Instead of fostering conditions under which a
few grow rich, but the many inherit poverty and leave
it as an heirloom to their children, it gives wealth to


all who will work for it, reserving the curse of poverty
for the lazy self-indulgent sluggards who will not
work, but are not ashamed to beg or even to steal.
This policy will remove all objections to the intro-
duction of immigrants, because the hands of the
workers will be all too few to cope with the abundance
of work to be done —it will solve the drink question,
the labour question, and will free us from the ever-
menacing danger arising from strikes and disputes
about wages. It also gives a plain and sensible answer
to that problem, so perplexing to parents of large
families, “ What shall we do with our boys and girls?”
Instead of being a source of trouble and anxiety they
will fill the hearts of their parents with joy and pride,
because there will never be any difficulty in providing
for them; there need never be any anxiety about their
future, nor any dread lest poverty should befall them
and fill their lives with such miseries as so many now
endure. Even such a calamity as a fire ora flood that
spared nothing but their lives would involve but
temporary discomfort to an industrious and frugal
family, because there will always be both the
opportunity and the means of recovery ready to hand.
They would have no tolls to pay out of the product of
their labour, no taxes to increase the cost of living, so.
that all they could earn would be their own, and less
would suffice to maintain them than is now necessary.
When our boys and girls grow up there will be
nothing to prevent them from marrying and setting


upjn business for themselves. No young man need'
say, */ I can’t afford to keep a wife,” and no young
girl will allow his poverty to deter her from marrying
the man she loves, for, when this policy is enforced,
we will find that a brighter day has dawned at last,
and that there is indeed “ wealth for honest labour
in this “ new and happy land.” Seeing how easily he
can provide every needful comfort for his wife and
children, the honest lover will throw heart into his
labour, and will not hesitate to take his bride as soon
as he has earned enough to buy furniture for their
home. He will face the future with a braver heart
than we could have, because we never had any-
thing but a shadowy hope to encourage us, instead of
the assured confidence the “ boy of the future” will
have from his knowledge of the facts that his path to
prosperity is clear, the products of his labour are all
his own, and the tolls and taxes abolished that kill the-
enterprise and chill the courage of the youth of our
own day, and filled their parents’ hearts with anxiety
because they knew not what to do whth them.
SUCH, then, is the system for which I ask your support
in order that it may be realised with the least possible
delay. It is for you to say whether it shall be done or
not; whether our present blundering, irrational, and


destructive policy shall be given a longer lease to
work greater mischief, or be replaced by a policy both
rational and just; whether or not the choked springs
shall be cleared, and the long pent-up flood of pros-
perity allowed to gush freely forth and cover the land
with prosperity, and fill the homes of our people with
comfort and happiness.
Before you decide let me point out that this is but
the introduction of the beginning of a complete change
of policy —a change that will ultimately sweep away
all manner of taxes, fees, assessments, rates, and
charges of every kind whatsoever which go to make
up our present contributions to the public revenue, or
to cover the expense of municipal government. All
these will be swallowed up in the one tax I have
endeavoured to set before you. In due course these
reforms will follow; but the first and greatest reform,
the abolition of taxes on goods and tolls on traffic, must
first be realised before we take in hand the lesser ones.
We must first remove the strangling grasp from the
throat of enterprise, set free the industrial energies of
our people, and adjust the land tax —the spur which
will set us moving in the grand march of national
progress, leaving smaller matters to be considered
afterwards.
What say you then ?
Shall we cry “ Advance Australia ” and raise the
standard of Freedom, or shall we continue to present
the marvellous spectacle of a people struggling forward


in fetters with which.they have bound their own limbs,
over obstacles they have themselves placed in their
own path ? . .
Shall we continue to provide, for future generations
to wonder at, the stupendous puzzle of a people, wise
in all other respec.ts, but only to be compared with a
family of ants in their knowledge of political economy ?
Shall we always, as we do now, harness our team
to the waggon of national progress, block the road
with tolls, and screw down the brake of Custom House
taxation, then crack our whips and shout “ Gee ! ”
expecting our team to step out briskly, and our waggon
to move evenly along the blocked-up road ?
Or shall we clear away the obstructive tolls, remove
the retarding brake of taxation, and set our team in
motion by applying the rational and sensible stimulus
of a tax that will accelerate our progress ?
It rests with you to decide.
Turner and Henderson, Sydney.




