

parental gaining u| (^hildreir.
A SERMON
in £>t gnttreto’si Catftetiral,
SUNDAY EVENING-, MARCH 30th, 1873,
BY THE VERY REVEREND
WILLIAM MACQUARIE COWPER, M.A.,
DFAN OF SYDNFT.
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
Sglnug :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET-,
‘‘ A ustralian Churchttmn ” Office.


say, was
request
? ul. In
to the
■■■ -
come.
humble
prayer that God for Christ’s sake may be pleased to what
in it is according to His will, to those into whose hands it may
W. M. C.


m ass/fijte
tt-5-77
nnoiu
“ Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he ivill not depart from it." — Peoveebs xxii. G.
It is laid down in the Word of Q-on as a certain truth, that
“whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” Not,
remember, in a field of wheat, or other grain ; (though that is
perfectly true) but iu a far higher sense, in the moral and spiritual
world, in the cultivation of the mind, the soul, and the immortal
spirit.
Experience confirms and illustrates the declaration. In all
ages men have found it so, and have embodied that experience in
proverbs, allegories, and fables.
This book of the Proverbs of Solomon abounds with such
illustrations taken from almost every department of human life.
It shows the consequences which flow from the courses of action
which men pursue ; how evil begets evil, and good begets good;
how shame and disgrace and ruin are the result of a wicked life,
while a godly and righteous life brings peace and blessedness in
the end. And it is full of maxims and rules for our guidance and
direction, every day, and everywhere.
Now, in the text before us, this great principle is applied to the
training up of children. And the law which it lays down is that
in this as in other things we shall reap as we sow. “ Train up a
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it.”
The subject is one of eminent importance, and I intend, with
prayer for the Divine blessing, to put it before you to-night in a
plain and practical manner, so as to bring it down to our daily
lives, and what goes on, or should go on, iu our several homes.


Three weeks ago, I spoke to you of education more generally ;
but now I propose to speak of it more particularly as regards tlie
duties of parents in bringing up their children. But I may re-
mind you, before I proceed, of two things, which should ever be
borne in mind. First, that a child is not educated by the imparting
of knowledge, however extensively that may be done. The other,
that you cannot properly educate a human being, without religion
to develop and regulate the powers which God has implanted in
us. The mind may be vastly enlightened, and many of its powers
developed ; but man, in his true nobility, in his spiritual and im-
mortal nature, is if he is not imbued with those
religious principles and motives which shall render him true, and
conscientious, and GoD-fearing, in the business and transactions
of life.
And now what does our text say upon the subject before us ? I
observe three things laid down in it: Ist, That there is a way in
which a child ought to go; 2nd, that he is to be trained to go
therein; 3rd, that if he is so trained, when he is old, he will not
depart therefrom.
I. There is a way in which children should go : a way in which
they ought to go. Nothing can be more absurd than to suppose
that the mind of a child is to be left to fluctuate between truth
and error, and to find out for itself what is truth and what is not;
what is duty and what is not. God has made known His will to
man in the Bible; has taught us therein what truths He requires us
to believe, and what are the duties he requires us to perform. And
in the case of Abraham He has pointed out what He requires in
Parents as regards their offspring. “ I know him, He said, that
He will command his children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment.”
Gen. xviii. 19.
The ivay of the Lord; the way which He has enjoined, is, then
the way in which children ought to go. The way of His revealed
will; the way of His commandments ; the way of faith and
obedience ; the way of holiness and righteousness of life.
Observe how this was laid as an injunction upon that nation
which God chose out of all the nations of the earth, to be the


depositary of His revealed will, and to maintain His truth in the
World. This was the command given by Moses the inspired
Law-giver in regard to the instruction of their children: “ These
words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and
thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk
of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest
by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.”
Deut. vi. 6, 7.
And in the 78th Psalm the purpose of God is thus plainly and
emphatically declared. “ He established a testimony in Jacob, and
appointed a law in Israel, which He commanded our fathers, that
they should make them known unto their children, that the
generation to come might know them ; even the children which
should be born, who should arise and declare them to their
children ; that they might set their hope in God and not forget
the works of God, but keep his commandments, and might not be
as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a generation
that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God.” Yv. 6 —B.
And so it became a recognized principle, and an established
rule, among them that ‘ the father to the children should make
known God’s truth ! ” Isaiah xxxviii. 19.
Then mark, again, what in the New Testament is enjoined upon
Parents : Lathers, provoke not your children to anger; but bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord ; ” the nurture,
i.e., the discipline which is requisite for their right training, and
the admonition, i.e., the instruction, the counsel, and reproof
which the Lord has enjoined, JEphes. vi. 4. Nor should we over-
look the exhortation which he gave to Timothy: “ Continue thou
in the things which thou hast learned, and hast been assured of,
knowing of whom thou hast learned them, and that from a child
thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.”
2 Tim. iii. 14,15.
Now if you take these rules for your guidance, you cannot
doubt that the right way to train children is that which is laid
down in the Bible. The way there pointed out is the way for a child


so long as he is a child, and the way for him when he becomes a
man. It is there we learn what is truth, and what is duty ; what
are the principles which are to guide us in this life, and what are
those which will lead us safely to the life that is to come. There
we learn what we need to know about the God who made us ;
the Saviour who died for us, the Spirit who sanctifies us, the
eternal world to which we are going, and the means by which
we may secure a blessed immortality. And there we are taught
those principles of righteousness, which are our only safeguard,
in this perilous world, against the snares which beset us on every
hand.
It is easy, my brethren, and very agreeable to our fallen
nature to put away religion from the training of our children, and
to say that it is not necessary. But I ask, what security have you
for truth and honesty and integrity of life, of virtue and purity, if
the knowledge and fear of God are not implanted in the heart?
Will you depend upon self-interest, upon a sense of right, upon a
feeling of honour, and upon a good reputation P Alas ! these
are frail and miserable substitutes for the principles which are
learnt from the Bible. They are broken reeds in the hour of temp-
tation which daily experience proves utterly to fail. Godliness
is the only sure preservative of our goings, whether we are
engaged in the duties of the present life or pursuing our way to
a better. It is like the magnetic needle which guides the ship
through unknown and stormy seas, and enables the mariner to
steer safely to the .wished-for land. While he who sets out on
the voyage of life without it is like the seaman who attempts to
steer his w r ay without a compass, and is soon lost amidst darkness
and uncertainty, Neither man nor woman is safe, if they have
not as an abiding principle in the heart the love of God in Christ
Jesus.
11. Having thus showui you what the way is in which a child
should go, I proceed to notice the second part of our subject —the
training of him in that way. “ Train up a child in the way he should
go ” is the duty before us.
And I would ask you to consider what “training up ” mean?.
Think of it, my brethren; examine it; and grasp the idea it


conveys. Train up. To ray mind this implies much, steady and
persevering effort. It implies that time and patience and steady
application are necessary to bring about the result. It implies
watchfulness and care and earnestness, to effect what you desire.
Look at the man who has charge of a vineyard: one just planted
with young vines, which he is appointed to tend and train. Mark
the vigilance with which he applies himself to his work; the
attention he gives to each, the care with which he handles the
young shoots, lops off those that are needless, and leads those that
remain to the place he means them to occupy. Day by day he
walks round amongst them, observes how they grow, notices any
blighting influences which affect or retard their growth and fruit-
fulness, and applies the necessary remedies. And mark how he
pursues this course month after month, and year after year,
pruning and dressing, and in every way helping them to bring
forth fruit.
There you learn what is meant by training up. There you see
a parable of what we have to do with our children. And I may
now observe that for doing this as it ought to be done, three
things are required. Those with whom we have to do are not
mere plants ; they are beings endowed with rational and immortal
souls: who are to be influenced by knowledge, by motives, and
by observation.
These three things then are requisite in training them, instruc-
tion, discipline, and example.
1. Instruction. Every child has a right to look to its parent
for such knowledge as it needs to guide it aright. And it is one
of the solemn duties of a parent to impart that knowledge to his
children, and if he is not able, to get it imparted by others. As
soon as they are able to understand anything, we should begin to
teach them such things as it is for their good to know; and as
they advance in years we should give them farther knowledge, as
they are able to receive it, and their circumstances may require.
Things natural, things moral, and things spiritual, are to be ex-
plained to them; all that is necessary to guide them aright in
this life, and to teach them the way to the life to come. The
knowledge of God who made them, the knowledge of Christ who


redeemed them, the knowledge of the Holy Spirit who alone can
make them new creatures, the knowledge of that world which
Gon has prepared for them that love Him, and the knowledge of
all that He requires us to believe and do. This we are bound to
give them and to press upon their attention.
But it must be as they are able to receive it. And it should
be with much patience and by degrees; as the prophet said,
“ Line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a
little.” But still like the gentle dew which falls 'perpetually upon
the tender grass, moistening and forcing it into life.
And it is not unimportant to observe in carrying on this process
of instruction that the first things that children understand are
words, then facts. When you have taught them these, you may
then advance to plain doctrines and simple duties. And you
should dwell upon these again and again, bringing forward illus-
trations and enforcing them by examples.
2. But it is not by mere teaching or instruction that children
can be trained. The next thing is discipline. And by this I mean
the regulation of their manners, and the formation of their habits.
All the knowledge which we may impart to them, all the advice
and direction which we may offer, and all our counsels and
entreaties will fail to produce any good and abiding effects, if they
are not accompanied with proper discipline. And I believe that
it is owing to the neglect of this, principally, that the most care-
ful religious teaching is so often found to produce no good results.
Those who have been brought up by religious parents, and those
who have been constant scholars in our Sunday schools, are often
found in after life to be ungodly, and why ? Because their unruly
wills and affections were not controlled ; their selfish desires were
not restrained, and their inclinations not regulated by the will of
those whom God placed in authority over them.
Children’s natures, we should remember, are evil. They are
self-willed, and prone to go asti’ay. How it is true that ice can-
not change their hearts. But as by instruction we inform their
minds, give them right sentiments, and lead them to form true
ideas, so by discipline we may restrain their evil tendencies, con-
trol their passions, and cultivate in them good and useful habits.


Such discipline should begin with their earliest years. It may
he commenced, in fact, before instruction, A child of a year old
may be taught to obey, and made to yield its will to that of its
mother. And as we act in natural things, so should we in
spiritual. "We begin with a plant in our garden while it is ten-
der and pliable, and so are able to bend and train it, according to our
wishes. And if we wish to train our children well, and accustom
them to right ways of acting, we must fashion and habituate them
while their minds are tender, and the passions have less strength.
The first duty which a child has to learn is obedience, and this can
only be enforced by teaching it to deny its own will. The parent’s
word must be the law, backed up, as it should ever be, by the Word
of God. And when this is properly enforced, the child understands
that there is rigid as well as might in the parental command, and
his conscience tells him that he is bound to obey.
But how blameworthy are many parents in this respect!
Instead of restraining their children, they indulge them; instead
of accustoming them to deny themselves, they allow them to
have their own way. They threaten punishment, but seldom put
the threat into execution. And is it any wonder that under such
treatment their wills should grow stubborn, and their passions
strong, and the parents’ authority be set at nought, and a race of
men and women reared up who not only know not how to govern
themselves, but violate the laws, and teach one another to break
them ? It is the natural and certain process of cause and effect,
the growth of plants from the seeds which were sown, the ripening
of the blossoms which should have been plucked off at their first
appearing.
Take a remarkable instance in the history of king David.
When his end was near and he might be thought too weak to offer
any effectual resistance, Adonijah, one of his sous, aspired to
succeed him, and took means to get himself proclaimed king. He
was well aware that David had designated Solomon to ascend
the throne. But his pride and selfish ambition could not brook
this; and heedless of all the trouble and confusion his conduct
might occasion, he rose up in rebellion against his father and the
lawful authorities in the land.


Now, if we look at what is stated in 1 Kings, chap. i. v. 6., we
see from whence all this sprang. “ His father had not displeased
him at any time, saying, why hast thou done so ? ” His self-will had
not been curbed ; he had not been trained to submit his wishes
to those of his father ; he had not been taught to deny himself.
He had been suffered to have his own way unchecked ; and now
he sets at nought the authority of the King, and the will of G-on,
and -wounds his parent sorely in his dying hours !
Yes : he even takes advantage of that very season, when his
heart should have been softened and subdued, to insult his aged
father, and to frustrate the directions he had given concerning
the kingdom.
And it is just by the same means —or rather by the same neg-
lect—that parents are continually teaching children to disobey
and thwart them, and to become evil doers. By letting them alone.
By suffering them to do as they please. By not taking them to task,
kindly aud firmly and judiciously, and restraining them tohen they
need it. The self-willed child becomes the headstrong and
stubborn youth, whom no words of kindness can win, no authority
control. “ A child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame.”
Thus you make Adonijahs and Absaloms : and then you complain
that you have no comfort in them. Oh ye parents: consider how
vast is your responsibility! how great the interests committed to
your care! What the men and women of the next generation
shall be depends very much upon you. Train your children to
obey; to be truthful, reverential, modest in behaviour and in
dress ; to be industrious and frugal, and virtuous, to be just aud
considerate of others, and you will confer a far greater boon upon
the colony, than if you discovered a Krohmann’s mine, and stimu-
lated the industry of ten thousand people.
3. But teaching and discipline must be accompanied by
example. The common saying that example is better than precept
is in nothing truer than in the training of the young. Children
are creatures of imitation. Almost unconsciously they do what
they see in those about them. They speak as they hear them
speak ; and think very much as they think. Whatever then we
wish our children to be, that we should labour to be ourselves.


Let them see that we believe that which we teach them, that we
do what we require them to do, that we are what we say they ought
to be. We may then hope that our teaching and discipline will
succeed. But if they find that while we send them to Church we
do not care to go ourselves; that while we say to them that the
Sabbath is to be kept holy, we spend it in idleness or pleasure, or
work ; that while we send them to the Sunday school, we neglect
the Bible ; that while we tell them to pray, we never bend the
knee in prayer ourselves : they will follow our example and
not regard our precept, they will fall to our level, or even below it.
A thoughtful writer says, “ After all, it is the lessons which
you let drop occasionally, the conversation they overhear when
they are playing in the corner of the room, which has more effect
upon them than many things which are addressed to them
directly. As to maxims remember that, between those that you
bring forward for their use, and those which guide your oion con-
duct, children discern most readily. And it is by the latter they
will mainly be governed. You ask, what will educate your
children ? Your example will; your conversation with your
friends ; the business you transact; the society you live in ; your
house, your table, and your daily behaviour there: all these v/iil
educate them.”*
What we see around us proves all this to be true. And when
we consider it, and think of the mighty influences which we are
every day exercising upon their minds and hearts—we may well
ask ourselves, “ What manner of persons ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness ! ”
111. The time will hardly permit me now to say much upon the
prospect of success which is held out in the text. “ When he is
old he will not depart from it.” But I must not conclude without
a few words upon this point.
*A criminal was once condemned to death. As he stood at the foot of the
gallows, ready to mount the fatal steps, his mother rushed out of the crowd
and clung sobbing about his knees. He turned and cursed her, exclaiming
bitterly, “ Mother, if it hadn’t been for you, I shouldn’t be here! ” “My son,
my son! ” she cried, “don’t say so; you know' I never taught you to rob and
kill; I never taught you any harm.” “ But, mother, ly your example you
never taught me any good,'"


It may be said that the children of godly parents often prove
the very reverse of their parents, often disappoint their warmest
and most cherished expectations. This is no doubt true. But,
let me ask, may it not be that there has been some neglect,
some omission in the training, some adverse influences which
were unheeded, which were so strong that they overcame the good
which was too feebly attempted ? Godly parents sometimes err,
as did David and Eli, in the bringing up of their families. If the
instruction is what it ought to be, the discipline may be wanting,
or the example may be defective. And it will sometimes happen
that all these are more or less wanting.
There must be a due mixture and combination of these three
things—instruction, discipline and example —to constitute train-
ing up ; and these continued through a series of years, prayerfully
and systematically, to ensure success. And when this is done
with full reliance upon the promises of God in His Holy word,
we have reason to believe that God will grant His blessing. His
promise to the Church at large is, “ I will be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thine offspring ; and they shall spring up
as among the grass, as willow's by the water courses. One
shall say, lam the Lord’s; and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord and surname himself by the name of Israel.”
Isaiah xliv. 3,4, 5.
Such promises as these the believing parent will take to God
and plead in prayer, just as you take a banknote to the bank
which has issued it, and ask for gold. And God is faithful. He
will not disappoint those who trust in Him.
It is recorded of a mother who had the joy of seeing her
children early brought to surrender themselves heart and soul to
God’s service that, being asked the secret of so much blessing,
she replied, that she thought it must be because she had always
brought them up with prayer. “ While my children were infants
on my lap, as I wmshed them, I prayed that God w ; ould wash
them in that blood which cleanseth from all sin. As I dressed
them in the morning, I asked my heavenly Eather to clothe them
in the robe of Christ’s righteousness. As I set their food be-


fore them, T prayed that God would feed their souls with the
bread of life, and give them to drink of the water of life. When
I made them ready for the house of God, I used to ask Him that
their little bodies might be fit temples for the Holy Ghost to
dwell in. When they left for daily school, my heart followed
their little feet with the prayer that they might be guided along
the narrow paths of life. And as I laid them on their little beds
at night, the silent cry of my heart was, that their heavenly
Father would take them to His embrace, and fold them in His
everlasting arms.”
Such earnest and constant prayers as these were answered by
Him who delights in believing prayer.
I appeal then, in conclusion to those amongst you who are
parents, and I ask you, I pray you, to lay these things seriously
to heart. 0 consider how your children are to be trained, that
they may become blessings to you and to mankind. Think of
the time, the attention, the care, the vigilance which are necessary,
and the prayers with which all this is to be accompanied, that
they may be so trained. But is any time, any care, any
attention, any vigilance, any prayer too much, if you can but
obtain that they shall become faithful servants of Christ, children
of God, and inheritors of the kingdom of Heaven ?
Sad indeed and most sinful is the condition of those parents
who neglect these momentous interests, and leave their children
to take their chance, as it were, whether they shall have these
blessings or lose them ; whether they shall be saved or lost;
whether they shall enter into life, or suffer death eternal. Such
parents indeed there are. May God of His infinite mercy awaken
you to a sense of your sin and danger, and arouse you to a con-
viction of your duties and a strenuous endeavour to discharge
them. For how terrible it will be to discover at the last, that
both your own souls are eternally undone, and those whom God
entrusted to you to bring up for Him, are undone also for ever!
But for those who have laboured to train up their children in
the way they should go, in Christian faith and holiness, how
blessed will it be, when the Lord comes again in His glory, to
receive His gracious approval, and in their salvation to find the


reward of all their toils. Oh Christian parents, fathers and
mothers, look forward to that day, and with that prospect before
you, leave nothing undone that you ought to do, that those
immortal beings whom He has entrusted to your care may then
be presented unto Him without spot and blemish, cleansed in His
blood, clothed in His righteousness, sanctified by His Spirit, and
so made meet for His eternal kingdom.
Joseph Cook & Co., “ Churchman” Office, 370, George Street, Sydney.


A Prayer which may he used by Christian Parents for their
Children.
OGOD, our Heavenly Father, who didst of old promise to
Thy servant Abraham to he a God unto him, and to his
seed after him, we would plead with Thee for our children that
this promise may he fulfilled unto them. Be Thou their God, as
we trust Thou art ours. Give us grace to train them up for
Thee. And make us examples to them of what Thou wouldst
have them to he and to do. O make them holy children, walking
in the paths of truth and obedience, of submission to Thy will,
and reverence for Thy holy Name and Word. Plant in their
hearts Thy holy fear ; and root out of them everything that is
sinful in their natures and habits. Give them Thy Holy Spirit,
and grant that He may lead them to the true knowledge of
Christ as their Saviour and Redeemer. And as they grow in
years, make them to grow in grace and love to Thee : so that, at
the last, they may be partakers of Thy glory, through the merits
and mediation of the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


