

: °ft BOYS anJ GIRLS
Bi i




G\„.
WfiP&n 1 2(BrS
DUCKT Dozem
READ EIFE STORIES
ROTS AMD OIRES
ill
Ep. I. MORESBY


'


WELL, I have never known him
to be late before,” murmured
Brian Bayly, standing on the V(
▼ » Brian Bayly, standing on the verandah of his bungalow in Assam, listen-
ing for the tinkle of the postman’s bells. "Strange how important the mail always
seems!” he mused, smiling to himself. Even in that out-of-the-way spot the native
postman arrived unfailingly at the tea plantation at 8 a.m. on mail days. His route
was along an old elephant trail which passed through a thick patch of jungle. The
hours went by; no postman.
"It’s to be hoped nothing has happened to the poor fellow,” thought the man-
ager of the plantation, "I’ll send some of the natives off to look for him.”
But still no sound of the tinkling bells. The postman was not on the trail.
Perhaps he would be at his thatched hut at the other end? Then suddenly one of
the natives gave a cry of fear and horror.
"Bagh (tiger) has killed him,” he wailed in his own language, for upon the
trail was evidence which could not be mistaken. Racing back to the bungalow the
men told their sad news. That postman would never come again.
"This must be the tiger which has been killing the cattle for some time,” re-
marked Brian Bayly. From now on the creature would be the terror of the district.
What could be done? The assistant manager of the plantation happened to be
away, so they were short-handed. But who could tell what terrible things might
happen before another day, with a man-eating tiger at large?
~ Bayly looked across to where the crowded bamboos hid the fringe of the jungle.
By this time it was late afternoon. To wait would mean a night of frenzied anxiety
for the natives in the nearby huts. At any moment the enemy might prowl Into
their midst under cover of darkness. Many of them were even now begging the
white Sahib to go out and shoot the tiger.
"Call the beaters,” ordered Bayly, "they must try to scare the tiger out of hid-
ing.” Then buckling on a belt of cartridges and taking his high-calibred close-


range rifle, he prepared to start out on foot, accompanied by Sarai, his devoted
bearer, a slim lad aged fourteen years. There was no time to make any complicated
plan of attack. The chief thing was to try and follow up the man-eater before it
escaped in the darkness.
Sarai eyed his master anxiously, wishing that the assistant Sahib had been there,
too. It was a risky business. But Bayly was a fine shot, and accustomed by now to
the dangers about him. Almost immediately they entered the jungle, leaving be-
hind them the strange cries of the beaters.
''How silent it is, Sarai!” Was that the faint sound of the beaters, or had it
ceased altogether? Side by side walked the man and the slight brown lad, with every
sense alert. Bayly had no false ideas about this hunt. Yet it was hard to imagine
that deadly enemy near at hand. Dusk began to fall. Still no tiger. For a few
minutes they stood gazing into the gloom ahead. Farther on there was a creek to
be crossed, and then the more open country where they would have a clearer view.
"We won’t go on much farther, Sarai.”
"Too dark, Sahib.”
"Tes” —there was a moment’s hesitation—"but there’ll be someone killed be-
fore dawn if we don’t get the tiger first,” continued Bayly. "Perhaps we had bet-
ter push on over the creek at any rate.” He knew that the tiger would almost cer-
tainly attack again before sunrise. They must make every effort to track it down
quickly. So, in utter silence, they went on, prepared to keep watch during the night
if need be. The creek must be just a little way ahead now. They stumbled hur-
riedly through the tangled growth, eager to escape from the growing blackness over-
head and around them.
"Ouch! Sarai!” stifling a cry, the planter tripped on a great twisted root and
was flung violently forward with arms outstretched. There was a sickening crack as
he pitched against the trailing limbs of a tree, and the report of his rifle echoed
through the twilight.
In an instant the boy was beside him, trying to help him to rise. "Are you hurt,
Sahib?” he inquired softly. The answer came with difficulty. "My arms .. . Sarai.”
Wincing with pain he made an attempt to find out just what had happened. His
arms hung useless.
"Must have fractured them both!” he thought with dismay, fighting against a
growing feeling of faintness. What a plight! They were now utterly defenceless.
Bayly did some quick thinking. He had very little chance of rescue, that was cer-
tain. But the lad . . .
"Sarai. . . you go home quickly. There is too much danger here now.” Silence.
The slender native lad might have been a bronze statue. "To-morrow,” continued
the voice still more weakly, "you—can—bring—help.” Then the planter knew no
more.
Sahib! Sahib! Shaking him gently, the boy attempted to rouse his master.
But Bayly lay white and unconscious. Sarai kept guard. "Water!” The lad bent
close to catch the feeble whisper. Then, as lithe as any creature of the jungle he


slid away to the creek. He filled his gourd and came back to wet the sick man’s
forehead and lips. Consciousness seemed to be returning.
"What is Sarai'doing here?" was Bayly’s first thought, knowing that he had
ordered the boy to go home. Then, "Where is the tiger?” Bit by bit everything
came back. No persuasions or commands could shake Sarai’s resolve. "No, sahib,
I stay.” Perhaps the beaters would have heard the shot and would in time come to
search for them. Then began a strange vigil of many hours. Was that a moving
shadow yonder? Once Bayly thought he caught sight of two fiercely luminous orbs.
Sarai’s body stiffened. He scarcely breathed. "Shout, boy” ... it was an eerie sound
in that still silence. Then at intervals they shouted, hoping to keep that terrifying
shadow at bay. In between the shouts it seemed to be moving toward them. There
was the gun lying beside the planter, and both his hands were powerless to hold it.
"Bagh!” whispered the boy, as he caught sight of those eyes like lamps in the
Ouch! Sarai!” Stifling a cry, the planter tripped on a great
twisted root.
dense fohage. How could they possibly escape? Any second now the man-eater
would pounce upon them.
"Sarai . . . have you ever fired a gun?”
"No, Sahib.” There were still three shells in his rifle.
"Well, lift it up carefully and quickly.” The boy obeyed. "Now put it across


V
my body ... that’s the way.” Sarai was trembling. Bayly knew there was only one
chance in a million that his plan would work.
"You are not afraid, Sarai . . . you are now a big hunter!” continued the kindly
voice in a whisper, "and I will help you.” The trembling ceased. "Crook your
finger round the trigger . . . yes. Now wait.” Clearly and simply the planter told
the boy how he must watch again for those two fiery eyes. "Look through the little
hole, then along the barrel . . . when the eyes seem to be exactly beyond the little
notch in front . . .” That moving shadow had an outline now, and a tail twitched
up and down.
”Between the eyes.”
Sarai s lips scarcely moved. . . . His aim was true,
The jungle resounded with a sharp retort. A convulsive shudder and the man
eater rolled over —dead.
"It is day, Sarai,” The slender boy still clutched the wonderful weapon which
had saved his master. "I go for help,” was the quick reply. The white Sahib
glanced at him proudly: "You very brave hunter, Sarai!”


came from
WHEN do you reckon we’ll make port, Eddie?” asked the third engineer
on the Silas K. Hardy, an oil tanker flying the American flag, as he
stood on the top platform of the engine-room removing his greasy boots
before going off watch.
"Well, in this gale, Clem, I guess it’ll be to-morrow morning at the earliest be-
fore we get an eyeful of that lil’ ole coast of New Jersey yonder,” replied his mate
decidedly.
"We’d be about 80 miles off. Oh, boy! won’t it be fine to —” Boom!
A deafening explosion shook the engine-room and threw the two men violently
against the bulkhead. Thick black clouds of smoke belched fiercely from an oil
leakage. Suddenly great tongues of flame shot out of the blackness and enveloped
the prostrate and helpless engineers. In one tragic instant life had become a living
death.
While the fire gong clanged its terrifying alarm up on the bridge, automatic
extinguishers commenced to play in the choking, blazing engine-room.
"Come on, boys!” shouted the mate, as he raced aft, followed by the bo’sun,
"get to the sand boxes, and make it snappy!” Every man of the crew knew the
frightful peril of fire on a tanker. Even at the cost of their lives they must stop
the fire from reaching the great oil-filled tanks and setting the whole ship ablaze.
There was not an instant to be lost. Who could tell the fate of those trapped in
the engine-room? Even now it might be too late to save them. While the rest of
the crew dashed for sand and fire-fighting apparatus, the bo’sun struggled quickly
into his asbestos fire-suit.
"Okay, Matt,” muttered the mate, screwing on the bo’sun’s smoke helmet, and
anxiously watching the dense clouds of smoke coming from the door and the sky-
lights of the engine-room. "Keep the sand going, boys,” he roared, knowing that
so much depended on getting the fire under control at once. "A couple of you stand
ready to lend a hand to get the engineers on deck. Poor devils, I only hope—”
From the moment of the fateful explosion it was only a few minutes, though
it seemed a lifetime. Wakened from his sleep by the alarm, the chief engineer
dashed along toward the engine-room. "Those poor boys,” he groaned, "they’ll be
burned alive.”
Quite conscious, but suffering untold agony from their burns, the two young


engineers were carried from the reeking engine-room up into the fresh air.
"You all right, Buddy?” mumbled Engineer Edward Horner through his
charred and blackened lips.
"Fm okay . . . shake, Eddie,” came the whispered reply, after a long pause, as
Engineer Clement Casey tried valiantly to move a blistered hand nearer his pal.
After that there was silence. The effort of speech seemd to have used up the last
scrao of strength. But the all-important question had been answered. They were
both alive. Very gently, some of the sailors carried them to the sick bay.
this time the
fire was well under
control, and the worst
of the danger past.
rr Tell them help is coming!”
"We 11 have to try and race for Philadelphia,” said the skipper, one glance
showing him the terrible plight of the two engineers, "that’s the nearest hospital . . .
but it will take us all of 12 hours.” "You’re right, skipper,” replied the chief stew-
ard gravely in an undertone, "all we can do won’t save them without proper medical
attention.’ ' Yes, they’re in a bad way, Fm afraid.” Meanwhile the steward hast-
ened to do what he could for the injured men. Wfth deft fingers he cut away the
singed clothing.
"What can you use, Stewie, oil?” asked the bo’sun anxiously. "No, tea is the


best i King we’ve got. Bring that cold tea from the galley, and there’s clean linen in
the cupboard here. I must be quick.” Soaking strips of linen in the tea, he and the
bo’sun worked hard to cover the shockingly burned limbs and faces. Not a mur-
mur nor a moan from either of the patients through all their suffering. Gasping
painfully, they lay very near to death.
"Worst of all it’s shock I’m afraid of,” murmured the steward as he tried to
find positions where he could safely place hot bottles round their bodies. "Twelve
hours! I’m quite sure that even half that time would be too long, poor fellows.”
Meanwhile there was feverish activity on board. "Full speed ahead!” ordered
the captain. Every effort must be made to get the sick men ashore as quickly as pos-
sible. But in that heavy sea the vessel tossed and rolled and made little headway.
Once more the skipper stood in the ship’s tiny hospital. "I’m fearfully worried
about them,” he said, realising that his men were having a hopeless fight for life.
"In fact, steward . . . I’m afraid they’re sinking fast,” he added in a broken whisper.
Then, like a flash of sunlight through the storm, came an inspiration. "The
coastguards!” he gasped. "Why, they’ve recently acquired big flying-boats.” . . .
Would they be able to help? He looked at the raging sea. What aircraft could
possibly land out there in such a gale? His own sturdy ship was having a stern
enough struggle.
"It’s terrible to have to stand helplessly while those splendid lads are just hang-
ing between life and death —it’s worth a try, anyway.” Hurrying off to his wire-
less operator he sent an urgent message to the coastguard station at Cape May:—
"Plane required rush men hospital,” giving the position of the tanker. "Will
they attempt it?” he wondered anxiously, scarcely daring to hope. "We can do no
more.”
"What’s that? What did he say?” barked Lieut.-Commander Hamilton at the
Coastguard station. "Trouble on a tanker. Here’s the message.”
"I see . . . yes. I’ll go myself,” he decided swiftly. Within a few minutes the
veteran airman had swung himself into the pilot’s seat of the big flying-boat Amicus.
"Filthy weather,” remarked a fellow officer. "It’ll be a pretty tough job.”
"Makes no difference,” was the brief reply, "We must give them a hand.”
In record time arrangements were made to be off. Pointing the nose of the
flying-boat into the teeth of the gale, the pilot headed out to sea. Climbing steadily,
he was soon out of sight of the friendly coast.
On the bridge of the tanker the captain eagerly scanned the distant sky through
his glasses. "No sign,” he muttered. "Could hardly expect . . . but what’s that?”
For an instant there was a glint of silver just above the horizon. Surely it was
moving nearer!
"Tell them help is coming,” he said a few moments later, with a thrill of ex-
citement, keeping his eyes glued to the glasses, "it’s a flying-boat.”
Above the noise of the waves came the deep drone of powerful motors, as the
graceful plane raced towards them. Sweeping low, the Amicus circled around the
tanker.
"Supposing it is too rough, supposing—” But while those on the ship waited


-— /%-Jz —
and wondered anxiously, the intrepid pilot headed down to the foaming waves. With
supreme skill he levelled off just above the surface and let the machine settle down
to a perfect landing.
"Only half an hour since we sent that call for help!” exclaimed the skipper in
grateful astonishment.
By this time the injured men were in a serious state of collapse. It looked as
if the last little spark of life would flicker and die, if they were moved.
"Don’t attempt to put them on stretchers,” came the prompt advice. "Lower
the beds over the side and let them down through the hatch in the top of the plane.”
Within a few minutes they had been made as comfortable as possible, and without
wasting a precious second the pilot had his engines going again, and the plane lifted
easily. Twenty minutes later he was back at the coastguard station where a doctor
was waiting. "We must get them to hospital at once,” he ordered after a hurried
examination. "I’ll come, too.” Once more the pilot had his flying-boat in the air,
bound this time for Philadelphia. An ambulance was waiting when they arrived.
"Rush these patients to the emergency ward,” said the doctor urgently. "It’s a
matter of life and death.”
"Say, Buddy . . . you all right?” asked the second engineer a week later, as he
lay in an electrically-heated apparatus, recovering from his burns.
"I’m okay, Eddie,” answered a familiar voice from the next bed. "Some flying-
boat, eh?”


'Me rial
for One
I SARI might have been called "Isari the
Faithful.” Fighting a shark single-handed,
he faced death for the small English child
fiqht Shark
One Rubee
rc (■ i . \fy^z
left in his care. "You like go England, see big •
London city, and English boys, Isari?” "Oh, yes, Mem Sahib; me see Test Cricket,
you tink- -great players of my country?”
"Well, you shall come and look after Baby Beth when we go in a month’s time,”
promised Mrs. Maiden, smiling to herself over Isari and the cricket, little guessing
that the brave Indian boy was to save her baby’s life.
Beaming with joy, the devoted nurse "wallah,” a slim native boy of fourteen,
was glad to know he would not after all be parted from his adored little charge.
Weeks of excitement and preparation followed. It was two years since Mr.
Maiden had been appointed British Magistrate for Jaipur, in India. This is the
"rose pink city,” where every building is either mauve or pink, and where lived that
wonderful astronomer, Maharajah Jai Singh 11., centuries ago.
From the moment the little party boarded the Frontier Mail —India’s fastest
daily train service—lsari was in a dream of delight. He cared for the three-year-old
toddler with the wisdom and patience of a mother, proudly guarding her almost from
the glance of passing strangers.
Twenty-two hours in the train brought them to Bombay, the gateway of India,
and to Isari’s relief there was the great liner, ready to take them to England. A
thousand times he had secretly wondered if they might have missed the boat, which
to him was the ship of adventure.
A babel of voices, and Lascar sailors hurried barefoot about the deck, clad in
their blue smocks and red turbans, while the head "serang” gave orders, and blew
the shrill whistle hanging round his neck on a long silver chain.
Relieved of little Beth for a time, the lad watched the native boys diving for
coins at the ship’s side. Isari could swim like a fish, and had been used to diving
in the river. For a moment he longed to be in the cool water instead of setting off
to a strange country. But at the sound of a baby laugh and pattering feet, the


brute that seemed to have been fM
waiting for this moment. Jim
He shot from the deck into the
shark-infested water.
thought vanished, and he proudly held the golden-haired child up close to his own
chocolate face, so that she could see the clever diving boys.
As eight bells sounded the hour of noon, the Rajputana cast off her lines, with
her siren blowing a last farewell to India.
"You take care of Baby Beth, Isari, while we go ashore for an hour or two,”
said Mrs. Maiden, as they were nearing Aden, the first port of call. The barren
redness of this town on the edge of the desert showed in the distance.
"I go with Mummie.”
"No, darling, you stay with kind Isari; it is too hot and dusty for a little girl,”
said her mother.
As the gangway rattled down, Isari held the child’s hand firmly, coaxing and
comforting her. But, pulling away, she ran for a last kiss to her "Mummie.”
There was a scream of horror. "Oh—my baby!” as she tripped and slipped
through the railing into the sea. Lascars jabbered in a frenzy, passengers were run-
ning for help, while the poor mother had to be held back from jumping
over the gangway. But a silent slip of a boy, seizing a knife
from the belt of the nearest Lascar, had shot from
the deck Into the shark-infested water. In a
few moments he had grasped the drown
ing child, and holding her high in one
arm, he stabbed at an ugly, vicious


_ • • - _
Round and round went Isari, dodging and hacking at the shark, while the ter-
ror-stricken watchers threw out a lifebuoy and called encouragement to the heroic
swimmer Quickly a boat was lowered, and eager hands were stretched to lift the
precious child and Isari from danger.
''Take Baby! Take Baby!” gasped the boy, as he still stabbed the water, for
the angry shark had grabbed his leg. Little Beth was safe, but when they pulled
Isari into the boat the water was stained a cruel red, and the brave lad lay in agony.
He was attended by the ship’s surgeon, then rushed to the Aden hospital, and
a very sad family sailed for England without him.
* *
"Master, master, me fight shark for
Master!” A splash, and a stab, and cheers
up at the sound of that voice, as the boat
one rupee! One rupee you give me,
from the ship, and Mr. Maiden looked
reached Aden bound for India, a year
later. Native dhows were crowding round, and there was noisy bargaining over
souvenirs, with the tourists on the ship. Through the hubbub came the plaintive
voice: "Master, master, me fight shark —”
A little apart from the others, a slim boy with only one leg clung for support
to the tiny mast of a dhow. In his teeth he held a knife, after pleading for
rupees to risk his life for the entertainment of the passengers.
"Isari! Isari!” shouted Mr. Maiden, recognising the lad whom they feared had
died from his injury—and a smile glorified Isari’s anxious and pitiful face, for he
knew now that he would see his native land once more.


THERE goes the last light,” mumbled
"Slippery Archie” under his breath,
"I’ll give ’em a while to settle down.”
"I’ll give ’em a while to settle down.” Well hidden behind a leafy shrub,
he was patiently spying on the magnificent home of Sir Ernest Heywood. Archie
prided himself on being thorough.
"Pots of money”, he muttered, "they’ll scarcely miss it —at least I hope they
won’t until I get safely away!” He chuckled lightly at his own joke, then looked
round nervously in the darkness.
How peaceful everything seemed! The sweet scent of flowers, stars twinkling
overhead —a strange night for a robbery! No sound but the occasional hum of
some passing car.
"It shouldn’t be much bother”, mused the shabby young man crouching on
the dewy dawn, "’specially with some of ’em away for the holidays.”
A few minutes later he was dodging from bush to bush, making his way
cautiouslv across the garden. Every few seconds he paused, and listened intently.
"All fast asleep,” he breathed, moving on again in the shadows.
"I’m taking no stupid chances, anyway,” he thought, as he gazed up at the
tempting windows and hastily went over his plans for the last time. "No noise
and no dawdling .... slowly up and quickly down . ”
Taking a deep breath, Slippery Archie slid one long leg over the window sill,
and waited an instant. "Not a sound .. . lucky .. .” All hesitation vanished.
"Better get on with the job”, he decided, dropping silently and neatly to the
floor. So far, so good. Quiet regular breathing—
' Someone asleep over there .... I shan’t disturb ’em!” Tip-toeing softly
he began to cross the room. "Street light’s handy”— Suddenly Slippery caught
his breath sharply. "Mind my basket, please,” piped up a sleepy little voice.
"Hush!”
"But I fink you’ve knocked it over.”
"Hush!! Don’t talk”, hissed the intruder urgently.
"My name’s Bobbie .... did you come ’stead of the wabbit?”
"You go to sleep .... I must be off ... ”
Please tay a minute”, coaxed the child, in an excited whisper, sitting up very
wide awake. "Fll be as quiet as a mouse, twooly”.


"A nice fix”, thought Slippery in alarm, "he’ll probably yell at the top ot his
lungs if I make for the window.” By this time the small boy was hanging over
the side of the bed, vainly trying to get a glimpse of his precious basket.
"Here, get back . . . that’s right . . . and go to sleep for goodness sake.”
"Did you fix my basket at the end of the bed”, he persisted.
"Wait a jiffy till I find it”.
"A wabbit is going to put an egg in it ... . Good Fwiday tomorrow”.
Slippery groped around on the floor, with his mind in a turmoil. Who would
have expected a hold-up like this?
"An egg, yes, a bad egg .... that’s me!” mumbled the man on the floor, for-
getting himself for a moment.
"Oh no, not a bad egg!” explained Bobbie promptly, in a stage whisper, "Cook
says there aren’t any weally bad eggs .... ’cos there’s always gold inside”.
"Ahem! I see ... . well, there’s your basket”.
Bobbie liked his visitor. It was comforting to have someone to talk to in the
dark. Slippery Archie had quite lost sight of his original intention. Somehow,
it was hard to break away from Bobbie’s childish confidences. Yet he ran an
absurd risk of being discovered any minute.
"I hope you get a nice Easter egg, too,” whispered the child, "it was kind of
Jesus, wasn’t it?” ... he continued innocently, "Mummie says ...”
"Here! FU have to be going—”
"Fm so sowwy ~ . where do you have to go?” Slippery was desperate. "This
baby’s got me in a tight knot”, he thought helplessly, "how on earth can I shut
him up?” Was that door opening? Better hurry.
" Look, kid ... . I’ve got to see, er . . . . about this rabbit business”, he finished
with a rush. Bobbie clasped his hands delightedly, and nodded wisely. Quite easy
to understand why his new friend must not wait any longer.
"Hush .... not a sound” — Quite content, and thrilled beyond words, the
child snuggled down with a happy smile on his face. What a secret!
As silently as he had come, Slippery Archie slid down into the garden, empty-
handed, and darted swiftly away. Just once he turned for a split second and
glanced toward the open window. All quiet. Young Bobbie was safely back in
the land of dreams. But any time now an alarm might be raised.
"Funny little beggar .... Golly! To think I didn’t get a bean!”
Quickly climbing over the fence, he hurried down the deserted street in a
business-like way, keeping his eyes wide open. Once around the corner he com-
menced to run for dear life. "Got to put a few miles between us,” he panted, slap-
ping his empty pockets, "just to be on the safe side.”
Day was breaking as he let himself into the cheerless room in a narrow side
street. Flinging himself wearily on to the dingy camp-bed, he dozed off into a
troubled sleep.
"Well, matey, how did you get on?” enquired an oily voice, "come on, share
the dough!” Slippery Archie awoke with a start.
"Hullo, Nick .... you’re early.”


Why .... don t you see? faltered Slippery, as he began to read slowly;—
Missing Friends. Will
the gentleman who visited Bobbie Hevwood on
the night before Good Friday please return if possible? Boy dangerously ill.
Asks for him continually.”
"Stuff and nonsense!”
"His name was Bobbie . . .
. the child I disturbed” . . .
Please tay a minute
coaxed the child.
"All the better. Well?”
Got nothing.” "Nothing!” exclaimed Nick incredulously, "you’re joking.”
True , replied his pal briefly, feeling rather shame-faced, "someone woke
up.” He obstinately refused to say any more.
Well, you’re a big chump!” was the scornful comment, "the 'cops’ will be on
your tracks just the same.”
I know .... Slippery was thinking uncomfortably of tell-tale fingerprints,
time for us to buzz off, anyway, he added decidedly, "and you won’t catch
me near old Heywood’s mansion again!”
Look at this, Nick .... look!” While unwrapping a parcel of chops a
fortnight later, Slipery Archie s gaze fell on the most surprising advertisement.
Well, what is it? asked the older man, glancing vaguely at the page of
newspaper thrust under his nose.
"Then it’s a trap!”
"This paper is three days old,” muttered Slippery, thinking deeply, "Fm sorry
about the poor little kid.”


«. *.■; * "•• •
‘ •.'•■• -‘•••■r '•*■•• . .
> ' ' ; ' -A’.*, " :
•: ■:
f>>
"Don’t be a softie . . . it’s a trap all right .... they must be cracked to
think you'd go! Run into the arms of the police, no doubt,”
"Yes ... . but still, I think I’ll have to go.”
'What? You’re mad!”
Hand-cuffs, a prison van, disgrace, a lonely cell, an end to freedom. Slip-
pery’s dark eyes were filled with a brooding look of dread. Silently he slumped
down over the paper and re-read the curious paragraph:
" 'Boy dangerously ill’ .... he trusted me ... . three days since that message
I wonder if it’s too late?” Suddenly he sprang to his feet. His grim and
resolute face was alight with courage.
"I’m going, Nick. It’s goodbye .... You’re safe. I won’t give you away.”
"So you’ve come. A brave thing to do,” said Sir Ernest Heywood, in a
low grateful voice as he put a friendly hand on the visitor’s shoulder. "Bobbie
has pneumonia. He took a great fancy to you . . . Seems to be fretting over
something .... keeps asking . . . . ” continued the father brokenly.
"Here’s Bobbie’s friend, Sister.”
"Good! .... Just come over to the bed, and see if he knows you,” she said
in an undertone. There was a lump in Slippery’s throat, as he looked down at the
flushed little face, and listened to the rapid breathing. Awkwardly he laid
big hand over one of Bobbie’s small ones.
"Hullc . . . Bobbie” ... A flicker crossed the child’s face. Surely he remem-
bered that voice. Why, of course, he saved half his egg . . . Bobbie opened his
eyes and smiled contentedly. "It’s . . . my . . . Easter . . . man!”


HIDDE
GOLD
HOW would you like to go and look after Grandfather for a little while,
Susie?” asked Mrs. Foster. "It’s so lonely for him, and I don’t think he is
really very well at present.”
"Do you really mean it, Mother?” asked the 12-year-old Susie, her face light-
ing up at the thought of a new adventure.
"Yes, I’m quite serious. You see, father can’t leave the mine, and I must stay
here with the little ones.” As a matter of fact, the sensible and helpful young
Susie could not easily be spared at all. "I’ll go like a shot,” she exclaimed, "if you
think he won’t make a fuss.”
"Oh, I know Grandfather’s very independent, but that’s partly because he
doesn’t want to be a bother. We just wouldn’t ask him.”
"Give him a surprise?” Mrs. Foster nodded. "He’s been having some worry
about his 'claim’ lately, I believe.”
"But nothing would make him leave it,” remarked Susie, "and I don’t blame
him, after all the work he’s put into it.” Living on the Ballarat goldfields had
taught the Foster family all about the patience, determination and industry of the
old-timers. Susie had great admiration and affection for her courageous grand-
father. So the matter was settled.
"You can go along to-morrow, dear,” said Mrs. Foster. "I shall certainly feel
more satisfied about him then.”
"Come in! Who is it?” called the old miner, surprised by a knock on the door
of his humble and spotless little shanty, so early in the morning.
"It’s only me —Susie,” replied a cheery voice, "come to see you, grandfather.”
"Why, is anything the matter, m’dear?”
"No, no,” said Susie, laughing. "I’ve come for a holiday. Can I stay?”
"Bless the child; not much of a holiday.” For an instant he hesitated: 'l’m
all right, you know.”
"Of course, but you don’t mind me helping a bit, do you?” coaxed Susie. "And
I can have the 'partner’s room’ ... a good thing he went away, wasn’t it?” she
rattled on brightly.


The old man rubbed his head thoughtfully: "I don’t know that I ought to let
you stay, child; there have been some bad characters round about lately.”
''But I’ve got my luggage,” announced Susie triumphantly, as she ducked out-
side and brought in a small dress basket.
"Grandfather looks worried,” she was thinking, "I’m glad I came.” Within a
few minutes the little girl had unpacked her belongings and was bustling about,
making herself useful.
No one knew that the old miner’s eyesight had been giving him trouble lately.
The deep-set blue eyes looked so keen and youthful. But there were times when
everything seemed a blur before him, and at times when he could not be sure if he
saw the glint of gold in the earth and quartz, or if he only imagined it. Although
the small claim had yielded a fair amount of the precious metal, over a long period,
the solid nugget of his dreams had never appeared.
* * *
There were evil strangers at Ballarat who had left a mining camp in Cali-
fornia under a cloud of suspicion some months before. Making a pretence of look-
ing for work, they were spying round, only waiting to rob some miner of his hard-
won treasure.
"Mornin’, Grandpa!” was the unexpected greeting one sunny morning, "want a
hand?” The old man looked up from his work with a start, to see two seedy indi-
viduals almost at his elbow. For a couple of minutes he peered at them steadily, in
silence. They began to fidget uncomfortably. Perhaps the old man was deaf.
Raising his voice, one of the strangers tried again: "Mornin’, Grand —”
" 'Mister’ to you!” retorted a surprisingly deep, rich voice, "and you can just
get off this claim as quickly as you came!”
"No harm meant, guv’ner,” was the mumbled reply, "just lookin’ for work.”
"Work, indeed! A likely tale,” thought the wise old miner, as he watched
them out of sight. "Greed is written all over their faces . . . they’re bad eggs, and
no mistake.”
Ever since that day Grandfather Foster had felt uneasy. Several times the
men had been back again, on some pretext or other. Their meek behaviour was a
horrible mockery.
"One of these days he’ll turn up a fortune, and we’ll take charge of it for
him,” sneered one of the men boastfully.
"Yes, it’s worth waitin’ for. Lucky he’s all on his own ... no trouble at’ all.”
In the meantime young Susie had come to stay.
"What’s that for, grandfather?” she asked with interest, looking at the old
gun he was rather secretly taking outside.
"Just a precaution, m’dear,” he confided. "Those bad characters are hanging
around, and they’ll see I mean business,”
"Pooh! I wouldn’t take any notice of them. What harm can they do?”
"Ah! That’s just it. No, I don’t trust them,” he said with spirit, as he
trudged off to the cherished spot, which still held such high hopes.


"I’ll be along soon,” called Susie, watching him with a motherly air. "The big
cowards. It isn’t fair!” she exploded under her breath.
A strange sight met her gaze as she ran out later. There was her snowy-haired
grandfather sitting motionless on an upturned box, with his old felt hat pulled down
well over his eyes and the loaded rifle across his knees. He looked forlorn, some-
how. Susie felt a lump in her throat. Hurrying over, she put an arm around his
drooping shoulders.
"Having a rest?” she asked rather shakily.
"Can you keep a secret, m’dear?”
"Rather! What is it?”
"My eyes, Susie —I can’t see properly,” He sounded puzzled and distressed.
"I’ll help you. . . It’ll be fun.” She immediately set to work.
Turning up the earth carefully, she searched it thoroughly.
"You’re a great comfort, Susie,” remarked her grandfather as he watched her.
For a long while she poked and prodded.
Suddenly she stopped, and bent closer to the ground, with her eyes nearly start-
ing out of her head! Could it be? How had he missed it? For a moment Susie
could scarcely breathe for excitement. His dream come true! At the same instant
she spied two strange figures half-hidden on the little hill opposite.
Grandfather . . .” she whispered hoarsely, "I’ve found it! Don’t move. I
think those bad men are watching.”
"The nugget?” he gasped. "Surely—”
"Yes, it is! I’ll get it for you soon!”
rr We mustn’t let them
guess” In a flash Susie
was doing an impromptu
dance.


"Just look at that stupid Jfcirf
doing a dance for him!”
"M’dear, although my old eyes are not what they were, I’ve seen those two
on the hill every day for a week.”
"We mustn’t let them guess. ... I know. . . .” In a flash Susie was doing an
impromptu dance, apparently to entertain the old miner.
Round and round she twirled, flopping down on the ground at last laughing
and out of breath, right on top of the precious find. In a trice she had stuffed the
nugget into the top of her long black stocking, and was dancing over to her grand-
father, His trembling hands still clutched the gun, but there was a sparkle in his
eyes.
Like a pair of vultures, the men on the hillside kept their crafty eyes upon
the old miner.
'Tie’ll either get tired and clear out, or else he’ll find something before long,”
said one of them confidently.
"Just look at that stupid kid doing a dance for him!” sneered his mate. "Crazy
nonsense! I thought at first —but, no, they’ve got nothing.”
"We shan’t be safe for a minute once they know,” muttered the old miner
anxiously.
"But it’s Thursday! Bill Potter passes with his cart in about an hour.”
’’You’re right, m’dear ... he will take us to the bank. Oh, isn’t it wonderful!”
He wanted to shout for joy.
"Don’t move, they’re still watching,” warned Susie once again.
"We must wait, then,” sighed the old man. The minutes dragged past.
The clatter of horses’ hoofs —the rumble of a cart.
"Listen, grandfather . . . come on!” The "dream nugget” was safe.


WELL, I’m hopping out of this, quick and lively,” announced Joe Purley,
gentleman crook, "before things get too hot.”
"You’ve got the wind up!” snarled his accomplice, irritably. "Any-
how, how are you goin’ ter do it?”
"Don't know yet . . . coming?”
Not on yer life. I know a snug little dugout where I’ll lay low and wait until
things blow over.”
"Have it your own way, then . . . but it wouldn’t suit me, thanks.”
For some weeks Joe had been working out a neat way of disappearing should
things become awkward.
It will be too open and too brazen to excite suspicion,” he thought confidently,
as he carefully went over the plans in his cunning and resourceful mind.
Dressing himself with the utmost care, and looking very smart in a new grey
suit, he picked up a small leather grip and flung a well-cut overcoat across his arm.
"Well, Joe, my dear boy,” he murmured to his good-looking reflection in the
shaving mirror, "no one would take you for anything but a perfect gentleman!”
A regular master in the art of disguise, Purley had tricked the police many
times. In fact, he had often tricked his shady mates as well. They never seemed
able to keep track of him. He was clever, daring, unscrupulous, and intensely con-
ceited.
This little old town won t see me for quite a time,” he reflected with a swag-
ger, as he stepped into a Grand Central taxi bound for Newark Airport. There
were several other passengers, and Joe made himself quite agreeable. In less than
half an hour the car drew up with a flourish at the aerodrome.
I want to make arrangements for a flight over this famous airport,” said
Purley to an official, looking about him with an air of great interest.
"Just step up to the office, if you please, sir.”


"A first-class plane and a first-class pilot, and I’m ready right away,” said Joe
with a laugh, trying to keep all traces of eagerness out of his voice.
Within a few minutes they were in touch with Jack Clinton, a young pilot of
exceptional ability.
'Tm not at all keen on these joy flights, as you know,” he replied briefly.
' ? Weli. this guy seems to want the best he can get, and looks as if he had the
money to pay for it.”
"You can’t always go by looks,” chuckled the pilot, "and that’s not exactly
the point . . . but anyway, I’ll have a word with him.”
Giving a fictitious name, and describing himself as a merchant on holiday, the
wily Joe finally managed to engage Pilot Jack Clinton and his smart little plane.
Secretly he was well satisfied. Everything seemed to be going according to plan.
"Can’t stand these self-satisfied looking Johnnies,” thought Clinton, taking in
Joe’s appearance at a glance. "Still, business is business, I suppose.”
A few minutes later the Firefly was run out of the hangar, looking very spruce
in the afternoon sunshine.
"Swell little bus,” remarked the passenger, in a gratified tone. "What’s more,
I could handle her myself at a pinch,” he might have added.
However, making a show of knowing practically nothing about aeroplanes, he
asked the pilot a few elementary questions as he ran his eyes over the instrument
board and had a good look at the controls.
"I guess it’s a bit complicated,” he drawled at last, settling down comfortably
in the cabin, just behind the pilot. "Contact!” The magic word.
Joe heaved an involuntary sigh of relief as the plane taxied slowly away from
the hangar. His mind had jumped suddenly to the uncomfortable possibilities
connected with his escape. Supposing the police were on his track already? They
might even now be sending a message to watch all airports, giving a full description
of him. A sinister smile crossed his features for an instant.
"I should worry!” he was thinking. For none of his confederates had ever
seen him like this —so extremely respectable. And, besides, the police would find
no trace of him. He felt quite safe, provided it was possible to get quickly to a cer-
tain spot two hundred miles away.
Turning steadily, Clinton brought his machine round into the wind. A glance
at the control-tower; then, as he opened the throttle, the Firefly rose swiftly like
a graceful bird, and they were off and away. Up three thousand feet, and cruising
pleasantly, with the wonderful airport spread out below, and the sharp line of the
horizon all round. It was a perfect day to be in the air.
As the pilot sat easily in his seat, with the plane responding sensitively to his
touch on the controls, he little guessed the anxiety filling his passenger’s mind.
"Fll have to choose the right moment ... no use while he might have some way
of signalling to the ground. You never know these chaps ... act like lightning.”


A wicked little pistol was jabbed into the middle of his back
No one would have thought the man was on a joy flight. His face was flushed and
his eyes were, restless.
"When we get a bit farther away —just before he turns to come back again.”
Clinton took little notice of the man behind him, surmising that he was enjoy-
ing things in his own way.
"Surely I’m not getting nerves!” thought Joe in alarm. Then as his gaze took
in the great lonely spaces of the sky his confidence returned. His mouth set in a
cruel line. Stealthily slipping his right hand into his breast pocket, he waited.
At that very moment the man at the controls was thinking:
"It’s about time I took this 'button king’ back again. . . Hullo! What’s hap-
pening?” Right behind him the passenger was standing up. A wicked little pistol
was jabbed into the middle of his back.
"Keep going due north! I’m in charge now!”
"Gee whizz! A gangster!” muttered Clinton between his teeth. "Just too
bad!”
"Make it snappy, and do as you’re told,” commanded Joe fiercely, "I’m in
a hurry.”
"And supposing—?” came the unruffled voice of the pilot,
"No 'supposing’ about it. I can fly this plane myself if need be.”
"Whew! A nice kind of bird! Perhaps he’s bluffing,” thought Jack Clinton.
"Maybe it isn’t a gun at all.”
"I know what you’re thinking,” chipped in his passenger, pushing the weapon a
trifle harder, "but I’m not kidding, and you’d better not try any tricks.” The pilot
had no choice but to obey. Inwardly he was furious. What a relief it would be
to turn round and face the blackguard! It was enough to freeze anybody’s blood
to have him so close with that gun, and to listen to his arrogant orders.


- ( .
"Surely I can do something!” fumed Clinton, racking his brains, and continuing
to pilot his plane in a masterly manner.
"I knew this plan would work,” thought the gangster with an unpleasant
smirk. "When we land I can soon make short work of him, if it suits me.”
For an hour or more the unfortunate pilot had been flying toward Joe’s secret
destination. His keen eyes, so used to watching the instrument-board, the sky, and
the horizon, narrowed thoughtfully.
"Gee! that’s an idea!” he almost shouted. "It’s worth a try, anyway.
Nothing could be worse than this.”
Here was a spark of hope at last. He would have to act in a flash, but if it
worked, well —.
"Keep going, then turn when I tell you,” roared the man behind him. It was
his last order. For answer Pilot Jack Clinton waggled his stick sideways, and the
aircraft wobbled violently.
"Here! —” protested Joe Purley, making a wild attempt to keep his balance.
"Now’s my chance!” thought the quick-witted pilot. Like lightning he grabbed
the fire extinguisher in his right hand. Turning half-way round, he brought it
down with a mighty "whack” on the gangster’s head, knocking him unconscious.
"So that’s that,” he breathed, smothering his excitement, and giving all his at-
tention to righting the Firefly once again. Then as quickly as possible he made
for the airport.
"Where’s your passenger, Jack?” asked a fellow-pilot in surprise, as the plane
came to a standstill.
"Oh, he’s in the back,” was the quiet reply, "you’re welcome to him!”


w .. fop...*
o/h//er
r'
WHENEVER I look at the time, or hear a clock strike,” said Uncle Allan,
home on sick leave, "I think of a little brown boy with a white heart, away
on a tiny island in the Pacific Ocean. Do you know, he once saved my
hfe. And now he wears my wristlet watch, which he admired so much, as a keep-
sake.”
How old was he, Uncle? Was that on the cable station?” queried the children
breathlessly. For at last they were to hear the promised story.
Just below the equator stands the sunkissed Pacific island of Papaseea, where
the days are much the same all the year round. Here a great cable comes up out of
the bed of the ocean to a sub-station controlled by just two white men. The in-
habitants of the island are all natives, and a bright little lad of 12 was the house-
boy on the station. Up at dawn, dressed in his brightly-coloured "lava lava,” Navua
was always eager to begin his daily duties. Fascinated by all the strange instru-
ments at the cable station, he loved to watch his master tapping the small Flack
key which sent messages round the world. In fact, Navua wanted to learn this
mysterious language, thinking he might even be able to talk to the stars!
One day he begged to be allowed to try the strange "tap, tap, feller key.” But
the operator was tired after doing his night watch, and hastily dismissed the boy
with. Tnis feller no speak your lingo, Navua.” Not disheartened, Navua con-
tinued to spend every possible minute in the office, watching the operators at work.
There came a time when the island was swept by a terrible epidemic, bringing
suffering and death to many of the natives, including the parents of poor Navua.
Heartbroken, the little boy bravely carried on with his duties, trying in his own way
to shield those at the cable station from the dreaded influenza. For the cables must
go through.
But in spite of care and precautions the disease reached the station, and when
Navua went one morning to call the assistant operator there was no reply. For
death had come to the cable station. Navua rushed in a panic to tell his master who
was on duty in the office, only to find the operator huddled over silent keys.
Master, Master!” he wailed, trying with a gentle shake to awaken the stricken
man. Carefully the little boy eased him on to the floor, then opened the medicine
cupboard for the bottle he knew had often been used for sick friends. It was almost


empty —only one dose left! Placing the bottle to his beloved master’s lips, Navua
breathed a native prayer.
"Master, Master, feller key, feller key!” he cried. And presently the operator
stirred and opened his eyes, feverishly muttering Navua’s name. Suddenly he re-
membered everything, and in anguish he gasped: "The key! Help! S O S.”
Navua’s eyes brightened—"Master, you tellem me tap, tap. I do.”
The operator groaned. "You no savvy, Navua.”
"Me plenty do tap tap,” said the boy. But the only reply was a weary shake of
the head. Yet the call must go out to the world for help. Perhaps, after all, the
boy would understand.
"Navua,” whispered the operator, as the lad bent down to catch each precious
breathless word. "You tap feller black key: dot-dot-dot-dash-dash-dash.” Navua
crouched closer, listen-
ing to the feeble voice,
as the sick man strug-
" Master, Master!” he wailed, trying with a gentle shake to
awaken the stricken man.
gled to finish the vital message —"dot-dot-dot—.” The operator fell back unconscious.
Shaken with grief, Navua sat down at the "feller black key,” timidly touched
the magic instrument. Tap tap —would it bring help? Again and again he tapped
out the message ... ... then rushed back to care for his master.
As the sun rose over Honolulu, hundreds of miles away, a sleepy operator
pricked up his ears —dot, dash, rather jumbled at first. Then "S O S” frantically
repeated —little Navua’s tragic call for help—then silence.
In vain the operator tapped out the name of the tiny island of Papaseea, No


Navua watched his master being carried
answer. From the wireless room he broadcast an S O S to all ships in the Pacific.
"Rush help to sub-station Papaseea.”
And soon the great liner Maitai had changed her course and was ploughing full
steam ahead to answer the distress signal from the island.
Patiently Navua kept watch by his master’s side, tenderly stroking his burn-
ing brow and trying to sooth his delirium.
An excited native came running on to the verandah of the cable station:
"Navua —light on sea —ships come —” he jabbered in his native tongue.
In an instant, as silent as a shadow, Navua was peering at the distant light of
the approaching ship. No sooner had the Maitai anchored than a boat was lowered
and the ship’s doctor and an officer raced ashore.
Navua watched his master being carried to the ship for care and attention. A
forlorn little waif, he turned to leave the cable station. But the kind voice of the
junior officer who had stayed behind in charge of the magic key, called, "Come here,
Navau. You very brave boy. You like help me cable station? Your master get
plenty well now.” For the "feller black key” had spoken.


yLLO, Skeeter, ’ow’s
| ' yer leg gettin’ on?”
inquired young Billy
Brown, peering through the doorway of a shabby room in the East End of London.
"Bit sore it is—come in, Bill,” replied the small invalid in a weak voice, smiling
at his mate.
A firm friendship had sprung up between the two boys a year ago when
Skeeter was knocked over by a car that killed his mongrel dog and did not stop.
The boy just managed to scramble painfully to his feet and limp away, assisted by a
freckle-faced urchin near by.
"The dirty blighter! Just lemme get ’old of ’im —give ’im a blood nose, I will,
and two black eyes!” threatened the 10-year-old Billy darkly, as he helped the in-
jured boy home. Ever since then Skeeter had never been strong, and his left leg
hurt him unbearably at times.
"Mother’s got a job,” continued the sick child. "She’s that pleased—been out
looking for work for weeks.” The boy paused for breath. "You don’t say. That’s
a bit of good luck, ain’t it? —but you’ll be pretty lonely. ’Ad any breakfast?”
"N-no —but mum says we’ll be able to have some tea when she gets back to-
night.”
" ’Arf a tick.” Billy was off like a shot. He had been treasuring "tuppence”
for a fortnight. Dodging in and out of the traffic he stood at last outside a pastry-
cook’s shop and went through some keen pricing as he fingered the precious coppers
in his shabby pocket.
Billy’s chance earnings invariably had to go into the family purse, but this had
been an unexpected tip.
"Poor old Skeeter . . . ’e looks bad . . . wish I could do somethink to make ’im
better,” mumbled the boy, as he stood eyeing the goodies in the window.
"Two ha’penny buns, please, miss.”
"They’re a penny each. Wait a second . . . you can have two stale ones for a
penny.” The girl looked kindly at Bill’s troubled face. "With a scrape of butter,”


she added. This was unheard-of generosity. Billy beamed his thanks. Within a
few minutes he was racing up the dingy stairs leading to Skeeter’s room.
" ’Ere you are ~ . now tuck in,” he ordered. "I’m off for some milk,” "But,
Billy! What about you?”
"Eat up . . . not hungry.” Taking a broken jug from the table the boy
darted away to the next street with the penny he had saved on his bargain at the
baker’s. A shining brass tap in a tall paling fence, a penny in the slot, a quick
gush of fresh milk, and the deed was done.
"Ladies and gents . . . ahem ... no deception, you see . . . nothink in my right
sleeve, nothink in my left . . .” announced the boy, appearing suddenly, like a con-
jurer at Skeeter’s once again.
"What’s that lump? I know your tricks, 'Mr. Maskeleyne’!” With the great-
est care Billy skilfully produced the milk jug from the top of his ragged sweater.
" ’Arf a pint of the best, from the 'iron cow’ me boy,” he said with a flourish.
"Now drink up . . . I’ll ’ave to be goin’ soon.” Sitting down on the edge of the
bed he lowered his voice mysteriously.
"Listen. Skeeter, I’ve got an idea . . . what d’you want most in all the world.”
"Oh. Billy . . . you know ... a dog.”
" ’Course you do! I might be able to borrow one ... not sure yet. ’Mum’s
the word.” For fear of disappointing his pal, he steadily refused to say any more,
and hurried away in search of odd errands that he was expected to find from day
to day.
"Golly ... I only ’ope it works all right,” he murmured anxiously, thinking of
the thrilling secret he had been bottling up. "They oughta know me a bit by this
time.” A week before a lucky errand had taken the lad to a house some distance
away, where they had two dogs. Sudden inspiration had come to Billy. Each day
he had found a chance to pass the place again and speak to the animals quietly, at
the large side gate.
" 'Beware of the dog’ . . . urn, the big feller . . . Vs a bit of a terror, I can see
that.” The splendid mastiff showed his teeth in an ugly snarl, though the small
rough-haired terrier wagged a friendly tail when Billy spoke.
"You’ll do, Nipper, you will ... see you later,” he whispered, and was off at
a brisk trof.
"Yes, I’ll nick in to-night and get ’im ... if I can.” It was not so easy as it
sounded. The big dog was evidently savage. "Nice thing if ’e barks and wakes
’em all up ... or if ’e goes for me.” The prospect was certainly risky. Still it was
for Skeeter, loyal old Skeeter, who was having such a miserable time.
Nine o’clock—ten—eleven. Billy strolled along casually, feeling decidedly
nervous. Now that it came to the point, he saw what a difficult job it would be.
"But rve promised Skeeter . . . he’ll be so excited . . . never let him down yet.”
He knew the catch of that side gate off by heart; could open and shut it without
even a click.
'What about the 'cops’?” A little shiver of fear ran through the boy. "I
ain’t goin’ ter do anythink wrong ... just borrow it.” In imagination he could see


Skeeter lying in that poverty-stricken room, praying every day for a dog. It was
too much
"Bloomin’ coward . . . that’s what I am.” The next instant he stood by the
shadowy gate. Not a soul was about. No sign of the dogs. Would they be
chained up in the yard? He whistled softly. No, there they were just at the end of
the short drive, hidden from the house by a tall cypress hedge. There was a low
growl.
"Golly! If he goes and gives the show away,” thought poor Billy for a frantic
moment. He whistled again. They seemed to recognise him. Screwing up his
courage, Billy opened the gate with its warning notice, and began to creep slowly
over the crunching gravel. With bristling coat the big dog advanced suspiciously,
with a terrifying snarl. The small terrier trotted behind. Scared stiff, the young
intruder wondered what on earth to do next. It was an awkward moment. Still,
here he was, with no time to lose.
r 'Magic alright!” he breathed. ’’That Billy’s a wonder!”
"It’s all right,” he croaked jerkily; "good boy! good boy!” and commenced
walked cautiously backward to the gate. "I only want . . . this!” In a flash he
had picked up Nipper in his arms, and was away out of the gate and down the
street as fast as his legs would carry rim.
Meanwhile Skeeter dozed fitfully. His mother had gone to help wash up after
a late party. Was that a knock on the door, or was he dreaming?


"Who is it?" he called huskily.
"Only me .. . can I come in?” "Yes, come on .. . what is it?”
"I’ve got him!” panted Billy, out of breath with his long run. The street light
shone on Skeeter’s bed.
Speechless with joy, the boy put out his arms for the dog and looked into the
trustful brown eyes. Nipper licked his face and jumped about gleefully. This
was quite a good adventure.
"Mind you, Skeeter . . . I’ve got to take him back again soon, but I’ll borrow
him for you every night . . . till we can get one for your very own.” For an hour
or so the sick boy was the happiest mortal in London.
"Billy, you’re a wonder!” he said as he gave the dog a parting pat and settled
down contentedly.
With his heart in his mouth Billy had done his amazing trick successfully for
five nights. Skeeter was looking better already for the pleasure of having a pet
half his own. Once more Billy opened the familiar gate in the darkness.
"Woof! Woof!” It was a big, throaty bark. No wonder they put "beware of
the dog!” For an instant the boy felt frozen to the spot. Supposing he was dis-
covered.
"Here, what are you up to, you young villain?” A firm hand grabbed him by
the collar, "Nothink. I just . .
"Lucky I happened to be sitting up late. You come along and answer a few
questions.”
"I’m done,” thought Billy mournfully, as he kept pace with the gentleman
who had appeared so suddenly; "bad luck for Skeeter.”
"Tell me the truth, youngster, what were you after?” Somehow Billy didn’t
feel so terrified now. He began to explain about Skeeter, and forgot about his
own worries.
"So I thought we could borrow Nipper at night . . . you would have him in
the day, and you see Skeeter’s got no money to feed him.”
"That seems a rather good idea,” was the surprising answer.
"You’re not kidding, mister?” Billy’s frank blue eyes searched the steady
brown ones.
"By jove, I’m not. We can’t disappoint Skeeter. Get the dog . . . I’ll come,
too.” Scarcely knowing if he was awake or dreaming, Billy hopped into the smart
car beside his new friend and gave precise directions. In a few minutes they had
reached the shabby street. Billy led the way up the creaky stairs.
"Nipper! Nipper!” called a feeble voice.
"Mind you don’t frighten ’im,” whispered Billy guardedly.
"Ladies and gents ... no deception . . . ’ere is the true Maskeleyne,” he began,
in a high-pitched voice, as he flung open the door.
"Hullo, Skeeter , . . we’ve come to make you well again,” said the famous
specialist, "your mate brought me along with Nipper.”
The rick boy sat up in bed, his pinched little face alight with happiness. "Magic
all right,” he breathed. "That Billy’s a wonder!”


THERE! that will be just the thing for the birds,” said Uncle David, setting a
big white clam shell under the tap on the lawn. "These come from the South
Seas, you know. Much safer on the lawn than under the water, too!”
"What do you mean, uncle? Are they dangerous?” asked his mystified young
audience.
"Dangerous? Why they lie about on the bed of the ocean and snap down on
anything that comes along! You might as well try and get out of an iron safe.”
Uncle gave the beautiful shell a rough shake, for he was thinking of a young
pearl diver caught in one of these shell traps.
Looking very picturesque in his red and yellow "pareos,” Temanu was laugh-
ing and talking excitedly. The best swimmer and diver on the island of Raiatea,
he had just been engaged to go to the pearling grounds the following day.
"Boss, you takem my brother, Lovaina? Plenty good diver” —he had begged
the big red-haired captain of the white schooner Tofua, lying in the lagoon.
"All right, boy, him come too,” was the good-natured deply, for the 16-year-
old twins hated to be parted. Captain Wills promised them a good reward for
their skilful services, and the boys put on a little swagger of importance, for it
was an honour to be chosen to work among the dangerous atolls of the Paumotos.
As the moon began to rise from the edge of the reef, and shed its silvery light
on the lagoon, sounds of laughter and singing floated across to the schooner.
"These boys are having a party,” laughed the skipper.
On the little island the friends of Temanu and Lovaina, wearing garlands and
wreaths of flowers round their necks, began to arrive for the farewell feast. Soon
they were all seated in a happy circle, enjoying roast pig, fowl, yams, and taro tops
—eating until they could eat no more! Then the boys began to strum their native
instruments and sing their island songs. Faster and louder grew the beat of the
drums as the native boys and girls danced their farewell "hula.”
At sunrise the young divers had to be on board the Tofua. It seemed as if
everyone on the island had come to see them off. But the boys felt very sad as their
friends returned to the beach in their canoes, singing "Himene Tatou” and calling
"la-ora-na,”
Seven days at sea and the fairy island of Makura was sighted. Above the


rim of the dazzling white beach tall coconut palms swayed in the breeze. Temanu
and Lovaina felt happy and excited as the Tofua dropped anchor in the lagoon,
and preparations began for the pearling next day.
The long-boat was laden with stores, ropes, a bucket, an iron-hooped net, a
glass-bottomed box, and other tackle required by the divers. Watching Lovaina
handling the glass box, Captain Wills warned him: "Suppose you break that fel-
low 'titea mata’ you get no bulla-macow for your dinner!”
"Me plenty careful, Boss,” smiled the lad.
Next day pearling began. Through the glass-bottomed box —the "titea mata”
—Captain Wills looked eagerly into the clear depths of the blue water. Fish of
every colour swam to and fro, and strange sea plants shot their long arms upward.
Among them went sneaking eels, looking like stock-whips that cracked, then van-
ished. But danger lurked amid the beauty, and, as Temanu stood ready to go down,
the captain went to his side, saying, "Watchem plenty shark, boy.”
Temanu grinned and nodded, holding up his knife, a sharp, short-handled
weapon. Round his neck was slung a bag for the shells. Pausing, he began to
fill his lungs. Some minutes were spent in inhaling and exhaling noisily, then,
storing his great chest with air, the boy went over the side of the boat, and sank like
a stone for about 15 feet. "Now he swim plenty down bottom,” said Lovaina, never
taking his eyes from his brother’s movements.
Temanu could be seen wrenching off shell after shell and cramming them into
his bag. After two minutes he let go and shot to the surface, and, flinging his
arms over the long-boat’s boom, gasped for relief. Taking the bag, the captain
emptied the shells on the floor of the boat. Temanu dived again and again, and
the last time the shadow of a shark slid between him and the boat.
"No more, Temanu,” said the skipper, and, turning to the waiting brother,
"Now, you fella Lovaina, suppose bring up good pearl, get plenty bulla-macow,”
Heartened by the promise of corned beef, a favourite delicacy, Lovaina willingly
dived over into the clear water.
Temanu watched him reach the bottom and work along the bed, filling his
bag with shells as he groped. Then, turning on his side, Lovaina stretched out his
hand to give himself a push to rise to the surface.
A look of horror spread over the watchers’ faces in the boat above as they saw
Lovaina pause, then struggle like a mad creature. Guessing the cause immediately,
the captain muttered, "The poor wretch is clammed to the bottom; nothing can
save him!’ A giant furbelowed clam, with its two-hinged shells open, had closed
like a vice on poor Novaina’s hand.
With a cry of anguish, Temanu seized the pearling knife and dived over and
down to his brother. Lovaina’s frantic struggles were beginning to weaken, for
he was drowning. Nothing on earth could open the shell and set him free. Every
second brought death nearer. Dimly he could see his twin.
In a flash Temanu had made his decision. Drawing his knife, he cut at the
trapped hand until Lovaina was free, then, grasping him by the arm, brought him
to the surface. Lifting Lovaina into the long-boat, the captain worked hard until


c
' £ V;
at last the lad began to show signs of consciousness, his brother kneeling in dumb
misery by his side.
Back to the schooner as quickly as possible, where the maimed limb could be
cared for. Temanu shuddered. But Lovaina knew that only his brother’s brave
act had saved his life, and he whispered words of comfort and gratitude.
When the shells were opened up next day Lovaina watched with interest. But
the captain was disappointed, for, although there were pearls of various shapes and
sizes, there seemed to be no pearls of great value.
With a sudden thought Temanu reached for Lovaina’s bag, which, in yester-
day’s excitement, had been thrown aside. With his knife he began forcing apart the
shell and examining the inside. Then, with a spring, he was at the captain’s side.
"Look, boss!” he exclaimed breathlessly.
Nothing on earth could open the shell and set him free.
The captain’s kindly face brightened, for here was a pearl that was worth
having—a beautiful and valuable gem. Knowing how he could make the boys
happy, too, he promised: "Me go Papeete, buy you boys plenty bulla-macow, and
sing-sing box (gramophone), then home to Raiatea.”


TR/CHS THE
BANHBOBBm |s|g|
I SHAN’T be long now, Marjorie,” said Mr. Mansell, manager of a country
bank in Victoria, as he gathered up some important papers for the safe, "It
is much later than I thought.” An interview with a farmer who had come
some distance to discuss business had lasted late into the winter afternoon.
' Oh, it’s all right, Daddy,” replied the nine-year-old girl, busily scribbling
figures on blank forms. "I’m writing cheques!” Every Friday after her music lesson
Marjorie called at the bank to drive home in her father’s car. It was seldom as late
as this.
Outside two strongly-built men slouched along in the shadows of the deserted
mountain road and paused not far from the side door of the bank. "I say, Bill . . .
he must be still there,” whispered one of them, pointing to the waiting car.
"Mm . . . never mind, we can tackle him, and then use the car for a getaway,”
replied his mate confidently.
"Perhaps you’re right.” For a moment there was silence between them, "And
in any case we’ve got to catch that night train to the city whatever happens. . ”
"Come on then, Joe —there’s nobody about.” For weeks they had been care-
fully planning to rob the bank.
"We could do it blindfold,” boasted Bill, "considering we just about know every
inch of the place.”
"But then there’s Mansell.”
’"We’!! catch him on the hop, and it’ll be two to one, anyhow.” Within the
next few minutes they had silently and skilfully managed to get the side door open.
In the meantime the unsuspecting bank manager busied himself putting away
the last of the cash. Suddenly he stopped and listened intently. What was that?
Stealthy footsteps surely.
Hullo why, it s Bill Hogan, exclaimed the astonished man, recognising his
two visitors, and imagining they must want to see him urgently.
"Stick ’em up!”
"You’re joking!”
"Stick ’em up, I say,” snapped Bill once again. "We want that cash,” whip-


"Get out bank!"^
ping out a revolver and covering the manager. Outwardly calm, Mr. Mansell was
by this time really alarmed. The men were certainly in earnest. He had to think
quickly. No hope of reaching his own weapon.
"I’m not going to give in,” he decided. "They are cowards, anyway.”
Anxiously he thought of his little girl the other side of the low wooden parti-
tion. At the first sound of the strange voice speaking so roughly, Marjorie had
been too scared to utter a word. Hidden from view, she sat as silent as a mouse,
and waited.
"Well, I’m surprised at you fellows. . .” Anything to gain a little time.
"Cut that out, we’re in a hurry,” was the impatient retort.
"Say we talk this business over,” continued Mr. Mansell quietly as he edged
toward the writing table.
"Tie him up, Joe, and make it snappy,” ordered Hogan, without wasting any
more time. Why bother to argue? He was at their mercy. It would be an easy job.
"Right-o,” replied the burly Joe, producing some stout cord, but keeping a wary
eye on his mate’s gun at the same time. Neither of them guessed for an instant
that the quiet, pleasant-faced bank manager, standing with his back to the table,


was at that very moment hurriedly planning a method to get the better of them.
"If they think I’m going to let them truss me up and make off with the cash
they're greatly mistaken,” he thought furiously, groping behind him with one hand.
Stepping forward, Joe made a rough grab at his arms. But in a flash Mr, Mansell
had seized the flat glass ink-tray with its sharp-edged wells.
"Get out of this bank!” he shouted, bringing the impromptu weapon down
with a terrific crash on the hand that wrenched viciously at his left arm. There was
a howl of pain, and the two men stumbled to the floor as they closed in a desperate
struggle.
For a second Bill Hogan was staggered. This resistance had been so sudden
and unexpected. It looked as if all their plans were going wrong after all. Bang!
A random shot struck the bank manager as he struggled to his feet once more.
"Get out of the . . .” he gasped, his voice trailing away as he lost consciousness.
The two intruders were beginning to feel decidedly scared at the turn events had
taken.
"He’ll come round later and probably raise an alarm,” muttered the man who
had fired the shot.
Well, just look at my hand, groaned his mate. "Can’t you do something
for it?”
Realising that before long someone would wonder at the manager’s delay, they
decided on a plan.
"The job’s a bungle, but we’ve got the cash.”
The wounded man on the floor stirred uneasily. "Better lift him into the car
and drive like made for that empty old farmhouse.” Feeling very shaky, Joe
nodded in agreement.
"Then we’ll fix your hand up a bit, abandon the car with Mansell in it, not too
far from the train, and be off before a soul knows anything.”
AH this time the bank manager’s little daughter had been listening, frozen with
horror. Puzzled by the commotion, she had only dimly guessed what it was all
about. At first she quite expected the strange men to go away in a few minutes.
Then that sudden crash, followed by the revolver shot and the ominous silence of
her father. Instinctively she felt it would be better to remain hidden. As the
thieves unfolded their plans the child forgot her fear. She must not miss a word.
"They’ve hurt Daddy . . . taking him away ... I’m going, too!” Thoughts
rushed through her mind in a kind of breathless telegram.
In the excitement of stowing money-bags into their pockets, and with Joe in
mortal terror of bleeding to death, the two men hastily completed their arrange-
However, they failed to notice a small figure bent double slip under the
hinged part of the counter and dart noiselessly along to the side door. In a trice
she had whisked behind a clump of bushes close to her father’s car. Not a min-
ute too soon. Tramp, tramp. . . "Here they come!” she almost shrieked as her
father was carried out and bundled quickly into the back seat.


There was no time to be lost. Anything might happen. Jumping into the
driver’s seat, Hogan advised his injured friend to "look lively.” But a plucky little
girl who darted out unseen from the bushes and leapt on to the carrier at the back
of the car was smarter than either of them. "Let’s get away from here, it gives
me the creeps,” muttered the man at the wheel as he started up the engine. Over
ruts and bumps rocked the car. The small passenger clinging on for dear life at
the back was in constant danger of being thrown to the roadway.
"We should be right now,” mumbled Bill as he drew the car to the side of the
road near the old farmhouse, and glanced keenly into the back seat. "He won’t
stir for hours!”
"Come on and let us get your hand covered up . . . can’t board the train like
that,” he added irritably.
With a gasp of relief Marjorie
saw the men disappear. What a
lonely spot! If only she could drive
the car and take her father safely
away from these dreadful people.
Peering at his white face, a sudden
resolution came to the little girl. In-
to the driver’s seat quickly. They
were at the top of the hill. Perhaps
the car would run down by itself.
"Let me see —this is the brake.”
Trembling with eagerness, Marjorie
eased it off. Why, the car was mov-
ing forward! Kneeling on the seat
she bent forward and gripped the
steering wheel firmly. "We’re go-
ing! We’re going!” she whispered ex-
citedly as the car gathered speed. Down the hill, and a sudden bump into some
scrub at the roadside.
"Here, what’s up, girlie?” called a farmer and his son coming into view at that
moment. "You’re not hurt, are you?”
Marjorie rattled out her startling news. "And they’re up there at the old
farm.” But by this time the men were in full pursuit of the runaway car, think-
ing they had forgotten to fix the brake.
"Why, here they come!” she cried, collapsing in a heap from strain and shock,
just as the thieves dashed almost into the arms of the waiting farmers.
"Well done, Marjorie,” said an unsteady voice from the back seat. "It took
a child to trick them.”


Autumn sales in a week’s time,’’ exclaimed Mrs. Nicholls, glancing side-
ways at a newspaper lying open on the sofa, as they sat at breakfast.
"And Anzac Day in less than a fortnight!” murmured her husband, a
returned soldier, half to himself, "it’s hard to realise.”
"Going down to the march, Dad?” asked Elaine, looking up quickly.
"N —no, not this time . . . can’t leave the farm,” was the brief reply. But the
thoughts of ex-Private Jim Nicholls were miles away. It was worth no end of
trouble and sacrifice to march with the boys on Anzac Day. Even though marching
with his artificial foot nearly crippled him for a few days, he always felt better for
being there. In a flash the years had slipped away, and he was back on Gallipoli,
"What glorious pals they were!” he was thinking, as he unconsciously pushed
aside his breakfast, and sat staring into space.
"Yes. it will be absolutely impossible.” The honest grey eyes, with their
"smile crinkles” at the corners, had a strangely far-away expression. Miles of dug-
outs in a foreign land . . . youths and men in khaki digging, digging . . . often half
naked in the burning sun, tormented by flies . . . driven crazy with thirst, fighting
often an unseen enemy in a treacherous, unknown country, the whine of shells and
the ping of bullets . . . friends killed . . . wounded . . . joking and singing in the
midst of it all.
With a jolt Jim Nicholls became aware of the family chatter, and of young
Bertie munching toast at his side. His wife was watching from the other end of
the table. "You haven’t eaten your breakfast, dear.”
"Sorry, Bess, but I’m not very hungry this morning.”
"Did you notice dad?” asked Elaine, as she slipped out of the room a few
minutes later, and button-holed her 15-year-old brother, "look, Bunny, something’s
got to be done,” she continued emphatically.
"How do you mean 'something’s got to be done’?” fie asked, in surprise. "I
certainly thought the old boy was a bit absent-minded this morning, but . . .”
"Silly! He’s hurt and sad ... I don’t really understand what it’s all about my-
self; he says so little.” Elaine paused an instant, "but I tell you he’s got to go down
for that Anzac march.”


"Well, you know he can’t leave —said so himself just now," expostulated the
lad. "Honestly, I don’t quite grasp this Anzac business.” Elaine pursed her lips
and wrinkled her forehead in perplexity.
"No, of course he can’t go! . . . can’t afford to, that’s why . . . what with the
struggle we’ve had, and now this drought.”
"You see, he’s right.”
"Can t pay a man to keep things going; can’t raise the fare. . . . Oh, I see why
he can’t go all right!” finished the girl, choking on the last word.
"Don’t get worked up, sis,” chipped in her brother, with a good-humoured smile,
"we can’t help it.”
"Well, that’s what we’re going to do . . . and we’ve got to hurry . . . there’s
less than a fortnight.”
"Hanged if I can understand . . . with that foot of his, and all.”
"Never mind, it pleases Dad ... the point is, Bunny, what can you do to help?”
"Me? Why, I don’t know, unless ... say I get Robinsons to let me cut up
some of that wood?” suggested the boy, "that’ll mean a few bob . . . and how
about you?”
"Oh, that’s fixed,” replied his sister, lowering her voice, "the guinea I got at
the show . . . prize for home-made cake.”
"But I thought you were going to buy a hat?”
Plans had to be made quickly and in secret.


"Get it out, then,” ordered Elaine firmly, "we’ll need that live shillings.”
"Oh, well, since it’s for Dad —right-o.”
Only the twins left now.
"There’s our dinkey-toy money,” they volunteered in the same breath.
"Why. yes, of course,” agreed Elaine, who had almost forgotten.
"We’ve got it hidden in a little tin . . . there’s nearly enough to buy one of
"Yes, I know ... but that’s off now . . . there just can’t be a new hat. Now
where are the twins and Bertie? We’re all in this.”
Plans had to be made quickly and in secret. Elaine racked her brains to think
how the work of the farm might be carried on without her father, and how they
could scrape up his fare to the city. Last year he missed the march, too, scarcely
saying a word about it.
"To think I didn’t see through him!” thought the girl, reproaching herself. "I
believe he minds more about it than anything else that happens the whole year
round.” All the more determined to see that her soldier father was not disappointed
this time, she hurried after the three younger children, and explained things to them
in a few words.
"Now look, Bertie, what about that five shillings Grandma sent you?”
"It’s in the school bank,” replied the round-faced boy, feeling very secure, and
stuffing a last bite of apple into his mouth.
those . . .”
"Wouldn’t you rather help father to go down to the Anzac march?”
"Does he want to go very much?” Those pennies had taken a long while to save.
"Yes, awfully.”
"Come on, Jack,” said Jill, "let’s dig it up.”
Little guessing the scheme afoot, Jim Nicholls toiled about the farm, up early
and to bed dog-tired at night. Never a grumble or complaint. But his heart was
heavy. As Anzac Day approached he carefully avoided mentioning the march.
I haven t forgotten . . . I’ll never forget!” he told his unseen comrades.
Meanwhile, the days were slipping past. Bunny slogged away at the extra
wood-cutting, as well as helping his father on the farm. The ticket fund was grow-
"Now. about the work while he’s away,” said Elaine, feeling rather anxious.
"I’m going to run over and ask Charlie if he’ll help with the cows.”
"But he’s got his own to see to,” protested the others.
"Yes, but he’ll do it,” replied the girl confidently, "for dad’s sake. I’m sure
he will, Charlie’s a good sort.”
Within half an hour she had made her request at the neighbouring farm.
Don t know if I could manage,” said the young man doubtfully.
Just for a day or two,” coaxed Elaine. "I know it’s a lot to ask, but think
what it will mean to dad.”
"You think he’s keen?”
"Do I what!”
"Very well, old girl, you can count on me.”


So it was all arranged. Even the twins and Bertie were to be responsible for
some of the lighter jobs. As for Elaine and Bunny, well, they were ready to work
day and night to make sure their father had no worry.
It was Thursday morning, and breakfast time at the farm.
"What’s this at all?” inquired Jim Nicholls, picking up a weighty envelope
which lay at his place, labelled in large letters:—"Dad, with love from the children.”
"That’s for you,” said Elaine hurriedly, "exes for Anzac Day . . . you’re going
. . . it’s fixed.” ■
By this time her father had slowly opened the envelope, and was gazing m
amazement, at the contents. Then something seemed to give way inside. His eyes
were suddenly misty. .
*'Y ou — WO nderful —kids,” he muttered, in a shaky voice, "how on earth . . ..
But there’s the work, too,” he
added, "I can’t possibly —” "Oh,
that’s all settled,” said Elaine,
throwing her arms around her
father’s neck. "Charlie’s going to
help with the cows. You can be
off to-morrow morning.”
"You don’t mean to say?”
he stammered incredulously. . .
"Well, I’ll try and tell you now
why the Anzac march means so
much to me.”
"What’s this at all?” inquired Jim Nicholls.
Jim Nicholls leant forward, with a wonderful light shining in his eyes: "You
see, out there ... on Gallipoli ... we were all such pals. Many of the boys never
came back. They lie buried there. Tiny Macduff, a great tall streak of good
nature, young Issie Barnett, scared to bits and as brave as a lion, Nickie O’Shea,
with his never-ending jokes; Billy Thomson , . . Billy carried me on his back when
I got hit . . The halting sentences ceased altogether for a moment.
"Under the stars at Anzac I vowed I would never forget them . . . never . . .
and that’s why I march with the others. It’s a promise.”


/ITCHING tie
BY Jove, I’d like to get hold of
those cattle thieves!” exclaimed
Mr. Ferguson, hotly; "this is
the second time, and we’re not the only ones to suffer, either.” "We’ve never had
anything like this happen before, have we?” remarked his wife; "it’s certainly very
worrying.”
111 say it is! That’s over a hundred head of cattle gone in a month. . . I’m
blest if I know just what we can do about it.”
"They’re obviously pretty cunning. .
Yes, and they know every square mile of the country like a book, I should say.
For all the searching no one seems to be able to find a sign of them.”
"Well, we can only hope that’s the end of the trouble.”
But they ve got our stock! Anyway, I suppose it’s not much use worrying
about it any more just now. I’d better send Charlie off for the usual stores.”
"Peter is sure to want to go, too . . .it will be all right. That child thinks the
world of old Charlie, and it is quite an adventure for him.”
Every few weeks provisions and other stores had to be brought from the town-
ship at the railhead, 20 miles away. Peter Ferguson, a lively and good-natured little
b °y> a ged 8 years, looked forward to these trips. Charlie, the old aborigine with a
wooden leg, was his firm friend. Secretly he was teaching the boy to drive. "Master
Peter, him learnum quickly,” the old man boasted proudly; "him allem same bright
boy.”
... " Yo “ like h f”g » keep you company,” teased Bob, the big stockman;
besides, I guess he’s handy loading up the stores!” Charlie’s broad grin was the
only reply as he hobbled about, getting ready to be off.
Here I am! I’ll help you, Charlie,” shouted an eager, childish voice; "I
know how to do it!”


" ’Course you do, Master Peter,” rumbled Charlie slowly, 'jes’ wait till we back
this fella Sandy into the shafts . . . whoa! steady now, steady.” With surprising
agility the old black managed to harness up the horse and sling the nosebag into
the back of the spring cart.
"Look, I’ve got all the messages, Charlie . . . and the lunch” —feeling quite im-
portant, the boy handed over a long list —"and I’m going to get a cricket ball if
they have any at the store. Dad says I can.”
Perfectly content, the strange pair were soon on their way, seated side by side
on the hard, bumpy seat, with some folded sacks for cushions. It was more fun to
Peter than the most stylish and up-to-date vehicle in the world.
"Do let me drive, Charlie,” he coaxed, as soon as they were well away from
the homestead; "I haven’t told anyone I’m learning yet. Won’t Dad be pleased
when he knows?”
"Fella Bob, him think maybe you allem same little boy,” chuckled Charlie,
thinking of the capable way the lad handled the reins already; "bimeby we give
him one big surprise.”
Within three hours they pulled up at Wheeler’s store. "Hullo, Charlie,”
called a friendly voice. "We’ve been expecting you for over a week. Everybody
well at the homestead?”
"Oh, yes, they all well —Master Peter, him tellem you.” Charlie hesitated a
moment, then, in a confidential tone he added: "Fella boss him plenty worried.”
"What’s wrong?”
"Cattle thieves!”
"Again? Haven’t they caught them yet?” asked the man in surprise.
"Station boys ridem everywhere. They look . . . and 100k —but no find ’em.
Pouf! Gone away like smoke!” Charlie waved an expressive hand in the air, and
nodded mysteriously. He enjoyed a yarn at the store, and this was quite the biggest
bit of news for ages. Slowly he clambered down while Peter slipped quickly to the
ground and darted off in search of a cricket ball.
"Here, young ’un, what about that peppermint walking-stick you forgot last
trip?”
"My favourite,” remarked the boy, smacking his lips. "Thank you, Mr.
Wheeler.
What a wonderful place it seemed. Even a cricket ball was unearthed from a
cardboard box under the counter, Peter was very good at packing the goods into
the cart. He knew the bags and parcels off by heart. Besides, it saved poor old
Charlie a lot of trouble climbing up and down. Before long they had quite a full
load. "I’ll put the 'spilling’ things on top, Mr. Wheeler,” said young Peter, as he
placed the most tricky packages carefully, and pocketed his precious cricket ball.
While Sandy had a good rest and a feed, they enjoyed a picnic lunch and pot-
tered round for a while. The time soon passed, and at 3 o’clock Charlie decided
to leave for home. "Mind you take care of that load, Peter,” said the storekeeper,
with a wink, "and look out for the special setting of eggs your father ordered.”
"Oh, we’ll be careful. Charlie and I never smash anything, do we, Charlie?”


Just as an extra precaution the boy turned round on the seat and patted a few
things well into place, "Next time we come,” chimed in the aborigine, "me think
Master Peter him drive Sandy.”
"You don’t say so! That’ll be fine.” He glanced quickly at the bright-eyed
The man produced a nasty-looking gun. "Cattle thief!”
thought Charlie in a flash.
lad in the cart. "The old chap’s pulling my leg,” he muttered, "but Peter’s a smart
nipper all the same.” Scorning a helping hand, Charlie climbed deliberately up to
his seat and took the reins.
Mind you catch those cattle thieves, and don’t be too slow about it.”
"Bad fella thiaf him long way off by this time,” mumbled Charlie, with a
doubtful shake of his head, as the storekeeper waved a cheery good-bye to them both.
For more than an hour and a half they had been on the way when Charlie
noticed a horseman appear suddenly in the distance at the side of the road. Who
wouid it be? He knew everybody for miles. Somehow it looked odd for a man to


dismount and wait for them to come up, instead of riding forward to meet them.
"Looks like a stranger, Master Peter.”
"Don’t you know him, Charlie? Perhaps you will when we get nearer. Gee
up, Sandy!”
"Good-day!” said the man as soon as they drew level. Charlie pulled up his
horse, wondering at the unfriendly tone of the voice, "And get down off that cart
quick and lively—you and the boy, too.” This was a queer order.
Opening his mouth to protest, Charlie was soon silenced by the big stranger.
"Get down, I said! I want those stores ... no funny business.”
Worried about any harm coming to Peter, the old aborigine felt it was better
for him to obey in case the man became desperate. Mumbling and grumbling, he
tried to argue the point. "These stores belonga fella boss at big station,” he in-
sisted. But it was no use. The man produced a nasty looking gun. "Cattle thief!”
thought Charlie in a flash, wishing some of the boys had been handy. Reluctantly,
he climbed to the ground. "Come on, youngster, or you’ll get hurt. I tell you I’m
going to have those stores.” But Peter was not coming. With his small hands
behind him, he silently defied the rather terrifying stranger.
"If I go down, I won’t be able to do it,” he reasoned, "but if he comes up here
to get me.” . . . The little boy clenched his chattering teeth in an effort not to be
scared, while his busy hands groped anxiously for the bag of pepper on top of the
groceries.
"I’ve got it!” He almost shouted aloud. Standing by the cart, Charlie was
puzzled.
"Me think you all alonga come down, Master Peter.” But still that obstinate
shake of the head. He was ready.
With an angry leap the man dashed up to pull him down. Round came the
busy hands full of pepper! With a cry of pain and alarm the stranger staggered
and fell to the roadway. Peter was down like a shot. Beaming broadly, old
Charlie forgot about his lame leg. For the time being, at any rate, the enemy was
helpless.
"Hand me that rope, Master Peter!” Wild with excitement, Charlie made a
good job of tying him up.
"Now we hurry and sendem boys along,” he grunted. "Gee up, Sandy. Master
Peter, him the boy for cattle thieves!”


fJ Ct> pv_j
■A U3. S
■V.
»* A 2 J-L
V\ 5 tn
Wholly set up an 4 printed in Australia by Verona Press Pty. Ltd-, 26-30 Flinders Street,
Melbourne, C.l, Victoria,




