

~.r-WH.T>nn Hl^norf
THE LABOURS OF SIR JOSEPH BANKS.
Sir Joseph Banks, -whose discoveries in natural history-
place him in the highest rank among English scientific
men, was noted when a hoy for his immoderate love of
play and disinclination to study. When at Eton, at the
age of fourteen, his tutor was one day surprised to find
258
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


Mm reading, in Ms leisure hours, an imperfect copy of
“ Gerard’s Herbal,” wMcb be bad carried away from
borne. Banks afterwards said, in allusion to this period,
that one fine summer evening be bad been bathing in
the river with other boys, but having remained a long
time in the water he found, when he came to dress him-
self, that all his companions were gone. Returning
home alone, and walking leisurely through a lane, the
banks of which were covered with wild flowers, he was
struck with their beauty; and the idea occurred to Mm
that to study their characteristics would be far more in-
teresting to him than poring over Greek or Latin exer-
cises. Pleased with the notion, he immediately began to
teach himself botany ; and for want of better instructors
was accustomed to ramble about on holidays with women
employed to gather simples for the druggists and
apothecaries, for whom he occasionally obtained infor-
mation on their habits and localities. Banks told Sir
Everard Home that when he first came to Oxford, if he
happened to join any party of students who were dis-
cussing questions respecting Greek authors, some of
them would call out, “ Here is Banks; but he knows
nothing of Greek,” To this rebuke he made no reply,
but said to himself, “ I will very soon excel you all in
another kind of knowledge, to my mind of infinitely
greater importance and not long after, if any of them
wanted to clear up a point of natural history, they were
accustomed to say, “How we must go to Banks.” *
In pursuit of his favourite science, Banks herbalized
much on foot; and being somewhat careless of his per-
sonal appearance, he was often mistaken for a vagrant.
On one occasion, worn out with fatigue and soiled with
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


Ms labours in the woods, he lay down to sleep at a little
distance from the high road with his collection of speci-
mens by his side, and being found there by a parish
constable, he was taken, in spite of remonstrances,
before a Justice of the Peace. A few explanations, of
course, procured his dismissal. Banks made many
voyages to distant countries in pursuit of new disco-
veries—remaining abroad two or three years at a time,
encountering numerous perils and hardships. Many
plants and animals hitherto unknown were brought by
him to Europe. He accompanied Captain Cook on his
fourth expedition round the world, aboard the “ Endea-
vour,” which arrived in England, after an absence of
three years, in Juue, 1771. The people received the
voyagers on.this occasion with rejoicings, and the king
showed his esteem for Banks on many occasions. Banks
afterwards became President of the Royal Society, and
was invested by the king with the Order of the Bath,
and admitted a member of the Privy Council. His en-
larged and liberal views on international obligations are
thus noticed by Cuvier: —
“At the breaking out of the American war, Louis
XYI. gave orders that his vessels should everywhere
show respect to Captain Cook and his companions. To
the honour of the age we live in, reviled and contemned
as it has been, be it said that this noble example has
become an article in the laws of nations ; but it is chiefly
to the constant zeal of Banks that we owe this great
boon. Hot only did he never lose an opportunity of
getting the English government to comply with it, but
more than once he even succeeded in persuading foreign
governments to conform to it. From the first breaking
260
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


out of the war which desolated Europe, he procured
similar orders to he issued in favour of La Perousc, if he
still existed ; and he caused inquiries to he made for him
in every sea. When discord had terminated the expe-
dition of D’Entrecasteaux, and when the collections of
M. de la Billardiere were transported to England, he
succeeded in procuring them to he given np to him ; and
not only did he hasten to restore them to their owners,
hut he accompanied his bounties with the singular deli-
cacy of returning them unopened. He wrote to Jussieu
that he would not carry off a single idea from a-man who
had procured these collections at the peril of his life.”
On no less than ten different occasions, collections
addressed to the Jardin du Hoi, which had been cap-
tured by English vessels, were recovered by him, and
restored in this manner. He even sent as far as the
Cape of Good Hope to procure some chests belonging
to Humboldt, which had been seized by pirates; and
on all these occasions he 'would accept no reimburse-
ment. He appeared to feel that he was, as it were,
answerable for the outrages committed by his country
on science and the arts, and that it was almost his duty
to repair the injuries done by other nations to science.
Having learnt from the newspapers that Broussonnet
had been obliged to fly from his country in order to save
his life, Sir Joseph Banks gave orders to his correspon-
dents in Spain to supply all his wants; and a friendly
hand and an open purse awaited him at Madrid, and
again at Lisbon, and followed him as far as Maroe.
When the distinguished mineralogist Dolomiere, by the
most unjust violation of the laws of nations, in order to
gratify the vengeance of an angry woman, was cast into
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


the dungeons of Messina, it was the ingenious humanity
of Banks that first penetrated the subterranean prison,
where, concealed from all mankind, he languished in
despair, and whispered solace to his affliction, and gave
him tidings of his country and of his family ; and if his
benefactor did not succeed in procuring him his liberty,
it was not for want of zeal in attempting all possible
means with the government that so unjustly detained
him. The zeal which Banks displayed for the scien-
tific sons of France was not less exerted for his
own countrymen. When by a violation of the rights
of nations, thousands of Englishmen, resident or
travelling in France, were suddenly declared pri-
soners of war, Banks hastened to discover all those
in whose favour some scientific occupation or title
could be alleged, and he called upon the Institute
of France to assist him in supporting his demand
for their liberation, and the Institute did not examine
with very nice care the claims advanced in favour
of the liberation of numerous persons. By these means
many were released from a captivity that might have
proved fatal.
Sir Joseph Banks, says one who knew him, was
in person tall and manly, with a countenance expressing
dignity and intelligence. His manners were polite, his
conversation rich in instructive information. On most
subjects he exercised the discrimination of an original
and vigorous mind. His knowledge was not that of
facts merely, or of technical and complex abstractions
alone, but of science in its elementary principles, and of
nature in her happiest forms. He died on the 19th of
June, 1820, at the age of seventy-seven, at his house at
262
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


Spring Grove, near Hounslow, leaving an immense col-
lection of specimens, and a very extensive library, whicli
be bequeathed to the British Museum.
of
I „
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.
