

f ? 5
*




f e***fi***4'B %\
TH E EVIL a=i£ -&£s> ®’3t
\v©P OUR 7% f „ fifo&U*.
W.j’v " ,f- /. / A ' #fjs ji.
BANKING SYSTEM.%/^/
°f»o#X° " ■ 'iHt f' ‘ f vjs,J!>S>*
fpN Adam’s day the Divine Edict wejit forth ;—“Man sliall eat
1 1 bread by*the sweat of bis brow.’-’ There is no doubt, that for
% many years,, the men of the time did eat bread by the sweat
of their brows. But alas ! the change came, and men ate
bread by the sweat of other people’s brows. That order has
continued down to the present day. I believe a greater number of
people now live and feast on the luxuries of life, by the sweat of
other people’s brows, than in any former period of the world’s his-
tory. The present paper is designed to show, how one class
(Bankers) live by the sweat of other people’s brows.
The apostle James in his fierce denunciation of the rich must
have had the present order of bankers in his mind. He said, “Go
now, ye rich ! weep, howling over your miseries that are coming upon
you, your riches have rotted, and your garments have become moth-
eaten ; your gold and silver have rotted, and the rust of them for a
testimony shall be to you, and shall eat your flesh as fire. Ye made
treasure in the last day ! Lo, the reward of the workman, of those
who in-gathered your fields—which hath been fraudulently kept
back by you—doth cry out, and the exclamations of those who did
reap, into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaoth have entered, ye did live
in luxury on the earth, and were wanton, ye did nourish your hearts
as in a day of slaughter.
These are scathing words, and predict terrible retribution on those
who keep back the rights of the worker, no matter how respectable
the means may seem. The amount of robbery that is being perpe-
trated in England at the present time is almost incredible. The
National income is about £1,250,000000 yearly, of which those who
toil not, neither do they spin, receive the enormous sum of
£800,000,000, while to the workers, who produce all the wealth, is
allotted £450,000,000 (see Davidson’s “ Old Order and the New) ”
hardly sufficient to keep body and soul together.
Previous to the establishment of banks in England, it was the
custom of borrowers to interview capitalists themselves, and arrange
with them direct for advances of money, the rates of interest varying
from 2to 3 per cent. But on banks being established, the whole
was changed. The banker offered the capitalist 3 per cent, for his
money, 4 and offered to lend it out again at 6 per cent, to those requir-
ing it. This suited the capitalist and banker, admirably. The


borrower had now to support two men in idleness, instead of one. It
was an ingenious arrangement to rob the poor man, much less
dangerous than highway robbery, but nevertheless, none the less
criminal in the sight of heaven.
The earliest records of banking that I shall make reference to, is
the Amsterdam Bank, whose line of business was to act as the
custodians of coin and bullion, for which care they charged a good
round sum. It was the custom to give orders, by those owing money,
to their banker who would credit the sum to the holder of the order,
and debit the amount to the issuer, the money all the time lying in
the bank, and producing no return whatever to the"owner, but rather
a loss. John Law, a Scotchman, when visiting Amsterdam in 1700,
observed the great amount of trouble, the orders given, saved the
owner of the money. He was thus induced to think, how advanta-
geous it would be to print notes or orders of different values, repre-
senting money in the Bank, On his return to Scotland he endeavored
to cause bank notes to be printed and issued. He was unsuccessful
in bis efforts. He afterwards went over to Paris, and in conjunction
with his brother, opened a bank in that city. He received money
on deposit, on which he paid interest and re-lent the money at a
profit. He projected the Mississippi Scheme, which eventually proved
a great failure, and ruined thousands. Law had to leave Paris, and
he ultimately died a penniless outcast—on the continent.
The Bank of England, the most important in the world, was pro-
jected by William Paterson, another Scotchman, and was incor-
porated July 27, 1694, with a capital of £1,200,000, which was lent
to the Government of William and Mary, at the time in a state of
embarrassment. The capital of the Bank of England has been in-
creased from £1,200,000 to £14,558,000, The amount of notes
issued without any security or reserve, is £15,000*000 sterling, which
at 8 per cent, produces yearly £450,000, which sum comes out of
the workers of England, and for which they receive no return what-
ever.
There are nearly 500 other banks in England and Wales, a great
number of whom have the privilege of issuing notes, and thereby live
on the sweat of other people’s brows.
In 1793, out of 850 country banks in England and Wales, 300
were compelled to stop payment, producing by their fall, an extent
of misery and bankruptcy, till then unknown. The reason of their
fall was owing to the fact that they issued notes far in excess of the
coin held in reserve, or supposed to he held in reserve.
On February 25th, 1797. demands for cash poured in fro.m all
quarters on the Bank of England, which had only £1,272,000 of


cash and bullion in its coffers. The Council met, and issued an order
prohibiting the directors from paying their notes in cash. Although
they were issued on those conditions to the too confiding and gullible
public. Parliament afterwards agreed to continue the restriction
till six months after a treaty of peace.
Bankers, merchants, and traders met, and agreed to a resolution,
that they would receive bank notes as cash, themselves, and would
induce others to do the same. (Previous to this it was customary
on receiving bank notes, to take them to the bank at once and deposit
them, or get them changed for cash. They were not transferable
then as they are now).
Those who agreed to the former resolution, worked diligently, and
proved successful in getting notes taken from hand to band as cash.
Thus the thin end of the wedge was inserted, that was to split up
into fragments the human family. The Arch-fiend of Hell himself,.,
guiding each blow that was delivered to drive home the wedge. The
first wedge having been successfully inserted, other wedges, to wit—
Sweating, Insurance, Assurance, Building Societies, and numerous
other forms of fraudulent wedges were driven home, amid the loud
groans of the suffeiing public. Society has been split up in every
direction by these wedges of infamy, and is bei ig consumed for the
benefit of those who have grasped the power ul the sledge hammer of
robbery and violence, and by each successive blow rend the great
heart of the masses. Hence we find to-day that millions of bank
notes are issued, and transferred from one person to another as cash.
Perhaps for years never entering a bank, until they are surcharged
with disease germs, which they have been disseminating for years
among the unwary public. All the time the banks are reaping a rich
harvest, by the circulation among the people of their disease dissem-
inating, hell-born pieces of dirty, printed promises to pay. And the
man who works hard every day is soft enough to take for payment,
for his invaluable services, these dirty pieces of paper, instead of
demanding the standard coin of the realm.
Most of the bank notes are so filthy that they are scented to ward
off, or cover up the abominable stench, that would otherwise deter
anyone who valued his life, from accepting them.
It would be interesting to the public no doubt, (if not to the
banker) to know how much of disease and death has been incurred
by the circulation of bank notes. Take for instance a supposed case.
A workman ceases work on Saturday, receives payment for his
services in stench-emitting bank notes, he pockets them stench and
all, takes them to his wife, the next day he is laid low with the fatal
i lease, typhoid fever, his wife nurses him and the bank notes as


well as she can. At last she has to part with the bank notes one by
one, to the butcher, milkman, and baker, who again transfer the notes
to others, while perhaps reeking with disease, producing death,
widowhood, orphanage and sorrow in their track. They say that
milk disseminates disease. How much more can a bank note do so,
that perhaps has been the close attendant in the homes of disease
and death. For instance, some few months ago, it was reported by
the press, that a man had died in Collingwood, who had gained his
living by gathering rags and bones. He had lived for years in a
miserable hovel, amid filth and dirt. In his clothes were discovered
some hundreds of bank notes securely stitched under the lining. It
is reasonable to suppose this man had lain on his clothes for years,
to guard his money, yet these same notes found their way among
the public, whom I leave to judge of the,repulsive nature of the cir-
culation, and the legal method of hawicing disease and death into
their midst. Hundreds of similar cases might be cited, but let this
suffice.
If only for this reason, a working man should point-blank refuse
to receive payment by bank notes, every one of which he handles, in-
forms him that he is being robbed night and day by their use.
In the year 1809-10, there were in England £22,541,523 in notes
in circulation, so much in excess of gold or silver in their .coffers,
that their value fell from 20s. to 17s. ' In 1812, to 16s. In 1813,
to 15s. By these means the public, who has a right to protect itself
from robbery, was robbed of the enormous sum of £5,635,380. From
that day to the present, the robbery has been going on, increasing
every year, until in this our present age, society is engulphed in
misery, starvation and death, on the one hand, and pomp, pride and
luxury on the other. In the year 1797, there were 280 banks in
England, and owing the enormous profits made by these 280 banks,
others were immediately started, and in 1813 there were 900 banks
levying blackmail in England.
The banking returns for 1885 of the Imperial Bank of Germany
informs us that the note circulation was £92,150,299 ; the subscribed
capital, £6,000,000 ; duty for issue of notes, £136; and profits,
£966,409. The average circulation of Bank of England notes at
present is 1 nearly £25,000,000, on the great bulk of which there is
no duty paid at all, the profits reaped from their use being enormous.
The Irish, Scotch, Joint Stock and Private Banks, have the privi-
lege of issuing an additional 15,000,000 notes, making a circulation
of about 40,000,000 bank notes foisted on to the public.
In 1889 the reserved profits of 16 banks in Victoria was £6,141,628,
this is labor stored up and rightly belonging to labor.


The amount of dividend last declared by these 16 banks was
£766,095 for the year.
Profits accruing from the circulation of notes £180,565.
Notes in circulation bearing interest, £1,657,082. Average rate
per cent, of dividend, 1
Percentage the reserves of coin and bullion bears to the banks
liability £16.008 to every £lOO.
I will not recite the Act by which this system of robbery has been
legalised, by which at least 80,000,000 of hard earned cash has been
filched from the long suffering Victorian public.
“ Victorian Act to facilitate the operations of a bank to be called
the Bank in Victoria, Capital to be £1,000,000, three-
fourtbs of which, £750,000, is to be subscribed within three months,
and £500,000 paid within three years, the bank to have the power,
on payment of moiety of said £500,000, to issue and circulate bank
notes of not less value that one pound stg. each, for a period of 21
years, and from time to time during the said 21 years, to re-issue
any such notes or bills, when and as often as the bank shall think fit.
But such privilege shall cease on the suspension of specie payment
on demand for 60 days in succession, or for 60 days in one year.
The amount of notes shall not exceed the coin bullion and public
securities held by said corporation, nor shall the proportion of coin
be less than one-fourth part of the coin bullion and public securities
so held by the bank. No note shall be deemed payable except at bead
office, or where signed and issued. The said bank shall pay for the
privilege of issuing said notes the sum of £2 for every £lOO worth
of such notes, computed on the average amount of notes payable on
demand in circulation.”
Such is the law that provides the means of levying blackmail.
One of the leading lawyers at the present time defines Law as
follows : “ That law provided redress for violation of rights, inflicts
punishment for breaches of duty.” If he is correct, then we are
justified in desiring, nay demanding, redress for such wboU sale viola-
tion of the rights of humanity.
This is going on all over the world, the note issue of which can
safely be put down at thousands of millions.
If product of labor is the natural recompense or wages of labor,
as defined by Adam Smith, then the villians who live in luxury on
these ill-gotton millions ought to be working in chains on the roads.
For it can’t be the product of their labor, as they have never labored
for it-. Hence it has come out of the hard earnings of the working
classes and no one else. He that is not a working man is a thief
and a robber. It is only by work that men can live, hence if a man


does not work, he must of necessity be living on some one that does
work. For without work we would all die. Here are a number of
men who desire to live without working. They think bushianging
is too dangerous, burglary is not respectable enough, to beg they are
ashamed. Therefore they say, “Go to, let us amalgamate and open
a bank, and gull the people into the belief that we are assisting them,
while we at the same time will be enabled to live in luxury and idle-
ness, while they go out into all weathers and toil from morning to
night to provide for us first, and themselves afterwards, if there
should be anything left.”
Thousands upon thousands of these human leeches have fastened
on to the public body, and suck the life's blood out of it, each sucking
operation reducing the public and swelling the sucker. But it is
enough that we know the end of such leeches, only if we act on our
knowledge.
No private ’ banking should be allowed, but be immediately swept
away, and the State become our banker. It is the duty of every man
to fight for the establishment of a National State Bank, the only
sweeping remedy for these hordes of robbers.
I shall now proceed to give a few reasons why I think the present
banking arrangements should be stopped, and a National State Bank
established as soon as possible.
The National Debt of Victoria is now about £40,000,(>o0, on
which the public pay nearly £2,000,000 interest yearly. The bulk
of the money borrowed at 4 to 5 per cent, is lodged with the Associa-
ted banks, who pay to the Government 1 per cent, for its use. The
bank immediately lend it out again (the public money) to the general
public at 9 and 10 per cent., thus making a profit out of the use of
the people’s money of about 5 per cent.
The estimated amount of money robbed from the Victorian public
(borrowers alone) during the last 30 years is about £00,000,000, that
is for charges over 5 per cent, alone, supposing that we admit 5 per
cent, as a legitimate charge.
Now the whole of the money borrowed, as well as the revenue
derived, might with advantage be used in the establishing of a
National State Bank, who would be enabled to lend money out to the
public at 5 per cent. The result would be that all the Aristocratic
Pawnshops (Banks, Building Societies, &c.) would have to lend out
their money at 5 per cent, or close their doors, which would be a
decided public boon. It is a notorious fact that there is peace and
p rosperty when money is cheap and readily obtainable. Establish a
Bank, and the former follows as a matter of course. There is
no power on earth which tends to keep workingmen in the hands of


slavery more powerful than the banking interest, the producers
foolishly placing the weapon, which is to slay them, in the hands of
the capitalist.
There is no body of men more antagonistic to the unity of work-
men than the bankers, the tools of capitalists, and yet the working-
men are as a rule the mainstay of these institutions of robbery.
The Friendly Societies of Victoria, the members of which are
nearly all workingmen, have invested in mortgages and banks,
£698,587, and a further current account with the hanks amounting
to £60,491). And a very good living indeed the banks make out of
the use of the workers’ money, being used by the banks to rivet still
stronger around the worker the chains of slavery.
There is deposited by workingmen in Private Savings Banks
£5,000,000, on which 4 per cent, interest is paid ; this is lent out
out again at 9 and 10 per cent., whereby the yearly sum of about
£BOO,OOO is taken from the workers, while in the Post Office
Savings Bank there is only deposited £1,790,750, the profits of which
come back to the worker in the shape of public works. The risk
of losing their money is 50 times greater in Private Savings Banks
than it is in the Government Savings Bank, Yet the workers rush
into the former eager to secure fat dividends to the very men who are
the first to crush him, should he try to raise his voice for right,
justice and freedom.
The whole of the sweating system, which some call piece-work, is
brought about by the banking system. For instance, a manufacturer
has an overdraft at his bankers, on which he is paying 10 per cent.
He tacks the cost of interest on to the price of his goods, and his
customer has to pay the interest. Competition and interest oblige
the employer to put his men on piece-work, in order that he may get
the work done as cheaply as possible, thus man is pitted against his
fellow man for a living, hence wages are cut down to the lowest
possible figure.
Sweep away banks, and you can afford to give the worker an advance
of 80 per cent, on present wages of labor, and ultimately to get the
whole produce of labor.
The world is groaning under the sweating or piece-work system,
and the toilers cry aloud for deliverance. I trust that I have shown
enough to cause the blush of. shame to rise to the cheek of the
interestmonger, and quite enough to incite workingmen everywhere
to put on the dignity of manhood and endeavor to emancipate
THE ENSLAVED MILLIONS.
I therefore advocate that it be known unto all workers that the


POSTERITY WILL BLESS YOU.
“Enslaved nations shall weep for joy,
When Idlers by robbery no longer annoy.”
time has now arrived when the yoke of slavery is to he lifted off the
shoulders of the industrial classes, who are hereby urged for their
own sake, as well as for the good of future generations, to arise in
the majesty of their power, and claim their rights and privileges like
men. One mighty and well-directed stroke will for ever free you, and
hurst asunder the chains that have so long bound you, rendering you
the helpless victims of craft, rapacity and cunning.
For ages the clanking of your chains has resounded throughout
the world.
Heaven has placed within you the power to free yourselves.
Right, Justice and Truth cry aloud for vengeance. Working
Men ! Awake ! Put on your strength ! Be Men !




