

The Secret of
Prosperity:
National and Indioidual
Where is it Hidden?
BY E. PRIDHAM.
ADELAIDE :
,J. h. BISYTHOS' & CO., “ THE ADVERTISER ” OFFICE, KIX(! WM. STREW*




MOO/
5.[A i
THE SECRET OE PROSPERITY:
NATIONAL and INDIVIDUAL: WHERE
IS IT HIDDEN?
■ROSPERITY with the wheat-producing and laboring popula-
tion of the world has for a number of years been fast
disappearing, until at last it seems to be totally obscured,
and, although many schemes have been devised to secure its return,
but up to the present it is a mystery to many. Some think it is
caused through droughts ; some, too high rents paid to the Crown
for land; others, that it is the imposition of taxes and custom duties
that is causing the trouble ; while not a few fancy that protection
has a great deal to do with the decline of prosperity. And our
State Governments have been asked to liberalise various Acts with
the idea that by so doing the lost one might be found and returned to
the people ; but, instead, hidden prosperity seems beyond recovery.
Reviewing the above we find that prosperity is not hidden there,
bnt is to be found in wheat production and prices realised that
would be an equivalent to the cost of its production, and in unionism
with wheat producers, assisted by the State making advances on the
produce while held for the consuming market. We may charge the
middleman as being the cause of falling prices in the breadstuff mar-
ket, but in this we are altogether wrong. Wheat producers only
are responsible for the present and past state of the wheat market.
Wheat production is looked upon by many as a secondary considera-
tion. They consider that it is other professions in life which is the
supporter of the bread-producer, and without them the bread-
producer could not exist, and that it matters nothing to them
whether the crops are large or small so long as the price of bread is
low, and that any scheme that would cause the breadstuff to sell at


what they would call dear would be injurious to them, although at
the same time they are deriving their support from the bread-
producer. Now I would like to put this question, What is the
bread-producer and who are dependent upon him for an existence ?
Is he not the germ of life and the mainspring of every industry
under the sun ? Is there any one industry that does not actually
originate from bread production ? If so, then he is the life of all
other industries. Consequently it matters very considerably to
those who exist by him whether he gets a paying price for his pro-
duction or not, because if lie only get half the cost of his production
he has only half the amount at his command to expend in the pro-
duction of other lines which he might require in connection with
bread production, consequently those classes have to go so much
short in their line of business. For instance, if the wheat growers’
crop realises 2s 6d. per bushel only instead of 4s. 6d., which is about
the cost of production calculating six bushels to be an average crop
at 2s. per bushel, would mean a dificiency to the producer of 12s.
per acre to an average farmer of 350 acre would mean a deficiency
of £2lO each, or in other words calculating the whole colony of
South Australia to average 10,000,000 bushels per year would mean
a loss or deficiency to the producing people of £1,000,000 sterling,
which affects every trade and profession to that amount, the State
Government not omitted. Then how does this deficiency affect the
laboring and trading people and the State Government. In the first
place the farmer is compelled to shorten hands on the farm, or even
if he employs the full number it is only for a short time at reduced
wages, and as soon as possible he is compelled to discharge some at
least, notwithstanding he could find employment for them if his
returns would permit. Then, again, many who have sons grown and
growing up on the farms who ought to be setting up for themsalves,
and becoming employers of labor, but instead owing to low prices
in the past, they have been unable to obtain assistance from parents
where they have spent their time, have been compelled to go out
and compete with the already overstocked labor market. Then,
again, there are other trades who do a correspondingly less business
at a less profit not only with the producers alone but on the whole.
Then there is the State Government, the railways which must carry
a considerable amount less goods and also less personal traffic by
rail, which would mean a very considerable deficiency in railway
receipts. Then there is the trouble with the Government extending
due purchase money payments, remitting and extending and reduc-
ing rents, &c., which all mean inconvenience and loss to the Crown.
Then, again, there is the necessity for the Government to find relief
for the distressed farmer, and also relief works for the unemployed,
which is caused more by the deficiency in prices than by the short
crops harvested. I wish it to be understood that it is not in large
crops that maintains the prosperity of the people and the State, but
in the money that is brought into circulation, besides large crops
always would mean over-production, consequently wheat would be
an unsaleable article and prices would be nil, in fact there would
only be a limited quantity required for consumption, which unde r


the present system of dealing in wheat would mean mere nothing to
the grower, and he would or could use the balance himself or let it
go to waste, hence it is plain to be seen that prosperity does not so
much depend upon the quantity of breadstuff produced as in the
amount of money that is circulated through its production. Past
experience has proved that there has always been sufficient bread-
stuff produced to meet the i equirements of the world, while on the
other hand there has been none to spare if every one had their share.
If such be the case then, it is plain that it is not increased produc-
tion that is required but prices that would be an equivalent to the
cost of production.
We will consider the present system of dealing in wheat. Is it
a fair system ? Is it right and just that the producer of breadstuff
should be compelled to part with the fruits of his outlay and care at
any figure that is offered to him, even if it only be one-third its cost
value short ? Which would mean he must live by the loss. Then,
again, is it fair and just to other classes of people who are obtaining
their existence through the producers, directly or indirectly, that a
certain class of dealers and millionaires should be allowed to get hold
of bread supplies at a ruinous price to the grower and then hold it
from the needy consumer for the purpose of extracting higher prices
from the poor who have been rendered poor by the very small price
paid to the producer ? Then, again, is it just that bread should be
locked up waiting for higher prices while there is enough for every
one by paying the cost of production ? It must be admitted that it
is absolutely unfair that wheat should be held back from the needy
by a few for making millions out of the poverty of the poor. It is
at such times that the severity of fluctuations in prices are felt by
the poor who have been thrown out of employment on account of
the low prices that was paid to the producer now to be utterly
unable to obtain the one necessary of life. Is it not, therefore, a
matter demanding the most earnest consideration of all people who
depend, directly or indirectly, upon the bread production to make
bread production a paying undertaking to the producer ? I will
here note that low prices do not enable the producer to sell a larger
amount of his produce by which he would gain a little by the quan-
tity disposed of, but on the contrary would tend to increase supplies
as there would be many families who, on account of low prices paid
to the producer, would be compelled to go short of their require-
ments, consequently there would be less consumed than if it was
double the price countinually. Is it fair and just to the producer
that he should part with his produce and have no say as to what
reward he should receive for his labor and expense, and be compelled
to jdve up all for nothing for others to make thousands out of him ?
Viewing the foregoing, I come to the conclusion that it is time that
the old system of dealing in wheat was swept away and a new prin-
ciple adopted in itsp'ace. Gold is the standard metal of the realm,
and no one would think of selling a sovereign for fifteen shillings.
Wheat also being the standard article of consumption should not be
sold at less than its cost value, because if it is every individual who
is in any way interested in the producers, and there are certainly


none who labor do business or trade in any way who are not inter-
ested must suffer correspondingly more or less.
As the foregoing shows that all classes of people are dependent
on the producers for their existence would it not be to their advan-
tage to support a scheme that would benefit their individual
circumstances as well as that of the producers direct. Would it not
be an advantage to the State to support a scheme that would return
to its treasury hundreds of thousands a year ; if so, why delay ?
There is no necessity. If the people and the State unite for the one
pur ose it is bound to succeed. But then fixing the selling value of
wneat would not be a matter for one State alone to deal with, it
would be a scheme that would affect the whole world to some
extent, but would not require the co-operation of countries that
were not exporters or countries whose exportable surplus was very
small ; but even if it did require the co-operation of all countries I
feel sure that they would all eagerly grasp the opportunity to
improve their financial positions which would certainly come about
by such union for the purpose of establishing a fixed selling value
for wheat that would be equivalent to the cost of production.
I maintain that if the Australasian colonies unite for the above pur-
pose the American producers would gladly entertain the proposed
scheme for the reason that what is needed in Australia is also
required in America. If other countries stood out they could o nly
supply a limited quantity, and then the united body would have the
supply all to its own self, and would be able to dispose of all its
surplus within a reasonabe ilime.
I will now endeavor to explain the working of the scheme, but
before doing so I would note that the producers as a whole, owing
to low prices in the past, are reduced to a position that would pre-
vent them from holding their wheat to await the demand by the
consumer, without some assistance by way of a loan on their pro-
duce. This could be accomplished by the State making an advance
of one-half the cost of its production when stored under a united
body appointed to receive produce on behalf of the producers, and
transact all sales on their behalf. The State when making advances
would officially inspect stocks and books to see that all was square,
and, if satisfied, should advance, if required, up to one-half its
producing cost. Then the united body to advance to those who
required the loan. In estimating the producing value of wheat it
would be necessary to take the average of the States’ crops for a
number of years, say ten years, and add up the cost of cultivating
one acre, which I will not give here, which would show the produc-
ing value of a bushel of wheat. The next part is selling, this would
be unlike the present, instead of the poor farmer at harvest time
having to sell his little all for next to nothing to meet his liabilities
while his richer neighbor is enabled to hold over and gets 3 to 1 foi
his crop —which means the rich are getting richer while the poor
are getting poorer ; but, instead, the wheat would be sold to the
consumer in lots to suit their immediate requirements, whenever
they wanted it, at a fixed price to be paid. The whole proceeds
from every sale so made would be paid over, after loan and interest


were deducted, to every holder his or her proportionate share of
the sale then made, and so on until the whole of the produce had
been disposed of. Then at the end of the year the producer would
have taken about double the amonnt for his crop that he would
otherwise have done.
The above scheme must or should not be looked upon as a party
scheme, where opposition is likely to take place, as is the case in
many other public acts, such as Acts of Parliament, and so on,
where what is in one’s favor is against another, but where all would
share the advantage of a much larger circulation of money. States
and people of every class and profession, except those who are
living on their money without trading in any shape or form, and the
wheat speculator would have to stand out. {These only would
have to pay more, on the whole, for their bread, and the money
gained by the wheat dealer would fall into the hands of the pro-
ducer, which would mean distribution amongst various classes of
industries. Then, the farmer would be placed in a more reliable
position, he could calculate upon his income within a trifle, he would
be enabled to construct the necessary improvements on his home-
stead and obtain the necessaries of life to a far greater extent than
he now does ; also, those who are trading with him by supplying
him with far greater quantities of the necessaries of life and the
farm requirements. Then again, those who are supplying those
who supply the farmer would sell to them a far larger quantity, and
so on to the end of the chapter. The State railways would have
the pleasure of transmitting a far greater quantity of merchandise,
the public of all classes would spend a great deal more in travelling
by rail, which they have to forego as much as possible under present
conditions because of the shortness of cash they can sacrifice for
that purpose.
I will now point out in what way the fixing the selling value of
wheat equivalent to the cost of production, would benefit the
general public and the State. In the first place, the producers
would receive at least one-third more for their produce, conse-
quently they would be prepared to expend a considerable portion of
their extra income in the necessaries of life and farm requirements.
Now, we will calculate on the average there are 100 farmers
surrounding each township in the colony, and each of those farmers
expend on an average in their business town the sum of £25
annually more than they are and have been able to do in the past
owing to the low prices they have been getting for their wheat,
would mean that the town would be doing a business to the value
of £2,500 extra —which means a considerable profit to the trades
and labor people of that town. Then again, if so, the railway
department would benefit by the extra carriage of £2,500 worth of
goods, the merchants would be getting a profit on the same if
imported, the State would be taking import duties on that amount,
if shipped from foreign parts, the shipping companies would be
doing a greater trade between the countries dealing. Then again,
the producers and manufacturers of these foreign countries would be
doing a greater trade and would be greater employers of labor in the


production and manufacturing of those foreign supplies. So it must
be admitted that by making the selling price a paying price to the
producer, would be doing a wonderlul favor to all classes and con-
ditions of men who in any way do business or trade, especially the
poor and laboring classes of people.
Let us unite and make a stand
To fix a paying price for wheat,
That every person in the land
May always get enough to eat. [E.P.]
Language fails to express the greatness of importance there is
in fixing the selling value of wheat at a price that would be an
equivalent to the cost of production. It means that by allowing
the present system to continue, that we are committing a crime that
is very little if anything short of robbery to our children who are
depending on us and upon our providing a means for their future
existence. It is our duty to see to their future comfort in life, to
make laws and adopt principles by which they may gain a comfort-
able existence, which can only be accomplished by fixing a selling
value on bread production that would be an equivalent to the cost
of production. O that I could urge every person to use every effort
to accomplish this end which is so important to all classes of people
who are in any way depending on business, labor, or trade of any
kind whatever. When cfops are good in France the French
Government places a heavy duty upon all imported grain, so that
it shall not bring down prices to an unremunerative figure to the
producers, and when the crops are small the duty is removed alto-
gether so as to prevent breadstuffs reaching famine prices. As we
are not importers, but exporters, the above system would not be
applicable to our requirements, but tends to show that the State
can assist its people in dealing with breadstuff supplies. What is
really required by us as producers and exporters is State assistance
by making advances on breadstuffs when harvested and in store, to
prevent a rushing of supplies upon the market until required for
consumption.
Now we will consider how prices affect the small farmer and
the laboring classes. In the first place, in years of good crops and
low prices the farmer is unable to expend extra money in labor and
material, as it takes all to meet the present and past liabilities ;
consequently, the laborer is not employed to the full extent that he
would be had the price been a paying price to the producer ; conse-
quently, the laborer is unable to provide for the future. Then
again, when crops are poor the price runs up to a high figure, the
laborer is still unemployed owing to the small crops, ana is utterly
unable to get bread even at a low figure, leave alone at a high rate.
So it will be seen that he has to suffer in both cases ; whereas, if
the price was a fixed price equivalent to the cost of production, the
income to the producer would be an average one and would ensure


constant employment of labor. Then again, there is the small
farmer of from 200 to 300 acres is unable to live on his land. Owing
to low prices he is forced to go outside and take work to try and
make' up the deficiency which he should have received for his crop,
which, for 150 bags at 6s. per bag deficiency, would be £4s—which
would be his year’s living cost; also, by his taking outside work he
is competing against the laborer who ought to be employed doing
the work which he has taken, thereby robbing the laborer, who has
no other means of obtaining his living. To accomplish the suggested
scheme let every wheat-producer join the Farmers’ Union and not
sell or store one bushel of wheat with any other firm. Let the
millers obtain their supplies for this colony from the Union, which
could be delivered to the various mills at harvest time by the
farmers’ teams after the millers had made their purchases from the
Union. By this means alone we could get importation prices for all
that is consumed in this colony—which would be about one shilling
per bushel more than we should obtain otherwise, as wheat could
not be imported for less than one shilling per bushel from other
countries. By this means the producers would secure the handsome
sum of £70,000 annually. Victoria and New South Wales would
gain the advantage of £300,000 each on wheat consumed. We
will suppose it is possible to produce an everlasting surplus, would
it not be to the advantage of the’lproducer, and also the consumer,
to sell and buy what is required for human consumption at a profit-
able price to the producer, and utilise the surplus in producing
bacon, fowls and eggs, and sell to the laboring class and others at a
reasonable price so that they might gain some advantage in obtain-
ing cheaper meat, which to-day is a matter of serious importance.
In summing up the whole subject, we can arrive at no other
conclusion than that the producers, by continuing to submit to the
present system of selling their wheat, are producing their own
destruction and also of those from whom they obtain their necessary
supplies of goods and material.
Why do you languish, noble State ?
What reason to be cast down ?
Is it caused by the farmers’ fate
As the years pass onward bound ?
Yes, ’tis caused by the farmers’ fate,
As the harvest comes around—
Chills tbe heart of a noble State
When farmers are breaking down.
Caused by a selling system bad
To wheat merchants, who maintain
To be the farmers’ friend—but had
Been so for their personal gain.


H CQ
Unite, brother farmers, unite !
Agents are prowling about
To buy all our produce at quite
A ruinous price throughout.
To conquer this evil design
We’ll stick to our produce tight;
No wheat to merchants consign,
Unless beat in a desperate fight.
It is better to take four bob
Than take two shillings or less—
To find we are successfully robb’d,
Fixed in a terrible mess.
Hence, let us sell our produce through
Our Farmers’ Union agent,
Having nothing at all to do
With self-interested merchant.
Come, join together, one and all,
And adopt a scheme complete
That will prevent a fatal fall
In the price of farmers’ wheat.
[Original, by E
Pridham.]
J. L. Bouythou & Co., Printers, “ The Advertiser ” Office, Adelaide.




