

THE SECOND COMING
OF CHRIST.
HOW? and WHEN?
By REV. JOHN WATSFORD.
“ The Son of Man shall come in the glory
of His Father with His angels; and then shall
He render unto every man according to his deeds.”
XATTHEW xvi. 27.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Melbourne:
Printed by T. Shaw Fitchett, at “Review of Reviews” Office, 169 Queen Street.
MDCCCXCVIII.




THE SECOND COMING
OF CHRIST.
HOW? and WHEN?
By REV. JOHN WATSFORD.
“ The Son of Man shall come in the glory
of His Father with His angels; and then shall
He render unto every man according to his deeds T
Matthew xvi. 27.
Melbourne:
Printed by T. Shaw Fitchett, at “Review of Reviews” Office, 169 Queen Street.
MDCCCXCVIII.


THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST.
HOW? and WHEN?
“ I do not see how the pre-millenarian theory can be better
dealt with than by your book. Tt is unanswerable; and its
spirit is excellent. I shall not fail to assist in its circulation.”
—Rev. W. A. Quick.
“ 1 thank you very much for the opportunity oP reading your
MS. I think it is very timely, and certainly ought to be pub-
lished in a cheap form, so as to secure the widest circulation.
Your arguments are simply unanswerable.
—Rev. E. H. Sugden, 8.A., B.Sc.
“I have just read your MS. through with much interest and
profit. I believe it will allay a good deal of unrest, and tend
to concentrate our people’s attention on the work we have to do.”
—Rev. W. Y. Blackwell, M.A.
“ Mr. Watsford’s little book on ‘ The Second Coming of Christ ’
is an admirable example of sane Scriptural teaching. There is a
world of nonsense, sometimes very pious and well-meaning non-
sense. talked and written on this subject. Some of our very best
people, indeed, go wrong on this subject, with much mischief
to themselves and much injury to their usefulness. To this
Mr. Watsford’s book is an admirable corrective. His spirit is
reverent, his knowledge of the Bible profound, and with him piety
and common sense are not in quarrel. Our ministers generally
ought to interest themselves in the circulation of a book so whole-
60me” —Rev. W. H. Fitchett, B.A.


PREFACE.
\ ery much zeal is displayed just now by many of our pre-mil-
lenanan friends in disseminating their views by means of addresses
lectures, books, &c. Many members of my own Church have had
these views presented to them, and some of those who have never
studied the subject have been somewhat puzzled. I have been
again and again urged to speak on this matter; and ministerial
brethren, for whose wisdom and judgment I have had’ the greatest
respect, have read my manuscript, and have pressed me to publish
1 * his I have hesitated to do, for I have for years been ear-
nestly working to promote peace and union among Christians,
and I have been afraid lest I should in any way weaken the in-
fluence of my work in that direction. Now, however, lam fully
convinced that brotherly love and desire for Christian union do not
require me to be silent on this subject. lam attacking no one,
.but am writing m the .interest of what I believe to be the truth.
My pre-mil lenanan brethren have written largely and frequently
on the subject, and their doing so has not interfered with bro-
therly love, or robbed them of the love and respect of their
brethren who differ from them; and what they have done, I am
sure they will allow me to do without being grieved or offended.
I therefore send forth my little book, with the fervent prayer
and earnest hope that it may help some who are perplexed on
this subject, and may bring to them the settled peace and satis-
faction that I have in holding fast to the views expressed therein.
Kew, May 10th, 1898.
J.W.


“ To damp our earthly jdys,
To increase our gracious fears,
For ever let the archangel s voice
Be sounding in our ears;
The solemn midnight cry,
‘ Ye dead, the Judge is come,
Arise, and meet Him in the sky.
And meet your instant doom!’ ”


THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST.
SECTION I.
SPEAKING THE TRUTH IN LOVE.
Believers in the second coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ are divided into two classes: —(i) Those who
believe that He will so come before the Millennium
to reign with His saints on the earth for a thousand
years: these are called pre-millenarians; (2) Those who
believe that He will so come after the Millennium, to
judge the world: these are called post-millenarians.
I may say at once that I hold the latter view. But
I remember that many good men hold the opposite one,
and among them are some dear friends of mine, whom
I greatly respect and love, and with whom I often
labour in the work of Christ.
The Rev. A. Murray says: —“ ‘ Till He come ’is the
watchword of every true-hearted believer. There may
be very serious differences in the exposition of the
promise of His coming. To one it is plain as day that
He is coming very speedily in person to reign on the


earth, and that speedy coming is his hope and stay.
To another, loving his Bible and his Saviour not less,
the coming can mean nothing but the judgment-day—
the solemn transition from time to eternity, the close of
history on earth, the beginning of heaven, and the
thought of that manifestation of his Saviour’s glory is
no less his joy and his strength. It is by abiding in
Christ, the Glorified One, that the believer will be
quickened to that truly spiritual looking for His
coming, which alone brings true blessing to the soul.”
It becomes us all, then, to speak on this subject in
the spirit of Christ, carefully guarding against every
word that can be regarded as intended to wound or
grieve any brother. In a book advocating the pre-
millennial view, called “ The Days of the Son of Man,”
the writer, speaking of different opinions held by the
advocates of the pre-millennial advent, says, “ Where
men of God, of mature years, of ripe scholarship, and,
no less, of deep experience, differ so radically, I would
noft be supposed to speak ‘ex cathedra.’ ” But this
should be said not only when we speak of the smaller
differences that are found among those who hold in
general the one view, but.also when we speak of the
greater difficulties that divide us into two classes, for on
both sides are many “ men of God of mature years,
of ripe scholarship, and of deep experience.”
D. L. Moody, in a little book on the Second Coming
of Christ, writes, “ I do not know why people should
not like to study the Bible, and find out all about this


precious doctrine of our Lord’s return. The Church
has very little to say about it. Now I can see a reason
for this—the devil does not want us to see the truth.”
Now, this is rather hard upon all those of us who do not
see with Mr. Moody, but we must not complain. lam
sure Mr. Moody is wrong, for I can truly say that I
have carefully studied God’s Word, with earnest prayer
for the light of the Spirit, and I have done this the more
since I have been brought nearer to some holy men
who are pre-millenarians, and I have pleaded with God
to lead me in the right way, and to give me fully to
know the truth. Though a man of mature years, I
make no pretension to ripe scholarship, or deep experi-
ence; but I do claim to be a sincere enquirer after truth,
open to conviction, willing to learn, and yet, after all,
I cannot find the pre-millennial theory in God’s Word.
I have no desire for controversy on religious subjects,
nor, indeed, on any subject. There is so much to do,
and so little time to do it in, that it seems to me every
moment should be spent in the great work we have in
hand: but I feel it laid on me to give my views on this
subject, to make known what thoroughly satisfies my
mind and heart; and I do so with the hope that it may
help some among the many who are perplexed about
this matter.


SECTION II.
VIEWS OF CHRISTIAN CHURCHES.
The post-millennial view is held by Christians gen-
erally, and it is taught by most qf the Churches.
I. The Church of England.
The Church of England teaches that when Christ
comes again, He will come as our Judge. In Article
IV., on the Resurrection of Christ, it is said, “ He as-
cended into heaven, and there sitteth until He return
to judge all men in the last day.” In the Apostles’
Creed, “ He ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence
He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.” In
the form of Baptism, “ Dost thou believe . . that
He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty, and from thence shall
come again at the end of the world to judge the quick
and the dead?” In the Creed of Athanasius, “He as-
cended into heaven, He sitteth on the right hand of the
Father, God Almighty, from whence He shall come
to judge the quick and the dead. At whose coming-
all men shall rise again with their bodies, and shall
give account for their own works, and they that have
done good shall go into life everlasting, and they that
have done evil unto everlasting fire,” In the Collect


for the first Sunday in Advent, That in the last da\,
when He shall come again in His glorious Majesty
to judge both the quick and the dead, we may rise to
the life immortal.” In the Collect for the thud
Sunday in Advent, “ That at Thy Second Coming
to judge the world we may be found an acceptable
people in Thy sight.” And, to quote one more pas-
sage from very many, in the Te Deum, Thou sittest
at the right hand of God in the glory of the Father.
We believe that Thou shalt come to be our Judge.”
Not a word in all this about the personal coming to
reign on earth a thousand years. It may be said that
many ministers of the Church of England hold and
teach the pre-millennial view. That is true; but it
is not what their Church teaches.
2. The Presbyterian Church.
The post-millennial doctrine is taught by the Pres-
byterian Church. The “ Confession of Faith,” chap,
xxxiii., “ God hath appointed a day wherein He will
judge the world in righteousness by Jesus Christ,
to whom all power and judgment is given by the
Father. In which day not only the apostate angels
shall be judged, but likewise all persons that have
lived upon the earth shall appear before the tribunal
of Christ, to give an account of their thoughts, words,
and deeds, and to receive according to what they have
done in the body, whether good or evil.” In the
same chapter it is stated, “ Then shall the righteous


go into everlasting life, but the wicked into eternal
torments;” and, “Christ will leave that day unknown
to men, that they may shake off all carnal security,
and be always watchful, because they know not at
what hour the Lord will come; and may be ever pre-
pared to say, * Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Amen.’ ” “ The Shorter Catechism,” Question 28,
“ Christ’s exaltation consisteth in His rising
again from the dead on the third day, in ascending up
into heaven, in sitting at the right hand of God the
Father, and in coming to judge the world at the last
day.” In his “Commentary on the Shorter Cate-
chism,” the Rev. Dr. Alexander Whyte, on this “Ques-
tion 28,” quotes Bengel, “ Between His ascension and
His coming in glory no event intervenes equal in im -
portance to each of these two events; therefore these
two are joined together.”
This teaching is surely clear enough. The pre-
millennial theory is that there will be three judgments;
that Christ when He comes personally and visibly
will reign on the earth with His saints a thousand
years; the Presbyterian Church teaches that when He
comes it will be to judge the world, and that there
will be one general judgment of all who have lived on
the earth.
3. The Wesleyan Church.
In the Wesleyan Methodist Church some ministers
and laymen hold and teach the pre-millennial doctrine.


blit they are very few. The teaching in our colleges
and in our standard works is all opposed to it. It
has been said that the Wesleyan Church has no teach-
ing on this subject. Let anyone read Wesley’s ser-
mon No. 15, on “ The Great Assize,” and he will find
clear and definite teaching there.
It has also been said that some of the hymns in the
Wesleyan Hymn-book teach the pre-millennial doc-
trine of the second coming of Christ, and Wesley’s
biographer (Tyerman) refers to two hymns, No. 66.
“Lo! He comes with clouds descending”; and No. 68,
sixth and seventh verses. Our pre-millennial friends
may be able to find their view in these hymns, but I
cannot. I understand the writers as using the figures
of Scripture just as the Bible uses them, and we sing
the one as referring to the Judgment, and the other to
heaven.
Some have contended that John Wesley held these
views. The Rev. Luke Tyerman, in his “Life of Wes-
ley,” says, “ Mr. Hartley wrote a book on the Mil-
lennium, in which he shows the importance of the doc-
trine of Christ’s glorious reign on the earth with His
saints,” &c. Mr. Wesley wrote to the author, “ Your
book on the Millennium was lately put into my hands.
I cannot but thank you for your strong and season-
able confirmation of that comfortable doctrine, of
which I cannot entertain a doubt as long as I believe
the Bible.” Mr. Tyerman adds, “ There can be no
doubt that Wesley, like his father before him, was a


millenarian, a believer in the second advent of Christ,
to reign on earth visibly and gloriously for a thousand
years.” That John Wesley was a mffl'enarian there
can be no doubt — that is, that he believed in a coming
millennium, when evil shall be restrained, and the
Gospel gloriously prosper; but that does not prove
that he believed that Christ will come to reign on
earth, visibly and gloriously, with His saints for a
thousand years. Mr. Tyerman refers to Wesley’s
notes on Rev. xx., and we are greatly surprised that,
having done so, he should have written as quoted
above; for while Wesley, in his notes, expresses his
belief that the sainted dead shall be raised again at
the Millennium and reign with Christ, he most dis-
tinctly says that they shall reign with Him, ‘‘not on
earth, but in heaven.” Speaking of the thousand
years, he says, “ The danger is of interpreting them m
a gross and carnal sense. The doctrine of the Son
of God is a mystery. So is His Cross, and so is His
Glory.” His note on Heb. ix. 28 is that Christ’s ap-
pearing the second time is “when He comes to judg-
ment,” and in his note on 2 Cor. iii. 11, (he says that
the Gospel “ dispensation will remain to the end ot the
world.” Let anyone read Wesley’s sermons on “The
Great Assize,” “ The General Deliverance,” “ The
General Spread of the Gospel,” and “ Scriptural Chris-
tianity,” and he will find teaching there which Mr.
Tyerman is compelled to acknowledge scarcely har-
rnoniges with the pre-millennial theory.


But what John Wesley’s views were does not affect
the question. Wesleyans do not profess to believe
everything that John Wesley believed on every sub-
ject. They hold and teach his views on the great
fundamental doctrines of our holy religion, because
they believe they are according to the teaching of
sacred Scripture. Nor is the question affected by
the creed of any other Church.
SECTION III.
TO THE LAW AND TO THE TESTIMONY.
We appeal to God’s Word —“ to the law and to the
testimony ” —more especially we appeal to the four
Gospels, and the Epistles, with the Revelation of St.
John We take these together, learning just what
is plainly and fully taught, and from this endeavouring
to fix the meaning of that which is prophetic, dark,
or mysterious. This, we know, is not the course our
pre-millenarian friends adopt and contend for. Mi.
Grattan Guinness 'says, “ It will not do to postulate
certain general principles drawn from the Gospels and
Epistles, and then, working from them, reach conclu-
sions at variance with the plain and direct statements
of the prophecies, which alone explicitly treat on the
point in question. We should enquire rather what is


the predicted sequence of the advent and of the millen-
nium in those prophecies which foretell them and their
order.” It will be noticed in this extract that Mr.
Guinness speaks of the book of Revelation as giving
on this subject plain and direct statements”; that
it treats explicitly,” clearly, on the point in question
and }et in his own school what different interpreta-
tions are given of many passages. The Rev. Canon
Fausset, D.D., contends that we should go first to the
book of Revelation, and interpret other parts by this,
for to follow the other course “ is equivalent to saying
we ought to judge of the revelations of the latest and
best telescope by what the naked eye or the earliest
telescope informs us.” To which Professor Beet re-
plies, “We have no proof whatever that the last book
of the New Testament is the latest. To speak of the
book of Revelation as the ‘ best telescope ’ is to beg
the whole question. If we are to compare in worth
the books of the Sacred Volume, that is ‘best’ for our
purpose which speaks most plainly about the matter
on which we seek for information.”
I hope that while we search the Word, we shall
very distinctly keep before us the definite question
that we are now discussing, which is not—Will Christ
come the second time, personally and visibly? for we
believe that He will so come to be our Judge, that
this same Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go
into heaven.” It is not—Will there be a Millen-


nium, when evil shall be restrained, and the kingdom
of Christ greatly extended? for we believe this. It
is not —Is the Millennium near or distant? for the
question is not affected by this. Ihe real and only
question is—Does the Second Coming of Christ
spoken of in the Bible mean that He will come person-
ally and visibly, before the Millennium, to reign on the
earth with His saints for a thousand years?
I do not think so, because, in my opinion, that view
is contrary to the teaching of God’s Holy Word.
SECTION IV.
CHRIST’S SECOND COMING WILL BE TO
JUDGE THE WORLD.
There are many parts of the Scripture that speak
of the coming of our Lord that must mean a personal,
visible advent; but these refer to His coming to judge
the world. Let the reader carefully study the follow-
ing passages without prejudice, and with much prayer
for the light of the Holy Spirit: —“ When the Son of
Man shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels
with Him, then shall He sit on the throne of His glory,
and before Him shall be gathered all the nations. . .
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment;
but the righteous into- life eternal ” (Matt. xxv. 31-46).


“ For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of His
Father, with His angels, and then He shall reward
every man according to his works ” (Matt. xvi. 27).
“Because He hath appointed a day, in the which He
will judge the world in righteousness, by that man
whom He hath ordained; whereof He hath given as-
surance unto all men, in that) He hath raised Him from
the dead ” (Acts xvii. 31). “ For we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, that everyone may
receive the things done in his body, according to
that he hath done, whether it be good or bad ” (2 Cor.
v. 10). “ For we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ ” (Rom. xiv. 10). “ I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at His appearing
and His kingdom ”(2 Tim. iv. 1). “ And I saw <
great white throne, and Him that sat on it, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there
was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small
and great, stand before God; and the books were
opened; and another book was opened, which is the
Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books, according to
their works” (Rev. xx. 11, 12).
From these passages of Scripture, and many others,
we learn (1) That the judgment will be universal. The
words and phrases “ every man,” “ all,” “ all nations,”
“ quick and dead,” “ the world,” “ small and great,”
clearly prove this; (2) That there shall be one day of


judgment, of both the righteous and the wicked. Be-
side the passages quoted, read also in proof of this, “For
the hour is coming in which all that are in the graves
shall hear His voice, and shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damna-
tion ” (John v. 28, 29). Let both grow together
until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I will
say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares,
and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather
the wheat into My barn ”; “ The Son of Man shall send
forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do in-
iquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father” (Matt. xiii. 30, 41-43). “Who will
render to every man according to his deeds. . .
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ according to My Gospel ” (Rom. ii. 6, 16);
(3) That this general judgment will take place when
He cometh (Matt. xvi. 27). “The Son of Man shall
come. . . . and then shall He reward every man,”
&c. (Matt. xxv. 31, &c.). “When the Son of Man shall
come, then,” &c. (2 Tim. iv. 1). “ Who shall judge
• . . at His appearing ” (Rom. ii. 6, 16). “ Who
will render, &c., in that day when God shall judge,”
&c.; (4) That the general judgment, and, consequently,
His Second Coming, will be post-millennial. Rev. xx.


Matt. xiii. 30, 41-43, 2 Tim. iv. 1, are very clear on
this point. So is 2 Peter iii. 10, the words of which
are quoted in our next paragraph. Consult also
1 Cor. xv. 22-25. Indeed all the passages quoted show
that it is at the last day that He shall come, when
all shall be judged, and the wicked shall go away into
eternal punishment, but the righteous into life
eternal.
The Rev. Principal Brown, D.D., of Aberdeen, says,
“ Look at the conflagration of 2 Peter iii. 10-13, th* 2
words of which I must quote in full: ‘ But the day of
the Lord (the day of the Second Advent) will come
as a thief, in which the heavens shall pass away with
a great noise, and the elements shall be dissolved with
fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are
therein shall be burned up.’ ” Seeing that these things
are thus to be dissolved, we ought to be “ looking
for, and earnestly desiring, the coming of the day of
God, by reason of which the heavens, being on fire,
sihiall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat. But according to His promise we look
for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness.” Now where, let me ask, will there
be room for any of the things which the pre-millenniai
theory teaches us to expect upon the earth, after the
whole theatre on which they could be constructed has
been swept away? “ The earth,” says the Apostle,
“and the works that are therein shall be burned up.”


“ But they will be there all the same,” says the pre-mil-
lennial scheme, “ just where they were, and what they
were.”
“The difficulty is admitted —the difficulty, that is,
of believing a thing can be swept away and be there
still, while the ways proposed for getting rid of it only
show how insuperable it is. One would limit the
conflagration to the prophetic or Roman earth, or
Christendom; another would make it a mere ‘ paring
and burning process ’; a third would break it up into
a succession of partial fires in the course of the Millen-
nium. But that would make the Apostle’s warning
to the scoffers pointless. Ye think the day of the
Lord will never come, but it will burst upon you to
your cost all unexpectedly—when? After a thousand
years of peace! It is as certain as anything can be,
that the pre-millennial theory will never survive a
straight-forward interpretation of this prediction.”
The Pre-Millennial Theory.
The pre-millennial theory is that there are three
judgments yet to come. (i) That of the “servants of
Christ,” and it is said, “ we may safely presume that this
will be in heaven” (Matt. xxv. 1-30). (2) “That of the
living Gentiles, soon after Christ’s return, who will be
punished or rewarded according to their treatment
of the Jews who are called ‘My brethren’ ” (Matt. xxv.
31-46). (3) The final judgment (Rev. xx. 11). To me
the generally received interpretation of Matt. xxv. is


very clear and simple, beautiful and appropriate. We
have three parables, because what our Lord wished to
teach could not so clearly be taught in one. The
necessity of deep and persevering piety is shown in the
first; of active usefulness in the second; and of works
of mercy in the third. These parables must be taken
together, for the three teach what is required of all
who would stand on the right hand of the Judge, and
enter into the joy of the Lord. The p re-millennial
view of two judgments appears to me strained, unnatu-
ral, and contradictory. We are told that the “first act
of the returned Lord will be to remove the elect, His
bride, to heaven ”; that “we may safely assume that the
sphere of this second judgment will be in heaven”;
and that this will be the judgment of His servants ac-
cording to Matt. xxv. 3-14. But the parable teaches,
no matter what some may assume, that the first act
of the returned Christ will be, not to take His servants
away, but to reckon with them, and then admit the
good and faithful into the joy of their Lord, and cast
the wicked and unfaithful “ into outer darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
It is contended that Matt. xxv. 31-46 cannot be a
description of the General Judgment for these reasons:
(1) That in Matt. xxiv. 30, Jesus says, “ They shall see
the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and great glory;” and in Matt. xxv. 31 He says.
“ The Son of Man shall come in His glory, then shall
He sit on the throne of His glory,” because He has


come on it, and so the two do not agree. (2) The
word rendered u nations ” always means living nations
on the earth—Gentiles; and the cause of trial is the
question of Gentile treatment of Jews. (3) “It dis-
agrees with the scene of judgment in Rev. xx. It
only needs to be pointed out that there (Rev. xx.) it
is wicked manhood raised from the dead, after the
earth has ceased to be, and judged not by a solitary
test, as in Matt. xxv. 31, but by the works of a whole
life as recorded in the books.”
These are the arguments used to prove that the
generally-accepted interpretation of Matt. xxv. 31-46 is
“ utterly false and groundless.” And on the strength
of these arguments I am asked to abandon the one
view and accept the other; but to do this it seems to me
that I must give up any knowledge I have of God’s
Word on this subject, and the light that the Spirit
has given me, and I am not prepared to do this.
Pre-Millennial Difficulties.
One of the many difficulties in the way of the
pre-millennial theory is found in Matt. xiii. 30, 41-43.
According to that theory “ the first act of Christ when
He comes will be to take the good, His bride, to
heaven ”; but Christ here says that at the harvest, the
end of the world, the tares will first be removed, and
then the wheat gathered into the barn. One way pre-
millenarianism has of getting over this difficulty is
by making it another and separate judgment, or no


judgment at all, but the execution of a sentence pre-
viously passed. Another way, which the writer oi
“ The Days of the Son of Man ” says “is as clear as
it is satisfactory,” is this, “ The Gospel of Matthew,
being the Gospel of the Kingdom, concerns itself prim-
arily and directly with what relates to the Kingdom on
earth, as foretold by Daniel. Further the revelations
of Matt. xiii. are partial. At that time the ‘ ekklesia ’
of the then future —the Church of the present —was
not revealed. Still less its removal from the earth
prior to the establishment of the Kingdom. Now, how-
ever, that the canon of Scripture is complete, and we
read Matt. xiii. in the light of subsequent and further
revelations, all is clear.” But if Matthew is the Gospel
of the Kingdom, is it not strange that it should be par-
tial and fail to give such important information? And
how is the Gospel of Matthew the Gospel of the King-
dom any more than the other Gospels? How is the
revelation in Matt. xiii. only partial? It was Jesus
Himself, the King, who delivered the parable of the-
tares; did He not know?
Another great difficulty is in 1 Cor. xv. 23-26. Our
Lord is now on His throne, and He is to remain there
till every enemy is subdued: Psa. cx. 1, Matt. xxii. 44,
Heb. i. 13. Then when every enemy is destroyed,
He shall come (1 Cor. xv. 23-26). To get over this
difficulty the pre-millennial theory contends that de-
livering up the Kingdom to God, even the Father.
“ is synonymous with receiving a kingdom from Him,


or entering on such a kingdom.” “ A strange mode
of exposition, truly,” writes one. “They must also
make the destruction of the last enemy precede by a
thousand years the resurrection of all mankind, ex-
cepting the pre-millennial martyrs, or, at utmost, pre-
millennial believers; yet it is expressly said that Christ,
who now reigns at God's right hand, must reign till
the destruction of this last enemy of the human
I*clCC ”
0 The rendering of i Cor. xv. 24 in the Revised Ver-
sion greatly increases the difficulty that our pre-tml-
lennial friends find in reconciling that passage with
their theory. In a discussion on the Second Coming,
Professor Beet, replying to Professor Godet, said, “ Dr.
Godet appeals to me as having written a commentary
on 1 Corinthians, and as therefore aware that the true
rendering in chap. xv. 24 is not ‘ then the end, when
He shall deliver up the Kingdom/ but ‘ When He shai
have delivered up/ ” This is a most unfortunate over-
sight. For Dr. Godet has himself written a valuable
commentary on 1 Corinthians, and has there accepted
as correct the reading he says I ought to know to be
incorrect. And in so doing he has followed all recent
critical editors of the Greek Testament, and the West
minster Revisers. From Dr. Godet the advocate of
a pre-millennial advent, I appeal to Dr. Godet the
nowned commentator. And on this reading the ar
gument turns. St. Paul does not say that the end
is to be preceded by Christ’s surrender of the Kingdom


to God, but rather suggests that the surrender is itself
the end.”
Another difficulty is in i Cor. xv. 51, 52: “ Behold,
I shew you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed.” Here is “the last trump, and the raising
of the dead, and the changing of the living.” But it is
contended that this last trump is the last of the seven
trumpets in Rev. viii. 6, and of this Professor Beet says.
“ As if the Christians at Corinth could possibly inter-
pret St. Paul’s language to them by the unique alle-
gorical language of a mysterious work not yet written.”
To me it seems that the pre-millennial theories are
altogether irreconcilable with the teachings of our
blessed Lord and His holy Word.
SECTION V.
CHRIST’S COMING BEFORE THE JUDG-
MENT NOT PERSONAL AND VISIBLE.
There are other passages referring to Christ’s com-
ing which cannot mean a personal, visible coming.
John xiv. 18, 23, “ I will not leave you comfortless, I
will come to you;” “If a man love Me, he will keep My


words; and My Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him”; Rev. 11.
5, 16, “ I will come unto thee quickly, and will re-
move thy candlestick,” &c.; “ Repent, or else I will
come unto thee quickly,” &c.; Rev. iii. 3> I w hl come
on thee as a thief,” &c. Read Matt. xvi. 28, and com-
pare with Mark ix. 1. Some then living when Jesus
spoke should, He said, before, their death, see the
Son of Man coming in His Kingdom,” or ” the King-
dom of God come with power.” Was not this ful-
filled on the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost
was given and the Kingdom of God came with power?
But at all events the Son of Man did not come per-
sonally and visibly to reign on the earth before the
disciples died.
Read Matt. xxiv. 29-34. In Rev. ii. 5* hi. 3, Christ s
coming there spoken of must mean His coming in
judgment to punish the apostate Churches; so in Matt,
xxiv. 29-34 His coming must mean to punish Jerusa-
lem, and in verse 30 He says, “ Then shall they see
the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and great glory,” and in verse 34, “ Verily 1
say unto you, this generation shall not pass until all
these things be fulfilled.”
In Matt. x. 23 we have the same teaching, and in
all the passages the coming of the Son of Man is
spoken of, but there is no personal visible coming.


Pre-Millennial Interpretations.
In order to get over the many difficulties they
meet with, “ pre-millennia! writers interpret Gad’s
Word,” as one puts it, “ in a way that would go far
towards destroying all the fixed laws of sound inter-
pretation.” In “ The Days of the Son of Man ” the
writer assumes that there will be a pre-millennial ad-
vent; that the present dispensation is not the last,
scarcely a dispensation at all, but only a “ parenthesis
between the Jewish age and the millennial age ”; that
“ the object of the dispensation as to the results of the
Gospel is to gather out the elect of God ”; that “ the
structural formation of the New Testament will agree
with the theory that it propounds; that the structure
is on the principle of Eclecticism, or that only a few
will be saved.” He then proceeds to show that such
is the structural formation of the New Testament, and.
in doing so, takes the words of Scripture, and gives
them a meaning the very opposite of that which we
believe was intended. In the parable of “ The Mus-
tard Seed,” and “ The Leaven,” our Lord, by all com-
mon sense and fair interpretation, meant to teach that
liis Kingdom, small at first, should grow and increase;
but the pre-millennial theory teaches that He meant
it should become worse and worse until it was al-
together corrupt.
Really one can make anything one likes of the
Bible in this way. lam afraid that the treatment of


God’s Word, and the oft-repeated cry of “ Lo, Christ
is here,” have done more harm than many imagine.
The Epistles to the Thessalonians.
There are certain passages in the Epistles to the
Thessalonians that pre-millenarians always quote as
proof of the correctness of their views. Let us look
at these without prejudice, and praying for the teach-
ing of the Holy Spirit.
i Thess. iv. 16 and 17: “ For the Lord Himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the
dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall
we ever be with the Lord.” Now, what is there here
to indicate that the Day of Judgment is not referred
to? The Apostle would comfort believers sorrowing
about their departed friends, and says that, when
Christ comes, He will bring them with Him; their
bodies shall then be raised, and they who are alive shall
together with them be caught up in the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air, “ and so ” not we shall reign with
Christ a thousand years on the earth, but, “we shall
tver be with the Lord.” In this passage it is not
said that Christ shall come to the earth at all, but that
the saints “ shall be caught up in the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air.” There is not a word about a
visible reign on earth for a thousand years. The Rev.


A. Barnes in his note on these verses says, “ The per-
sonal reign was wholly unknown to Paul, or how can
it be accounted for that he did not advert to it? Would
a believer in the ‘ personal reign ’ now be likely to
omit so material a point in a description of the scenes
which are to occur at the Second Advent?”
2 Thess. i. 7-11: “To you who are troubled rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with His mighty angels,” &c. This must also refer
to His coming to judge the world, for there is not a
word in it that teaches that He will come personally
and visibly to reign on the earth.
2 Thess. ii. 8: “And then shall that Wicked be re-
vealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit
of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness
of His coming.” We have seen that in many other
passages Christ’s coming means His coming to give
success to His cause, or to overturn and punish His
enemies, and why should it mean anything else here?
We are told in other parts of His Word that the
world is to be converted, and evil overthrown by the
Spirit of the Lord through the preaching of the
glorious Gospel (2 Cor. x. 4,5). What is said in
2 Thess. ii. 8 to be done by the Spirit of His mouth
and the brightness of His coming is, in Daniel ii. 44
said to be done by His Church. His powerful in-
visible coming in the preaching of the Word and the
power of the Holy Ghost, or by His overwhelming


judgments, is to be first, and then His personal, visible
coming to judge the world (Rev. xx. 11).
Pre-Millennial Bulwarks.
But the great bulwarks of the pre-millennial theory
are the prophetical books of the Old and New Testa-
ments, especially Ezekiel, Daniel, and tihe Revelation
of St. John, the most figurative and symbolical books
in the Bible; and in dealing with these, pre-millennial
writers interpret some figures literally, and others they
regard as symbols.
In Ezekiel xxxvii. to the end of the book, where
the glory of the latter days is referred to, “ priests”
and “ Levites ” are mentioned, and “ meat offerings,”
and “ burnt offerings,” and “ circumcision of the
heart,” and “circumcision of the flesh”; are these
to be understood literally? In Ezekiel xxxvii. 24.
it is said, “ And David My servant shall be king over
them.” Is this to be taken literally? “ No,” say
pre-millenarians; “ th!at means Christ.” True; but
if this is figurative and must be so understood, why
must other expressions which are clearly figures be
understood literally?


In Rev. xix. it is said we have an account of our
Lord’s coming' personally and visibly to reign on the
earth just before the Millennium. But is all in this
chapter to be understood literally? Will Jesus Christ
come personally and visibly, and all the armies of
heaven with Him, as here described? And will He
carry on literal war against the beast and the kings of
the earth, who with their armies are gathered together
to war against Him? Understood figuratively, the
chapter teaches a glorious truth—that Christ now
reigning on His throne will, one day, 'show forth His
almighty power in destroying the beast and the false
prophet, and overturning corrupt and apostate govern-
ments, and by the power of His Spirit and the word of
His mouth, as a sharp sword, stlbduing and saving
the people; but that the blessed Lord shall come
in person, riding on a white horse clothed in a gar-
ment dipped in blood, with a sharp sword going out of
His mouth, and all heaven’s armies with Him on
white horses, and that there shall be a pitched battle
or battles between Him and His enemies, seems to me
so extravagant and so dishonouring to our blessed
Lord that I wonder that anyone can for a single
moment hold such a view. The Rev. J. R. Gregory,
referring to chronological calculations given by the
leaders of thought among pre-millenarians, and to
their views on the subject, says, “The Second Advent
is.accordingtothem, to occur in 1917, and the glorified
Son of God is to spend seventeen years in physical


conflict with His foes before He becomes the acknow-
ledged King, and His Kingdom can be deemed secure
against assault by mortal men! And even then mut-
tered discontent and incipient rebellion remain until,
by-and-bye, they manifest themselves in open, dan-
gerous, and for a time successful, revolt. Surely
it is needless to argue against notions so derogatory
to the Second Person of the Trinity.”
In Rev. xix. n, John says, “ I saw heaven opened”;
not “ I saw Him come down from heaven,” as is said
of the angel in chapter xxi. And what need is there
for Him to come? Surely we may have as strong
faith in Jesus as the centurion had, and say, “ Speak
the word only,” and all Thine enemies shall be over-
come.
In Rev. ii. 16, Jesus says to the church in Pergamos.
“ Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will fight against thee with the sword of My mouth.”
But He did not come personally and visibly. So in
the whole of this mysterious book a great variety of
symbols is used “because of the infirmity of our flesh.”
To meet our weakness and our ignorance, terrible
figures of war, famine, death, &c., are used to warn
us of the danger of living in rebellion against God,
and to teach us what the consequences of such rebel-
lion shall be. On the other hand, most beautiful
figures are employed—foundations of precious stones,
gates of pearl, streets of gold, crowns and white robes


—to point out the glory of our home above, and the
holiness and bliss of the ransomed there.
I think if I believed in the pre-millennial theory,
and had in me the mind of Christ, instead of praying
that He would “quickly come,” and pour out the vials
of His wrath, I should plead as He does, “ Spare it yet.
another year.” 1
Revelation XX.
Rev. xx. is regarded as the stronghold of pre-mille-
narianism, but I can find there nothing to sup-
port that theory. On the contrary I find many
passages directly opposed to it, passages which
so puzzle pre-millennial writers that it is impos-
sible for them to come to any agreement as to their
true meaning. It is distinctly stated that the thous-
and years shall end; that then Satan shall be loosed out
of his prison; that he shall deceive the nations still
existing on the earth; that there shall be a wide-spread
apostacy, and a fearful conflict between the world and
the Church; that the devil shall be cast down into
hell, and the enemies of Christ overcome, and then the
Son of Man shall come, seated on His great white
throne, and the judgment begin, and the books be
opened. All this is fatal to the theory of a personal,
visible advent of Christ before the day of judgment.
The pre-millennial view is, that in Rev. xix. we are
taught that Christ will come personally and visibly,
as there described, and beat down and destroy His


enemies; that Rev. xx. 1-9 teaches that literally an
angel will descend with the key of the bottomless pit,
and a great chain in his hand and bind Satan, and cast
him into the bottomless pit, where he will be kept from
deceiving the nations for 1,000 years; that during this
period Christ will reign with His saints on earth, as
literally described in verse 4; that at the end of the
thousand years’ reign Satan shall be loosed for a
season, and there shall be revolt and conflict; that
Christ’s enemies shall then be destroyed, and the devil
cast into the lake of fire, and then shall be the judg-
ment of the wicked, not the general judgment.
Professor Beet says, “ The passage in question (Rev.
xx. 1-9), the sole and narrow foundation of the doc-
trine of the pre-millennial advent, is wholly insufficient
to sustain the fabric erected upon it; as is abundantly
confirmed by the inability of any writers holding that
doctrine to bring a single passage (except this in
Rev. xx.) which so much as hints that the glory to be
introduced by the coming of Christ will be followed
by conflict. We have had abundant quotations from
prophets, evangelists, and apostles, but not one word
about a coming reign of Christ, limited in duration,
and followed by revolt. This greatly simplifies the
matter before us. If the doctrine of the pre-millen-
nial advent be true, it is taught in one chapter only
of the New Testament. The issue before us is now
simple— Is it more easy to reconcile with the agree-
ment of the rest of the New Testament the teaching
3


of Rev. xx. i-io; or to reconcile with a pre-millennial
coming of Christ the very many statements, by vari-
ous sacred writers, which teach that the coming of
Christ will for ever end the conflict of good and evil? ’
To me it seems simply impossible to reconcile the
pre-millennial doctrine with the Word of God; but
whatever difficulties there may be, Rev. xx. i-io may,
I think, be reconciled with the rest of the New Testa-
ment. We have seen that in other places the com-
ing of Christ means His invisible coming in judgment,
or in the power of the Holy Ghost with the word of
His mouth, to give success to His work. In Rev.
xix. we have this His invisible coming described in
symbolical terms. In. Rev. xx. 1-3 we have the re-
straining of the Evil One, or Satan bound. Jesus
said, “ How can one enter into a strong man’s house ;
and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong
man?” In the case of every,bad man under the power
of the devil, there is the binding of the strong man.
when he, the sinner, is converted to God. In the
wonderful spiritual changes wrought in a whole com-
munity famous for wickedness, Satan is bound, evil
is restrained. We went to Fiji, where Satan’s seat
was, and we preached the Gospel of Christ, and wc
saw how evil was restrained and Satan bound. In
Rev. xx. 4-6 we have, under various symbols, the mil-
lennial reign of the, to us, invisible Christ, and the
triumph of His truth and His Church. In verses
7-10 we are told of apostacy and conflict, and the de-


struction of Christ’s foes; and in verses 11-15 we have
the account of the General Judgment.
We contend that if those parts of Scripture which
we think are figurative or symbolical are taken liter-
ally, they clash with those which all admit must
be understood literally; but if they are taken as figures
or symbols, there is no disagreement or difficulty.
When Jesus spoke of “ eating His flesh and drinking
His blood ” they murmured at Him, and He said, “ It
is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth no-
thing. The words that I speak unto you are spirit
and are life ” (John vi. 63).
It seems to me that the pre-millennial view is verv
similar to that held by the disciples before the day
of Pentecost. They were for ever thinking of a tem-
poral, personal reign, and the high positions they were
to occupy, and the important part they were to play
in it. They disputed by the way which should be
the greatest. Two of them asked that they might
sit, one on Christ’s right hand and the other on His
left, in His Kingdom. The last question they asked
before He ascended up on high was, “ Wilt Thou at
this time restore the kingdom to Israel?” And He
was for ever correcting and teaching them, “ The
Kingdom of God cometh not with observation ”; “the
Kingdom of God is within you ”; “My Kingdom is
not of this world.” His Kingdom is a spiritual king-
dom; He began to set it up and establish it while here;
it came with great power on the day of Pentecost.


and has been growing, and will grow, until the stone
cut out of the mountain without hands shall fill the
whole earth. For this He teaches us to pray, “ Thy
Kingdom come.” Christ is now on His throne,
seated at the right hand of the Majesty on high. When
He had made purification for sin, and ascended into
heaven, the Father said, “ Sit Thou on My right hand
until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool.” The
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, and then
shall Christ come. Pre-millennial writers teach that
Christ’s reign has not yet begun; read Matt, xxiii. 13.
Luke vii. 28, xvi. 16, xvii. 20, 21, Heb. xii. 26, Col. i. 13
Rom. xiv. 7, and it will be seen that such teaching
is not according to God’s Word.
SECTION VI.
STRANGE INTERPRETATIONS.
I confess that I find it difficult to read many of the
books and addresses advocating the pre-millennial
view, and more difficult still to understand them. They
seem to me such a jumble; prophecy added to pro-
phecy in the strangest way, and with such, to me.
unaccountable interpretations of God’s Word. This
may by some be attributed to my little intelligence,
or my need of the light of the Spirit; but so it is, and


it is a puzzle to me how anyone can be influenced by
them. In an address lately delivered by an eminent
man in England, he said, “ Now in the 17th chapter of
St. Matthew we have one of God’s pictures of the
second coming of Jesus Christ. In the last verse but
one of the 16th chapter our Lord says, ‘ The Son of
Man shall come in the glory of His Father with His
angels, and then shall He reward every man according
to his works.’ Then in the first verse of the 17th
chapter we read, ‘ And after six days.’ In six days
God remade the heavens and the earth. These six
days of reconstruction and the seventh day of Sab-
bath are, I believe, a pattern of the world’s history.
Taking a thousand years for a day we may therefore
expect that at the end of the six thousand years there
will be a thousand years’ Sabbath, the millennial reign
of the Lord Jesus on earth. At the end of six days
Adam appeared, and Eve was very soon with him. At
the end of six thousand solar years Christ will appear
and will bring His bride with Him.”
Now, I ask, where is there in God’s Word any foun-
dation for a belief like this, or any authority for making
such statements? Every now and then in the history of
the Church there has been a revival of this theory, and
prophets have appeared fixing the date of the Lord’s
coming, and rejoicing in the expectation of living in
the Millennium; but their prophecies have failed, and
they themselves have passed away. Professor Beet
says, “We are informed that Columbus was a mil-


lenarian, and believed that Christ would come in 150
years from his own day. If so, Columbus was, as the
event proved, in error. And his example is only
a warning to good men not to' write about what they
do not understand.” ’
In the book, “ The Days of the Son of Man,” there
is a passage that has grieved me not a little. It is this:
“ The ordinance of the Lord’s Supper is to be con-
tinued ‘ till He come.’ This was added after He had
gone, in His supplemental instructions, by the Apostle
Paul. But why ‘till He come,’ and not afterwards?
He has Himself supplied the reason. While He is
absent, His deliberate and wilful murder remains un-
avenged, the sentence of judgment by Noah apply-
ing to His blood as well as to any other man’s, only,
of course, with added emphasis proportioned to His
worth, and He designs that His death should be shown
forth ‘ till He come.’ ” I have always regarded the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper as intended to keep
before us the sacrificial death of our Lord, with all
the blessings that flow from it, a commemorative sign
and seal of the covenant of our redemption; but in
the above extract it is put as the remembrance of a
deliberate and wilful murder that is yet unavenged,
reminding me of what we often saw in heathen Fiji—
the dress of a murdered man hung up in the house that
the children might ever see it, and remember the
murder, and seek to have revenge; and not till then
would the dress be taken down. To meet the ob-


jection, “ If the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is
to end, and, as you say, there is to be a dispensation
after the Lord comes, we shall have a dispensation in
which the work of the Cross will be carried on to ac-
complish God’s purposes of grace, and yet have no
sacramental memorial of it,” it is replied, In the dis-
pensation that is to follow the present, provision is
made for the remembrance of the Cross in the instruc-
tions for the re-establishment of the Jewish ritual in
the coming, crowning day. It is fully detailed in the
end of Ezekiel.” So that all in the last chapters of
Ezekiel is to be taken as referring to the Millennium,
and to be taken literally; there will be priests and sac-
rifices of various kinds, and sprinkling of blood, and
circumcision, and all that is now in the Jewish ritual.
SECTION VII.
PRE-MILLENNIAL VIEWS AND THE HOLY
SPIRIT.
I am further opposed to the pre-millennial view be-
cause I regard it as dishonouring the Holy Spirit and
His work. Jesus said of the Holy Spirit whom the
Father would send in His name: “He will abide
with you for ever” (John xiv. 16). “It is expedient
for you that I go away, for if I go not away, the Com-


forter will not come; but if I depart, I will send Him
unto you ” (John xvi, 7). “And He, when He is
come, will convict the world in respect of sin
and of righteousness and of judgment ” (John xvi. 8).
All that has been done since in the salvation of man
has been the work of the Holy Spirit, and all in the fu-
ture in the way of conversion of sinners and the sanc-
tification of believers will be His work. “Go ye, there-
fore,” said Jesus, “ and make disciples of all the na-
tions.” But how are they to do it? “Ye shall re-
ceive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon
you ” (Acts i. 8). What glorious promises we have
in God’s Word with reference to the future! Isaiah
xxxv., lx. 3-5, ii. 4-18, Mai. i. 11, Psa. ii. 6-8, and
many others. And how is all this to be accom-
plished? Read Isaiah xxxii. 15, xl. 1,3, Ezek. xxxix
2 9> Joel ii. 28-32. This last promise began to be
fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, and how glorious
were the results! “ They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.” “ And the same day there were added unto
them about three thousand souls” (Acts ii. 4, 41)
Then we read, “ The number of the men was about
five thousand (Acts iv. 4)- Then, “ Believers were
the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men
and women (Acts v. 14). “The Spirit was poured
out upon Cornelius and his friends, the first fruits of
the Gentiles ” (Acts x.). Since then how often have
the mighty workings of the Holy Spirit been given for
the conversion of sinners and the purifying of be-


lievers. And if the Church were only fully right, and
faithfully witnessing for Jesus, there would be a con-
stant fulfilment of the promise, and signs and wonders
would follow.
But the promise is, “ I will pour out My Spirit
upon all flesh ” —the entire human race. So that
we have the command to “ go and make disciples of
all the nations,” and the promise of the outpouring of
the Spirit “ upon all flesh.” The promise has not yet
been fulfilled to its utmost extent, but it shall be; and
then by the preaching of the glorious Gospel in de-
monstration of the Spirit and of power, the blessed
state of things referred to by the prophets shall be
fully- realised.
Now, I ask, Does not anything that speaks of the dis-
pensation of the Spirit as a failure dishonour Him. J
But this is what pre-millenarianism does. In the
“ Days of the Son of Man ” we are told that the pre-
sent dispensation is “a kind of parenthetical one”;
that “ the object of the dispensation is, as to the results
of the Gospel, to gather out the elect of God ”; and
that “ this is not merely man’s day, but Satan’s day.”
In his book on the Second Coming, D. L. Moody
says: “ I do not find any passage in which God says
the world is to grow better and better, and that Christ
is to have a spiritual reign on the earth of a thousand
years; but I find the world will grow worse and worse,
The world is getting darker and darker,”


SECTION VIII.
THE PRE-MILLENNIAL THEORY AND
EVANGELISTIC WORK.
I am also opposed to this theory because I be-
lieve it is calculated to paralyse effort in the great
soul-saving work. How can it be otherwise if ir.
teaches that the world is getting worse and worse,
darker and darker, and must continue to do so? 1
know that some who hold this view are earnestly and
successfully working for the conversion of sinners;
but to me the certain tendency of the theory is to
lead those who really believe it to dwell almost ex-
clusively on it, and to teach little else, and this with
the hope of gathering in a few only —the elect —be-
fore the Lord comes. With what heart can any man
labour if things are only to get worse and worse? And
how can he pray? The Lord has given the promise
that He will pour out His Spirit upon all flesh; and we
are exhorted in i Tim. ii. 1-4 to pray for “ all men,”
“ for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Saviour, who will have all men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth.” But how
can anyone pray in faith for this outpouring of the
Spirit if he believes the promise cannot be fulfilled?
Are not many to-day working in connection with mis-


sions with the idea that the Gospel must be preached
among all nations before the end shall come, but.
that it must be preached only for a witness, that is all,
not that the nations are to be converted and male
disciples? For how can they, with their views, look
for the Spirit to make the world better? I have heard
a minister say when speaking at a missionary meet-
ing, “ It is not our work to get sinners converted,
but to prepare the bride for the coming of the Bride-
groom.”
The Rev. Principal Brown, D.D., of Aberdeen,
writes, “ My dear friend, Mr. Andrew Bonar, says,
‘ The Gospel is the instrument in God’s hands for con-
verting the world —it will always be the one instrument
in the Spirit’s hand. Yet He does not design so to
use it at present, in this dispensation that precedes the
Lord’s coming, and to look for it before that is a
visionary hope.’ And he has heard missionaries
regret deeply that the Church at home should be
dazzled by the vain hope of conversions on a grand
scale. ‘lf the missionary would see that the gather-
ing out of the elect is his sole hope, he would be far
less disheartened by opposition than when he vainly
expected everv day to see symptoms of national and
universal conversion; and if it would be wrong, griev-
ously wrong, to say that the Gospel is not the instru-
ment in the Lord’s hand for converting the world,
equally wrong is it to say that the Lord is to use i h
at present.’ ”


What teaching is this for the missionary! What
a cutting-off of hope for our poor sin-stricken world!
What extreme Calvinism is here! And all so opposed
to God’s Word, “ Go ye into all the world, and make
disciples of all nations,” and “ I will pour out of My
Spirit upon all flesh.” Talk about missions to “ China’s
millions,” or to “ India’s millions ”! Why, they are.
according to this theory, missions to a select, elect
few only. Will anyone say that such teaching as this
is not calculated to send forth men with contracted
views of the glorious Gospel, and to dishearten and
paralyse those who are labouring to win the world fo~
JeSus?"
To me this is a most painful subject. We believe, so
many of us, that God’s Word teaches that the world is
yet to be converted by the preaching of the Gospel in
power, and in the Holy Ghost, and any theory that is
opposed to this, and is embraced by many Christians,
must, in our view, seriously hinder the work of God.
This, we think, the pre-millennial doctrine is doing,
while it professes to glorify the Lord Jesus Christ.’
There are Christians praying for the outpouring of the
Spirit upon all flesh, and saying that then the word
of the Lord in Ezekiel xxxvi. 23, and John xvii. 21, 23,
shall be fulfilled, who are yet at the same time teach-
ing that this cannot be done till Christ comes again
to subdue His enemies and reign visibly on the earth.
a In “ The Tongue of Fire,” the Rev. W. Arthur says.
We do not mean to hold any controversy with those


who have deliberately adopted the view that the
Christian dispensation is a kind of interlude between
the Lord’s lifetime upon the earth and a future earthy,
reign, meanwhile, bearing witness in His name, a wit-
ness for the conversion of a few, and the condemnation
of the many. We leave them with the praise of being
perfectly consistent in expecting small results from the
preaching of the Gospel; and with the,responsibility
of looking on that Gospel in a light that warrants
little faith.” “The difference between preaching
the Gospel with a full expectation of doing no more
than saving small companies of saints from amidst
multitudes of sinners, on whose shipwreck no influence
is to be exercised beyond holding them a light to
sink by, and of looking upon every converted man as
one rescued from a common danger, who is imme-
diately to join in rescuing the rest, is such that, in one
case, when a little is accomplished, it is looked upon
as what the Gospel was sent to do; while in the other
case, every little is taken as but an earnest of the great,
and the great as an earnest of the universal. While
we aim at few we shall win but few; for that our suc-
cesses shall take their proportions from our faith is
the universal law of the service of Christ. Should
it be true that the grace of God, which has appeared
to us, is really ‘ good tidings ’ for every creature; that
He does mean that literally every creature should
hear it from the lips of His servants, that literally the
whole earth should be filled with the knowledge of the


Lord; should all this be true, and we spend our
strength in observing the clouds, and the judgments,
and the trumpets, telling those who are calling the na-
tions that they may call, but they will accomplish little
thereby; as far as in us lies stealing the nerve from their
arm and the fire from their voice; should we in the
midst of this die, and find ‘ ages to come ’ yet advan-
cing, then, perhaps, we might feel as if the Scripture
had been neglected by us, which says, ‘ He that obser-
veth the wind shall not sow, and he that regardeth the
clouds shall not reap.’ Futurity, judgments, and
providential designs lie within the unshared province
of God; and none need make it his chief concern to
settle or to ascertain them. A world of sinning and
suffering men, each one of them my own brother, calls
on me for work, work, work. I may trust the future,
and the time of restoring Israel, to better hands than
mine.”
These are wise and weighty words of a master
in Israel that should be well pondered by all.
I cannot help thinking that the old severe Calvinist
view that some few are chosen to be saved, and the
rest left to the wrath to come, is at the root of this
theory, and I am afraid that unfaithful Churches may
find in it a refuge, and be for ever waiting for Christ
Himself to come and do the work He has given us to
do, by the preaching of the Word with the power of
the Holy Ghost. if the Church were only filled with
the Spirit, and witnessing for Jesus as she ought to


do; did we all return to the simplicity of the Christian
life in the first days, and were we all endued with
Pentecostal power, what triumphs of the Gospel w;
should see! Thank God the day will come when Zion
shall arise, and shake herself from the dust, and put
on her beautiful garments; when the showers and
floods of blessings shall come upon her; when the
power of evil shall be restrained, and Satan bound;
when the man of sin, the beast, the false prophet, shall
be cast down; when the fulness of the Gentiles shall
be brought in, and the Jews shall look upon Him
whom they pierced, and mourn; when Christ’s King-
dom shall extend until all shall know the Lord .from
the least to the greatest, and the Millennium, the
thousand years of glorious success and triumph, shall
come. How long that will last who can tell? If
a year in another place means 360 years, as we are
told it does, why should not a prophetical year, or
360 prophetical days, mean in this place 360 ordinary
years, and 1,000 prophetical years 360,000 ordinary
years? That would manifest the long-suffering of
God, as in 2 Peter iv. 9, and millions upon millions
would then be converted, and Jesus would see of the
travail of His soul and be satisfied.
FALSE VIEWS OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE
PRE-MILLENNIAL THEORY.
Much is said of the blessed influence which the
pre-millennial theory has upon the Christian in leading


him to seek that holiness without which no man shall
see the Lord, and to be ready every moment for His
Lord’s coming; and the powerful influence it has in
stimulating him to labour earnestly for his coming
Lord; but I ask every unprejudiced Christian to say
which must have the greater influence on the believer:
the pre-millennial theory which teaches that the Lord
will come before the Millennium, personally and visibly
to reign with His saints on earth for a thousand years,
and that He may come at any moment —a theory
held by some from the beginning, who have expected
to be in the Millennium, but who have died like others
—a theory opposed to the great majority of Christians,
among whom, all surely will allow, are many of emi-
nent piety, learning, and experience; or the post-mil-
lennial doctrine that at death, which we know may
come at any moment, true believers will be received by
Jesus, and be for ever with the Lord; that when He
cones to judgment He will bring with Him all who
are asleep in Him, and that then their bodies shall
be raised, and they shall be glorified together with
Him? What a glorious hope is this! Which will
more powerfully influence the worker in the cause of
Christ: the doctrine which teaches that the dispensa-
tion of the Spirit is a mere interlude, intended only fo“
the gathering in of the elect —that the world must get
worse and worse, since it is not intended that the
Kingdom of Christ should grow and be extended by
the preaching of the Word, and the outpouring of the


Holy Spirit; or the post-millennial view that Jesus
Christ gave Himself a ransom for all; that God’s will
is that all should be saved, that the Gospel is “ good
news” for every creature, and must be preached to
all, and that the promise is that God will convert the
world by the preaching of the Word and the coming of
the Holy Ghost?
SECTION IX.
WHEN WILL CHRIST RECEIVE HIS PEOPLE
TO HIMSELF?
The name of the parties holding different views
on the Second Coming among the pre-millenarians
is legion, for they are many. Hence it is difficult
to say what individuals believe; but the theory gener-
ally adopted is that “ there is a calling for the Church
to future heavenly glory, as there will be when the
Church era is ended by the closing of the present dis-
pensation, another calling to Israel as a nation, to
earthly rule, and temporal power and supremacy”;
that the great object of the preaching of the Gospel
is to gather out from the world all the elect, and that
when the last one of the elect is gathered, the Lord will
come and remove the Church from earth to heaven.
Some believe in this coming of Christ who do not
4


believe in the personal reign and the setting up of an
earthly throne in Jerusalem. Some say that this
removing of the Church will be the first act of the
Lord when He returns; while others contend that it
will be a separate, distinct coming, known only by the
Church that is removed, and that it may take place any
moment. This is called the rapture of the saints.
To prove this, many passages of Scripture are quoted,
some of which we will examine. One or two we have
already referred to on another point:—
1 Thess. iv. 11-17. The pre-millenarian view is
that Christ will come to raise His people and remove
them to heaven, that the dead in Christ will rise before
the rest of the dead; that then they, with all living
believers, will be caught up to be with Christ; and
that after the great tribulation Christ will come in
glory, with all His saints, to reign on the earth a thous-
and years. But Paul’s teaching on the above pas-
sage is that when Christ comes, He will bring all
who sleep in Him with Him; that the dead in Christ
shall rise first—that is, before the living are caught up
—and that then they all shall be caught up
together to meet the Lord in the air, and be ever with
the Lord. There is surely nothing at all in the pas-
sage to indicate that there will be any special coming
of the Lord to receive the saints, separate from the
great judgment day.
2 Thess. i. 1-3. Pre-millenarians say that “in the
first verse Paul speaks of the rapture, the coming of


the Lord, and our gathering together unto Him; and
in the second verse he speaks of the Revelation, or
day of the Lord ”; and that “ the failure to make this
distinction has led to great confusion among commen-
tators on this subject.”
This is a good specimen of how some pre-mille-
narian writers deal with Scripture; they interpret it to
support their own theory, and charge commentators
who have argued that the Apostle, in these verses, re-
ferred to one and the same event, with “ making Scrip-
ture contradict itself.”
If there were no theory to support, surely everyone
would admit that the Apostle in these verses refers to
one and the same event. He begins with, “ Now,
we beseech you, brethren, touching the coming of
our Lord,” and then exhorts them not to be troubled
by the thought that the day of the Lord was at hand.
Rev. xx. i-io. Pre-millenarians contend that a
literal resurrection is referred to here. I confess that
there are some things in this passage hard to be under-
stood; but the theories of the pre-millenarians do not
lessen, but greatly increase, the difficulty. To begin
with the first three verses. How can what is there
written be taken literally? An angel coming down
with a real key of the bottomless pit, and a real chain
to bind the foul spirit, and cast him into the abyss,
and shut him up for a thousand years. And if these
unmistakable symbols are not to be taken literally,
why should others equally figurative be so taken.


Jesus said, “ The hour cometh in which all that are
in the tombs shall hear His voice, and shall come forth ;
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done ill. unto the resurrection ot
judgment.” That is clear, there can be no mistake
about it, and no twisting or turning of it will make it
teach anything but a simultaneous rising of the just
and of the unjust. With it also agree so many
other parts of God’s Word. But this passage in Rev.
xx. is a vision in which in a symbolical representation
was shown to the Apostle John the things that should
come to pass. In the vision, the first thing is the
binding of Satan, which, as I have shown in another
chapter, must surely mean the restraining of evil or
the Evil One, the binding of the strong man that
Jesus speaks of. Then John sees Jesus reigning a
thousand years, not as an earthly king, but reigning
in the hearts of the vast multitudes that now bow to
His sway. Then he sees the martyrs living and
reigning with Christ. By the preaching of the glori-
ous Gospel in the power of the Holy Ghost, evil and
the Evil One have been driven back and restrained,
and wonders and signs wrought in converting and
sanctifying the people, and the workers with Christ
in the Church, influencing and ruling the world, are
like the fully consecrated, self-sacrificing, wholly de-
voted martyrs who sealed the truth with the r
blood; they are living over again in these their worthy
successors.


We read elsewhere that the disciples asked Jesus,
“ Why say the scribes that Elias must first
come? And Jesus said, Elias truly shall first
come, and restore all things; but I say unto you that
Elias is come already. Then the disciples under-
stood that He spake unto them of John the Baptist.”
Jesus showed the Apostle John in vision that the mai-
tyrs live and reign in the Millennium with Christ,
meaning men having the martyr spirit. “ But the rest
of the dead lived not again until the thousand years
were finished.” No men of their spirit are influencing
the world at this glorious time seen by John; they live
not till, at the end of the thousand years, Satan is
loosed, his power is revived; then they live —itheir spirit
and work —and there is widespread apostacy, and
a fearful conflict, in the midst of which the great white
throne descends and Christ comes to judge the world.
In opposition to this, pre-millenarians point to certain
texts where the resurrection is referred to, and ask,
Are we not told in Heb. xi. 35 of a ‘'better 'resurrec-
tion” which must mean this in Rev. xx.? Read the
previous part of the verse and it is all plain. “Women
received their dead raised to life again, and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.” A better resurrection
than that of the children of the Shunammite and the
widow of Sarepta; these obtained a resurrection to life
in this world for a While, but the martyrs desired
a resurrection to eternal life, which is far better.


But did not Paul say, “ If by any means I may
attain unto the resurrection of the dead”? Yes, he
did, but what does he mean? He speaks of himself
as running a race—pressing forward to the mark, the
prize, the crown of life which he knew he could only
obtain at the resurrection. There are other passages
often referred to by our pre-millennial friends whir'
we think give no more support to their views tha
those we have examined. There is, however, one
more text to which I must refer.
John xiv. i, 3. No one can say that there is any-
thing here to teach that Christ will come visibly and
personally to reign on earth for a thousand years;
but it is often quoted to prove that He will come before
the Millennium to remove His Church to heaven.
But the question is, What did Jesus mean? And how
did the disciples understand what He said? We learn
this from His general teaching, and from what the dis-
ciples taught. Jesus told them that He would come
in the glory of the Father with His holy angels, and
then render to every man according to his works;
that in the time of harvest He would say to the reapers,
Gather up first the tares, and bind them in bundles
to burn them, but gather the wheat into My barn; that
when He came He would receive the righteous into
His joy, and banish the wicked info eternal punish-
ment. The disciples taught that He would come to
judge the world, the quick and the dead; that we must


all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; thai
when He comes He will punish those who know not
God, and be glorified in His saints; that the day of
the Lord will be the day of judgment and perdition of
ungodly men, and that we must be diligent that we
may be found of Him, in peace, without spot and
blameless.
From all this we conclude that Jesus Christ re-
ferred to His coming in the day of judgment to pub-
licly acknowledge His people before an assembled
world, and receive them into glory everlasting.
But did not Jesus receive these disciples when they
died? And has He not since received millions more?
Pre-millenarians often say that death is not the coming
of Jesus—that at death the believer goes to Jesus;
Jesus does not come for him. In his little book on
the “ Second Coming,” Mr. D. L. Moody writes.
“ Some people say this passage (Matt. xxiv. 44) refers
to death. But the Word of God does not say it
means death. Death is an enemy, but the Lord has
the keys of death. He has conquered death, hell, and the
grave, and at any moment He may come to set us free
from death and destroy our last enemy for us. Christ
is the Prince of Life; there is no death where He is.
Death flies at His coming; dead bodies spring to life
when He touches them. There was a time when I
used to mourn that I should not be in the Millennium,
but now I expect to be in the Millennium.” What
does Mr. Moody mean? Most pre-millenarians be-


lieve that all who look for the Lord’s return will be
with Him in the Millennium; for though He will first
come to remove His Church from earth to heaven,
yet when, after the great tribulation, He comes in
glory to reign, He will bring all His saints with Him.
Mr. Moody must therefore mean that he expects to
live on till Christ comes. And so have a good many
more, but they are gone. A dear friend of mine,
who is a man of God, writing to me on this subject,
says, Great harm is done by the theory which ex-
cites expectations that have not been, and are not
likely to be, gratified. It is a theory which has been
revived again and again, yet those who have most
firmly and enthusiastically believed in it, and have been
hourly expecting the personal coming, have died dis-
appointed men, and they are dying still. It is a pa-
thetic fact.”
It is true the Bible does not say that death
is Jesus coming; but it does say that at death He is
there to receive us. The Christian is united to Christ,
has Christ in Him the hope of glory, and, dying in the
Lord, He who has been with him all the way does
not leave him there, but gives him glorious victory
over the last enemy, and then receives him to Himself,
Dying Stephen, when he fell beneath the shower of
stones, cried, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” Paul
says, “ Absent from the body, present with the Lord.”
These comforting words of Jesus have been applied
with power to the hearts of many dying saints, and


they have testified that He has been true and faith-
ful to His promise. “ Oh,” said a dying young
woman some time ago in the Ballarat district, “ I
thought that He would send an angel for me, but
He has come Himself, and brought an angel with
Him.”
No, death is not the coming of the Lord, but the
Lord comes at death to receive the happy spirit, and,
as on the day of the Lord’s personal coming to judge
the world, the living believer shall be removed from
all the trials and sorrows of this life, and shall be with
Jesus, so is it with dying believers now; they depart
and are with Christ, and when He comes to judgment
He will bring them with Him.
The preparation necessary for the coming of our
Lord, everyone must admit, is the preparation neces-
sary for the dying hour; and that is to “ be found in
Him, not having a righteousness of mine own, even
that which is of the law, but that which is through faith
on Christ.” He who looks for Christ’s coming looks for
Him as he will have to meet Him when He comes to
be our judge, for he knows that as he is at death,
so will he be in the judgment of the great day. Can it
be said of him who does this—is living to God, and is
ready to depart, being in Christ —that he has no blessed
hope, that he does not look for and love his Lord’s
appearing? Or that he suffers loss by dying? I
know some men say so; but does the blessed Lord?
Hear the answer from His own Word, “ To die is


gain.” “To depart and be with Christ- is far better.”
The dead in Christ are with Him now, shall be with
Him when He comes in glory, and shall be with Him
long as eternal ages roll.
In Heb. ix. 28 we are told that “ unto them that
look for Him shall He appear the second time with-
out sin unto salvation,” and any theory that makes
this second coming to mean a personal and visible
coming of Christ before the Millennium to reign on
earth with His saints for a thousand years, cuts off all
those who do not thus look for Him. Many would
shrink from saying that, but some do not hesitate to
say it. I was once told by a pre-millenarian that I
could not be among those first admitted to the mar-
riage-feast because I did not hold this view. To all
such I say, “ I know that my Lord is with me now;
He dwells in my heart; and He has said, ‘ I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee/ so that if what you say is
true, He will break His own promise to me, and can
never again be called ‘ True and faithful.’ But that
can never be. Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but His sure word of promise shall never fail.”
No one can take from me the blessed hope I have
that I shall not only be glorified with Jesus when He
comes to judge the world, but that whenever death
comes to me He will be there to receive me. I know
not what others think and feel, but I could not face
death if I did not know that Jesus was there to go
with me through the valley and receive me at the last.


It satisfies all the earnest longing's of my heart to know
that then I shall be with Him where He is, that when
He comes in glory to judge the world, He will bring
me with Him, will raise my body and make it like
unto His own most glorious body, and that then I shall
enter into His joy and sit down on His throne. So
I will go on my happy way rejoicing, “looking for the
blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our
great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, to Whom be
the glory for ever and ever. Amen.”


Printed by T. Shaw Fitchett, IC9 Queen Street, Melbourne.


NOTES.




