

THE MYSTERIES AND MISERIES
OF
SCRIPOPOLIS:
An Account of a Week in Sandburst.
BY DEMONAX.
A WORD OF EXPLANATION.
I KEEP a boarding-house. Soma time
ago a rather respectable-looking man
came to my house, and took up his abode as a
boarder. Ho had only a carpet-bag. He said
he came from Sandhurst. I liked the man well
enough. At the end of the week I asked him
if he would be good enough to pay his board ?
He replied, most, surely he would be happy to
do so, but he had not had his bank account
transferred, so he would ask me to delay until
that was effected. I did so. Strange to say, a
few days afterwards he did not come do his
breakfast. I called him. He was not in, He
had vamosed. He left behind him nothing but
a heap of manuscript, which I had a mind, so
vexed was I, to throw into the fire. My son
Tom, who is proof-reader on the “ Thundering
Rag,” begged me, however, to give them to him,
and, I did so. He read them, and was so struck
with their excellence that he persuaded me to
peruse them. When I did so, a happy thought
struck me. Why not publish them and get
back my money? My wife said it would be
throwing good money after bad, but Tom and I
were of a different opinion, and the result you
see before you. I wanted to expunge some
rather broad parts, but Tom dissuaded me, for,
said he, the spirit of the satire would be en-
tirely spoiled, and the point lost. I also wanted
to put in fictitious names, where real ones were
used, but Torn again got the better of me, for, he
observed, the point lay in the openness of the
thing. So we have made no alteration, and
submit the work as Demonax wrote it. The
author’s evident intention is, to hit hard at the
vices and follies of Sandhurst and Melbourne
life, and he is compelled to descend occasion-
ally. He calls a spade a spade; that is the
whole matter. I dare say, if the publics like
the work, he will not. be backward in claiming
his share, and giving to the world another book
about Melbourne itself.
Yours truly,
JOHN STARVALL.
Hush Lane,Temperance Boarding-house.
P.S.—-I strongly suspect that Demonax is not
altogether what he makes himself out, but uses
the character he represents as a vehicle for
satire on Verandah men.
MARKING OUT THE GROUND.
I give an Account of Myself, which it Is to be hoped will be interesting at the price.
KIND READER, your beloved friend, the
author of the following piece of wisdom, is
a gentman, who, for some time past, has lived
the life of a Melbourne Corinthian, having gra-
duated at the Ballarat Corner. There, at one
time, your humble servant was a speculator of
considerable extent (five feet four), and,in his
day, did many excellent things. He played
her and 100, and had a Lais of his own. He
was looked upon as “good.” But, alas the
evil days came when people buttoned up their
breeches’ pocket, and the banks began to frown
upon your friend. He addressed several short
epigrammatic letters to his banker, beginning
“ Pay to," but that worthy evidently thought his
notes a bore, and checked him by writing on the
other side “N.S.F.” Your obedlenk saw that
the days of the Corner were numbered for a
while, so far as his class was concerned, and
with the remnants Of his Sintered fortune (a
shirt and an old hat) he retired to the Metro-
polis The buttermen have since dealt exten


sively in his autograph at Ballarat. In Mel-
bourne the ways of the people appeared vain,
and they did not properly appreciate yours
truly. He paid numerous visits to a relative,
whose coat of arms is the Three Golden Balls,
and sought secluded paths. Matters were made
more difficult by the strange conduct of certain
landlords, who appeared to think more of his
room than of hi s company. He saw this with sor-
row, and his noble soul revolted; so he thought
to himself it would he as well to try the new El
Dorado, Sandhurst. One thing was certain, he
had nothing to lose, and there might be some-
thing to gain. So, one fine Monday morning
early, he departed for the great metropolis of
quartz and scrip; and of his adventures, this
humble pamphlet is a description. The writer:
must premise that the reader must not be sur-
prised if he does find anachronisms anti inoon-;
gruities, such as events occurring far apart being*
jumbled together—the author never did care'
much about trifles; and, besides, since his visit®
to Sandhurst his ideas of mmmi and tnum have t
been lamentably confused. So the reader musts
take everything as it comes, and he thankful.
GETTING THE LEASE.
I depart from Melbourne, and seek Pros'll Fields and Pastures New—Am nearly turned into an Amphibian at ICyneton—
Am charmed with Sandhurst, vl mvviso— Gaze with rapture on the Scene of my contemplated Exploits.
I LEFT Melbourne by the early train, in a
state of stupefaction. Ten is generally my
hour for rising, and to get up with the lark was
no lark for me. That bird—the acclimatised
specimen—is very foolish to rise so early. It is
a fault in his education, and as English youths
when transplanted to Australian soil lose so
quickly all they have been taught about morals,
I think the lark should conveniently forget as
well. It is convenient to forgot at times. Yet I
confess there are advantages in connection with
rising early, particularly if you are about to quit
a city whore you have some enemies. Few
people care to bo about when the first train
starts, so you escape some affectionate farewells.
All I know about my departure from Melbourne
waa the being in a mental and real fog, through
which loomed my own condition and the linea-
ments of the huge city, as the sun fought with
the offspring of the night. A great sea of grey
fog appeared to mo, out of which arose the spires
of the churches, as if ascending to Heaven, and
the chimneys of the factories, sending forth
columns of smoke that hung in the air. The
great hive waa awaking to begin the struggle of
life once more. Away our train sped like a
living thing, adding its puffs of smoke to the
other columns the sun and wind were beginning
to dispel. Away, away, through a horrid ditch,
surrounded by houses—proof of the wisdom of
the city. On, on, through scattered villages, out
into the Kcilor Plains, from brick and stucco
into the verdure of nature, into the sweet per-
fume of the wilds. Gradually I recovered under
the influence of the morning ah - , and gazed with
pleasure on the ever shifting panorama presented
to my view. The beautiful hills and dales about
Riddell's Creek and Sudbury, covered with ver-
dure, soothed my eye for a moment and then
were gone. Mount Macedon, timber covered,
varied the picture, and then came woody scenery,
suggesting ideas of forestry, of pastorals, and
occasionally flocks of sheep appeared in the dis-
tance dqtting the green herbage. Farms, too,
canjfl, in , sight, with all their wealth of vivid
green, I asked myself how I would like to
iiepart from the fevered and troubled existence I
bad led and take Up a block, build a homestead,
and raise children and wheat. My own fireside,
. my own farmyard, &o. Alas 1 one clisagreeahlo
spot blurred the whole —I would have to work.
That settled the farm business. Work, indeed I
such a word was not in my vocabulary. An
inspiration seized me at that moment, and I
penned the following ballad, or rather I pen-
cilled it:—
THE FARMER AND THE DEVIL.
[The following is an attempt to versify, with
some alterations, an old German story, and the
writer presents it to the author of “ The History
of the Devil,” as an incident which escaped that
gentleman’s attention. He regrets he is unable
to state on authority as to whether the devil got
out of the predicament in which he is loft nt the
close of the story, but, from, the general predis-
position of the people of the present day to evil,
thinks’it highly probable.]
John Smith was a selector poor,
With barren, rooky land,
One half a cold and' dreary moor,
The other stones and sand.
John Smith he took his lonely walk
About his only field,
To view the wheat whose withered stalk
Foretold a scanty yield.
Just when he to a headland came
There met his eyes a fire,
A heap of ruddy coals—no flame—
John felt himself perspire ;
For squatted on the red-hot heap
There sat a little chap,
Apparently in study deep—
A small spit in his lap.
His skin was black as negrohend,
His eyes like meteors shone,
And easy as on downy bed
Ho seemed the coals upon.
“Good evening, John,” he said quite blaiSft
“It's rather cold and wet;
The season's bad for moory land,
At least it has been yet,”
“Your words are true,” John softly said, {..jw
“Although I feel surprised, w
I thought your studies higher laid— Sfej
At least so I surmised,


Though cold and wet the season be,
I think you need not fear;
Your seat is warm enough, I see,
Even for this time of year.”
“It’s warmer far below, my friend,”
Replied the jolly sprite ;
“ Hence ’tis our way we hither wend,
And seek your sun’s cold light.
“ This laud has been unkind to you,
Though you’ve worked like a horse;
And ’twill, no matter what you’ll do,
Until you are a corse,
“ Unless a bargain wo can hit,
Which I will now propose—
Will you not take by me a seat —
“No, sir, not if I knows.”
“ Well, here’s the plan ; this is my ground,
My title none can try ;
Here by my sprites I’m al ways found,
When 1 wanted’ for game high.
“ Now, half by right you know is mine,
Half shall belong to you ;
If you consent—be quick—l dine
On misers’ souls at two.
“ One wish yon may have, name it now,
And yours at once Twill be;
No parchment business or such row' —
Relics of Gramarye."
John Smith, he was a cunning blade,
Deep as the sprite was he;
The chances iu bis mind ho weighed,
And thus he spoke with glee :
“I give consent i£ you will cast
The half that you will have;
My wish ; to whom I say ’stick fast,’
They’ll stick like corse in grave.”
“Agreed,” the little fellow cried,
And she 1 ho was away;
John nothing saw down by his side
Except a lump of: clay.
The harvest passed, the seed-time came,
The plough began to speed ;
While buckling on a horse’s home
John saw his friend in need.
Said he with grim and cunning leer ;
“ Good man, how'do you do,
I’ve come to settle for the year
Aud strike the half with you ;
“AVhatever grows above the ground,
That all, list now', is miuo ;
Wbato’er beneath may then be found,
Good fellow', that is thine I”
John winked his eye, but he agreed,
And off the devil wont—
I may remark, with lightning speed,
Leaving a brimstone scent.
The winter fled, the spring came in
And summer followed fast,
The autumn came, the best e’er seen,
The harvest being vast.
The devil flew up to his field,
A merry fiend was he;
“ 0£ wheat I’ll have the biggest yield,
Hoots will liis portion be.”
As round he glanced, dark was hia frown:
But withered tops he saw ;
’Cute John potatoes had put down,
The liend hadn’t even straw.
“ This comes,” said he, 11 of one defect;
Books on this I've not read ;
My library is too select,
At least upon this head.
“ Books agricultural I’ll read,
And weeklies on farm loro;
Where fellows write on land and seed,
Which some folks think a bore.
“ This year I’ll have what grows below,
AVliat grows above you take ;
If yon your tricks this time will show,
Look for the burning lake 1”
Bwitt sped the year, the autumn came,
Ho did the devil, too,
But when tie saw the crop was grain,
He looked exceeding blue.
“ Gome on 1 ” in wrath to John ho cried ;
“If crops I cannot get,
In this at least you can’t deride,
I have your own self yet.”
John Smith ho said, “The journey’s long,
W'c’ll want upon the way;
To go without some food were wrong;
List for a moment, pray ;
While in I hie to got some bread,
Pray mount that peach tree nigh,
And gather fruit—’twill not bo said
That hungry I did die,"
The devil went up like lightning flash
And gathering ho began ;
John cried “ Stick fast”—vain Nick did gnash,
He was like a dead man.
Now John walked off, n happy elf,
And chuckled loud with glee ;
“ I’vc done the oldest cheat himself,
The devil is up A timsb I ”
Kyueton came in view, at least the station,
for there was such a fog on that I never saw the
town. I am told it is very pretty ; I trust so.
When we arrived there was a perfect Scotch
mist and a thick fog, and the wind was cold
enough to cut your nose off. I am told the
Kyuetonians have their fingers and toes webbed,
and are amphibious, and X placed implicit faith
in the statement, for I never heard of anyone
worthy of credence who deposed to passing the
town in dry weather. AVe had breakfast bore —
at least we paid for it. lam not going to talk
about the quality of the refreshments, because
I have in my mind’s eye the fate of the editor
of the Heathoote paper who found fault with
Stemhel’s coffee when he was lessee, and bad
afterwards to find fault with Judge Williams.
Oue thing, they appear to value their articles at
a proper rate. After passing Tarodale,we began
to smell the goldfields, and soon Castl emaine
appeared, a pretty town if it were not for the
dissections of mother earth in all directions.


The country began to be sterile as a desert, and
we knew we were nearing a great metallic
centre. Gold appears to have the same effect
on the growth of grass and herbs in nature as
it has in the destruction of all the kindlier
feelings and affections in the heart of man.
“Where gold is to be found in the earth she fails
to produce the green herb, and dwarfed bushes
and gnarled trees abound, just as in the heart
whore gold has the mastery everything is
dwarfed and distorted. But a truce to moral-
ising. We were nearin'g the great 131 Dorado,
the golden gate to happiness, the centre of the
earth, according to the Bendigo “Advertiser”
and “ Independent.” Who has not dreamed in
their youth of Golconcla, the City of G ems, and pic-
tured it as one blaze of Koh-i-Noora, rubies, and
sapphires, something too splendid for this world.
But, alas for their dreams, they have afterwards
read that the real Golcouda'is a poor ruined
town, adjacent to a region too dreary to de-
scribe. So those at a distance, reading of Sand-
hurst, will, no doubt, picture something very
grand, but woe to them if they attempt to see
the reality. Of all that is hideous, Sandhurst
is the incarnation.
As we passed the Big Hill, a granite range, the
Metropolis of Quartz gradually unfolded itself.
In the midst of dreary hills, on denuded rocks,
is built Sandhurst—or, rather, Sandhurst strag-
gles. Streets of weather-board houses straggle
from one hill-top to another, red-briek houses
rise out of fiery red clay. Once at the Sandhurst
station, the eye rests on nothing but the gal-
vanised iron roofs of houses, their red-brick
sides, and the fearful rod and yellow glare of the
mounds of the departed diggers, with the stacks
of engine chimneys, belching forth smoke, and
ugly poppet-logs. In England they have their
“Black Country,” here we have our “Bed
Country,” On an ugly red hill, on the opposite
side of the creek, is the Great Extended Hustler’s.
Out of that hill hundreds of thousands of pounds
worth of the yellow metal have been got in a
few months, and that life blood has coursed
through the veins of Sandhurst, and made her
what she is. And, in another direction, there is
pointed out to me the tops of the stacks of the
Garden Gully engines, the wonderful reef that
came upon the colony so unexpectedly, and re-
vivified Sandhurst mining men, almost reduced
to their last penny. And away to the south was
shown the place where lies the Golden Fleece,
over which there has been quite as much excite-
ment as anciently there was about the Golden
Fleece of Colchis. I am of the opinion that the real
Golden Fleece was a company of which .Jason
was the projector, and by means.of which lie
fleeced his comrades; he was manager, and
bolted. There were no tug-boats in those days,
and he got off. Away to the west rose the stacks
of the Lazarus (not of Bethany), the Old Oh urn
(too old to recognise me), and the famed Vic-
toria Reef. I could sweep all the famous claims
and reefs at a glance. Sandhurst was all before
me where to choose—who would I honour with
my patronage ? Why, Billy Hefflemnn, of course,
like all my fellow-travellers. So I called a cub,
and “went” for the Shamrock Hotel.
REGISTRATION OF THE COMPANY.
lam Eistonmlcd at the Beauties of Sandhurst—View tlio Beehive, “ a palace ami a chimney on each hand"—l am missed
by my Cahmmi —Honour the Shamrock, unci praise the Girls —Thoughts on the Balcony.
DOWN a dusty and most unsightly tho-
roughfare of one-storied wooden houses,
generally, called Mitchell-street, the cabman
drove us. We swore at the dust, which is red
and suffocating, and is called Fletcher’s mixture,
and asked the cabman if this was Sandhurst.
With a knowing wink he told us to wait. When
we got to an open space, called Charing-cross,
in the centre of which was a most fright-
ful structure that he called a lamp-post, he
appeared to be 'chuckling with glee, and ready
to exclaim—Now, don’t you see our magnificen t
city, the Pride of the North, the centre of the
world? look at its palatial buildings, snuff up its
choice dust, and be struck dumb aud spiiiioated.
I saw a two-storied structure called the Baths
Corner, and a largo three-storied brick build-
ing immediately over a gutter—l beg pardon—
the Bendigo Creek. This latter was Loridan’s
Buildings, which, next to the creek, had tower-
like fronts. I declined talcing a lease of these
towers, the views were too romantic. Before me
was View Point, with some fair stucco buildings,
the View Point Hotel, Oriental Bank, &c. But
the cabman turned the corner sharply, and we
were in Pall Mall. There was a sight for ns 1
Pike’s. Corner is truly a moan one, hut the Bee-
hive is a splendid affair. And now a vision
most unusual presented itself ; not only was the
pavement in front of this building crowded, but,
out to the middle of the street was a crowd,
standing, talking, and now and then darting
about. I can liken it to nothing except the
street in front of the Theatre Royal on Boxing
Night. Indeed, all. the block appeared alive
with people, who on business wore intent. X
rubbed my hands. It was the old Corner again,
on a more extensive scale perhaps, but once
more I was at homo. My spirits, hitherto de-
pressed, rose, and I could have embraced my
bitterest enemy at that moment. We got to the
Shamrock, a fine hotel—indeed, one of the best in
the country. I always get in at the back of a
cab—l had done so ou this occasion—somehow,
in the crowd about the Shamrock, I lost that
cabman ; I am told he missed mo ; so have
many before him. I am afraid they do not think
kindly of me. I entered the hotel with my
portmanteau in my hand. The hotel was
crowded with people. In the lobby, all the por-
ters were taking in the luggage of “commer-
cials,” as they hero designate commercial
travellers. But suddenly a thin, wiry old man,
with dark heard, shaved about the mouth, so
that the beard resembled a frill, and of a Dar-
winian-puzzling physiognomy, rushed up to me


and took my portmanteau upstairs himself, and
then went and booked my room, I wondered
within me who he was ; evidently a sort of
superior janizary of the hotel. But mark my
surprise when I learned he was the great Billy
himself, the proprietor of this hotel, worth
at least £.30,000, and the Albion, &o. X did
wonder. People in Melbourne, worth all that
money, keep carriages, and live in great houses,
but people in Sandhurst appear to live lor
money-making and drinking alone; not that Mr.
Helleruau drinks—he’s the soberest landlord I
ever saw, and the best, too. I wont and had
lunch. It was put down to No. 16. I felt
much obliged to No. 46 for Ms hospitality, and
availed myself of it while in Sandhurst. It
prevented a lot of confusion, and was an ar-
rangement simple and agreeable. I expect No.
16 has had to pay for the honour of my acquaint-
ance, at least I have never troubled myself about
the matter. These things are disagreeable and
spoil digestion.
The Shamrock Hotel has one of the largest
bars I have seen in the colony, and it is generally
crowded in a way that would make Melbourne
hotelkeepers ojoen their eyes. On Saturday
nights there is no getting at it. There is an
inner bar where the select congregate— of course
I patronised it. The diningroom is large, but at
meal times it is always full, and people guzzle
like so many pike. The waiters are nearly all
girls, and it’s a great institution, oven though the
girls are Irish. Short ns was my stay in Scrip-
opolis I recollect with feelings of pleasure the
gentle attentions of Mary (about a dozen), Mag-
gie, Bessie, Nora, Biddy, &o. To paraphrase an
old rhyme;—
Who brought me food with hands so neat?
Who ran for beer with willing feet?
Who smiled at me so sly and sweet?
Why, Mary!
Who stood behind the genteel bar,
And handed me the light cigar,
And gave me gin both strong and sqnar’ 1
Why, Bessie 1
Tes, these dear girls are worth their weight in
gold. Men in this country are too independent
to be waiters. Old John Milton knew the abili-
ties of women in the line when he wrote of the
“ neat handed Phyllis." And now, having had
dinner, and feeling quite pleased with myself, I
strolled on to the splendid verandah, unequalled
in Melbourne, and looked out upon the fair city.
Opposite Pall Mall is Rosalind Park, or the
Iteserve, and here I noticed green for the first
time since I came into the town. It has been
reported to me that spots of verdure are to bo
seen around Sandhurst in winter time, but I
reserve judgment until I see them. In the Re-
serve there are a few spots. There is nothing
“green” about Sandhurst people, although the
Ballarat folks thought so at first. There are also
some lakes or “ dams ” in which the water can
with difficulty he made out, so like is it to the
red clay on the banks. J. B. Thompson, editor
of the 11 Ballarat Courier,” called the water
“ poa-sonp,” and nothing could be more apposite.
The prisoners have made these dams, and I
suspect while they were at work they d d
them often. This is a joke.
Would I spend the remainder of the day
knocking round, or would I boldly go under the
Verandah ? I decided to have the titbit first and
the other dishes after. Besides, I wanted money.
SINKING.
1 survey the Enemy—Eavesdropping likely to turn out profitable—l introduce myself ns a Man of Means to an eager
Broker of the oleaginous class —His warm Friendship at first sight—Purchase of North Mullochs, and virtuous indig-
nation at all Cheats-—Mr. Ivisstoe gives friendly advice, fortunately not acted upon—The Yaluo of a few Words over-
heard “permiscnsly,” £27S 10s.—-I retire in glory.
X ENTERED Scripopolis without a stiver.
The last money I had in the world had
been invested in coffee at Kynoton, I knew no
one in Sandhurst. The simple will ask how I
was jto live. Gentle reader, read and you will
see how the “talent” do this kind of thing.
Mind you, I don’t say it is to bo done now since
the Apfel business.
I strolled carelessly up Pall Mall, with the
dogmje air of a man, nob particularly pressed with
business engagements. Neither was I. I put
my hands in my pockets, too, ns if I wanted to
jingle my money. The effort was not successful.
Money X had not, but money I would have. The
crowd round the Beehive and Victoria was great.
There was some excitement on, I thought. I
questioned a gentlemanly individual as to what
was the great hubbub about. “Ohl it’s not so
much as usual,” was tbe reply, “ things are quiet
to-day. You ought to have seen the groat ex-
citement in October, 1871.” I wished I had. I
passed several little groups. Every word that
reached my ears related to quartz, sinking,
driving, water, good prospects, stone, the reef,
or of that Mud, “ They got it last night,” said
one. “ We've struck water,” said another,
“ Shows gold well,” chimed in a third. “ We’re
down 94 feet,” was the exclamation of a fourth,
and so on. Getting into the crowd further
the talk became a little more business-like.
“ I’ve one hundred Now Ohum and Belle Vue
Railway Reserves at 37a.” “ I’ll take ’em.”
“ Pnps at A 5 17s. 6d.” “ Sell you twenty-five at
£5 13s. 6d.” “No you don’t.” “Oanyou get
me one hundred Kooh and Hildsbraudt’s 7”
“ Yes, if you give me an hour.” “ All right; its
now 3.30.” “ Will you let-me off that Latham
and Watson’s?” “Yes, for £10.” “ All right.”
“ How’s Bxtendecla?” “Rising.” “What about
Koohs?” "Very flat.”
I thought now the best course for me would bo
to march up to the splendid bar, where I saw
quite a crowd smoking and drinking, and talk-
ing to the bnrgirls. X placed myself next to two
indisputably prosperous looking men. You can
so easily tell the prosperous man. He is not to
he mistaken j neither is the unfortunate. They
were in very close confab. I always keep my


eyes and ears open when on the Verandah. You
want your eyes and ears there, I can tell you.
“ I toll you there’s a good chance now,” said
one, in a very low tone, “the manager, Blather-
skite, is going to put in a shot this afternoon,
and if he sees the colour of gold he’ll bring in a
lot of specimens, and then they’re off! like steam.
I’m sure there’ll be specimens.”
11 Ain’t they been done too much?” said the
other, “it’s always an evening spurt now, as if
we was afraid of the light.”
“ Never you mind,” said No. 1, 11 when they see
’em Hying, they’re always on for a spurt, and
we’ll pot a lot of ’em before we’re done, you’ll
see.”
“ How much money will we have to put in ?”
said No. 2.
“Oh 1 about £2OOO a-piooe, £4000; and D. and
E. have agreed to supply the other £4OOO. It’ll
be big this time, £BOOO ought to move a rock.
Although we’ll have to be prepared with £BOOO,
in all likeliness we won’t have to spend a six-
pence, as we can easily sell to-night, if it takes.”
It is unnecessary to say I was all ears. There
was an operation about to be performed. The
public were to be bled. I always like to attend
such operations, and eagerly did I desire to
know the stock the £BOOO was to be expended
upon. I strained my ears to catch the faintest
idea.
“ What’s the price of the North Mulloohs
now ?” asked No. 2.
I was in an ecstaey of expectancy.
“Oh I about 85.," said No. 1. “We’ll soon
send ’em to a pound.”
1 had them, I gloried, I gloated over my dis-
covery. I clutched, in imagination, £ 200 ;
visions of millions rose in my mind. North
Mnllocha were the stock for me. No time was
to be lost.
I noticed a slcek-looking individual at my
elbow, intently inspecting a pocket-book. I at
once put on the man of means.
“ Do you know of any person who has North
Mnllocha for sale?” said I.
The sleek, serpent-looking individual bright-
ened up at once. He surveyed me like a slave-
owner about to purchase a new addition to his
stock.
“ I know of a person who has some,” replied
he.- “Will you wait for five minutes, sir, and
I’ll see him ?”
I drew out my aluminium watch (I had re-
deemed it from my uncle, because a gold watch
is a necessary adjunct to a great speculator), and
he made a dart oil. I could tell at once he had
but started business here, and was just the man
for me, because he would not take too much,
trouble in ascertaining what a customer was,
being too good a gift to he turned away. But
he was a crafty wretch, and selfish, I knew, so I
said I would ho even with him. It turned out
to be tbe other way.
He returned in less than five minutes, bringing
with him a digger-looking person, who appeared
rather eager to sell the- stock. He had two hun-
dred at 9s. I couldn’t give that. A consulta-
tion took place between client and broker, result-
ing in the sale of the two hundred to me at
Bb. 9d, —£87 10s., delivery to take place on Tues-
day, at eleven. I now declared myself a stran-
ger, from Melbourne, come to speculate; and,
after a virtuous outburst of indignation, said I
bad heard of repudiations, and other trickery,
bore, and, therefore, must positively not only
have sale notes, but references also. As I spoke
in a high style both cringed, to me, particularly
the broker, and a very respectable looking per-
son was appealed to, whose name was Solid
Deutscher, and he was witness. That was all
I wanted. Then I told the broker —who I will
call Kisstoe, for want of a stronger' appellative—
that I would take three hundred more. Kisstoe
immediately went searching, and was successful
in “ landing ” the three hundred, at 9s. So far I
had invested £222 lt)s.; at least, others had done
it for me. I took care to seal the bargain as be-
fore. Of course I said I didn’t doubt the honour
of the gentlemen, hut then I was a stranger, and
strangers were so sadly taken ini I ought by
rights to have shouted, but I didn’t. The broker
did, and it amused me to see how the venal
wretch clung to me, because he thought he would
get some pickings. How oily and' affectionate
he was. What fun I had in playing the
grandee.
In talking, the afternoon passed away, and 1
tried to “take in” all the celebrities. I won’t
weary the reader, however, by giving my firs t
impressions; ho will have them when fully
formed, and when I had obtained all the know-
ledge requisite to form estimates of character.
I retired to the Shamrock with my broker, and
feasted with him at the expense of No. 46.
Wo had just quietly finished, and were nib-
bling at celery, when a fellow rushed up to Kiss-
toe and whispered mysteriously. Kisstoe became
greatly excited, then rose, and went outside with
the new comer ; after a little while ho came
and sat down with me, and resumed nibbling as
if nothing had occurred.
“So you mean to try and speculate in our
mines,” said he, quite, unconcernedly, " I can
assure you I’ll do level best for you, if you give
me your business. Allow me to do what I see
will be tbe best. Now, if you’ll take my advice,
you’ll clear out these North Mulloohs at a little
profit, if I can hear of a bargain to-night.
They’re the worst stock in the market, always
being rigged. I might get a buyer, although
they’re not lively. Will you leave them with me
at, say Os. (id. I’ll do level best,”
I am rather too old a bird, I confess, not to be sus-
picious of the obsequious, affectionate gentleman.
Why all the mysterious whispering with the
other individual ? I Informed him I had bought
for a friend, and would not sell except with his
sanction. That stopped him.
We walked down to the Verandah. The gns
was lit, and it presented quite as lively an ap-
pearance ns during the day. X noticed the crowd
was great, and very animated. People flew
about, and pocket-books were being consulted,
I lost my broker. I mildly inquired what was the
matter, of an old gentleman leaning against a post.
“ Why, them d North Mulloohs are flying
again,” said ho, "I could ha’ got ’em at Bs. this
morning ; 1000, if I’d liked."


My heart rose. I confess to palpitations occa-
sionally during the afternoon when I thought
my confabulating friends might have funked, or
the specimens not been forthcoming. Now I
was right. It seemed as if all the blood pent in
my heart had been relieved and rushed through
my system to give it a glorious stimulant.
“ What’s their price now,” said I,
“ Why, I was just offered SOs. 3d.," replied my
friend.
What a leap my heart gave. I saw my re-
spectable friend of the afternoon close to me, a
stolid looking German, who was a tobacconist’s
shopman a year or so ago, but is now reputed to
have thousands, and to be very careful of them
too. However, Mr. Solid Deutsche! appeared
a “ safe” man, so I went up to him and gave
him the selling of the 500 shares. He got 20s.
for them. I am too much of a stoic to go
into estacies, but I did feel rather elevated that
night. I had to ' pay £222 10s., and was to
receive £278 10s, Now, I think £278 10s. is a
good evening’s work. If I had had any money
I would there mid then have got stone blind drunk,
like Johnny of ballad memory, but as I hadn’t I
contented myself with going to the Shamrock,
having a good supper, and going to bed to sleep
and dream of millions of money and cakes of
gold as large as the dome of the Mosque of
Omar.
The Snudlmrst Nimrod appears upon the Scene—"We hunt together after North Old Chinns, and are hunted—The Turn of
the Tide, and the Old Poxes lose their Brush—l get tight, and am taken in hand by a Charitable Friend ns a Specimen
of “ soft" Humanity—l 100, and am looed—“ Ho looed me weel”—A Loo Table, and tho Characters around it—Lon on
tho Ascending Scale —Looed on tho King and Jack—A big “ pot”—Tho “ Force” seeks Explanation—l resolve to
adjourn, to the deep regret of my Friends—Sundry Reprisals—A Dlscurstnn on tho Morality called Hypocrisy—
Other UißCnrsions on my Connection with the " Muddy Gully Journal,” and on Popularity—Visit to the Sandhurst
Hetmre—Humours of Mliss—Bottles begin to fly, when we fly also—Closing Ileflectiuus.
AFTER breakfast next morning my lord
ICisstoe appeared on the scene, and was as
obsequious and affectionate as could be. Ho
handed jno the scrip and took my cheque. The
cheque I drew on a Sandhurst bank, but I crossed
it. My name was going to bo worth something
again. I went to Mr. Solid Dentscher ami
received his cheque, which I duly paid in to my
account, and tho consequence was that before
twelve o’clock there was £278 10a. to my credit!
0 I ye gods 1 why didn’t I draw it, retire to Mel-
bourne, and take a cigar shop, or anything,
instead of folio whig the gay and festive Veran-
dah.
Byron woke one morning to find himself
famous. So did I. Yesterday 1 was as solitary
as the stork in the wilderness, to-day I was
surrounded by friends. My broker had not
been Idle. I found I was put down as the gen-
tleman who had operated on North Mulloohs.
My 600 shares had been multiplied to 5000, my
£278 10s. to something like £2700. “ He’ll be
another Brilliant,” said some, I moved about as
befitted a man of such consequence, and showed
proper contempt for tho brokers. Jemmy Ponis-
tan came up to mo to sec whether I’d buy and
sell, hut I wouldn’t say anything decisive. I’d
wait my time.
Just then a dashing horseman passed the
Verandah at full gallop, attracting all eyes.
“ Who is it I asked. “ Brilliant,” By-and-
by he came up from the Shamrock. I couldn’t
think ho was a scrip man; he looked like a
young country squire, dressed in a tight-fitting
riding suit, that showed the good proportions of
his neat, muscular figure to the greatest advan-
tage. I fancy if I were a girl I would like that
young fellow for a sweetheart, if only for Ms
build. I like to look at a man anyway, and that
tight little fellow’s a man, every inch of him.
He’s worth all the Beehive folks put together.
By this time tho Exchange was going in, I
forgot to tell what the Exchange is ; it’s a select
few who, for £5O each, form a Tammany ring’,
and give the law to the crowd outside. It has
been stated they make quotations, but I do not
think this correct. There’s another Exchange
—the Bendigo Mining Exchange—where every-
thing’s open, and the charge is only £2 25.,
and it’s given the old and exclusive Ex-
change a little knock. There was something
very determined about Brilliant that morning.
“ Wonder if he’s going to be up to hia old
games ?” asked one. “ He’s the chap to move the
market; he’s not afraid, ho goes in to win, and
d it, he triumphs over them by sheer pluck,
He’s a thorough Briton, never afraid.”
I fell into conversation with a party who
was once a miner and groat teetotal spoutor,
now a “big bug” in the mining world, and re-
ported to be iu the good graces of the powers
that be. Ho is a man of politics, and has, with
W. D. C, Denovan,helped to getMaokay in several
times. While conversing with this gentleman I
noticed a commotion, and several persons hurried
down from the place where the Exchange was
sitting. My friend left me at once to ascertain
tho newest tMng in Tammany. So did I, and
I resorted to my broker. He had been smelling
round, and said it was Brilliant. North Old
Chums were “going,” and I ought to slide in.
I did, but to my surprise, I soon found myself the
centre of a knot desirous of “ potting ” me with
North Old Chums. Brilliant was still in the Ex-
change, I did not know what to do, I trembled,
experienced as I was. Then, considering I could
lose nothing, as I would take care to repudiate
if I couldn’t soli without loss, and clear out, I
boldly went into it. I was a buyer at 305., and
they poured 1000 into me. Then Brilliant came
out, and I was a little relieved, for half of the
mob got round him. Both of ua began to bid,
SINKING —CONTINUED,


and the excitement that ensued was intense.
A number of people who had been “potted”
months before, and were glad to get a chance to
sell, crowded round, under the impression that it
was only a spurt of Brilliant’s, and glad to sell a
few while it was on. But soon the news spread
about better stone being got, other buyers besides
Brilliant and I came in, and then the tide turned.
Those who had sold became anxious to get back
their shares. We were surrounded by buyers
now instead of sellers. But we were inflexible,
at least I was. The excitement went on to fever
heat. Men rushed about, and the shares rose to
385., 355, 6d., 365., 365. 6d., 375., 385., 38s. 9d.,
395. 6d., 395. 9d., dOs. It was breathless speed.
But let not the gentle reader bo under the im-
pression that 1 did not sell. Eisstoe was selling
for me after they had got to 36a., while X was
loudly oSering to buy. He had sold all by the
time the reaction set in, I will say that of
Kiastoe, that he was a good broker. I had
seldom passed through such a period of excite-
ment. I hailed dinner with real pleasure, and I
am not ashamed to own that on Tuesday night I
got fairly tight, for a rough calculation had
shown me that I had at least netted about
£IOOO that day. My broker got tight with me,
and nearly stifled me with his embraces. The
“ glorious vintage of champagne” was freely spilt.
A sprightly young broker of my acquaintance,
for I had lots of friends now, proposed to me to
go and have a hand at “loo.” I could have
taken him to my breast, and kissed him for his
own sake. It was my old, my cherished game,
and yet X have an idea that this young gentle-
man did not entertain the best of motives for
my welfare when he proposed the amusement.
He saw I was pretty “ well on,” and, no doubt,
as he was an expert player, he thought there
was a harvest to bo reaped. What a foolish
young fellow he was 1 I’ve played 100 when I
was as tight as a drum, and won, because I was
tight. He had a rare soft one to deal with—ho
had.
I never hesitate to give names when there’s
nothing to fear in the shape of actions, but once
I touch boggy ground I cry “woa,” and veil
myself in conscious modesty. So I decline
stating the name of the hotel where we toot a
hand in the “game we did not understand."
Sufficient to say that the players were about the
jolliest lot I ever came across. There were re-
presentatives from all the professions in Sand-
hurst, even the “ force ” was present, but instead
of “taking up" the gamblers took “ miss,” and got
looed. A couple of the worthies who sat around
that festive board are flown now, one to Callao,
the other to Sandhurst gaol, after being taken
back from the Heads much against his will.
Fogs are nuisances, and so this gentleman found.
Struck with, his fate, I wrote the following
story;—
THE FATE OF APFEL.
Early in 1872 it became apparent to the
numerous dwellers Under the Beehive that
there was an addition to their select gathering in
the questionable shape of a young Jew, very
dark, I mean physically, for at that time there
could be nothing but superficial judgment, seeing
that although the tree had put forth branches
and blossomed, and struck its roots amongst
them, yet the fruit had not come. No one knew
whence he came, nor for that matter did anyone
care, for it would not do for people to inquire too
closely into antecedents Under the Verandah.,
The new addition seemed a ’cute, cautious, bar-
gaining child of the Tribes which are not lost,
and many of the mean curmudgeons on the
market took him under their patronage, because
“birds of a feather, &c.,” vide Shakespeare.
True, he did walk in the paths of the ungodly,
inasmuch as he occasionally played 100, but he
generally went in for light stakes, and gave up
if he got it any way hot. He has been known
to weep over the loss of half-a-crowu. Still it
was only spoiling the Philistines, this 100 playing.
There could be no doubt but that he was mean
and penurious, and that was such a recommen-
dation that several at once took him to their
hearts. Surely a man who was so careful
deserved trusting. Ho various parties trusted
him, and Apfel appeared to thrive. “ Apples,”
as he was jocularly called, indeed presently
became a great man, and did a lot of business.
He was trusted to a considerable extent. Now
let us raise the curtain. Apfel, or “Apples,”
was an adventurer. He had never had money
before to any extent, and he could not but feel
elated when he was made the medium of such
confidence. He began speculating, and lost.
Still he kept on, and by virtue of loans, money
borrowed at high interest, &c., he jogged along.
While he could keep up the appearance of
solvency, meet his cheques, &0., he was all right.
But he saw it could not last. He knew the
bubble would burst, and that it could not be
delayed. At this time began the Great Extended
Hustler’s racket, when the stock rose £IO,OOO
and £50,000 a-day, and large transactions took
place, necessitating huge amounts of money
changing hands. Day after day Apfel had
thousands going through his hands. A devil
stood at his elbow; that devil was the son of too
much confidence. That devil kept nudging him.
O I how powerfully does our Lord’s “ lend us
not into temptation ” show the danger of being
led where temptation lies. What proof of om-
niscience! One morning he read the “Argus,”
He generally did so, but this identical morning
ho road it with great attention. For there he
saw the announcement that the mail steamer
was to start two days afterwards. The devil at
his elbow became obstreperous. Quoth this
individual insidiously; “My dear Apples, of a
verity here is a chance. To-morrow enter the
market and buy up all the Extended Hustler’s,
and Extended Hustler’s Tribute yoit can, and
then at once realise. Depart in peace with the
money, and leave thy loving friends slips of
paper, signed with thy autograph, as memorials
of kindness and affection.” But Apfel replied,
“Truly thou counaellest well, but how am I to
escape 7 Will not the detectives track me and
stop the steamer?” “Nay,” quoth the devil,
“even so, once past the Heads thou oanst, like
Tam O'Shanter’s grey mare, shake thy tail at
them.” So Apfel listened to the devil. It was
in the Shamrock that the confab took place,


and around were all the groat brokers and
speculators. At times Apfel quailed and his
heart sank within him, but the prospect of a
speedy relief from all his difficulties did a great
deal to urge him on to the deed. He would be
free, not a. soul would trouble him, and iu his
beloved Fatherland he would have £SOOO or
£6OOO, and be able to sport it like a little prince.
That picture he dwelt upon, the other he shut
his eyes to. Alas 1 for him. The next day he began
his nefarious work. Ho bought tributes and
company’s shares at high rates, and then forced
sales, pocketing the solid cash. He-made out
drafts for some of the money, aud took £I2OO
with him in gold, bright shining gold. The
evening came. Apfel was glorious. Ho shouted
champagne, changed a cheque for £lO, unfor-
tunately for Mr. Hefl'ernnn, and then deported
by the train. Swiftly it sped away in the dark-
ness, and left bis dupes slumbering unconscious
of the schemes laid to disturb their rest. Morn-
ing came, the cheques were presented, the
answer of the Bank of Hew South Wales was
not encouraging. By this time Apfel had de-
parted iu the mail steamer. Swiftly, however,
the pursuers came on. But he did not fear. He
paced the deck and witnessed the lights of the
great city disappear one by one ns the bold
ship sped on over Port Phillip, widening the dis-
tance between him and his relentless pursuers,
who, now aware of the plot, were after him like
bloodhounds. His heart beat slower as ho saw
that he. was beyond recall; that the swiftest
steamer could not get at him. But what was
this ? Horror 1 a thick fog came down ns they
got to the Heads. Apfel, with terror in his
heart, and bis face pale as ashes, beard that the
captain bad resolved not to go out. Then,
indeed, be gave way, and ho re tired to his cabin
to think over the horrors of Ms situation. Still
there was hope. The alarm might not have been
sounded; be might still escape. But ip the
early morning, as hope had again begun to spring
in his heart, lie heard the ominous sounds of a
steamer. It was a tug-boat. Then ho knew his
fate had come. The dream was over, nud he
was a criminal, not a German prince, not a
Miranda. Well aud securely had all been
planned, but a miser-able failure bad been tbc
result. Providence itself had fought against him.
Aud in a short time Phillip Apfel stood in the
dock and received eight years. Ho could not look
at bis many friends—those who were once his
friends. Ho said nothing, but turned his back
to thorn. The stroke had come, and being foiled,
ho bowed his head and received it. Honesty,
after all, is the best policy.
Wo had a nice little party of six. Six-100 I
like, especially when the “tit-np” is three shil-
lings, eightoenpenco for the deal, aud club law—
nineteen and sixpence every offer. Of course I
pretended to be a great deal tighter than I was,
and took the “ miss ” by mistake first in say. It’s
strange to remark, and shows the natural bright-
ness of my parts, that I happened to have
noticed the ace of spades being put into the
“miss” as the cards were dealt, and spades were
trumps that time. Still, I was put down as a
reckless player, and business looked improving
for the old hands. A bird was to be plucked.
There was grog galore, wine, brandy, and even
champagne when wo were thoroughly heated.
I got loned for -M odd, and pulled out such a
roll of notes that the mouths of the players
watered (this is metaphorical—people don’t eat
notes). The “friend” who introduced me got
looed for my 100 in company with another as-
piring individual, who went In on the jack, which
was soon nipped up by the ace. There was over
£■ Bin the pool now. This was a trifle exciting.
The cards were dealt round, the Jewish gentle-
man stood on the nine and some strong court
cards, his heart was thrown into his mouth when
I “ knocked in ” on the deuce and ton, and both
of us shook with palsy when the “force” gave
the table a sounding rap on the king and knave,
confident of success ; but when the last in say,
the cattle man, stood on the ace aud queen and a
good court card, wo grow white with terror. Of
course, though I’ve named the hands, none of us
then know what the other had. The press and
the broker, who had thrown up, looked on with
eager interest, for they knew they would have a
“ big pot” next time without the risk of playing
this hand. Diamonds were trumps.
“ Ace of hearts,” said the Jewish gentleman in
a low but not linn voice, laying down that card.
I had no hearts, so I put down my deuce of
trumps with fear and trembling. To my great
grief the “ force” had no heart or compunction,
aud triumphantly squashed my poor deuce with
the jack. You could have heard a pin drop.
But when the cattle person declared he’d no
heart either and took the lot with the queen,
there was groat excitement. He would not be
looed. What would ho lend ? You might have
knocked the lot down with a feather.
“ Gentlemen," said the bovine player, with
that easy tone a fellow who knows he will nut
ho looed can command, “ What is your opinion
of the ncc ?”
Wo replied our opinion was that under or-
dinary circumstances the ace was a card that
would command respect and affection If in our
own hands, but, at present, wo hoped it was
reposing in private lodgings in the pack, as its
exhibition would not suit our book. Upon wbicb
the individual referred to calmly laid it down,
and wo all started up horror-stricken.
“ Gentlemen, be calm,” said the fellow.
Calm I As well ask a fish to be quiet while it
is being fried. The “ force’s” king, my ten, and
■ the Child of Israel’s nine, went like the last rose
of summer. Yet there was hope. One of ns
might get a trick. Alas I the cattle gentleman
led the king- of clubs, aud ns the ace of that suit
was not “ about,” the Israelite, the “ force,” and
yours truly, were looed for £8 odd apiece, and
there was over £3B in the pool. But the “force”
rose and dashed the cards on the table aud
began to pull his hair.
“ Snob infernal. luck,” he cried ; “ looed on
the king and jack. Giutlemen, I call you to
witness, I was looed on the king and jack.
Will any gintloman kindly explain do me how
I was looed on the king aud jack? Is there
raison iu it ? I apale to yon,"giutlemen, the king
and jack—it’s unpossible,”


“ Put yoni' money down, and no vain regrets,”
said tie cattle man; 11 -we’ll explain to you after-
wards how it was done, or we’ll get a lawyer.”
“I’ll lave to putin a cheque,” said the “force.”
I virtuously objected to deques, and someone
lent the money,
“ I’ll give a pound to anyone that explains how
I was looed on the king and jack, so I will.
What’s a man to stand on?" said the “force,”
while the cards were being dealt.
They were very cautious in “ standing ” this
time ; the £33 frightened them, especially as I
objected to cheques, stating if I was looed I’d
put clown the ready cash. I dealt, and the
second in say stood. Unfortunately no one
came in after him, and I had to defend, which
I did with the “ miss,” and got jolly well looed.
But I put down the dust jauntily, and observed
all to look hungrily at the heap of notes. How-
ever, I said, “ I’ll have ’em now.” The cattle
man took miss out of his turn, and so the Child
of Israel, the “ force,” my introducer, and my-
self, stood against him; on weaker hands Hum
we otherwise would have stood on. I don’t
think anyone breathed while this hand was being
played. Two of us must be looed. The cattle
man found a little trump in “miss,” and, in spite,
“put us to together,” resulting in the annihila-
tion of our trumps by the ace which the “ force”
held in hand. This ruined the chance of three
of us, for the second trick was taken by the
“ force,” and the last liy “ miss.” Three loos for
£33 odd—over £lOOl But there was no groat
battle over this “ pot,” for I took two tricks out
of it—nearly £7o—and the cattle man got the
other. After this we all breathed. The “round”
had cost me about £l5, and as I took £7O out of
the last pool I made about £25 out of it; not so
bad, alter the heavy hitting there was.
“ GHntlemon, will anyone explain how I was
looed on the king and jack,” asked tlie “force;”
“ I’d kindly thank any gintlemnn that would toll
me how it was done.”
Hereupon various attempts wore made to solve
this knotty point, but I do not think any satis-
factory explanation has been yet attempted.
We played and drank for some time afterwards,
until everyone got jolly tight, and some had to
knock off playiug, so drunk were they. The at-
tempt to solve how ho was looed on the king and
jack so hopelessly muddled the brain of the
II force ” that ho was not able to play, and retired
to the sofa ; where, while asleep, ho anxiously
demanded if any “ gintlemau would explain how
he got looed on the king and jack.” I had a
great run of luck, and netted some £7O. My
friend and introducer lost a lot of it. He was
getting savage. Ho had laid a pit for another
and had fallen into it himself.
“ Q-ontlemen,” I observed, putting my money
in my pocket, “you’ll excuse me, but it is one
o’clock, and after the next single I’ll go. Don’t
lot mo disturb, or break up the party, I bog, but
my custom is, never to play after one o’clock.”
How blank they looked.
“ Will any gintleiuan explain to me " came
from Her Majesty’s “force,” ou the sofa.
“ That’s not the practice of this table,” cried
my “friend.” “We play to a set hour.”
“ I don’t,” I said.
My introducer was greatly riled, and. the cham-
pagne had got into his head.
“Just like you d Melbourne sneaks,”
said he; “ you come here and win a fellow’s
money, and then go off with it, giving him no
chance to win it back.”
“You’ll excuse me,” I remarked, “I didn’t
come here to lose. It may give yon pleasure to
lose your money, and does appear to, but I’m of
a frugal mind; I'm very glad you’ve lost, be-
cause if you hadn’t I wouldn’t have won.”
The Excitable was dealing the cards just then,
and his wrath grow so hot that he threw the
pack right at me. That did him. There was
not another pack left in the house, for, during
the evening-, the unlucky players had chucked
away so many packs that the floor was strewed
with the devil’s books, thick ns leaves in Yallam-
brosia. My “scotty” friend tore his hair and
threw his belltopper at the pier-glass when ho
heard this, damning his luck, but presently he
came round, and said as he had the moat money
and won heaviest, he’d shout champagne. As
this was meant to be a drive at me, I at once
declared I’d shout half-a-dozen Moet and Chan-
don. Up it came, and the “force” was awoke.
He drank lots of the swizzle, continually ejacu-
lating if anyone would favour him with an
explanation of how ho had been looed on the
king and jack.
Amongst the onlookers I recognised several
gentlemen, seedy in appearance, whom X had
known in prosperous times in Ballarat, mid who,
like myself, had been addicted to 100 and poker.
Alas I they had changed. One, who had the
thirst of gambling so deeply implanted in
him that I believe he has often acted like the
fellow in the fable who sold his coat when he
saw the swallow, was thin as a rake, and his
hatchet face was pinched to nothing. He had
come to Sandhurst in a good time, and had he
eschewed the demon gambling he was in a fair
w;ay to get on in the world, hut gambling and
women brought Mm lower than over. Deserted
by his Mends, whom he had deceived, deserted
by those who had preyed on him, ho looked
a miserable object. Fatty they called him, I
think, iu derision. When I looked at him, I felt
almost inclined to reform. But what is the use
of one who has become imbued with these ter-
rible vices trying to escape, once ho has become
entangled iu their chain—as well may the fly
try to break from the spider’s web. Life with-
out gambling, and women, and wine, was nothing
to me now. Take them away, and the world
were darkness itself. Put me in a well-lit room,
with good players, plenty of wine, a cigar, ami
the game 100, and I’m in heaven. Place me
under the Verandah, with plenty of excitement
on, and I’m in paradise. When the day and
night’s work is over, and the wee small hours
creep on, let mo flutter iu Anonyma’s smile,
and my bliss is perfect. No fireside happiness
for me I Young men, read and learn I
And what is the result of such practices ?
Looking back at the room where I played that
night I. can, even amidst my own misfortunes,
think, with sadness, on the fate of some of the


bright and happy fellows assembled there, whose
stars have fallen to rise no more.
Poor Patty I pass over as incorrigible, He
has been the author of his own misfortunes, and
every farthing he can hog, or borrow, ho at once
invests in gambling of some description, and
yet lie has talents that would get him a good
living. 0 1 madness that drives its victims re-
lentlessly to ruin, that unfits them for everything
else.
The elegant, the sarcastic, the talented cattle
man has departed to fresh fields and pastures
new. Ho was liked by all, a sort of popular
idol, but he has disappeared mysteriously, and,
no doubt, the cause was gambling under the
Verandah, and elsewhere. What a curse popu-
larity is, when you haven’t the money to keep
pace with it. Once you become ’popular, there
is no end to the number of friends who hob-
nob with you, and, of course, you with them.
They can easily afford the coat, you cannot ;
yet, you must keep it up. How better it
would be to shim popularity i Why arc
pressmen generally poor and in debt ? Be-
cause they receive screws equal to that of a
decent labourer, and are expected to keep com-
pany with men who have their thousands a year
coming in to them. The M.P.’s, M.B.C.’s,
mining men, and others, who hang on to press
people because they arc useful in publishing
their glories, never think what is fun to them is
death to their victims, I was once very hard up
at Muddy Gully, the celebrated quarts’, field, and
as I was supposed to bo an fait iu mining and
in the price of shares, the proprietor of the
“Muddy Gully Eroo Briton” generously “took mo
in” as mining reporter at the liberal salary of
255. a week, and find myself, which 1 did—l
found myself in tatters at the end of a month,
Eor 255, a week I was expected to “read” the
proofs of the valuable journal, which kept mo
from nine at night until four in the morning, to
report the squabbles in the local police court,
and to give full 2iarticulars as to how many feet
every mine in the district had been driven
timing die day, together with n full and correct
resume of the market, and a leader or two occa-
sionally. It was a billot which presented little
opportunity for twiddling your thumbs. When
I spoke to the proprietor about a rise, he almost
wept. How happy he would be to increase my
wage, but the fact was, he was nearly broke,
almost beggared, with his newspaper specula-
tion, as Mr. Ij. L. Smith says was his ease iu
regard to the “ Times and Mines.” Strange to
say, the proprietor was every day getting fatter
and fatter, while I was wasting away to a
shadow. Presently the proprietor contested the
election and became member for Muddy Gully.
He appeared to entirely forgot mo then. At
last, when I was nearly next to naked, some
scrip a kind-hearted old reefer gave me turned
out well, and I found myself decently provided
for. That was my first, and will bo my Inst,
connection with newspapers. The profits of the
speculation may be seen when it is known that
I spent nearly 12s. 6d. a week in shouts for
people I had to get information from, or who
shouted for me to got me to put some flourishing
“ pars ” in the paper, which left me 12s. 6d. for
board, lodging, and clothing. I worked of an
average, eighteen hours. I have since heard my
worthy employer hold forth with proper indig-
nation at the idea of miners, who get £2 Bs. a
week, having to work eight hours. He charac-
terised it as too monstrous to be thought of. I
shouted, “How about your reporters and typos?”
and bolted. What infernal bosh these spouters
give vent to on the platform. Disingenuousuesa !
why, it’s one d tissue of lies from begin-
ning to end.
But to resume.
There was the press chap, a young fellow
whoso pen was wonderfully powerful, and who
was also a popular idol. I believe he’s lost all
now. Of the others I won’t speak, because they
are ultra vires, whatever that means.
The champagne had a different effect on the
company. The “ force ” was silenced by it, and,
like Satan, lay prone his full length, the last
words he was heard to utter being, “ Looed on
the king and jack ; will any gintlcmnn —” The
Excitable lost his head, and at once proposed an
adjournment to certain temples of Bros, known
iu Sandhurst as the “ stone houses.” My picture
would not be complete if I did not follow the
company down there, and therefore I have to
beg the “unco guid” reader to skip over the end
of this division, although X him I won't
give him anything half as prurient as the
newspapers give their venders in a orim. eon, or
rape case, when the details are reported almost
to the most minute particle. [When editors
road this work, no doubt, I will get a pen and
ink. cow-hiding, hut I would observe to them,
“ Physicians, heal yourselves.”] It’s the fashion
now-a-days not to talk about the social evil or
Alsatla, hat to look at it. Miss would go
into fits if you would use the good old English
word denoting the ladies of easy principles,
although she passes them by every day. Oh 1
it’s a wicked world, where deceit and hypocrisy
usurp plain truths. A spado ought to called a
spade.
“ The devil’s darling sin, of a verity,
Is falsehood that mocks sincerity.”
Bold Paraphrase.
I recollect once spending a quiet evening in a
genteel residence, and being surprised on finding
there was in the house a barrister of note who
was gloriously tight. The barrister had a wife.
In the morning that 1 ady drove up in a stylish
affair, and “skull-dragged” her better half from
the scene of his excesses That same day, about
two o’clock, I was reporting at the police court,
and, lo 1 the barrister was addressing the bench
about some terrible breach of the law by a young
man who had seduced an innocent gixi. It would
almost bring the tears to your eyes to hear how the
worthy man expatiated on the charms of virtue
(“’Tis distance lends enchantment to the view"
whispered a fellow-reporter), and the detestable
character of men of loose morals. Unfortunately
for his case it turned out, when the other side
was heard, that the young and innocent girl had
been the seducer, ana that she had not been stingy
of her countenance to others beside the unfor


tunnte defendant, who was made the scapegoat..
Ton very often find in such cases that there is a
good deal of blame on both sides.
But we will never got down street if we digress
in this way.
The “ Stones,”* are called so, I believe, because
stone buildings are so rare ou Sandhurst that
these, being of that material, arc denominated
so to show there are such structures. One is two-
storied, with a balcony, the other one-storied.
OH this balcony, about a year ago, the then mis-
tress of the establishment threw herself, because
the same elegant cattle man whom I have spoken
of as being “ departed this colony,” would not
allow the light of his countenance to shine upon
her, or that she had drank too much strong tea.
She was laid up for a while, and no doubt it
cured her of jumping off balconies. Those who
have tried that once won’t do so again. Our
business lay with No. 2. There was light and
there was music in No. 2, and there we wont.
The Excitable gave a great knock. A sweet
voice asked who was there. The Excitable
replied in language more forcible than polite.
The siren inside answered in sweeter phrase-
ology, and told us we might go whore you can
cook victuals without kitchen tires. Upon this
the Excitable mentioned his name, which acted
like a charm or “open, sesame,” and we were
admitted. Such a crowd 1 A lot of Verandah
notables were there, anil sundry Melbourne
gents. Ah I mothers, wives, and .sisters in Mel-
bourne, yc little know the freaks your darling,
whose whiskers are being fledged, plays when
he’s away from under your eye. A young lady,
whom I will call Mliss, was mistress of the
house, and a jolly mistress too. She was in that
happy state called half seas over. She affection-
ately inquired if wo wouldn’t “shout,” and
receiving an affirmative answer, she sat down at
the piano, and striking seventeen chords and
thirty-four discords, struck up “ Love among the
roses
“ I confess I love A. B. 0.,
A. B. 0., that’s his name.
There is a charm about him,
Which I cannot explain.”
During our stay, her inquiries after this gen-
tleman were numerous and kind, and she
declared, if ho did not como hack to her, she
would take poison, I believe she persecuted
this unfortunate follow till he had to take to
the law. We asked her to take a glass of brandy,
* These houses are now thoroughly rnspcctfihla, tho vile
denizens of former clays having boon banished.—Eli.
which she did. It soothed her. At this moment
I saw a policeman being let out at the back door.
No doubt he was there “ from information re-
saved,” but I have my opinion. An aged party,
too, was found in one of the rooms, but beat a
hasty retreat. Numerous were the requests,
“ Don't you tell you saw me hero,” and, when
we came in, the salutations wore something after
this fashion, “ Oh, my, you hero?" “O, Jerusa-
lem, is that you, Ercd? Don’t say you found
me here,” “ Oh, hero’s a lark.” “ Oh, lord,
who’d ha’ thought it,”
Presently one of the gents, the elegant cattle
party, sat down at the piano, and struck up—
“ II sogreto per essor felioi
80 per provic I’iu segno agii amici,
Sia sereno, si a nuhilo il cielo
Ogni tempo, sia caldo, sia gclo.”
Mliss was delighted. “ Let us bo happy
together,” was her favourite tune, and she got
up, and we all got up, and we shouted and
danced like the greatest Bacchanals you ever
came across. It was pleasing. Presently, a
gentleman ventured a remark at which the fair
one took umbrage, and she sent a lemonade
bottle flying at his head. This was becoming
interesting'. The Excitable chose to disagree
with another fair denizen, and the result was
a black bottle hurled at him, which found a
resting-place in the stomach of a rather stout
party, who vowed ho wouldn’t go out ou the
spree for a little while. A betting man, upon
this, wagered with Mliss, she \va,sn’t game to
smash the lamp. Wasn’t she? She flung it
right at him, and darkness supervened. Wo
retired. Business was becoming too brisk. We
feared we would not bo presentable to-morrow.
The end of the row was that the very identical
“ force,” who was playing with us, had to bo sent
for to take one of the combatants into custody,
and it is reported that, on the way to the lock-
up, he asked the fair enslaver if she could “as
a gintlowoman,” explain how a man could lie
looed on the king and jack? 1 regret that I
cannot insert here the 'idiomatic and forcible
reply of the lady.
I could hardly get to bed that night, and
where my companions got to I know not. I
have confused recollections of asking the night-
porter, who helped me upstairs, if he stood on
the ace, and he replied that I could not stand on
the floor. I observed I would take the miss.
I mado a miss in grasping the bedpost, and
came heavily to the ground, Onoo in bed, I
know not how many games I played, in all of
which I had the ace, Mug mid queen of trumps.


The World, from different points of view—T walk in the Sunshine, end run received with applause—l imbibe—lmbibing
continued—Calculations—How to make Half-a-crowu n “ Poun”’—How to get “ oil'” a Bargain—The Striking of tlio
Garden Gully Beef, Theatrical Tableaux—Easy como, cosy go—The Bank Manager inflexible—The .Millionaire's Wife
borrows a Loaf—T'tic Ways of Providence mysterious—The Melbourne Reporter and How Ckmu Gold—Beery’s
Practice—. Tack Tipple takes a nobbier noth Death, and is floored at hist—George l.nnscll—“ Give mo your luck, and
d ■ 3 r our judgment”—Ballerstcdt and his romantic Villa—The Music of the Mill—Lazarus raised from tiro Dead—
Joe Bell, the hearty reefer—Joe Minin—'Bob Carr, or “coolas a cucumber”—A Pup of an auriferous taste—Ho
takes Medicine, and is, in preacher parlance, “ exercised”—Brevier and Bourgeois for over—A full “ case,” and plenty
of “ fat”—Sehmoule, the gentlemen t£ at large”—“Pandoah”—Only 4(1 feet off £ooo,nD0 —The Money and tho Position,
not the Man—Sago llefloctions on the folly of mistaking yourself for your position—“ Following down the Lava,” the
Story that ends the Dark Side—The Inhabitants of Wishing Gully—Han, the Pour-legged Thief —Polly and her Day-
dreams—John Palmer's craze, “ Following down the Lava"—Two Contrasts, Mrs. Swcethlossom and Mrs, Pinchnose
—John strikes the Lava—Mrs. Pinclmoso proves that she is a Saint, to the admiration of Beholders—Polly’s new
Revelation—The Pillars of Purple and Crimson aud Gold—Poily’s Farewell—The Striking of the Beef—The Presen-
timent—The Statue lu the Moonlight—Fate of the Family at Wishing Gully.
IT" ow fair and beautiful this world appears to
L the man who has no care on his mind, who
can walk abroad with his hat well up on his fore-
head, and eau look every man straight in the
face, just as if he meant to say, “ .1 don’t care a
lig for you.” How the hum of the busy
street sounds to him like music; and as ho rat-
tles the coins in his pocket he thinks of the snug
balance at the bank, and its influence on all these
busy workers. The wind makes melody in the
trees for him; the sky looks brighter and
bluer than to an ordinary, care-ridden mortal,
and the sun shines upon him with double
warmth. His fellows pass him with smiles, and
his hand is often grasped by friends. A halo of
peace, prosperity, ami happiness, follows him
wherever he goes. How differently does the
world appear to the same man if misfortune
overtakes him. However fair and beautiful the
world may be, to him it looks dreary as a winter
landscape. He seeks unfrequented streets, and
his head is bent, and his hat drawn oyer his
eyes. He can look no oaa straight in the face.
The memory of his prosperity brings him back
but pangs of regret. The hum of a busy street,
if he has to pass through it, terrifies him; and
in every face ho expects to meet an angry cre-
ditor. Thoughts of the bank bring no consola-
tion, the overdraft there is over present with
him; and he almost tears his hair when he
thinks of the bills that are becoming due, with
no means to meet them. The sun shines not for
him; however sunny the day is, his heart is cold
as ice. No smiles are for him; acquaintances
pass him by with perhaps a nod, and his hand
hangs by his side, for no one desires it. Where-
over he goes a cloud of gloom follows. Such are
the different aspects the world wears under dif-
ferent circumstances to a man.
I can honestly say that I walked down Pall
Mall with rny head lifted high, my hands jingling
the coins, and that I felt as happy as a king, and
as independent as the Marquis of Bute, “ Lo-
thair,” whose income is some £300,000 a year.
And everywhere I was mot by Mends who “ took
me by the hand,” and warmly inquired as to my
health. Even some of the notabilities crowded
around me, and there and then certain gentle-
men asked me to give them a “tip.” Eig’em
gave mo a dig hi the ribs, and said I was the
successful man, and the fellow who knew how to
rig the market. Would I give lessons? and so
on. It was pleasant. I was courted by all, and
I can’t give the slightest idea how many drinks
I had, and what champagne I made disappear.
The gooseberry wine merchants in Melbourne
must have made n fortune out of Sandhurst dur-
ing the late excitement. The real fact is, that
the Sandhurst people were so suddenly thrust to
the front, so quickly elevated from the position
of hard workers to that of comparative million-
aires, that there is no wonder that they indulged
in a little wine-bibbing. Follows who had never
known what the taste of champagne was now
enjoyed that pleasure, and “went In” for it.
What pleased those of a frugal mind, however,
was the fact that generally the “ shout” was at
the expense of soma person who had made n
“hit,” or a company that had struct gold.
Champagne flowed like a river, and colonial
beer became a drug. I think the champagne
swizzle is over for a little while, now, except
with the “ well in” folks, who go In fox it like
devils, whenever they can at the expense of
somebody.
After I had " settled up ” on Wednesday, I re-
solved to throw business aside, and at once go in
for a thorough afternoon’s enjoyment, when I
would become acquainted with Sandhurst and
its lions. I was now in the happy position to be
able to take a spoil. The cost of becoming ac-
quainted, however, with Sandhurst folks, was
rather large, whether I take it as regards the
amount I had to pay for drinks, or the quantity
of drink I had to imbibe, Just to give the un-
sophisticated reader an idea of the stuff I
took in, I will endeavour to supply him with a
bill of liquids—
3. d.
Four soda and brandies, early, to clear
my head and stomach ... ... 2 0
One seltzer ditto ... 1 0
Two brandies with A. 8,, to give my
stomach “tone” 1 0
Two port wines with Kisstoe, on set-
tling 10
Two brandies with Solid Deutsoher, on
settling 10
SINKING— CONTINUED.


One lemonade and raspberry with s. d,
Tom Hawkey, to cement acquain-
tance ... 0 6
Half-dozen champagne with the Ex-
citable and others, on my North Old
Chum success ... ... ... 75 0
Two whiskies with the manager, to
make an Extended Hustler’s ac-
quaintance ... ... ... ... 1 0
Two whiskies with Inebriate,ditto.,, 1 0
Two sherries with the Manager of the
Bank, for account’s sake ... ... 1 0
A bottle of Meet with Brilliant over
North Old Chums 12 6
Two brandies with the “press” to get
its “oar” 1 0
A' bottle of champagne with the
Mayor, for the honour ... ... 12 6
[I began to feel rather weak, so I changed.]
s. d.
Three sodas, to “right” my stomach 1 fi
Two brandies with Boss Neal, to
make a “racing” friend and
strengthen my stomach 1 0
Two brandies and bitters with Tommy
Dodd, who did a good “line” for
mo 10
A soda with Jem Clogg, to make
another racing friend 1 0
Two whiskies with Kiss toe, to close a
bargain 1 0
Two port wines with Harry Stanley,
the theatrical, to make a stage
friend 10
A round of champagne, paid for by
Jemmy reinstall, because it was
his birthday.
Two lemonades with Bob C , who
is “teetotal” 1 0
Two ales with Young Cautious, to
make am acquaintance 1 0
[I began to feel “full” at this stage.]
Two brandies with an O. B. 0. fellow
at Hemming’s 1 0
Two Marett’s brandies with the “ In-
dependent ”... 1 0
Two drinks, I forget what, with am
M.P 1 0
A drink with Bob M o.
Homebody shouted champagne.
Some brandies.
Some porter and oysters.
Some whisky.
“ The rest is silence.”
Ton see I spent on this hody of mine, on that
fateful Wednesday, M 2s. in drinks. There
must hare been another £6 2s. spent over me by
other parties, so my drinking cost £l2 4s. that
same day. That’s the way the money goes on
Sandhurst —in and out the Victoria. FalstafE’s
pen’orth of bread to unlimited sack, was nothing
to what I was guilty of. My feeding didn’t cost
65., if I’d paid for it. How happy my stomach
must have boon. I’m sure it felt grateful for the
favours heaped upon it. It seemed to feel so. /■
If you happened to be working hard every day
of your life, and faring poorly, when a rich
relative obligingly departs the world, and you are
at once lifted into tiro ranks of the Upper Ten
Thousand of Mammon, you can comprehend how
the Sandhurst folks felt when their stocks came
into Victorian estimation, and their mines began
to turn out thousands of ounces, when tiro once
deserted Verandah under the Beehive became
the scene of wild speculation, and hundreds of
thousands of pounds changed hands there
weekly.
“A change came o’er the spirit of their
dream.” Men not worth £IOO blossomed into
reputed owners of £50,000 ; men with “ screws ”
of £2 (to, a week became the lucky recipients of
incomes of £IOO a week. It was like a dream,
and the dream of 1871 will be remembered by
everyone as the most gorgeous ever dreamed in
Victoria. The ready road to wealth was disco-
vered. Anyone_ could make a fortune. Buy
scrip, that was ’ all. Let mo give a few ex-
amples :
Young Lyon was a “farmer’s boy,” at the
“ beautiful ci ly” of Kilmore. He heard of the
beauties of Sandhurst, and with his family
“went” for it. The fever was beginning. He
had 2s. 6d. in his pocket when he arrived at
Sandhurst. How to make that half-crown a
pound was his aim. Ho heard a “ tip” given and
he bought; next day he sold out at £7O profit.
This was pleasing. He got a reputation for being
smart and doing broking work cheaply, and all
the mean curmudgeons, which means all the
wealthiest men of Sandhurst, who know the
ropes, employed him. Nicely he had them, for
when they gave orders he bought for himself as
well, and worked matters so neatly that before
he was two months on Sandhurst he could sign
a cheque for £2OO0 —aye, and it would be cashed
too. This is all true. In the memorable night
when the Catherine United took such a wonder-
ful Jump, he netted between that stock and the
South Catherine, over £SOO in two horns. These
go-betweens who are employed by the big people
easily use the information supplied, and soon
become independent.
Talk about cleverness ; here’s a little tale.
Young had an order to buy two hun-
dred Golden Fleeces from Melbourne at £5
16s. He went to a very wise old codger
in the broking line, and bought them. When
he returned to his office, imagine his consterna-
tion when there was a telegram awaiting him
stating the other’ to be a mistake; it should have
been to sell two hundred Golden Fleeces. Here
was a nice thing; over £IOOO involved. Now,
with ordinary folks the course would be to get
the seller to “ let you off ” for so much, that is,
the difference in the price of the shares, which
in this ease would be considerable, £IOO at least.
But young didn’t do so ; he made down for
the Verandah in a great hurry, and asked
anxiously if anyone had Golden Fleeces. An
inquiry begau, and the result was it came to the
seller's ears. Young offered £6 to parties
he knew to have no Fleeces, and when those
who had came to him, he said ho had supplied
the order, but he would telegraph to town to see
if more would be taken. All this came to the
oars of the seller of the two hunched, and he


looked blank. He thought there was something
up and repented hia hasty sale. Presently ho
met young . The following entertaining
conversation took place:—
Young . “Have you any more Fleeces? I
can give £5 17s. fid.”
Old Codger. “ Oh 1 that was a mistake of mine
selling the two hundred at £0 165.; my orders
were to sell at £6. Why, I will buy two hundred
at -JIB 17s, fid. myself,”
Young . “ Done; you shall have two
hundred at ;B5 17s. fid. ”
And the ’cute old codger found he’dhccn done,
and, after a lot of barneying, consented if young
would let him off he would let young
off, and they liquored. This was how young -——
saved £IOO.
Joe Blunt was a mason hold, and I was pointed
out some of his masonry not done four years ago.
Joe hold some interest in the Sect,
and ho increased it as much ns he could. He
had strong hopes had Joe, hut the more ho hoped
the poorer he got with calls. One day he went
out to his own claim, after laying some hearth
stones, and went down to sec how his mates
prospered. They wore just letting oil a shot,
and hoped to strike tho reef. When the smoko
began to dear away they noticed there was a lot
of water in the drive.
“ That looks like ns if we’d tapped somethin’,"
said Tom.
“Aye,” said Joe, and they went over to the
“face,” where the shot had knocked down a lot
of atone. Tho water was trickling out of the
face, and had just cleared a little road down the
quartz. It was beautifully white quartz with
blue seams,
“Ah,” said Jack, “d it, that’s the stone
to look at. Jim, bring’s a bucket of water.”
The water was brought and splashed over tho
roof. The men crept close to the white surface
exposed. Tho pure lovely quartz, like Parian
marble, was there, and in that white matrix
glittered tiny specks of rich yellow gold ; in the
blue seams, through the white quartz, it shone
out, sol oil by the background.
“ 0 God 1 we’ve struck her at last,” cried
Joe, gazing as in a dream at the thrilling sight.
That expression was the christening words of
the great Eoef.
There stood the men, dressed in dirty ruined,
habiliments, their eyes and faces begrimed, sur-
rounded by a cloud of smoke, face to face with
the magician that was to transform the quiet
locality into a hive of industry, the homo of
many throbbing engines, the goal of many a
throbbing heart—a mass of white and blue stone
with stars and spangles of gold !
There’s a picture for a future Turner. Talk
of there being no romantic subjects in Australia I
why, it teems with them. Joe, who was not
worth £IOO the day he went to visit the reef,
was worth £IOO,OOO six mouths afterwards.
Johnny Martyrson had a tribute with some
mates a little out of Sandhurst. They could
make nothing of it, and wore on tho point of
selling out, when one day, as they were reduced
to their last pienny and knew they would have
to give up and go to work in other mines, Charley
advised the mates, instead of pegging east,
to put in a crosscut west just a few feet.
They did, and met some spurs, but saw no gold
in them. Johnny said, as they couldn’t hold out
to continue the crosscut, they bad better chive
along these spurs and see if they made into any-
thing better. They hadn’t driven five feet when
they came on a perfect nest of glittering gold,
and before many months were over, £30,000 was
divided between them. Sorry am Ito say that
Johnny didn’t stick to his ; it went as it came,
and when the tribute was at an end so was
Johnny, and he had to go to work again. His
signature was worth a lot once, but it was only
a cross.
This reminds mo that the signatures of the
best men on Sandhurst arc very doubtful, writing
being the least of their accomplishments. A had
signature is always tho sign of plenty of money
in the bank, in Australia at all events. But to
resume our stories.
Ludlow and Weston were jolly Yorkshiremon,
and bought a claim on a celebrated line with all
tho money they could got together. The claim
didn’t at all turn out to expectation, and they
had to sink deeper to see if they would get a
new make. So, having no money themselves,
they made for the bank. The manager, sleek
and sedate, was in his neat little room. In
came our too rough worthies.
“ The fact is, we believe that theer ground’s
good,” said Ludlow, “ an’ a’ think 1 you could gio
us a little help wi’t, and we’d soon get on the
gold, and pay you back.”
“ Ay,” said Weston, “ that we would, lad.”
Mr. Sleek smoothed his hair goirtly, and
sailed sweetly.
“I’m sorry, gentlemen,” said he, “but I can’t
do it. Per my own part I would bo as willing
as could bo, but you see I’ve my instructions
from Melbourne, and X cannot go beyond them.
You ask me to advance on the possible contin-
gency that the ground may contain gold; I
can’t advance on probabilities, I must have the
hard equivalent. Of course, if you ban get any-
one of standing to accept a bill for you, X would
be most happy to discount it,”
“Oh I bills be d d,” cried Weston, “woTl
nane o’ yer bills,” And they had to get a “ shixty
per cent.” gentleman to advance them a little.
As it was, they worked until they came to the
last shilling, until one of their wives had to go
one day to borrow a loaf of a friend. While
talking, in came the friend’s husband, who was
working in a claim next Ludlow and Weston’s.
“Glad to see you, Mrs. Weston,” said ho,
“ Them’s fine news.”
“ What be fine news ?” cried both the women.
“Why, thikky woman’s husband’s volks have
struck hcarn rich to-day,” was the reply.
Mrs, Weston laid the loaf down and never
cried “stop” until she had reached the claim.
The news was true. Ludlow and Weston’s turned
out one of the richest reefs on Bendigo, and the
claim which the stingy manager would’nt ad-
vance sixpence on, is now worth in tho market,
after about half a million worth of gold has
been taken out of it, £200,000. Such is the
story I was told.


James Fearless was a long time a manager of
a claim, and was only able to make both ends
meet. He was a fine, bold, venturesome fellow,
and at last a few of his stocks turned out. But
a great claim, on which ho had pinned all his
faith, and staked the hazard of the die, suddenly
came to the front with a rush, struck the richest
reef ever found in the district, and thousands a
week came rolling into Fearless. Then once the
tide turned, claim after claim came right, specula-
tion after speculation proved good, and the bank
balance began to grow from £IOOO to £IO,OOO,
from £IO,OOO to £30,000, and so on. His income
was about £50,000 a year. But. a cloud came;
a deadly disease hud insidiously insinuated itself
into his system while ho was working for wealth.
He got rid of it, apparently, only to return with
a hundredfold vigour, this time strong beyond tho
power of all doctors. I am told ho offered
£20,000 for a euro. It could not be obtained ;
nature must be loft to fight with the grim
enemy, to fight with all her forces, and perhaps
prove victorious. Fearless was one of the best
men Under the Verandah—bold, quick, and in-
trepid, a warm friend, a helper of all who were
struggling. After hearing his praises sounded
by those well competent, 1 could trot but wonder
how the Almighty should visit a calamity on one
so kind, so good, and leave untouched the num-
berless curmudgeons, liars, skunks, and sinners
who fatten on tho riches of the laud. How
often is it thus ; how often do wc sec tho noble
stricken down, and the mean and paltry living
on in ease. What did David say?—He was
afflicted because he saw the prosperity of the
wicked, but when he understood the cause ho
bowed to the Supreme Will. So must wo, al-
though, unlike David, we cannot see the reason.
Bather a good story is told of a gentleman
who was sent up from Melbourne to report on a
company which had struck tho reef. He was
shown some stone which was streaked with
“new chum” gold—a sort of coppery, cobwebby,
affair, like Dutch metal—and he got into ecsta-
sies over it, writing down to the “ Thunderer ”
he was connected with such a flaring descrip-
tion that there was quite a rush on the shares.'
So there w r as when they had a crushing, hut
t’other way, for tho stone went a grain to the
ton. That reporter ought to have had a modal.
Generally, however, mining reporting is clone well
on Sandhurst, and tho 11 car ” of the press is not
“ had.” It was the “ "X’iser,” I believe, first
started mining reporting, and for years I was told
that work was clone by a gentleman who also re-
portedfortho “Argus,” and who was quite notable.
Ho appears to have had a thorough knowledge of
mining, and as all mining reporters since have
followed in his wake, mining has been well dealt
with in the papers. Some of the metropolitan
reporters, however, made flue blunders.
Tho acquisition of gold has often been tho
death of some reefers. Beery was a sample. He
used to come up to the Verandah about eleven,
and at one o’clock he was tight as a lord; then
he wont homo and slept it off. By four he
would again roll up, and would then begin
business and drinking. By ten o’clock he would
be seen clinging frantically to the bar of Jem
Clegg’s hotel, faying to swallow a glass of beer
and take an oyster or two. He seldom suc-
ceeded. How lie found his way home was a
miracle, but he generally had a couple of friends
with him—how rich people get friends ! Beery
never would go in for buying stock until he was
“ well on.” J act Tipple was sent to the next
world by the' turning out well of the Garden
Gully. He was a drinker if you like. He
soaked. Having got fixed to a bar, ho would
there remain. His favourite drink was beer, a
“ long pull." How lovingly he would let it
glide down his throat, allowing it to descend
slowly, that ho might got the taste of it. He
had considerable bar practice. Ho was one day
standing, indulging in a long swig, when the
fell destroyer found him, aud stopped the descent
of the beer, and the man fell to earth, a man no
more.
Men of all trades have changed places in the
dance of wealth. I’ll just try and enumerate
the golden lions of Sandhurst. There's, of
course, George Lansoll, tho man. I can count
£200,000 worth of stock ho holds, on my fingers,
and I don't think ho knows how wealthy he is.
He was in the fragrant mid cleanly trade of
candlcinaking once, in View Point, and the cor-
poration had a few quarrels with him. George
saved the frugal penny, and paid his calls, buy-
ing up all stocks on good lines that were low,
I am told he was once hard pushed, and that
the banks wouldn’t have anything to do with
him. But he came out to spite them, and now
he’s a little Icing—not in speculating, however.
He buys, it is true, when he lias made up his
mind ns to the value of a claim, but ho holds
for dividends, and doesn’t dabble. These arc
the men who got on best, so many losses are
made in tho market. Georgo has been wonder-
fully lucky of late years. He puts it all down
to foresight and severe study, however. Once,
when the Windmill Hill Company, in which he
holds a great number of shares, began to look
like turning out, George had a talk with a friend.
“ Ah," said ho, 11 my success there cost mo
many a sleepless night. It was my foresight
and judgment.”
“ Give mo your luck and d—• —• your judg-
ment,” was his friend’s forcible response.
George bought out Balleratedt, the man who
got a ton of gold out of the Victoria Hill. This
Ballcrstoclt was a generous man—he once gave a
penny to an orphan, and mourned over it lor a
fortnight. He was a man of msthetio tastes.
He built a line, two-storied, brick house, in a
gutter, and next it erected a quartz-mill. It
must have made pleasant music. I’ve heard of
tho farmer who said ho preferred the lowing of
his own cow to the music of the beat band ; and
so, no doubt, the worthy Ballorstedt would rather
hoar the noise of his own stampers than all the
opera music ever invented by Verdi, Bellini,
Donizetti, and other lights. Verily, there was
sense in it. How nice to rest on your hod of
down, and hoar the stamps go clatter, clatter,
clatter, each sound representing so much gold.
1 dare say this German lay often in bed, count-
ing his ounces of gold by tho clatter of the
stampers. George Lausell has now inherited


this romantic palace lor £30,000, and reigns
there supreme. George was a sprightly youth, I
heard, and, although he is rather a withered
apple now, no doubt, as was the case with Horace’s
vase—
“ You may break, you may ruin, the vase,
if you will,
But the scent of the roses will hang round
it still.”
Opera people and play people visit at Fortnna
Lodge, that’s the name of the delightful resi-
dence, the view from the front window being
over a heap of tailings.
Opposite George’s, built in rivalry of Baller-
stedt, is the house of Lazarus ; as I remarked
before—not of Bethany, This gentleman—a
Child of Israel, desperately fat—owns half of the
Lazarus Company, and once had a dividend of
£3OOO out of it in a fortnight. His shares were
then worth about £9o,ooo—only a trifle. I
believe he is a generous man also ; in giving he
never lets his right hand know what his left
does, hence both remain in ignorance. He has,
also, a palatial brick residence overlooking a
charming gutter—quite romantic. The best
story 1 picked up about this Child of the Captivity
was this—
A funny follow met him when the Lazarus
Company was coming to the front, and taking a
place in the market. Says ho—
-11 So they have raised Lazarus from the dead.”
“Lazarus from the debt” cried the irate Jew,
“ Vy, Lazarus never vos in doht!" The funny
person retired.
J. B. Watson is, I suppose, the next richest
man on Sandhurst, J. B, is a little man, very
’cute. He it is who owns about half a mile of
the Garden Gully reef. Lucky J. B.!
Joe Bell is, I suppose, one of the next in the
list of rich men. The Garden Gully made him,
and lie bought a station with the profits. Joe is
a genuine follow, as unpretending to-day as
when he wasn’t worth anything to speak of, and
hearty as you would wish. He’s a king of a
man, and I felt pleased when I had a glass with
him. It does you good when you come across
fellows who have the genuine ring in them ; who
are not changed by circumstances, but still re-
main men.
Joe Millin and Bob Carr are very rich. Joe
was manager of the Hustler’s, and is a capital
fellow. He’s worth thousands. What Bob is
worth no one knows. He’s the coolest card out.
When the Extended Hustler’s was turning out
thousands of ounces a fortnight; when everyone
was mad about them; when every night he went
to bod he rose hundreds richer next morning;
Bob Carr wont about as quietly as if he was only
in receipt of his ordinary screw. Excited visitors
rushed over to the Extended, expecting to see
something frightfully exciting. Bob would be
coolly making up his books, or signing cheques
for thousands of pounds,
“Well,” after shaking hands, “Whnt’s up,
Bob ? Struck it rich ?”
“ Oh 1 things are about the same," Bob would
sny, signing a cheque or making an entry.
“ We're getting along as usual.”
And that was all the satisfaction the excited
visitor would get.
I heard a story about Bob that was not bad.
When ho was a young man, puddling in Eagle-
hawk Gully with some other mates, they washed
off the first lot, and the result was 12|oz, of gold.
This was left in the washing-off dish. In the
hut was a pup. This canine iudividual took a
great fancy to the gold, and while the men were
outside it quietly licked the dish clean. Cleo-
patra swallowed a pearl worth thousands, hut
this was, I think, the most expensive feed ever a
dog had—it cost about £6O. It had like to
have proved more costly to the dog, for one
of the mates wished to quietly out his throat,
and dissect him. Bob, however, interfered, and
procured a remission of the criminal's sentence,
although the alternative was almost as bad. He
went up to Eaglehawk to purchase some medi-
cine, and it is shrewdly suspected this reprieve
of the pup had something to do with his desire
to see a pretty barmaid he was sweet on. How-
ever, his errand aped well. That pup took medi-
cine for the first time in his life. It didn’t agree
with him. He was sorely disturbed. I believe
he has not hankered after loose gold since, and
the sight of a chemist’s shop always made him
lower his tail and fly.
John Hechle was, I am told, No. 57 on the
“Argus” typographical staff once (Britt, of Huntly,
a successful deep alluvial miner, was also con-
nected inth that journal, I think, being a ma-
chinist), and for years was overseer at the “ ’Tiser.”
In this honourable trade he contracted, no doubt,
iu conjunction with scrip speculations, a round
purse. X recollect him being shown to me as a
specimen of the real Bendigonian. He has fat-
tened in shaves, holding some of the richest in the
district. He’s one of those who hold, and it’s
proved good for him ; the only time he departed
from his custom cost him £(>000, and I believe
he has belonged to the Never Sell Company
since. He changed 500 Extended Hustler’s
Tributes for Victory, at 345., giving 2s. Gd. a
share to boot. The Victory are 16s. a share, the
Extended Hustler’s Tribute went to £lO, and
paid nearly £8 in dividends. Mr. Hechle can’t
see “ exchanges ” in a favourable light since.
But he is rich. Unlike the run of typos, his
“ case ”is full, and he’s got in a good “gully.” In
“taking up ” copy a lot of the “fat ” has fallen
to him, and his “ dividers ” have been many,
lie has been “sot up ” for life, and may “ dis ”
all thoughts of “putting in time" at a “frame,”
or on “grass.” His “take” is decidedly a good
one. Some other brethren of the “side-stick”
have been lucky; and the “ ’Tiser” office, be-
sides turning out barristers, parsons, M.P.’s,
and the like, has yielded a fan crop of lucky
reefers.
My list of, successful reefers wouldn’t lie
complete without “ Schmoule,” as his cronies
call him ; and my gallery of pictures of charac-
ters would bo without a conspicuous ornament.
If you go to Sandhurst you can never mistake
Schmoule. His umbrella, his hat, his coat,
are all Schmoule, and nothing but Schmoule.
The mine ho made the biggest lift out of
was the Pandora. He always called it “ Pan


doah.” Speak to him about any claim he would
invariably come round to the surpassing rich-
ness of the “ Pandoah,” and suggest a few shares
at 60s, would be a certain fortune. Sohmoule
sold tobacco and cigars near the Shamrock, and,
like all Hermans, smoked like a furnace. The
cigar was never out of his mouth. In vain his
friends said smoking cigars softened the brain ;
he remarked, those who originated that saying
must be soft-brained themselves. Between his
shop and the " Pandoah,” thou in its infancy, his
time passed away. I believe he also did a little
“ ahpecling,” for fun ; the meaning of which let
the reader find out. But the “ Pandoah ” turned
out, and Sohmoule quitted the counter, and re-
tired into private life. He is now a gentleman
at large, and knows not what to do with himself.
He buttons his pockets, furls his umbrella, and
is independent of the world. If he does give, the
world knows of it. He don’t do things in his
closet; he goes on tho house-top and blows a
trumpet. So do a few other celebrities, Mel-
bourne people will see Sohmoule atNiasen’s cafe.
The latest vagary of Sohmoule has been to buy a
nugget, found at Berlin, or thereabouts, and
worth £2OOO, simply because it was discovered
near a place which is Herman by name, and to
exhibit it in the real Berlin; where, no doubt,
Sohmoule, tho whilom cigar vendor, will come
out ns an Australian nabob. This is the “Argus”
version. Another rumour has it that Schmoulo
bought this nugget to lay it at the foot of
Bismarck, This I will not believe, unless the
great statesman present, in return, some Gorman
principality. Bohmoule is a great patriot, but
ho has greater respect for his pocket; ho loves
Germany, but he loves Sohmonle more ; like the
vizier in Aladdin, “ He loved his country aud
lie loves its till.” An evil spirit has whispered
to me, by means of the planchette, that Sohmoule
bought the nugget for the sake of notoriety,
which he dearly loves; aud, also, because he
thinks it will pay well.
Strange what a change takes place in men
when they get rich. When poor, those in pros-
perous circumstances pass them by unnoticed,
and look upon them as mean and low. But
let tho wheel revolve and the North so and so, or
Extended this, that, and the other, turn out, and
these scorned people become favoured indivi-
duals ; nothing is too good for them,
“ Thou art lord of the earth, bright gold,
In thy potent power unrivalled.”
William Brookes and Bill Tipper, “the twins,”
have also been successful. The Golden Fleece
tinned the tide for them. How much Brookes
made then I know not, hut he has retired to St.
Kilda a happy man, I suppose. If that Golden
Fleece wasn’t a nice thing I’m a Dutchman.
Bill Tipper is a genial character.
This is one side of the picture; let me turn
to the other, although it must necessarily be
imperfect, for success is soon trumpeted to the
world, but disappointment and ruin are recorded
only in the breasts of the sufferers.
Bill Nash and Jack Honor were mates, and
worked in a hill which is now worth untold gold.
They sank a shaft down 200 feet and drove east
and west, but no gold was to be found. They
could go no further; they were in debt up to
their eyes and knew not what to do. So they
had to go to work again—one as a saddler, the
other as a carpenter. Some time afterwards a
certain party took up the ground, cleaned out the
shaft, and sunk it 40 feet more, when they came
into the richest reef ever found on Bendigo. Bill
and Jack are working away at their trades. Had
they gone down another 40 feet they had been
possessors of hundreds of thousands. Poor Jack,
who, when I met him, was “on the beer,”
observed it was enough to make a fellow drink
himself to the devil. I thought he was in a fair
way to do so.
Henry Common was once a high and mighty
in the town of Sandhurst, and as J.P., &c., took
the lead. His claims turned out well, and he
was a comparatively wealthy man. Popularity
told on him as it tells on so many. He neglected
business; he began drinking and gambling, and
down, down ho went, and down, clown his family
went with him. In the very court where ho used to
adjudicate he stood in the dock charged with a
criminal offence, and though he was found not
guilty, it was his rain. To trace him afterwards
is too painful. Where were his friends, his
fellow-roysterers now? Alas! such people fall
away from the unfortunate and are scon no more.
The Priest and the Levite pass hy on the other
side, and how few good Samaritans are to bo
found now-a-clays to take tho fallen by the hand
and lead him up to light and life again. What
a horrible world 1
Ought not a man to stand out, while he is pros-
perous, and say to himself, when he is surrounded
by friends and flatterers, “ Whom do those
worship, me, ns a man, or the wealth and posi-
tion I have? If to-morrow my wealth and
position left me, would they crowd round mo and
bo as dear as now?” and who, after careful
analysis, could arrive at any solution but that his
wealth and position alone were worshipped.
Such might well put the question the young lady
propounded to her sweetheart, in another form,
“ Who are you after, me or my father’s grey
mare?” How many a man has mistaken bis
position for himself, and thought if ho were out
of it next day, his friends would rally round him
as warm as over. Young Brainpan made that
mistake. He held a high position on a big
newspaper. He was followed about hy M.P.’s,
M.8.0.’5, mining men, &0., and was tho flattered
of the flatterers, till he got too big for his boots
and acted so as to result in his dismissal. Now
Brainpan went out into the street, but the sun-
shine had left him; the flatterers passed by, his
power was gone, and he was nobody, Ho fell
into difficulties, and he went one clay to ask a
trifling loan of a man whom he had benefited to
a vast extent by his writings. He was coolly
received, and respectfully informed his request
could not be complied with, as the gentleman
couldn’t see the prospect of repayment 1 Brain-
pan won’t forget that lesson in a hurry, and is
not likely to mistake his humble self for his
position hereafter.
I could multiply instances innumerable of how
poor men paid into or worked claims for years,


and were forced to sell, to find in a few weehs
that the claim began to turn out well, and men
whohnd done nothing on it reaped the beuefitof all
their toil. I could tell of successful reefers who
fluttered in the sunlight of prosperity and went
to ruin, How old Hustler was lord of all at one
time, and how he died miserable in the Bendigo
Hospital, within sight of the scene of his glories.
How, —hut I will only tell one story; one that,
when X hoard it, deeply affected me. I have
called it —
FOLLOWING DOWN THE LAVA.
IN a little hut, the walls of clay, the roof of
hark, in what wo will call Wishing Gully, a lone
spot, lived, or rather dragged out an existence,
John Palmer and his daughter Polly. They were
a good distance from any dwelling, but as then-
situation was high, they could see the suburbs of
Sandhurst and the great engines puffing and
puffing out smoke, like huge giants enjoying a
quiet “ draw.” It was an arid place where the
hut was built, the only water near being a
muddy dam containing a fluid about the consis-
tency of putty. In summer time, not a bit of
green was to bo found except the few flower-
hushes and homely vegetables reared in the bit
of garden by Polly. You can always tell where
a woman is; in the dreariest wilderness her
natural taste will blossom into flowers, be they
humble marigolds or costly dahlias, Polly and
her father- wore the sole occupants of the hut.
Ah I I forgot there was another, old Nan, the
goat. The age of this Nan no one knew; her
venerable beard spoke for- her- antiquity. The
diggers said she was old enough in iniquity.
Nan was black, and she obtained the soubriquet
of the One-eyed Devil, because she was deficient
of the left optic, which she lost in a fray with a
Chinaman, and that her general characteristics
were supposed to accord with those of the much
maligned individual whose feet are said to be
like hors, cloven. Nan had thoroughly earned
her name. There was no thievery to which she
was not up, as all those who had gardens knew
to their cost. If Mrs. Tregarthn went out iu the
afternoon, after her “man” had gone to work on
the shift, to have a chat with Mrs. Trevallion,
depend on it, when she returned her- choicest
herbs and shrubs would have vanished. It was
all set down to Nan, who, strange to say, never
was caught iu the act. She was, however, seen
lurking in the neighbourhood of a reporter’s
garden, and a bitter paragraph about the depre-
dations of goats appeared in the “ ’Tiser” next
day, in which the powers of the Legislature were
invoked against all four-legged thieves. Nan
didn’t care a straw, she used to stand quietly
blinking her eyes at the door when her enemies
passed, secure in the protection of Polly, It is
true that she was the favourite sport of all around,
who sought every opportunity to lay her low, hut
she appeared to load n charmed life, and always
escaped, not without marks of the battles she
had gone through besides the lost eye, such as an
ear missing, hair deficient in several places, and
a horn broken. Hence it was that Nan was
always allowed to sleep in the hut—her life
would not bo safe five minutes out at night,
Nan was affectionately cherished by the inmates.
She it was whose milk was one of the few luxu-
ries poor Polly enjoyed, and Nan’s family hud
not only furnished many a toothsome meal, but
occasionally replenished the exchequer. So that
no wonder Nan was doated on, and in her turn
she was attached to her master and mistress, but
particularly to Polly. How easily animals find
out kind gentle souls! And Nan, though the
greatest thief that ever walked on four legs—
having no mercy on hard-working diggers, whose
loaves she abstracted out of their InitaVhUe they
were at work, nor .even caring a rap for poor
little Tom or Nelly when they were eating their
11 piece,” but would boldly knock them over and
rim off with it—Nan would never touch a hit o£
anyhhing in their own garden, although times
were ever so hard. “ She’s got as much sense as
a human creature, and a deuced sight more,”
John would say. There wore also two other
dumb inhabitants—Sissy, the oat, and Nip, the
terrier —which lived a kind of life of internecine
war, but were always united when any enemies
or depredators from the other gallics attempted
to poach on their preserves. Generally, however,
their quarrelling was more bounce than anything
else, like that of husband and wife ; they would
lie on either side of the fire and spit and snarl,
but matters seldom went so far as a downright
outbreak. A word from Polly soon put them
right.
Polly was the angel of that household, the
light of that home. Tender, fragile as the rose-
leaf, she had been left to begin battling with
the world at ten years of age, by the death of
her mother, who was burled away at the White
Hills Cemetery, and whose grave, though humble
and unmarked by a stone, was always kept neat
and covered with flowers by Polly. After her
mother’s death Polly led a lonely life, seldom
seeing anyone except her father, to whom she
made a good housekeeper, cooking Ms poor
meals daintily, and keeping the house like an
old woman. The child had much of mature
age in her face, and she never laughed, although
her smiles were ready always, and were sweet
beyond expression. His child’s smile, when ha
returned from work, was the only gleam of light
in the world for John. Polly was a strange girl,
she seemed not of this world. Her high mystic
brow appeared full of matured thought. Her
thin, worn face, beautiful nevertheless, and
white and red, was lit up by two great blue eyes
that seemed looking up into the Infinitude of
the blue sky, and going beyond, beyond, far-
away, She loved the spring time, when the
lonely gully became covered with grass, out of
which sprang all the wonderful flowers with


which the hills around Sandhurst abound —the
red creepers, the snow-white star-like sprays of
bushes, the yellow and red heath, the blue and
purple orchids, the wealth of golden wattle
blossom —all conveyed ideas to her mind that
were beyond utterance, ideas of light, and hap-
piness, aud hope, but not tho hope of this perish-
ing world. In these quiet spring days, she
would sit reading in the old Bible tbe Eevola-
tions, and now and then pausing, she would
gaze up into the deep blue sky, and slug—■
“ There is a happy land,
Far, far away,
Whore saints in glory stand,
Bright, bright as day 1”
And, in summer nights, too, when the glorious
moon rose in splendour in the east, and
bathed the world in her mystic light, pencilling
each delicate spray in elegant silhouette on the
turf, toning down what appeared glaring and
discordant in the sunlight, Polly enjoyed the
scene, and as she sat by tho door, her hand in
her father’s, she drank in tho dream-like ideas
called up by the moonlit panorama, the mystery,
the other-world sensations. People looked at
Polly, and said she was a “rum girl, not at all
like other girls.” Kind, motherly, Mrs. Sweet-'
blossom, at the general store, would say, “ Tho
lass ain’t for this world, I’m sure; she’s too
good.” Polly was a favourite with all, but she
was too poor to have many friends.
John Palmer was not a lucky man. He had
never been. Ho lost a fortune at home, because
his uncle, who altered his mind at the last mo-
ment, became insensible before bo could sign
his name to the codicil, bequeathing all his
property to John. When, he came to the dig-
gings, ho got a claim in Eaglehawk Gully, the
richest on Bendigo, and, when ho sunk his shaft,
mistook a false bottom for tho real one, and,
finding tho prospect poor, started off to another
rush ; a man jumped the claim, aud, sinking a
few feet, got on the right bottom, and netted
£6OOO out of it that week. John took up a
claim on a new roof, since celebrated, sunk a
shaft, but had to abandon it, and the result was
that another man took it up —no other than tho
famous Bailers tedt—who got a ton of gold out of it.
That was the sort of man John was. Ho had
been compelled, for some years back, to work as
a minor, and not being a very strong mim, did
not have much employment, so that tho little
hut was often poorly provided with food and
clothing for its inmates, who would have got
on but indifferently were it not for Nan, But
to mate matters worse, John got “a craze.”
He had followed tho croppings of the famous
reef on which he was near making a fortune,
and he was as sure as sure could be that it
passed directly under tho old hut. Ho spent all
the money he had on a lease, aud began to sink
a shaft. This work he kept at constantly, until
Polly’s appealing looks, and the state of the
house would make him go in search of some-
thing to do. Polly was never much of an cater,
but how often and often did she go with only
a bit of bread a whole day, so that her father
would have enough. He was working hard, she
argued, to her unselfish self, and she was doing
nothing, so she required little; and John was
blind to all this. His craze would not let him
see anything. I don’t know how they would
have got on if it were not for kind Mrs. Sweet-
blossom. That dear woman —coarse, ugly,
heavy, and commonplace to sight though sho
appeared—had in her ungainly body, one of the
truest hearts that ever beat in the bosom of a
woman. In the book of the remembrances of
the Lord, her name is posted in many entries.
Although the times then were hard, and much
“tie” had to be given, she never would see
anyone wanting. She had a sort of intuitive
knowledge of when John had the craze, and
would soundly rate poor Polly for not coming
for her usual supply of flour, _ tea and sugar.
Her heart used to twinge again when she no-
ticed the poor girl’s thin and worn appearance
on these occasions. She used to say—
“ Why don’t you come oftoner, Polly dear?
You haven’t gone to another store, have you 7"
“Oh 1 no, Mrs. Swcctblossom," Polly would
stutter out, “but—but wo must be saving, for
father’s out of work,”
“Go ’long with you,” Mrs. Swcctblossom
would say, “as if you'd not pay every shilling,
child, when he gets work. I’m giving little
presents to my good customers this week, so
Polly, here’s a pot of salmon for you.”
And thus did the good soul try to smoothen
Polly’s thorny path through life. Mrs. Sweet-
blossom was not a church-going woman; she
was not in the odour of sanctity like her rival,
Mrs, Pmohnose, who was a pillar of the Wes-
leyan Church, being a teacher of the Sabbath-
clnss, and having all the business of that deno-
mination —but that couldn’t influence her re-
ligion, of course—and was even suspected of
occasionally taking a drop too much; but she
did no one harm, and she bad a heart that was
worth mountains of gold. Mrs, Pinclmnse sold
out the customers who wore in her debt, though
the wife were on her confinement bod, and the
husband out of work, and then she would go
and worship the Lord—the devil I ought to say.
The destinies of tho two were different, and,
judging from tho opinion of the world, Mrs.
Piuchnose was a saint supremo, and Mrs, Hwcct-
blossom a sinner of the biggest. Mrs, Pinch-
nose lived in the odour of sanctity and made
money, and bought houses, and now lives
retired in St. Hilda, an “ example.” Mrs. Sweet-
blossom struggled on until she was ruined by
her son, who turned out bad, and at last died
poor, from apoplexy, the doctors said, but the
neighbours sot it down to drink. Now, which of
those women have a place in the register of
God’s elect ? I know not how tho reader will
judge, but this I will say, that Mrs. Sweetblos-
som is an angel, and that when Mrs. Pinebuose
follows her into tho dark valley, if the door of
Paradise is not shut sharp against her, why, I’m
a long way out. Those are my sentiments.
John kept pegging away at tho shaft when-
ever he was out of work, which was often, but,
as he had no mate, his progress was slow. Polly
helped to pull up the buckets of stuff, till the
depth became too great; and John would not let


her. He reckoned, however, that at a depth of
forty feet, he would intersect the vein that led
to the golden reef below. He would then sink
on the underlie, that, is, follow the vein down,
and this would load him on to the reef. Provi-
sions were getting short, and Nan’s last
youngster had to be sacrificed, when one day
Polly, who was sitting on the doorstep, saw her
father ascend in a groat hurry, and run towards
her. She ran to meet him, and anxiously
asked if the shaft had fallen in ?
“ Come here, Polly,” said he, and he led her
over to the shaft. “ Look at this,” he continued,
pointing to a thin slice of stuff like unctuous
black clay, “Look at it, Polly—your fortune’s
made, you’re a lady 1 That’s the lava of the
great Victoria Beef —the backbone of Bendigo,
the great gold vein. It’s exactly like the lava I
struck in that fatal claim on the hill which
I deserted, for that mean Ballorstodtto go in and
make his pile —curse Mm 1 A few feet more and
our fortune is made.”
Ho clasped her passionately to his heart, 0,
could ho not feel the change in her?
"He drive a carriage and pair,” cried Johu,
wildly. “ Ho Haunt about and look on me with
contempt as I pass by. Why, Ms claim will be a
mere bagatelle to mine ; I have 600 yards along
the Uriel Oh. I child, what a fortune is before
you. The hut yonder will rise into a palace at
the beck of the enchanter, gold; your moan
cotton dross will, become one of gorgeous silk;
a splendid carriage will be at your command, and
Bendigo, aye, proud Melbourne, will bow the
lrj.ee to you. Miss Mary Palmer, now unknown,
of course, shall be sought by the highest in the
land, and will wed the brightest and best youth
the world has produced. A happy home, a
brilliant husband, a lovely wife ; children beau-
tiful ns the wattle-blossoms in spring, and nu old
man with a face bright ns the sunshine of life
can make it, by the fireside in winter, and in the
garden on sunny days. Gold every where—bright
lustrous gold, potent magician, before whom
every head is abased, every knee bent. Oh I my
heart is fit to break with joy—joy for my darling,
my Polly, dear, dear Polly.”
Father and daughter wept together, wept tears
of joy. Polly believed her father, and while ho
descended again to begin the underlie shaft on
the lava, she returned back to the house to see
if she could not get n cheerful little meal ready.
But there was little in the larder, so she took
her way down to Long Gully, to see what Mrs.
Sweotblossom would say to the event, Her face
fell, when in Mrs. Sweetblossom’a accustomed
place behind the counter, she saw her sou, a
graceless fellow. She inquired where Mrs.
Sweotblossom was.
“Gone to Melbourne, Miss,” was the inebriated
reply, for young Sweotblossom was rarely sober
when ho could get the run of the till.
Polly’s heart appeared to her to sink right
down into her shoes. Still, when she thought
about the cheerless homo, the scant food, she
ventured, with throbbing heart, to ask for
credit,
“Mrs. Sweotblossom always gives me the
things,” Polly stammered out, “ she knows we
pay whenever we get it. I don’t want nracli—a
few pounds of flour, some sugar, some tea —”
Polly stopped; the expression of the young
man’s face made her clutch the counter for sup-
port, He went over to the little desk where the
rough hook was kept in which Mrs. Sweethlossoin
entered debts in her hieroglyphics. He looked
solemn when ho came hack to the counter
again.
“We can’t give you any more credit, Miss,”
said he harshly, “You’re already £l4 into us,
and you must pay a little off. Won’t do, Miss,
we’re nearly ruined with bad debts.”
“ But Mrs. Sweethlossoin would never object,”
Polly breathed out. “Father’s struck the reef.”
Mr. Sweethlossoin took no notice of her, but
served other customers, and with a weary sigh
the girl turned and went over to Mrs. Pinch-
nose’s place, to prefer the same galling request.
This she did to her assistant, a vinegary maiden
cousin. Mrs. Pinohnose herself was at the dra-
pery end of the counter, confabulating with a
bevy of Wesleyan ladies about an intended love-
feast.
“Oh 1 it was a le-ovely sermon,” said Mrs.
Pinohnose, the whites of her eyes turned up to
the ceiling, “ and that dear Mr. Vampire, ’ow ’e
did himpreas on us that he that giveth to the
poor giveth to the Lord. My ’cart, Mrs. Sniggle
Sniggers, fairly broke when he described the poor
and broken-hearted. He is a le-ovely man, full
of grace.”
“Ho makes my soul go soarin’, soarin’ up to
’eaven,” said Mrs. Sniggle Sniggers. “Wot’s the
price of that now ciishermexe ?”
“ Please, mum," said the assistant, “ ’ore’s a
girl named Palmer as wants to got some goods
on credit.”
Mrs. Pinohnose adjustodlier spectacles severely,
and looked at Polly till the poor creature was
ready to sink to the earth.
“ So you’re John Palmer’s daughter,” said Mrs.
Kaehnose. “Pic as deals with that wesscl of
wrath across the way, Mrs. Sweethlossoin. Allow
me to say, young girl, as I doesn’t care for cus-
tomers from over there. My shop's respectable,
thank ’eaven, and as to her’s —oh 1”
There was an “ Oh I” all round.
“Yes, Mrs. Sniggle Sniggers,” continued Mrs.
Pinohnose, raising her voice, “you see 'ow I’m ill-
■ used. These people pays their cash to that snare in
the steps of the righteous, and when they’ve ruined
themselves with her chunk, why, they comes to
me to get credit, and a lot of credit I’d get by
the custom of sich. It’s a hinsult, besides, and
if I was carnal and 'ad not thrown off the old
man an’ ’is deeds, I’d get excited and turn the
girl out of doors without nothing. But grace
enables us to stand a great deal, Mrs. Sniggle
Sniggers, we grow charitable and meek of spirit
when we’ve been born again, and peace rests upon
the soul. So my girl, I won’t upbraid you nor re-
proach you in the spirit of the carnal and vmre-
genorate, but give you this tract by the blessed
Samuel.. Snifflsins, upon the text, ‘ Blessed are
they that give, for to them much shall ho given.’
Take it, road it, and it may soften your hardened
heart. If you feel the moving of grace, come to
the prayor-meotiu’ to-night at half-past seving,


and taste of the manna that drops from the lips
of the Rev. Mr, Vampire.”
“ Mrs. Pihohnose, you’re a saint, mum,” cried
the admiring Mrs. Sniggle Sniggers, ” and I feels
unworthy to he standing by you.”
“ Mariar Jane,” said Mrs. Pinchnose, solemnly,
“ don’t talk like that, lest you exalt me in my
own opinion, and I have a grievous fall from the
paths of salwaiiou.”
Polly went out of the shop, the hot tears drop-
ping down her face, and slowly made home, with
feet almost too weak to carry her. After such
rebuffs she could not go to the butcher, who was
a hard, rough man. She rested at a deserted
puddling mill, and sat on the hard clay and
looked at the tract. She wondered whether Mrs.
Sweetblossom was such a terrible sinner as Mrs.
Pinchnose made out; and whether she, herself,
was so frightful a character. Polly was quite
willing to think she was wicked herself—like all
truly noble natures, she was hrnnble and diffi-
dent —but she could not believe dear Mrs. Sweet-
blossom a great sinner. Glancing over the tract,
which, like all publications of that class, was a
medley of scriptural quotations denunciatory of
the wicked who would not support churches,
missions to the benighted savages of Hokeypokoy,
&0., her eye caught a sentence the writer had
lugged in—“ Come unto me, yc that are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest,” These were the
words of Jesus, aud as the imago which the
reading of the Testament had given Polly of that
most glorious of all characters arose in her
mind—a meek, and mild, and loving face, going
forth to all sufferers—the tears suffused her eyes,
and she cried—
“ Oh I Lord Jesus, dear Saviour 1 , give me rest,
peace, rest, rest, rest,”
The child’s prayer was answered I
She prepared a humble supper for her father,
and ha ate of it heartily, all the time talking of
the great things in store for her. He never
noticed she did not eat j if he thought of it at
all, he said to himself she had had a 11 piece ”
between meals, and besides, she had the run of
the house. Little good that was I After supper
he got a candle, aud went again to work till
eleven o’clock.
Polly had had nothing that clay, and she had
passed through great mental excitement. Yet
she did not feel hungry. The mystic words of
Jesus were sounding in her ears, pervading her
whole soul, breathing peace unspeakable. The
moon rose over the sombre forest, illumining the
world with argent light. Dark as that world
had her soul been before these words sounded in
it, but now it was irradiated, never to be dark-
ened again.
Days passed, and John worked incessantly on
his underlie shaft, the lava widening out, aud
quartz coming in here and there —quartz of the
right colour, that made his heart leap with joy.
The lava, it may ho as well to explain, is a
kind of clay that always accompanies gold-bear-
ing reefs, going down by the side of them. The
reef often tails out, or disappears, but the lava
continues, going downwards, often thin as a
thread j but, nevertheless, the unerring guide to
the bodies of stone below. It is the miners’
compass, the clew to their labyrinth. Hence,
when a reef is lost, the saying amongst miners
is, “Follow down the lava mid you’ll got the
lode, richer than ever.”
Polly told her father, when they were reduced
to a bit of bread, how the storekeepers refused
credit. He got into a fearful passion.
“ They’ll live to cringe in the dust to us,
Polly,” said he ; “ the low hounds. In a day or
so, to-night perhaps. I’ll strike the reef, and then
see if they’ll refuse. Why, d them ! there
was never such a sensation ou Sandhurst before
as will take place. Keep heart, Polly I”
“Yes, father dear,” sighed Polly, looking up
in his face, with her large, trusting eyes. “ I
don’t think of myself, only of you —you work so
hard, and want food.”
“ The hope is food for me,” said the enthusias-
tic man. “Go you, Polly, to Mrs. Pemvanuot,
and ask her for the loan of a big loaf, and a bit
of salt meat, and some tea and sugar, and that’ll
do us till the gold is struck. Then, Polly, then :
Oh I won’t it be glorious.”
And he caught her up and kissed her. Gould
he not feel, by the weight of the child, that
something was wrong? No ; his heart was
fevered with the gold, his pulse boat too wildly
to taka notice. Polly wont to Mrs. Penwannet,
and got the loan, although very begrudgingly,
and small in quantity, because Nan had lately
been at her old games, and besides destroying
some marigolds—the pride of Mrs. Ponwannet’s
heart—had disfigured her best cap, which bad
been on the fence to dry.
It had been a lovely day—calm, mild, atfd
bright, but not glaring. The sun had set in
glory—pillars of crimson, purple, blue, aud gold
rose on each side of him as ho entered into his
test. John ate his supper—the last of the
borrowed bread and meat —in the doorway, and
Polly sat by, gazing earnestly at the grandeur of
the sunset, John looked at her, aud his mind
being at that moment in a way free from the
fever of gold, he was struck with her almost
supernatural appearance. He had seen pictures
of pale thoughtful angels ; surely, never had ho
seen a living resemblance to them like his
daughter. A cold shudder went through him as
he noticed her ethereal frame, light enough,
almost to be blown away by a breath of air.
“ Polly,” he said in a startled tone.
“Yes, father dear,” she replied, fixing her
strange large eyes upon him.
“ Are you not Well ? ” asked ho.
“ Oh 1 quite well, father,” she replied.
“What were you thinking of, Polly?” he said.
“ Of these wonderful colours in the west,” said
Polly in a dreamy tone. “I’ve read, father, in
the Revelations about the new Jerusalem, whoso
gates are of jasper and pearl and all manner of
precious stones, and I was wondering if this was
not something like it, some resemblance.”
Again a cold chill went to John’s heart. There
was the magnificent sunset, the Jewelled pillars
leading up to the gate of gold into which the
sun had disappeared, and there Was his daughter,
her spiritual face, with its large mournful eyes
fixed on the west, flushed with the glow, re-
sembling, that of a rapt seraph’s 1


“Polly,” said he, hastily, “this won’t do. You
must not think of such things. There are glories
in store for you in this world, of which you do
not dream now. When I strike gold, Polly, love,
your lot will be bright then ; ‘bright, bright as
day,’ as yon sing_ yourself.”
“But, father, isn’t Heaven a better place than
this world?” asked Polly, quietly.
“Yes, child, yes,” he replied hastily, “when
we’ve fulfilled our destiny here it’s a home for
us. But don’t talk so, child, go inside or you’ll
catch cold. I’m almost certain to strike it
to-night.”
And he went and got his candle and cheerily
prepared to go to work.
“Father,” said Polly.
“Yes, dear,’’ he said, somewhat peevishly, for
the tone of her voice was so sad, unearthly and
mournful, that it disturbed him in the fulness
of his joyous expectancy.
“Hiss me,” she simply said.
“Tears, child!” he said, “this is wrong.”
“Don’t speak harshly to me,father, dear,” she
said, fixing her eyes on his.
He clasped her to his breast and kissed and
kissed her again,
“ Good-bye, father, I’m happy now.”
Ho went to work with a mind much rmsettled
by his daughter’s words and ways. He wondered
what was the matter with her. Her eyes, those
great touching eyes, troubled him, and from
every corner of the shaft they looked at him.
Ho got in a good shot towards ten o’clock
and went down to clear the fallen rook away,
and see if the long desired reef had been
revealed, clambering on his hands and knees
down the underlie, pushing aside the blocks of
stone, in the murky atmosphere caused by the
smoke, in which his candle glimmered faintly.
Suddenly a strange awe, a dread, a horror, came
upon him; then a deep pang passed through his
heart, followed by a painful joy, such as those
feel whose smiles and tears are mingled. Again
he thought ho saw Polly’s mournful eyes gazing
at him from the darkness; again the words
“kiss me, father,” fell on his ears. Then it was
all past, and he thought he heard in the far-
off distance the sound of music, low and sweet.
It might be the circus baud, mellowed by the
■ distance. Then Ms fever to get a look at the
“face” grew, and ho crept down. For awhile
he looked and saw nothing but the black line of
the lava. Suddenly his eye struck the line at
the side of the shaft; by the side of the lava
appeared the top of a creamy white stone, with
blue veins. It was the top of the reef 1 With
his heart beating at high pressure, his tongue
cleaving to the roof of his mouth, his eyes
staring wildly, he reached the spot and clutched
the stone which the shot had broken off. One
glance was enough. It was the beautiful Vic-
toria Beef stone, and in one of the blue veins
glistened two particles, set off by the cream-white
of the quartz—one rich yellow gold, the other
blue glittering galena I It was over j the dream
was a reality.
When John recovered his senses, for he had
fainted, he sat for a few moments on a atone, his
mind tumultuous with joy, pictures flashing
through it of the grandeur that was to be his
daughter’s, the glory of the Palmers in Victoria,
the joy, the ease, the plenty. Parties of plea-
sure, halls of dazzling light, youth and beauty,
and Polly supreme amongst all. Such were
John’s visions as he sat in the gloom near the
potent magician, gold—for he had overturned
the candle and put it out.
“ But why keep the discovery from the dear
girl 1” ho cried, and with nimble steps he went
up the rough ladder.
It was a lovely night. The moon was flooding
the world with her soft light, and tree aud hill
appeared graceful and romantic. On high was
the queen of heaven, like some godlike face look-
ing out of the windows of paradise, to compas-
sionate man. Longfellow’s beautiful lines came
into John’s mind as he gazed upon the tranquil
aud beautiful scene, move like a picture by
Turner than an actual Australian landscape :
“ The feverish day,
Like a passion died away,
And the night serene and still,
Fell on village, vale, and hill.
“Then the moon in all her pride,
Like a spirit glorified,
Filled and overflowed the night
With revelations of her light,”
“ I wonder Polly hasn’t come to see me before
tbis,” said he to himself as he made his way to
the hut with light steps.
The door was open; there was no light. Had
she gone to bed? She had never done so before.
He entered. Opposite the door was a small
window, and through it the moonlight streamed,
lighting up with silver glory the head of Polly,
who appeared sleeping, her head resting on her
hand. Her face was upturned aud there was an
expression of ecstasy in it that the mooonlight
dwelt on lovingly. For a moment the father
gazed on the lovely picture in delight. Ho
sculptor could throw such expression into marble,
although her features seemed as if chiselled out
of pure Parian, so motionless was she, so sta-
tuesque. At her feet lay Nan, silent and happy.
“ Polly.”
She answered not.
“ Wake, dearest," said the fond father.
She did not stir.
“ I will wake her with a kiss,” said he, and he
stepped over to her.
Through the wild waste of Wishing Gully that
night there echoed a terrible cry as of a strong
man whose heart was broken, as if it wore the
sound of the last chord snapping asunder. And
in the hut all that night, while the moon glided
calmly through the sky to her home in the west,
there was heard wailing and moaning, deep,
deep, as of a strongman in agony, and the words
of the wailing were, “ My child 1 Oh, my child!
Too late I Too late, accursed gold 1”
* * * * * *
Visitors to the Yarra Bend Lunatic Asylum,
Melbourne, often wonder at the curious madness
of an old white-haired man, almost a shadow in
appearance, who is continually digging, being
allowed, as he is harmless, to wander about and
do what he likes. His sole talk is of “following


down the lava,.” “ It’s a matter of certainty,"
lie will say; “ not a doubt of it, Polly, if I follow
the lava down I must come on the Victoria Eeef,
and when I do, why, we’ll be millionaires. Don’t
look so, Polly, you’ll bo the-brightest hi the land,
the admired of all—a hundred thousand for a
dowry. Who said Polly was dead? Hal ha!
Good indeed! She’s sleeping beautifully in the
moonlight; don’t she look lovely, like a statue?
Don’t wake her. Poor Nan! how lovingly the
dumb creature lies at her feet. I won’t wake
Polly; the picture will be spoiled. Sleep on,
Polly, with the morning beams nestling in your
hair, and I’ll follow the lava down, down, till I
get the reef, the gold, the glory of the world I
Sleep, Polly, sleep."
0 yes ! she did sleep, too deep to be awakened.
The morning after Polly’s death the principal
doctor in Sandhurst was thunderstruck by a
wild figure that rushed into his breakfast-room
with a hit of quartz in his hand, and proffered
n mine of untold wealth to him If he could wake
ids daughter. He only wanted, him to wake her,
the sleep was so heavy on her. The doctor had
the man taken up for a lunatic, and after finish-
ing his breakfast, went out quietly to Long
Gully with the sergeant of Police, and poor
Polly’s remains were found in that hut, with the
faithful Nan trying to wake her dead mistress
by licking her hands and face, and rubbing
against her. Polly was buried by the Govern-
ment, and John wars sent to the Tarra Bend,
while poor Nan, now bereft of her friends, led a
vagrant life in Wishing Gully, sheltering in the
old hut, and bleating piteously at night for her
lost friends. Bereft of her friends, she soon
became a prey to her enemies, wiro shot her
remorselessly.
The shrewd doctor, after the excitement was
over, bethought him of the words of the maniac,
and had the lease taken up afresh, and floated a
company to work the ground. On descending
John’s shaft they found the cap of the reef, and
sinking a good shaft the claim proved to he one
of the most valuable in Victoria. Where poor
John -worked, friendless and alone, “following
down the lava,” a hundred men are now em-
ployed, and the throb of many engines and the
clatter of many batteries are hoard. Had Polly
lived, she had been a queen of society now.
But which lot was best ? It is true she lost the
pomp and glory of earth, but did she not gain
admittance into the realms of joy and peace,
and escape the thousand pains and sorrows of
humanity, in exchange for the trumpery and
gew-g-aws of a wicked and perishing world.
Here is another tale, with a brighter termination :
SHUNNED: A TRUE STORY OF GOLDFIELDS LIFE.
“You don’t say so,” exclaimed the manager of
Goliah Bank, Sandhurst, one quiet evening ns
he and a few cronies were nohblerising at the
.select bar of the Shamrock Hotel. “ Eh, mon,
I’m astonished at it.”
“It’s the fact, sir,” responded the influential
broker with whom he was confabulating, “he’s
gone clean broke. Why, you never heard of such
n muddle ; he seems to have been Jumping from
a bad bog into a worse ; first one bill and then
another, bills all round, bills of sales, mort-
gages—l can’t tell what. His property’s worth
£20,000, but he’s about £40,000 in debt. He
could not have thought of what he was doing.”
The best Hennossy’s brandy, the manager’s
favourite drink, went down but badly that even-
ing. He had no pleasure in it.
“ Eh, hut I must hie awa’ at once,” said he,
“ and see about his account, he’s overdrawn
some thoosands. Weel, weel, who would have
thought it of Geordic Grancllaw ?”
The day that followed was one of horror to
George Grandlnw. Summonses innumerable
were served upon him ; threats of criminal pro-
ceedings were showered fast and thick at him ;
bailiffs were in his house, mortgages were fore-
closed, one after another, and his claim adver-
tised. He who had risen, the supposed posses-
sor of thousands, went to bed penniless, and
worse than penniless, having lost, in the estima-
tion of all, his honour, and almost made himself
a criminal. He had attended a meeting of his
creditors, and the scene had absolutely un-
manned him, and he had left the room with his
face red as fire, and his heart ready to burst.
Hohftfllookeclrouuclouabout thirtyfaoea, on each
of which ho had hitherto only seen smiles and
friendly looks ; now every countenance was. ab-
solutely fiendish with hatred, and evei-y voice,
once so kindly when saying “How are yon, old
fellow?” grated with malice and intense aversion.
He fled from the terrible storm, and the credi-
tors had to do their best with the securities.
George Grandlnw had been a lucky reefer.
Only a young man in an office a couple of years
previous to the time when we introduce him to
the reader, he had invested some of Ha savings
in a claim on a celebrated line of reef, then not
known. Ultimately, the claim fell into his
hands, by default of the other shareholders in
paying their calls ; and, but a few months after-
wards, a strike of a rich character being made
in the next claim, George obtained money to
work his, the result being the finding of the
lode, which, when once fairly opened out on,
gave him fortnightly dividends of. about £IOOO
for some time. Besides this he had speculated
in other claims, and was looked upon as the
richest young man on Sandhurst. For about
nine months George knew nothing hut pros-
perity. It was one delectable dream—one pano-
rama of light, and beauty, and pleasure. He
had been a temperate young man, but his suc-
cess made him so popular that he could be so
no more. Popularity has o ver- and over been the
ruin of many a one. Wealth has its duties,
which must bo attended to, or it soon makes
wings for itself, and flies away. George learned
to drink champagne, to keep racehorses, and bet
on the turf j to spend moat of his time in the


oity, and to gamble. Open-hearted, frank, free,
and unsuspecting, he was as easy n prey to those
who make their living at these practices, as one
could meet with. He thought all men like him-
self—honest. But, notwithstanding all this,
George’s luck saved him for the first nine months.
His claim yielded steadily, every mining specu-
lation he went into turned out well, and on the
turf and at the 100-table he was suocesful beyond
compare. But at the end of that time tie
“streak” went under foot, to use a mining
term. The mine stopped dividend paying, and
as the manager had worked it in a very bad
way to meet George’s demand for money, the
permanent works cost a great deal, and took
much time to effect. Forcing is bad in farming,
mining, or anything else. Every mining specu-
lation he went into turned out badly, and his
betting and gambling ventures were equally un-
lucky. Hence he had to begin overdrawing,
and meeting no opposition, hut, on the contrary,
being courted to “ overrun the constable,” he
went into it extensively. When the bank began
to object, ho went to money-lenders ; when they
drew in, befell back on his friends. People will say,
Why did he not draw back ? All very well to say,
but it doesn’t come oS in practice. The fact
was, that George was in a fever; he never stopped
to think, he kept reason at the door, and refused
to let him in. If, indeed, serious thoughts of
the complications of his position entered into his
mind, he always thought to himself that the
claim would begin turning out well, his specula-
tions would come right, or he would have a good
“run” at betting or gambling. None of these
desired events occurred, to put the break nn,
and the downward pace was very rapid. The
interest on the borrowed money, itself, amounted
to something frightful. Still, if he had paused,
even then, he might have been saved. But lie
did not. An accommodation bill for £SOO be-
came due, and was paid by the acceptor. An-
other bill was readily signed by the friend, to
whom George gave his cheque for £SOO. George
then discounted the bill at the bank where he
had his No. 2 account. He had an overdraft
here also, and the manager, who had got some
inkling of his difficulties, judiciously retained
the proceeds of the bill, and sent George’s cheque
hack, marked “Not Provided For.” George’s
friend looked upon this as positive dishonesty,
and would hear no explanation, going so far as
to ask the detectives if George could not be
criminally prosecuted. The result was that he
wont at once into the public resorts, and pub-
lished the whole matter, eventuating in the
crash wo have mentioned. Once the bubble had
burst, Georgs was “ gone ” irrevocably.
It is wonderful how, in spite of all precedent,
men will mistake themselves for their position
or their money ; and, in the vanity of their
hearts, think that without these they will be
held in equal regard. George lahoraed under
this error. As he stood in the garden of the
house that no longer was his, ho thought to him-
self that, after all, he had only lost his property
and money; after all, he was still George Grand-
law, the admired of the admired, the friend of
hundreds, who would set him on his feet once
more under happier auspices. He almostpaased
condemnation upoMhimself for haying passed so
many restless days and nights ; for Toeing each a
fool ns to think of suicide. Of an elastic tem-
perament, George soon recovered himself, and
taking down his hat, he carefully adjusted his
favourite geranium in his button-hole, and de-
parted for the city, certain that happiness was
not all sealed to him.
As he passed down the street, he marvelled
not a little to notice the change that appeared.
Passing Smike and Sorapeall’s office, he noticed
the partners—who every morning regular used to
meet Mm, and invite him to liquor up, by way
of a beginning—intent on a sharelist, not deign-
ing to look up, as he loitered for a moment,
thinking it was accidental. A little beyond
their office he mot with Takemiss, a 100-player,
who had won fabulous sums off him, and who
had always stuck like a brother to him ; he now
intently surveyed certain shawls in a window.
Strange to say, Takemiss was not married, and
had never been known to enter a draper’s shop.
George now noticed that as he went along,
groups were standing looking at him, and even
pointing at him. His courage began to fail.
Arrived in the thick of the Verandah crowd, he
was utterly surprised to find himself, once the
observed of all observers, unnoticed. Every
morning before this his arrival on the flags
had been the signal for a sort of impromptu
levee. The whole crowd of brokers came
round Mm, and inquired particularly about
his health, his wishes in reference to scrip,
and for the latest “ tip.” Speculator after spe-
crrlator would shake him by the hands, and every
face wove to him a smile of welcome ; every eye
beamed with friendship. Here was a reverse.
Not a soul noticed him, faces were turned from
him as if he were a basilisk ; but everyone be-
hind his back, looked at him until then- eyes
blinked, and whispered witticisms at his expense,
some of which came to his ear—“ Will you take
my bill ?” “ Give us your name, old fellow,” &o.
There could he no mistake; he was cut dead.
The money, the position was gone, and George
Grandlaw was alone there. He was a cypher.
Even his jackal, Liokfoot, whose servility to the
great speculator had been almost painful, now
would not condescend to look his way. George
could have stood the blows of the noble, but
from the insults of such as liokfoot, he shrank.
As George stood, solitary, watching the crowd,
he wondered whether he had changed from a
handsome young man into a leper. There was
a mirror opposite. He had not altered save so
far as the anxiety of the past few weeks had
imparted to his face a worn appearance. He
was still young, handsome, well-made and at-
tractive. But he had lost the talisman, and was
no more a fit associate for the worshippers of
Mammon. At first he could not believe that the
many he saw around him, who had received so
much from him, who had fawned upon him in
the days of his grandeur, could turn upon him.
He found out the bitter truth of his own nothing-
ness, and the power of the gold that, but for his
folly, would still have been his.
George Grandlaw went home that night ours


ing mankind, cursing himself, and wishing only
to die. He found that he was completely ostra-
cised, thrown out of all hope of getting a chance
to hetter his condition, of even obtaining a live-
lihood. He was proud as Lucifer, and in his
desperate rage ho resolved to cast all behind
him, and to labour with his hands, He became a
miner, at first but a mere drudge, but soon his
earnestness and intelligence told, and he took
rank as a first-class hand, and had £2 ss. a
week for wages. He inhabited a little hut in a
lone place, which he himself called Despair
Gully. Wild and despairing, indeed, was the
inmate of that hut, filled with hate and bitter-
ness.
“ Where have you been to-day?” asked young
Flyldte of Bill Dashaway, the flash reporter of
the principal journal.
“ Up near the Golden Fleece,” was the reply.
“ And who do you think I saw while I was
down one of the mines 1 Why, George Grand-
law, who was all the go hero some time since.
He’s a mere miner now. I was going to speak
to him, but he looked as if he would have eaten
me, and turned away. He does look savage,”
“ So he ought to do,” said young Flyldte, who
“ departed this colony” some months afterwards,
leaving many “sorrowing friends” behind him;
“ any one who played such pranks should, hide
themselves. I Wonder he didn’t have to go to
gaol for his doings.”
The Golden Fleece was then in the first stage
of attracting public attention. George was a
miner in it, and could not hut admire the reef.
He noticed, also, the great excitement in mining,
and looked around him at the umvorked and
unleaacd ground on every side. Ho had lived
hard and had saved a little. There was the huge
piece of nnleased ground lying between the
Golden Fleece and the G, G. Consolidated. This
he took up, and then other leases to the south.
By the time he had completed the preliminaries,
the ground had risen enormously in value. He
took hi one or two shareholders in each lease at
high rates, and made companies of them. Once
more he appeared on the Verandah, hut not the
pleasant jovial man he had been; he was now
dark and gloomy, and dressed in miner’s clothes.
He never spoke to his old Mends, although many
would have renewed acquaintance, as the rumour
was that he had become rich again. He worked
harder there than in the mine, and never stopped
until ho had sold every share —and ho held over
60,000—at enormous profits. He found himself
a wealthy man just as the excitement closed.
Then all those who had been his creditors in the
past were called together. They crowded into
the room of meeting. There sat George at the
head of the table, stem and gloomy, his lawyer
at his right hand, and on his left little chamois
leather bags, duly ticketed; one of these the
lawyer handed to each creditor, receiving a
formal discharge. There was a silence. Each
money-grub was chuckling with glee at receiv-
ing every farthing of his money, interest added.
Such pleasant surprises did not occur every day.
Old Gripall was even about suggesting a round
of champagne to celebrate the event, hut he
judiciously restrained himself lest he should
appear ostentatious and oretae a precedent.
Sldnflea had also in his mind a proposal for a
Kentucky shout, that is one in which everyone
pays sixpence and the chairman shouts, but
recollecting he wanted some tobacco, for which
the sixpence would do excellently, he was silent.
At length George rose and spoke in a sup-
pressed tone, as if he feared to trust himself :
“ I have taken the earliest opportunity," said
he, prefixing his speech by nothing, “to pay all
the money I owed, with Interest added, and
heaven only knows what a load is lifted off my
heart this day, when I can raise my head and
look you in the face. Not that I want your good
opinion, On the contrary, I so thoroughly
despise yon, that your approbation and friend-
ship would seem to me a misfortune. When I
sat in this room last, a miserable and ruined
man, it was in your power to have stayed my
downward course by at once buying my claim
from tho bank and keeping it in trust. It has
yielded, since I lost it, double the amount of my
debts. No; you would not, but rather sought
in every way to aggravate my distress, and only
thought how to wreak your pitiful malice on a
fallen man. You gloated over tho thought of
my misery when X worked in the depths of the
earth. When I did not want money you pressed
it upon me; when I was in sore need you turned
from me as if I were a leper. Thanks to a kind
Providence, I fell only to rise. I learned at a
terrible cost the great lesson, that there is
but one friend in tho world—a man’s pocket;
and that ho who mistakes himself for his
money or his position, is an egregious fool.
And now I will part from such serpents, When
the dark day will come for some of you, and
come it will, sure as tho sun will set and rise,
may the mercy you meted out to a young and
inexperienced man, bo meted out a thousandfold
to you I”
“Another Timon,” said an elderly creditor, who
was getting down the stairs as fast as he could,
looking behind him. “ I don’t mind his hard
speeches so long as I have this equivalent,”
tapping the hag of sovereigns.
George Graudlaw has left Sandhurst, aud is
seeking, in other climes and countries, those who
worship not Mammon, hut the man, the soul, the
disposition, the affections. Let us hope ho will
meet with them, but, knowing what we do, we
fear there is little hope of his search being suc-
cessful in this world,


I take tho Brokers out of winding, and show their character? —Ballarat Folks introduce a INew Style—Tom Smith—
Larry Robertson, and his episode at Long Gully—dVakley potent in Stocks and -with Girls—A. generous and
likeable German—Story of a Schinoule —Young Cautious—Other queer Pots—The Sandhurst Council—George Avery
Fletcher and his Mixture, not the genuine Scottish—Johnny Mncintyre, his Influence, and his Fall-Tilts at the
Sandhurst Tammany Bing—The Silent Member, and the Injudicious Talking One—lncident 1n a Public House—
Tho Tammany Hall at Ticw Point, and its Tehm-Gerioht—' W. X). 0. Dcuovau, Politics, Manifestoes, Spiritualism,
and Stocks—Sandhurst Pulpits—Final Shots at the Press.
SANDHURST was once theparadise of honesty,
integrity, and good faith. A man’s word was
his bond, and he never gave a cheque unless
there were funds to meet it, Every broker and
shareholder thoroughly believed in each other,
and transactions, by which thousands were lost
and thousands won, often passed without a scrap
to show except the cheques. But the influx of
the experienced Ballarat and Melbourne men
has considerably changed affairs ; and repudia-
tions, cheques marked “N.8.F.,” and all that
kind of thing, are not unknown now on (Sand-
hurst. Sly Bob Wideawake, from the Corner,
would take up stock if it rose, or showed symp-
toms of doing so ; but, if things looked blue, and
stocks were falling, Bob had the ready excuse
that his buyer had cried off. Men without a
sixpence rushed in when they saw the wonder-
ful rises in stock ; and some of them, like ray-
self, came off rich, others went to the devil.
Hence, distrust has crept into the Sandhurst
mind, and there is no move of the pleasant and
happy belief in the goodness of human nature;
no more, “ Give us your cheque for £fioo till
Saturday, old fellow ; here’s mine, payable that
day.” “ All-right, old flah, here you lire.” “Buy
1000 Extended Hustler’s of yon at £4.” “All
right.” “ Let’s have a drink.” Oh I it’s all
over now ; such men as Apfel have stopped that
kind of thing. Tho pleasant clays are gone, and
people trust no more. Still the Sandhurst
brokers are a fine lot of men, speculative, ready,
and honourable. There’s Tom Smith, of Smith
and Robertson, a regular trump, ready to go in
to the thick of the melde, and fight the battle
of stocks with the best of them, ready to toss
for champagne, and when it’s tossed for,
drink it and be jolly. Tom’s a capital fellow.
His partner acts as set-off, and appears
generally a sort of mild individual. I did not
hear anything particularly exciting about him,
except a little episode at Long Gully, where
Mr. John Maeintyre (of whom more anon) was
to hold forth as a candidate. The meeting,
which was full of Mackay’s people, headed by
the impulsive Hany Hattam, then manager of
the Hercules, now broker, would’nt hear him. The
Cornish howled down the Irish that time.
Johnny was accompanied by his brother-in-law,
and two excitable Irish publicans. In vain did
the first Pat raise his shillelagh; uselessly did the
second “ hurroo,” and flourish his hat; the mob
made a rush at the platform, and down went the
candidate and the reporters under the table,
which was smashed to smithereens. A certain
party made nn attempt to get out at the window,
hut received such a prod a posteriori that he
dropped to earth pretty quickly. The Macin-
tyre party beat a retreat, and tried to hold forth
at another hotel, when Paddy No. 1 became
excited at some Long Gully larrikins, and
threatened them with bis stick, upon which a
general meldo ensued, stones flying, the air
resounding with the battle-cries of the Irish and
Cornish. It was in this engagement that Mr.
Robertson came to grief, and hence his pub-
licity. Wakley is a favourite broker, dashing
and full of spirit, mighty in love and war.
Davy Grant’s a quiet stick, but he’s worth lots of
money, and does a good deal in the speculating
way. Hoary von der Heyde, once manager of
the Victoria Gold Mines and other claims, is one
of the best men Under the Verandah, and has
taken tho palm as a legal manager. Solid
Deutsohcr, of course, is n German, and substan-
tial, that’s all I, can say. 1 don’t care much for
him otherwise. These Germans love a man won-
derfully until you want anything from them. I
once had a German friend in the guileless and
innocent days oi my youth, long ago. He sought
my company, and appeared to love me much.
I never had so affectionate n friend. He ap-
peared to love me as Jonathan loved David. He
was a Sohmoule. Vast were hia embraces, and he
asked me to drink with him twice, but I paid by
mistake, and he sternly rebuked me. I thought
he was a fine friend, and once being hard up—
a peculiarity of mine-—I asked him for the loan
of £5. I never saw snob a change, the Lord’s
Prayer said backwards could not be more effica-
cious. I believe never did man appear so injured.
He looked upon me as if X had deliberately
attempted to cut his throat. How could I sup-
pose he had £.5 to lend ? Ho walked out of the
hotel (I had shouted preparatory to putting the
request) as if he were a most injured man. I
have not conversed with him since. When I
am passing by he discovers some extraordinary
object on the footpath or on the walls. In my
presence he has become quite a student of
paving stones and stucco. He must be worth,
consulting on these subjects. Do you know a
Schmoule i Just ask him for tho loan of £6 or
ss. It will afford you some amusement, and
won’t harm anyone. There ar-e some other
people, besides Sohmoulea, who can be experi-
mented on with great success. Think of Lord
Lytton’s lines in the “ Siamese Twins” ;
“ He asked them not to feed or board him,
And therefore all his friends adored him;
For Banltok is a place where you,
If rich, have love enough to sate you;
But only ask them for a sous,
And gad, how bitterly they hate you.”
SINKING —CONTINUED.


Young Cautious is tip there, too; a ’cute
devil, and pleasant, connected with the uni-
versal firm of Cautious and Co. Cautious, I
think, “spoons” occasionally, hut that doesn’t
interfere with business. There was iron in the
way the week I was in Sandhurst. Foundries
are not pleasant places, bnt they have strong at-
traction for some people, I could go on speak-
ing of the 500 or 1000 small fry, but it won’t do.
Jemmy Penistan is the oldest established broker,
bnt he’s been greatly out-distanced in tho race,
and is no more the broker of Sandhurst. A word
for the speculators. There’s Harry O’Neill, the
queerest fish out of water. He’s always in a
hurry and bustle; and successful enough, all
know. There’s Matthew Maofadzean, afat Scotch-
man—“ oarefn’.” Tom Hawkey was onco a
great man here, holding at one time 7000 Ex-
tended Hustler’s; bnt ho has lately been gra-
dually selling out and investing in Melbourne,
as have many of the other lucky specula-
tors. Then, who doesn’t know the gentleman
who owned the North Old Chum mine ; jolly old
Jack, looking as if he wasn’t worth a pound, and
worth thousands. Jack doesn't care sixpence
about your finikin affectation ; ho’s plain “ Sur-
face Jack ” still, no matter how money matters
have changed. The old reefers generally are
selling out, and investing in Melbourne. They
have had their days of hardship, and excitement,
and speculation, and want to secure something
that will be certain.
Let me, now, give the townspeople a turn.
The Council, of course, comes first. The Sand-
hurst Fitzglhbou is a small, red person, called
G-. A. Fletcher, after whom the sweet dust of
Sandhurst has been called Fletcher’s Mixture,
in grateful commemoration. Hootch mixtures
are generally looked upon with favour, but this
is not. The Sandhurst Corporation get a lot of
tailings and spread them on the streets, and call
this “metal the traffic soon pulverises the
“ metal ” to a fine, red dust, that lies feet wide
on the road. Polished boots ain’t much use in
Sandhurst, and black cloth suits turn out ex-
pensive luxuries. In summer-time a cloud of
red dust hovers from the ground to a good height,
as the fog does in Melbourne. In winter the
dust is formed into mud, and makes pleasant
promenades—the question to be solved being,
whether, when yon have one foot out, tho other
can be extracted before the freed foot is bogged
again. It is rumoured that some persons left
their logs behind, like the angry little dwarf
who shoved his foot down into the ground when
his name was found out; hut this I look upon
ns a fable. G. A. was a topic for the “ ’Tiser ”
for years, and I am sure the city editor must
have sighed when he lost the billet of City Sur-
veyor, being now only Town Clerk. A cantan-
kerous Town Clerk does afford such openings
for slashing articles, in up-country capitals.
The Mayor, when I was up, was Dugald Muc-
dougall—a dashing fellow, and a great specula-
tor. The great gun of tho Sandhurst Council
once, was John Macintyro, who at one time
ruled tho roost entirely.- Unfortunately, the
ratepayers came to the conclusion that the
Council was too happy a family. Whenever a
new candidate addressed the ratepayers, he
directed the slings and arrows of his wrath
against Johnny, as the person who mesmerised
the members of tho Council, and made them all
his. He (tho candidate) would soon break up
the happy party. Strange to say, it was ten to
one if he didn’t record his first vote in favour of
Mao. The ratepayers, who admired Johnny, as
the only talented man in tho body, at last got so
enraged that they resolved to relegate him to
private life ; which they did, much to Johnny's
astonishment. He has since tried to got into
Parliament, but failed, as he took tho wrong
side. Maointyro is, undoubtedly, an able man,
and how he has been kept out of Parliament I
cannot understand. The other members of tho
Council are not worth touching ; hut, before I
dismiss them, I must speak about certain charges
made against them of bonofitting themselves.
Lately, Councillor Garscd preferred this charge
against tho Mayor, but it came to nothing.
Some people said it wouldn’t do to let out tho
secrets of the prison-house. Some “ ’cute” ques-
tions, however, were propounded to mo on this
subject, which I will give without remark. How
was it the. Baths Corner was let for some £SO a year,
when some persons would give £250 for it, and
the building's lately erected will bring in, at
least, a rent of over £looo'a year 1 How is
it tho ratepayers persist in saying that five of
the Councillors were in tho conspiracy, and that
one sold out lately for £1600! How about the
Hustler’s Heserve, the lioyal Hustler’s, the City
of Sandhurst Companies, &o. &o, 1 But these
things don’t interest the general reader, so I’Jl
let them pass. I was once on the spree with one
of the councillors. He said ah 1 what
people do say when they get tight, It’s worse
than somnambulism.
Sandhurst has two members of Parliament—
Hobort Bnrrowes and Angus Mackay, Burrowos
is one of the “silent” members, and it would be
well for his colleague, now Minister of Mines, if
he were so . also. I had the pleasure of attending
his meeting at the town hall one night. You’ve
heard John Eobertson of Now South Wales,
you’ve heard Duffy? well, they are not a patch on
the Hon. Mackay. A wicked supporter of John
Maclntyre told me a disagreeable story about
Mackay. There was a private meeting of tho
Liberal Association at View Point some time
sinco, called, I believe, to administer chastise-
ment to Mackay and Bnrrowes for sins com-
mitted. Mackay spoke in his own defence for
something less than live hours. Some jolly quartz
roofers were in the next room doing a couple of
bottles of Moot and Chandon, Presently one of
them, who was wall on, got up as if to go. As
he was generally tho last to leave good stuff, this
surprised the rest, and they asked him what was
the matter. “ Matter,” cried he, “ why, look here,
I’ve been in many hotels in my time, and
travelled a hit, but I never know of a house
where they sharpened saws next the room fellows
are getting jolly in.” That reefer hasn’t had
any titbits from the Mining Department, yon
may be sure, since the Hon. Mackay came into
power. On the night when I heard him, thepeople
ultimately rushed the platform and drove him and


his supporters out, and I did not wonder. I was
thrown down the steps and grazed my shins; still
I was glad, for it was a relief. Of course, the
world knows Casey is member for Mandurang.
This strong young man has done well for himself,
Self ho worships and nothing else; therein ho
is consistent. Now the best way to serve your-
self is to be everything to all men—that is, the
party in power—and J. J. Is that. He's the big-
gest tactician I’ve known, except Mr. MfOullooh,
and him he bids fair to rival. J. J. is the
“coming man.” He was once part proprietor of
the “ 'Tiser,” but sold out too soon. He has done
better, however. Of course the colony has heard
of the View Point Liberal Association, known as
the arbiters of the destiny of the colony. They
meet in the View Point Hotel, and are about as
intelligent-looking a lot as you’d wish to see. I
had a peep at them as “lions." If you’ve a
shilling you can become a member, so you see it
doesn’t require any great wealth to be a swayer
of the destinies of the State. Tho great gnus of
this Association are the celebrated W. D. G.
Deuovan and Robert Clark. W. D. G. is the
JAMES Alipius of Sandhurst, and issues his
political or spiritual pastorals or manifestoes
whenever there is a crisis, just as any pope,
bishop, or icing would. They arc generally
verbose and sensational, beginning—“ Men of
Bendigo,” &c. &c., a la Napoleon. He lately
issued one about education, and earned the name
of Bishop Denovan. W. D. 0. is one of those
speakers who write their speeches and commit
them to memory, a class the reporters have
groat affection for, He speaks as befits so great
an Oracle, slowly, and as if gold dropped out of
hia mouth. He is also n broker and a spiri-
tualist, so the reader can see how many parts he
performs. He has done well in mining; whether
the spirits gave him the “tip” I know not. And
bore I may remark that before the late excite-
ment broke out, the spirits manifested exten-
sively at Sandhurst, W. D. C, Denovan was the
priest, and he it was who introduced Leech of
Oastlemaiue, the prophet. Out at Crusoe Gully
is a famed hostelry, where spirits other than
brandy appear, and thither went the elect of the
Progressionists. The Rev. Tyermau imbibed
spiritualism there, being at that time minister of
the Church of England at Kangaroo Elat.
The latest in W. D. C. spiritism is a spirit
hand dropping half-crowns, I have not heard
of this being repeated. It is not a paying busi-
ness. If continued there would be few people
who would not become spiritists. Besides, it
opens suspicions of theft. Unless there is a
spirit coinage, verily the departed stole the half-
crowns, and if so a panic must ensue, for whose
pockets are safe, if spirits begin to usurp the
magsman trade ? Of course it will be said that
it was a deception of W.D.G’s. No fear; I’ll
answer for that; the worthy Denovan sticks
close to the bawbees, and not even for renown as
a medium would he spend half-a-erown. If I
am taken up for stealing a half-crown I will
have an excellent defence In stating that a
spirit put it in my pocket. I’ll call Denovan as
witness, and make him conjure up the “ gone be-
fore” individual to duly attest to his depredations.
The following acootmt of a spiritual seance
is from the pen of a thorough unbeliever ;
THE INTERRUPTED SEANCE.
There was to be a seanoe. As an unbeliever,
I was pressed to attend by my friend Seeklight,
who is a great searcher after new faiths, and
follower of new prophets. I went. There were
five males and five females, very nice people.
They earnestly impressed upon me the necessity
there was to disabuse my mind of all previous
notions, and seek the light. How I was to
do that did not appear, since the light was
put out as soon as operations began. We
sat very solemnly for some time, sandwich
fashion, lady and gentleman. Sister Tabitha
sat .close to me, and hy-and-by, thinking
the spirits were very tedious, I put my arm
around her waist. 11 Hush,” said sister Tabitha,
they are here.” Solemn silence ensued. Em-
boldened, I snatched a kiss. “ Scoffer,” cried
Seeklight, 11 do you hear that ? Believe. What
spirit has kissed sister Tabitha 7” I replied in a
deep voice, “ Her brother.” The triumph of the
party was now complete. Several other kisses
were given, and the ladles said they had spiri-
tual comforter's around their necks and waists.
I bethought me I had one of 801 l and Black’s
best in rny pocket. I lit it noiselessly. I cannot
describe the scene revealed ; sufficient it is that
all the sisters beat a precipitate retreat, blushing.
An aged medium said there were evil spirits in
the room. I smelt rum. I may mention that I
have not since boon invited to attend at a seanoe,
and that the sisters avoid me when they pass.
Generally speaking, the mining excitement
drove the spirits away, and even Denovan forgot
them in his success. Religion is nowhere in
Sandhurst, although there are plenty of churches,
Eew believe in God or the Bible. A vast
number think that when we die there is an end
of us, and live rrp to their theory. Some believe
in the spiritists. When you ask such men why
they attend church, and pay pew rents, they will
say, “Oh, for cxamprleto my children.” 1 What
horrible hypocrisy I But to return. A few
people make politics a business, hut the greater
number of people in Sandhurst trouble their
heads little about it; if they can make money,
that’s all their care.
There’s a well-known story going of how this
Association treats the members for the district,
be they ministers or not. Once, when the Asso-
ciation itself was divided, there was a meeting
held to pass judgment on the conduct of the
members, who, while this was debated, wer - e
kept in a little closet, listening, no doubt, to the
palaver about thou 1 characters. At last, when
matters were going hard, the head man opened
the door, and out marched the two lions, whoso
appearance and defence squashed the adversa-
ries. In such a way do the members cringe to
the Association to stick to place and pay.
I was going to give the Sandhurst Bar a mb
on their habits, but I have a wholesome dread of
actions—and I couldn’t touch this subject with-
out giving room for fifty—so I must pass them
by. The Clergy are all muffs, dry bones, and that


accounts for the dendness of the church mem-
bers, When the Free Ghurcb of Scotland was
separating from the Established, a Gaelic poet
characterised the ministers of the latter Church
as: —
“ Ministers of wood,
Standing in pulpits,
Speaking unwillingly,
With scarce a live soul in them.”
Translation.
This description answers the Sandhurst clergy.
Ho wonder the Church does not put life into men
here. Of course, there’s the Eev. N , who
thinks he is “ some chalks,” hut I am of another
opinion.
And now I come to the last section of my
satire, the Sandhurst Press. The “ ’Tizcr” is the
leading journal, and is doing a wonderful trade.
Nevertheless, it makes no progress—the pro-
prietors appearing to take all the profits and
doing little to deserve the patronage of the
public. It is edited by E. E. Haverfield, an
old journalist, once proprietor of the paper, and
a great explorer. The “ ’Tizer” is a great den,
like all newspaper offices, not fit for a decent
man to go inside of—-dirty as the devil. I had
not the pleasure of becoming acquainted with
any of the staff, but judging from our “staff” on
the Muddy Gully Free Briton, I don’t care for
newspaper people. The head reporter of that
important back-district journal was a thin
meagre individual, with an exceedingly largo
swallow and a poor beard. It was at the christen-
ing of a new engine that first we met. He paid
great attention to the “ comestibles” (I quote his
report). I should imagine I would sooner keep
him a week than a fortnight. The proprietor I
have already mentioned. His people loved him
dearly, I am told—they could eat him, for thou
there would be an end of him. I suppose all
employers suffer similarly. He was addicted to
raising the salary of his employes from thirty
shillingsto onepound a week. His generosity was
appreciated. At Muddy Gully there wore evening
papers, one printed, from appearances, in the
channel, hut I never got so far, consequently,
I knew nothing about it. I was pointed
out one night a party reclining sweetly in the
gutter, gazing into the sky, and told he was con-
nected with an evening journal, I asked the
recumbent what was the matter. Said he:—
“ The par’s got in the wrong plasho, old mansh,
letsh clriuksh.” I thought he had got in the
wrong place, and I departed.
DRIVING.
I mn invited to attend the Starting of Machinery—The Opening of the OolTln Hecf—Three tin-citable Individuals—The
Night before the Battle—The Money—The “ Coffined” Pair”—Mutual Mistakes—Change of Apparel and Change of
Appearance—The Old Woman of the Wood, and what she did—An Old Dog for a Hard Bead—Michael O'Snliivan
to the fore, against his will—Discovery and Happy Ending—Strange Boport of the Proceedings—Wc arrive at the
South Extended Q-olconda—Waste Not, Want Not—Baptism— The Speechifying—The Chairman's Acquaintance with
the Queen —Strange Speeches—The Go-ahead Tribute, and our Descent—“ Caged"—Good Idea —Suggestion for a
Strike —Kisstoe in the Ascendant—A *£oooo Transaction—Loo again—Looed in Two Ways—The Fall of Lazarus, not
risen from the Dead, or Debt on this occasion—Kisstoe in the Ascendant—The First Loss—The Turn of the Tide—
Revelations of Broking—Sandhurst Society—A Valuable Partner—The Waitresses of the Post, the Ladies of the
Present—Retire to sleep and dream.
AS a wealthy and influential man ; and a
stranger, I found myself invited on
Thursday morning, while at breakfast, to the
grand opening of new machinery, on the mine
of the Extended South Golconda Company, in
which all the big people of the town held shares.
This magnificent company have 600 yards along
the northern extension of the Golconda reef.
True, the Golconda reef is, at the best, not 300
feet wide, but about a mile east and west was
pegged out on each side of the Extended South
Golconda, about nine companies abreast claiming
the name of Golconda, and to be “ dead one the
reef,” but the Extended had had a survey made
by a “ thoroughly reliable mining surveyor of
standing,” who made the reef pass right through
the centre of their ground. It should not be
omitted, however, that the Great Golconda next
east, the South Golconda west, the Main Beef
Golconda, next but one east, and the Golconda
Consols, next but one west; all bad surveys
made, and, strange to say, the surveyors brought
the reef right through their respective claims.
However, that was none of my affair ; I was
bidden to the feast, and I never look a gift
. horse in the mouth. Besides, was I not told
that if I bought in I would get a lift, inasmuch
as the claim would soon be sub-divided into a
tribute. This is a favourite dodge* When a
company’s shares have been sent up as high as
possible, a tribute is let to themselves, and
there’s another spurt. Often tributes sub-let
tributes, when the game is flagging. But that
game is almost played out now. If companies
were divided and sub-divided, into bits the size
of a shilling, they wouldn’t sell. I and Loowell
started ofi; in a hansom to the scene of opera-
tions. On the road I heard a capital story, and
I’d better let the reader enjoy it; —
THE OPENING OF THE COFFIN HBEF.
The groat promoting firm of Smart and
Quiet floated successfully the claim of the de-
funct Otahcitans, called the Coffin Beef, because
all that the original shareholders got out of it
only paid for their coffins—one cutting his
throat, and the other drinking himself to death—
and a powerful directory being put on, the
shares “ flew,” and magnificent machinery was
erected. To the opening were invited three
young bloods—Bill Bounce, the incomparable
broker, Joe Slyboy, the “ deceiver,” as he was
called Under the Verandah, and Daniel Take-
miss, the reporter. As it was desirable to be up


early to catch the bird, the worthies resolved to
do “ 100 ” until the morning, but, owing to some
slight disagreements, ending in “lights down,”
bottles flying, they were compelled to adjourn
to a resort not exactly conducive to religion, to
pass the remainder of the night. Here, how-
ever, they were not welcome, and were looked
upon as intruders. Still they might have got
along till daylight, had it not been for Bill
Bounce, who had imbibed so much champagne
that it is no figure of speech to say he did’nt
care for man or the devil. Hence he made
a few observations of a not complimentary
nature to a lady on deshabille, which resulted
in an appeal to O’Connell and the Orangeman’s
weapons of war. Strange to say, and it speaks
well for Bounce’s vituperative powers, he beat
the demoiselle at her own weapons. "When
lovely woman is beaten at words—rare occur-
rence I —she generally resorts to her nails, but as
this party had lately pared hors, she took to
chairs, bottles, lamps, glasses, anything that
came handy, in consequence of which our
friends had to boat a hasty and ignominious
retreat through the window. Our three beauties
now took to the street, and performed sundry
little playful pranks. They put a pawnbroker’s
balls on the front of the Commercial Bank,
upset a tea and coffee stand and broke the head
of its proprietor, smashed a few windows, wrote
various ditties, not of the Dr. Watts’ school, on
the doors, and otherwise behaved themselves as
if they were escaped from Bedlam. By daylight
they made a start for the Coffin Beef, driven by
Slyboy, for Bounce and Takemiss had much ado
to mount, being topheavy. Presently it came
on to rain, and the day looked delightfully
dreary. Bounce and Takemiss lay in the
bottom of the buggy, closely looked in each
other’s arms in maudlin affection. Both had
splendid belltoppors when they left Sandhurst,
but by the time they were half-way they had
hopelessly squashed them in this manner ; they
put the hats under tho seats for safety; now
their feet wore beneath the seats also, and as
each felt a hat he gave it a good kick, under the
impression it was the other’s.
Arrived at Blumgudgeon, the nearest village
to the Coffin Beef, they alighted, and had break-
fast. Such figures, you can imagine—wet,
dirty, and with hats like a chiffonier's. A
change of raiment had to be got, and when it
was had the result was even more laughable.
Bounce was dressed in the innkeeper’s coat, which
did not reach down to the small of his back.
Takemiss had trousers largo enough to hold
three like him ; and Slyboy, only a small man,
had a coat that reached down to his heels. The
distinguished visitors created considerable amuse-
ment amongst the youthful population, and were
received with derisive cheers. But they at once
made np for all discomfort by going in for un-
limited Moat and Chandon, and were tight as
lords before tea o’clock. Indeed, it’s a question
if they had got over their first “ drunk.” After
a while—new hats, more ridiculous than tho
garments, having been provided—the three
hopefuls departed for the scene of operations,
about three miles distant, taldng with them a
bottle of brandy. They happened to come across
a very humble hut, tenanted, by an aged person
of the female persuasion, who had the appear-
ance of one of the celebrated Eumenides—she
had one eye and one tooth, both large.
“ Come, let’s have a lark with the old blade,”
said Bounce, ever up to practical jokes ; and
clown they went, and sought the protection of
the hut, and its fair proprietor. The bottle of
brandy was produced, and jollification was the
order of the day. The old lady was at first in-
clined to be standoffish, and spoke much about
her 11 characther,” for she was Hibernian; but
the influence of the brandy was not to be with-
stood. The three heroes now entered upon an
Herculean exploit, they bent their resources to
make the old woman drank. She took nobbier
after nobbier, but there was no symptom of
excited nature. Presently our worthies, who had
to keep her company, found themselves drifting
into the laud of dreams, Want of sleep, and
rest, told powerfully upon them ; and, ere they
had succeeded in them charitable intention of
getting the old hag chunk, they succumbed
themselves. The “leary” old lady at once
snatched at the bottle of brandy, and, with many
chuckles, finished it; after which she carefully
examined the pockets of the party. Thanks
to dissipation, there was nothing in them, and
the old woman did not dare to lay hands on
their watches, which would have proved white
elephants to her. She avenged herself, however,
in a different style. Making her way to the
town, in a gay mood, she informed the sole and
valiant guardian of the peace there that three
desperate-looking villains, armed to the teeth
(the old woman’s mouth watered when she
thought of the brandy), had come to her house,
and demanded food and rest. She felt sure they
wore some notorious bushrangers. The heart of
Michael O’Sullivan, the constable “ in charge,”
wont into his boots at this intelligence. How
could one man, though brave as a lion, take
throe desperate bushrangers ? What was he to
do ? He communicated with the landlord, and
a council of the chief men was called, which
resulted in the arming of all the male population,
and then marching to the scene of battle. The
soul of Michael O’Sullivan was sorely perturbed.
As constable, he was forced to march in front,
exposed to all the slings and arrows of misfor-
tune. ’Twas dreadful; and yet, when he thought
of the paragraphs that would appear in the
“’Tiser,” “ Independent,” and "Argus,” about
“the undaunted bravery of Constable O’Sullivan,
who, we are glad to state, has received £3OO
from the Executive,” his heart rose, and he
thought of marriage with Biddy Mulroony, to be
shot down into his boots the moment a noise
was heard. But now they arrived at the fated
hut, and a council of. war was held. A spy, in
the shape of a small boy, was told off, and he
reported the enemy to be quietly sleeping. Then
the hut was rushed, and the redoubtable bush-
rangers captured. In them the landlord recog-
nised his guests of the morning, and the result
was a general reconciliation,; although Michael,
O’Sullivan was sorely disturbed at the idea of no
reward being forthcoming. At one time he had


serious thoughts of getting the old woman to
prefer a charge of assault with intent, hut her
age, and extreme ugliness, made him desist. He
had to console himself, however, with plenty of
drink, at the bushrangers’ expense. But the
cream of the joke was, that the three adventurers
had missed the opening of the Coffin Eeef.
However, they were present at the ball given in
honour of it, and enjoyed themselves capitally ;
the adventure of the day affording more fun
than if they had been present at the opening.
Strange to say, Takemiss, the reporter, gave a
most flourishing account of the ceremony and
speeches, next day; and put down, amongst the
assembled company, the names of Bounce,
Slyboy, and Takemiss.
We had now arrived at the ground, and were
cordially received. There was a large number
of persons present—many ladies. The place for
the ceremony was the machine room, where lay
the monster that was to suck all the water out
of the Golconda Eeef (for this was a co-operative
drainiug engine, being erected at the joint
expense of the companies along the supposed
lino), and enable the miners to come on stone as
rich as the Extended Hustler’s. The head man
called us—a select party —inside, and opening a
bottle of champagne, gave us a taste all round.
The bottle was then filled with cold tea and corked.
This was the christening bottle. “It would not
do to throw good liquor away on the engine,”
said the chairman of directors, a lover of good
liquor, “ she wouldn’t appreciate it and we can.”
The bottle (in the “ "i'isor” it was said to he
“ filled with the glorious vintage of Champagne”)
was then tied to a hit of cord attached to the
roof, and the tremulous young lady who was to
christen the engine, was instructed by the
Lothario of the directory in the dirty. 1 couldn’t
but think that he went in for too much handling
of the young lady, although he represented it to
be necessary. The puffer was now put in motion
and duly the wheel began to revolve, upon
which the young lady swung the bottle with
vigorous force upon it, so strongly, indeed, that
the splinters flew about to the imminent danger
of everyone. Then we all set up a great cheer,
hats and handkerchiefs were waved, and a rush
made for the tent where the good cheer was
spread. A certain banker took the chair, and
was rather disgusted to find brandy had been
left out of the programme : 11 That wishy-washy
champagne,” said he. The feeding over, the
toasts began. I toot down the speeches, hut I
am afraid I had partaken of so much champagne
that my shorthand notes were confusing; all I
can make out of them I give below. The reader
will see the speeches are mrlatim, ; —
The Chairman: Ladies and gentlemen, “The
Queen and Iloyal Family.” I can speak feel-
ingly of Her Majesty, because I have had the
honour of her acquaintance. (Sensation.) Yes,
ladies and gentlemen, when I was a small boy,
she told me to get out of her way. (Groat
laughter.) Still, ladies and gentlemen, although
you are not likely to be so honoured, let’s drink
health to her.
A Yoioe: What about John Brown ?
A seedy individual hers rose, and in maudlin
tones, evidencing great devotion to the “Waoh-
ter,” said, that he deeply regretted that a dis-
agreement had occurred between himself and
Her Majesty for some time past, and he had not
seen her face for a considerable period, Would
any lady or gentleman kindly stay his longing
to see the face of his beloved sovereign by pre-
senting her likeness in gold or silver. Ho did so
love to see Her Majesty’s face engraved on these
metals. He could say no more, hut weep fond
tears of regret.
The Chairman; Order, order. Ladies and
gentlemen, the toast next on the list is, “ The
Governor.” I have seen that gentleman, Ho
appears a plain old buffer. They say he’s fond
of the bawbees, and won’t give any balls. (Oh I
and disapprobation.) No doubt he’s tired of
dauciug, and prefers other amusements. Ladies
and gentlemen, whatever dissatisfaction may be
felt by persona in Melbourne on that account, I
don’t think we need have a grudge towards His
Excellency for that reason, for wo have small
chance of ever being present at any Yioe-regal
party.
A divertissement here occurred, owing to an
unskilful gentleman, in opening a bottle of
champagne—it was the first ho had handled iu
his life—letting the cork fly into the face of his
neighbour.
Tire Chairman ; Let us now drink to our own
selves. It is unnecessary for mo to dwell upon
the magnitude of the undertaking of this com-
pany. Since Eome was founded such a grandeur
of conception was never entertained. (Hear,
hear.) Here, where only a few years ago hopped
the playful kangaroo and the lively flea (A
voice ; “ The latter is still here.” Another voice :
“ Catch him.”) and corroborood the wild black-
fellow (cheers), the magnificent engine puffs
and creaks and whistles. ’(Hurrah.) Need I
say how all this is owing to these enterprising
men, Messrs. Fox, Lamb, Wolff, Hogg, and
Bullock 1 Actuated by the purest motives, the
desire to see Bendigo progress, they spent their
time, energies, and money, on the advancement
of the Extended South Golconda. Let us drink
“ Success to the Extended South Golconda Com-
pany,” coupled with the names of the directors.
A Shareholder ; How long will they bo direc-
tors 1
Another Shareholder’; Until the first spurt.
The toast was heartily drunk by all, even the
individual who was so fond of the Queen’s por-
trait in metal: he had fallen under’ the table,
hut Lad providentially taken a bottle of cham-
pagne with him, so that he enjoyed his otiwm
oumdUjnitato.
The Chairman : Mr. Fox, chairman of directors,
will reply.
Mr. Fox (nervously): Gentlemen—ladies and
gentlemen—Mr, Chairman, ladies, and gentle-
men. I—l don’t exactly know what to say, I
feel prond to he so honoured. I—l hope you’ve
all enjoyed yourself. (Makes a desperate push).
I hope the shares will rise to sfil, (Cheers, and
a voice, “ Hook ways,”) I can say no more, but
wish you good night, and thank you.
Mr. Fox sat down under the impression that


he hadn’t particularly shone. There were loud
cries for Lamb. The lamb arose.
Mr. Lamb (a saintly looking individual with
a great white beard, an Oily Gammon): Mr.
Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. It is my proud
privilege to lay before you this afternoon a
statement of how this mine was taken up; how
the company was floated; how we went to work;
the machinery erected; the work done ; and all
particulars. (A hiatus occurs here in my notes.
’They are all figures, Interspersed here and there
with “chives,” “crosscuts,” “acres,” “cranks,”
&o. &o.) I thank you for your patient hearing,
and I am sure this is a day for us all to he proud
of to the hom of our death, the starting of the
Extended South Golcoada—the regeneration of
the Golconda line. The first pull of this engine
was the breath of life of hundreds that will yet
exist on this lino, until it becomes the greatest,
the richest in Arictoria, in the world. ’ (Great
cheering. A Larrikin at the window, “Well
done, Patty!”)
The Chairman; Mr. Bullock mil propose the
next toast.
Mr. Bullock: Mr. Chairman, ladies, and gen-
tlemen. You all knows I ain’t much of a talker,
but then I works. (Hear, hoar.) The toast I
has to propose is the manager and mining
manager. I ’opes they’ll lead us on to gold,
that’s the wuss thing I hope for ’em. (Hear,
hear.) Gentlemen, the manager and mining
manager.
Legal Manager (a conceited looking youth,
once a clerk); Mr. Chairman, ladies, and
gentlemen. Allow me to thank yon for the great
honour yon have done mo in getting drunk—l
beg pardon, in drinking my health. lam sure
you all feel for the harassing- duties I have to
perform, my sleepless nights and daily toil. (He
had an hour’s work to do in a week, for which
he received £2.) But I’m prepared, ladies and
gentlemen, for even greater exertions for your
benefit if wo strike stone (Hear, hear,) and pay
dividends, for no doubt I will he compensated.
(Hear, hear.)
Mining manager: Gentlemen, yon be all
aware I ain’t a speaker, but, like my hon’ble
friend, Mr, Bullock, a worker. Au’ I intend to
sink (A. voice ; “ The Shareholders’ money ”) till
1 got her, and when I’ve got her, I’ll make her
pay. (Cheers.)
The Chairman; Mr. Lanky will propose the
next toast,
Mr. Lanky; The toast I’ve to propose is one
you’ll all heartily appreciate, because it is a mill-
turn in ymrw, (“Good Lord,” cried several old
women at the end of the table, “what's that/”)
and is “ The contractors, the miners, and the
mud-scrapers." (Heal-, hear.) Gentlemen, you
must all acknowledge the way the contractors
did their work was admirable; ’ow beautifully
they finished the blacksmith’s forge till it’s
a thing of beauty, although it may not be a
joy for ever, and the galvanised roof is a
great credit to the artistic ability of Tommy the
Tinman. How the iron-work was done you
have all seen, the flywheel being a master-piece
of effects, and all the nuts being so tightly fitted
that larrikins can’t crack ’em. (“ Oh !”) As for
the miners, gentlemen, arc they not the bone and
sinew of the district ? (Great cheers. By-the-
bye, Mr. Lanky was about putting up for the
Mining Board.) Ought we not to bo proud of
them ns a body of men, strong, hardy, with iron
hands, as the poet says. How beautifully can they
drill holes, with what artistic effect they swing
the hammers I How they can toss off a pot
of boor! Thoy’ro the base and foundation of
; the groat human pyramid. Gentlemen, ns for
the mud-scrapers, I don't know who they are;
I’m sure, from their name, they’re useful, and all
admirers of the ntilo duloi (“Ohl Jerusalem,”
cried the old women again, “he’s clean beyond
ns.”) will approve of them. So let us drink the
health of all with three times three.
Which was done, and as this was the last toast
of importance we “went.” At the pressing invi-
tation of the manager and directors of the Go-
ahead Tribute, Bmithcreou Gully (you won’t find
these names in Hogg’s map), wo resolved to pay
that mine a visit:, and see the gold workings.
The Go-ahead Tribute is a celebrated claim,
and has been in work for some time, so we know
wo would see some splendid workings. On
arriving on the mine we found the manager, an
easy-going man, ready prepared. He soon meta-
morphosed us into as 'disrespectable looking a
lot as you would want to see, by the aid of sundry
old coats, trousers, and hats. Where wore our
good looks gone to now ? As I looked round, I
could not recognise the dandy follows who had
been standing about me a few minutes ago.
Such sights, to be sure I We heartily laughed at
the guys we had become, and it was universally
agreed that never was the force of the saying,
“S’ine feathers make line birds,” so felt before.
We first inspected the quarto-mill. Here wo
saw stamper after stamper fall down into its box,
crushing the precious stuff, which flowed out of
boxes into the ripple-beds, where the hungry
quicksilver extracted the gold. The inside of n
quarto-mill is not favourable to hearing. You
have to shout at the highest pitch of your voice
to bo heard, and then your mouth must be in the
hearer’s ear. There is not much room lor dis-
cussion in a quartz-mill. Just get two disputants
like Blair aud Tyermau there, and they would
make their speeches very brief. It wouldn’t bo
a trad idea to put up a quartz-mill near Parlia-
ment Houses, so that hon. members would team
to be brief aud to tho point. The best speeches
made are those bawled into reporters’ ears. Alter
the quartz-mill inspection, an intellectual opera-
tion, we wont to tho mouth of the shaft and
entered a “ cage”—a square arrangement. Then
word was given to lower, and down wo wont into
the darkness like “winkin'.”
I felt as if I was going to sea. Tho manager
told me to look out for my bead, I was looking
up lit the gradually lessening light above. Pre-
sently we heard “pick-pick,” which told us we
were nearing the scene of operations. The cage
stopped, aud we were lauded safe and sound,
and provided with a caudle a-pieoe to explore
the labyrinths. We had scarcely stepped out of
the cage, when we passed through a. deluge of
water, "not unlike a shower-bath. Suddenly, as
we were about to thread our way in the murky


light through the tunnel or “load," we heard a
voice in the distance 017 11 Dire." While I was
wondering in my own mind what such a cry
was raised for in a place 600 feet under the
earth, and so damp, the manager drew us hack
into another level, explaining that a shot was
going to be let of£. At that moment there came
a sound like a thousand thunders, the earth
shook like a leaf, and half our candles were
blown out by a violent current of ah' caused by
the shot. It is a fearful sound, imparting a dread-
ful sensation, when you hear the ground rattle
as if it were made of tin, and it gives you an
idea how risky an occupation these poor miner's
follow in muck and water. The manager now
bade us follow him, and we went along the
level, which was ankle deep in water. We tried
hard to walk on the rails of the tramway, but
often stepped in. After a lot of circuitous turns
and twists, we got to the level where work was
going on, after narrowly escaping being killed
by stone coming down the pass. There was
quite a glare of light where the men were, the
smoke having just cleared away, for the mine
was a well ventilated one, and we could see the
men at work, belting away at the hard rock.
For the benefit of people who live above ground
I will describe the operation. One man holds a
drill, giving it a half-turn at each stroke, while
another bolts away at it with a hammer which
ho swings about in a most reckless manner.
Anyone would swear his comrade’s hand would
stand a poor show, but such is not the case, I
never heard of an accident this way. I wish
they would engage me to do the hammering
business. I warrant that I'd give work for the
hospital for a while. Give me the billet of
striker, and there would be a strike amongst
those who held the chills before many minutes
were past. The men stopped work, and we ex-
amined the rock; slate and sandstone on each
side, and a vein of white quartz, with blue
seams passing through. We came across some
specks of gold, at which we wore overjoyed, and
were permitted to break those pieces off. The
manager entered into a lengthy explanation of
the_ workings. Ho was a Comishman ; that ex-
plains why I did not understand his explanation.
I never heard a man who could run on so. Ho
talked and talked, never waiting to take breath,
which I imagine was pumped into him by some
one at the back of his head. “ He,” and “ she,”
“oauutcr," “she rides a horse,” “winze,” &c.,
were the principal words in his vocabulary. He
was in fall song when wo left, explaining to the
latest arrival of our party. I asked Loowell
if he understood what the manager was saying.
His reply was characteristic—“ Couldn’t under-
stand the old , anti dkl’nt care ad— either,”
It would make you shiver to see the cavern
we were in ; the rock hanging above ns in
places quite loosely, and here and there propped
up by a bit of wood, preparatory to “ sets ” being
put in. All I can say is, that every time I
looked up a shiver went through my frame.
The manager, indeed, told us, in a half-breath,
between his explanation of “her” course, that
there wasn’t the slightest danger. I don’t know,
hut I was deuced glad when wc left.
After passing through the shower-bath, -we
duly got into the cage, and were “ heaved ” up,
"being quite astonished, when, after an half-hour
in the depths of Hades, we once more came into
the light of day. So much for my trip “ Down a
Mine.”
Arrived at the Verandah, after I had had
lunch, I was rather surprised to notice that a
great crowd was gathering, as they told me
Thursday was generally a dull day, Kisstoe
came across me, and at once lugged mo to one
side. Ho nearly smothered mo with his em-
braces, and wouldn’t speak a word above the
lowest whisper. Something awfully mysterious
was up. Ho couldn’t even tell me what the ex-
citement was in the Victoria : ho took me into
his office.
“ My dear fellow,” said he, in oily exuberance,
“ I told yon I'd do best for yon ; I told you I’d
give you a show. The time’s Come. Such a
oharroe is now on that won’t occur for a long
time. Give me joy, dear friend, my dear fellow.
There’s to be a ran on Lazarus,” here he sunk
his voice to a whisper, afraid the walls would
start out of their places at the intelligence,
and dart out under the Verandah to purchase
Lazarus shares. “I’ve bought GOO for myself,
at 80s,, and a lot of fellows are buying
up all they. . can got hold of quietly.
Give mo an order at once, and I’ll do best.
You’ll make a clear thousand before the second
Exchange meets. Quick, my dear fellow, quick.”
Now, although the prospect of a thousand was
always irresistible to me, I can’t say that on the
present occasion Mr. Kisstoe’s urgent appeal
struck me favourably. I brought to memory his
kind endeavours to get my North Hustler’s out
of me, and I looked with distrust upon him now.
I said I would go out and see.
“There yon are now,” said he. “You never
give mo an order to do best; you always appear
to distrust me. Well, go to the street, nnd see.”
We went down stairs, and I moved amongst
the crowd, to see what was the feeling in
Lazarus. As Kisstoe said, it was strange, very
strange. There were free buyers at from 70s. to
80s., and all the brokers wanted Lazarus.
Thought I: They are a good, substantial stock,
and can’t decline much in value. So, in a fatal
moment, I determined to go into them. As well
do the big-lick business in such a stock. So I
gave Kisstoe an order for 1500 shares at &i each.
This was rather good, seeing that my bank
balance was only about £ISOO, very little more,
perhaps less. I said to myself I would sell out
early, if they wore falling, Pate was against
me still. At that moment, who should I meet
but the Excitable, and he at once told mo he
was looking out for another to make up a 100
party of six, “ At that hour of the day ?” said I,
“Yea,” he replied, “it’s a splendid party, and
you stand a ohanoo of making £IOO or £2OO.
All big men ; high stakes, and money right.
Gome on.” Still I hesitated. I ought to remain
to watch the proceedings, and sell out if any re-
action took place. At that moment Kisstoe re-
turned. Ho had secured the shares, and abso-
lutely held them in Ms hand—lsoo. This rather
gave me a start, and the idea took mo that Kisstoe


had the lot ready to hand, and only wanted an
order. I asked him rather severely how he had
managed to secure them so soon. He made
groat capital of his cleverness, and entered into
a long story about how ho got them out of a
fellow who was in difficulties with ins hank,
“Why,” said he, “yon could get 81s. for them
now.” Oh I that I had taken the 81s. I felt
quite cheered by this intelligence, and readily
gave my cheque (it was past hank hours) for
£GOOO, getting the scrip in exchange. It was a
big transaction. Kisstoe must have made £3OO
out of it—a good day’s work indeed. Still I felt
happy, and said to myself I could spend an hour
or two at 100, comfortably, allowing the shares to
grow. Fatal hour 1 So I went with the Excitable
and we started 100, with six of the most reckless
players I ever snt with. Miss would bo taken
first in say for £SO or £ 60, and three and four
loos were customary. 1.0.U.s were current coin;
for everyone there was looked upon as good as
gold. I question if those who have my 1.0.U.s
are of that opinion, ’Tis highly doubtful, for
I never redeemed them. Such pleasant memo-
rials of an hour’s play, I argue, should never be
destroyed ; they serve to warn. By four o’clock
I had lost some £2OO. I had intended to knock
off then, and go and sell the Lazarus; but now,
I changed my mind, and kept on until half-past
four o’clock—then I had lost £4OO. I looked
blue. We kept up play until six o’clock, when
the other gentlemen would play no longer.
However, X felt a little easier, as I had brought
back my losses to £l5O. We then separated,
and I and the Excitable went to dinner. I
noticed, as we sat down to table, that there was
more than the usual excitement. The talk was
very loud. We sat down at the same table with
Schmoats and Brilliant,
“Well, it bents the devil,” said Sohmouts, “I
never see such a fall, nearly 20s. in one day—
two hours.”
“It’s hot,” said Brilliant, “they tumbled down
like a heap of dirt. They say the directors sold
out and sold each other.”
“One’s heavily hit,” said Sohmouts.
“ Maodougall’s trying to stop the panic,” said
Brilliant.
“What stock’s that?” inquired the Excitable,
“ I’ve been at 100 all the afternoon, and been
out of the market.”
“Why, you’ve missed the biggest excitement
ever on,” said Brilliant. “At the second Exchange
Lazarus’—”
I started at that.
“ Lazarus’ began toppling, and in spite of all
efforts to stay them, down they came with a rim.
A report came in that a sandstone bar had been
struck. Prices fell like lightning—B3s,, 80s.,
755., 705., 695., 685,, GBs., 64s.—and closed about
6 is. 6d. or 625.”
I stood aghast, and for a while know not what
to do. In vain Biddy asked me what I would
order. X stared rigidly at my napkin and
revolved my position in my mind. I resolved at
once to hurry to Kisstoe and strangle him. Then
I changed my mind, and determined to send an
order to him to sell out at once. 1 could then
meet the cheque for £6OOO, not otherwise. While
my cheque was met, there was a chance to get
right, for I could buy again without money; but
if my cheque was dishonoured, farewell the ease,
the tranquil mind, of one whose cheque is talceu
quick as gold. So I dispatched a messenger in
hot haste to Kisstoe, to sell “at best.” He
couldn’t complain but he had an order of the
kind he wanted at last.
I then began dinner, and as it is the duty of
everyone, who studies to get on in the world, to
appear totally unconcerned when some dreadful
event occurs to him, I was gay as the rest and
rallied some who were reported to be hard hit.
But the tide soon turned on myself, for the nows
had leaked out that X was one of the heaviest
victims, and I could see several wore revolving
in their own minds how I could stand the heavy
blow. Kisstoe had let out that I had bought
1500, and this was soon multiplied to 3000, so
that I was looked upon as the man of the period,
the suoked-in. Several other brokers kindly-
advised me to beware of Kisstoe, who, they
said, was in the pay of certain Mg men, and was
used for “potting” and “taking in.” This was
certainly poor comfort. I began to feel gloomy.
My prosperity had been grejit: at 100, Under the
Verandah, in society, I had heen successful.
Was it not probable the turn of the tide was
coming ? I shuddered as I recollected the many
turns of the tide I had had in.my short life; the
days of splendour and prosperity at Ballarat, the
days of misery and poverty. “ There is a tide in
the affairs of men”—how true that saying is !
One time, no matter how you act, no matter
what may be the wisdom of your speculation or
not, everything goes right, you make money like
water, it flows steadily in, and the tide goes on.
But the ebb sets in; you can do nothing right,
however wall-studied your speculations are they
come to nought, and your hand is ever in your
pocket until there’s nothing loft in it to take out.
Was this turn of the tide or ebb come for me
now ? It looked like it. I’d gone wrong in 100
that afternoon, and my speculation had been
most unfortunate.
I was thinking sadiy over all this, and munch-
ing celery, when Kisstoe arrived. He came up in
a great bustle, and condoled with me in the most
lamentable manner. He had lost £6OO himself.
Where had I gone to? He had been hunting
everywhere for me when he found the shares
falling, and if I hud been present he would have
got me off with at most a loss of £SOO, instead
of £I6OO. To give the devil his due, I believe
Kisstoe never meant to cause me such a loss.
He was tempted to “pot” mo for the large com-
mission of £3OO, and hoped to pull off another
commission for me of £3OO in selling, my loss to
be about £SOO. But my absence had done the
thing. Two hours’ absence from the Verandah
had ooat£lsoo. Hence it can easily be seen how
assiduous in his attendance and study of the
markets, a man must be who intends to make a
fortune by mining.
Kisstoe, to his credit be it spoken, was a good
broker, and he had sold all my Lazarus shares at
an average of 605., a loss of 20s, n share, and on
the whole transaction of £ISOO. Glad was I he
had sold, for they ultimately fell to 30s. 1 Yes,


Kisstoc was a broker. The requisites of ft broker,
pure and simple, are—any quantity of “ blarney,”
tongue enough to talk a hole in a forty-shilling
pot, unblushing effrontery, and a wholesale and
retail knowledge of the art of lying, positive,
inferential, and indirect. All those Kisstoc pos-
sessed to perfection, in conjunction with another
quality—alfeotionateness. Altogether he was
irresistible, and not to be shaken off —that’s a
great deal. It didn’t matter to him particularly
what side palled olf; he made money at all
events. I was heartily amused at the way
in which ho operated. He was quite as
lively when the market was falling as when it
was rising; like the celebrated contented man,
be took matters whichever way they went, and
smiled. If the market was rising, Kisstoc
rushed and bought, to sell out at profit to some
person who was not so quick as himself. If the
market was falling—and Kisstoe was a perfect
barometer, ho could toll a full or a rise, indeed, he
could smell them —then Kisstoe “potted,” that
is, ho sold to those who were buying to support
the market, although he hadn’t a share. If the
stock fell a Is. or so lower ho could “supply” at
a good profit. lam told that on this occasion
he potted a prominent Lazarus man, who was
buying to atop the panic, with 600 shares at 765.,
which 500 he afterwards bought at 60s. —a clear
profit of £375 I By buying the Lazarus’ for mo
lie made £3OO, by selling them he made £3OO,
this was £6OO, a profit on the day of altogether
£976. That wasn’t a bad day’s work, was it?
I felt heavy at heart, especially as the reports
had gone abroad of my being so largo a loser, for
that would, no doubt, cause people to be cautious,
and make thorn beware of mo as the “ unfortu-
nate,” However, I put a good face on the
matter, and as I received an invitation from a
certain gentleman to attend a little party bo was
giving, I resolved to go and witness a little of
Sandhurst high life, to see if it would liven
me up a bit.
Clorinda Villa was rather-a pretentious name.
I discovered, on arriving there in n hansom, that
it was merely a low building with a how window.
Whan we arrived, the gaieties were at their
height, and wo were ushered into a rather small
room, where a large number of ladies and gen-
tlemen were assembled. As a gentleman from
Melbourne, supposed to bo in the good graces of
South Yarra soft-goods people, I was pretty
warmly received, and as I was a little past the
bloom of youth, thanks to dissipation, I appeared
to be apportioned to a rather literary lady, who
I afterwards learned did keep or had kept a ladies’
academy in some gully, I don’t know which—
Beelzebub, or Ouc-eyo Gully. Of course, I
must say I would much sooner have been the
partner of Miss M. D a dashing Irish
belle, the daughter of a retired publican, who,
in appearance, is like the redoubtable John
O’Shimaasy, and quite as good at the blarney,
but I soon discovered that I had the best
partner in the room for my purpose. We soon
found out that going round the room in o. waltz,
or walking through the Mrst Bet or Lancers, was .
not so inuoli to our taste as picking our neigh-
bours to pieces. I professed myself vastly de-
sirous of knowing what the present company
was composed of, and my gratification was soon
complete.
“ I assure you, my dear sir,” she said, “that
nothing but stern necessity compels mo to stay
in this savage place, with its dust and its inha-
bitants. Why, sir, my father had a good busi-
ness iu the city of Loudon (she did'nt mention
what it was) and gave us girls (modest, seeing
she was 86) a refined education. You know, sir,
how an educated person feels when with these
clods of earth, whoso utmost proficiency is the
signing of their own names—several here can’t
do that.”
I ventured to suggest that some names wore
worth very little at the bottom of a cheque,
though excellent specimens of penmanship.
“Ah, there’s where it is,” said she, “they
put on such airs because they have sortie money,
although in this fluctuating place no one knows
who will ho up- to-day and down to-morrow.
I’ve some Extended Softheads, sir, and they
might go to a pound. Would you like to invest!”
Horror 1 speculation in a ball-room I I de-
clined,
“There’s the host; why, bless yon, ho was in
difficulties a few years ago, and now who but he la
lord .supreme, although ho doesn’t know the Pons
nsinorum, sir 1 And his wife, sir, the lady with
the die-away airs, as if she had been brought up
in Belgravia, she was a barmaid not many years
ago, and X have passed by and thought what a
degraded creature she was. Now, she wants to
do the patronage business. She can’t play a bit
on the piano. There goes a high and mighty’s
wife, a cook once, then a waitress, now lolling in
her carriage. As if she know how to sit in it I
Why, sir, look round you, I can count one, two,
three, four groat ladies here who were once
waitresses at the Shamrock Hotel. That matron
in the splendid silk waited upon mo for three
weeks while I lived in the Shamrock. She can’t
bear the sight of mo now. That’s the sort of
society you have got to put up with here, sir j
cooks, waitresses, barmaids, fee. See. Oh! the
gentlemen. Well, look at that superb fellow
with the grand albert and the costly diamond, a
few years ago he used to puddle not far from
my sohoolhouso. Oh 1 that person—ho was a
quartz-carter not. above a year ago, and now he’s
rolling in wealth. You see he’s already rolling
with drink. That’s little J. B, Watson; small,
but a mighty man in his own estimation.
That’s of the Extended Hustler’s with his
wife, a fine motherly sonsy woman, with none of
the affectation of the others. Who is that eccentric
party, you ask, who is frisking about the room
and talking- so loud 7 That’s Johnny Mncintyre,
once the great man here. You’ll hear more
funny speech from him at supper. There’s
Alexander Bayne, the generous, the liberal 1
Oh I they’re going to have mnaic. It will amuse
you to .hear them. The Infant Prodigy is about
to hold forth.”
We seated ourselves in expectancy while a
very young lady was led by a bank clerk, of
whom thorn were many hero, all of them dressed
superbly, to the “ grand.” Her mother and
sister accompanied her to give confidence. I


forget the particular composer who was mur-
dered, but I fancy it was Bellini. The young
lady sang correctly every fifth note, the others
were left to take care of themselves. There was
great applause when she concluded, and she had
to give an encore. Now, it is the misfortune of
some people at private parties that they must do
all they can te make themselves agreeable, and
if anyone sings they think it the correct thing to
demand an encore. Hence the infliction. A
dashing looking lady was now led forward by
another bank clerk. She sat down at the piano
with a determined look, as if she harboured
some design against it.. Then she looked round
at the company in a way that plainly said,
“ Live, and applaud me; thank your stars you
have had an opportunity of hearing me, and then
die.” Down came her fingers on the piano with
a mighty hang. She was a believer in harmony,
melody was beneath her. After a few hangs,
her fingers began chasing one another up and
down the piano in an alarming manner, as if
they were afraid one would succeed in creating
discord before the other. This, her brother called
“ pearls of melody.” I was of a different opinion.
Then she began touching some of the notes as if
they -were red hot, gently tapping them, and
jerking her fingers away quickly. After this, her
fingers were again attacked with racing fever,
culminating iu “von dam smash,” as a German
near me observed, as if all the larrikins in Sand-
hurst had flung all the available stones on the
roof. Of course, there was prolonged applause
and an encore, but I didn’t listen to it. Tired of
the inanities, and conscious the morrow would
be an eventful day for me, I hade all adieu, and
retired to the Shamrock to my couch, wearied
and anxious.
STRIKING THE REEF (NAUTICAL).
Reckonings up aro always sad—The Basket, the Butcher, and Party who was not at Home—“ Sitting” on a Debtor —
False Alarm of Fire—A man with a broken leg climbs a Shaft and departs in a' - hurry—l exchange Cheques
benevolently—Some people’s Blessing or Friendship not worth n Penny—Walls have ears—An intelligent Bank
Wall—The Bill that was not taken up—The result of Accommodation Bills—l ask Unctuous to do a Bill—
His Horror,
IT was with a strange feeling of relief that,
next day, I settled up with Kisatoe, and met
all my engagements. And yet, when I went to
the bank, and found my balance to be the mag-
nificent amount of 17s. (kb, while it was about
111500 the previous day, X cannot say I felt at
ease. My mind sank under the depressing cir-
cumstances for a while, and I regretted that I
had not repudiated, and knocked Kisstoo “ in,”
I could then have gone off with ray £l5OO. In-
deed, when I came to think of it, I looked upon
myself as little short of being a fool. Still, I
reflected that if I had not met the cheques my
credit would have been destroyed, and I
would bo debarred from entering into the
markets. But my mind, thank heaven, has
never been of the oak class ; like the bulrush, it
bends to the storm and rises again. So, after a
while, I thought to myself that I could easily
make another rise by the same moans that I had
employed to make the last one. So, on to the
Verandah I want. Strange to say, Kisstoe did
not appear to feel very warm towards me after
this. He had evidently had all he wanted, and
now sought some other party on whom he could
expend his lavish affection. The Excitable and
I had a drink together.
“Do you see that stout fellow,” said ho; “he’s
the rnmmest card out. You never saw such a
strange chap as ho was, a few years ago; now he is
a‘• big’ ’ man. He used to go wandering about in
the gullies, and was a “hatter which signifies
a person who lives by digging iu the gullies.
His name’s Mark. Well, Mark would pitch his
tent in Dead Dog Gully this week, and would
duly leave word with the nearest baker and
butcher to supply bread and meat at his
place. As he was generally oat, he would
place a basket on, a bush, near the door, and in
it they could deposit the goods, The trades-
people did so, and at the end of the week left
their bill. Weeks passed, and they could never
find Mark “at home so at last they would
cease leaving the goods. It was remarkable that
when they did so Mark disappeared from Dead
Dog Gully, and came out at Pegleg, Jackass,
Beelzebub, or some other equally euphoniously
named gully. Once a much-tried tradesman re-
solved to have Mark, and followed him to his
hole, on a quartz-claim, now famous, but then
unknown. The creditor hallooed if anyone was
below, but not a sound was heard save the tap-
tapping of the pick. So. the creditor “sat”
on Mark, “Fire,” after a while, cried a voice
do prufunilis. The creditor beat a retreat to
some distance, and waited for the blast, but it
did not conic. “ Help I” cried the voice below.
“What’s' the matter?” cried the creditor. “ I’ve
broken my log in getting away from the shot,
which missed fire, thank heaven. Oh, help 1"
The creditor was not, after all, a had-hearted
man, and, besides, there was the consideration
that if his debtor went to kingdom come, no pay-
need bo expected, So he hurried off for help,
and when he arrived with some sturdy miners,
the bird had flown, and the claim was empty.
I didn’t hear of Mark being persecuted after
that. That same claim turned out well for
Mark. But his obstinacy was wonderful. He
bought a large claim with a body of stone 60
feet wide. Someone said the stone wouldn’t pay;
Mark said it would ; and to prove it he crushed
for months every bit of quartz that came out of
the mine, the result being a few pennyweights.
Such are the queer characters of Bendigo.
Worth £50,000, though.
A little while after this, as I was ruminating on
what I would do, up came to me a gentleman
who was known, X learnt afterwards, as tho
“ Exchange-cheque Man,” from his proclivities.


I had made some acquaintance with him. He
drew me aside, and, alter some preliminary con-
versation, asked me if I would do him a favour,
a trifling favour. I answered that I would if it
lay in my power.
“ My dear fellow,” said he, “ I merely want
your cheque for to-day. It’s near hank hours,
and I haven’t been able to get in all the money
due me. It would greatly oblige me. It’ll pass
through to-morrow, and then you can pay mine
in.”
“ Oh 1 you want the lend of my cheque,” said I.
“ Merely that,” said he.
“ Oh 1 certainly, my dear fellow,” I replied,
warmly, “just come in.”
And I record it as a fact, to redound to my
praise as a philanthropist, that I gave him my
cheque cheerfully. You have heard the old
story of the man who asked the priest for the
loan of a penny. The priest replied that ho
could not entertain such an idea. “ Myrcverend
father,” said the fellow, “it is-not the penny,
hut your blessing I want.” “ Oh I that’s a case
of another kind,” replied the priest—l’m not
particular about the words. “Kneel down, and
reverently receive it.” “ You’ll excuse mo, most
munificent man,” said the other; “ upon second
thoughts I must decline, with thanks. You
would not give me a penny, yet arc ready to give
your blessing ; ergo, your blessing is not worth
a penny, so I conclude it’s not worth having.”
The priest was a little bothered. Some people
are remarkably ready to give what is not worth
a penny. For instance, I know numbers who
will thrust their friendship upon you, but if you
test it by asking n substantial favour, like Harry
Rickards they say “ Good evening,” and depart.
Now, my cheque, at best, was worth only 17s. (id.,
but on this occasion it was not of even that value,
inasmuch as I had signed my full name, instead
of one initial, one Christian name, and the sur-
name with four dots—my bquk signature. I pity
that party j in the innocence of his soul lie
thought he had me, and that his cheques would
be met; but that evening he received a note
informing him my cheque had been returned,
marked "'Wrong Signature,” Consoling for
him I But I had given exchange cheques be-
fore.
And hero let me have a “ shy ” at the banks of
Sandhurst, and the hankers. They are the aris-
tocracy of the town; and are looked upon as
some “pumpkins.” The big quartz-reefers arc
only clods of earth after all, and take no stand
in society. The banker’s clique is very select.
As for their commercial relations, the hankers
arc a queer lot. Rumour has it that some of the
blink managers are not scrupulous in using means
to enrich themselves, allowing big overdrafts to
favoured individuals who can return the com-
pliment, and giving the cold shoulder to small
fry. Walla have ears, and a peculiarly de-
moniacal wall who’d walked out of its place to
see how things were on the Rialto, whispered the
following tale to mo :
“ It was singular that Highflyer could com-
mand such a lot of money. Highflyer had
started business not long, and yet was able to
buy stock when he liked, up to the extent of
£lO,OOO or £15,000 a day. When he ‘went in’
stock rose, and ho generally cleared out at a
profit. Well, one day I was standing up straight,
looking longingly at the bright, golden bars in
the strongroom, and watching the manager
quietly going over the bills, when in walks
Highflyer. He had a pile of scrip in his hand.
“ 1 Another lot?’ said the manager.
“ 1 They won’t be long hero,’ said Highflyer.
‘ I want £lO,OOO to move the market. 11l make
it fly. How many will you have V
“ 1 Oh 1 a oonpie of hundred ; they’re heavy
metal,’ says the manager, 1 Mind you have
it ofE by Saturday. These Melbourne fellows
will be down on me like devils if I don’t square
up. I’m not to allow overdrafts on solid bullion,
let alone scrip I’
“ It was singular, but next day Highflyer came
in to take out all the scrip. He gave the ma-
nager a pretty big cheque which ho paid into
his account. I couldn’t make out what that
cheque was for. I’ve studied it, hut I nearly
knocked all the mortar off myself trying to And
out.’
How about this, ye Melbourne directors, who
101 l at ease in your chairs, and imagine you arc
earning your fees 1
This appeared to be a day of stories, not busi-
ness. Jack Holdfast mot mo, and asked mo to
drink with him. Presently a rather remarkable
individual came in and was also invited to join.
He thou went away, and while I and Jack woro
doing the amiable again, Jack said he’d tell me
about the fellow who’d gone out.
THE STORY OF THE BILL THAT WAS
NOT TAKEN UP.
What you have just said about popularity
being the ruin of a man in some instances is
perfectly correct. To be too popular is not to be
happy. It means either to be continually bor-
rowing or eternally lending. Bill Fincfdlow,
the chap who had a drink with us, and who you
could see was shunned by all except myself, for
I pity him, —well, Bill, a few months ago, was
the best loved man hero. Ho had a good and
influential billet, and thought it was for himself
aud not for his influence people courted him.
Perhaps it was lor both. He was a free, affable
fellow, and good-looking and nioe-manucred. I
never knew him to have a quarrel. Now I
believe that, hr spite of all his popularity, Bill
would have got along capitally, if in an evil
hour his bosom friend, Hick Connor, had not asked
him why he did not speculate ? Bill replied he
had no money.
“What?” said Dick, “and be out of the
market, and other fellows making hundreds a
day, and you in the cold? Do a bill, my dear
boy, I’ll give yon my name, and buy scrip,”
Ho they did a bill, and 13111 bought scrip, but
it didn’t turn out well, and this necessitated an
appeal to another friend, who readily enough did
a bill for Bill, and so on. When he had onoe
tasted blood, Bill was like a tiger, he thirsted
for more. He found no obstruction. He had
only to ask for a bill and it was done for Mm at
once. And so the game went on. Bill was not
successful. Bill, having command of money.


gambled, and began to haunt the scenes of vice.
Then the hills had to he renewed. No objection
was raised to that. Bill hoped some of his
scrip would come up and put him on his feet.
Alas 1 futile thought I instead of rising, the
scrip fell; calls came in orushingly, and 100 told
heavily upon him. He got hills accepted to I
don’t know what amount. At Inst ho made a
mistake. He contracted an overdraft with a
hank, and having got a large bill renewed, paid
in the proceeds into the bank to meet the cheque
given by him to the acceptor (the acceptor
having paid tho previous hill). The bank, who
had suspected Bill was tottering, coolly appro-
priated the mouey paid in to paying off the
overdraft, and the result was that the cheque
was dishonoured. The acceptor was indignant,
and brought an action. Then the crash camp.
Bills, cheques, &c., were showered at Bill until
he fairly sank under them, and now he is penni-
less, having lost what was of greater moment
than money—his honour. He, who a few months
ago, when he made his appearance on the flags,
was met by all with hearty shakes of the hand,
was crowded round as one honoured, was fawned
upon and cringed to, is now shunned as if he
had the small-pox ; and he has lost his billet
too. Is this not a lamentable fate for one so
young, so lovable, once so high in moral cha-
racter ?
I acknowledged the story was a sad and in-
structive one, but said that, at all events, Bill
was young, and would stand a chance of begin-
ning the world afresh. But I was that moment
going to do what Bill did.
Amongst my many friends was one Unctuous.
That man had shown great affection for me.
He had once, in a fit of inebriety, asked me if I
wanted a bill done, or some mouey —he was the
party who would back me up to the last farthing.
I backed him up that night, and took him home.
I thought of this party at the present time, and
as I saw no prospect of a stock in which I could
just then make a rise, I said to myself X would
go and see Unctuous, and find if he was as good
as his word. His residence was not far horn
Pall Mall, so I made for it. He was at home.
He had been on the flags in the morning, but
getting tight had gone home to recover himself.
He received me warmly. I fenced about a few
topics, and then boldly started into the subject
matter. I said I had sunk all my money in
Lazarus, &c., and felt a little want of cash now,
to go on with. Depend upon it, I said, I would
not be long making a rise in the market, when I
could retire the bill. Unctuous stared at me as
if I had proposed to poison him. After a little
while, he recovered himself, and spoke to the
following effect; —
“My dear fellow,” said he, as well as the
drink would allow him, “ I can’t tell what plea-
sure it would give me to do a bill for you, but
the fact is [I saw at once my case was a bad
one] that I went too far in that kind of thing
some time ago, and my partner bound mo down
not to accept a bill for twelve months [his
partner was a myth], so I can’t do it. I’d lend
you a thousand, willingly, if I had it, hut I
spent all my ready cash in Lazarus as well as
you, and I never overdraw.”
I looked at his mouth; it was a very firm one,
and I knew ho would intrench himself behind
his impenetrable position, so I said no more. I
merely remarked, jocularly, that perhaps it
would ho all the better for me, as I would be
prevented from speculating. So, after indulging
in a few brandies, we parted the best of friends.
I made a mess of it by asking Unctuous. By
four o’clock, after he had done his afternoon
round, all the principal men knew I had keen
to him to borrow money, So much for his
friendship.
I had struck the reef indeed, but it had turned
out a rank duffer.
That night I spent in 100 with poor success.
The tide had turned.
THE TRIAL CRUSHING.
“ A cliango came o'or tho spirit of my dream”—Kasstoo's Poverty— Sudden Poverty of tire Principal Men of Sandhurst—
—Tho B’s and tho Grasshopper—Sandhurst on Saturday Night.
ONE morning early in the week I wrote that
I went down Pall Mall in the sunshine,
and with applause. A change had, indeed, come
over the spirit of my dream now. On Saturday,
about eleven o’clock, I walked down the Mall a
poor solitary. The sun shone brightly, the crowd
hurried by intent on money-getting, but the sun
shone not for me, the crowd looked not at me.
I had made another fiasco ; some one had been
too much for me in the race of life again, and I
stood melancholy and dejected on the flags. It
was strange, too, how everyone avoided mo.
Unctuous had carefully spread the rumour that
I was “ going,” and immediately I was shunned
as if I were spotted with the plague. So I was—
with the plague of impeouniosity, I had several
cheques to meet and didn’t know where to turn
to got the money. Oh 1 that I had stuck to the
£ISOO and repudiated. I met Kisstoe. I drew
him aside and asked him if he would oblige me
with the loan of £SO for that day, as I had a
great deal to meet. I would give him my cheque,
which would be duly met on Monday. Kisstoe
embraced me, and I thought that he was going
to poll out the £SO and hand it to me at once.
Not he 1 He represented that he had spent every
shilling he had in Lazarus, and that he had con-
tracted an overdraft ol somewhere about £2OOO
to meet cheques, as he had not collected all the
money due to him. The wretch ! he wouldn’t
lend me £SO, after making £6OO out of me. I
could have almost knocked him down. I now
bethought me of several parties who had pre-
tended a violent affection for me, and to them
I went. I thought tho people of Sandhurst were
exceedingly rich, but never before did I hear


such' tales of ■poverty. : Everyone had an over-
draft, elephantine in its proportions —everyone
■was completely cleaned out. Not a penny could
I extract. One fellow, who had the reputation
of being enormously rich, told me so piteous a
tale about bis poverty, that I generously asked if
the loan of a £5 note would do him any good,
pulling it out of my pocket at the time. He
■declined,-hut look a drink with me. Whnt ft lot
•of gratuitous lies people tell in this world when
their friends ask them for favour's. There’s no
need of it. Why don’t a man come out boldly
and say at once, “I will not lend you the money,”
or, “I won’t give you my name.” It should be
easy enough to do so, for the greatest unkiud-
ness you can do a Mend is to lend him your
■name or your money. I never heard any good
come of it yet. When it comes to a man want-
ing accommodation bills or money, why, the best
he can do is to go insolvent at once. It’s the
proper and straightforward course, and always
the best. Talking about insolvents, some people
do wonderfully well in that business. A fellow
I knew wont insolvent a year or two ago.
Strange to say, he entered business shortly after-
wards, and retired »little while ago happy and
rich. Indeed, he has gone home. This is a
wonderful world. Yory few people can afford to
wear gold guards, I saw n mighty man of com-
merce, who made a most inglorious failure,
walking about the other day with a chain of
Brobdignagian size. I never could do it Hint way.
Once X get command of the money I lose my
head, and the rhino must lly while it lasts. I
resemble the grasshopper famed in fable. This
gentleman, dressed in the neatest fitting green
coat, and altogether spruce and dandy, hopped
down the Gollius-street of his genera in the
lovely summer time, courting gay ladybirds, and
otherwise enjoying the luxuries of this world.
But the winter came on, the grass faded, the
flowers withered, and our friend found hi s occu-
pation, like Othello’s, gone. Not far hence was
a great warehouse tenanted by a certain firm of
B’s, respectable parties with nldormanic sto-
machs, and having any amount of “ sugar”
stowed away. Thither dragged the grasshopper
his weary limbs, and presented himself in a very
bedraggled condition before the door, on which
was a brass plate of large dimensions. Out came
a heavy B with spectacles, and asked the forlorn
what he wanted. “A little of your superfluous
sugar,” humbly replied the grasshopper, “ such
as might have dropped on the floor among the
dirt, or any scrapings.” “ How is it,” inquired
the B, “ that you did not provide yourself with
sugar in the summer time, when the fields were
in bloom and open to you?” “True,” said
Hoppy, humbly, “ but I am naturally of a light,
gay condition, as you are of a heavy one, and I
followed the bent of my inclination, which was
to dance and sing, while you gathered honey.”
“You’ll excuse me,” remarked the. B, “us you
have followed your inclination so long, continue
to do so; the weather is cold, and hopping ought
to warm you. What we have stored tip we
intend to keep for ourselves, and the scrapings
of the floor wo will send to the ants, who will
pay a good price,” and the B shut the door,
upon which the grasshopper remarked, “ B
d Now, I am one of these unfortunate
grasshoppers,
* Sandhurst presents, or did present, a beautiful
and stirring sight on Saturday nights. All, the
population of the out-districts throng into town,
and Pall Mall—the only decent street—becomes
the scene of bustle, equal, if not superior, to that
of Bourko street; the great flood of gas-light
flows out of the shops in the throe blocks,
illuminating the Camp Hill, from which a
splendid view of the panorama is obtained. In
the balcony of Hcfforunn’s Shamrock Hotel the
splendid city band, the best in the colonics, plays,
and the music, the lights, and the crowds of
people produce an effect I do not recollect to
have seen elsewhere. Perhaps this is owing, in
a great measure, to the full view that you have
of the whole panorama, lying ns it does beneath
your feet if you stand on the Gamp Hill. And
away in the dark back-ground are throbbing the
great engines which infuse the life-blood into
this crowd. When you enter and mix with the
assembly, the effect is perhaps a little disenchant-
ing. Drinking is going on ; the Shamrock bar
is crowded, and there is any amount of talk and
fun. It is the evening for gossip, and us a matter
of course, the prospects of every claim are eagerly
discussed by the townspeople with the outside
population who come in. Then the bank win-
dows present, themselves, a groat attraction.
The Saturday night X was in Sandhurst, the
Lazarus and the Extended Hustler’s Tribute
yield were each over SOOOozs., great cakes of gold,
looking awfully tempting in the glaring gas-
light. Thou splendid specimens, thick with gold,
are exhibited in the windows. Eew who have
the means should miss the .ohancc of seeing the
splendid scene presented in Sandhurst on Satur-
day night.
WINDING UP THE COMPANY.
In forma pauperis— Reflections on Broking and Speculating—Beeps at Professionals—Story of. a Prize-fight— I The
Chinese damp—Pan-tan—Cl ambling for Ever—Two' Papers written by mo on Sunday Night—The Chinese Theatre;
Altootiou of tiro Doorkeeper i High Leaps in Chinese Opera; Success in the Upper Notes; The sweot Celestial
Music; The Mysterious Wand, which drives me out—Sevonty-flvo Pounds for Sissopeuuy—The Now Zealander—The
‘ Chinese Lottery Explained—Loo on Sunday Night—The Good Drinker—“ The. Sleep of Sorrow and the Dream of
Joy.”
I HAD sundry bad dreams on Saturday night,
nud \vlaeu X woke ou Sunday morning about
eleven o’clock, I didn’t feci particularly lively.
Out in the vacancy there stood a party of a
peculiarly uncomfortable aspect, who pointed to
a placard on which were the words “You must


go.” I.saw no'other fate instore. I must leave
this pleasant city, where I had made so brief a
flutter, and Shake my wings elsewhere. I could
not but heave a sigh of regret as I thought of
leaving the fair pastures which a week ago had
presented so bright a view to me. But the un-
fortunate grasshopper would have to betake him-
self elsewhere. So, I lay in bed for a long time,
thinking of the past and the future, and of the
fevered existence I had led. I thought, too,
what a sad thing it was that mining, one of the
greatest pursuits in the colony, should be
degraded to mere gambling, to the ruin of many.
How many a one the great rush at Sandhurst has
taken from good billets, from quiet homes, to
lend tho fevered life of Californian gamblers, to
end in the fates of Apfols and of Booties! The life
of the man Under the Verandah is not one that
could be desired. From ten o’clock in the morn-
ing until twelve at night the Verandah man, be
he speculator or broker, must bo at his post, for
five minutes’ absence may cost Mm thousands.
He must be prepared to swindle, to dissemble, to
lie I He must lose such an impediment as a con-
science. It is inconvenient. He must be pre-
pared to live like a man in a fever. Quiet days
and peaceful nights with his family are not to be
thought of. His wife is to all intents the gam-
bler’s wife. Thought and study, except to think
on schemes and study deceit, are not allowed by
the engrossing pursuit. But, more than this, ho
has to become the receptacle for the drink of the
publicans. Melbourne people have no idea of the
drinking that is done in Sandhurst. It is drink,
drink, all day, and swim in it at night. Every-
one you meet, will “ shout,” and you have to
“shout” in return. The consequence is that
many “lose their heads" (such is the expression),
and hence often the mad pranks in the market,
A' stock once went up rapidly. Quoth one—
“ What's the matter? .What’s making them go?”
“ Jerry Heffernan’s brandy,” replied a wag, and
he was nearly correct, And after all Ms sacrifice
of 'the dearest privileges of a man’s life—edu-
cation, study, home comforts—the speculator or
broker Is presented simply with the fevered
pleasures of a gambler’s life, runs down to Mel-
bourne occasionally to throw his money at the
foot of Aiionyma, that she may give his jaded
bfain some hew excitement, and iri the end, the
loss of all the money so easily earned at one fell
swpop by a bad speculation, or a series of such, a
sudden flight, or a return to the old. business.
Miserable gambling life 1 The bieii who pursue
it are a curse to themselves and the world, for it
is they who raise stocks to: prices not warranted.
I know of none who have made u fortune out of
speculating, and kept'it. Iconic! poidtto scores on
Ballarat and Sandhurst who matte fortune alter
fortune, and lost them. The fact is the life makes
even the most cautious reckless, and, so much,
money passes through their hands that they don’t
know’ the value of ‘it. 1 I cannot but p;iy the
numerous young men who,, dining the late rush,
left their 1 trades, businesses,, and professions, to
hollow this precarious calling. Hepeiid upon it,
the best thing to dd is ;to stick to industry ; on it
alone can you depend for the foundation of for-
tune, If a man could go Under the Verandah,
and clear out after a tew successful “Mis,” all
would be right; but few can do that; like all
gamblers, they begin to like the business, and
they stick at it till ruin overtakes thorn. I have
already pointed out that many of the principal
Sandhurst mining men have withdrawn out of
mining as much as they could, ami made sure of
something to fall back on. Some Who have
made great hits have settled a lot of money bn
their wives, and allowed themselves a certain
sum to speculate with. A wise thing this. Of
course, mining investors are quite different from
speculators.
After breakfast, X lounged on the splendid
balcony. The air was cool, the day beautiful,
and the people going to church. I could see
fathers and mothers of families lending 1 their
children to the temple of God, dressed in Sunday;
suits, looking quiet and happy; and as X looked,
there came into my heart thoughts of once When
I used to go to church. with my father and
mother, my sisters and brothers, in the clear,
bright mornings, to mingle my infant voice in
the Chon- of praise to the Redeemer. Fevered,
restless gambler that I am, lost to all the finer'
feelings that actuate humanity, at times there
sweep across my soul thoughts and recollections
that stir chorda that have lain dormant for years.
The human heart is a wonderful organ; like a
piano, the world of business plays only upon its
centre keys, but occasionally the fingers wander
away to the deeper and the higher chords.
The Shamrock Hotel is a famous resort for
all the principal professionals who visit Sand-
hurst. At the time that I was there, profes r
slonala of very diverse character were there. Mr.
Harry Rickards and troupe were boarding at the
Shamrock, and Madame Caranclini and her
daughters. As I stood lonely and unnoticed, I
could see, Madame Carandini, and, the Misses
Fannie, Lizzie and Rosina—and, by-the-bye, a
fine young broker was doing the amiable to one
of these charming young ladies. Very pleasant
indeed was the scene to see ; the ‘ young man
appeared to be fully welcome, and no wonder.
The elder lady—for I cannot use the adjective
“old”—appears to be “beautiful for ever,” and
she sings as well as she did in days of yore. I
could also survey the apartments of Mr. Hairy
Eickards and crew. X have nothing to say about
Harry; he is clever, undoubtedly, but I don’t
like him. I know the reasons, but I won’t
commit them to paper, inasmuch as it is not
politic.: The distance frbm the Orderly-room,
where he 1 was performing, to the Shamrock, is
not above a few hundred yards, so you may
imagine that he should be able to walk it. Hot
ho; himself and Miss Carry Eickards had a
biighy and pair... This is what I, call! inter
snobbery. There were lots of cabs about. .’
There was also a barrister stopping herei who
bore awointerful likeness to a 1 prize-fighter, and
whose conversation was pot dissimilar to that of
a professor of the noble art, . Barristers are
generally ,a queer Tot. Talking of prize-fighting,
the funniest scene I ever witnessed hi my life
was at one 1 held hear Hensarit 1 Creek. in ■ the, old
days. I forget the names of the worthies who
“exhibited,” but I fancy one was called the


Ballarat Banger, the other the Bungaree Butcher.
A ring was formed some distance put of the
town, mid there were at least a thousand per-
sons present. The police, got scent of the affair,
and the worthy sergeant and two constables—
the available force —came to the rescue. But
never did Grecian phalanx do duty as bravely
as the crowd j not a soul stirred, and the police-
men had to stand outside, and watch the fray.
The “noble pugilists” now peeled, and at it
they went after some preliminary flourishing.
It was eleven o’clock when the fight commenced,
and by twilight there did not appear any great
chance of it coming to an end, although both
the combatants were not exactly as beautiful as
Apollo at that period. Pugilists are never hand-
some men to look at, but after a good pummelling,
they do not precisely resemble Hadrian’s leman
Antinons. Candles, however, were lit, which
was unnecessary so far as the fighters were con-
cerned, inasmuch as they could not “sea a
stem.” SHIT they boxed a>vay, for they were
game fellows. A “ professional” pugilist’s life is
not one df roses. There are pleasanter exist-
ences. I fancy it would take more than £2o—
sum contested—to tempt mo to allow my body
to be made such a mess of. But some people
are remarkably fond of fighting for little. There’s
the common story of the 1 highwaymen and the
Scotchman. Certain brethren of the fond pounced
upon a Canute Sandy, who was “gangin’ his
ain gait till lunnon,” and bade him deliver his
money or they would have his life. Sandy re-
plied he would fight for hia “siller” to the last
gasp, and' accordingly business was commenced,
arid lasted for a good while, lively and brisk.
The minions of the moon had had considerable
experience in'the trade, but hover had they
dome across so tough a" job as this. His resist-
ance, of course, still further aroused their
Cupidity, as they sot it doyni that ho had at least
a fortune on Him. At long last, after they had
nearly knocked tiro life out of him, ho succumbed,
and they searched him, and got all ho'had' —
seven farthings.' The robbers were astonished.
Cried tlm leafier, “ If this man had had seven shil-
lings oil him, he would have murdered us all.”
But to resume the story of the prize-fight. The
Ballarat Banger nt Inst got his opponent over the
ropes, and proceeded to hammer him sounmerci-
fully,—his blqodbeingup, for he hadhatl aterriblo
knocking about, and was as blind as a bat,—-that
as the other man would not give .’in, there was
every prospect of the fight ending in a death.
Suddenly,' however, the candles wore quenched,
anil the rope out, upon which occurred such a
terrible rush that no one knew what occurred
afterwards. 1 The greatest part of the crowd was
composed of as fine a'set of beauties ns you would
see In a 1 day’s journey through Little Bourke-
atf eet, Melbourne, or Durand’s -Alley in Sydney.
Such a pbnfusion'of mom% and timvni as took place,
I never Jreard fell df. Every man got his hand,
by mistake, In his neighbour's pocket; in trying
to ascertain the time in the dark those who hail
no watches took frbm those who had. It was a
general transfer busideas.' Such a hullaballoo
arose that must have startled the respectable opos-
sums in the trees considerably. Cries of “My
watch is gone,” “Take that, you thief,” followed
by blows, “Take your handout of my pocket,”
“Murder,” "Help,” “Police,” “Bobbery,”
“ Thieves,” arose on every side, and from behind
every bush, while the language used was not of
the most sweet and moral description. The
screams of a few women wore unheeded in the
great din. Even hats were snatched off heads,
and bare-headed people were seen on the road to
Pleasant Creek that night. I don’t think I will
go to a prize-fight again, unless there is a stipu-
lation.' that it will bo ended before night sets in.
After lunch, a person who was staying at the
Shamrock invited me to pay a visit to the
Chinese' Camp, where wo could see the game of
Fan-tan, and take chances in the lotteries. We
walked down Bridge street, which fronts the
Bendigo sludge-channel; but a beautiful row of
sycamore trees helps to hide the hideous ditch.
Notwithstanding these ditches, and want of
drainage, Sandhurst is a healthy place, the air
being very dry. The Chinese Camp is a horrible
den of tin buildings. Every precaution is taken
to exclude the sun and air by the little alleys
being covered over, and the smell of opium is
most refreshing. In little boxes of wood and
tin I saw Celestials reclining on their hard bunks,
last in the grip of opium; dreaming, no doubt,
visions of beauty and splendour never to be else
than airy phantoms to them. The hands wore
often clenched, and the faces drawn in, like peo-
ple who have the horrors. Wo came across
some ladies, whose beauty and language were
on a par : what a horrible and repulsive being
a woman becomes once she falls I "We now
made lor the fan-tan establishment. A crowd
of Chinese and Biiropeans hung round a dirty
counter, on which sat, cross-legged, two fat, com-
fort,able-iooMng brethren of the Sun and Moon,
One had piles of money before him, and was the
banker ; the other had a lot of Chinese tokens
before him —ho was the croupier. Between them
was a square piece of slate, each side or corner
being called 1,2, 3, and 4, if I mistake not; the
names I recollect—“yet, gay, sam, gee,” that is
one, two, three, and four. The croupier sweeps
the heap of “ cash ” into the middle of the board,
and then straightway places a bowl on top of
them. • All the tokens outside the bowl are swept
to one side, airtl immediately the bowl is removed
and the croupier counts all the tokens that were
under it. The betting is decided by the last two
groups. He counts' by fours. How, if you have
betted on the 3 and i, and when he counts four
tokens at the close three remain to be counted,
then you win double ; if you bet on the 3 only,
you win the amount of your stakes; if one or two
turn pilt, you lose. I put clown a shilling, and
won ; and then won a few more, and lost them
all. Sometimes the bank is broken. When this
is the case, I am told it is not unusual for the
" bank ” to bolt, follpvyed hard'and fast by Celes-
tials and Europeans.’ The Chinese 'do not ap-
pear to think gaming an unlawful pursuit; their
best men follow it as a regular trade, based upon
calculations. After I had lbs t a little, a person
at my elbow said I did not know the game, and
asked me if I would let him play for me. I did
not object. He won at first, but, strange to, say,


his luck turned, and I had to fork out another
ton shillings. That went too, when he observed
wo had better knock off. I began to have glim-
merings of something wrong ; I could not get a
proper view of the proceedings, so I thought I
would have another try, and gave him live"shil-
lings. This time I looked sharp, while pretend-
ing not to, and I saw my lord win four or five
times in succession, and quietly pass the money
into his pocket, I called him aside, and repre-
sented to him in forcible language that there
should he honour amongst thieves, that I was a
brother gambler, and that he should not have
used mo as he did. He stoutly denied unfair
play, until X helped his memory, and threatened
to quietly hand him over to the tender mercies
of Sergeant Drought, Detective Alexander, and
Cons tabid Doyle. He then gave me back all the
money I had given him for the purpose of play-
ing, and wo parted. I think he felt relieved
when I quitted the fan-tau shop. It was dread-
ful to see the collection of humanity there. One
old Chinaman struck me with horror—l verily
believe he had the leprosy, but it might be want,
for his face was white and pinched ; ho threw a
sixpence down to play with, but Ah Tip, the
banker, would not allow Mm to play, and threw
back the sixpence, indignantly telling him to go
and purchase food with it. An intelligent China-
man told me the old man’s story, and it revealed
to me the awful power that the spirit of gambling
has upon men. This poor fellow once had a good
shop, but gambled it away, and, getting old, had
to betake himself to rag-gathering and hawking.
Every penny that he earns he rushes to the
gaming house with, and ..though without a mor-
sel of food for hours, stakes his last sixpence.
The passion of gambling is greater oven than
hunger. Of course the respectable Chinese fan-
tan bankers will not allow him to play, but
there are those who even grasp at this man’s
last sixpence. Boys of tender ago were here,
clerks and others; and I am sure many an
embezzlement can bo traced to the influence of
these shops.
We visited the Chinese theatre, and the lot-
tery houses. I wrote separate articles on these,
for insertion in a newspaper, and gave them into
the hands of a city editor. He received me
blandly, and told me he would give them all at-
tention. About a fortnight afterwards, not see-
ing theni appear, I called to see what was to be
their fata. He received me affably, and said,
although good, the articles wore not suited for
his paper. X inquired why ? The first, which
below will be found under the head of 11 A visit
to the Chinese Theatre,” he characterised as too
argumentative, and religious ; the second, below
called “ Seventy-five pounds for Sissepenny,” he
objected to as of a political bins, opposed to the
“platform” of his paper. When the reader
reads these articles, he will understand why I
smiled at this. The editor had, evidently, not
read a line, nor did he intend to. When editors
enter into statements about articles submitted
which they have not read, the best thing they
can do is to confine themselves to style, &c,, and
hot go into’ details—at all times dangerous.
Here they are.
A VISIT TO THE CHINESE THEATRE.
Novelty is charming—the use of which time-
worn saying does not promise much of the
pleasant quality in what is to follow. But, not-
withstanding, it must be conceded that, of all
the novelties which can be seen in Sandhurst,
the Chinese Theatre is at present the greatest,
whether I deal with it so as to make it appear
old as the sun, or invest it with a new interest.
A novelty it is with a vengeance, this barbaric
entertainment in the midst of a modern parvenu
city. Accordingly, the waiter, who like the
Greeks of the time of Paul, is always in search
of something new, sought the tent of the celestial
performers in the sweet smelling Chinese Camp
at Sandhurst. And here I must premise that,
although, according to benight ed understandings,
a novelty is supposed to impart some pleasure,
yet such is not invariably the ease. It is a
novelty to a hen to have her neck wrung, but I
have never happened to hear of a commonsense
fowl that expressed pleasure at the operation,
possibly because none of the species have been
guilty of enjoying a quiet walk in the poultry
yard afterwards, owing to weakness of the legs
and general debility, which not even L. L. could
cure, able doctor, politician, &c., as he is. For-
tified by this reflection, I felt quite equal to any-
thing the pigtails could inflict, and I am bound
to say, although many of the details, particularly
the assiduity of the gentlemen who constituted
the band, failed to please, the affair generally
did stir my sluggish blood and yield just a trifling
new sensation. We were ushered in by quite a
loving Chinaman, who, T believe, would have
embraced me if I had paid the full price, but for
two shillings I think I had had endearment
enough, I thought of theei wiZhoxkeepers of white
people’s theatres somewhere in Bourke-street and
elsewhere, and the Chinese usher rose in my
estimation. The place—the good old tent, bring-
ing up memories of Ashton’s Circus and the
early digging days—was lit with the dim reli-
gious light of candles; visions of the days of the
great Siddons arose in my mind, when candle
snuffers were regular employes in the theatre,
not so very long ago either—and it was pervaded
with a not dim (if I can use that adjective in
reference to the nasal sense), and not religious,
but t’other smell—of opium, I think, at least, I
charitably put it down to that, as all were
smoking. The “dress circle” was filled with
Chinese, in then- dingy napieturesque costume,
relieved here and there by a fair partner - of
celestial joys, “in silk attire.” These Chinese
took the entertainment as stolidly as if they
were at a funeral, the only means of demon-
strating then - feelings appearing to be the ejacula-
tion, “ Ho!” signifying, I believe (for I have
not gone through the curriculum of Chinese),
“ good.” I thought I could detect not a few
critics amongst them, who cooked then - eyes
knowingly, and said quietly to their neighbours,
“ Quang yang ah lah, ah,” which being inter-
preted, means that it was all very well, hut after
seeing the renowned Cop Ein at the great
theatre in Pekin, and Boh Mont at the opera
house in Canton, one could not but look with


pity on- the efforts of the promising young actors
here. But I have been dallying with the until
cnee, while, as all know, my attention must have
long since been fixed upon the actors. Just as
we entered, the tragedy-comedy uproar had
begun,. There were three groat actors on the
stage—one was an actress, but perhaps the first
term is right, as they any there are no female
performers; anyhow, lam told Chinese meu and
women are so much alike that you oau’t tell the
difference except in the way exorcism's used to
find out the Dark Gentleman, who, it was once
believed, used to wander about, seeking whom he
might devour, in the shape of easily gulled indi-
viduals who would sign papers with their own
blood, as if he wasn’t sure enough of them
already—by the feet. I forgot to mention (hat
there was a fourth actor, lint ho didn’t do much
worth speaking .about, letting the. others carry
him about, a trait that showed considerable
sense.: There, was one good quality about him,
however, which is much needed on the boards of
Celestial theatres—he had no voice. Had the
other actors been similarly gifted, I should have
thought them perfect. However, it may bo that
this was because 1 did uot understand what they
said, although they took good cure I should
hear. The fourth actor I referred to was un-
doubtedly what is theatrically known as a stick,
being-a wooden baby, the only child, it appeared,
of the Empress, which she was confiding to two
ministers—one a person with a white beard
growing out of his mouth (so it appeared to me),
the other wore a hideous mask, fitting to the
face, . la order to do this business, much singing
was thought necessary. Some reporter has
written that the appreciation of this depended on
taste (so does the music of the bagpipes). Of course
does. Up at, the Princess’s, Signora Guy and
the other artists presented ns with music written
within the, treble , staff, or not many ledger linos
below or above it; at the Celestial theatre a new
upper clef must have been invented. The lira-
press proved herself a marvellous musical acro-
bat. lam ready to take oath she went up HIM
ledger lines, above the treble stall’, and could
have gone double, that height if site had liked.
Her management of the. upper 0, 1618 lines
above, was striking and effective, so far as the
.European tympanum was concerned, A critic
in shirt sleeves once, speaking of a favourite
singer, observed to me, “ Lor’ 1 she his a singer
now; she’ll. send her voice up, up to the ceiling,
and make it like a bird up in the sky, and then
bring it, down again.” So did the Chinese night-
ingale; she sent,her voice, up high enough, but
unfortunately she never brought it down, Pos-
sibly it had got out of her reach. , “ What a lino
voice for a scream," observed a while man near
me. The gentlemen strove ineffectually, by going
into falsetto, a la Squires, to rival the lady, but
although their efforts wore pretty successful,
they did not touch the fair one. After the gen-
tlemen had obtained possession of the wooden
baby, and thq. Empress had departed, they gave
way to demonstrations of joy. How? Opera
singers generally give us ,to understand when
they are in the seventh, heaven by pressing their
hands on their hearts, lint the Celestial performers
study nature ns manifested in boys, and show
their exhilaration by a hop, step, and a kick,
with a pirouette thrown in occasionally when
anything- extra is going on. Imagine Mr.
Erancis showing off Ms delight in that way
when the Duffy Ministry wore defeated, and
tire lion. John O’Bhauassy showing , off by
skipping like a young call: before the ancients of
the Council. Imagine that, and you have spine
idea of the figure out by the Prime Minister of
China. The dresses, though barbaric, wore
splendid; and although made, of course, in a
measure, of tinsel, gave a good idea of the dress
of high Chinese, personages, inuhuliug fans
behind the oars, and sham Apullyon wings.
Hut all this time I have been, forgetting the most
Indefatigable performers of all.—the musicians.
Would I could forgot them—they never ceased.
They had, evidently, a contract, and imagined
without their din the world must come to an
end, or the sun would lie swallowed up. Now, I
have lioruo the name of a peaceable man—l
killed a mosquito once, and dreamed of its ghost,
as big as an elephant, sucking my life blood, for
a mouth afterwards, so .that I declined the
butchering business—still, if the gentleman who
belaboured the frying-pan, and the cxccutionist
on the principal stringed instrument, were in
private with-mo, I fancy I would make an effort
to hasten their entrance, into the realms of
Celestial felicity, without a pang. I have heard
people say, after listening to a great singer in
“II sogi-eto,” “11 bakni,” or some other renowned
melody, that the tones lingered in their ears
for days after; so, of a verity, “ the memory
haunts me yet" of the Chinese opera. I have
broken .quarts in a crushing machine, I have
worked in a large tinsmith’s shop, but I never
realised the groat theory of discords until I
visited the Chinese theatre. Just imagine
Koch’s Pioneer crushing works, .with 10,000 cats
confabulating on the roof, 200 steam whistles
going, 1.00(1 carpenters knocking down the beams,
and 2000 tinkers hammering the iron oil the
roof, and you’ll have a faint idea of what I
thought tho Oh it lose band resembled. 1 trust,
for the interest of humanity, that I will not meet
in private With tho bloodthirsty villain who
operated upon the frying-pan. The accompani-
ment to all the ,songs appeared to be a sort of
common-time tune, like “ Try-a-littlc, , try-a-
little, try-a-littlc, try-a-littlc, tea, tea, tea,” like
a hornpipe played 1(500 lines above the staff.
This appeared to suit solos, duetts, and trios, in-
discriminately. The stage was small, and the
scenery -was loft to the imagination. A chair
was once placed on tho stage, with an inscrip-
tion on it. Emm the great difficulty some of
the actors had in passing it, this chair evidently
represented a fearful fortification, but to our eyes
it was easy to get round it. Thu actors also wont
through a hole in a curtain at one side, which, a
well-informed youth told us, was intended to re-
present the walls. I am afraid Hennings would
make hut an indifferent living in China, whore
the old style of scenery still obtains, such as—
“ This in a wood,” “ This is a castle.” Biit now
the parlour scene came to an end. In rushed a
furious crowd of barbarian, hordes from outside


the famous walls. Clang, whang ; never did I
see such a Victoria Theatre combat. An Amazon,
lighting for the Empress, was the hero of the
day, “ Come one, come all; this firm rock,
&c.” One down, two come on; two down, four
come on ; four down, eight come on, tas. After
all the subordinates are vanquished, the two
principals engage. Greek meets Greek—Chang
meets "Whang. Very good quarterstaii play
follows. Evidently dissatisfied with this, the
heroine gets on a chair, and jumps with her feet
on to her opponent’s breast, falling heavily on the
portion of the person supposed to be the seat of
reason by grandmothers and school teachers.
Chinese spectators grin for the first time—she
must have caught it. Human antagonists failing,
in comes a gigantic frog, Froggfe is a fraud ;
gets easily worsted. Now appears the great man
of the day—immense Apollyon wings; pirouettes,
gives hop, stop and kick, which means, “ Don’t
care a darn for you.” He holds a great spear—
puissant instrument —which acts as a magic
wand. At each wave, oil: goes a host of Chinese;
evidently the look is enough lor them. Judging
from what-we saw, Chinese warfare must result
in very few lives being lost, and is preferable to
the Prussian style. I rend once an amusing
account of a Chinese battle, or skirmish, One
“brave ” singled out a rebel, and, like Bill Nye,
“ wont for him.” Hebei dodged “ brave’s ” gun.
The day was hot, and the temper of the “ brave ”
waxed warm. At last he cornered his man, and
putting the gun to the rebel's ear, fired, Of
course yon will think the result was that the
rebel’s head went searching for its brains in
small particles. Nothing of the kind ; ho was
unhurt, for the Chinese put in his powder and
shut without ramming, and, in the heat of the
excitement, he let them drop out of the gun.
But the gentleman, of the spear was far more
puissant—one blow, or wave, the goose of live
Celestials was settled ; another wave, ten bit the
dust. Dead walked themselves off, to save the
aoeneshiftor trouble, ns ho was just finishing his
pipe. Third wave, all on the stage disappear.
Apprehensive of the fourth wave of the “brave’s”
wand, our party decamped, amidst n tremendous
row by the band, who were getting frantic.
Someone, must have stopped that brave’s arm,
else the fifth wave of his wand would, have
swept Victoria into Hobson’s Bay. After that
night’s experience I rest, and am thankful..
SEVENTY-FIVE POUNDS FOR SISSE-
PESNNY.
If the intelligent Now Zealander, or any other
representative man, wore, .after exhausting the
lions of Scripopolis, to take a walk to the Chi-
nese Camp—'famed throughout the colony for its
unsavoury character, physically and morally—the
first sensation ho would experience would be
through the olfactory organs, and he would ac-
tually “ feel ” a smell, all grammarians notwith-
standing, unlike any hitherto known to him,
strong, but not aromatic, suggestive of stale
clothes and over-perspiration, but in reality the
fragrance of opium. No doubt he would have
been somewhat prepared for it if he had pro-
viously paid a visit to European cheap 'bars,
dancing halls, &c., where the perfume of bad
tobacco and unwashed living flesh give zest to
the entertainment. Having become accustomed
to the ancient but not fish-like smell—for the
human nose is .a wonderfully accommodating
organ—his next wonder would be as to what was
going on. inside the shops. Merchandise there
appeared to be, but the buyers were not to be
seen, although the shops were crowded. Curio-
sity would prompt the intelligent Hew Zealander
in, after he had assured himself this was not a
criminal proceeding, and he would then get a
“ wrinkle” that would supply palaver when the
ruin of Loudon was forgotten. He would find a
lot of Jolly-looking Chinamen behind the coun-
ter, busily engaged in marking little books full
of Chinese characters, dotting a letter here and
there. He would find the persons outside the
counter also busy, some in marking square slips
of paper, and handing them to those behind the
counter to be marked and returned ; others
comparing slips of paper already dotted with
black paint, with slips marked in red. Then a
light would dawn on the New Zealander, and
he would surmise this was the celebrated Chi-
nese lottery.
Leaving the worthy representative of the
last race, according to Lord Macaulay, to hold
up his hands in abhorrence of: the wick-
edness of his white and yellow brethren, and
to thank his stars he was of the brown or:Malay
race, I will now take the reader into my confi-
dence and escort him through the lottery shops
of Chinese Scripopolis. Almost every house here
is a lottery shop, and from appearance there’s not
a more thriving trade in the city. Day and night
the fat, oily Chinamen behind the counters are
kept hard at it, marking the little square bits of
paper, which arc the tickets, for which the
public, mostly Europeans, pay from (id. to £3
and upwards, the larger the price of the ticket,
the greater the prize? if you get one. The
tickets most in demand arc (id, ones, and the
customers arc generally the hard-working class.
Mankind, and especially that section which, has
to work hard, and faro middling, while they see
others rolling in wealth, are always easily per-
suaded to take chances of making a “rise,”
and getting out of their conditiou of servitude.
To lay foundation slow and sure is not a gene-
rally accepted maxim with the working classes.
And this unfortunate predilection has been seized
upon by wily individuals in nil ages, who work
against the public with their own money. So do
these Chinese. It would be far bettor for the
public to pay so much into a general fund, and
divide it by lot, for they would then save the
enormous profits the lottery-keepers must make.
The lotteries, however, are perfectly fair; al-
though at first, to a European, they appear
rather confusing. On all the counters of the
“ agents”—so the shopkeepers arc called; the
principals will be dealt with presently—on a
file, are a lot of the slips already mentioned ;
on each slip are 80 Chinese characters, with a
row between, acting as denominator. The per-
son who wishes to invest his sixpence, has only
to take a slip, and with a brush mark ten differ


ent characters in any position he pleases. He
hands the paper, when he has done as directed,
to the Priest of Fortune behind the counter,
who returns it, marked with certain cabalistic
characters, which do duty exactly like the unde-
cipherable initials the ledger-keeper puts on a
cheque in the hank, signifying it is all right,
with this difference, that the lottery has to take
place before you will know whether your paper
is worth money or not. A duplicate is taken.
Having got back your slip, your best course is
to see the lottery drawn. Now, indeed, the
affair is becoming interesting. To see this event
you must go up the Chinese Arcade, a dark, un-
savoury place, with boxes on either side, from
which any amount of Celestial (infernal) din is
proceeding. These boxes are “banks,” There’s
the Old Bank, and Nos. 1,2, 3 ; 4,6, and 6 Banks,
so it is easy to see the business is flourishing.
A railing separates the expectants outside, from
the performers inside. The furniture of the den
where the latter do the hanky-panky is merely
a table, and in the corner there is a little high
table, under and on which perfumes are being
burnt, no doubt to propitiate the Chinese For-
tuna, who is represented by two rather Tartarean
looking Chinese characters on the wall. It is, in
fact, a shrine to Chance. We find hero, on one
of the wads, a fac-simile of the ticket-slip,
magnified, the characters, which are separate
hits of paper, being almost as largo as our
tickets. The presiding genius, after due incan-
tations, takes the, board down, and holding it to
the bars, permits the public to pick off the
letters, roll them up and place them in
four jars, each jar containing 20 characters.
One jar is, after some mysterious “ tiddly-wink-
ing ” selected, and the 20 characters in it are
stuck into places on the hoard, or enlarged
lottery-ticket, and in accordance with the way
they come out, the tickets are marked. While
the Head Druid pastes them up, slowly unfold-
ing each, he indulges in a recitative or chant,
not exactly equal to Signori Dondi or Coliva,
hut still preferable to the Chinese circus opera
singers. This is the whole mystery.
In the way the twenty characters in the
selected jar are placed on the enlarged ticket,
smaller tickets are marked and handed to the
expectant crowd “ beyond the bars,” Thou
follows a close scrutiny, and comparison with the
tickets for which Cd. was paid. The majority
find they have marked wide altogether. Ho
who finds that he has made five marks identical
with five on the “hank” ticket gets Is. 2d,, the
happy owner of six marks, 9s. Seven marks
entitles the holder of a ticket to £3 IBs., eight
marks to £2l, nine marks to £37 10a,, and ten
marks to £76 for “ sissepormy.” Five, six, seven
and eight marks do come out occasionally, but
nine and ten are like angels’ visits, few and far
between, as they ought to be to snob murky
Tartarean regions. Some one had ten marks in
the Sandhurst camp years ago. Tickets marked
eight arc shown in the windows pretty frequently.
Such is the little game that keeps the Sandhurst
Chinese Gamp and Little Bourke street alive now,
and enables numbers of fat Chinamen to live at
ease. The “hooks” appear to be kept very cor-
rectly, and are always ready for inspection. The
agents, too, furnish the “banks” with books,
and only receive, I believe, so much per cent,
on the tickets they sell. Happy and content
they sit in their opium perfumed cribs and deal
out to .the public square hits of paper for “sisse-
penny,” returning to the aforesaid public about
the hundredth part of a farthing out of each,
sixpence. And thus the merry game goes on,
the Chinese sure of winning, the outsiders sure
of losing. There is not much difference between
them and the bookmakers in this regard, only
the latter do business hi higher style and blossom
into diamonds and white vests, while the Celes-
tials stick to the dingy blue blouse and tho pig-
tail. Which of tho two does tho most injury to
society?
"Wo closed tho Sabbath with a game of 100. I
won a few pounds, which was very convenient,
as I did not wish to leave Sandhurst as poor ns
I had come into it. Tho only feature in the
evening's performance was the conduct of a now
me uher of tho “ Verein,” new to mb, but old to
the others. He was a fish of the rarest kind.
He commenced to drink while the cards were
being dealt, and never cried quits until X left.
They did their best to keep the drink from him,
but he would have it. First, ho would begin
with brandy, but as soon as his glass was ex-
hausted, which was a moment or two after he
got it to his lips, ho would snatch at his neigh-
bour’s soda and brandy, finish that; oateh hold
of No. 2’s ale, guzzle that; seize No. B’s port
wine, ditto; grip No. 4’s porter and down with it;
grasp No. C’s colonial wine and make it
evaporate double quick; “ annex” No. (i’s rum
hot, and finish by drinking dry the water jug.
I wondered where he put it all. He was soon
in a state of fuddle, but played away and won
like a demon. He would go to sleep while the
cards were being dealt, and then suddenly wake
up, ory “ 'What’s trumps ?”jvnd in all probability
lead the ace and 100 the board. He was about
tho queerest player I have ever seen, and in my
days, like the individual who is so persistent in
paddling his own canoe, I have seen a “few,”
I went early to rest, for the morrow was to be
a clay of fate.


COLLAPSE.
“ The end of this eventful bistory—
Sans money, sans respect, sans everything.”
IE the grey dawn on Monday morning I left
the Shamrock Hotel. I dislike fuss. Ido
not care for affectionate farewells and crowds of
friends.- It is not at all times pleasant, so no
one saw me depart. I am an humble man and
do not care for public displays. A celebrated
nigger said of a person who was Governor of the
State, as a compliment, that he “came in widout
an enemy, and went out widout a friend.” That
applies to my departure from the Golden City.
I left without a hand to grasp mine, and my
memory is not sweet. I have one, advantage, I
am not likely to be soon forgotten. All cannot
say that. -j
As the, train steamed away in the cold grey
dawn past the many stacks of Sandhurst com-
panies, beginning to send out smoke, I could not
but paraphrase the lines of a favourite poet;—
“ In the glimmer of the dawn
They stand—the solemn silent witnesses
Of human toil—altars.or graves 1”
Altars they are on which the speculator offers
freely to the fickle goddess of Fortune, and smoke
ascends from them continually. Graves, indeed,
many of them have been for the money of not a
few.
Before I end, a serious word for Sandhurst.
She has seen the best of her days for some time;
a heavy downfall has come. She cannot
keep all the companies stinted dming the rush
going, and sure and certain collapse will follow.
Still the district has the germs of greatness, for
her reefs are vast in extent. I reckon that
twenty miles square are covered with them.
Sandhurst will bo a great city, but she must work
according to her strength. She has been doing
too much for her strength in 1871-2, and the result
must be a crash. Such must be the end of all
gambling. The district will eventually benefit
by the flight of those “ too clever by half.”
And now I close this satire with regret, for it
has been a pleasant and congenial talk.
“ The rest is silence.”
L’ENVOI.
THE jester now drops his mask and craves to
address his readers in a few serious words.
An apology is needed in issuing tliis work, in-
asmuch as it goes beyond the usual range of
literature in these colonies, and boldly strikes
out a new path. There is no parleying with
vice—no half-and-half descriptions. He simply
strives to paint, in strong colours, the vices which
ruin so many young men in this colony, and the
means which are used in Sandhurst, and else-
where, for the deceiving of persons who are not
as clever as others, or not long enough resident
to discriminate. The vice of gambling is de-
picted as strongly as possible ; and, in this respect,
the scenes might have been laid in Melbourne.
There is no vice which saps morality, and leads
to ruin so quickly and surely as gambling, and
the young should be warned earnestly against it.
Many of the incidents in this book me facts, so
that the young reader entering on a gambling
career can pause and think what will he hia
fate if he continues in his pleasant sin. Most of
the personages hero mentioned, and the scenes
depicted have had existence. Hence, the reader
Is not wasting his time on a dream, but on
actualities. As a relief from scenes of vice,
deceit, and villiany, the story, “ Following down
the Lava,” is introduced, and should well repay
perusal, particularly when the reader is informed
that it also is fonncled on fact. I know not how
the press will regard this effort, but I feel certain
that every impartial man who reads the book
will judge that it is a bold attempt to unmask
many of the evils which ruin some of the best
men and women in this world.
38$) e.


M'CAimON, BIRD AND CO.,
PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.
