

Fionsj
f£T' u
PAHS
BOX M
H%C J'ssaf off the G[i c;imnj;
OE, THE
MOTIVE, METHOD, & MORAL OF ACCEPTABLE OFFERING.
the Rev. D. JONES HAMER.
Published under the auspices of the Congregational Unions of
Victoria , New South Wales , and South Australia.
This subject is said to be not “popular.” I cannot pledge myself
to make it popular ; but I do pledge myself to give you good grounds-
for a conviction that if it be not popular the fault is with us, and that
our very hesitation to consider it is a sign of the need for its-
consideration. We shall never come right by continuing in the wrong.
The contraction of a muscle may mean a life-long incapacity, and
though the patient may very reluctantly face the pain, and use the
patience, requisite for recovery, there is only one way out of the-
difficulty. In comparison with other subjects, stirring, inspiring,,
entrancing as they are, this of mine appears lowly enough. But what
is lowlier than a foundation ? Yet the most glorious towers and spires-
stand sure because of that lowly strength and reality. What is-
lowlier to the tree than its root P Yet the most stalwart strength of
noble stem and reaching branch and radiant leaf abides because of
that hidden grip and life-bestowing lowliness. By these sentences
then I don t apologise, but I explain. In dealing with such a question
let me acknowdedge at the outset that I fully reckoned upon the-
attendance here to-night of some of my brethren in the ministry. If
my contention be mistaken none will more genially and lovingly
correct me. If that contention be right in the main none will more
loyally or frankly acquiesce. I have a shrewd suspicion that I must
endeavour to convert some of them to the faith I hold. Let me
the indulgence and forbearance of any man who is an exception in his-
practice to what my previous experience assures me is the unfortu-
nate rule among us, —of avoiding the sufficient, even ample, discussion
of this matter in the ordinary course of pulpit ministry. I
do not mean that vre are unready to arrange for necessary collections,
or when the time comes, to press with all due eloquence and earnest-
ness the claims of the cause which then may be making its appeal.
All this we all do with more or less satisfactory results. But, speaking
broadly, and not even of our own section of the Christian Church
I $ S


alone, I do not believe that there has been, or yet is, a fair and
adequate setting forth of the emphatic and imperative Scripture
teaching on the subject, so that our people become zealous in
cultivating the grace and stirring up the spiritual gift. If I were
questioned concerning the grounds on which such conclusion may be
established, there must be confessed of course but scanty opportunities
of noting the omission, as I can seldom hear anybody preach except
myself. Also that not being very far advanced in years my experience
is limited. So is every man’s at a certain point.
But in connection with this subject, I have had occasion to move
about among the churches of the northern and midland counties at
home, and I have learnt a little of what is done here under the
Southern Cross. I read the papers, and receive no small quantity of
intelligence through the post. If then I mention what seems a fair
conclusion from such facts as offer, you will, I am sure, believe that
this is done in no spirit of captious or unneighbourly criticism,
nor by any means in thoughtless or unkind judgment, but only
that if mistake and mischief exist they may be destroyed. It
seems then, that on the whole our churches bear favourable
comparison with those of any other section of the Christian
community ; but still that the resources they provide are inadequate
and in many cases startlingly disproportionate to their means. That
the methods of dealing with church finance are often needlessly
complicated, and very often there is no method at all. That it is
shown to be risky in practice as truly it is unsound in principle to
rely upon a spasmodic effort. Better and more trusty culture comes
through a regular and average rainfall than through alternate deluge
and drought. The manners and customs of the Nile are unique, the
exception which proves the happier rule. That under stress of
debility there is temptation to make use of stimulants which increase
the disorder, and intensify the craving: or to translate —recourse is
had to numerous and varied expedients for raising money, and the
brains of ingenious people are set to work to invent some fresh plan,
attaining the bathos of employing the scene painter and the
costumier for the replenishing of the treasury of the house of the
Lord. That often such expedients involve the principle of gam-
bling, and are utterly demoralising and discreditable. That the
successs attending such attempts is held to justify the means, and
is more fatal than failure, because it hinders the growth of true feeling
and conviction on the subject. That seeing there is no effect without
cause, the partial failure in the harvest of good, and the evident crop
of weeds and nettles betokens some carelessness of culture. Now let
no man shrug his shoulders and give this thing the go by. It is a
poison which rankles and slays. I believe that Christian men have
only to see the evil to be resolute in casting it out for ever, and that
Christian ministers have only to confront the consequences of their
silence in order to be stirred to speak. Now I honestly believe that
the weakness on our part which is thus noted, and which should be
zealously conquered is a weakness which “ leans to virtue’s side.”
Our failing has its roots somewhere in feelings which, however
mistaken, are really self-sacrificing and generous, and we ought to be
ready to sacrifice anything and everything in our Master’s service.
But we have no business to minimize His right and to imperil His
people’s good. A worthy man in my college days was accustomed to
conduct the week-night service at a Lancashire village church. One
time he was seized with those subtle and peculiarly penetrating
agonies, which are but feebly described as toothache. Was not
such an attack fair ground for not attempting the service, or at all
events for a modification of its length ? But he regarded such
suggestions as having origin in the nether world. He determined to,
as he expressed it, “crucify the flesh and he did it by adding to the
usual exercises of the worship a slow and stately reading of the 119tli


Psalm right through from the first of Aleph to the last of Tau. The
only objection to this kind of penance was, that every one of the
congi egation that night was involved in it. There ■was respect
enough for him to forbid any rebellious rising. This must be true,
because I’ve seen the chapel where the thing was done. Moral:—ln any
act of sacrifice, be careful that no one is implicated but yourself.
There is another aspect of the matter too, under which it may become
apparent that Tve are sacrificing something on the one side for the
sake of sparing ourselves something on the other. It is cowardly to
be afraid of being called a coward. It may be selfish to endeavour to
escape being called self-seeking. Plainly put, and I wish to speak as
plainly as I can, what I mean is this. The Christian ministry
.among us is supported by the free-will offerings of the people. The
right of this is established by New Testament teaching, authority, and
practice. naturally hesitate to say much on the subject of
Giving, except in direct relation to some object quite unmistake -
able, because such appeals, if responded to, might result in pecuniary
advantage to themselves. They are willing to struggle, to suffer, to
face difficulties, to compel their dependent dear ones to struggle, rather
than seem for a moment to press a selfish and personal claim. The
feeling, so far, is a noble one, to be held in all due honor; and if the
claim which the man of God thus hesitates to press were merely a
selfish and personal one, not a syllable could be said to him that did
not breathe sympathy, encouragement, and praise. But just there
the fallacy lurks ; the falsity which has been, and is, such a peril, such
a paialysis to the spiritual life of the church. The claim need be
in no degree a personal or selfish one. The fallacy would explode, the
falsity would be seen for what it is, if we were bold to stand by the
Scripture teaching as regards the stewardship of money ; and the as
clear Scripture teaching as regards the relation of the Christian
minister to the people among whom he labours. The man who
asks for money that he may hoard it and lay up superfluous and
idle treasure upon earth is a fool, “ according to the Scriptures.”
The man who worships money is an idolater, “ according to the
Scriptures.” The man who aims at luxury and self-pleasing is no
true Christian minister, “according to the Scriptures.” The man
who accepts his just meed, and is told to claim it, who ministers to a
people who can afford to provide not only for his present wants, but
enable him to distribute of his substance, and to make some rightful
provision for the future of his family: the man who accepts what
is given, and holds it along with all his other possessions in mind and
heart and physical endowment as a solemn trust, to be used as he
uses these other things for the glory of God and the good of men—
what is he but a true and loyal servant of the Master who used His
whole mighty self, and who wrought a miracle to obtain money when,
he needed that, in order that He might complete an unflawed work
and finish what he came to perform. But perhaps here a man
demurs and says, this may be all very true if people generally saw it
in that light, but they, some of them, don’t; and I should be
suspected, perhaps have hard names flung at me, perhaps lose my
influence for good. I could not bear to be thought avaricious and
self-seeking, even though I should know in my clear conscience that
it wasn t true. Ho you think the Lord Jesus liked being called a
Sabbath-breaker, a glutton, a wine bibber P Men did call Him by
these names, and probably thought that He deserved them; but He
m ent on doing what He knew to be right. You and I may and must
avoid every form of evil,” let it appear under whatever changeful
shape it may, but if we determine to avoid and abstain from what the
translation calls “ all appearance of evil,” we shall many a time
in the faithful performance of what may be most urgent and
critical duty. False suspicions are among the burdens of the Lord,
unjust thoughts and words. If the thing be right, if the word be


true, we must speak the word, and do the thing and take the conse-
quences. It may he ws shall suffer, but God helping us we shall
break down a great misconception, we shall unfold a great truth, and
wear the crown of Him that overcometh in the day of the Lord. I
might even step aside from the thought which is my main contention
to-night, and find fair argument in the facts of the case, as they
concern ourselves. Why should we by failure bereave ourselves of
power? Power to help by well-timed, well-advised, money gifts, the
many helpless ones whose appeal cries in our ears daily. Power to i
make due provision for our children, and for the feebleness of our own
after-life. Charitable funds and institutions may be stop-gaps in an
emergency, but their provision does not touch the root of the matter,
and the very need for their existence is a mighty weapon in the
armoury of my advocacy. Why should we be denied the luxury of
giving £5 to this, £lO to that, or £SO to help the building of a new
church yonder ?
I remember in 1808 being invited to a dinner party given by Sir
Elkanah Armitage in Manchester, to inaugurate a fund of £20,000 for
the aiding of the erection of thirty churches and schools in Lancashire
and Cheshire. I was a member of the committee for the five years of
its existence, voting away money contributed mainly by others. For
at the dinner the subscription paper which went round among the
guests was carefully passed behind my chair and that of the two or
three other ministers who were present. I caught but a glimpse of it,
and the figures then, though it had not gone the round, reached some
£16,000. Generous and noble gifts they were, in which it was taken
for granted that I could not be one of the donors. Rich men have
been ready to give instead of us. It would be, I thought then, and
think still, happier and healthier if they entrusted us with some of the
responsibility, and permitted us some of the joy. Why should so
many brethren be constrained, if they would keep clear of debt, to
undertake work extraneous to the ministry ? One is indignant when
one reads of Paul working at tent making, when the church has all
too few epistles from his pen; only that in his case, this was not
because he hesitated to declare the truth of God, but because ho
would accept no support that was begrudged; nor need we. What
then, my brethren in the ministry, must be done ? Why, preach tho
gospel of Jesus Christ, glad tidings which promises more than a mero
snatch from perdition, it declares a power and a purpose to fill men’s
hearts with the life and generosity of God. An essential part of tho
gospel concerns, as we shall, I hope, see presently this very subject of
money gifts. For the sake of the souls committed to your charge, do
not hesitate to enforce the plain and practical teaching of prophet
and apostle, and if you are not spared to behold the harvest, it will
arise in the next generation, and some time, sower and reaper shall
rejoice together.
I am thankful to believe that this gathering is largely constituted of
office-bearers and earnest Christian workers in our churches. At home
our deacons have a reputation for being cautiously chary of change..
Especially when the account books show a clear sheet, with, perhaps,,
a small balance in hand, it is, perhaps, not unnatural that those who
are officially responsible should be satisfied with things as they are,
and should hesitate to disturb any system which makes both ends
meet. But I want to disturb that satisfaction. I want to ask what is
the circumference of the circle thus pleasantly rounded. I want to
urge the solemn question, What is the purpose of our church organiza-
tions ? I submit that we have higher duties, wider responsibilities,
grander privileges, than merely to keep certain conventional church
institutions just so far in motion that they can’t be said to be still.
We have to possess the land, the world, for Christ. lie spared not
Himself. He “kept back” no “part of the price.” “If any man
have not the spirit of Christ he is none of His.” As long as it is true


that a man spends upon superfluities in a day, or a week, or a month,
more than he contributes for the spread of the Gospel in a year, it is
not the word “ incapacity ” which duly describes us, but spiritual
delinquency , and the malady is of the gravest order.
.Thus am I brought to the root of the whole matter, and to discuss
the first item of my alliterative title subject, Motive. What is the
moving impulse of acceptable offerings to God ? My friends, I have
no nostrum in this matter. I declare that in this lecture throughout
lam doing nothing but expound the teaching of Scripture. There is
no room for fancy or imagination, no claim upon invention for
-argument. The whole thing is a plagiarism. You may find it in the
This is the only claim it has upon your attention. But that
claim if it be sound is claim enough. I need not say that my exegesis
is not lightly assumed. I am prepared to defend it if it be challenged,
though this is scarcely the fitting place or time. Here and now I can
offer results, not processes of honest thought and study. We shall
find amply sufficient for our purpose in the Bth and 9th chapters
of Paul s second letter to the Corinthian Christians. The revised
version, with almost literal exactness, reads —“Moreover, brethren, we
make known to you the grace of God which hath been given in the
churches of Macedonia.” Ido not accept Dr. Stanley’s modification
of “ grace into “ contribution,” which he himself is immediately half
disposed to recant from. The contribution was the outcome of the
generosity, and it is the underlying character and life of which Paul would
triumphantly tell. Take this then as the foundation fact. On the
authority of Paul, the disposition to give is a spiritual grace, a gift
from God. Now such a word addressed to the Corinthians came with
sj)ecial emphasis. We gather that the Christian converts there were
prominent among all the newly-formed churches in the matter of their
possession of peculiar and strikingly assertive supernatural powers.
The position of Corinth and the unique condition of society there
occasion for the useful display of such startling powers. At
all events, we hear more about them there than elsewhere. There
was danger of abuse. Two or three chapters in the earlier letter are
taken up with solemn reminders, intended to check such abuse. The
very incidental way in which the reference is made puts the fact
beyond reach of reasonable question. Many Corinthians, upon their
conversion from heathenism, or Judaism, became empowered to do
things which lay beyond the range of ordinary human reach. Such
powers were recognised as a sign of discipleship, as an actual and
specific gift from God, a supernatural grace. My point is that Paul
puts the impulse of generosity in among, and side by side with such
things, both by his use of the word which had become almost special
and technical with those to whom he wrote, and also unmistakeably a
few sentences further on in his letter. He wants the Corinthians to
know that the Christians in Macedonia have received a gift, a grace —
as solemn, as sacred, as transcendent a bestowment as any of these in
which they rejoiced, and that gift was the spirit of liberality. Now,
if Ave put to ourselves the question as to w r hether this is the light in
which we are wont to regard the motive of offerings made to God, I
wonder what answer we should get. We should want to be able to say
yes; nay, more, we should be very reluctant to allow any other but
an affirmative to be returned. And yet that answer, on its AA'av toward
utterance, would get contorted and silenced as we see that the" facts of
our arrangements for the collection of offerings and our appeals for
help proceed upon quite other grounds, so thoroughly different as to
be almost exclusive and destructive. But you say, perhaps, spiritual
education has not proceeded so far, humanity is frail, supreme motives
are not always there to be appealed to. We must have money mean-
A\hile, or our churches must stop their work. Who must haA r e money?
Who are w r e P Whose is the work P You will never put in such a
plea on behalf of Him whose is the silver and gold and the cattle


upon a thousand hills ; on behalf of Him whose angel ministrants are-
ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of thousands; on
behalf of Him who once beheld an assembly gathered to work deliver-
ance from Midian, and said once and twice, they are too many, and
who by a fraction of the number wrought the victory. I confess,
solemnly, I look with dismay often at the record in our papers of large
sums of money obtained by appeals to meaner and unreligious motives.
It is of the earth earthy, and is calculated to hinder rather than help
the advancement of that kingdom which is not of this world. Of all
men, we Independents ought most solemnly to guard against any
touch of the fell contagion. To admit it is to allow the presence of
all the degradations of the pure spirituality of the church of Christ
through all the forms of Anti-Christ, and down to the monstrosity of
a State Church itself. If we are loyal to our principles our life is set
in the very highest spiritual plane. We live by the faith of the Son of
God, and we must not dare to condescend from this. “In the world,
yet not of the world.” “ I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
I do not say that motives meaner than the highest can all at once be
excluded and destroyed. I am far too sadly conscious of an inter-
mingling to deny the fact. But this I do say, that our endeavour
must be to obtain by prayer and striving an extinction of unworthy
impulses, and our full possession of the gifts and graces of the Lord.
If this be so then that it is a blunder and a sin to cultivate worldly
impulses by appealing to them, to ignore the highest, or even to
appear to do so, by using the lowest, goes without the saying. We
have a warfare, but it is spiritual, and it must be waged by spiritual
weapons wielded by a spiritual might. We may be tempted ; we may
be recommended to accept another kind of panoply, but we ought to
feel that such, as ill befits us, as would the helmet, the breastplate, the
sword of Saul, have served the shepherd champion who with sling and
stone overthrew the blasphemer of the living God. I can never believe
that to build churches and support Christian institutions out of the
proceeds of gambling is likely to hasten the conversion of the world to
Christ. Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit saith the Lord.
I believe that a shilling given as the outcome of a divinely implanted
grace will be more fruitful than a pound which comes into the treasury
by some other way; and on that faith I stand.
To recur then to the word of testimony. The gift of Jesus Christ
to his disciples is the spirit and impulse of generosity. This is more
than kind-heartedness of natural disposition. A man naturally so
disposed will find it easier to receive the gift. But this bestowment
transforms a selfish man and makes him self-sacrificing, it transforms
a miser and makes him generous. I have seen this actual work
accomplished ; and the way to be stirred to obtain the large and
universal bestowment of this transforming spirit, this Divine miracu-
lous grace, is to face the fact that we are not entitled to use money in
the possession of which this spirit has no place, in the Lord’s service. The
wood and the hay and the stubble may be apparently more easily obtained,
an erection falsely built may more quickly rise. But in the trial by
fire the fact is declared. We must surely give good heed to the origin
and nature of the materials with which we dare to build upon the
foundation of the body and blood of Christ.
And this leads me to the most transcendent thought and truth of
all, put plainly though by the Apostle in the chapter referred to.
This gift, this supernatural grace, is actually kindred, nay, in kind
identical, with that supreme self-sacrifice. The Apostle can dare ta
mention the giving of Corinthian money for the help of needy ones in
Judea in the same breath with a recital of the humiliation and the
agony of the very Christ of God. I should like to see in every church
a chancellor of the exchequer who understands first principles. Do
you know what that is which, aside from all political party questions,
has made Mr. Gladstone’s reputation peerless in national finance ? It


is because in that sphere he is a prophet and a seer. His methods are
not of superficial expediency. They are founded upon great moral
facts and principles. They come out of perception and recognition of
underlying laws and movements. A mistake in that kind of judgment
is the exception not the rule. Paul was accustomed to go down to the
realities of things and show how deep the springs of all true actions
lie. Spasm may be superficial, but a patient, enduring energy has
deeper promptings. He lived and moved and had his being in the
innermost shrine. What does he say with regard to the Divinely
bestowed grace which in exercise resulted in the Macedonian contri-
bution ? He says —“Ye know the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that though He was rich yet for your sakes He became poor, that ye
through His poverty might become rich.” Or, if I may paraphrase
and interpret the connection—“ I have been making known to you
the fact that a gift from God has been bestowed upon our fellow
Christians in the North, a gift which has brought forth after its kind.
If you would know what the working of that divine impulse of
generosity is, in its supremacy, look toward Him who is Supreme, the
man Christ Jesus. In Him, the image, the manifested form of the
invisible God, the operation of this impulse was perfect and un-
hindered. See the grace there in majestic and sublime movement, and
the pictures rise before your mind’s-eye of Bethlehem and Gethsemane
and Calvary.” Brethren, the motive upon which God relies to save a
fallen world is the self-sacrifice which is urgent and impetuous and
unrestrained. It is the reproduction in us of that impulse which is
the heart of His own Infinite Being. It is His gift to the church*
Having this, the issue will be ample means. We must rely on nothing;
less. Hailing this, we dare not work by any other method or spirit*
We must labour and pray to be enriched with this grace, and then we
may dare and challenge all. “ The God of heaven, He will prosper us,”'
for it will be He who is working through us to accomplish His good
pleasure. The only adequate, the only lawful motive of acceptable
offering is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and a new sanctity will
come upon all our church operations as we feel we are using the fruit
of His Spirit, a mintage which bears “ the image and the superscrip-
tion” of no worldly origin, but is the issue of “ the King of Kings, the
Lord of Lords.”
Now to proceed to the next point — Method —the presentation of
which has been in some measure unavoidably anticipated, and which,
therefore, need not be dealt with at such length. Before I look for
Scripture teachings in any detail here, let me lay down one or two
perfectly natural postulates, not to say axioms, which probably no
man will hesitate to accept. True method will be such as to permit
the impulse, a practical expression without restraint, with the least
possible degree of friction. Though machinery of some kind is
necessary to apply the expansive force of steam to some definite
purpose, the wise engineer is careful so to arrange his rods and wheels as
to make the smallest possible diminution of the created energy. He
applies the force as directly as he can. He may require to change
longitudinal into rotary motion, intermittent into regular, but he
knows that dead-weight is a hindrance and everything superfluous is
so much loss. True method , therefore , is as simple as possible. As
to the next item, the science of physics deserts me; there is no*
parallel. We are in the higher sphere of life and will. In spiritual
dynamics force is not exhausted by exercise. It absolutely increases
by expenditure. The illustration must be found in the living man,,
kis body, his intellect, his soul energy. Here is growth, added effect-
iveness, progression of power through the use of it, riches accumulated
by distribution. True method again then, will be so the creation of'
the true spirit, as to be kindred and essential, and the working of it
react in good. All that falls short of these requirements is a weakness.
All that defies them is a failure. All that opposes them is a sin. One


other instant s pause before I turn to enquire of Paul, because the
very possibility of so doing carries with it an emphasis. Do you want
a schedule of Christian doctrine ? Turn to the New Testament, and
you can t find it. Do you seek an elaborated church system, an
authoritative polity ? Turn to the New Testament, and you can’t find
it. Do you desire distinct and unmistakeable instructions as to the
method of dispensing the Christian ordinances P Turn to the New
Testament, and you can’t find it. Now, if I find anything definite,
authorised, and ordained by an apostle, in such a matter as this of
Church Finance, is not that fact profoundly significant ? If here is no
concretion of creed, no rubric of worship even, and if here is a clear
biddance as to the method in which the gift, the supernatural grace of
generosity, should find issue, lam bound to give good heed to it. Or
if in the exercise of Christian liberty, through any special grouping of
circumstances, I am led to enlarge or modify the method, I must not
traverse it and stultify its operation.
Now to the law r and the testimony. Paul says in his first letter
the Corinthians, “ Now with regard to the collections for the
saints : as I have ordained for the churches of Galatia, so also do
ye. Upon each first of the week (or Uord’s day) let each one of
you put on one side something, storing it, as he may have
prospered, that there may not, when I come, be any collections
then. That s the English of it, to the best of my ability ; and I
claim from Christian communities loyalty to Apostolic ordainment,
and at all events, whatever minor modifications may be necessary,
no disloyalty to the spirit of the command. It may be said, that the
incident was one of temporary emergency. The famine and the
poverty would pass and the special claim disappear. Does anybody
raise that demur? Very well, I accept it. It is a fact. I take it as
it stands. It is another weapon in my assault upon unscriptural and
unreliable methods. For an emergency Paul ordained a systematic,
conscientious, universal, thoroughly applied scheme. Some Christians
now-a-days appoint spasmodic and emergency methods for the supply
of a regular and continuous claim. Let that shot tell. Now, let me
put into plain, simple assertions of principle this precept of Apostolic
authority and apply it to our methods of finance. You will not
hesitate, I imagine, to give your assent to the following :
I. Systematic weekly laying aside and giving according to each
one s means.
11. A self-assessment throughout the entire community.
111. This w r eekly offering brought as an act of thankful worship.
IV. (Arising out of a well-known precept of the Apostle James.)
The arrangements of the house of God to be such that the pecuniary
circumstances of the worshipper do not enter into account.
You accept these propositions. They are plain, fair, sound. Well,
then, ( Faith without works is dead.” “If ye know r these things,
blessed are ye if ye do them.” “Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do
not the things which I say ?” And f suppose that you do not fail to
discern that tnese Apostolic precepts are dictated bv the genius and
spirit of the Master.
The most serious and, to my mind criminal, deflection from such
teaching lias been in the system of pew-rents, now 7 happily disappearing
very fast; and if with such a system the traditional and forbidding
construction of pew and pulpit and the special official costume of the
Christian teacher vanishes too, I for one shall say, “Thank God.” I
am never ashamed of being called a radical in theology, ecclesiasticism,
politics, or anything else. We must go down to the root principles
and act upon them. The Lord Jesus Christ struck at the root when
He said, “ Ye make the word of God of none effect by your traditions.”
The leaders of thought in His time considered Him a dangerous man ;
hut history has proved that it w 7 as they who were endangering both
religion and the nation. The name “ Christian ” itself was once a


stigma. lam glad to find that in this colony the system of pew-rents
is for the most part dead, and has been buried in sure and certain hope
'Of haying no resurrection ; and so the veritable crusade which I under-
took in England against this spoliator of the holy places is superfluous
here. But is the spirit which dictated the system also dead P That’s
the important question. You who have crossed the ocean know that
•the effects of a storm or a gale are not at an end when the wind lulls.
The waves do not instantly subside. As a man once expressed it to
me, “ There’s a good deal of wind in the water still.” Oil on the
troubled waves may be effective as an expedient, but not as a radical
remedy. Or again, to recur to the former figure and attach the
simile of Christ. If the evil spirit be cast out and nothing be put to
occupy the vacant place there may be danger of its returning with
seven other spirits worse than the first. But I have already sought to
enforce the truth that possession by the Spirit of Christ is the true
•and complete exorcism of all meaner invasion.
In some churches at home where the system of pew-rents has been
abolished as a method of supporting the ministry of the Word, a
definite levy is still made for incidental expenses, under the pretext,
as fallacious as it is specious, that ground rent, charges for lighting
and cleaning, are definite and measurable expenses, and that as every
square inch in the church receives the advantage so every square inch
should pay its proportion. You can see that this is a mere evasion of
conscientious voluntaryism for the maintenance of worship. The
minister’s house-rent, rates, and taxes, tradesmen’s bills, also in a
measure are definite items of expenditure, so the system is inconsistent.
Its adoption is a symptom of the “ wind in tlie water still.” The fact
is that there is a weakness of our common human nature which Christ
fought against wherever He found it, and which we must combat also.
Men like to have a limit set to their duty. They seek to have the
word “neighbour” defined. They want to know how many offences
they ought to forgive, and at what point they may consider they have
•fulfilled their utmost duty and may with satisfied conscience begin to
They are inveterate priest makers. They dislike being cast
hack upon conscience for everything. Jesus Christ always refused to
set such limits. He always would refer men to the judgment of their
conscience; and so must we. It was amusing, when it was not dis-
tressing, for a long time after the abolition of seat-rents in Bichmond
Church, Salford, to hear from my deacons the recital of the persistent
■efforts made by one and another to escape this self-assessment. When
such an applicant came into conversation with the deacon who had
charge of the allotting of seats the dialogue had but little variation in
its form.
D. How much accommodation do you require ?
A. Well, we are five in family.
D. Then there is room for you yonder.
A. But what is the price of the sittings ?
D. We have no seat-rents. We encourage what we think the
New Testament teaches, and shall be glad if each member of your
family contributes, if it be but a penny per week. We will supply
each one with envelopes.
A. What is usually given P
D. I don’t know what anybody gives excepting myself. Only
the Weekly Offering Steward keeps that record. But lam told that
the gifts range from id. to £2 per week. Each one according to ability.
A. But I like to know what I have to pay.
D. You have nothing to pay. You may give what you choose.
You will, if you please, fill up this paper and send it to the Weekly
Offering Steward or give it to the verger. You and your family will
then be supplied with envelopes for use.
A. And is that the payment for these sittings ? Is there any
difference between one part of the church and another ? *


D. The payment, as you call it, has nothing to do with the allot-*
ment. Seats are allotted on condition of punctual and regular
attendance to all who wish for them. The gift is your own voluntary
offering in the service of God.
Scores of times, almost that identical dialogue has taken place.
I have had experience of the system for at least twelve years and,
faithfully worked, have never known it anything but a great success,
and that in more important respects than the mere raising of money.
Kow let us see how some other of our methods fare, tried by the
Apostolic standard and precept.
Imagine Paul with a copy of any Saturday’s newspaper in his hand,
what would be his conclusions ? Well first, until he looked at tho
advertisement columns he would suppose the population of the colony
to be wholly occupied in business activities, mutual abuse in Parlia-
ment, athletic sports and gambling. He would never be led to
suppose that many thousands of the community were interested in
religion and philanthropy. But presently his eyes would light upon
a column announcing a number of special religious services to be
conducted by eloquent preachers, collections to be made in some cases
for the funds of the church or school. “Ah !” you may hear him say,
“ Why didn’t those Corinthians send a copy of my letter over here.
These people evidently need a little advice. I will have the verses
printed on a circular, and underline the words ‘ that there be no
collections when I come.’ ” He carries out his purpose, and for a long
while no one is bold enough to tell him that his epistle is among the
Scriptures “ appointed to be read in churches,” and has been read and
ignored. This matter may not be a large one, but the practice comes
of a bad family, and has some kindred features. It is not satisfactory
to say the least to cast the provision of the means for carrying on
Home and Foreign Missions, Sunday-school, etc., upon the die of
favourable weather or the attractiveness of a star preacher. An
anniversary festival is a joyous, helpful time. To call friends and
neighbours together to rejoice with you is a righteous act; but
directly it is made the occasion of a collection you introduce a
deleterious air which debilitates the healthy good. Presently I will try to
show you “ a more excellent way.” Brotherly interchange of pulpits
is a benefit, and will be unalloyed when it is for ever dislinked from
pecuniary speculation and an eye to such results.
A little further down the column Paul stops aghast over a statement
that the monster bazaar in aid of the building fund will be continued
next week. He finds in the body of the paper a report of the pro-
ceedings of the sale. He reads how they were diversified by the
performances of comic minstrels and the antics of punch and judy, and
discovers that some of the more valuable articles were offered as a
prize to gamblers. What would he think ? How hot the words of
scathing scorn and rebuke would pour from his indignant heart. Is
it thus that the Church of Christ degrades herself ? Is it thus that
the progress of the kingdom can be truly furthered ? Money may be
obtained, but it is stained and contaminated money, and men
dishonor God if they seek to bring to Him an offering so unclean. It
is high time that we looked this matter fairly in the face. Bazaars
have for a long time been the fashion and the rage. They are losing
the first honest simplicity. In many cases they have lost it quite. The
end does not justify the means. The end is very often lost sight of
in the means. I may probably find myself in a minority, perhaps a
minority of one. I know that many whom I honor do not see the
evil as I see it. But though to speak as I do, may appear censorious,
I will accept the judgment rather than keep silence. Let me state the
matter fairly, and leave it with you. That a number of people should
join together to compass a worthy object is good. Their very association is
in itself a good. That many who have not money to have
time and skill is a fact which may be rightly used. That such gift of


time and skill and labor may be translated into money, which may
honestly be offered for the cause of Christ, is beyond dispute. That
any one has a perfect and just right to sell his produce of labor in
a fair market, and give what he receives as an offering to God is also
beyond all Whatsoever is more than this cometh of evil.
The buyer gives nothing. He gets or ought to get fair value for his
money. To create an impression that this coming to buy is itself a
charity, is to enter into unfair competition with the regular trader. A
gentleman conducting a large drapery establishment in Manchester
told me that bazaars were hundreds of pounds a year out of his legiti-
mate profits. If people came and opened a store in the same line of
business close by, he would have no complaint to make. It would be
fair and open competition. But the bazaars insinuated an untruth
into the rivalry. Buyers were led into the fallacy that they gave to
the cause what they spent at the stalls. They purchased there what
they would have bought of the tradesman, and went home hugging the
conviction that they had bestowed so much in charity, admiring the'
goods which should have given the lie to their comforting conviction.
Or if it be said that some people buy at a bazaar “ for the sake of the
cause, what is useless or superfluous to them, and what they would
not otherwise have bought at all, that is only a method of justifying
wastefulness and extravagance, which a Christian should surely not
encourage. It must be self-evident that two or three people cannot
give the same shilling. Who does give it ? Well, the purchaser gives
nothing ? In his case there is nothing but an interchange. The
artificer gives what is added to the value of the material by his labor,
giving perhaps that material also. The profit, if any, is taken out of
the pocket of the tradesman without so much as saying ü by your
leave; or if nothing be included in the price by way of profit, that
tradesman who has to maintain himself and family and pay taxes is
unfairly under-sold. It may be that this last item of injustice, as it
seems to me, is too elusive and obscure for a practical remedy, unless
justly proportionate rates should be levied upon these .commercial
enterprises. But I have stated the case as I believe fairly, and not
one of these considerations should be left out of account. The evil
would be reduced to vanishing point if the fact which is put forward
as the justification, viz., that the help is enlisted of those who have
time and skill but no money, were the only one acted upon; but then
I think bazaars would be reduced to vanishing point also. We shall
have no temptation to consider these uncouth expedients if we can
have our people gifted with the grace of which Paul spoke. We shall
have a repetition of that glad hour when Moses had actually to forbid
and restrain the enthusiastic offerings of the willing tribes. I feel this •
as the very burden of the Lord upon me, and Christian brethren in
the ministry, it is a glorious task to attempt and accomplish.
I draw a breath of relief at having concluded what is to me the ■
unpleasant portion of my task, that of demolition and attack. It
is more congenial to endeavour to construct than to destroy. Let me*
offer some suggestions on the practical and positive side. The question
arises is it possible to organize such a system of complete and satis-
factory church finance as shall stand clear and high above all
discredit, as shall include all the points suggested by and inferred from
the apostle s teaching ? In other words is it possible to have in our
church life of to-day these noble Christian principles moving in
practice P I say unhesitatingly, not as a matter of opinion, but from
thoroughly tested experience “yes!” and I’ll tell you how. Recall the
conditions :
Ist. Support for the cause of God to come from voluntary
consecration.
2nd. Each one, from youngest and poorest, to oldest and richest,,
to have a share, training children to share in the privilege.
3rd, Each one’s conscience to be the sole judge.


4th. Reguler periodic weekly storing proportionate to ability.
sth. The element of worship to be essential in the act of offering*
Paul was no mere rhapsodist or doctrinaire. He was eminently
-matter of fact and practical. We may be sure that his principles can
he relied upon to work.
This then is my attempt at so translating them, and is what I
i intend to try to persuade my own people to adopt. Let the Christian
' community, banded together to proclaim a gospel, and to further the
kingdom of the Lord, have one fund for the purpose supplied and
maintained by one method. From this fund each church agency may
receive its proportionate support. The relative amounts now expended
upon the various operations of the church may with suitable
modifications if required be a guide in determining that propor-
tion. Some ascertained items, such as incidental expenses, may be
fixed by an upward limit, as not to exceed such and such an amount.
Let the limit be large enough to allow for variations due to accident,
etc., and a fund is gathered over actual expenditure which will
renovate the building as it requires it. Now seek out a man in whom
the people have full confidence, and whose heart is in his Master’s work
and make him Weekly Offering Steward. He, and he alone, will know
the amount contributed by any giver. In a large community his
labour must be lightened by the appointment of assistant stewards.
My church at Wolverhampton started the plan with seven, which were
afterwards reduced to five. They will register the offerings under
certain numbers, and send out a quarterly statement to each con-
tributor, knowing only numbers and not names. If such account
should show any arrears through absence, etc., an envelope is enclosed
for use, marked “ arrears.” If the contributor be willing and able,
that envelope will be used. If it be not used it must be taken for
granted that the contributor is unwilling or unable. In either case as
the Lord loveth a cheerful giver, as compelled gifts is a contradiction
in terms, as the offering should be “ not of constraint, but of a ready
mind,” the arrears must not be pressed for, or carried forward to
another quarter. People are made trustworthy by being trusted;
every one must stand as before God, not before man, and be cast back
upon conscience and honour. As the offering is an act of thanks-
giving, an actual utterance of consecration, the opportunity for it
should be arranged as one of the exercises of worship; not relegated to
the exit doors. It may fitly come at the close of the devotional
part of the service, and the offering when gathered may fitly and
suggestively be laid upon the table, which bears sometimes the font
of baptism, and at other times the emblems of the unspeakable
offering of His unreserved whole self, to whose service we dedicate
this which we render now. The offering should be taken, not on
plates, for there must be no ministering to vanity, no trespass upon
conscience, but in bags, which can readily be passed from hand to
hand along the seats throughout the church. If it be said “we should
not get as much,” I answer, “ What is given to the plate is not given
To God, and you have no business to obtain money like that for His
service.” The reason for the use of the plate is to my mind the
reason for its abolition. Turn to tent making or its modern equivalent
rather than accept a begrudged or meretricious shilling. Be true to
principle, and have no care for consequences. If your trust in prin-
ciple be not strong enough to run alone, I offer it the go-cart of
experience. Within my knowledge there has not only been no case
of failure, but no case in which the results have not shown large and
startling success. How can it be otherwise when God says “ Them
that honour Me I will honour.” These items may seem trifling.
•/ O
But each one has a great principle behind it, and we must to be
thorough, learn to be “ faithful in that which is least.” In the allotment
of proportions a considerable proportion, say one-tenth or one-
twelfth, should be set aside for the meeting of such emergency claims


as are always arising and cannot be foreseen. There need be no fear
that any means supplied will be a superfluity. If you should really
ever be at your wr’s end as to what to do with an excess of means,,
your minister will know what to do with it, and can turn it to good
account. On this head I need say no more but to commend it to
your judgment and conscience. Be as noble as the Bereans, and
search the Scriptures whether these things be so.
Finally then — Moral —by which I mean considerations which
should induce us to aim for this reform. I hold that it is simple,
comprehensive, and Scriptural as none of our methods in the past
have been. It has stood the test of all kinds of experience, of which
instances crowd upon my mind to give you did time permit. Success
in the adoption of it will give freedom from anxiety to our office-
bearers, and that means a large accession of power for good in other
ways. Thought and time and labour now occupied in the task of
making both ends meet will be liberated for worthier exercise and
enterprise. We shall be strong in the consciousness that what means-
we have are rightly obtained, outflowings of generous hearts which
God has touched and opened, solid and genuine expressions of thank-
fulness and consecration which He has stirred. The means with
which we seek to spread the Gospel will be themselves a gospel, coming
into existence not by worldly or human methods, but by the Spirit of
the Living Lord. The rule of Christian society is that in Jesus Christ
all things consist —stand strongly together, acting and reacting all for
growth and good. My own eyes have seen two forms of glorious
result, to attain which is the worthiest aim we can set before us. The
one is the education of conscience, the other is the development of
receptivity. I say the education Of conscience. Every six months or
twelve months each member of the congregation has stated as before
God, not in the sight of men, how much per week at least such an one
is willing to offer for the furtherance of the cause of Christ in that
church organization. Week by week the conscience is appealed to.
Every one is called to think of God, to remember His gifts, to recognize
such successes as have come as bestowments from His generous hand.
Every one is called to bring an offering and come into His courts.
The work of every day is sanctified, for the man has dedicated a pro-
portion of its proceeds to the cause of his Lord. Conscience called to
work in this one matter becomes more widely active ; its realm spreads,
its voice ever speaks, and with more and more regal tone over a larger
and growing sway. Consecration touches time and talents and energy.
Carelessness disappears, the lethargic stir into activity and Christian
work. I have seen it. I have watched the rising of the moral tone
and spiritual life throughout the church and congregation brought
about largely through this claim upon a quickaned conscience in
worshipful and constantly recurring offerings to God. We move in a
different sphere from that of annual or quarterly subscriptions. It is
like the building up of the body by reiterated breathings, by recurrent
meals. And it is surely no strange thing that a method dictated by
moral and spiritual principle should, beside its tangible success have
this reactive moral and spiritual result. I say also the development of
receptivity. This opens up a very serious and unspeakably important
matter, which even of itself would be my sufficient justification for
urging a consideration of this subject. Time would fail me to accord
it the full and forceful treatment it deserves ; but for the sake of the
souls of men and the honour of our God, I charge you, do not pass it
lightly by, because my exposition may be scanty. 1 turn to the record
of the sayings of the last prophet whose voice was heard before that
long, long silence which was broken at length by the trumpet utterance
of John. If I wonder at the disappearance of such a ministry for so
long, I do not, at all events, find any explanation through any cessation
of the need in the nation and the world. I know that sometimes the
silences of God, as well as pauses in his work, are through deadened


ears and hardened hearts. But what was the message of the last voice
that rang in the audience of the people before the weary and empty
interval ? The words of Malachi’s teaching well may thrill us as we
read. The charges flung like bolts of indignation upon the people
may find us open to their indictment. “Ye offer polluted bread upon
Mine altar; and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, the lame, the sick,
is it not evil ? Ye brought the torn, the lame, the sick, thus ye
brought an offering. Should I accept this of your hand? saith
Jehovah. Will a man rob God P Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I
will not open the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing that
there shall not be room to receive it.” And if it be thought that such
a challenge was to a special people and under a temporal covenant, I
have only to turn to the Tvords of Jesus and His Apostles to find that
the underlying truth is an element in human nature, and enduring as
the relations of God to man. Forgiveness! A man cannot receive it,
oven at the hands of the All-Merciful One, if he be not ready to
forgive his brother man his trespass. The fulness of the blessing of
the Gospel of Christ! A man cannot receive it if he curb his generous
impulses and strive for no kindred with the self-sacrifice of God.
“He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he which
soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.” Christians lament
the power of wrong and the slow progress of the kingdom of Christ
on earth. They read of the rapture of Pentecost and of the triumphs
of the Apostles. They watch the forward wave of Christian convic-
tion and discipleship, which arrested the sneer of the sceptic even
while that curled upon his lip, and confronted him as a mighty
problem. We cry aloud in earnest and honest prayer to the same
all-conquering Lord that in our day also He may move in manifested
victory. I tell you on the authority of Prophet and Apostle that to a
church which is feeble in the exercise of the Christian grace of giving
according to its means no such help can come. Such a church chokes
the channel: through it the streams'of the water of life cannot freely
flow. Before the eyes of such a church let such words as those of
Malachi blaze in lines of living fire. Is such an utterance empty and
perfervid rhetoric, or is it solidly true? “Heaven and earth shall
pass away but My words shall not pass away; the word of the Lord
endureth for ever.” I hold it as my highest joy to serve God in the
Christian ministry of the Congregational Church. lam one among
many brethren. We long to see our work effectual in the manifest
spiritual growth of the church, the strengthening and
ennoblement of Christian manhood, the passion of an
enthusiasm for Christ. We want to do and to be an
ever-greatening good. My conviction is that our hearers cannot
receive the best of what God has to send them through us unless they
have and exercise this wondrous Christian grace. We say, “We seek
not yours but you ;” but how if we cannot have the man unless he be
ready with his gifts ? The Christian teacher, ambassador for Christ,
who discourses to a number of people who have paid a levied charge
for the places they occupy attempts one of the hardest tasks which
can be set before him. He speaks in quite another atmosphere who
stands up to utter God’s message to those, part of whose purpose in
being where they are is to give with joy and alacrity according as God
hath prospered them. That the church may be growing into fit
companionship for Christ she must “ see to it that she abounds in this
grace also.”
Then, in closing sentences, part of the moral of my plea concerns
our witness-bearing to those who are without. I hope no man will
deem me a mere optimist, or careless and unsympathetic, if I say that
lam not overpowm-ingly troubled at the eager and sometimes irritated
restlessness of the age. I am not anxious concerning what is called
materialistic scepticism. If a scientist, through his microscope had


discovered a man’s soul, or through his telescope had seen God, I
should begin to be startled. During the marvellous revolution which
is taking place, and will continue, by which the essential conception
of government and nationality and human individual rights in extent
.and limit will be gradually and more or less peacefully changed,
offences will come. In the flush of a great and beneficial triumph,
like the processional march of physical investigation during the last
half century, it is not unnatural that men should trust the weapons
of that noble warfare, somewhat beyond their real capacity of range.
In resentment against priestcraft and monstrous articles of creed men
will not be cool and cautious to distinguish the exact limits of their
opposition, “offences will come.” What I am anxious about is
that the disciples of the Lord Jesus should not be those “through
whom the offence cometh.” We have our triumphant facts verified
by experience and consciousness, tested by time. Our life is hid
with Christ in God. It is an unworldly life we live in the world.
Our temptation is to condescend, to minimize the significance of
facts which belong to God, and which affirm His presence now as
of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth. Men are casting
.an anchor into the things that are seen. They say other things
which are unseen are, therefore, unreal. We must refuse to stir, but
•cling all the more closely and declaredly to our anchorage within the
veil. Our methods must be alike spiritual. We must manifestly
trust the Christ. If we say we can walk the billows in His strength,
but all the while take care to have some good stout planks of earthly
growth between us and the experience of test, our testimony will be
scorned. We especially, as Independents, who are Protestants of
Protestants, and freest among free churches, must let our noble faith
be operative down to the smallest details of our organizations, that the
kingdom which it is our very crown of glory to be called to labor
for, may be unmistakeably a kingdom not of this world. Who can
tell of the results now awaiting our achievements ? The nations are
•opening their gates to the free entrance of the Gospel. We must go
in and possess by blessed Christian invasion the lands which beckon
us. Thoughtful men are asking “of all church systems which is most
-fully adequate, as well as most perfectly free?” Which can evangelise
and preach the Gospel to the poor ? Which can most swiftly touch
society and affect legislation ? Which can colonize, which can stir
zeal and inspire sufficient energy P We glory in our principles. We
garland our dead heroes’ tombs and revere their memory. We look
with pulsing pride upon our splendid history. Are we ready for
the present and the future ? Public opinion is moving in our
direction, we hold the keys of the position. By the alacrity of
generous faithfulness we may be enabled to give firm answer to the
•exclamation, “ who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom
for such a time as this ?”
Trice , Id. each , or 7s. 6d. per 100 ; parcels of 300, £1 Is.
Carey & Page, Printers, Adelaide.


